Four Paradoxes, or politic Discourses. 2 Concerning Military Discipline,
written long since by Thomas Digges Esquire. 2 Of the worthiness of war and
warriors, by Dudly Digges, his son. All newly published to keep those that
will read them, as they did them that wrote them, from idleness.

Horace. Me castra iuuant and lituo tubae
Permistus sonitus, bellaque matribus
Detestata.
Imprinted at London by H. Lownes, for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at
his shop at the Sign of the holy Lamb in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1604.

To the Honorable THEOPHILUS HOWARD, Lord HOWARD of Walden, son and heir
apparent to the Right Honorable Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain to his
Majesty.
A General report (worthy Lord) of your honorable disposition bred in me
even at my first coming into France, an earnest desire to see you, which
through your courtesy and my good fortune was happily effected: But when I
perceived with what virtuous industry you indeauored to make the best use, of
your well spent time, in those parts; I conceived great hope to receive much
greater contentment, in so truly honorable acquaintance, and the taste I had of
your favors assures me I had been happy in my hopes, had not my untimely
return, such were my unfortunate crosses, deprived me of the comfort I took,
in the company of your admired virtue. Notwithstanding I have hitherto fed my
self with the hope of your return etc. Hoc equidem occasum Troiae tristesque
ruinas solabor, this shall be my refuge. In the mean time as Jews of France
did his country friends rape root, or as the Percian King did the poor man's
Apple, I entreat your Lordship to accept these slight discourses as a token of
the dutiful respect I owe you: They are I know most unworthy your Maiden
patronage, yet my first fruits they be, and I earnestly desire, that my first
borne should bear your honors Name.

Your Honors devoted Dudly Digges.

To the Reader.
THat there are many faults in these few leaves I doubt not, neither would I
but you should find fault, yet not maliciously with wrested and unnatural
applications, yet not too peremptorily till you have children of your own:
only this, if you be such a Merchant as hates a Soldier, think it no
victory to pick matter of advantage out of my weak handling of their good
cause: If on the contrary you love the profession, take in good part these
slight endeavors, till some one of better ability speak more effectually, and
let this public protestation assure you I am no dissembler, but one that
heartily desires to show himself a loving countreyman to men that so well
deserve the love of their Country.

Farewell.
The First Paradox.
That no Prince, or State does gain, or save by giving too small
entertainment unto Soldiers, Officers, or Commanders Martial: but do
thereby extremely loose, and unprofitably waste their Treasure, besides the
dishonor and foiles, that necessarily thereof ensue.

I Confess sparing of Treasure, and all due providence for the preservation
thereof, to be a thing very necessary, especially in the wars of this our
age, where treasure is indeed become Neruus Belli; and therefore by all
reasonable provisions to be regarded. But there are in all actions some
sparings, or pretense of profit, that are utterly unprofitable, fond, and
foolish, and woorking effects clean contrary to that end, for the which such
pinching is pretended. As, who sees not, that, if a husbandman (that has
first allotted a reasonable proportion of grain, for every Acre of his arable
ground) shall (of a covetous mind) abate a quarter, or one third part of his
due proportion of seed, thinking thereby to save so much; who, (I say) sees
not, that by this foolish saving in the seed, in the crop he shall loose
thrice as much, besides the hurtful Weeds, that, for want of seed sufficient,
grow-vp, and spoil the rest? Or, if a Merchant, setting forth his Ship to the
seas, fraught with Merchandise, shall know that (to rigge her well, and furnish
her with all needful Tackle, furniture and provision) it will cost him full
500. pounds: Yet, of a coueteous and greedy mind to save thereof some 100.
pounds, or two, he shall scant his provision, wanting perhaps some Cables,
Ankers, or other-like necessaries, and after (by a Storm arising) for fault
thereof shall loose both Ship and goods. Who will not condemn this miserable
foolish Merchant, that (peeuishly to save one hundred pounds, or two) has lost
both ship and goods, perhaps of 10. times greater value? Much more is the folly
of this error in Martial causes, where the Tempests are as sudden, and no
less perrilous. And therefore such fond sparing, is far more absurd in these
Actions, than in either of those, of the Husbandman or Merchant. For proof
whereof, if I should produce Antique Examples out of the Roman and Grecian
Chronicles of such Kings and Princes, as (by such fond sparing of their
Treasure) had lost both their Treasure, and their Kingdoms also, I could
easily make of this subject a great volume: but for brevity sake (leaving many
Antiquies) I come to our present age and time, and to matters of our own
Remembrance, and Experience. For who knows not, What course the States of the
United Provinces took, for payment of their soldiers, before the arrival of
her Majesty's Lord General, the Earl of Leicester. Who, for sparing, or to
make (as they pretended) their treasour stretch, did pay their Bands after 48.
days to the Month, their pay being so scant and bare at 30. only to the
Month, as it was very hard for soldiers, or Captains, to live honestly upon
it: And the same being now stretched to 48. days, utterly impossible for them
to live without Frauds in Musters, and pickories, besides on their Country and
friends. Hereof it came to pass, that the honest, and valiantest men retired
themselves from the wars, and the worst disposed Free-booters were readiest
to enter with these base conditions. For such a Captain (as intends only
dishonestly, by Fraud and Robbery to enrich himself, to the ruin of his
Country) will especially desire to serve on such base conditions, as honestly
it is impossible for every man to live upon: And so having just color thereby
to shift, has all these means ensuing infinitely to enrich himself.

First, (in the choice of his officers) to get, or accept such Free-booters and
Thieves, as (only to have the name and privilege of a soldier, to escape the
pain due by Martial law to such vnsouldierlike persons) will serve without
pay, or with half pay.

Then, every of these his officers Lieutenaunt, Ensign, Serieants etc. (being
men of that Crewe) will draw in as many also as they can of the same Moulde, to
live on pickorie without pay, and therefore very ready to serve in their loose
manner with half pay. Of such Rakehels then the Captain having rayzed an
Ensign, passes his Muster, and is sent to his Garrison, or place of Service.

Now, the Prince or State that is served with such as will accept these
dishonest base conditions, is much deceived, if he think to be souldierly
served. Viz. To have their Watches and Wards strong, vigilant, and careful:
For in steed of one thousand five hundredth soldiers past in Muster, they
shall never find fifty on Guard, or Sentinels, upon any Round: As all honest
Serieant-Maiors, and other officers (that have past their Rounds) can testify:
The rest (if he keep any more) being either abroad in the country at the
Picoree, or in the garrison more unhonestly occupied, in abusing some honest
Burgh^r his wife or servants: (for, to drudge in watch or ward the gallantest
of this crew disdain.) If any faults be complained off, the excuse is ready:
Alas their pay is so small, as we must wink at faults.

But if at any time the Commissarie of Musters come with treasure to pass a
Muster, ye shall ever find them strong 150. present and absent orderly set
down in Muster Rolls. And for their Absents such formal Testimonials,
Protestations, and oaths, as among Christians were horrible to discredit, and
their frauds so artificially conveyed, as will be hard to try: But the
treuth is, Forgery and Perjury are the first lessons such Freeboters learn,
and then Pallardize, Murder, Treachery, and Treason are their Attendants.
Hereof it came to pass (for many years together) that after the death of Don
John de Austria, the States lost such a number of Cities, Towns, Forts,
Castles and Sconces, yea whole and entier Provinces revolted from the^, by
reason of the exextorsions, oppressions, and robberies insolently committed on
the Country people, and best Subjects, by these insatiable Cormorants, Lions to
their friends, and Hares in presence of their enemies, having not only, Linguas
sed animas venales, manus rapaces, pedes fugaces, and quae honest nominari non
possunt inhonestissima, vere Galeati Lepores et Hyrudines Aerarij. And this
base beggarly pay the only ground-plot of all these horrible villainies, odious
to God and man, and not tolerable in any Christian Government.

For, if Princes or States will give such convenient pay, as men of value, and
honesty may sparingly liue-on without fraud and robbery, they may boldly
execute Martial discipline, and purge their Army of these idle Drones, and
carowsing picking Caterpillars: And in stead of these, they shall (in short
time) have their Ensigns complete with valiant, honest, sober, loyal
soldiers, that shall carefully and painefully in watch and ward execute their
Martial duties.

The Earl of Leicester with his own eyes beheld before Zutphen camp nigh
Arnhem two or three Regiments of Scotts and Dutch in the States pay, sent for
by Count Hollock as the most choice bands that followed him, having sixteen or
eighteen Ensigns in their Regiments, and paid for nigh three thousand
soldiers: That (marching in rank, and after embattailed) were found not full
one thousand, besides their officers.

Now, if the States had paid truly but 10 Ensigns after 30. days to the
month, (as her Majesty did) and by Martial discipline have kept them strong,
they should have had 500. more heads and hands to fight at least in such 10.
than in these 18 Ensigns paid after 48. days. And at the very same time, and
the same place his Excellency saw eight English Ensigns embattailed in the
same Field, that for heads of men were more than 16. of the other Ensigns, and
for Arms and weapon full double so strong: And yet these eight Ensigns stood
not her Majesty (paying honorably) in so much as the other 18. so dishonourably
paid by the States, by many thousand Gilders a month.

Most foolish therefore, and peevish is such saving in these Martial causes,
being more absurd far and fond than other of those my first Examples of the
paltering Husbandman or miserable Merchant that stumbleth at a straw, and
swalloweth a block, and by greedy pinching for a penny, fondly loses or
wastes pounds.

But that dishonor that falls out in these actions is much more to be
respected: For, if eight Ensigns (well and truly paid) shall ever be
stronger in all Martial encounters than 18. of the other: how much more honor
shall it be with eight Ensigns to have performed any honorable action than
to have done the same with eighteen? As contrariwise the foil, to loose eight
Ensigns is far less than to loose eighteen.

Again, if the States had rayzed a mean Army (not of such Mercenarie
vagabondes as would serve on any conditions, resolving by pickorie and
extortion to enrich themselves) but of temperate, honest, painful, valiant
soldiers which full easily with sufficient and complete pay they might have
done, and then have kept a steady hand on Martial discipline, severely to have
punished such cormorants as should any way have spoiled or extorted on the
country Booer, or honest Burgher. They had never tasted those horrible Ruins
of their towns and desolation of their countries, that afterward for many
years they did. For it was not the great Subsidies or Leuies made on Brabant,
and Flaunders, and other vpland Provinces by the States united that made them
all revolt afterward to the Prince of Parma, but only these abuses, spoils
and pickories. For in Holland and Zealand they have ever since, and do still
levy as great and far greater contributions than ever they did on those
malconte^ted Provinces: But it was the wrongs, injuries, Insolences and
Extorsions committed by this crew of degenerate bastardly soldiers or rather
picke^s, the servants or rather idolatrous slaves of their misbegotten
Mistress Madam Picorea that alienated the hearts utterly of these Provinces.
The people having reason to revolt to the government of Papists or Turks rather
than to endure the outrages committed on them, their wives and daughters by
those their own hirelings so deeply wounding them in wealth and honor. For
what Tribute, Subsidy or Task had not been far more tolerable to any
honest or Christian people than to have such a crew of hell hounds laid upon
them? As, not content to have the best chambers, beds, and fare that their host
could yield them; yea wine also bought and far fet for them, but would
enforce them to pay money also, and yet at their parting (in recompense or
their good Entertainment) rifle them of all that was portable of any value,
besides other indignities not to be spoken of by honest tongues, or heard by
modest ears. The horror of these villains has made Holland wisely and
prouidently these douzen years and more yearly to give ten fold greater
contributions (yearly I say respectively weighed) than the greatest Subsidy or
benevolence that ever our Nation gave during all these 34. years of her
Majesty's most gracious and happy Reign. The which they do most frankly and
willingly still continue to maintain the wars out of the bowels of their own
country, and to free themselves of those horrible oppressions which they saw
executed among their Neighbors, which wise Resolution of theirs God has also
so favored and blessed with extraordinary aids and favors many ways, as
these of Holland are not the poorer, but rather much richer than they were
before the wars began, Notwithstanding their huge contributions are such, as
in common reason a man would think were able to beggar any mighty Kingdom:
That little country of Holland only (being for scope of ground and firm land
not comparable with the least of any one of many Shieres in England) yealdeth
to the wars yearly a greater contribution than half the fifty Shires of
England ever yet did in any one year by any Subsidy. It is not therefore the
great charges or contributions that beggereth or spoyleth any country, but the
ill disposing of the Treasure levied, and the ill government of the Souldierie
therewith maintained, which becomes indeed more odious and intolerable to
any Christian Nation or people far, than any Tax or Subsidy that is possible
to be cessed or imposed on them: Neither is it the multitude of Ensigns that
terrifieth the Enemy, but choice election of the Soldiery, and the true
execution of Martial discipline.

Hereof it has come to pass that so small handfuls of Spaniards (while they
were well paid and discipline) did at sundry times foil so many Ensigns of
these Mercenary Freeboters: And contrariwise after those Spaniards fell to
mutenies (for want of pay) and to committing of like extorsisions and
insolences on the Country people, they caused a sudden revolt of all the
Provinces.

But for our own Nation I hold it a Maxim most assured, and hardly by any
one Example, to be disprooued: That ever we received any foil where our
Ensigns were complete, but only in such places, and at such times, as our
Ensigns were maintained (not like the eight Ensigns before mentioned in the
Earl of Leicesters time in her Majesty's pay) but rather as the other eight in
the States pay, as will be found too too true, if it be deeply examined.

The like I say in pay of Officers and superior Commanders, that to give them
honorable and convenient entertainment is not only not unprofitable, but most
profitable and gainefull to any King, Prince, or State: And the contrary (I
mean by accepting or admitting such Commanders or Officers as will offer
themselves to serve for small or base entertainment) is a thing unto the King
or State not only dishonorable, and most hurtful (in respect of the seuice)
but also even in regard of their Treasure only most unprofitable, damageable,
and discommodious, as I will prove by manifest and true reasons.

But because the Discourse would be ouer-long and tedious, if I should
particularly enter into the office or charge of every several kind of
Officer or Commander, I will only choose two, of either sort one, which (to
conjecture and discern of all the rest) may abundantly suffice to prove my
present Proposition.

Among Commanders therefore I will only entreat of the Collonell or Maestro
del Campo. And among chief Officers of the Comptroller, Censor, or Muster
Master General.

And first of Colonels I say, if they take upon them that charge to command
any convenient number of Ensigns appropriat to their Regiment, it is fit their
entertainment be proportional to their reputation and charge: The which as it
far surmounteth a private Captain, so ought his allowance to be accordingly,
as well for maintenance of a convenient Table, to entertain the chief officers
of his regiment. As chiefly such gentlemen of value as many times (without
charge or office to see the wars upon their own private expenses) will
follow him.

For if this Collonell, have not such entertainment from his Prince or State,
he must of necessity either spoil or undo himself to maintain that port
is fit, which few in these days will, or sor remedy help himself by
tollerating frauds in Musters, and suffering the Captains of his Regiment to
keep their bands half empty: Out of the which both Captains and Coronell
may pay themselves double and treble the greatest entertainment that ever any
King yet gave, but not without the very ruin and utter dishonor of their
Nation.

For what Captain is there so foolish miserable, (if he make no conscience to
gain by robbing of his Prince or State;) that will not be content to give one
half of these his foul and corrupt gains, to enjoy the other? Knowing
otherwise he shall not only quite loose that base gain, if he be called to
account for it, but his reputation and life also, if Justice be duly
executed. But if by his chief Colonels favor, he may be paid for 150. and
keep scarce 60. to defend his Ensign, and so gain a thousand pounds a year
clear, to give the moytie yearly thereof to go scot-free with the rest, and
escape the shame thereunto due, he makes a very profitable bargain if such
dishonest lucre deserve the name of profit, which course of gain is so much
the more damnable and perrilous to be suffered, because it utterly
discourageth the honest valiant Captains, and enricheth the contrary: And so
tends to the very Ruin and ouertherthrow of all true virtue and value.

For if the chief Commander be so affected as he will be by any such
device to supply his wants: In very gratitude and policy he must most
countenance those that yield him most benefit: And those Captains may be most
beneficial to him, that (by keeping their Bands most feeble) do most rob
their Prince or State. And so the worst persons (of such Commanders) must of
force be most favored and countenanced.

Farther these Favorites if they commit any other Extorsions on their
Countrymen, Friends, or Allies, being entered into such a League with their
Commanders, it is likely they may find the more Favor also, and thereby more
boldly by all devices and extortions rake-in Wealth to maintain themselves,
their Patrones, and Followers in excessive bravery.

Whereas the right valiant Captain indeed, that (keeping his Band strong and
complete with armed soldiers, gaining nothing above his bare Wages, nor will
extort unhonestly upon any Friend or Allie, and his wages (besides his meat and
Atmes) scarcely sufficient twice in a year to buy him a Suit of Buffe)
Remains as a Man contemned and disgraced: Where the other by his Robberies
and pickories can flourish in Monthly change of suits of silk, dawbed with
Embroderies of gold and silver lace, and Jewels also: And so countenanced by
such Commanders Favor, and by such other mighty Friends as his spoils may
procure. That (...) road and at home also generally this picking, (...) rousing
Freebooter shall be called a brave (...) ^^llant soldier, yea Fit to be a
Collonell or great ^^^^ander that can drink, and dice etc, with the proudest:
When the true, valiant, honest, and right Martial Captain indeed is not able
in such riotous Expenses to keep port with the others waiting Servants.

But whether these silken, golden, embroydered delicate Captains (with their
demi feeble Ensigns) Or the other plain leather, well armed, sober,
painful, valiant Captains (with their complete Ensigns of armed soldiers
maintained as their companions) shall do their Prince or Country more honor
at a day of Service? If we have not yet learned, we shall I doubt hereafter,
if these abuses be not reformed, with the dishonorable loss of many more
English Ensigns, than all the Chronicles these 500. years before could tell
us of, to remain for an vnhonorable monument of these our errors, to all
posterity.

For I have ever found it in my experience a Rule almost infallible among
private Captains: The more brave and gallant the Captain is in his apparel,
and Wastfull in Expenses, the more poor, feeble, weak and miserable ye shall
for the most part find his soldiers full of lice many times, and stinking for
want of a shirt to change the^, when such Commanders with some few Favorites
are over sweet and fine.

And then is it any Marvel if so brave and gallant a Gentleman (perfumed
perhaps with Musk and Syuet) disdain to haunt the filthy Corpse du gardes of
ragged, loathsome, lousy soldiers? Or is it any marvel then, (where Captains
give this Example:) If Lieutenants and Ensigns also do take their ease, and
living in like delicacy, disdain to associate themselves with their poor
flocks.

If Towns of great Importance have been lost by the cowardice of some one
Corpse du guard, that beastly have abandoned without blows, a ground of such
advantage as was defensible against any Royal Army: Only, because at the
approach thereof, there was neither Captain, Lieutenant nor Ensign present on
the guard, but a knot only of these poor Ghosts: And thereby dishonorably a
town of great Importance lost, very experience (me thinks) should teach us
rather to choose such Captains as would so apparel themselves, and regard
their fellow soldiers, as they should not disdain their company, or abhor
their stink.

I have read, that a worthy General of the Graecians, after he had with a
small Army of valiant, rude, plain, sober, obedient soldiers conquered ten
times as many of the rich, silken, golden, riotous perfumed Persians, abounding
with horses and chariots and Armours of gold, because (quoth he) the Persians
were so delicately and daintily bred, as they were not able to abide the savor
of my soldiers arme-holes.

I would therefore wish no Captains chosen but such as should contemn utterly
such feminine delicacy in apparel and wastfull riotous expenses, and could be
content to make himself a companion of his fellow soldiers, and think his
honor consisted (not in gay garments) but in good Arms, in the strength of
his band, in his travels, pains, watchings, and adventures, and not in
c^rowsing or perfuming, or any other delitious, idle, or rather effeminate
unmanly vanity. For as Marius the Roman General auerred: Munditias
mulieribus, viris laborem conuenire: So, if Soldiers and Captains would
contend one to excel another therein, (I mean in Military labors and
careful aduenterous endeauours, contemning all delitious pompes and idle ease,
as effeminate and unworthy their professions) then should we see a great
alteration, both of the fortune and fame of our Nation which heretofore has
ever been comparable with the best and most renowned.

But the only or chief means to bring this to pass, is, first to allow unto
the General and chief Commanders so honorable and convenient Entertainment,
as may suffice to maintain the port and honor of their place, without
practicing or consenting to any corruptions, especially such as utterly
disgrace the good, and enrich the bad, deface the painful, careful, sober,
valiant Captain, and advance the idle, negligent, riotous coward. But above
all things to have him detested more than a coward, that (of a base corrupt
mind) shall seek to make his gain by keeping his band feeble and weak, and
by deceipts, fraud and periuries at Musters to contriue the same: For by this
means he does not only rob his Princes treasure, but is also guilty of the
blood of those soldiers that are slain for want of hands to fight when the
honor of their Nation comes to trial.

As all true Martial Discipline therefore is not to be revived and put in
execution among our Nation: So especially that part which concerns this
mighty and gross abuse (above all other) ought most severely to be regarded.
And to the end Officers of Musters may by the General or chief Governors be
countenanced in their honest proceedings (for discovery and correction of such
abominable frauds and Robberies as so usually and shamelesly have been
practiced) I would wish their own particular bands (where they have any)
should always be allowed them without check, for any default: presuming in
honor they would be the more careful to be an example to other, when they
shall see themselves by their Prince so trusted. And then having less cause
(in respect of their private profit) to favor any such deceit in others,
there is no doubt, but (having also honorable entertainme^t) they will (as they
are by a double duty bound) honorably advance that course of discipline which
shall make their Armies victorious, themselves famous, and their Country
felicious; especially if due regard be had in the choice of such chief and
principal Commanders, who ought indeed to be honorable and not base minded
persons.

And as good trees are not judged by the blossoms, but by the fruits: So
surely are men rather by their deeds than by shows or partial Fame to be
discerned: For, as in all other vocations, so chiefly in the wars by common
Fame such Commanders ever shall be most extolled of their Followers, as most
content their humors. Now if Captains humors in this age of corruption, be for
the greater part infected or depraved, to make choice yet by common fame or
opinion, should be an error exceeding great: For as in the pestilent Feauers
and like violent diseases, the Patient many times does far better like that
Physician which suffers him to take cold liquors, and other pleasing
phancies, agreeable to his appetite, which as very poisons do cause his death,
than such a Physician as prescribes a severe diet, accompanied with such
bitter Medicines as only is able to save his life, and restore his health and
strength. And as the error therein were great to choose a Physician after such
sick-mens appetites: so surely for reformation of these Martial diseases, the
error were no less absurd at the beginning, to choose such Generals or chief
Commanders by common Fame, or liking of most Captains. But after Martial
discipline is again in some good measure restored, and that Captains begin to
detest riotous expenses in meat, drink, and apparel (as effeminate
delicacie) and contend who may exceed other in labor, pains, watchings,
diligence, and virtuous Martial Actions, having a right taste and sense in
deed of true honor and Martial valor, and wherein the same consists, and
by some convenient continuance of Exercise and use made the same not grievous
but familiar unto them: Then were there no more compotent Judges (of the
ability and sufficiency of a General,) than such, as (aduenturing their
lives with him) have greatest need and use thereof.

But as that famous General and Censor Cato at Rome exclamed in his time, The
public had need of a sharp and merciless Physician, and a violent
purgation: And that therefore they were to choose (not such Commanders as
should be grateful and gracious,) but resolute and severe: So surely much more
in this time and state of wars have we cause to proclaim such choice, or
rather great Princes and Magistrates to have especial care and regard thereof.

Now therefore if the Collonell or chief Commander be chosen such an
honorable person, as of himself abhorres deceit, fear God, contemn
gourmandize and quaffing, and other more base and beastly pleasures, or
effeminate delicacies, by the example of many worthy Roman Generals, as also
of that famous victorious Lacedemonian General King Agesilaus, it shall be
easy for him (having convenient and honorable pay) to banish these Monsters
out of his Camp or government, as unworthy for Soldiers professing Arms,
and fitter for the pompous rich slaves of Persia.

But if contrariwise any chief Commanders be persons that will wink at
deceipts or frauds in Musters, and make their profit (as infinitely they may
thereby) no wonder if all the inferior Captains insolently put the same in
execution, and keep their Counsels and ordinary Consultations how to exploite
and execute those deceipts, and by all dishonest practices, slanders, and
lybels, etc, to disgrace any Officer that shall oppose himself dutifully
against it: And so their Bands continued ever feeble, weak, and miserable.

Or if this Coronell or chief Commander be a person that has no compassion
on the poor private Soldiers, nor care to preserve and maintain their lives,
but rather (respecting how largely he may make his gain by their deaths
(expose them to the Butcherie, ye shall presently have almost all the
Captains regard the^ less than dogs.

Or if the Collonell or General (forgetting that right Lacedemonian law, that
whosoever did save his life by flight in the field, was infamous ever after
even to his grave) do take so little shame (of running away in the field) as
he will have for himself a horse of swift cariere always in readiness upon
any danger to take his leave: What marvel if ye have inferior Captains
provided for the like? Yea many times Liuetenants, and Ensigns also? And what
is then to be expected, but dishonorable flight, shame and confusion,
whenever they are roundly charged by any soldiers?

If the Collonell or chief Commander be a man, that (regarding wholly his
profit) will wink at the extorsions of his Captains, they have reason to
spare him half their pay, or all their Imprestes, for that they can full
easily (from the Booer or Burgher under their crushing) extort much more than
the greatest pay any Christian King yet gave, and thereby so enrich themselves
with Gold and Jewels, as they have no reason any more to hazard their life,
but to provide themselves good horses to escape away with their wealth
whensoever they shall be charged: Leaving their soldiers to the slaughter, by
whose deaths also there may grow a good Dividend, to be shared among such
artificial Fugitives.

If Coronels or chief Commanders of their ease, pleasure or private respects
hold it no disgrace or shame to be absent from their Regiments: No marvel
if any inferior Captains be ready to follow such discipline also, and
consequently all their Favorites and persons best appointed. And then what
marvel if the silly Remnant of the feeble flock (having scarcely Sheepeheard
or Sheepeheards Dog left to take the care and charge of them) become a pray
to the Ravening Wolf, that will not let slip so good an opportunity.

But if the Coronell or chief Commander himself be such a one as takes no
shame in Field to save his life by flight: It is not strange that Captains
under his charge should imitate his discipline. And then much less reason have
private soldiers to stand so much upon their honor, or rather to die than
turn their face. But if such indeed be the true profession of a soldier
rather to die reasolutely in his rank, than turn his face, or cowardly by
flight to save his life. If this be the duty of the meanest and most private
soldier, then how much rather is the Captain, and much more the Coronell
bound to such an honorable Resolution?

If in the most honorable and Martial Nations of the World, Such cowardice in
a private soldier has been noted with perpetual shame, how much more ought
it to be detested in Captains? And then a fortiori in their Superiors.

But if by corrupt custom and education in licentious loose wars, such
principal persons be grown so far past Shame, as not only to commit these
base and vnsouldierlike errrors, but also (that most miserable is) in their
ordinary Discourses and banquets amids their Sacrifices to Bacchus at open
Tables to vaunt of these their Stratagems, Recounting in how many Encounters,
the places where, and when they fled gallantly, and spurred their horses in
their Violent Retreits, who might run swiftest: What shall we say but that
such degenerate shameless persons might (with much better reason) vant how
many Bastinadoes they had received bravely?

For surely cowardice in a Man (especially professing Arms) has ever been
accounted the foulest vice: As Incontinency the greatest dishonestie in a
woman. And as an honest woman may fortune by violence to be abused, and yet
all her life time after cannot but blush to have it spoken of: So though an
honest man (I mean a valiant man in the Field) by violence and multitude of
Enemies unhappily should be enforced to turn his face: Yet ashamed should he
be ever to hear it spoken of. But as that State were horribly wicked where
women should aduant openly of their Incontinency: So, desperate is their
disease that are so far past shame to aduant of their cowardice: And
miserable that State must needs become, where such impudency should be
tolerable for men professing Arms shamelesly to vaunt of their fearful
flights, or as they are termed in their new Discipline, Their violent retraitz.

But (that most lamentable is) many times it may come to pass, that these
impudent Runawaies being escaped (consorting themselves) shall by Rumors,
letters, or printed Pamphlets perhaps sometimes disgrace those valiant men that
resolutely died in the place, rather than they would shame themselves, and
dishonor their country with a cowardly flight. And then such Fugitives
(extolling one another with Heroical names, having also by their former
pikories store of crowns to purchase friends, by such Thrasonicall Stratagems)
of the ignorant multitude be counted gallant soldiers, and fit for new
employments. An error of all other the most dangerous: That (contrary to all
Martial discipline) that fault that deserves death or dishonorable disarming
under a Gallows, should be honored with new employments, or greater credit.

But as the disgrace of a few Ringleaders of Runawaies and other corruptions
would wonderfully repair the honor of any Nation: So the tolleration of them,
and much more the employing of them again in new charges by their Example may
breed effects most dangerous and fearful, if in time (by due execution of
right Martial discipline) such weeds be not eradicate.

The Lacedaemonians (by due obedience to their Martial laws) were become the
most mighty and puissant State of all the Graecians, which then for Heroical
prowess surmou^ted all the world besides, as by the multitude of their
victories on the Oriental Nations, and Asiaticall mighty Empires is apparent:
Whose huge Armies and innumerable Forces they vanquished in a number of
Battles with a very few, but choice, painful, sober, well trained and
disciplined Bands, being accustomed from their infancy to travail, pains,
sobriety, and hardness. And by the same custom and education learned also with
all duty to obey their Superiors, Reverence the Elders, and to fear nothing
but shame and infamy: And of all infamies none so great to a man there as
cowardice, being by their very laws noted with disgrace perpetual to his
death that ran away from his Enemies in the field, or saved his life by flight:
Which fault was held so soul and base, as the very Mothers abhorred and
renounced them, yea and some with their own hands have killed such of their
sons as by flight in the field have saved their lives, as Traitors to their
country, and dishonorable to their parents: Yea they were disgraded from all
honor and employment, marked by shauing of half their heads and beards,
derided and disdained of all their countrymen, and lawful for all men to abuse
and beat them as serviceable Slaves. These were the shames ordained for
Fugitives in those warlike Nations. Whereupon a King of theirs being demanded
how it came to pass that the Lacedaemonians so far excelled all others in
prowess and arms? Because (quoth he) they are taught from their infancy not
to fear death, but shame. As Marius also that famous Roman General said of
himself, he had learned to fear nothing but Infamy. They therefore that by
education in lawless wars grow so impudent as to vant of their foiles and
flights (which by true Martial laws, especially in leaders and Commanders
should be noted and punished with perpetual shame) are so far of from true
Soldiery, and Martial honor as they are fitter (like most dangerous contagious
sheep) to be expelled and severed in time, lest they infect with their leprosy
the whole troup and Military flock: howsoever the corruptions of this age and
ignorance of the dangers yt ensue by contempt of true Martial honor may excuse
or delay their due punishment or shame for a time. For if a chief Commander
shall neither blush to save himself by flight, nor corruptly to make his gain by
the death of his poor Soldiers through Frauds, perjury, and deceit in
Musters: his readiest plot to grow rich and puissant is, presently so soon as
he can finger his soldiers pay, or Princes Treasure, To devise some desperate
vnfeasible Service, where he may bring his Fantery to have their throats cut,
and then having choice horses to save himself by flight, and his confederate
Favorites with the pay of the dead, they may banquet and riot their fill, and
have so great Masses of Treasure to make friends, as none of these Tragedies
can come to vnripping, if once it be persuaded lawful or intolerable for a
General or chief Commanders to save themselves by flight.

But the tollaration thereof and of these Frauds and abuses in Musters, and
the immeasurable sweet gains that bad consciences see they may make thereby
(if they can also shake of shame, and extinguish true Martial discipline) is
the chiefest ^^ use of all base and dishonorable corruptions, and will still
increase such impudency and insolency as corrupt persons by sufferance will
grow unto: Which ought so much the more severely and speedily with the sword of
Justice and true Military Laws in time to be corrected, as the continuance
does make the disease more desperate and perrilous to their State, and more
hard to be recured, when wealthy wickedness thereby gets such authority
and purchases such parties, as after by Justice shall hardly be suppressed,
unless the Sovereign Majesty or Ephores of the State in time I say minister
the bitter Medicine, that only must cure this pestilent and contagious
sickness.

For if Demetria of Sparta with her own hands killed (for cowardice) her son
Demetrien as a degenerate Monster not worthy to be called a Lacedemonian or to
walk on the earth, being (as she said) a monument dishonorable to his country
and parents, and the like done by diverse other Ladies and worthy Women of that
State to their own children, for abandoning only of their Rank, to save
their lives when they were forced with violence and Multitudes of their
Enemies: What could these worthy women have done to such sons as
premeditately before hand provided them horses of swift carrier to save
themselves, so soon as they shall find any danger growing. Or if this fault
of Flying or abandoning their Rank only has been in a private soldier so
abhorred, as his own Mother has executed Martial Justice upon him, with
detestation of his cowardice as unworthy to drink of the River Eurotas, or to
bear the name of a Lacedemonian: How much more is the same to be detested in
a Commander, On whose error or cowardice the lives of so many as are under his
charge depends, besides the dishonor of his Nation?

Or if that fault could receive in that Martial Nation no excuse, though they
were enforced thereto by the violence and Multitude of their enemies: How much
more abominable is it in them that of purpose before hand are provided of
their means to run away and abandon those for whose safety it were their
duty to sacrifice their lives? And by leaving their soldiers to the butchery,
to make their excessive gains by the pays of the dead and Robbery of their
Prince and Country. If so many worthy Generals both Greeks and Romans
(that full easily at sundry battles might have escaped and saved their own
lives) have refused utterly both horses and all other means offered them to
save themselves, and chosen rather (when all hope was past) to sacrifice their
lives among their troops, than to return to yield a dishonorable account of
the blood of their soldiers: How much more should we abhor such as not
only commit these base errors, but impudently also are not ashamed to make
their vauntes thereof?

If Manlius Torquatus when his son was challenged by a chief Commander on
the contrary side, (only because without leave he did accept the particular
Combat, although he had the Victory, and struck of his Enemies head in sight
of both Armies) would nevertheless have executed the Martial law upon his
valiant Son (Only) because he brake one point of Martial discipline: What
reward do we think this General would have bestowed on one of our
shameless Fugitives?

If this famous General so highly respected the honor and safety of his
country, as he resolved to execute the laws Martial of this his only and
most valiant son: Not for any cowardice or corruption, but only for want of
due obedience (in accepting without leave the Combat) choosing rather to
deprive himself of his only son and incomparable Jewel, than the Martial
discipline of his country should in the least point be corrupted. How much
more has the sacred Majesty of a Prince and honorable Ephores of any State
cause with severity in time to see due execution of Martial Justice on such
(as not moved by Magnanimity or hautie courage, but contrariwise of a corrupt
custom and base mind, for lucre, pleasure, or riot only) commit
(premeditately) not one but many of those gross and shamfull abuses and
breaches of true Martial discipline: That in those days and States the most
inferior soldier of an Army for fear of perpetual shame would not: Faults
I say so far surmounting this error of the worthy Manlius son, as the
foulest leprosy or pestilent Fever does the Ephimeris Ague, Tending indeed not
only to the robbing of their Prince and public Treasure, and to the spoil
and betraying of their fellow soldiers (Men many times of better valor and
worth far than such Leaders or superior Commanders) but also to the utter
overthrow of all true Martial valor, and dishonor perpetual of their
Nation, and smally tending to the utter ruin of their Prince and Country.

But to pass over infinite honorable Praecedents of Antiquity, to return
again to our own Age, I say, That even by experience of the wars, and
Nations of our own time it is manifest, that these abuses and corruptions have
been the very ruin of the Realms and States where they have been
practiced, as in time they will be also of all other that shall admit the
continuance of them. And first for France that worthy soldier Mounsier de la
Noe in the Military Discourses plainly shows, how with these civil wars
these corruptions there began, and by what unlawful Generation Mistress
Picorea was at Boygenye first begotten, which bastard in short time had such a
Multitude of Servants both in France, and after in the Low Countries, as they
created their mistress a Lady: And that mighty Lady Madam Picorea has now
so many brave servants, (not only among the French and Dutch, but of other
Nations also) as it is to be feared they will make her a Queen, to the Ruin
of all Kings, Queens and Realms that shall endure her, and not suppress in
time both her, and her shameless presumptuous, lewd, licentious servants.

What extreme misery they have within these thirty years reduced all France
unto, we see: What desolation in Flaunders, Brabant, and other base country
Provinces, by the Ruins remaining, is manifest. Shall we suffer her and her
followers also in our Nation, to see what they can likewise do of England?
Absit omen. But the French Proverb says most truly;

Qui par son peril est Sage celuy, est Sage malhereux: And, Foelix quem faciunt
aliena pericula cautum.

He tells of an honorable Execution done by that worthy soldier the Armirall
of France in hanging up a Captain and 5 or 6 other chief servants of this
basterdly lady Picorea adoring their gallows with their booties, which
honorable soldier ( Shattillion I mean) he commends highly to have been a
most fit and meet Physician to cure this Malady: For he was (says La Noe)
severe and violent, neither could any Favor or vain frivolous excuses take
place with him if the party were faulty: Which is indeed the only way to
cure it, For it is most fond and vain to imagine that either by verbal
persuasions, or printed Laws or proclamations it is possible to cure this
fore, but with armed Justice some of the Ringleaders must be seized and
roughly chastized, to bring a terror upon the rest. For if these mischiefs
(says that worthy Soldier) were like to other crimes, where men (condemned
by public Sentence) are quietly content to be led by the Executioner to
receive their due, they might full soon be banished. But they fare more like
a rough and restife horse, that (being touched with his Riders spur) lasheth,
yerketh, and biteth, and therefore such a Jade must roughly and rigorously be
corrected and made to know his fault: For if ye spare him or seem to fear
him, he will sure unhorse you, for generally these Military vices are
presumptuous. And if they smell you fear them they will brave you: But give
them the terror of Laws, and their due punishments severely, and so shall you
cure their malady. For most merciful is that rigor, that (by dispatch of
four or five) many save the lives of so many hundreds, or rather thousands,
and recure such a pestilent contagion as is able in time to subvert the most
mighty Realms and Monarchies. When iron is foully kankored, it is not enough
to anoint it with oil, but it must be roughly and forcibly scoured and
polished, to make it return to his perfect brightness. And if in Pleuresies and
other like corrupt exulcerations we have no remedy but to open a vein, and
content our selves to part with many drops of our blood to save the whole body
from destruction: So must we be content (though it were with the loss of many
such corrupt persons) to recure our Military body from utter confusion:
Seeing thereupon depends the health or ruin also of the whole politic body
of the Realm: For the French have a true Proverb.

Le Medicin piteux fait vne mortelle play
And most wisely the Poet.

Obsta principijs, sero Medicinaparatur,
Cum mala per longas inualuere moras.
As France and Flanders both our next Neighbors by their calamities may teach
us, where no kind of abuse or corruptions have been practiced: Their Bands
not 40. for 100. strong. Which kind of Picoree Mounsier de la Noe terms
Desrober enfalquin non pas engentilz homes: But of gentlemen all piciories
ought indeed to be detested, as fitter for base minded slaves, than honouable
free minded soldiers. But for other extortions and Robberies upon the poor
Payzants, Booers, or husbandmen, it were as hard to name any one kind that
has been omitted, as to recite particularly every sort that has been
executed by these insatiable cormorants, whose maw is never full though their
gourmandize be infinite, besides the defacing of so many goodly Churches and
stately Palaces in the country, as by the Remnants of their Ruins is to be
seen, and the Ransacking of Villages, Castles, Towns and Cities, and infinite
outrages otherwise committed in all places where this misbegotten Ladies
servants or filching followers could lay their graceless hands. But seeing the
first pretext and color they had in France to engender this monster, and since
in the base countries to foster her, was by reason of want only of convenient
pay: Which enforced even the most famous Generals of our time (I mean the
Prince of Condee, and the Prince of Orange) at the first to tolerate these
cankers, which after wrought the very Ruin, of those States. It is a singular
warning to King and Princes that have Realms to command, that not yet so
far corrupted, and able to yield maintenance for honest and right Martial
soldiers, by no means (for want of convenient wages, stipend, and pay) to
give any color or excuse to this degenerate bastardly kind of Seruitors, or
rather Pickers, to excuse their corrupt Arts, or Devilish crafts and abuses.

And for their Subjects of all degrees rather to give double and treble
Subsidies yearly to continue an honorable pay, for maintenance of sober,
valiant, painful, honest, obedient soldiers in true Martial discipline,
than to become a pray to these merciless carrowsing, degenerate insatiable
monsters. And it is to be hoped the present King of France (if God bless him
with any obedience of his Subjects (as were to be wished, and his constancy
in Religion, and other Heroical virtues meriteth) will no doubt by all due
means in his Territories endeavor to procure a Reformation of these horrible
disorders, which is yet utterly impossible for him to redress, being in that
state, by long continuance grown to a most difficile and hard cure.

But as the Estates of the united Provinces (by means of such bad pay and
collections of corruptions in their Martial or rather mercenarie Commanders)
did also for many years together continually lose by peacemeale a number of
strong Fortes, Towers, and Provinces in their possessions, being driven almost
on every side down into their Marches where they were enforced to implore her
Majesty's present aid to escape their impendent ruin: So, having of late (by
honorable Example of her Majesty's Bands) well reformed that their base kind
of pay, and in part thereby also their other abuses (which of late years has
crept in among their Enemies) have been able to make head and recover again,
many of those important places that before they lost: Repayring thereby
somewhat the fault of their former Errors.

Yet when I persuade to give unto all Colonels and such like chief Commanders
such Entertainment as may suffice them contentedly to live, without seeking so
much as (by tolleration or suffering of Frauds to enrich themselves, or to
supply their wants. It is no part of my meaning to have Colonels so commune,
or such multitude of needless Officers, as in disorderly wars has been
accustomed. For one Collonell or Maestro del Campo may very well suffice for
three or four thousand men, and the contrary is but an abuse and embasing of
that name which should not be bestowed but on old soldiers of judgment and
experience, able to discharge a place of that importance. And this Officer
having (for himself, his Martial, his Serieant Mayor, and other necessary
chief Officers of his Regiment) convenient allowance to maintain on
honorable Table, the inferior private Captains may and ought to content
themselves with meaner port till (by virtue and desert) they be advanced to
higher place: And (abhorring all vanity in apparel, and wastefull expenses
in baser appetites) endeavor themselves by travel, care, good Arms, and
trayning of their companies (in right Martial exercises and exploits in the
Field upon their Enemies) to make their value known, and by such Aemulation
one to excel another, whereby they may be chosen and advanced to higher
offices: The private Captains place being indeed but the first step toward
Martial honor: And therefore not to be accompanied with such pomp, as now
is too too usual.

It may perhaps be replied. So long as men are content to accept these glorious
names only (without any charge to their Princes purses, or craving any increase
of pay) it is a small matter to content fantasies with Feathers.

I answer, it it a matter of far greater consequence than is conceived: For,
first it embaseth those degrees of honor which chiefly should allure right
Martial minds, and makes them seem vile, when they are so common as they
fall to the the lot of persons unworthy such degree, and so grow in contempt;
and not affected after by the true honorable minds: Besides wanting
maintenance for the due port of that place, they are enforced to be patrons to
all or many of those disorders and abuses before mentioned, unless they would
choose to undo themselves and friends to maintain it otherwise, which few I
think now a days use to do.

Farther having once taken a greater name, they disdain ever after to serve in
any inferior calling, fitter indeed for their Experience: And so become
persons altogether unprofitable, and to maintain those glorious names enforced
(by shift of brain) to try conclusions: And so by all these means the cause
of greater inconveniences.

I conclude therefore by all these reasons before alleged, and the success of
plain experience also (both of old time, and in our own age) that as it is
more honorable for the Prince, and most necessary for the advancement of the
Service, to have all chief needful Commanders to have such complete
Entertainment, as they may (without extortion or corruption in themselves, or
alteration of abuses in others) maintain their place with Reputation, and
execute Martial discipline with severity. So discharging their duties
honorably and honestly they shall save at least one third part of the royal or
public Treasure, and yet the forces (though not in show of Ensigns to scare
Dawes) yet in armed hands to conquer Enemies far more strong and puissant
than those multitudes of colors farced with Freebooters or other seely unarmed
Ghosts or disordered Mutinous persons, that by licentious education will
scarcely endure the pains of Watch and Ward, or abide the due execution of any
true Martial discipline. And as these superior Governors and Commanders
(doing their duties) are worthy of all reputation, credit, advancement, and
honor: So contrariwise, after they have convenient entertainment, if they
shall be found the Patrones or Pandars to such corruptions and abuses as tend
to the ruin of all true discipline Militare, I would wish them disgraded, and
with all shame disarmed as incapable ever after to their grave, of any true
Martial honor.

And for proof of this Proposition in all the chief officers also of an
Army, for a taste of the rest having chosen to treat of the Martial Censor,
or general Comptroler of Musters.

I say there are of this kind of Officers (as likewise of all others) two
sorts: The one, honest, just, fearing God, and respecting the honor,
commodity, and advancement of their Princes Service. The other, neither just,
nor honest, nor possessed with any Fear or Reverence of God: but (aiming only
at favor, wealth, and advancement in this corrupt world) care not what
becomes of the Service, so they may by any means enrich themselves, and
purchase friends to back them in all their dishonest proceedings. But more
briefly or plainly to set forth the different or repugnant paths of these two
sorts of Officers, I cannot better than by these Brief Conferences of the Good
and Bad ensuing.

A conference of a Good and Bad Muster-maister, with his inferior Commissaries
of Musters, by the fruits to discern the Tree.
The Good.
THis Officer will not willingly serve, but with such a competent and
convenient entertainment both for himself and for his inferior Commissaries,
Clerks, and Substitutes, as he need not take Bribe or Benevolence, or depend
on the favor of any, but the General alone.

This Officer will be in his Expenses temperate, rather sparing than wasting:
that he be not by want enforced to strain his conscience, and deceive his
Prince.

This Officer seeks by all means to cause the General to establish Laws
and Ordinances, whereby orderly Entrances and discharges of Soldiers may be
registered, and thereby neither the Prince, nor the Soldier abused.

This Officer delivers these Laws to his inferior Commissaries with other
strait particular Instructions, and calls them to account how they have
discharged their Duties.

This Officer will not set down any penny check certain upon any Captain or
Band without apparent proof: and for such as cannot be decided, will respite
them to farther trial, That neither Prince, Captain, nor Soldier be
defrauded or injured.

This officer if any such doubt arise in the Checques as he cannot determine
by the Laws established, he either desires the Resolution of the General, or
that it may be determined by a Counsel at war, or some Commissioners,
especially aucthorized to assist him.

This Officer (if the Captains show any reasonable cause to be relieved out of
the Checques, either in respect of the loss of horse, or armor in Service, or
such like that deserves consideration) he presents his proofs thereof,
together with his check to the Lo: General, desiring his Lordship to have
honorable consideration thereof.

This Officer (if he see overmuch familiarity between any of his
Commissaries and Captains) is presently jealous of them, and calls them to
account: And if he find them conniuent or faulty, presently displaceth them,
or if he find no other proof but vehement suspicion, yet remoueth them to
another Garrison, and places such other in their rooms, as may sift and
examine their former behavior.

This Officer, as he would not (to gain a Million) do any Captain apennie
wrong, so will he not for the favor of the greatest persons in the Army, or
his nearest kin or friends stain his conscience to abuse his Prince one
penny: and therefore presents the Checque truly as he finds it, and leaves all
favor to be showed by the Lord General only.

This Officer procures orders also to be established for trayning of the
Soldiers, and himself requires the Captains to perform them: And to
encourage men to do well, will not spare out of his own purse to give rewards
to such shot as by proof he finds the best marke-men.

This Officer will not accept penny nor penni-worth of any Captain, or
Soldier, more, than the fee due to his Office, and that not as a benevolence
secretly, but as his due openly.

This Officer reposing himself only on GOD and his clear conscience,
laboreth not to make other friends but his Prince and General: And for the
General himself will not strain his conscience any way, though he be sure
of many enemies and small backbiting and even to his Prince for faithful
service store of false backebitings: yea the Swanne must be made a Crow, and
the Faulcon a Bussard.

This Officer as he is thus precise himself as neither to give penny for such
an Office, nor to receive Bribe or Benevolence more than due fees: So makes
he a matter of conscience whilst he carries such office to give to any of
his honorable friends any present, lest they or others should have cause to
suspect, he did it to be borne-out in any lewd Action.

The Bad.
This Officer cares not how little Entertainment certain he have for
himself or his Substitutes: presuming he can make what gain he list of his
Office: and make such Friends thereby also, as may bear him out of his
lewdnes. etc.

Such an Officer having so good means to get immeasurablie by playing the
good-fellowe, will spend infinitely, especially in keeping company with such as
must join with him in deceauing the Prince.

Such an Officer can no more abide Laws and Ordinances in Musters, than
lucrous Captain, saying, It barreth the Officer of his discretion, whereby the
Office ought to be directed, and brave men gratified.

Such an Officer likes none of these strict Courses, saying, Among Martial men
a man must play the good-Fellowe, and not to be too pinching of a Princes purse.

Such an officer calls this Examination nice Curiosity, and says, So there
be some Checques for fashion sake it is no matter: make them little enough
that the Captains be not angry, and all is well. One good-fellowe must
pleasure another.

Such an Officer says, It is great folly to loose that prerogative of his
Office, to resolve these doubts as he sees cause; And to subject him self to
Commissioner that is Master of the Musters himself.

Such an Officer will be Chauncellor himself, and never trouble the Lord
General with these matters, who has matters of greater importance to think
upon: saying, Princes purses may not be spared, and brave men must be rewarded,
and Officers must get love and honor by dealing bountifully.

Such an Officer likes none of these severe Iealousies, but likes well such
Officers as be plausible and grateful to the Captains, knowing the Captains
be liberal, and will not be ungrateful to him, seeing he minds and has
good means to requite their courtesy ten fold out of the Princes purse.

Such an Officer, being of another molde, will none of these melancholy
courses: he will pleasure his Friends, and cross his Enemies, and make them
know he is an Officer can please or displease the^: but displease he will not
for all that, and for his excuse alleges that Princes Cooks may give a good
fellow a piece of Beef, and the Butlers or Cellarers a cup of Wine or Beer,
and that he will show his Friends a cast of his Office.

Such an Officer will none of this, saying, it is but a turmoyling of Captains
and soldiers, and intruding on the Captains Offices to offend and discontent
them, and that brave men should not be comptroled, or the imperfection of their
soldiers discovered by such open exercises, and that such expenses are
foolish, and make more Enemies than friends.

Such an Officer will accept any thing money or ware, so it come secretly: and
like a good fellow will (on the Princes purse) requite it tenfolde, as easily
he may do, and none but his fellowetheeues able to accuse him.

Such an Officer will not only for the General, but for any other person of
authority strain his conscience any way, and to all other Captains also so
kind and liberal of his Princess her Majesty's purse, as he is generally
extolled for a brave man; An honorable Officer, an honorable mind, yea and his
Prince also whom he deceiues horribly shall be persuaded the Daw is an Eagle, and
the Cucko a Nightingale.

Such an Officer has no melancholy conceit, but as he will take lastly, so
will he give frankly to the^ that ca^ bear him out: and such a one as
Captains, Colonels, great Officers and all shall extol, how shall his Prince
but like of too, considering the more he robs, the more friends he maks, and
the more he shall be praised: So as if there were no God, the honest were indeed
to be begged for a right natural fool.

But this Conference of either kind I hope it appears plainly both how many
Enemies the honest must of necessity in this age of Military corruptions
draw upon him: And likewise how great a multitude of friends the dishonest may
make by their confederacy with others of that humor in robbing of the Prince or
public Treasure: And therefore how necessary it is that as well the honest
be honored with Entertainment and maintenance answerable to their reputation
and credit of their place, as the contrary well sifted and extraordinarily
punished in terror of abuse.

But as it is apparently best for the honor of any Prince or State to have this
honest office so backed with honorable Entertainment and authority as he may
boldly without fear or regard of any offense control fraud, thereby to
enforce all Captains to keep their Bands complete, or dull to check their
defaults as well for Arms as men: So is it also asmmuch for the profit and
benefit of the king Prince, or State (in respect of the saving of their
Teasure, which no way in the world shall be so extremely and unprofitably
wasted, as by the ignorance, confederacy or abuses of these Officers, if they
be unskillful, baseminded or dishonest: As none can better testify (if they will
truly confess their errors) than the States of the Low Countries, who I think
have had full exeperie^ce of the extreme mischief ensuing by imployme^t of base
co^missaries with poor wages, in place of so great trust and importance.

But somewhat to say of our own Nation, omitting theirs, I thinks there is no
indifferent person but will confess, That in the Earl of Leycesters time of
Government, the English Bands generally in the Queens pay (a very few excepted)
were maintained ever far stranger than either before or since, and great
reason it should be so: For as neither her Majesty, nor any Prince of Europe
ever paid more justly and honorably than in his time, having every four or six
months at farthest till the last, a full pay: So was there also so facile and
easy means for all Captains in her M. pay from time to time the^ still to
supply and Reinforce their Bands without the Captains charges, as never was
neither before nor since. For besides the 40, Footbda^s and 10 Cornets of horse
(by contract in her Ma. pay) there was ever at the charge of the country also
many other English Ensigns all the Earl of Leicesters time, somewhile 20,
sometime forty, and sometime 70, Ensigns at a time, which being by the States
as extreme badly paid then, as the Queens Majesty's were honorably and well:
Any English soldier that could get out of their Bands into the Ensigns of her
Majesty thought themselves advanced from Hell to Heaven. Hereof it came to
pass that all the Earl of Leicesters time the Captains in her Majesty's pay
needed not to send into England for soldiers at great charge, for their
leuying, arming, and transporting to supply their Bands as since they have: but
continually Suite was made unto the^ by soldiers of this ill paid voluntary
Bands to be received into the Queens Majesty's pay: For those soldiers would
rather freely forgive their own pay to their Captains, tha^ tarry in the States
pay, if they could obtain a place in any of her Ma: Bands: And so the Captains
of her Majesty's Bands (without any charge at all) had means then still to
maintain and keep their Ensigns complete, which (neither before nor since)
they ever could (without their charges in sending for and transporting of new
soldiers out of England) for the which they can have no allowance but upon
special petition to her Majesty.

Farther the Earl in his time of Government took such courses to make the
Captains keep their Bands strong, as never were before nor since. For at the
first, finding many Bands of fooftemen left unto him extreme weak, not 60.
soldiers in a Band of 150. and half a doozen such Bands at one Muster and one
place: his Excellency gave a general day to all Captains in her Majesty's
List to have their Bands reinforced strong, or else to be checked according to
to their weakness at the next future Muster: As they should likewlse for his
time receive the benefit for the time past, not to be checked, if they were
found complete, and strong for Service at that their appointed day.

This generally made them all, or the greatest part contend, who might
Reinforce their Bands strongest.

Again his Excellency (being both Governor for the States, and General for
her Majesty) had the commandment of both forces, and thereby caused Musters
General in his time to be always made of all soldiers in every Garrison at
one instant: Whereby the soldiers in the States pay could not fraudulently be
lent or borrowed to fill the Queens Bands at Musters, as otherwise they might
have done.

There was also such Ordinances for Musters established by his Excellency as
never the like in those Provinces (or better in any other) can be showed, to
enforce the Captains that for fear of due check (if for their own credit
any Reputation otherwise they would not) to keep their Bands complete: By which
Precedents the States have since much reformed their Militia.

And with all so honorable Entertainment allowed the Muster-Master General at
that time, as (if he would have but winked willingly at corruptions) he had
been worthy of all shame and blame: Who thereby (having convenient means,
carrying a severe hand (according to his duty) to execute his office justly,
was so maligned of the licentious sort of Captains, as they would vow to keep
their Bands more than complete, rather than he should have a penny check out
of their Bands toward his Entertainment,

The honest therefore and honorable (for their own commendation) and the
licentious and malignant (for fear of check and envy against the
Muster-Master) contend all, who might keep their Bands fairest.

And yet I think there will be found more checks certain, notwithstanding in
the Earls government fiuefolde for respective time, than other before or
after; When the Bands were far weaker, besides the checkes respited to
farther Examination, which would have amounted unto much more, if by conning
practices they had not procured his disgrace.

But as the bestowing some time of a thousand or two thousand pounds a year on
the maintaining of Sluices and Milles for the drayning of Marshes, may in some
Leuelles by clearing of the waters increase their goodness and value of their
grounds twenty thousand pounds a year to be bestowed on these necessary
Engines may leave them so insufficient as they shall not be able to drayne the
waters. And thereby the whole level of Marshes improfitable, or many score
thousand of pounds in their value yearly lost. So fares it in the due
maintenance of these important Officers in causes Military.

The Like I say of the Marshall and Serieant-Generall, and many other, who if
they have will and skill to execute their duties without regard of offense to the
bad and licentious in matter of Justice, and use their office as they ought, to
advance the profit and service of the Prince (which without compotent and
honorable Entertainment is not to be expected) they may not only be able
ten-folde in the advancement of the Service to deserve their wages, but even
(in saving of Treasure) requite it ten-folde also.

And therefore soundly may conclude, That neither the sparing of Seed by the
fond Husbandman, nor the pinching of pence before mentioned by the miserable
Merchant, in the rigging and furnishing of his Ship, Nor want of due allowance
for Drayning of Marshes by convenient Engines is half so fond and absurd, as
the omitting of such necessary Officers in Martial causes, Or the sparing of
such Entertainment as should enable them to discharge their offices justly and
honorably, That by corrupt and lucrous petty companions may be managed to the
extreme Robbing of the Prince, and confusion of all true Martial discipline.
For even as in this office of Censor or Comptroller-Generall of Musters a
corrupt person may with far greater gain give his Prince two thousand pounds
a year to farm that Office tha^ an honest officer can take two thousand
pounds yearly Entertainment for him and his Substitutes faithfully to
discharge it: So shall the 2000, pounds given by the Prince to such a one, be
ten-folde more gainful and beneficial to his Service, than the 2000. pounds
taken: Which by due consideration of the frauds and deceipts practiced, and by
me at large in a particular Treatise thereof already revealed, And hy the
very trial or experiences already made (duly weighed) will evidently appear.

And therefore may truly say, that as well for the profit of all Princes and
States, as for the honor and advancement of the service, it is fit this
Officer (as likewise all other Officers or Commanders of like importance and
necessity) should have such convenient Entertainment for the Reputation of
their place, as they may (without fear or regard of any) syncerely censure and
control all deceipts and abuses, by whom soever they find then boulstered or
patronized. And having indeed such allowance as the Reputation of their place
requires, if any such be found (for any respect) to become party or pander of
such corruptions and Robberies, whereby the Royal Treasure should be unduly
wasted, the forces enfeabled and Martial discipline corrupted Tanquam reum
lasae Maiestatis, I would have such a one Exemplarly to be corrected with all
blame and shame.

And for a final conclusion of this true Paradox may confidently confirm.
That the most thriftie, and sparing course that any Prince or State can take to
continue a war, (without wasting of their treasure, or ouer-burdening of
their Subjects with intolerable Taxes) is still to allow all necessary
Commanders, Officers, Captains, and Soldiers such convenient, large, and
sufficient Entertainment, as men of true value and honesty may indeed rest
therewith contented: And then to execute severe Martial Discipline on all
frauds, Robberies, and Extorsions, without respect of Persons.

The second Paradox.
That the Antique Roman and Grecian discipline Martial does far exceed in
Excellency our Modern, notwithstanding all alterations by reason of that late
invention of Artillery, or fire-shott. And that (unless we reform such
corruptions as are grown into our Modern Militia, utterly repugnant to the
Ancient) we shall in time loose utterly the renown and honor of our Nation,
as all other also that have or shall commit or tolerate like errors.

WHereas among many Captains and Commanders of the new Modern Martial
Discipline, it is maintained for a Maxim: That all ancient Roman or Grecian
Military Laws and Orders of the Field (as well for Government, as trayning of
their Soldiers) are for the wars of our age mere Mockeries, and that the
fury of the Ordinance and other rare. Inventions of our time is such, as has
enforced a necessary change of Discipline and Order in all those matters: I
think it fit to open the Error and absurdity of this opinion, held either of
such as of ignorance discommend that they never understood, or unadvisedly are
miscarried with the authority of others, or of malicious subtilty seek to
advance such opinions, as may reduce all Martial Actions to a turbulent
confusion, whereby such corrupt, base minded persons (as seek the wars for
gain) may excessiuely enrich themselves, even with the ruin of their country.

I therefore to the contrary auerre: That neither the fury of Ordinance, nor
any other like inventions of this our age, has or can work any such
alteration: But that the ancient discipline of the Roman and Martial
Grecian States, (even for our time) are rare and singular Praecedents. And
that many such customs as we have taken up (contrary to those honorable and
right Martial Praecedents) will work our utter shame and confusion, if we
should encounter with such warlike Troops and soldiers as their discipline
then bred: And yet not impossible but facile for any King in his own Realm
(especially of our Nation) by those ancient Praecedents to select and frame a
Militia as far surmounting in value vulgar Modern as the Lacedemonian, the
Macedonian, or any other Grecian did the effeminate Persian, who in sundry
battles have vanquished them when in number they were double, treble, yea
manifold the greater, and in wealth and riches far exceeding. And to enter
into the opening of this truth (so much repugnant to the conceit generally
received of the greater multitude professing Arms) First I say, That like as
in all other Arts and Sciences it is a matter of very great importance to
have sure grounds and true Principles without abuse or error. So in this Art
Military (whereupon depends not only the lives of so great multitudees, but
also the defense or ruin of the greatest Realms and Monarchies) it were to be
wished that men were not to be misled with such false and fraudulent opinions
as may bring-forth fruits most poisonous and perrilous.

Seeing therefore by the civil wars which have risen in this our age, diverse
disorders have spung up, and for want of ability to make due pay to soldiers,
the Generals and chief Commanders to have been enforced to tolerate many
abuses which in time have grown usual, and by use of some disciples (bred in
such lawless discentions) not only learned and practiced, but peruersely
maintained to be not only tolerable, but also laudable, yea far excelling
the auncint discipline of the Roman and Greek Armies.

This error because it tends to the advancing of vice: and defacing of
virtue, to the extolling of many corrupt new practiced abuses and licentious
delicacies, and the rejecting or contemning of the sober painful, strict,
severe, and sacred Military discipline of the Antiquity. I think it fit to
touch some principal points, wherein the Modern Militia (which I reprove)
does dissent from the Antiquity (which I commend) and propone as a Praecedent
for us to imitate: That any Soldier of judgment (not carried wilfully with
corrupt affection) may see, how far awrie they are, that so much extol the
one, or disdainefully contemn the other.

But first (lest I be misconceiued) I must explain a little farther, My
meaning not to be precisely to bind our Nation, or any other, to the same
very Rules or Laws which the Romans or any Grecian State was ruled by, which
most flourished in Martial prowess, I think the same as great an error as
that of some Divines, who would have all Nations ruled by the very same
politic Laws and pains that Moses praescribed to the Jews or people of
Israel. For albeit those divine Laws were prescribed by the infinite wisdom
of GOD himself, and for those people (no doubt) the most convenient, yet, as
times, and States, and dispositions of Nations are variable and different, So
may the pains or punishments be made more severe or remiss, as the
Magistrates and choice members of each State, (assembling as Physicians to cure
the maladies growing in the body of their Realms) shall find convenient: So
as they make nothing Lawful that is by Laws Divine prohibited, for that were
flat impiety. So say I also, there is in the discipline Military of those
Martial States-antique, many things, which (according to the nature and
disposition of our people) we may mitigate or increase, alter or accommodate.
But the dissent in the very chief grounds and principal Axioms of the Art
Martial (as such men of war of the new Discipline do) I hold it a
dangerous error, and fit to be effectually regarded, and speedily reformed.
Neither is it any part of my meaning, and to tax or reprove all Generals,
Commanders, Colonels or Captains that serve in these our Modern wars, as
men corrupted or depraved with these erroneous opinions. For my self in mine
own experience have known many, that highly esteem the ancient and true
Martial Discipline, and condemn as much the intolerable abuses that have
grown in by the late intestine and civil discentions.

As in France, how much that worthy Prince of Condie and Admiral Shattilion
abhorred those disorders which in their time began (and are since grown to
their ripeness or rather full Rottenness) may partly appear by their
Campe-Lawes, sauouring altogether of the Antique true Martial Discipline, as
far forth as the corruptions of this age, and their wantes to pay their
Troops would permit. As by that I have at-large set-downe in my Stratioticos
touching their Military laws, more manifestly will appear. Likewise in the
Military Treatize of that famous General, Guillame de Bellay Seignior le
Langey of Discipline Military, more euidentlye does appear: How much he
disliked also of the corrupt customs in his time, grown into the wars of
France, and how he labored to reduce it to the perfection of those ancient
Martial States, that for many hundred years together (having made that Art
and profession, and thereby mightily advanced their Realms in Fame, honor,
and wealth, and also increased their Territories) had indeed attained to the
high perfection thereof.

How much also that famous Prince of Orange disliked with these modern abuses
(albeit for want of means to pay, and also authority sufficient to govern as
he would, he were enforced to tolerate in his Mercenary Commanders many of
those corruptions) my self know by that I have diverse time, heard, even from
his own mouth, besides that appears otherwise by his Remonstrances and
Military Ordinances. The like I could say of many of our own Nation, Men of
honor, experience and value, that both know and acknowledge how necessary it
were to have a Reformation of Modern abuses, and Restitution of true Martial
discipline, but are loath to make themselves odious to such multitudes, as
(having been bred-vp in those base, easy, corrupt lucrous customs) would
extremely hate such a Governor, or Commander as should cross their profit,
and in his own Regiment first with severity begin such Reformation: Which is
indeed not to be performed but by the authority and Majesty of a Prince and
Royal State, that is able both to pay and punish.

So far am I therefore from condemning all Commanders of this age, either of
our own Nation or theirs, for Patrones of these Modern corruptions and
basterdly degenerate Souldierie, as clean contrariwise in mine own experience
and knowledge I can clear many: Having my self known and conferred with
diverse of our own Nation that as much abhor them, as that famous soldier of
France Mounsier de la Noe, whom I have my self also heard, as well in his
private speeches, as since in his Military discourses discover his extreme
dislike of such our modern vnsouldierly corruptions, which nevertheless my
self saw he was in part enforced to tolerate, even then, when he was
Martial of that mighty Army by the States levied against Don John de Austria,
and the Prince of Parma in Brabant utterly against his will and liking. I can
therefore the less blame any such of our Nation, as bear for a time with
these errors, when they see (by contending for redress without sufficient
authority) they shall little prevail, and yet make themselves extreme odious.
But for such as will not only tolerate, but (of purpose to make profit by
them) will impudently maintain their modern costomes good, and better for this
age, than the Ancient, As I know them most hurtful members, So I cannot but
wish such bad Patriotts reformed by better reason, or in time rejected as
infected sheep, that are able with their leprosy and infection to corrupt
great multitudes, to the excessive danger of their Prince and State.

First therefore to show some principal points, wherein the Modern Militia I
speak of, dissenteth from the Ancient by me commended, I say.

1 It was a very laudable custom of Antiquity to have in their States or
Realms Co^scriptos milites their chosen enrolled soldiers, not of ye base,
loose, abject, dishonest sort, by Cornelius Tacitus well termed Purgamenta vrbiu^
suaru^, but of the honest, well-bred, and renowned Burghers and other country
Inhabitants that had some living, Art, or trade to live upon when the wars
were finished, as well to have them practiced and trained in all Martial
exercises before they came to deal with their Enemies: As also that having
somewhat to loose, they more dutifully and obedienly behave themselves during
the Service. And having whereupon to live when the wars were done, need not
commit such Pickories, extorsions, and Outrages, as the common crew of such
Caterpillars and Vermin do: As, (having nothing at home to loose, or Art to
live,) seek the wars only (like Free-booters) for rauine and spoil.

2 I say, it was also a commendable custom in those States and commonweals
to choose Captains and Commanders of credit and account in their Countries,
Cities, or Towns, that might train and exercise neighbors in all Martial
and Military Exercises at home, before they led them to the wars: whereby
the very children in those States (only by looking on) knew far better both
the use of every sort of weapon, and how to march and raunge themselves into
any form of battle, yea, how to defend themselves (like soldiers) from every
kind of charge or assault of their Enemies, far better I say than many of
our brave men that have haunted such licentious wars or pickories many a
year.

3 I say also that it was a commendable course to make such choice of Captains
in those Antique wars (as being men of Reputation of the same country or
City from whence their soldiers were levied, might have the greater care to
perform their duties toward their countrymen and neighbors, among whom they
should live at their return from the wars, and thereby receive ever after
unto their death from them and their friends, either convenient praise and
love, or infamy and hatred as their Government had merited) So in these days
that the Captains are become not only the leaders, but also the Pagadores or
Pay-Masters of their Bands, there is greater cause to have them chosen not
only of skill and reputation, but also of ability to answer an account of
such Treasure as shall come to their hands, for the payment of their
soldiers: Seeing otherwise (if they be base-minded corrupt persons) they may
full easily wrong, starve, and waste their Soldiers many ways, to make their
own profit by their death and consumption of their Band, especially where
frauds in Musters by lewd custom shall also grow tolerable. For if any
such Captains be chosen as either have nothing of their own at home to live
upon, or never mean to turn into the Country, whereas the Soldiers were
levied, to receive from them and their friends the honor or infamy, the love
or hatred that their behavior has merited what hope is there that such a one
will leave the excessive sweet gain he may make by the fliecing or rather
flaying of his flock, and not (according to the Modern Discipline) scrape and
rake-in what he may to live afterward: having neither land living, nor Art
otherwise to maintain himself when the wars are done.

4 Likewise where Captains were rightly chosen of such Reputation and credit
as is before repeated, that they had a special care in health and sickness to
provide things necessary to preserve the lives of their Soldiers (being their
Tenaunts or Neighbors, that ever after to their death would honor and love
them for it, and the kindred and friends of those Soldiers also, whenever it
came to any fight with the Enemy, they were ever most assured and faithful to
such Leaders, and they likewise to them. In such sort as it was almost
impossible to break such a knot of united minds: but being otherwise levied
(as too too commonly in our Modern wars has been accustomed, where the
Captain neither knows his Soldiers, nor the Soldiers their Captain before
the Service, nor ever mean to meet again when the wars are ended) As the
love is small between them, So is their fidelitye and confidence much less.
And as the Captain takes small care to provide for them either in health or
sickness for any necessaries to preserve lives, So have as small devotion to
adventure their lives for him or his honor (to whom indeed the chief
reputation of their good service always should redound) But rather in all
Encounters with the Enemy, how to make shift by flight to save their lives. If
then these kind of Captains also (very prouidently foreseeing the worst which
is likely to happen) will not be unprovided of a beast, to runaway, trusting
rather to the legs of his horse than to all the hands in his Band: What can be
conceived? But that hereof chiefly it comes to pass, that in these modern
wars we hear of so many violent Retraits, (For so in their new discipline
they term that which in the old wars was called shameful flight) I mean
when the Captain and some of his Officers spur-away on horseback, and the
rest throw away both armor and weapons to leap ditches the more lightly, and
are shamfully slain without resistance: and many times by multitudes (pressing
to get boats) do drown themselves. Now whether such accidents be too usual
or no, I refer it to their own consciences that most boldly will commend
this base modern discipline. And if it be true whether there be any more
likely cause thereof than the diffidence before recited between the Captain
and his soldiers, and the want of shame (which in the Antique Soldiery was
ever accounted the highest virtue) But now by depraved custom in our
licentious degenerate wars utterly lost and abandoned: and such accounted
brauest men that are become of all others the most impudent.

5 I say also it was a most honorable order to have it punished with great
shame in any soldier to lose or throwaway his Arms, being held among the
Graecians a perpetual disgrace for any private soldier so much as to loose
his Target. But if now both Captains and some chief Commanders also of the
Modern new Militia will be much offended to have any of their Band so much as
checked by the Censor or Muster-Master for lack of his Curates or Caske. And
to encourage either to leave their Arms, will seldom themselves ever wear
any, but take it for a great bravery and Magnanimity in Service to be seen
unarmed. What shall I say but that indeed (for them that never mean to fight,
but to escape by flight) to be the lighter for a swift carrier, it is a very
politic invention and a gainful Discipline.

6 It was also an honorable course of Antiquity (besides the choice of the
Captains of such credit in their Towns and Countries at their entering also
into Service) to bind them and their Soldiers all with a sacred solemn
Military oath, being holden no better than a thief or Free-booter that
followed the wars, unless he were enrolled under some Ensign, and had
received his Militare oath, whereby he vowed both obedience and fidelity, and
rather to die than dishonourably to abandon his Leader and Ensign.

But in such new Discipline these ceremonies are scoffed at, and Captains
chosen suitable to their loose depraved Soulderie,

7 It was also a laudable custom to have the Captain carry his own Arms in
his Ensign, besides the Ensigns of the Regiments which were among the Romans
always Eagles. And that he that lost his Ensign should be held a disgraced
man, not fit to carry Arms till he had won like honor again.

But now in our new Militia in stead of Ensigns we have learned to carry
colors, because many Captains perhaps are yet to win their Arms, and
thereby make small account to loose their Masters colors, which may be one
cause (among many other) that the Spaniard within these 20 or 30 years can
make his vant of the taking of more English Ensigns, than I think they could
truly these 500 years before.

8 It was also a most laudable Discipline, whereby men from their infancye were
taught in those Martial Schools rather resolutely in the Field to die, than
to save their lives by flight, the Mothers detesting and abhorring their own
children that saved their lives by flying: yea and some with their own hands
doing execution on such children of their own as were Fugitives, rather than
they would have so dishonorable a Monument (as they said) to their parents and
country to walk upon the earth.

But if in our Modern Militia this error be thought so small, as many such
brave men will among their cups usually vaunt thereof, and recount at how many
places they have fled and run away: Taking as it were a glory to tell who had
fled fastest, the change is over great.

As in the ancient Martial States it was (even in a private soldier) held a
perpetual shame to have run away, or so much as only abandoned his Rank
wherein he was placed (unless it were to step forward into the place of his
precedent fellow slain) So in a Captain or Superior Commander it is much
more dishonorable and shameful: Which has caused many famous Generals (that
full easily might have escaped and saved themselves) utterly to refuse horses
offered, and all other means to fly, and have voluntarily sacrifized
themselves with their soldiers.

But if in our new Militia many brave soldiers (as they are termed by their
own crewe) will not shame to vaunt: In how many places they have escaped by
flight (belike of Zeal to fight again for their country) the change indeed
is great.

10 In the Antique Militia it was a shame for a Leader or Commaander of footmen
to be seen mounted on any horse of service, but either a foot, or for his
ease (being wearied) on some small Nagge, which no man could suspect was any
way reserved to escape by flight.

But if in such Modern Militia ye shall have both Captains and Colonels on
horses of swift carrier mounted, and bravely leading their men even to the
place of Butcherie, and then to take their leave (under pretense to fetch
supplies) The Discipline is greatly altered. And yet these shameless Fugitives
perhaps highly commending one another (when the valiant men that resolutely
died in the place, by slanderous inventions shall be lewdly defaced) These
Fugitives I say may be advanced, and the valiant disgraced, or at least buried
in oblivion.

11 In these Antique Martial Commonweales they used to make Statuas and
Epigrams in their honor that resolutely died in the Field for the service of
their country: and detested such base minded cowards as saved themselves by
flight. But if contrariwise we bury their names in oblivion that valiantly
died in the field, and extol Fugitives, and think them not unworthy of new
charges: There is a great alteration indeed of Martial Discipline.

12 In the ancient Martial States and Monarchies, there were public places
of Exercise, where the youth (before they went to the wars) used to inure
themselves to more heavy arms and weapons far than the usual for service,
making thereby their ordinary Arms seem light and easy to them.

But if such Patrones of the new Discipline scoff at these painful exercises
(because they neither trouble themselves nor the soldiers with the wearing of
such Arms) it seems that as they of the Antiquity prepared themselves to
fight and conquer. So these Modern Commanders to escape and carowse with the
dead paies of their slain Soldiers.

13 The Antique Martial discipline was to range their Soldiers into form of
battle by due proportions of Ranks, teaching the succeeding Ranks (where
any of the former were slain) to reinforce their places maintaining their
first Ranks still full with armed hands of fighting men in Martial order.

But if such Ringleaders of the Modern pudled discipline, as would have all
brought into a confusion, scoff at such order and Ordinances, and say, there
is no better way to make a battle than advance 4 pikes, and make their
Soldiers run in and fill them: And that all other Arithmeticall Rules (for
speedy dispatch thereof) are vnfeazible toys, because their own skills will
not reach it as a matter they never set their wits upon. Whether they were
fitter to fould sheep, or embattell Soldiers I leave it to the censure of
honorable and right Martial Commanders.

14 The discipline was to reduce their Armies into sondrie Battalions and
sundry several Frounts whereby the General and his chief Officers and
Colonels might orderly bring new succors to fight, and relieve such as were
tired or weakened by slaughter, and so to renew many fights upon the Enemy still
with corragious fresh men till they had entier victory. And for that cause had
they so many Fronts and several kind of Commanders, as Turmarum Praefectos,
over their Principes, Hastatos and Triarios: Tribunos Militum also Drungarios
or Chiliarchas, Turmarchas Merarchas, Celerum Praefectos, and many others as in
my Stratioticos is set down more lagely for their Fanterie only: Whereon those
right Martial Nations reposed their chiefest trust, and yet no idle Leaders or
Officers, but every one to so necessary a purpose as they might not
conveniently be spared.

But if such men of war of the new Mould scoff at all these Ordinances and
Supplies, saying: A battle is won and lost in the twinkling of an eye at the
first joining, and therefore needless: We may indeed confess it too true,
where they bring their brave men like flocks of sheep hudle confused to fight,
or rather to flight: The battle is many times indeed gotten before the
crossing of pikes. The terror only of Arms glistering is sufficient to scare
such pilfering vnsouldierlike Freebooters.

15 The ancient discipline was ever to encampe their soldiers close together
strongly, and so orderly to divide their Quarters, and set down their
Regiments: As their camp was like a well fortified Town, where ten-times so
many Enemies durst not assault them.

But our new discipline, to lodge our Army in Villages far and wide a
sunder, as every Captain may be provided most for his ease and commodity like
petty Princes, and thereby in no place more easily defeated than in their own
lodgings.

16 The ancient Martial men thought it not dishonorable with their own
hands to Entrench their Capms. And their great Generals would take the Shouell
in hand themselves when occasion so required.

But our brave men of the new Discipline disdain to be Pioners, and will
rather lodge abroad in villages at their pleasure and ease like gallant
fellows, where they may take their pleasure, and carouse lustily.

17 The ancient Discipline reposed their chief confidence in their Fanterie,
whom they so trained, armed and ordered: As twenty or thirty thousand
footmen forced not of five times so many horsemen.

But as our footmen of the new Discipline are armed and ordered, a thousand
horse is able to defeat five times as many such footmen. And yet might the
footmen of our time carry weapons of far greater advantage against horse
being well ordered, than were known in those days. So great is the error of
the Martial Discipline of our age among such Leaders, as have been trayned-vp
in Freebooter wars, and have vowed their service to their Lady Picorea,
being careless of any thing appertaining to Victory and Honor, respecting
rather their own private profit and commodity.

18 The ancient Martial Discipline tended chiefly to this scope, to carry
such an Army to the Field, as boldly durst march on all grounds, as well
Champion, as by Straights. And in Ordinance ready to fight with the Enemy by
their exercise, order, and assurance, not doubting of victory.

But the scope of such Modern Discipline seems to be rather to carry men
(so lightly armed and loosely disciplined) as they may be nimble to stray
abroad to pick and steal, and to escape by flight, when they are charged with
any Enemy of force. And as for loss of Ensigns or shameful flight, they
make it a trifling matter, being ready to do as much again at any time.

19 The ancient Discipline would never suffer any soldiers to go abroad to
spoil, but with Leaders and commanders to direct and guide them: having
intelligence before hand, which Quarters was best replenished with commodities
needful for the Army, and then sent such forces as might not fail to set it
in, or honorably defend themselves if they were encountered.

But this new discipline will send their soldiers to spoil by handfuls,
without Captain, Lieutenant or Ensign to guide them: if they get any
Pickorie, the Captain has his share: But if their throats be cut, the
Captain will have their pay, as well due before their death as after, by
mustering them absent, etc, til the Muster-master discover it. And whereas such
a Captain should be disarmed, and by the Provost hanged for such abuse: By
this new Discipline he will rail at the Muster-master lustely, if he cheek
him only the stolen pay.

20 The ancient true Martial Discipline was, That all Prays (so orderly in
the wars taken) should be brought to one place; where Magistrates and
Officers of purpose appointed should dispose thereof for the Ransoming of
prisoners, and the remounting of such as had their horses slain in Service,
and for reward as well of those that made the Stand, as of those that fet in the
pray.

But in our new Discipline it is Catch who catch may, and no order in the world
for distribution of the pray for any public uses, nor for redemption of
prisoners, or remounting of such as in Service lost their horses.

21 The ancient Discipline was that no armed man on pain of death should step
out of his Rank in time of Service, to catch or spoil, which they easily
obeyed, because by their Martial Discipline then, they had as good reward out
of the pray (that stood in battle armed) as the loose men that brought it in.

But in our Modern wars (where no such order is established, but Catch who
catch may) there is nothing but confusion: Which cannot be but to their utter
ruin and shame. Whenever such vnsouldierly Freebooters shall encounter with
any Enemy of good government.

22 By the ancient Discipline (besides the reward of the soldiers which was
left to the discretion of the General) there were ever great masses of
Treasure brought home to the public Treasury to maintain the future wars,
and thereby no Cesses or Subsidies on the people for many years together, by
reason of the treasure so saved and gained by their well disciplined wars.

But if by our Modern Discipline of Land Services the Prince or State has no
benefit by the spoils, but is riotously wasted among such Freebooters and
their assotiates and the best soldiers least part of the pray, and by such
disordered war, no ceasing of Taxes or Subsidies, but continuance or rather
increase of both, in all Realms and States served by such spoilers: It is easy
to discern which were the better Discipline for the Prince and people.

23 By such ancient Discipline Kingdoms and States by their wars have
increased their wealth, and their Subjects have grown more wealthy and
mighty.

But by our Modern wars both Prince and Subjects grow poor, and few of
these unruly vnsouldierlike Freebooters (how hugely soever they get by their
corruptions or abuses) grow wealthy by it, for, Badly gotten is ever commonly
worse spent.

24 The scope of the ancient Martial Discipline was chiefly to preserve the
public Treasure of the country, and to maintain the wars on the treasure
gotten by conquests on their Enemies.

But the scope of our Modern Discipline seems to be to enrich private
Captains and Commanders, and to convert both the spoils and the wages of the
soldiers also to their particular benefits. And so new Taxes and Subsidies of
necessity still on the people to maintain the wars.

25 The ancient Generals and great Commanders had their chiefest care how to
preserve their own people which caused them so carefully to arm them, train
the^, and entrench them strongly, etc. saying the held it more honorable to
save one of their own Soldiers than to destroy ten Enemies. As they likewise
sought to make their Soldiers and Country wealthy, respecting nothing for
themselves but the honor only of well-doing.

But in our Modern Discipline it seems, The more of their Soldiers are
wasted and consumed, the richer grow such Commanders as by deceipts in Musters
have the conscience to convert all the dead pays to their own profit: Which
wicked game of all other is most abominable before God and perrilous to any
State: the strength and glory of a Prince only consisting in the multitude and
force of his people which are wasted and consumed by such Moathes and
Caterpillars.

26 These ancient worthy Generals and Commanders in the Field bent their
wits and inventions only for such exploits as might be honorable and
profitable to their country.

But if Commanders of the new discipline devise only Exploits to waste and
consume the Treasure of their Prince or State: And care not (to supply their
own prodigal Expenses) though they spoil their friends thereby, not only
doing their best to break amity and make more Enemies to their Prince and
Country, but also commit such foolish spoils as their Prince or State shall
be sure to repay again double and treble any commodity or aid they received
thereby. This abuse surely ought to be amended.

27 In those ancient right Martial States we shall hear of Generals and
Dictators (after they had deposed Kings conquered great Princes, and brought
home to the Treasure of the country mighty masses of Gold and Silver) were
nevertheless content to return home to their poor houses, no whit enriched
in wealth, but only in honor, living soberly and temperately as before on
their private patrimony, and scarcely a piece of Siluer-plate to be seen in
their own houses, that have brought in millions to their State and Realm.

But if in our Modern Discipline we shall see petty Commanders (that never
brought into their Princes Realm or State the hundred part of any such masses
of Treasure, but rather have had their share in wasting huge sums to little
purpose) to abound in bravery, wast infinitely in all kind of vanities, that I
say no worse, And more Silver dishes on their Table than Quintus Dictator or
Scipio that conquered Hanniball and razed Carthage: It seems these men serve
themselves, as the other did their country.

28 We may read of Roman Generals that by conquering some Provinces brought
so great a mass of wealth to the public Treasury of Rome, that it ceased
Taxes, Tributes, or Subsidies there for many years.

But if our Modern Militia (clean contrary) do still waste and consume the
public Treasure, and be the cause not of ceasing, but rather of increasing
of Tributes or Subsidies on their country, the difference of Discipline indeed
is great: But which were the better for the honor and commodity of our Prince
and country, is easy by the wise, honest, and right honorable to be
discerned.

By the Ancient Discipline little Macedonie conquered all the large and
spacious Oriental Empire of the proud, rich, and populous Persians: And that
small Realm of Rome subdued so many Nations under their obedience in Europe
Afric, and Asia, and made Tributarie so many mighty Kings, as their
Monarchy was of the whole world admired: And that their discipline Military
was the chief or only cause thereof: That famous Roman Emperor Alexander
Seuerus in his Oration to his Soldiers declares, saying.

Disciplina Maiorum Rempub. tenet, quae si dilabatur,
Et nomen Romanum, and Imperium amittemus.
If then not only by the censure or prophecy of that famous Emperor,
concerning, that State, but by very experience also in our own age of many
others our Neighbors round about us, we may plainly behold the success of
this corrupt degenerate Modern Militia, so repugnant to the Ancient: It were
wilful blindness not to discern which were the better. And no less
negligence to permit the continuance of so dangerous a disease.

30 We shall also read of Generals in those warlike Commonweals, that so
highly esteemed of the Martial Discipline of their Nation, and were so zealous
therein, as they would not have it violated in the least point. As Manlius
Torquatus that would have executed his own son for encountering in particular
combat with his Enemy without leave, and before the Signal of battle
given; Albeit he had the victory and strake-of his enemies head in the sight
of both Armies, to the great encouragement of the Romans, and terror of the
contrary side, that took that particular Encounter as Ominous for the
success of the battle, as it fell indeed out, to the great honor of the
Romans, and utter ruin of their Enemies. Yet after the victory this
honorable and famous General, considering the danger that might have fallen
out if his son had not been victorious, and that the discipline Roman was
broken by this attempt (to fight without license) he would not spare it in his
own son, but commanded the Serients to apprehend him, and (after he had
been whipped with rods) to be openly executed: wherein he so constantly
perseuered, as his whole Victorious Army on their knees could scarcely obtain
his pardon. If then this breach of one point only of Military obedience
(committed of Magnanimity and noble courage, and abundance of Zeal to his
country) was in those days so severely censured: As the father would not have
pardoned his own son, notwithstanding by his happy success also he was
the chiefest cause of that honorable victory.

What shall we say of such Ringleaders of corruptions in the new discipline,
As shall not of any such Magnanimity or haughty courage or Zeal to their
country, but of a base, corrupt, and lucrous mind break not one or two, but
many points of Martial Discipline, and thereby not get victory, but more than
once or twice receive those dishonorable foiles and disgraces, that for shame
in those days no private soldier would never return home to abide the due
shame and disgrace of. What can be said? But that it is high time to have these
important Errors looked into, least the same succeed here, which in all other
States have done, where Martial Discipline has been so neglected, and
corruptions triumph unpunished.

It were infinite to recite all the disorders of our Modern wars, and would
require a long Treatise to lay-open all the commendable Ordinances, Customs,
and provisions of the famous Grecian and Roman Armies, whereby they honored
and immortalized their Generals, and amplified and enriched their States and
Countries. But these few notes may suffice to show how great a difference there
is between the one and the other. Neither is it my meaning to call in question
the doings of any particular persons, but only to open the dangerous error of
that opinion: That the loose customs of our time should be better than the
Ancient: Or of such excellency as we need no reformation or amendment.

For I doubt not by due consideration of these few by me recited it is
manifest how great a difference there is between that Ancient Discipline
(whereby mean and poor Estates were adua^ced to mighty Monarchies) And these
Modern corruptions (whereby flourishing States have been spoiled and defaced,
and mighty Realms and Empires brought to ruin.)

But because some Patrones of these new corruptions (for defense of their bad
cause) allege: That the late famous invention of Great Artillery and
Fireshott, unknown to the Antiquity, and so far surmounting all the
Ancient Roman and Grecian Engines both in terror and effect) has
necessarily enforced so great an alteration of Arms, Weapons, and Military
Order, as the discipline also must clean change: I think it fit to set down
some of their chief and principal Reasons.

1 First therefore (say they) it is now to small purpose to wear Arms, seeing
the fury of the Fireshott is such, as no Armor is able to hold it out.

2 It is vain to make Battles or Battalions in such order and form ranked,
as among the Graecians or Romans were accustomed. Because the fury of the
great Artillery is such as it o^^^eth, breaks and dissolueth all Orders or
Ordinances that ye can imagine to make: And therefore experience has taught
us (say they) to leave those massy Bodies of armed Battles that serve but
for Buts for the great Artillery to play upon: And to seek more nimble and
light Fanterie that may be ready to take and leave at their pleasure.

3 And for the severity of Discipline in the wars (they say) it is like the
Frenzy of some Divines, that would have men in this world pass an Angelical
life, without any fault or errors: which being so far above the nature of man
to perform: In aspiring to it many times they commit more foul and gross
faults than the vulgar sort, that never reach at such perfection: and thereby
become ridiculous to the world as they also will be that shall attempt such
praecise Discipline Military, as is utterly impossible to put in execution,
and unnecessary for this our age, where Weapons and Orders of the wars are
so altered and changed.

These are the most effectual Reasons that ever I could hear alleged on that
side to maintain their heretical opinion. But as there is no cause so bad,
but may by finenesse of wit be cleared and made appear probable. So is there
no doctrine so false but by craft and subtilty of man's inventions shall be
made plausible and to appear matter of good truth. These reasons indeed at the
first appearance seem probable, but being duly weighed are no thing worth.

1 And first for leaving Arms in respect of the fury of the Fireshot which no
portable Armor is able to resist, is both frivolous and false. For there are
many reasons to use convenient Arms, albeit that were true that they profited
us nothing against the Fireshot. For they defend us from the Launco, from the
Pike, the Halberd, the Iauelin, the Dart, the Arrow, and the Sword: yea and
from the greater part of the fireshot also that any way endaunger us in the
field: I mean even the portable and indifferent Armor that is made (not of
Musket or Caleuer proof) but only against the Lance and Pistol. For the
greatest part of the fireshot that touch the bodies of any man in the field,
graze first and strike upon the ground: And from all such shot, a mean Armor
very portable and easily to be worn by any soldier, suffices to save a
man's life, as ordinary experience in the field daily teaches. For indeed to
lade men with arms of Musket proof (I am of their opinion) were not possible
to endure, and mere folly to put in ure for many respects: too long to commit
to writing in this place. But this light and mean Armor is still to be
continued in all battles and battalions that shall encounter with Pike or
Lance, because it assures the life of man greatly from all other weapons, yea
and from the most part of the fireshott also.

2 Neither is there any Martial Commander of judgment, that will object his
Battles or Battalions as a But for the great or small Artillery to play
upon: But will always advance forward their own shot and lightest armed loose
men to encounter their enemies shot, and surprise his Ordinance before the
battles or battalions come within danger of the Artillery great or small,
to be played on at Poinct Blanke. And thereby shall the enemy be enforced
either to put forward his Light Horse or Fanterie before his great Ordinance to
guard and defend them: Or else they shall be possessed or cloyed.

If he protect them with horse and foot of his own from surprise, then may
the Squadrons march on safely, and so (by good discretion) the armed battles
are in no danger at all of their Enemies Artillery, but may adventure forward
in safety to back their own shot and light armed, which were sent to
surprise or cloy their enemies Artillery. And the^ without any more annoyance
of the great Ordinance, the Battles come to join with Lance, Sword, or
Pike, as in old time in ancient wars has been accustomed.

Farther all men know (that are of skill or experience) that great Artillery
very seldom or never can hurt any footeman, that upon giving fire only do
but abase themselves on their knee till the volew be past, being much more
terrible to unskillful and inexpert new Besoignes, than any way hurtful to
trained Soldiers. And therefore (as is apparent) no reason in respect either
of the great or small Artillery or Fireshott either to leave convenient arms,
such as the Antiquity used, and were able to march withal many hundred miles,
or such Battalions as the Romans used. If any man will object that Ruytters
with their Pistolles, and Argoletires with their Pettronels, (which the Romans
had not) would beat your massy Phalanx of Pikes (used by the Graecians) down
to the ground, without receiving any damage at all by them.

Heereunto I say, if we had not either Pistolles or Lances on horseback to
encounter these Ruytters and Argoletires, they said somewhat. Or if we had not
Musketers on foot to empale or line our battles, that should more spoil
their Squadrons of Ruitters before they could approach nigh the place where
they should discharge their pistols. For there is no soldier of judgment that
commends the ancient Roman or Grecian Discipline that would have us reject
all Modern weapons to cleave to theirs only. But embracing the Modern
fireshot also to leave the abusing of them, and using them rightly to use still
the ancient and right Martial Discipline also of the Romans and Graecians.
We see (long since the fireshot has been used) that the Zwitzers
notwithstanding have continued their massy battles of armed pikes like the
Gaecian Phalanx, and very honorably dischargd themselves both in Italy,
France, and Germany. In such sort as the Emperor Charles and the French King
both relied on them greatly, and to this day (of the Mercenaries) they carry
the reputation with the best. So that no fury of the fireshot has ever caused
them to leave their massy Phalanx by the Graecians used.

How much less then should the Roman Order of Battallions fear our Fireshot?
Nay rather is it not the most excellent ordinance that possibly can be
imagined? As well to open themselves (without disorder) to give a way to their
Fireshot to saly forth, and retire in safety without any danger of any charge
by their Enemies horse, and so more fit and convenient for our wars and
weapons now in use, than they were for the weapons of that age wherein they
were first practiced? And if neither the small nor great artillery of our age
could ever make the Zwitzers or Launce-Knights to leave their massy main
Battle or Phalanx, but that in all wars they have so honorably discharged
themselves, as all Princes are glad to embrace their friendships and aids: how
much more would they have excelled, if they had revived also the Roman
Embattailing in Battalions, which they invented only to defeat the Macedonian
and Grecian Phalanx.

3. Now for the 3. Inuectiue against their Phrenzie that would have in
Souldierie or Divinity such refined Discipline, as is impossible for men, and
more fit for Angels.

I answer I am indeed of their opinion, that it is fantastic and
phanaticall to advise such a Discipline any way, as is impossible for men to
observe. But if the Graecians and Romans also (being men in flesh as we are)
many hundred years together did observe and keep such Discipline as I
persuade, Then I cannot see any such impossibility as they infer, Or would
make Princes believe. But the truth is, it is not for the profit or private
benefit of such mercenarie Commanders as most commonly manage the wars of our
age, to have that honorable ancient severe discipline revived, which is the
chief impediment. Yet somewhat also I confess in Europe the great wealth that
most Nations are in this age grown unto, and the delicate education of their
children from their infancy does make that severe discipline more strange unto
us, and somewhat more difficile to put in execution, As all things of highest
Excellency are also accompanied with greater difficulty. But if it be
compared with the greatness of the good that thereby shall ensue, and the great
necessity without delay to have it done, (If we esteem liberty and abhor to
be slaves to strangers) it may perhaps be found more easy far than at the first
it seems. Or if at first for meaner faults we mitigate the pains, and by
convenient degrees proceed to cure the malady that grows too too dengerous,
we shall at least do somewhat if not the best, which is rather to be wished
than naught at all.

But because these Patrones of the new Militia have one-other arch Argument ( a
Verisimili) to abuse the world withal; I will also set it down with such
answer as briefly may open the fallacy thereof, and the necessity of
Reformation without delay.

The fourth Reason.

If (say they) the alteration of weapons considered, there were any better
Discipline for the wars, the invention of man is so excellent in this age,
and their wits so refined, as they would put it in ure, as well as they have
invented these fire-weapons, So far exceeding all their Antique Roman
Rams, Scorpions, Balistes, and Arcubalistes, as we see those old Engines now
(in respect of them) mere toys: Even so is also their ancient Discipline, in
respect of the rare Militia modern of our Age.

To this reason of theirs I answer: That no doubt the invention of man in this
age is in deed excellent, and far exceeding the former ages for 500. or
1000. years past: as may appear by all Arts and Sciences that have of late
more flourished than in a thousand years before. But if we have regard to the
more ancient times of the triumphant Grecian States, and Rothose mane Empire,
we shall find for all Arts and Sciences ages far excelling ours, and no persons
of our age (either for learning or Chiuallrie) yet comparable with them: If
comparing the actions and books of the one and the other, we will by the
fruits judge vnpartiallie of the trees. But even as Divines, Physicians,
Lawyers, Philosophers, Mathematicians, and Rethoricians, and all other
(studious of any liberal Sciences in our age) are enforced to repair unto
those antique fountains, where all Arts liberal were in their high
perfection: So surely for the wars much more we ought, Seeing there was not
one Science or Art then, more reduced to her full and supreme perfection.

Nevertheless I deny not, that the Commanders of our time for that scope and
end perhaps they shot at, have finely framed a Discipline as profitable and
perfect, as the antique was for theirs. For in this our age (especially these
forty or fifty years, since the Emperor Charles left his Martial actions:
And our renowned King Henry the eight, and Francis the French King dyed) there
has scarcely been any King of Europe that has at any time in any royal war
gone to the field himself, but only committed their Martial actions chiefelie
to the execution of their Lieuetennauts and inferior Commanders, which must of
necessity make great alteration. For where a King is Oculatus testis, he sees
that which his Lieuetenants will never acquaint him with, being not for their
commodities.

When Kings go to the wars themselves, they see what is profitable or
discommodious for themselves and their Realms, and advance such Discipline as
may be most beneficial to them and their State, As their Deputies will such
Discipline as may be most commodious for themselves, howsoever it be good or
bad for their King or State.

Again in this our age Kings generally have made their wars (not so much
with their own people, as with mercenaries and hired Soldiers. Who have
reason for their private benifite to use a government and Discipline far
different from that they ought and would if they were led and commanded by a
King of their own. Their scope perhaps for the most part being to enrich
themselves. Howsoever the success of the wars be for the King or State that
paies them.

I deny not but the Modern Discipline and Customs for enriching of
themselves, (I mean of Superior Commanders) is most singular and refined to
the utmost. As,

If a General will be content his Captains shall keep their Bands half
empty, and yet by frauds in Musters make his Prince or State pay nigh
complete.

If he will suffer them to pill and spoil the Country where they lie,
oppressing their friends more than their enemies.

If when he has fingred their pay, he will be content to lead them, or have
them led to some butcherie, where most of their throats shall be cut, that
their dead paies may be shared among the Leaders.

Or generally for all those points of the modern custom or discipline
repugnant to the Antique: who sees not they are as finely and wittelie
invented for the profit and commodity of the mercenarie lucrous Commanders,
as possibly can be devised: and surely the wit of men can invent no more than
has been, To pretend cunningly the benefit of the Prince and State they
serve, and yet finely indeed to enrich themselves with the impouerishing and
very ruin of their Prince or State that pays the^. And surely if Mercenary
(Leaders that serve not for any Zeal, conscience, or duty they owe to that
Prince or Country, but only seek the wars for gain) have framed such a
discipline, I cannot so much blame them though they carry no such Lacedemonian
or Roman resolution (rather to die in the field, than save themselves by
flight) But choose rather to enrich themselves and their confederates by such
escapes, having thereby the sharing of all their dead Soldiers paies without
contradiction, Seeing dead dogs bark not. But after they have learned abroad
in these mercenarie wars this foul, base, couning and corrupt cowardly
Discipline, to bring it home into their native Countries: who sees not it must
of necessity work in time the very ruin of their State? For as a woman that
has once made shipwreck of her honesty, easily makes a relaps: So fares
it in these mercenary Fugitives, that having once cast away shame (which only
or cheifelie makes men resolutelie to sacrifice their Lives for their
Country) afterward become so far past shame, as they hold it no disgrace by
shameful flight at any time to save themselves. This error alone creeping into
England (if ever we be invaded by a puissant Enemy) is sufficient utterly to
overthrow the State: For it is the honorable resolution of our Nation ( To
conquer or dye in the field) that must deliver England, If we be invaded by a
forceable Enemy.

For we have no such multitudes of strong Towns as other Countries: Our Arms
and weapons are our walls and Rampires. We therefore of all other Nations ought
to revive the ancient most Honorable Lacedemonian Resolution. To account the
shame of dishonorable flight worse than ten deaths. But seeing it is hard in
this age of delicacie to work in mothers that honorable Spartan Resolution (
To abhor their own children that were Fugitives) Yet surely for all men to
detest their company, And for Magistrates to disgrace them, (as persons unworthy
ever after to bear Arms) is a thing not only necessary, but of such
necessity as (if it be omitted, and not in time put in due execution) I doubt
we shall too late repent it when all remedy will be past: the Wiseman says
not Had I wist.

My meaning is not to call in question any private persons of our Nation, for
any errors committed in foreign countries: for surely these foul depraved
customs were grown so common among the Mercenary Seruitors of all Nations, as
many valiant men by Example of others their Superiors or Leaders have fallen
into them. But when we come to serve (not mercenarie for pay of strangers) but
our natural Prince and Country, (to whom we owe our bodies and lives) it is
fit this part of ancient true Martial Discipline be severely revived and
published, and remerkable Exampels made upon the first breakers, As also a due
reformation of all such other abuses, frauds, and deceits, as allure men
thereunto, and tend to the robbing of our Prince, the defacing of true valor,
and advancing only of subtle, base minded, lucrous cowardly caterpillars,
tending finally to the very ruin and overthrow of the honor of our Prince
and Nation, and faelicious estate of our Country.

I mean not at this time to enter into the means how this Discipline should
be reformed, or how Soldiery should be made obedient, for it would require a
great volume: but by that I have read of the Roman and Greek wars, and by
mine own experience conferred with the opinion of other worthy Soldiers and
great Commanders of our own age I dare boldly affirm and with good reasons
and authority maintain, That it shall be much more easy to frame such an
honorable Militia or Soldiery by a leauie of our Contrey-men (never in wars
before) than of such as have been depraved and corrupted in the loose, lewd,
lucrous, licentious liberties of the wars of this time: As by that I have
more at large set down in diverse parts of my Stratiotic^s concerning the
offices and duties of every several degree from the private Soldier to the
General, and the Military laws of several Nations) there set down also,
more evidently will appear. This much only in this place I may ad. That albeit
Premium and Paena be most Sovereign medecines to cure all Ulcers and
infections that happen to the politic body of any State, whether it be in
civil or Martial causes, yet Example specially with our Nation is the chief.

For as in the meanest matters (if it be but only in apparel, or attyres) the
Example of our Court is able to reform or deforme the whole Land, and by bare
Example only to do ten times more than Proclamations, threatenings, and
Statutes paenall: So in Martial causes much more we have regard to such
actions as great Commanders do, which in Court are favored, advanced, or
countenanced. If they do well, full easily will all inferiors conform
themselves: But if they either by custom continue courses inconvenient, or by
facility of nature be seduced but to tolerate only the abuses which are too
current in these days, and not severely chastise the delinquent without regard
of pleasing or discontenting the diseased multitude (how good laws so ever be
established, or proclamations made) it is in vain: For the loose licentious
sort judge them either published only for fashion sake without regard whether
they be observed or no, or else their lewd faction to be so strong as
Magistrates dare not punish them: And either of these conceiptes joined with
the profit and sweetenes these licentious Commanders make by their
corruptions, is sufficient to embolden them more audaciouslie still to put
their frauds in execution: But, what succeeds thereof, by example and
experience in all ages we may behold.

First in Rome (by reason of the Civil wars between Caesar and Pompey, and
after beetwne Augustus Caesar, Anthony, Brutus and, Cassius) the Martial
Discipline grew to corruption, no one side daring to use the ancient due
severity, lest they should revolt to his adversaries. But what ensued, after
the right Martial Legions were decayed, and a licentious Praetorian Guard
maintained? but the ruin of that famous and mighty Empire, ransacked, and
spoiled by the Hunnes, Goths, and Vandales, the most base of all the Barbarous
people that they before had conquered. The like I might particularly set down
of diverse of the most Martial Grecian commonweals, if we had not our next
neighbor the mighty Kingdom of France (even in our own age, by the very
like depraved Customs first learned among the Italians, and nourished in that
Realm likewise by Civil discentions) brought into most lamentable misery. A
spectacle to stirre-vp all Princes (while they may) to prevent those calamities
which (...) will be too late.

For after civil wars were once begun, (...) the King, nor the Prince his
enemies, could keep (...) severe hand on Martial justice, lest these
dissolute So^^^diers should reuolte, and so were indeed rather Suppliants than
Commanders of their Armies: which being for the most part composed of
mercenary hirelings, devised all means prodigally to maintain themselves,
whatsoever became of their Prince, or Country, the success whereof we see.

And that is that Modern discipline which so greedily the licentious of all
Nations swallow up, and are infected withal by the contagion of such as they
have conuersed with, Tending chiefly to the maintenance of themselves
inexcessiue riotous wastings, and to the utter overthrow of all Princes or
States that shall beserued with them.

To conclude therefore this true and needful Paradoxe, I hope (by the
conference of these few repugnant points of the Ancient and Modern Martial
Discipline) It does sufficiently appear. That as the latter are devised wholly
for the profit of corrupt persons (and both dishonorable and extreme dangerous
to any State or Realm that shall endure them, So the former which I have named
of the Antiquity) are both for the honor, profit and advancement of the
service of any King or State that shall embrace them.

And therefore too apparent (not only by evident discourse of reason, but also
by plain experience and success in other Realms and States) That where such
abuses and corruption of true Martial Discipline shall be permitted, there can
in time ensue no better than confusion and utter ruin. And yet nothing doubt,
but that our Nation, As by nature it is as warlike as any other under the
Heaven (having in times past while they were trained and led by honorable
Generals, conquered their enemies being ten to one, as appears by the
Chronicles and confessions of our very enemies themselves) So hereafter also
(by due regard in choice of such Commanders, and redress of such modern
Errors) we shall leave to our posterity also like monuments of Fame, as have
been left to us by those our right Martial and Honorable Ancestors.

The third Paradox.
That the sometimes neglected soldiers profession deserves much commendation,
and best becomes a Gentleman, that desires to live virtuously, or die
Honorably.

Proeludium.
I Will neither deny, nor commend, my love to Poetry, some little idle time
spent in it for my private recreation I repent not, it has good use, and is a
good exercise for busy young heads: The noble adorner of that practice Sir
Phillip Sidney though he lived an age before me, I yet honor, I love his
memory, and in my best wishes to my Country, I sometimes sadly wish our
Nobility and Gentry would be his followers: yet being as he was a man of Arms
by nature, Pallingen in Ariete.
quem Pallas nutriuit in antris, of Pallas bringing up, one that sucked milk
from both her breasts, a learned soldier; I would he had left the patronage of
Poetry to some more private spirit, and saved me a labor by bestowing his much
better wit on some requisite Apology for soldiers, whose profession is now
as much contemned as to be a Montag. lib. 1 Essay. 25.
Graetian, or as a Scholar was wont to be in Rome, whose name is as unpleasing
as Ide^ Essay. 42.
Iehan in France, or Guichard. 1. lib.
Ione in Naples, whose nature is esteemed so vile, that some men think it
justice to make a conuertible reciprocation betwixt them and wandering houseles
men: But when I call to mind how Hora: de art Poetica.
Homer the best Poet chose as the best subject to describe Ibidem et Iusti^
Histo.
Res gest^s regumque ducumque and tristia bella:
The exployts of Captains, Kings and dismal combatinges.
Tyrtaeusque mares animos ad Martia bella versibus exacuit.
And how men's minds to Martial fight,
Tyrtaeus did with rimes excite.


When I remember how Leonidas and his companions had in memorial of their ever
to be remembered service certain Poetical songs sunge by the Graetians how
even the Pet. Marti: Dec: 3. Cap. 7.
rude inhabitants of Hispaniola like our ancient Bards have their customarie
rimes, Ad praelia excitantes auorum gesta recitando, to quicken their courages
by reciting the acts of their forefathers; all which I know Sir Phillip Sidney
so great a scholar, could not but know: then lo I envy not the Muses good
hap, that had one of Mars his followers to be their Champion: since his
worthy deeds and honorable death assure me he would have spared that defense,
if he had not assured himself that it was Poetries best use Hora. Od. 8 lib. 4.
Vt dignos laud viros vetet mori.
To labor that the memory
of worthy men may never die.


Sure then I think some thankful Poet, that has drunk store of Castalian
liqour and is full of fury, cannot do better than in requital of his kindness
endeavor Idem.
Vt gratus insigni referat Camena, dicenda Musis proe^lia.

To singe in verse excellinge
wars worth the Muses telling.
Nor needs he fear to want attention, unless he want a Poets wit to tell the
contents of his book in proaeme with Luna: lib. 1.
Bella per Aemathios plus quam ciuilia campos etc.
I singe the Civil wars tumultuous broils etc.


Assuredly had it befallen me, Perseus.
in bicipiti somniasse Pernasso, to steal a nap amongst the rest in the top of
the mountain, or si quid mea carmina possent, if my verses were of any virtue,
I would desire to write some worthy soldiers praise in dust and blood as du
Bartas hoped to do Henry of France his in Pampeluna. But fool that I am.

Sir Phillip Sidney.
I never drank of Aganippe well
nor ever did in shade of Tempe sit.
Nor am I able to persuade our Poets to entreat of wars indeed.

Hora: Od: 6. lib. 1.
Praelia virginum
Sectis in iuuenes vnguibus acrium
Dum cantant vacui.
While idly they sing the scarres
that young men catch in wenching wars.
What then, shall soldiers want their due, because I want ability to do them
right? shall I not speak what I can, because I cannot speak what I would? no
sure, that were injustice, this were folly. Horace can tell.

Idem lib: 1. Episto.
Est aliquidprodire tenus, si non datur vltra.
It Is somewhat to do somewhat, though not well.

It is enough sor me to break the Ice, and let the world see what may be said
for the wars and soldiers when one whose whole kyndred almost by Father and
Mother lost their lives or spent their livings in the wars, is able through
bare love without learning, without Art to speak as fellows in defense of
Soldiers.

I ever thought nothing worse for Gentlemen than idleness, except doing ill,
but could not at the first resolve how they might be fitliest busied: To play
the Merchants was only for Gentlemen of Florence, Venice, or the like that are
indeed but the better sort of Citizens: ploughing and grazing I esteemed worse
than mechanical occupations: the Court was but for few, and most of the^
lived too luxuriously: to study or travel was good, but directed to this end,
that they might be fit for some profession the thing in question: For Divinity
they many times thought themselves too good, and I was sure they were most
times unfit: Law was but a money getting trade, and Physic a dangerous tickle
Art, at last I thought on the wars, where the learned might perfect their
contemplation by practice and the unlearned help that defect by well gotten
experience: and this was my 15 years meditation: afterward that impression
was strengthened daily by the remembrance of my fathers courses, by the
experience of some other occurrents and by the observation of as many things as
my little reading encountered that might make for that purpose. So I grew to
affect scholars such as would speak that, that might be understood, and could
reduce their study in histories the Mathematickes or the like from speculation
to practice for the profitable pleasure of their friends or honorable service
of their Country. I liked trauelers so they would be silent, yet were able when
time served to discourse iudiciously of the state and power of more Countries,
of the strength and situation of more Cities, of the form and force of more
several fortifications, than other Corkeheaded counterfeits could reckon up of
Bonna robbas Bordeaus or apish fashions: above all the perfection of the
endeavors of the former 2. I loved soldiers, such as hated Cheating, Drinking,
Lying, whooring, Prating, Quarreling and lewd behavior. And either maimed,
grown old or wanting imploiment, had retired themselves to some private
(perhaps poor) life, but that they lived contented: and though mine own
ability were then in minority, my heart esteemed him not a Gentleman, would
suffer such as these to want ought he could help them to: thus I spent the
five years following. And now my almost freede body is ready for the wars
which I before resolved was most fit for men of my place: But want of
imploiment imposes on me an unacceptable idleness which I sorrily passe-ouer
with laughing at the lamentable folly of our besotted Ge^try; one thinks it is
commendation to wear good clothes with judgment, another for that he is a
handsome man, a third for cunning carding, but if some youth of hopeful
expectation attain some skill in Music, some tricks in Dancing or some
Fencing quality, the World consisting most of Women-fooles and cowards will
peremptorily pronounce this complete Gentlema^s worth too great for one
Cronicle.

Iuuena. Sat. 1.
At quis ferat istas
Stultiae sordes
But who can quietly
Endure such foppery.
I that desire a man should be more worth than his clothes, the inside best, I
that think it my good fortune to have small skill in ga^^ing, I that hate
unnecessary qualities, as the Diodor. Sicu. lib. 10. Cap. 3.
Egyptians did Music for making men effeminate, cannot but dislike our
Gentry should be of Tailors mere creation or spend there time in pastime or
make their recreation there vocation, me thinks our Citie-Gentlemen as for
their slothful life, Un Gentle home de ville.
the Frenchmen scoffing term the^ might for their recreation sometimes read
how Plutar in vita Dari:
Phillip reprehended Alexanders skill in singing. How Ibidem.
Anthisthines condemned Ismenias his playing on the Flute, or the like Examples
and so learn to leave mispending of their precious time into too too well
affected fruitless courses They might remember how much one Ide^ in Alexan.
Alexander did in poor 12. years, what Idem in Scipiet Leo Impera cap. 28.78.
Scipio was ere he was twenty four and weghing well how z^ni^-like their
actions imitate their Forefathers whose honor they unjustly challenge me
thinks they might even hate themselves for letting the world see they have the
leisure to spend whole days at cards yet have done nothing worthy memory
save idely wasted their wealth to purchase infamy. But you whose Country life
has best affinity with your true calling the wars as least subject to
luxury as most affected of ancient Soldiers can you not love hunting because
it resembles the wars but you will never leave hu^ting? I. E. Cincinatus
alluding to Caesar's speech to the strangers Plutar. in vita Peric.
is there more Music in a stinking curres howling quality than a Drum or
Trumpet? will you in these times give men occasion to ask whether your
Country have no Men you make so much account of Dogs that your life seems
brutish still with Dogs and your discourse unreasonable still of Dogs? O
rather let the Example of our Great Great Master that worthily loves hunting
as the Noblest sport yet only follows it at vacant times teach you henceforth
to use your sports as sports and not still to dwell in them nor in the taedious
discourse of them.

But whither does contempt of folly carry me? Both the one and the other sort
of our decayed Gentry, have but the bare name of some ancient house but few
sparks of English virtue they are so far from being Gentlemen they neither
speak nor live like men, yet if their charmed Senses can endure to hear of
remedy as Plutar.
Phillip was put in mind of death or Herodat. in Terpsicore.
Xerxes of the loss of Sardis. I Will play the young man once, and cry to them
in the midst of their vain life and idle talking, Remember Plutar. in Pyrrho.
Pyrrhus whose life and study spent and employed in military affairs does
show what course of life best fits the better sort of men, who being asked who
plaide best on the Fluite, Python or Cephesias answered wisely though
indirectly, Poliperchon in his judgment was the best Captain to teach the
standersby how noble spirits should discourse. O then remember Pyrrhus, be as
you ought your selves, leave vanity and let your lives your words be warlike,
your truest honor will be to be Soldiers, and your most virtuous course of
life the wars.

But alas, as through the indirect proceeding of desparate Censurers, men often
condemn the wars for murdering our men, and wasting our money in lingering
fruitlesnesse, where many times the fault is in our soldiers disabilitie,
poor hunger-starued snakes half dead ere they go out of England: such as were
a cumber rather than an aid to the ancient Romans: such as with our modern
Estate of English Fugitives.
Spaniardes are sent a year or two to take heart at grass (as we say) in Italy,
before they suffer them to come to service, whereas most times the corruptnes
of Officers (such as seek the wars for gain only, and make no conscience to
cousin Princes, and the ignorance of leaders, such decayed unthrifty gallants
as to get a little money by the sale, spoil or slaughter of their Companies
make means to be fauorabl^ sent, from the Court to the Camp, as Commanders,
before they know how to obey) are true causes of extraordinary spoil of
Treasure, of making the wars seem (if not be, dilatorie and fruitless: So
on the other side, those officers, those Captains, and those Soldiers, being
in their kinds the worse part of our people, are indeed of such invincible
lewdnes that either dronelike sucking wax only from sweetest flowers, or worse
co^uerting holesomest things to poison, they only use the wars as naughty ^en
do learning, to increase their wickedness. Pro^^ing the axiom in Philosophy
most true, Arist. lib. 2. de A^nimi. Cap. 2.
Quicquid recipitur, recipitur secundum modum recipientis. That which is
received, is received according to the quality of the receiver: so that men
seeing them spend that most vitiously which they got most lewdly are ready
grounding themselves on their example to rail at soldiers as a profession of
licentious lawless liberty, and repute soldiers for dissolute rakehels in
whom there is Lucan: lib. 3.
Nulla fides pietasue, noe fear of God, no thought of goodness. Yet as the
study of Philosophy was not to be condemned, because some Philosophers were
Plutar: libel. contra. Epicu.
Epicures, as the name^ of Kings was not to have bin hated because Tarquine was
a Tyrant: No more I think are soldiers to be contemned or their profession
ill esteemed of for that some bawdiehouse Captains or alehouse soldiers live
loosely; Tit. Liui. De. 1 lib. 2.
or for that many that follow the wars of our time where discipline is too
too much corrupted are such as only live by the wars and so endeavor gain by
all the means they can save honest courses: For were our military discipline
as in truth it ought of that powerful sanctity that our arms the most
perfect politic bodies might for the goodness of their laws and orders and
the iustnes of their exscucion, attain their true perfection of surpassing the
best ruld Cities in Civility, that our Commanders like the ancient Romans
that held their faith more firm with enemies than some men now do nearest
bonds of duty and alleagiance, might know it is their office to punish even
their dearest friends offenses, that our soldiers worthily indeuoring in God
their Prince or Countries quarrel to exchange their lives for honor only
might learn to account it their greatest honor to be an honor to their calling
by performing the necessary duties of their calling.

Then as the Romans with their victories drove away barbarism out of our
countries by leaving us a pattern of more civil life, from their warlicke
government, of which most parts of Europe yet to this day retain some remnants
I see not but it might please God to reward our industry by making our
conquering swords the instruments to plant religion amongst Turks and
infidelles, and reform the errors of wandering Christians, when they seeing our
soldiers such as the Osor. de reb. gestis. Emanus: Histo: lib: 10:
Indians did Albuqueria and his company of Portingalls may steadfastly believe
that God omnipotent as they did that King worthy, that has such virtuous
servants: the^ would our warriors like true ancient soldiers strive to be
religious, virtuous, full of honesty, and we might justly think with the
Plutar: in. libell. declaratione lib:
Thessalian those of our countrime^ most dull and sottish that went not to the
wars: or say with the Idem in lib: de dictis et factis Lacaedemo:
Aetolian the war is better far than peace for him that has a mind to
prove an honest man.

For then our Camp would be a school of virtue where (by dutiful obedience)
men should be trained up and taught what appertaind to wise commanding: where
religion perhaps the cause of the quarrel should be so fervent, that men would
think it their chiefest joy, in midst of greatest miseries, to have the fear
of God their meditation and an unspotted life their comfort. For the^ the
memory of Alexander that the night before the battle with Quin^: Curt: lib. 2
Darius called for Aristander to win the favor of Gods with sacrifice: or of
Virgil. lib. 1
Aeneas. -- Quo iustior alter
Nec pi^tate fuit, nec bello mayor et armis:
Than whom there was none more upright
in goodness, nor more great in fight.
that in Virgil leaves his companions busied, et ^
Arces quibus altus Apollo
Praesidet horrendaeque domus Secreta Sibillae
antrum immane petit etc.
To high Apollos temple hies
and to those dreaded mysteries.
the horride vault where Sibil lies etc.


Or of Tit: Liui: lib. 5 Deca: 1:
Camillus that would begin and end his skermishes with prayers, or of the
Pluta: in lib. de Fortuna Roman:
Romans whose victories built Churches, with whom contempt of the Gods was a
certain sign of overthrow; would make our soldiers call to mind it is their
duty to be as earnest in holy works of piety, as they were zealous in their
superstition, they blindly did they knew not what, and though through the
souls struggling to ascend from whence it came, there arose some sprakes, that
gave them light to see there was ens entium: a power above all humane power
that looked for reverence, yet wanting means to apprehende that rightly, their
best endeavors proved but fruitles works of darkness, but out of doubt our
Christan soldiers as they have much more hope, more helps, and more
incitements, I do presume are much more truly and more earnestly religious.

These have assurance grounded on infallible witnesses that they serve the only
true and everliving God that gives the victory to the^ that rightly call upon
him for it, ^eo Imper. Cap: 20:47: and. 75: and Cap: 18:18:
and rewards plentifully those that deserve it. These by the orders of their
discipline, as helps to their weakness, co^forts to their miseries, and
Ministers of Gods blessings have necessary Levites to perform to them all
rites that may prepare them, that are in health and therefore less hindered
from being prepared for death that hourly ha^gs over them. To assure them when
they sometimes beseiged suffer famine as fearful as that of Iosc: de bell:
Iud. lib: 6: Cap: 24: et: 16:
Jerusalem, as great as King Plutar: in vitae Lycur::
Sous his soldiers that would not sorbeare drink to gain a Kingdom, yet
choose to die miserably, rather than yield to change their faith* that that
faith shall be rewarded with a happy crown of Immortality. To teach the^ that
to be sometimes for Christ's cause made gallis^aues, where with the constant
spirits of true Christian soldiers they endure afflictions, that would make
softehearted men such perhaps as speak against soldiers, eue^ forsake their
great captain Jesus: is a sure means to gain in exchange of those bonds the
freedom of Heaven. To exhort them last of all if by Gods merciful
preservation when death came a tithing on any side, when multituds of enemies
enco^passed them about, they prove the sole remnant of many hundreds, to
return to their native Country there to dye in peace, that whiles they live
they cannot have a better president to imitate than the worthy Captain Acts of
the Apostles. Cap. 10.
Cornelius.

Besides these Minesters, these soldiers have the Scriptures, where contemning
play books and base pamphlets unfit studies for dying men) they may reading
learn to imitate Joshua. Cap. 7.
Joshua before the battle, that prayed the Israelites might not be delivered
into the hands of the Amorites: or Exodus Cap. 17. verse 11.
Moses in the battle that lifted up his hands to heaven for victory: or Sam.
2. Cap. 22
David after the battle that praised God the author of his conquests with
joyful songs of thanksgiving: where they may reading learn to give
continually all honor and religious worship to that God Psalm. 144 ver. 1.
That teaches their fingers to fight and their hands to Battle, even in the
midst of their armies from whence he pleases to appropriate unto himself one
of his great and glorious titles Issai. Cap. 1 Ierem. Cap. 11.
The Lord of Hosts.

But perhaps some one observing how great Platar: in vita Antoni.
Anthony, did sacrifice himself to luxury, or having read the true cause of
Guichard: lib. 3.
Charles the 8 of France his posting pilgrimage to Paris when he should have
gone for Naples may think he sees good reason to condemn a soldiers religion
as consisting of too much Devotion to she Saints: I must confess the folly of
some soldiers in time of Idleness has given some color to the fable of Mars
and Venus, but I cannot see how the profession, can deserve that imputation:
for either that fable is a Poets mere fiction, and so not to be credited, since
through their lyinge madenesse even Heaven i^ self is defiled, or else is
grounded on some natural cause, and then as Sol and Mercury the Patrons of
Poets Lawiers and the like are in the Celestial Globe nearer to Venus as often
in conjunction and for their natural propriety more concordant, In reason me
thinks those Poets, Lawiers, and the like that lead Vitam sedentariam, a
quiet life, sleep their fill and eat their meat at due seasons must of
necessity be much more subject to incontinency than Soldiers, that may well
with Plutar. in vita Scipi.
Scipio contemn lasciviousness, since thinking still how to conquer men,
their leisure serves them not to become slaves to women, Mar. Barles. lib. 6.
that may learn of Scanderbreg to live long unmarried and yet most honest,
that their bodies may be the stronger and better able to do or suffer what
pertaines to Soldiers: that may as Plutar. in Peric.
Pericles willed Sophocles even keep their eyes from lusting, their course of
life being of such singlnes that they are seldom or never troubled with the
sight of women that are last of all daily mortifyed with cold, hunger loss,
of blood, and perpetual labor: so that if Osor. de rebus gestis Emanu. lib. 2.
Henry the maiden-King of Portingal could, they may well be per totum vitae
spatium libidinis expertes even al their life time free from
incontine^t-desires, at least able with Plutar. in Alexan.
Alexander to resist the temptation of a Philoxenes or an Ephestion though
their temper were as hot as Alexanders that by reason of heat brethed forth
sweet sauors.

And yet not need to cool their complexions with too much liquour: the death
of Quint. Curt. lib 5.
Clitus and the burning of Persepolis may assure them Alexanders drunkenness
drowned al his other virtues: Lib. 2. de benefic. Cap. 13.
so Seneca pronounced his happy rashness far from fortitude, tainted with
cruelty, the badge of Cowardice, and I may well condemn his wisdom for
loosing the benefit of his victory which Luca. de bell. civilly. lib. 6.
Caesar the best Captain thought was only this, victis donare salutem.

For to bestoe
Life on the vanquishtfoe.
It is an idle fond infirmity fit for immodest Quint. Curt. lib. 5.
Babilonish women that first drink then dance etc. or for unwise womenish men
lovers I mean twixt whom and drunkards there is such affinity that Heliod.
Histo. Aethio: lib. 3.
and in ebrietate^ amans, and in amorem ebrius procliuis admodum, the lover is
soon drunk, the drunkard apt to be in love: But the overthrow of the
victorious Iusti. Histo. lib. 1.
Scithians in Iustine has made me even from the infancy of my reading, afraid
to think such weakness should be in a Soldier, as was in those Lib. 2. de
reb. gestis Ioannit.
German^^s Pantaleon speaks of that after many valiant exploites falling to
drinking on Saint Martins day were al slain by the Turks that invaded them,
as the Graecians did Troy where the inhabitants were Virgil. lib. 2. Aenea.
vino sommoque sepulti.

Dead in a deep
And drunken sleep.
Let the barbarous Osor. lib. 2. de reb: gest: Emanuel.
Brasilians drink drunk before they enter into consultations, let their light
heads be far from bringing forth weighty counsels: but you in whose hands
consists the safety of kingdoms, whose affairs stand so tikle that as Lib. 4*
Gui^^ardine observes One commandment ill understood, one order ill
executed, one rashness, one The victory lost at Perousa. Guichar. lib. 3.
vain voice even of the meanest Souldior carries often times the victory to
those that seemed vanquished, keep you your wits about you still perfect and
still ready to settle unexpected Accidents, though some Vsu^ers of your names
waste their substance as the Their Amigdala are their money.

Pet. Martyr. De^ 5. Cap. 4.


west- Indians do their money in their quaffing cups and then like true
unthrifts such as was Meligallus a Knight of Rhodes endeavor treacherously post
Patrimonium patriam subuertere after the overthrow of their own estates to
betray their country; though the weakness of some men be such that they
first and surest learn the infirmities of the Countreies where they live, as
some ancient Travelers were wont to do lying of the Cret^ans, perfidiousnesse
of the Carthaginians, or effeminatnes of the people of Asia, as some modern
do affected gravity of the Spaniard. Reueng and ielous^y of the Italian, and
waste and lavish of the French, as some of our Soldiers have done freebooting
mutining and the like disorders in the Civil wars of the French Leaguers, as
some have and do this carousing quality by serving among the Dutch. Yet let
your settled judgments discern a difference twixt virtue and those mentioned
vices, let your wisdom direct you to contemn their folly that betray their
own by drinking to another health, let it assure you though somefooles like
the Pet. Marty. Dec. 8. cap. 8.
Indian Chirihichenses think him most valiant that drinks most, it can be
little praise to you to make your bellies hogs-heads, or your brains spunges,
you may and ought to show far truer and far greater fortitude by living
virtuous Co^querers of such vicious affections that so you may dye without
fear of death your countries faithful Champions, and go as Plutarch tells of
Plutar. in Romul.
Romulus armed to heaven, and (...) be as Plut. in vita Solon.
Solon thought of Tellus more happy than the richest King. For this forescore
yeeres-olde Idem in lib. de dict: and fact. Laca^emon.
Hippodamus advised by his king to leave the wars, and turn into his
country, replied he knew not where to dye more happily than in the wars
defending of his country: For this the young unmarried Ibidem.
Graecians part of Leonidas his gallant followers refused to shun a certain
danger and return unto their friends in safety, saying they came to fight and
not to carry news, For this I cannot choose but attribute great honor to the
war, that is of power to make both old and young so honorable.

Seen: in t^^g. Agamem.
Par ill^ Regi, par superis erit
Qui stiga tristem non tristis vidit.
He is a King or more than mortal man
That vnappalde, pale death encounter can.
And they shall be most happy x Quos ille Timorum
Maximus haud vrget lethi metus.
To whom of all fears chief
The fear of death does work no grief.


This is the perfect point of fortitude, this is the hardest point in all
Philosophy, yet surest learnd by practice and oftnest put in practice in the
wars, where private Soldiers like that Lib 22 dereb. gest. Emanuel.
German in Osorius will be sore wounded yet not retire til they dye or conquer
where Captains bury themselves in their own colors or like Montag. lib. 1.
Essay. 3.
Bayard fight till death seize on them, yet desire to dye with their faces
against their enemies; where sometimes both Captain and Soldiers like Apud
Thermopilas. Diod. Sicu. lib. 21.
Leonidas and his companions dine with a resolution vndismaide, to sup in
Heaven, and die all of them so happy, that none remains to carry the unhappy
news. These then and such as these are Soldiers, for these are Chronicles,
and such as these are (by Plut. in Licur.
Licurgus laws) esteemed only worthy to have Epitaphes; so now I see why Idem
in Pyr.
Pyrrhus trained up his three Sons to be Soldiers; while he himself did
live and dye a Soldier; and why within Lin. 2. Des recrech dela Franc.
Rome no man might be buried that had not been a Soldier: so now I think when
Alexander dying left his crown Q. Curt. and Plut. in Alexan.
dignissimo, unto the worthiest, he did intend a Soldier, when the most
Indians of Hispaniola bequeath theirs Pet. Marty. De 3. cap. 9.
fortissimo unto the valiantest, they can intend none but a Soldier: and
Plutar. in Pyr.
Pyrrhus when he told his Sons he should succeed that had the sharpest
sword, did only mean that Son that proved a Soldier: for why? should
Pyrrhus have resigned his Scepter to a Son as John of Armenia did to a
brother belli ignaro viro, Pantal de reb. gest. Ioannit. lib. 4.
a man unexperienced in military affairs, there might have well be feared a
desolate subversion of his state like that, that thereon followed, in the
Kingdom of Armenia. But he that saw the Romans grow from small beginnings to a
mighty nation by continual war, and found that for increasing of their
fame, riches and power, their love was settled on the war; had reason to
train up and seek to leave an heir that might maintain his quarrel and
resist the Romans force with force, their war with war: and having so
established his Throne, plenty of suitors would have come from neighboring
Princes if not for love, for fear, if not for fear, for profits sake, to
win such a succeeders Amity. For as it is reported of Pet. Martyr. Dec. 3.
Cap. 3.
Tubanama an Indian King, that he protested solemnly, he ever loved the
Spaniards, because he heard their swords were sharper far than his: so I
remember when at the selfsame time, the several provinces of Plutar: in
Pelopid.
Graecia, sent several Ambassadors to the Persian Artaxerxes, whose
frendshippe all affecting, all endeavored by all the means they could to gain:
the King did voluntarily prefer the Theba^ cause and Pelopid^s suit before
the rest, because the fame went they were the best practiced of and most
skillful soldiers of all the rest, little respecting the power of the
Athenians, or the wealth or number of other of the Cities, who for want of
military practice, neither knew how to use their number, nor their powerful
weath: so then for power in the war it is, one Kingdom is preferred before
an other, and strangers evermore do most respect those strangers that are
warryers.

The poor Artificers, the Mechanicke Switzers were not long since of most
mean estimation till that provoked by an injury of Histor. de Co^mes. Liver.
5. Chap. 2
Charles the last Duke of the house of Burgundy like horses ignorant of their
own strenght they entered the feilde and got a victory whose sweetness so
enticed them on to continue in that course to such there advantage, that since
that time some of the greatest Histoire des Dernies. troubl: liur. 2
Princes of Christendom have vied thousands of Crowns to gain their
freindeshippe, that in the wars of Guiehard: Histo.
Italy the victory did ofttimes follow their inclination, that last of all,
all Europe at this day respects them well, and him the better whose friends
they profess themselves.

Thus the lowcountrimen (a name not many years agone unknown) were once
Baptist: Lenchi: in politicis obseruat.
reputed a dull lazy yea a base Nation of poor handicrafts men, contemned of
their neighboring enemies and respected of their friends no further than
necessity enforced, yet after that as they profess their Lords severity had
forced them against their wills to take up weopons for their own defense,
they in short time redeemed so their reputation that their most powerful
neighbors were content to undergo inuirious imputations for protecting the^,
whom men that looked a squinte upon the cause esteemed too much disobedient, The
King of France and Queen of England.
and since that time the war that gave life to their force has so increased
their might, that for this but on part of their power their strenght at sea,
it is thought they cannot want good friends to back them.

Since then the benefit of power skill and practice in the war is such that
by it the poor have grown rich, the weak strong, and those that were reputed
vile have got an honorable reputation, since all sorts of men are either
through fear earnest or through love willing to entertain friendly amity with
those especially that are renowned for it, since last a Commonwealth through it
may grow from small beginnings to unlooked for height as that of Tit: Liui: De:
3. ilib. 2.
Rome, audendo et agendo, by daring and doing rose from nothing to be Masters
of the world, who is he that remembers how Plutar: in Romul: vita.
Romulus even in Romes infancy, did lay foundations of Romes greatness, by
choosing out of his followers, those that were able to bear arms to be
enroled into legions, that will not wish if he wish well to his Country, that
his countries governors would provide so, for their Cities that they may never
want soldiers to fight for them so long as they have Citizens to dwell within
them. For my part when I remember how the Rosin: Romani Antiquitat: lib. 10.
Cap: 11.
Roman state, as it increased in power did evermore increase the well deserved
respect it bare to soldiers, so that though while the weakness of their
poor beginning lasted they only gave them titulary rewards triumphs to
Generalles, and to each private soldier that deserved it a several Garland,
yet in the year of their Cities age 347, at the taking of Anxur the Wolsces
Town, they ordained for them a certain pay e publico which was augmented
aftetwardes by Caius Gracchus and doubted after him by Julius Caesar, so that
in process of time besides the gift of the government of infinite Towns
Provinces and Kingdoms, besides the sending forth of Idem lib: 2^. Cap. 23.
Colonies one chief use whereof was Vt praemijs milites veterani afficerentur:
that old soldiers might be rewarded, and besides the ordinary allowance for
those legions that lived in Rome, the Emperor Sueto: in Aug: vita:
Augustus allotted out certain portions of land for those that had been
soldiers to maintain them in a continual readiness to do him and their
Country service.

When I remember how in Imitation of those Romans the ancient Kings of the
Lui: 2: de^ Recerch: de la Fran:
Gauls gave to their soldiers Manors in the Country where they lived as
Lords over the peasants their Tennants, and were tied to come with a certain
number of followers according to the quality of their land to serve as
voluntaries at their own charge so long as the war lasted, a custom yet
observed by their offspring the Gentry of France: when I remember how perhaps
in imitation of those Gauls, William the Conqueror gave to his followers our
Gentries Ancestors distinct circuites in sondrie places of several Lands of
inheritance* one of the heirs of which distribution is reported since that
time to have produced a rusty sword as the evidence by which he held his
living: when I remember how the Kings of France used Knighting and when that
was corrupted in the Civil wars of the houses of Lecerch. de la Fran.
Burgundy and Orleans invented new orders of Knighthood, as new honors to
reward soldiers: When last I call to mind how gentlemen and their Coats of
Arms took their original from the wars as may appear by Lib. de. vanit:
scienti.
Agrippaes observation that in Heraldry the best coats consist of savage
beasts to testify the bearers nobility gotten by his courage: as says he, the
Goths carried a Bear, the Saxons a Horse, the Romans an Eagle, the Cimbri a
Bull, and each particular Gentleman thinks it nothing honorable to carry a
Sheep, a Lamb, a Clafe, or such like peaceable creature that is not Militiae
signum, a token of warfare; Then my zeal to the wars and my love to
soldiers is so revived that I can scarce forbear wishing, that in Engiand as
in Scythia none might drink of the feasting cup, or as in Carmania none
might marry that had not slain an enemy to his country: or as among the
Turks that none might be esteemed noble for Antiquity, but for their proper
virtue: or as old decrepite men were used among the Lib. 2. Cap. 3.
Trogloditae mentioned in Diodorus Siculus, that each young scapethrift that is
Telluris inutile pondus, a burden to the earth that can do nothing well, save
that that is passing ill might be tied by the neck to an Oxes tail and so
strangled as well worthy so shameful a death for doing nothing worthy of life.
But on later and wiser consideration I find it nothing comely that a Civil
Country should break her own customs to imitate a barbarous people, yet even
these examples with those before mentioned may lively testify how necessary al
antiquity esteemed Pramiaet honores rewards and honors, to nourish and hold up
the Art of war, one of the chiefest pillars of a Commonwealth I cannot
therefore but most seriously wish that our King a worthy in the worthiest
kind of Learning as he is the flower of two Stemmes of most renowned warlicke
auncesters, whom God has given us, Sam. 1. cap. 8. ver. 20.
To go out before us and fight our battelles, to whom the King of Kings Virg:
Aeneid: lib. 1.
Et mulcere dedit fluctus et tollere ventos.
Gives power as well as to appease
with calmes, with storms to stir the seas.


Would when it shall please his wisdom add life, I mean practice to our
Militia that often dies at least decaies much through secure idleness, and that
then the pay of England that is as honorable as any Nations may not be
detained from or gelded before it come to the hands of poor soldiers by base
unworthy Captains, nor the due of honest Captains be with held or lesned
through the fraudule^t corruption of Decitefull officers; but that severity of
military discipline may be revived to cut of those rotten members, those
adulterate counterfeites whose basens has made true soldiers conte^ptible,
and that true soldiers even in times of peace may be as much respected as
their virtuous worth deserves.

For then as by Plutar: in Lycur.
Licurgus institution it was in Sparta our free noble spirits will betake them
to the sword and lance, and leave al other occupatio^s unto white liuerd men:
the^ our young me^ will exercise themselves as Idem in Corio. lan.
Coriolanus did, in running, wrestling, riding, and the like warlike sports:
and our old men shall be fathers of great experience: so that with us as with
the Osor: lib. 5. de reb. gest: Emanuel.
Brasilienses the young men shall execute valiantly, the wise Counsel of the
old men: then our gentlemen remembering in what foughten field, or for what
special service their Ancestors received their badges of honor, will fall to
imitate those honorable Ancestors and knowing how poor a credit it is g
Aliorum incumbere famae, for to rely on other men's desert will strive rather
to have Effigies tot bellatorum, the images of their warlike ancestors, living
in their hearts than dead and smoke dried in their houses: Plutar: in Marcell:
Then our countrymen like Marcellus in Rome or the Idem in Pyrrh:
Mamertines in Sicilie, may perhaps have honorable name derived from Mars: Then
it may be as many of one name as were of Montag: Liver 2. Essay. 42.
Williams at our King Henry the second his Sons feast in Normandy, or as
many of one family as were of the Camde: Br^ita: in Richmond.
Medcalfes at on assize in Richmondshire will vow themselves like the 300.
Fabij in Rome to fight for their Country: Tit. Liui: De: 1. lib: 2.
at least we shall have many breathren, (noble slippes of some noble stock)
that like the Norrisses of honorable memory, will strive to be famous for
dying valiant soldiers in the bed of honor, rather than infamous like some
beasts unworthy to be named in the same discourse For their noted idle, if not
worse life. Then we shall have many Captains, such as were the Greeks and
Romans, and our soldiers shall be as much renowned for valor, honesty and
mutual love as was the holy band at Plutar. in Pelopid.
Thebes: And then now conquests shall make forreinors ashamed to laugh at us
when we tell of our forefathers victories in France, and our displayed ensigns
shall keep us from blushing at our slothful life: For then those true
soldiers that whiles the wars serve but as sinckes to rid away Purgamenta
vrbium, lie hid like Diamonds heapt-vp in dunghills covered with weeds, shall
be as rich Gemmes set in gold and worn and beautified by the comfortable
reflex^ion of the rising Suns smilinge beams, and in the mean time this may
their comfort though like old English words they be now out of use, yet Hora de
art poetica.
Multa renascentur quae nunc c^cidere cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor.


They will be in request that are neglected, and they contemned that are now
respected.

The time will come their country will leave fawningly to offer up her wealth
to those her unworthy children that live by sucking dry their Parents blood,
and rather motherlike respect those sons that are her Champions, and seek to
perchase her ease with painful industry, her honor with effusion of their
blood, her safety with loss of life.

The fourth Paradox.
Lucan. 1.
Et multis vtile bellum.

That war sometimes less hurtful, and more to be wished in a well gouernd
State than peace.

Sweet I know is the name of peace, more sweet the fruition, to those
ease-affecting men that foolishly imagine it the greatest point of wisdom to
enjoy the benefit of present time, though one of better iudgmet tell them: Ter:
in Adelph: Act: 3: sce. 3.
Isthuc est sapere, non quod ante pedes modo est videre, sedetiam illa quae
futura sunt prospicere.

It Is wisdom not to cast our eyes
On that, that just before us lies,
But to foresee and to provide
For harms that one day may betyde.
Some others without repect of public benefit, measuring the happiness of
the state wherein they live by their own particular contentment do most
eagerly make war against war, the apparent enemy to Persia^ luxury, whose
sworn slaves they live. And besides these the greatest part of men, blinded
like these, do tremble at the name of war, for fear of his companion
charge: not unlike some wretched pennie-fathers, that in time of this our
contagion, by resisting contributions fitting for the ordering of infected
persons, are often occasion of impouerishing themselves and their whole town, of
endaungering their own and many hundred honester men's lives.

But if it may appear on better deliberation, that the war, La Roque. li. 1.
Du ma^niement: de l' art militaire.
Est de long temps and continue encor, and durera en sa force iusqu a la fin
du monde Is of great antiquity, continues yet, and will remain in full force
to the ending of the world, so that we may well put it of, but cannot put it
away, since like a torrent of waters it rises as occasion forces here and
there, and may a while be stayed, but increasing so, breaks out in the end
more violently, and as Virgil says, Virgil: lib. 2. Aeneid.
Sternit agros, sternit sata laeta boumque labores
Praeeipitesque trahit siluas etc.
The fields it ouerflowes, the corn is dround.
Plowmen their labor loose, trees fall on ground etc.


Then it brings with it a confused desolation, whereas without danger at the
first, it might have passed on by little and little in a continuate quiet
course. If it may appear, that luxurious idleness is much more to be feared
than those monstrous bugbearers words I sometimes hear alleged to dissuade
men from the wars, the mere inventions of fainthearted and effeminate men,
that they may have some color for their dishonorable sloth. If last of all it
may appear, that in a just and good quarrel, which cannot likely want a war
wisely managed, cannot but be infinitely profitable: I think there is none
that honors his King, wishes well to his country, or desires fame; but will
far prefer the shedding of his blood, to procure his Kings honor, his
countries safety, or his own reputation, before the sorded sparing, lazy
living, or foolish delaying of those blinded men I mentioned.

For my own part, I ever disliked those patient pleasing Chirurgions that with
fond mildness suffer small hurts to fester, and grow dangerous: I ever feared
lest temporizing (like looking on our neighbors burning house) would suffer the
fire to come home to our own doors, and then I fear our poor loving sheep
will too late see, they only fed themselves fatt for the slaughter, when men
most resolute, shall rather be, determinate to do, than skillful how to. Then
I fear our conquestes past will little profit us, when ease like rust in our
Armor shall have eaten into and corrupted our valor when by discontinuance of
practice, we shall be unapt for service, yea by reason of the often change of
the course of our wars directly ignorant, and that ignorant unaptness will
dismay the most confident: Then it may be feared we may too late repent our
former negligence, our secure idleness, our sparing of a little to the
endangering of all, when we see our selves at length enforced to undergo the
danger with disadvantage which in time with ods, our side we might easily have
repelled: then we may wish we had imitated the Romans wisdom, that foresaw
inconveniences a far of, and would not to avoid present wars, suffer
mischiefs to grow-on, Machiauel: Princ: cap. 2.
they invaded Philip and Antiochus in Graecia lest othewise they might have
been enforced to deal with them in Italy. But my words perhaps are to these
peace-louers as wind that shakes no corn, assuredly I know it hard to
dissuade bewitched men from ease and pleasure, two seducing Sirens in whose
beastly servitude too too many are inthralled past recovery: yet those worthy
spirits in whose breasts the sparks of our forefathers courage are not yet
extinguished whose swelling hearts are ready to protest their English virtue
hates effeminate, longs to show it self in some laborious course of valiant
industry: They I doubt not will soon call to mind how dishonorable it was
to the Justin. Histor: lib. 6.
Egyptians under Ptolomie: Depositis militiae studijs, otio and desidia
marcescere. To pine away in sloth and idleness, neglecting military
profession, or how unprofitable it was to the Idem lib. 3.
Lydians to live in peace. Quae gens industria quondam potens, and manustrenua,
effaeminata mollitie, luxuriaque virtutem pristinam perdidit: which nation was
once famous for valor and industry, but they drownde the reputation of their
ancient virtue in effeminate and luxurious delicacie. And with a feeling
remembrance of those or the like examples, pray with me that those, and the
like inconveniences fall not on us: that we may not suffer our enemies or
neighbors to grow too mighty, whilst carelessly we our selves wax weak and
degenerate through sloth and case, under the color of a quiet life: I doubt
not but their hopes are like to mine. For as that great Captain Plutarch: in
vita Pyrrh.
Pyrrhus did in some particulars well correct the vain v^ine voluptuous life
of the Tarentines, so since God has given us a Governor as valiant as, but
much more wise than Pyrrhus: I hope, and my hope is strengthened with
confidence, that that valor will incite, that that wisdom will direct our
King, to take in hand the reformation of our idle life, more dangerous than
that of the Tarentines: In better manner and to better purpose, then did that
Pyrrhus. A work worthy a King, that can be worthily effected by none, but
such a King, in whom there is all worthiness. But here me thinks I hear
some object to me the succesfull felicitye of the peaceable Reign of our late
Queen, whose happy memory, and ever to be admired government, far be it
from my thankful thoughts to touch with the lest tittle of disgrace, whose
wisdom such obiectors too too saucely diminish producing her as an enemy to
Military profession: her sex indeed, and in her later time fullness of days
might well excuse far greater ease; yet see (that which these blind men
stumble over) from the first to the last in several parts of Christendom, she
ever found means to train up her better and more forward subjects in variety
of service; that so they might prove good members of her Estate, and
profitable servants for her potent Successor: So wise men know, besides that
many dangers were kept far of, this Realm was still tollerably furnished
with skillful soldiers, and prudently rid of many inconveniences: yet I must
confess the open show of peace bred diverse corruptions, yet such as all States
how ever wisely governed where peace is are of necessity subject to.

Who sees not to what riot in apparel, to what excess in banqueting, to
what height in all kind of luxury, our country was grown, when the flower
of England, the gentry and better sort, whom the meaner strove to imitate, for
the most part idly, if not lewdly brought up, confirmed in their dissolute
life, by superfluity of ill example, became so exceeding foolish, that he
which eat good meat, and ware good clothes, and did some one thing worse, was
ordinarily amonst them accounted most happy: How many of our elder brothers
consumed whole and goodly patrimonies at dice and cards, having no other means
to pass their time, as I have often times heard diverse of them penitently (but
too late) complain: how many of our younger brothers in all sorts of riotous
expenses, did in small time consume their portions, which otherwise employed in
virtuous courses might soon have equalled their elder brothers sons, and
then exclayming against their parents, that dealt indeed too well with such
ungracious children, fell to lewd courses, and often times came to such untimely
ends as I shame to tell: and of both these, the likeliest plants to prove were
most of all perverted, the spirits of best hope, did soonest step awry.

So Plutar: in Caesa: vita.
Caesar in his younger days, was most prodigal, he grew indebted 700. thousand
crowns. So Idem. in Cym^: vita.
Cimon in his former time was most riotous, and for it defamed through the whole
City of Athens: yet see, the wars redeemed the one and he became a most
renowned General: the wars reclaymed, the other and he proved as valiant as
Themistocles, as wise as was Milciades. Thus we may read that Silla,
Alcibiades, and diverse other carried themselves most lasciuiously, most
wantonly in peace, till the wars taught them to live like soldiers: And like
these (I think) some of our countrymen, for spirit no whit inferior to
Caesar, nor towardnes to Alcibiades, might in time have proved renowned
soldiers and extraordinary instruments of their countries honor, had they
not for want of employment, to our public loss, and their private overthrow,
spent their younger years like Cimon in riotous behavior, and their age like
Lucullus in luxurious idleness: so that Iuuenal had he lived in their time
might have truly said.

Iuuenal: lib: 2. sat. 6.
Nunc patimur longae pacis mala, saeuior armis
Luxuria incubuit. etc.
Now we endure the discommoditie
Of our long peace oppressed by luxury.
worse far
than war.
But these were such whose finer mould was incapable of drudging courses, who
perhaps as Cap. 1. Deca. 6.
Peter Martyr observes of the Spaniards, thought it Specialem nobiliu^ praero
gatiuam vt otiosi, ac sine vlla exercitatione praeterqua^ bellicavitam
degerent. The special privilege of a gentleman to live solitarily, free from
al professions, save that of arms. This was indeed an ancient custom of our
Gentry, till peace made some, of Gentlemen become Boores, who forgetting that
their truest honor came by arms, lived as they said to themselves, some
grasiers, some ploughmen, all basely sweating in the pursuit of dross, hating
the name of honor because it asked cost, and such as these robbing poor
farmors of their practice, like weeds in untilled land, have and still do spinge
up in peace the patron of their baseness, yet such as these might call to
mind what Civil contention, rest and want of foreign wars occasions, they
might remember bow many have been utterly undone by unnecessary law brables,
weighing well the number of those that have shot-vp deciding such
controversies, men I know whose laborious study deserves much commendation, but
when I think how In Timoleo^: vita.
Plutarch praises the Cornithians whose temples were adorned not with the
spoils of the Graecians, their friends, their neighbors, unhappy memories,
but dekt with trophies of their victories against the barborous people their
adversaries; then I wish those necessary members of peace, whose good parts I
reverence, had rather gotten their wealth by the sword from foreign enemies,
like our worthy Ancestors, then so to have grown great, through their
Countrimens contentions.

Now besides this private contention whose nurce is peace, even that peace is
oftimes mother of more perilous dissension, when idleness ministers each
active humor fit occasion of working, to the indangering of diseased, to the
distempering of most healthful bodies, when quite security gives busy heads
leisure to divide the commonwealth into contentious factions; so that as in
Iin Solon: vita.
Solons time at Athens, the people of the mountains desiring this form of
government, the men of the valleys that; to both which the inhabitants of the
seacoast maintain a contrary: all catch hold of the opportunity peace offers
to plot, and put in practice their several proiects for the advancement of
their particular, though with the weakening of the public state, and in the end
like Ide^ in Pyrrho.
Pyrrhus disordered elephants, some running backward, some forward, and the
rest standing still, the confusion of their actions me thinks resembles well
the Indian dannce described by Noua noui orbis historia. lib: 2. Cap: 16.
Benzo where diuerso modo singuli vestiuntur et alij hoc, alij illo modo corpus
circumagunt, nonnulli crura at tollunt, aliqui brachia, alius caecum, alius
surdum effingit, rident alij, alij plangunt etc. Where all are clothed after
sondrie fashions, one turning his body this way, another that way, some lifting
up their legs, some their arms, one playing the blind man, another the deaf,
some laughing, some weeping etc. But the danger of these differences is the
greater because not sensible, till strangers that grow through them
courageous, take the advantage of them, and then too late we may remember
Liuies warning by the example of Ti: Liu: lib: 4: Deca: 1.
Ardea that such dissension has been more hurtful to sundry Cities, than
fire, famine sickness or the sword, or what other calamity ca^ be imagined
while we too soon forget the last advertisement dying Mar: Barles: in vita
Scanderb:
Scanderbeg gave his son, in these words worthy to live ever. Nullum
tampotens validumque imperium quod non corruat quandoque vbi mutuis odijs
praebetur locus. There is no government so well established, that will not
suite it self, if once it harbor partial emmieties.

These enmities have been instruments in most Countries overthrows, they
overtake us in our security like secret fires in the night, and are therefore
more to be feared, they steal on us by degrees hidden in the deepnesse of our
rest, like the consumption in a body unpurged, unexercised, that is indeed
less painful yet proves more mortal than most diseases; they are as
plentifully bred in peace Diod: Sicu: lib. 2 Cap. ^.
as Crocodiles in Egypt, and would in time prove as pr^uitious, but God that
for man's good prouides the Ichneumon to destroy the eggs of the one before
they be hatched, has left us a perfect remedy to dissipate the other, if we
be not to our selves defective; to wit, foreign war, a sovereign medicine
for domestical inconveniences, whereby those stirring heads that like the
Justin: Histor. lib. 44.
Spaniards Bellum quam otium malunt, ideoque si desit extraneus domi hostem
quaerunt. Desire war rather than quietness, and therefore fall out at home
if foreign foes be wanting: shall have more honest and more acceptable means
to busy themselves, when as Lib. 9. de reb: gest. Emanuelis.
Osorius says: Commune periculum facile omnium animos ab intestinis
seditionibus auocabit, ad commune malum propulsandum: The general danger will
soon withdraw men's minds from intestine garboiles to resist the general
mischief, both which appeared in that wise proceeding of the Plutarch: in
Coriola: vita.
Senate of Rome in Coriolanus time that by this means appeased all divisions,
even then when as Lib. 2. Deca. 1.
Liuie observes heat of contention betwixt the people and nobility had made,
Ex vna ciuitate duas: Of one o^e two Cities. For the populousness of that
City, by reason of their peace occasioning a dearth and famine, and their
idleness stirring up lewd fellows to exasperate the desperate need and envious
malice of the meaner sort, against the nobility, whose pride and luxury grown
through sloth intolerable, caused them to contemn and injury the poorer
people, in the end the fire brake forth hard to be quenched, and then the
Senate having as I may say bought wit by this dear experience, were at length
enforced to fly to this medicine, which wisely applied before, had well
prevented all those causes, and their unhappy effects. Then they resolved on
a war with the Volsces to ease their City of that dearth, by diminishing
their number, and appease those tumultuous broils, by drawing poor with rich,
and the mean sort with the Nobility, into one camp, one service, and one
selfsame danger: sure means to procure sure love and quietness in a
contentious Commonwealth, as that of Rome was at that time.

Yet even then there wanted not home tarrying housdoues, two peacebred tribanes
Sicimus and Brutus, hindered that resolution calling it cruelty, and it may be
some now will condemn this course, as changing for the worse: some that will
much mislike a body breaking-out should take receipts of quicksilver or
mercury, that may endanger life: yet they cannot but know even those poisons
outwardly applied are sovereign medicines to purge and cleanse, and therefore
having a good Physician, I must profess, I think it much better to take
yearly Physic, when the sign is good and circumstances are corresponde^t,
that may work with some little trouble, our health and safety, than through
sordide sparing, or cowardly fear of pain, to omit happy opportunities of
remedy, and so suffer our bodies perhaps crasie already, so to sincke that
death follows or at least some grieuious sickness, asking far deeper
charge, bringing far greater torment, especially since the sickness of a
state, were it as great as a palsy may by a skillful Physician be purged and
euacuated at an issue in some remote part.

I cannot but therefore commend Plutarch: in Camill: vita.
Camillus wisdom for beseeging the City of the Faleriens, though it were so
strongly situated, so well stored with victual, and so fortified with all
manner of munition, that the secure Citizens walked up and down the City in
their gowns, since not regarding the winning of the Town as appeared, by his
ouerslipping weighty advantages his intent, only was to keep his Countrime^
busied about some thing, lest otherwise repairing to Rome they might grow
through peace and idleness seditious, and so raise some civil tumult: This was
as Plutarch well observes a wise remedy, the Romans ever used to disperse abroad
like good Physicians the ill humors that troubled the quiet state of their
Commonwealth: Ce qui s' est antrefecis pratique' apres les gueres ciuiles des
Anglois, which has been sometimes put in practice after the civil wars of
England, as Discourse: politi: 9.
Master La Noue delivers.

If then those men that marvel how Philip the second that wanted not his
oversight was ever able to possess Spain in tolerable quietness, his people
having been of old time as their dealing with the Romans shows of a
rebellious disposition, the continuance whereof made The Paraenetical discourse.
Ferdinand of Portugal refuse to be their King, and Ibidem.
John the second wish a wall as high as heaven betwixt his people and them,
which turbulencie continues yet, even in the better of them, how ever some
maintain the contrary, as some years past was manifest, by the ambitious and
seditious pride of Alanso Julian Romero and some other Spanish Captains, when
Don John of Austria consulted for passing his army out of the Low Countries
into Italy, as has not long since sundry times appeared by the mutenous
reuolts of his In the Low Countries 2000 at one time. Estates of English
Fugitives.
oldest soldiers for want of pay: If yet I say those men that marvel so,
would by that rule of the Romans examine that Phillips proceedings in imitation
of his father Charles the fi^^t, It will evidently appear that he procured the
place of Spayn and his own safety by keeping his active subjects in continual
employment, far from home, where their Eagle-like piercing eyes might not
come to pry into his Actions, nor maliciously observe the distates his
government occasioned.

He did not forget that the Satute of Plutarch: in Peric.
Pericles was graven with a helmet on to hide the deformity of his onion-like
head, nor that that Ibidem.
Pericles sent 60. Galleys every year to sea, and many hundreds of men away by
land, to rid his City of idle persons: but making use of both, received the
fruit of both, besides this further benefit, that as weeds in England prove often
good sallets in France, those his male contented and suspected subjects, while
they were at home, by their industrious life under severity of Military
Discipline became of good members, and were for their experience not unworthily
accounted as ready soldiers as most in Christendom, which opinion was
undoubtedly a great strength to king Phillips enterprises, making the
temporizing Venetians and other States of I^a^^ ^ore afraid than needed.

Then howsoever some may be dissuaded by Appian.
Catoes lively demonstration of Carthage too near neighborhood, from drawing
on us such an enemy as may in less than three days sailing knock at the
gates of our great City: and others in remembrance of some actions past, may
seem to dislike sending our forces so far from home that for want of fresh
supply of men or other necessaries, the voyage how auspitious soever the
beginning be, wanting sure footing, must of necessity prove as a fading
bubble: I for my part leaving the election of our wars as a matter scarce fit
to be thought on by so young a head as mine, to the mature consultation of our
Senate, and iuditious resolution of our Sovereign, with more loyal zeal to
my King and Country, than love (which I confess is great) to the wars,
wish, and with faith wish, that our settled state may reap infinite commodity
by that La Noue Discour. polit: and militar. 9.
politic rule, grounded on Ccipio Nasicaes desire to have Carthage stand,
that for the reasons Scipio then alleged, wills every Kingdom to provide it
self an enemy as the Machiauel: Prin: cap. 29.
Romans had many whose fall was their advancement, as the Plutarch. in vita
Alcibiad.
Athenians had them of Samos whose invasion appeased their domestical tumults,
as last of all the Justin: Histor. lib. 7.
Macedonians had the Thracians and Illirians: Quorum armis, veluti quotidiana
exercitatione indurati gloria bellicae laudis finitimos terrebant: With whose
hostility as with a daily exercise they were so hardened that their neighbors
lived in awe of their renowned valor: that so fear of the enemy may keep our
people from ease and luxury, the fatal ruin of States and Countries, yea
sometimes As Annibals at Capua.
conquering Armies that dealing with that enemy in imitation of Quint: Curt.
lib. 6.
Alexander after Darius overthrow, our men of war may be so trained and kept
in ure that for want of practice the life of all Arts, but most necessary, in
the most necessary Art of war, our warlike discipline decay not, and so
sincke, if not the estate, yet the honor of our state and Country.

But here whether to have one and the same still or rather variety of enemies
be more requisite would ask a more particular discourse to decide, Plutarch:
in vita Lycur.
than this general Paradox may admit: Licurgus knowing the inestimable
benefit of military practice, was desirous his people should have war but
not with one and the same Nation lest they might be blamed as Ibidem and in
lib: de dict: et fact: Lacad.
Ag^silaus was by Antalcidas, for making the Thebans against their wills by
continual inuading them to his own hurt, skillful soldiers; yet some may
think it best grapling with one whose strength we know, whom by conquering we
know how to overcome, whose fashions our soldiers are used to, but I dare not
speak all I could, lest my meaning be applied as I would not, this I say,
since it was truly said of the Romans, Ti: Liui: lib. 3. Dec. 1.
Magis bellantes quam pacati habuerunt deos propitios: That they were more
fortunate in war than peace: It was wisely (I think) fained of Plutar: in
Romul.
Romulus that the Gods told him his City should prove the mightiest in the
world, so it were raised by wars, and increased by arms, and well confirmed
afterward by Ibidem.
Proclus, delivering the same to the people as a message from Romulus after his
Deifiyng to persuade them indeed to war, which this politic Roman and that
worthy king foresawe was like to be most beneficial for them: this I say,
since Lib: de vtilit: capiend: ex hostibus.
Plutarch rightly says that Cities by warring with their neighbors, become
wise in their carriage and learn to affect good government: it was not
unwisely done of Robert the second of Scotland to will his Peers and subjects
in his last will and Testament, to have peace never above 4 years together in
respect of the benefit he had found and should receive by continual exercise
in military matters.

That then I may shut up this short and slight discourse seeing that to speak
of peace perpetual in this world of contention, is but as Aristotle's foelix,
Xenophons Cyrus, Quintilians Orator, or Sir Thomas Moors Vtopia, a matter of
mere contemplation, the war being in this iron age La Rocque liui. 1: du
maniement de l' Art militaryre.
si bienenracinee qui' il est impossible del l' en oster, Si non auec la rume
de l' universe. So well ingrafted that it is impossible to take it away without
a universal destruction: seeing that the quarrelles of this world are either
of Christians against Turks, and infidelles, in defense of Christ Crucified,
which ought never, and I assure my self shall never be extinguished till the
names of those dogs be clean extirpated: or between Chrians, with such
inueterate malice and irreconcilable wrongs for titles so intricate, as in
man's wit is to be feared will never be appeased, satisfied, decided, seeing
that many of the Princes of this world, though they talk of peace and amity to
win time, til their proiectes come to full ripeness, serving their turns
with that sweet name which they know is likely to blindfolde ease-affecting
people, yet in their hearts desire nothing less: when as some of them weakened
with the violent courses of their hereditary ambition, that can never be tamed,
seek peace as a breathing only to recover strength: others warely repecting
our increased greatness, and their own unsettled state make fair shows now,
but are like enough here after upon advantage to prove false hearted: others
having gotten much wealth, gained much reputation, increased their power, and
maintained their liberty by the sword, will never endure the loss of these
by harkening to peace, since last there never wanted coulorable pretenses to
break those truces, that like the Just: Histo: lib. 42.
Parthians promises are only observed, quatenus expedit, as far as is
expedient, and made like that of the Ti. Liui: lib: 8. Deca. 1.
Samnites who entertained peace with the Romans, non quod pacem volebant, sed
quia non erant parati ad bellum: not that they desired peace, but because they
were unprepared for war.

Let me not be blamed if I speak what I think, and as the scope of this
discourse directs, deliver, that is more safe and honorable (making a league
with some of them, so that necessity of state may force them to be faithful)
to keep some other of them at the swords point, while fearing our strength, or
their own feeblenes, cauponantur pacem, they but chaffer for peace, rather
than by te^porizing give them time to turn tables, and fall on us, when our
leaders shall be waxed old, and the number of them much diminished, when our
best soldiers shall be raw Besognios brought to some execution of importance,
before they were fit to learn what was fitting for the^ to do, when our
discipline corrupt before shall be clean rotten and as little worth as our
cancred rusty weapons at a day of service, when our ships of war one of the
greatest strengths and honors of our kingdom, shall for covetous desire of
gain, be easlyer in one year turned to hois of Burden, tha^ ca^ be reduced
back again, to do our Country service in an other 5 and 40. when our seamen
shall be few, and skillful only in their own ordinary course, passing directly
as they are bound at best seasons: where as long voiges, living at sea,
variety of weathers, change of Climates, searching and sounding all harbors,
bays, creekes, and corners, with ships well stored with men, is it that brings
forth store of skillful Masters, skillful pilots, skillful Mariners, when
last of all our people shall be more luxurious through such dangerous security,
more contentious among themselves, more careless of the honor of the State,
and in conclusion more ready to receive some fatal overthrow than ever
heretofore.

These therefore and infinite other weighty considerations spinging freshly out
of my zealefull regard of my countries welfare, and the desire I have to
adventure the shedding of my blood might I be once so happy in my Kings
service, makes me with ferue^cie of spirit wish his majesty may ever have as
Guichard: Histo: lib. ^.
Charles the 8 of France had once, Infinite multitudes of men, resolute of
minds, for service apt, of faith assured, of wills tractable, for
commaundment obedient, and lastly bearing all one common desire, to com^ their
lives to any danger for the glory and greatness of God and their King. And that
our commonwealth may never want many such worthy Patriots as will valiantly
when time serves, hazard themselves, their friends, and their best fortunes, in
paineful industry to procure their countries assured safety, that their
example may make our Gentry ashamed of their much dissolute, degenerate
dishonorable courses, the scoffing stock of proud co^temning foreign
Nations, that so desiring earnestly to show the world their swords can cut as
keen as their forefathers, by this first step to such desire, they may
profess with me and that with constancy, Hor: sat. 1.
Militia est potior:
the war
is better far:
Pulchrumque mori succurrat in armis. Virgil: Aeneid: X.

And think how worthelie
they die that armed die.


FINIS.

