THE DEFENSE OF TRADE. In a Letter To Sir THOMAS SMITH Knight, Governor of the
EAST INDIA Company, etc. From one of that Society.

-- Vexat censura Columbas.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for John Barnes, and are to be sold at his
shop over against Saint Sepulchers Church without Newgate. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, SIR THOMAS SMITH, KNIGHT, etc.
Right worthy Sir,
WHen I first heard of an Inuectiue published by some unknown busy Person,
against the East-Indian Trade: I must confess, I held it, In eorum genere quae
vilescunt spreta, worthy only of that Companies contempt, whose blessed endeavor,
with good service to the State, has surely freed them from the poison. Why
should they then regard the hissing of those lurking Serpents, that when the
Itching humor takes them, will be doing breuibus and carcere dignum, even with
the State it self?

But having since perused the Pamphlet, I find under the pleasing title of
Increase of Trade, and gilded over with that Commendable Proposition of the
Herring-fishing, a sort of Pills are put to swallowing, that perhaps may work
weak stomachs to distaste our Course of Traffic by societies in London,
especially that now of greatest hope and profit to the East Indies. And though
the Author handle the particulars with such confused Contradictions, as assure
me he conceived not what he writ: Yet sure, some Ape has put the Cats foot
in the fire, some cunning and malicious persons, for private ends, or lewder
purposes infused the Quicksiluer that set that running head a work. Remembering
therefore that a wiseman should not only keep himself from hurt of the Brute
Beast, but feed and clothe, that is as Plutarch notes, make profitable use of
enemies: out of my love to you that spend so much of your Time, for the good of
the worthy Merchants liberal Adventures, to advance the reputation and
revenue of the Commonwealth, I wish some one of our Committies best
experienced in that business, would take this opportunity to show how
wrongfully they are traduced, whose voluntary hazards in such long and costly
voyages, for such even by their enemies confession, dangerous and slow returns
were rather thankefully to be commended.

Good men, well-minded Merchants, while the idle Drone and greedy
Catterpillers prey upon the substance of the Subject here at home, with eating
usury and harmefull arts, while such a Spider in a corner spends his
fruitless days perhaps in weauing weak objections against them, from
furthest parts abroad, they fetch and bring the honey to the Hiue, laborious
Bees, they clothe and feed the poor, and give the willing man employment to
gain with them, and with the Common wealth, the honor, and the riches that
Venice first enjoyed by their Trade over land, along the Mediterran, and then
the Portingals (poor Portingals till then) procured by their more aduantagious
far Sea-trafficke with those Eastern Countries.

This was the first intention, this is still the endeavor of that famous
fellowship, best known to you that were their first, and are by well
deserving, still their Governor; and if it please Almighty God to continue
his wonderful blessing, and our good King his gracious countenancing of their
industry, I make no doubt, but by discovery of some nearer passage, or if the
worst fall, through the Advantage of our multitude of able bodies, and most
commodious Sea-situation, even the way we have that rich Trade may receive yet
our turn more, and in few years a Staple of Commerce for all the World be
settled in these Northern parts with as much life and quickening to the
navigations and affairs of this whole Island, as London and all sorts of
Merchants in it found by one return from thence last summer, Quae nobis placet
experientia very.

But Sir, this honorable enterprise, like Hercules yet in the Cradle, in the
infancy has been assailed by Serpents sly aspersions, which Natiua generi
humano pestis quae vepres nunquam desinit in alienis agris licet purgatissimi
sint quaeritare. Pet. Mart.
Envy long since whispered in the ears of ignorance, of killing Mariners and
carrying out the treasure of the land, in answer whereunto had the East India
Merchant then but told a truth like Martials, Bella, Dives, Puella, Fabulla,
he might have been (it may be judged) neither fair nor rich, nor chaste, but
only forward to commend himself: but now when as the poor Snake Envy grows
to be a Monster, Malice, when the pratler late a creeping Worm is waxt a
winged Goose, a setter forth in print of slanders. Now (me thinks) you are, if
not inforst, at least invited happily to show the world the well deserving of
that worthy Company, whose innocence will shine more gloriously even to the
eye obscured of him that dwells farthest from London, by passing through those
vapors of an idle or corrupted brain these forced or forged imputations.

A work for truths sake worthy of a fervent spirits careful handling: but
were it recommended to my weakness; though I dislike as much as any man, to
see one, by transcribing only in effect, an honest Gentleman's good Quae non
vult sic laudari-Nec tali auxilio nec defensoribus istis -- Eget, etc.
Fishing-Proiect, steal occasion to censure all our Trades, and give
intelligence what Ships of ours, how manned, and at what seasons yearly
pass from place to place, with such particulars of our Sea-states decay, as
must be either true, and so the secrets, or false, and so the slanders of our
Country.

Though I condemn his folly, that proclaims such weakness and such want of
Mariners and Shipping in our Ports from fond reports of idle fellows,
Informations certainly as false in these particulars, as we know they are in
our East India matters, especially at this time, when clean contrary, the
power and greatness of our Royal Mr. and the reputation of his strength by
Sea and Land, is for the good of Christendom, composing of those storms which
Armies both in Italy, and Germany do threaten.

Though I detest the hollow-hearted cunning, that does look on Holland, but
yet roues for other Countries, girding still and glancing at our Neighbors of
the united Provinces, those in reason of state, and through band of Religion,
best assured friends, with over sedulous insinuating into every ear, their
eating up of our prosperity, their supplanting of us in our Trades, and such
like seeds of Disaffection, prejudicial to us both. Whereas an honest
subject, well disposed in Religion, well affected to the State, would rather
rest content with this assurance, that our King has power enough, when it
shall please his wisdom to curb insolence. Our State may when it will, meet
with unthankfulness, and they that made the Their word was, Si collidimur
frangimur.
Emblem, for their own good, must be careful to keep the Pots from knocking
one upon another.

Though more particularly, out of many Touches, I observe such inclination,
such a secret variation in the Compass of that Pamphletors discourse, as makes
me very jealous, for all his fair conclusion that he framed his Almanacke for
the Meridian of Toledo rather then our Islands good fortune: witness his
willingness to have us Trade into those Countries, where we must be ever under
the Lee, in awe and subject to much inconvenience, rather then make double the
profit to our selves and to the Commonwealth by fetching from the wel-head,
from the Indies, rather then weaken them, their wealth and shipping, that in
all their Modern Treaties with all Nations show, how much account they make of
that sweet Traffic.

Though last of all that Pamphletors malignant raking up all sorts of railing
arguments, and spleenefull urging every thing against the East India Merchant,
might very well provoke from one of that Society, the lashes which his often
fond excursions fit him for; yet surely I should leave him to the Riuall-free
fruition of those errors, and apply my pen to satisfy an honest mind,
rather then make him smart or careless Readers smile. And as a groundwork of
Integrity, first I would set down what he says even in his own Apparel,
Scarf, and Feather too, As thus.

Now follows the consideration of the East Indie Trade, East Indies.
into whose Seas, not only the River of Volga, as before you heard,
disemboqueth it self, but even the bottom of the Straights is emptied to fill
up those gulfes, and not to only, but besides that many of our best Merchants
have transported their Staples thither; it has also begot out of all Callings,
Professions, and Trades, many more new Merchants. Then where there is increase
of Merchants, there is increase of Trade; where Trade increases, there is
increase of Shipping; where increase of Shipping, there increase of Mariners
likewise: so then rich and large East Indies. The report that went of the
pleasing notes of the Swannes in Meander flood, far surpassing the records of
any other Birds in any other places whatsoever, drew thither all sorts of
people in great confluence, and with great expectation to hear, and enjoy
their sweet singing. When they came thither, they found in stead of fair white
Swannes, greedy Ravens, and devouring Crows; and heard instead of melodious
harmony, untuneable and loathsome croaking. In indignation that they were so
received and deceived, in stead of applauding, they hissed; and of staying,
fled away. You are now brave East Indies Meander flood, your Trade is the
singing of Swannes, which so many journey so far to enjoy. God forbid you
should be found so discolored, and we so ill satisfied. And howsoever that I
may be sure to avoid any detraction, whereby my nature might have any
imputation, or by calling up more Spirits into the circle then I can put down
again, I might incur some danger, and be taxed likewise of indiscretion, for
that we only hitherto have complained of the want of shipping; we desire now
but herein to survey the store, and see how you help the increase. You have
built more Ships in your time, and greater far then any other Merchants
Ships; besides what you have bought out of other trades, and all those wholly
belonging to you; there has been entertained by you since you first
adventured, one and twenty Ships, besides the now intended Uoyage of one new
Ship of seven hundred Tun, and happily some two more of increase. The least
of all your Shipping is of fourscore Tun: all the rest are goodly Ships, of
such burden as never were formerly used in Merchandise; the least and meanest
of these last is of some hundred and twenty Tun, and so go upward even to
eleven hundred Tun. You have set forth some thirteen Uoyages, in which time
you have built of these, eight new Ships, and almost as good as built the most
of the residue, as the Dragon, the Hector, etc. So that at the first appearance
you have added both strength and glory to the Kingdom by this your accession
to the Navy. But where I pray you are all these Ships? four of these are call
away, of the which one was of three hundred Tun, another of four hundred,
the third of three hundred, and the fourth of eleven hundred; two more are
docked up there as Pinaces to Trade up and down: the rest are either employed
in the Trade in the Indies, or at home out of reparations; which if true, if
the Kingdom should have need of them on any occasion, it shall surely want
their service; and so then there is not only no supply to the Navy this way,
but hurt even to the whole Kingdom, the Woods being cut down, and the Ships
either lost, on not serviceable. Surely Stories can show us, which we may read
in the courses of Commonweals, how tolerable, nay how laudable it is in all
States, to enlarge Commerce. Merchants, whom we should respect, can tell us
of the casualties which not only the Ships, but their Estates are subject to
by adventures. Mariners, whom we must pity, can teach us of the ordinary
dangers not only that Ships and goods, but their lives are subject to by
Sea. I must not then exprobrate that to them which is to be imputed to the Sea;
nor are they to be blamed out of reason for that which deserves in humanity,
commiseration; nor is England bounded by our Horizon, to go no further then
we see. We have learned long since, that Mercatura si tenuis sordida, si
magna, splendida; the Stranger the Country, the greater the adventure; the
more famous our Nation, the more worthy the Merchant. Before we were, even
Horace Writ, Currit Mercator ad Indos. Loath then am I to borrow that saying of
Demosthenes on his courting of Lais, to pay it to the Indian Trade, by
alleging, that Non tanti Emam poenitentiam, only having now in common that
Roman Prouiso, Ne quid detrimenti Respub. capiat. Let us examine that which may
move patience, that our Woods are cut down, and the Ships either lost or not
serviceable: Our Woods I say, cut down in extraordinary manner, neither do
the Ships die the ordinary death of Ships. Our Woods, extraordinarily cut
down, in regard of the greatness of the Shipping, which does as it were
devour our Timber. I am able out of sufficient testimony to affirm, that
since the Indian Trade, and merely through their building of their Ships of so
great burden, and their repairing, (the building notwithstanding began but
five years since) that Timber is raised in the Land five shillings, and more,
in the load, nay, almost not to be had for money, which the Company (no
question) being sensible of, very wisely seek to help themselves in, by
building of Ships in Ireland for their service: yet it seems their
encouragement that way, is but necessitous, in regard by their own saying,
besides the hazard, the charges are little less; and which is worse, that kind
of Timber is but untoward for that use, being so extreme heavy, that a Ship
of a small burden draws much Water. In five years space their building,
together with their repairing of Ships almost equal to building, beget such a
scarcity, what will a little continuance bring forth? Bring forth I cannot say
ought, but a privation will follow even of all our Timber Wood. The Kings Navy
must be maintained, other Merchants of lower rank must have shipping, and the
Sea trade may increase, and then either we must Trade without shipping, or make
Ships, without Timber.

When the Norman Conqueror having subdued the most part of the Kingdom, passed
from Essex into Kent, which then made head against him, the Kents, having by
the advice of their politic Bishop and their stout Abbot, cut down great
boughs, and with them in their arms marched toward the Conqueror; whereby,
besides the novelty of the sight, the Army appeared double as big: William
himself so conceiving it, as also amazed to see Woods walk; more feared and
discontented with that sight, then otherwise assured with his former success,
condescended to what demands soever were made by those people, to have such
weapons laid down, and to gain such ingenious Subjects; whereby, to their
eternal benefit, and credit, their persons were never in bondage, no their
Laws altered. In this their Land-Stratageme, I see our Sea-Arts, in that and
these Woods being the fatal instrument of our fortunes, Boughs of Trees kept
the Kentish-men out of servitude, when they held them in their hands, and but
for show; their bodies will keep us in liberty when they contain us, and are
for service, and by their moving on the water they will amaze both French and
Spanish, and whomsoever, and keep them, and all others, from coming near us:
Out of which provident foresight, our most worthy Princes formerly reigning,
have made diverse Laws in favor of Timber Trees: 35. Hen. 8. 17. 13 Elizabeth.
25.
and our most noble King has provided thereto with new accessions for the
preserving and increasing of them; but that a parricide of Woods should thus be
committed by building of Ships, Forbidding by proclamation the building with
Timber
it was never thought on by any of our Royal Solons, and therefore there was
no prouiso for it: Nay, this inconvenience was to little suspected, that our
said famous Princes have provided clean contrary, with great bounty and
indulgence have encouraged by reward out of their own purses the builders of
great Ships; as bestowing on the builders five shillings on the Tun for every
Tun that is builded above one hundred Tun in a Ship; so necessary did the
Prince think his maintenance of shipping, the accession thereof consisting
much in their greatness, to the honor and safety of the Kingdom; and such
use he made account he should have of them. Whereas now this way he
contributeth, to the spoil of his Woods, to the loss of the Ships, and to
the hurt of the Kingdom. I heard a Shippe-wright say on the loss of the
Trades Increase, that if you ride forty miles from about London, you could not
find sufficient Timber to build such another. It was a Ship of eleven hundred
Tun: for beauty, burden, strength, and sufficiency, surpassing all
Merchants Ships whatsoever. But alas! she was but shown, out of a cruel
destiny she was overtaken with an untimely death in her youth and strength,
being devoured by those Iron Worms of that Country, that pierced her heart,
and brake many a man's withal memorable in her misfortune, only redounding to
the Commonwealths loss. For as for the Merchants, though I pity their
adventures with all my heart, yet in this their part of loss was least; for
all their goods were on shore; and she had brought abundance out of the Mecha
Fleet, which she did both tithe and toll: And thanks be to God, they are more
then serves by what is returned from her, and more then that often, by the
grace of God, will come from her to the Merchants gain.

The like untimely fall had the other three of great burden, gallant Ships,
never having had the fortune to see their nature soil again, or the honor to
do their Country any service, in respect of all other ships that wander
ordinarily to other Countries, therefore I may justly say that they die not the
ordinary death of ships, who commonly have some rest, and after long service
die full of years, and at home, much of their timber serving again to the
same use, besides their Iron-worke, and the rest otherwise serviceable, and not
in this bloody and unseasonable fashion, rather indeed as coffins full of live
bodies, then otherwise as comfortable ships. For the rest that live, Our Ships
are fain to take in the natives of the Indian Countries to supply the wants of
our dead Seamen to bring home their Ship.
they come home so crazed and broken, so maimed and vnmanned, that whereas they
went out strong, they return most feeble: and whereas they were carried forth
with Christians, they are brought home with Heathen. What the profits are to
the Merchants, for so great an adventure, I know not. I am sure amends can not
easily be made for so great loss, even in this point which is our special
subject, for wast of Woods, and spoil of shipping.

The last co^sistance of shipping propounded, was that of the East Indies:
which though youngest, was found in show and state to have ouer-topped all the
rest; as a Bird that makes her self gay with the feathers of all other
Fowls; having borrowed, nay, having bought the best ships out of other Trades
to honor their Uoyage, and plumed even Constantinople her self, of her
shipping: therefore that men are entertained extraordinarily in this Uoyage, it
is apparent out of the greatness of the shipping; the entertainment of them
increasing, if should be a consequent that Seamen increase this way: But that
we may not by ambages triumph in their loss, or our calamities, we see this
way that our ships perish, and therefore our men they shrink, Nay, though
ships come home, yet then leave the men behind: so in this Uoyage, there is a
twofold way toward our want of Marmers.

In that Ships, nay great ships, are extraordinarily subject to be cast away,
and then there must be lest likewise of men; In that though they come home
emptied of their men.

By the loss of four ships, we have lost at the least four hundred and
fifty men: and in the adventure of some three thousand that have been
employed since that Uoyage began, we have lost many above two thousand.

David refused to drink of the Well of Bethelem, which the strong men had
fetched, when he thirsted and longed, because it was the price of blood. This
Trade, their commodities are at a far dearer rate, being bought with so many
men's lives.

But happily some will say, that the greatest loss of these men was at the
beginning, when as all things are difficult: but since our men framed to a
better composition of themselves, to the variety of this Climate, and heartned
to the tediousness of this Uoyage, have better endured and overcome those
difficulties, and returned more comfortably. Herein the latest Uoyages will
inform us best, and we will instance in the three last that have made
returns.

The first was under Sir Henry Middleton, The Trades Increase.
whose former government in that kind of Uoyage, had approved his wisdom and
moderation. His ship was that famous and unfortunate Uessell of eleven hundred
Tun; his company in that ship some two hundred and twenty men. After four
years errors up and down the Sea, wherein he underwent many constructions at
home, and overcame strange difficulties abroad; having, to his eternal
reputation of policy and courage, out-gone the perfidious Turk, and revenged
their barbarous wrongs, Captain Pemerton that escaping imprisonment at Moha,
iourneying in that unknown Country 15. miles by night, got to the Seaside and
finding a small Canow, made a sail of his shirt, and a mast of a stick, and so
recovered the Ships.
to the Merchants gain, and the Kingdoms repute: After He, and his, had, I
say, been accompanied with many sorrows; with labor, hunger, heat,
sickness, and peril; That worthy Commander, with many a sufficient Marmer,
with the whole number (ten excepted) of his li^e Cargazon, perished in that
Acheldama, in that bloody field of Bantam.

Nicholas Dounton, the Uice-admirall of that Fleet returned, and of seventy
be carried forth, brought home some twenty; the rest, their labors and lives
were sacrificed to that implacable East Indian Neptune: the Darling of that
Uoyage is yet there, nor never will the master, and approved seaman, return,
with diverse others.

The second was that of Captain Saris, and Captain Towerson, men formerly
exercised in those iournies, and therefore thought meet to command. Whether
they were short of the opinion conceived of them or no, I know not; it they
were, I should attribute part of the loss of their men to their
insufficiency, but that the destiny of that Country challenges all to it
self. Captain Towerson, who first returned having left behind him of some
hundred and twenty carried forth, fourscore and five; and Captain Saris of
90. and odd not having brought home above two or three and twenty: the Thomas
of that voyage, which went forth with some 60. men, was brought home by way of
a wreck, you know the destruction of men that name imports.

The third, that of Captain Thomas Best, By staying an Armenian ship, wherein
at least were some 400 men bound to the Indies, and commanding the Port, he
drew from there plain dealing and made honorable conditions for the Merchants.
He encountered four gallions, wherein might be some two thousand men*
Admiral of the Fleet, a man, whose former behavior in sea-affaires drew into
that iourny with great expectation, and which is very seldom and hard, his
carriage in this employment went beyond that great expectation of a reposed
demeanor indulgent to his men, vigilant in his charge, his courage like on his
carriage, and his fortune above all, he checked the Indians, he mated the
Portugals: those honor our King, these fear his forces, he settled a trade in
Cambaya, reduced things in order in Bantam, brought riches home for the
Merchants, and kept reputation for himself; yet for all this had he, Nemesin
in do^se, the Indian vengeance haunted his ship even to our Coasts; of some
hundred and eighty men under him when he went forth, depriving him of one
hundred and odd men for ever. Some four or five and twenty of the remainder
are left, on the desperate account of men, for the Countries Facteridge, only
thirty are returned. In two great Sea Fights with the Portugals and their
Gallions, which continued four whole days, he lost not four men. It was not
then the fortune of war; neither out of want of ought that victuals and good
government could afford; imputations to some other Uoyages: Nor had the length
of time any fault, part of others bane; he having made the voyage in shorter
space then any other ordinarily* the dogged Star of those Climates, the
^^ench of those Countries were his fatalitie.

As one swallow makes no summer, so it is not much to be maruailed, that in all
these Uoyages some one ship has but been scarred, and not else much hurt in
this journey: She indeed but even seeing those Coasts, and presently on so
great a glut of our men and ships, with the which it seems the sea and Land
was then busied and full: when as Captain Newport returned with little loss
and in short time.

Now then as we have said before, that the Indian ships die not the ordinary
death of ships: and that we have shown likewise before, that men do die
extraordinarily in this Uoyage, which is almost incredible: they are distressed
likewise after their death, and that is very apparent by the mean account made
to their heirs of what they had in possession in their life time, by what
should otherwise be due to them in their purchase, by the calamities of their
wives, children, and friends, after their death. Fabulous and fantastical
Legends have been made of the restless death of many concealed Extortioners,
and Murderers, whose Ghosts have been said so walk in pain and penance. On
the contrary, how many live bodies indeed the true Images of the deceased,
complain of the death, call for the due of their friends? Fathers, Husbands,
Children, Kinsfolks, and Creditors: Poor Ratlife, Limehouse Blacke-wall,
Shadwell, Wapping, and other sea-townes abroad can sensibly tell. The Merchant
he is at home, and therefore he cannot embezell the goods abroad: and it is
likely that what is directly proved due is paid here to theirs. Then is the
calamity of that journey more fearful, because out of his own ill Planet if
makes so many miserable. How this is recompensed it is neither my purpose, nor
my part to examine: For certain there is want of Trade: the Hollander would
grow greater, if he had all this Trade in his own hands. The Kings Customs
are now advanced: this way Shipwrights are set on work, which must be
maintained; and other Mechanical Trades live hereby, with a number of poor
busied. And surely he that would not have the poor to live, I would he might
beg: And he that would not advance the Kings profit in all liberal manner;
and Merchandise is a fair means, I would he might die: and he that regards
not his Countries good, it is pity he was ever borne. I desire not, like a
second Phaeton, to make a combustion. All that I would enforce at this time is,
that in this trade our men are consumed, and thereby more want of Mariners. Let
the Straights-men, and the Lisborne-Marchants complain of their hinderance this
way, and say their Traffic before was more beneficial by much, and more
certain to the Custom House then the Indies be now. Let others report that
the foundation of this Trade was laid in the ruin of a Carick that Sir James
Lancaster took in the first Uoyage, and that the maine of this after-iollitie
proceeded of the forced Trade driven with the Mecha Fleet by Sir Henry
Middleton, Wherein he was his own Trade-caruer out of ten hundred thousand
pounds worth of goods.
whereby diverse durst not go presently after to the Straights, as the Angel,
and other ships, out of rumor of revenge for violence offered by our Indian men
to the Turks in the Red sea. Let the common people say that their commodities
are unnecessary: ask the Tradesmen, nay all men, what they have cheaper:
look into the price of victuals how it rises out of their great provisions.
Let the whole Land murmr at the transport of treasure, and bring in Charles
the fifth his opinion, speaking to the Portugals of their Trade to the East
Indies, Hall Chron. An. 15 Hen. 8.
who said that they were the enemies to Christendom, for they carried away the
treasure of Europe to enrich the Heathen. Let go the speech of the small
relief thereby to the poor, and they whom it does concern may suggest the
Indian home state and particular profit. Once I am sure, that as Vespasian the
Emperor said, He had rather save one Citizen, then kill one thousand Enemies;
so his Royal Majesty had rather have his subjects, then Custom for them: and
you see plainly, that his Majesty's subjects, our Countrie-men, fall this way,
and this way is want of Mariners.

Now Sir, imagine that you were the Reader to be satisfied, and you shall see,
how while the froth of his Meander flood and such like following fuming stuff
euaporates it self, out of the residence, Dross as it is, I will extract all
his Objections, which now like folded sheep, or as raw Soldiers in a rout,
stand faces every way, but I will put them in array, in order Sir, and yet
defeat them, fairly as I go.

First, comes a very forlorn Hope, two light, flight charges, were they true,
of the River Volgas disimboquing, and the Straights emptying, but I will take
the former rather from the fifth page of his Book where he speaks English.

The merchant formerly trading Russia, The first Objection.
has for warmth and profit seated himself in the East Indies, and transported
thither much of the Muscouie Staple, etc. To which I answer.

IF here, Answer.
as some imagine, he have looked asquint upon Sir Thomas Smith, an Honorable
Gentleman, whose constant and continual readiness to spend both time and
money in any action that may good the Commonwealth, does merit as much praise
as modesty may give a living man: How much is he to blame, to wrong a worthy
member of this City of the Kingdom, that (besides many other public
businesses) has been long, and is still Governor of the Muscouia Company,
and with them continually as great a Venturer as any? If he intend if by the
Company, how ignorantly does he tax that body, the With the expense of
120000. pou^ds in discoueries only.
Discouerers of the Northern World, that all the last age honored our whole
Nation with their famous Navigations, that far from letting full their Trade,
after so many years of loss by reason of the troubles of that Land, do yet
make good a stock, not only to With twice as many ships, as they need send
for fishing.
defend At their charge it was first discovered, and by their great charge
Visceniers sent for, and our Nation taught to kill the Whales.
their fishing of the Whale in Greeneland, against all other Nations, but at
this present able to bear the charge of six or seven thousand pounds
extraordinary, to defray a Muscouite Ambassador all the last Winter here, and
Sir John Merrick, one of ours now there, in hope to settle once more Privileges
for our Nation, and in time to bring over the Caspian Sea along that River
Volga, whose name (it seems) he only knows, a Trade for Indico and Silk so
rich, that the East India Merchant may perhaps be glad for so much to join
purse with them.

His second Objection The second Objection.
is of the Streights emptying, etc. or from his sixth Page. The Trade into the
bottom of the Streights is lessened by the Circumuention of the East Indie
Navigations, which fetches the Spices from the Wellhead, etc. but mark,

IF this he says were true, The Answer.
so long as by the change the Kingdom gain, and only Turks do lose, of
what faith is he that complains? The Turkey Merchant is too honest and too
wise, he knows that when the great Imbargo and the war that followed with
Spain, had forced us from the Marchant-strangers hand, to take our Spices
(which were fetched from Lisbone formerly) As when lowest Pepper eight
shillings a pound, etc.
at extreme rates, His witty Predecessor plotted, by his Factors, with the
Carauan, to bring those Spices to Aleppo over Land, and so awhile did help to
serve the subject here at lower prices, until the Hollander, by the Cape Buena
Esperanza found the means to bring such store of those Commodities, that the
Though not under four shillings the pound for Pepper, etc.
low price beat the Streights-Marchants from that Which when it was at best,
employed not pass 200. Tun of shipping yearly.
Merchandise: And then our Merchants, (that what ever ill men say, do scorn to
wear the shoes of other Nations) resolved upon an India Voyage for
themselves, with four good Ships, and some of them that wanted now employment
to the Streights: by the return whereof, and by continuance of that Traffic,
our Spices are not only cheaper to us As Pepper 2. shillings the pound when
dearest, etc.
half in half, but the Straights Merchant, long before this Pamphlet was put
forth, out of our overplus has served the Turks with Spice, and Of that which
came home 1613. already 2628. bags of Pepper, 5549. of cloves 22^0. of
Nutmegs, etc. which imploi'd outward at least 600. Tun of shipping and will
freight at least twice as much home.
carried in one year much more into the Streights then ever was imported
thence: The proceed whereof, as Turkey Merchants know, besides the increase of
shipping to export it, will return Wares, to employ at least twice as much
shipping more: so much has God Almighty blessed us, if we can be thankful.
So opposite to truth is all he says of the East India Trades decaying of the
Streights.

Besides, if the East India Merchant (that would he look at private profit
only, can employ his stock for swifter, and for surer, and perhaps more gain)
should, through discouragement of such malignant tongues, now give that
Traffic over, lives there any (in the City among Sea men) else so simple, as
to think, that while the Dutchmen hold their Trade, there will be any more
Spice brought from Turkey? Certainly that course is now for ever overthrown,
and so I think, are these two forlorn accusations.

Next then, to ouerpasse his Fireworkes of triumph only, before Victory, after
some crackling noise, and no hurt, his Vantgard comes up upon our East India
Navy, and like one of the wise Captains of old time, he would cosen his
Soldiers with false enumeration of their strength; I will therefore disprove
him with a truer Catalogue of their ships.

Per Tonne and Tonnage.
The Dragon -- 1060. An old worn ship bought by the Company, but by their
cost made so strong, that she is now gone her fifth voyage to the Indies. The
Hector -- 800. An old ship bought too, and made new and warlike, and now gone
her 5. voyage too. The Suzan -- 400. A very rotten ship, when she was bought,
and likely to have been broke up for firewood, yet she made one voyage, and in
her second, foundred in the Sea, as we think. The Ascension -- 400. An old
ship bought, Ordinance, Tackle, Furniture, and all for five hundred pound, she
yet made two voyages, and in her third was wilfully run aground upon the
sholes of Cambaya The Consent -- 150. A bought ship, she brought home Cloves,
etc. but being found too little, was sold away. The Union -- 400. An old Hulke,
bought from carrying Masts and Dele, yet made a warlike ship, and lost in
Brittanie. The Expedition -- 320. Gone out her third voyage. The Trades
Increase 1293 New built, and ouerswaid as she was careening at Bantam, etc. The
Peppercorne -- 342. New built, and now gone her second voyage. The Darling --
150. New built, and now Trading and discovering in the Indies. The Globe --
527. Bought and Rebuilt for Trade and Discovery in Bengala, whence she is not
yet returned. The Cloue -- 527. She was at Iapan with Captain Saris, a new
strong ship, and going again her second Voyage. The Thomas -- 342. New built
and gone her second Voyage. The James -- 600. New built, but not yet returned
from the Indies. The Oceander -- 213. New built, and not yet returned. The
Solomon -- 400. And now gone her second Voyage. The Concord -- 213.) (Gone out
lately. The new years gift -- 867.) (New built of Irish Timber. The Hope --
533.) (New built in Ireland. The Samaritan -- 543.) ( The Thamazin -- 133.)
(New built. The Advice -- 160.) (New built. The Lion -- 386.) ( The Great
Defense -- 400. Ready to go out with the Cloue.

And two more now building at Depford, one of 1100. Tun, the other of 900.
Tun, etc.

Out of these ships, the Company have set forth already 17. voyages. Neither
may he excuse his mentioning only 13. with pretense of his books being written
long before his friend (no doubt) put it forth, since in the book he speaks
of Captain * Saris return, etc. Page 29.
But let that pass. What says he to these ships?

Four of these ships are lost, The third objection.
and that not by the ordinary death of ships. The Trades Increase, that
gallant ship, was overtaken by untimely death in her youth and strength,
being devoured by those iron-hearted worms of that Country, etc. The like
untimely fall had the other three gallant ships, never having had the fortune
to see their native soil, nor the honor to do their country any service,
etc.

And is four of so many ships, so long at Sea, Answer.
so great a loss, especially in fourteen years of our yet infant and
discovering trade, while in the farthest and unknown parts of the world --
Ignari hominumque locorumque
Erramus, vento vastis and fluctibus acti,
Incerti quo fata ferant, vbi sistere detur,
while we seek for traffic with strange Nations? Surely we esteem it Gods
great blessing, that we lost no more, and we are thankful for it. He has
not dealt so with some other Nations. Look on the What work would he make,
if we should lose so much wealth, and so many men, in so lamentable a manner
as the S. John or S. Benoit, Carrickes of Portingal were cast away
Portingall or Dutch beginnings. Nay now they are so well experienced, the
first lost in a manner all their China Fleet and riches very lately, in return
to Goa; and the other, the very last year, out of four ships richly laden,
the return of many more set forth, saw the ruin, ships, goods, men and all,
of two; and one of them even at their doors in At the Tessel.
Holland. And if this Vulture that thus follows wreckes and dead men's bodies,
should but reckon other Merchants losses in that time, which I had rather
pity, he would, it may be, in his so approved New Castle coasting course,
find as great loss of Mariners and shipping.

And for the extraordinary death, I know not well what he intends: but sure
the Company, even in the loss of most of them, for some things, Found Gods
extraordinary blessing. Witness a true narration.

First, for the Trades Increase, when that thrice-worthie General Sir Henry
Middleton (that neither tithed nor tolled the Mecha Fleet, as malice would have
men believe, but like true Justice, with the Sword and Balance in his hand,
made the beginning, laid the true foundation of our long desired Cambaya-Trade)
had made the false Turks pay for his most barbarous imprisonment at Moha, he
conceived, a twelve months stay, by that misfortune, longer forth, might
peradventure bring his ship in danger, and therefore more for providence then
need, he purposed to careen her at Bantam, our then greatest Factorie, where
he was no stranger. But such was Gods good pleasure, as it has done here, and
may do any where, a mortal and infectious sickness raged then among the
natives of that land, and fell on him and many of his people unto death, so as
the ship (that by the breaking of a Cable ouer-swaied) was left half ruind
above water, Yet the goods were safe.
for want of skillful hands to help her.

The Ascension, though an old Ship bought, made for the Company two voiages
to India; but in her third, by the wilfulness of a lewd Master, that would not
suffer-a Pilot to be entertained, she was run aground upon the sholes of
Cambaya, where yet all the men, with the best merchandise, were saved.

The Union, bought from carrying Masts and Dele, was by their cost made
warlike, and so strong, that notwithstanding her unhappy loss of the
Captain, and eleven more of her principal men, through foolish breach of
their * commision, In going on land at Gongomora in the Island of S. Laurence,
contrary to express instructions.
yet she had come richly laden home, if first a mutiny had not fallen among
those new unfit Commanders, and then fourteen of her a blessed men had not
forsaken her distressed, to go for Rochell with a ship of Alborough. And yet,
good ship, almost at home upon the Coast of Brittanie, where she drove in
with her weak men, the lewd Inhabitants first drew her on the Rocks, then
boared her full of holes, and with more difficulty far then would have saved
her, made a wrecke, as since upon their execution for it, some of the actors
have confessed in France.

The fourth and last, was the old rotten ship, the Susan, ready to have been
broken up for firewood, when the East India Merchant bought her for their
voyage, which she yet performed, though in returning home upon her second
voyage, she foundred in the Sea, as men suppose: so that (as Neptune in the
Poet said) Vnus erit amissum tantum quem in gurgite quaerent,
Vnum pro multis, etc.
This only one ship properly was lost. Now let him then but read what he
has written of these ships, and if he can forbear to blush.

I but the rest of their ships are either out in the Uoyage, The fourth
objection
or here at home out of reparations, returning so crazed and broken, etc. that
if the Kingdom should have need on any occasion, it shall surely want their
service, etc. And this in truth is an objection worthy of an answer.

ALthough before this Trade grew quick, the Company had leisure, Answered.
and were forced to new-build, and bestow great cost upon their old bought
ships; yet now for diverse years, since they built new, there is no shadow of a
truth in that he says: for that their ships, some after two years and a
half, some after three, and longer voyages, come home so strong and
serviceable, that without cost of Planke or Timber (except only sheathing, due
to every Merchants good ship, and performed easily in thirty days) they
have been found fit to send out again unto the Indies. And thus without new
building

The Dragon Hector Expedition Cloue Solomon Peppercorne This ship he says
came home by way of a wreck, is it not likely?
Thomas
was only dock't and sheathed for the new Voyage.

And that this point of sheathing may be fully understood, The Cloue one of
the greatest, that had been at Iapan longest and farthest our, was for a trial
sheathed and fitted perfectly in fourteen days: who then can doubt of their
ability to serve the State at home upon our Coasts, or at the most, little
above a Summers Voyage out?

I but they are not here, etc. The fifth Object*


YEs commonly six Months, Answer.
and when our Navy is complete, and our Trade settled, by Gods grace we shall
have many ships returning every Summer, as well as those preparing in the
Winter to go forth: and see this man's ill luck, even this last mustering
year, before the putting out of that same Pamphlet, besides those seven above
set-ships. The Samaritan, the Lion, and the great Defense lay many months
within the River, ready, if need had been, to do the service which his
Majesty in his Princely wisdom How much is the whole Kingdom bound unto him
for his care, not only with infinite charge to keep his royal navy in better
state then ever, but to work out wisely such addition of strength in shipping
even from his Merchants?
prouides for, in his letters Patents of the Companies Incorporation.

Ten goodly ships and such as (not to meddle with our Merchants ships, our
friends at home) being all together, well provided of munition and men, would
not much fear the Royal Navy of some Kings in Christendom. A Squadron that
within our narrow Seas, having the Land and Ports to friend, might stop the
fury of another self conceited invincible Armado: what means this poor man
then to write he knows not, and it seems, he cares not what?

I think our Kentish boughs that got us Gauel-kind of the Conqueror, like
Bees in his brains have made him wood: In a wood I am sure he is now, and like
to lose himself, for his next forces, like Benzo his naked Indians come to
fight Ligneis Telis, with wooden Arguments. But any Wood will serve his rancor
for Arrows to shoot at the East India Company: and would he fly into the
Irish bogges, as he does into their Woods, I must now pursue him. He says,

Our Woods are extraordinarily cut down, The sixth Objection.
in regard of the greatness of their shipping, which does, as it were, devour
our Timber, etc. King Henry the eight, and Queen Elizabeth, by Laws, and our
King by Proclamation, sought to preserve and increase our Woods, but that a
parricide of Woods should thus be committed, by building of Ships, etc. and so
on, but Thinks he, Answer.
these royal Princes cared to keep their Woods for any nobler use, then to
build gallant ships, and those not to lie still and rot his ordinary death,
but such as round about the World disperse the honor of the Crown they serve,
and then return with wealth for King and Kingdom, and for those that set them
forth, in stead of Wood?

We must with thankfulness acknowledge, though he coldly set it down, that
our most gracious Sovereign has not by Proclamation only helped the Kingdom
in that point, but with a providence beyond his Predecessors, besides his
recommending bills in Parliament, and speaking eloquently for them, He has
urged good husbandry of Planting to us all, the only means to breed up
shipping Timber, since tall and goodly Trees do never prove of Tillers, second
springers out of old decayed stocks, how well soever kept by statute
husbandry in Woods.

But was this Care (thinks he) for Trees to look upon? The providence that
bids us go and plant, commands us too to use our wel-growne Timber ere it rot,
as that would soonest that is fittest for great shipping. His Majesty was loath
to have our Timber spent on Beggars nests (that growing scurfe upon this City)
new teneme^ts, whose rotten rents make many Gentlemen before their time, or
that our Woods should be consumed in fire and Furnaces for glasses and such
bables when God has blessed us with a Fuel in the bowels of the earth, the wast
whereof can do no hurt: but as for building ships, his wisdom likes that
well, and out of royal bounty, for encouragement gives them the most that
build the greatest, A policy of his Princely Predecessors. If then these
Eagles could foresee no inconvenience, what is he? that professes himself

Able out of sufficient testimony (questionless) to affirm, The seventh
Objection.
that since the East India Trade, and merely through their building and
repayring of their Ships (their building though begun but five years since)
Timber is raised in the Land five shillings in a load, nay almost not to be
had for money. This makes the Company fly into Ireland, And he heard a
skillful Shipwright (doubtless) say, that all the Timber within forty miles
of London would not build such another ship, as the Trades Increase, etc.

I Know what men in Kent esteem of him, Answer.
that said (because they agreed in time) that the building of Tenderden Steeple
was the cause of Goodwin sands increasing: but if there be a man so near of
kind unto a block, that he thinks cutting down of Timber, Parricide: His
tender conscience shall have some more satisfaction.

It is no news to hear the price of Timber rise, with most things else
(perhaps through moneys falling,) It did so, long before the East India
Company began, It does so now within the Land, where neither they nor any
can build ships: but to confound that poor Conceit, that they have caused
dearth, the East India Merchants Books will show, that to this day they have
in all of English Timber spent but five thousand, six hundred, twenty three
loades, and one thousand, eight hundred, forty two of plancks. Whereas I know
of my particular acquaintances within his Shippewrights limits, the Company
are offered at this present more then that, at as cheap rates as when they
built the Trades Increase: And they that best can judge the East India
Shipwrights, I know where in one Corner of a Country 2000. Tun of Timber
must be spent upon one Marsh-worke, yet no man dreams of dearth.
sent to bargain for the Company, auerre upon their credits, that they know
within that forty miles, Timber enough to build not only many a
Trades-Increase, but to use their words, Ten times as many ships as the
East India Merchants have.

Yet they foreseeing store can be no sore, especially near home, and hearing
how the stranger daily fetched away our Timber out of Ireland; out of an honest
good affection to their Country, put their foot in there, and now provide the
most part of their shipping and materials They have a stock of Timber, Trees
and Planke cut down, and seasoning there, and as the old is fetched away,
still new is provided.
thence, in which they find no I am sure it is a great deal too serviceable
for the stranger.
fault at all, save (as he only truly says) the charge and hazard: and if it
shall seem good unto his Majesty to keep our Irish Timber from the stranger,
for to build Busses and fishing Vessels for our selves; This ready Company,
to do him service, and to good their Country, may perhaps find means, to
save homestore, by trying a conclusion in Virginia, which this worthy Author
thinks, men know not what to do withal. Since therefore their provision out
of Ireland, neither is for need, nor to save charges: What is he that requites
that industry of theirs, and hazard, with ill words?

Now Sir, we are upon his next Invectiues, his maine battle, nothing now but
death of men, only a certain loose Wing, a straggling Objection about shipping
comes first in the way, and says that

The East India Merchants have bought the best ships out of other Trades, The
eight Objection.
and plumed even Constantinople her self, of her best shipping, like a Bird
that makes her self gay, etc.

But if the Horace, lib. 1. Epist. 3.
Poet were alive (from whom he borrowes that conceit) to read first a
Gentleman's Fishing-Proiect, Answer*
and then this Trades increase, assuredly, His Quae move at Cornicula risum,
Furtiuis nudata coloribus, in the proper sense, should not need to force it
self upon the East India ships: but to the matter of the Objection; if he had
his will, that the East India Merchants might neither build nor buy: what had
become of those old ships they bought, as the Hector, the Ascension, and the
Suzan, of Turkey Merchants, and some others of other men? had they not lain and
rot for want of work, or been broke up for firewood, as well as others since?
Or would he rather that they had been alienated into Spain with the Alceder,
a ship of four hundred Tun, the Beuis of Southampton, a ship of three
hundred Tun? or into Italy with the Royall-Marchant, of four hundred. The
May flower, of three hundred. The Prosperous, of two hundred and threescore.
The Suzan-Parnell, of two hundred and fifty. The Gold Noble, of two hundred
and forty. The Consent, of two hundred and fourscore. The Concord, of two
hundred and fifty Tun. Surely, an honest man would rather have said somewhat
of this sale, if he must needs complain, then quarrel that, which was but
change with gain unto the Kingdom. Where then, good friend, in the Epistle is
that Candor animi, in all Particulars? In all particulars it shows it self
alike, and even as charitably in his following clamor, about loss of men: a
subject worthy of a little meditation.

It is a precious thing the life of man, and would to God our single
Combatants, for idle words, would wey it well, at least those joys, that are
expressed by the term of Life to Come: Yet the true sweet thereof is not in
length, but use; a month of health more worth then years of sickness; an
idle week not worth one hour well spent. And if we look upon it, for it
self or for our selves, to stay from Sea for fear of death, and starve at
home, or pine away in poverty, were foolish superstitious cowardice: But as we
are the Bodies of our King, and of our Country (though in truth their greatest
treasure, witness a A poor naked King of
Pohatan, or a The goodliest Country in the world, were it well inhabited.
Virginia, without them yet.) This necessary Relative of Sovereignty. Living
bodies, vnimploi'd, are nothing. And if vnhealthinesse or danger of mortality,
should keep us from a course, wherein we may enrich us, or our Masters, or
serve the King, or good the Commonwealth: Who then shall live in Rumnie-Marsh,
or Holland, or our Cinque Ports, or Cities visited with sickness, or go unto
the Wars? There is an Author that can make all these the price of blood, with
phrases: But perfect wisdom in all Commonwealths, has honors, pay and
privileges, to invite the private man into such dangers, for the public
good; And God has given men wit and understanding to find out preservatives,
as armor against every peril, which Inbred courage, or obedience to
Commanders, or care of those we must provide for, makes us undergo. Besides,
the commonwealth esteems not of the life of any but good men, such as do
good, the rest are Tacitus his Purgamenta Vrbium, their death to her is nothing
but an ease. Nay Mariners themselves admitting them to be so scarce, were
better die in the East Indies, then here at home at Tybourne, or at Wapping,
for want of means to live; or else be forced to turn Sea-robbers, and
(besides their other hurts) give this man's 34. page.
pen occasion to cast such shameful and unnatural aspersions on our whole
Nation. But I will spinne out this no farther: the paradoxe is needless; for
the ground our Author took to fight this battle on, will fail him.
Unskillful Serieant-Maior, he is mistaken in his numbers. He says,

That by the loss of four ships, The ninth objection.
we have lost at least four hundred and fifty men: and in the Adventure, of
some three thousand, since that voyage began, we have lost many above two
thousand.

But how many soever have been employed since that Voyage began, Answer.
upon a true examination of our books, Whereas he speaks of Heathen men's
bringing home our ships, it is a mere toy, for that they come as well to see
our Country, and not near so many as we leave for the^. The Cloue brought
home the most, from Lapan, yet not the fifth part of the ships company.
it does appear, that in all our ships that have returned or been lost, unto
this day, there were at first set forth but three and twenty hundred, thirty
and three men of all conditions, Captains, Preachers, Chirurgians, Merchants,
Nouices and all: so that, unless multiplication help him, when those are
reckoned that are out in very many Factories abroad, and those that did come
home in 19. ships that have returned safe, there will not rest much likelihood
of many above two thousand cast away. As for his at least four hundred and
fifty, lost in the four ships,

The Trades Increase Union Ascension Suzan
had but 211 70 70 84
In all four hundred thirty and five, when they set forth.

And three of these, the Trades Increase, the Union, and the Ascension,
although the body of the ships were lost, as you have heard, lost not thereby
one man. But he perhaps will mend this gross account in the particulars. He
says,

That Sir Henry Middleton carried out two hundred and twenty in the Trades
Increase, The tenth objection.
all which live Cargazon, ten only excepted, perished in that bloody field
Bantam, etc.

But Sir Henry Middleton had but two hundred and eleven at first; Answer.
and notwithstanding the loss of his Monson, by his imprisonment, for all his
afflictions, and the accidental infection you heard of, besides four that
should have been executed for malefactors, that therefore ran away unto the
Portingals, and five that were drowned, and many that were slain, when he was
so barbarously captiued by the Turks at Moha, and sixteen that were left
abroad in Factorie, there returned with Captain Best thirteen more then the
ten he speaks of. But he says further,

That Captain Dounton, of seventy which he carried forth, The eleventh
objection.
brought home but twenty: the rest, their lives were sacrificed to that
implacable East India Neptune, etc.

But Captain Dounton, Answer.
for all his dangers with Sir Henry Middleton, besides diverse left in Factorie,
brought home twenty and seven. But he says further,

That Captain Saris and Captain Towerson, The twelfth objection.
whether through insufficiency or no, he knows not, but Captain Towerson of
120. carried forth, lost 85. and Captain Saris of ninety and odd, brought
home but two or three and twenty. And the Thomas was brought home by way of a
wrecke, etc.

FOr the sufficiency of men alive, Captain Saris would have M. Pamphleter
know, that he is not to learn the duty of a Sea-commander from any of the wise
Masters his Informers. He says his voyage was the longest, and hardest, and
costliest, and yet wealthiest of any returned hitherto, and that he brought
home above 40. men besides 15. Iaponeses for those left at Iapan, where he
obtained certainly ample and honorable privileges for our Nation.
able to answer for themselves, I will say nothing, let their actions speak.
But for the reckoning, Captain Towerson carried out but one hundred and
twelve, of which he left diverse abroad in Factories, and brought home 35. And
the General of that Voyage, Captain Saris, that carried out but 87. English,
and 4. Indians, did leave at Bantam eight in Factorie, and fifteen in Iapan,
and yet brought home many more English then he speaks of, besides three
Indians for the four that went out. Neither may one without a name, name the
Thomas a wrecke, whose men brought ship and goods into safe Port in Ireland,
which if she had done sooner, as she might, and not striuen in the cold stormy
winter, to come about for London, two months together, she had not lost so
many men. But he says further,

That by reason of the dogged star of those Climates, of one hundred and
eighty men carried forth by Captain Best, there returned only thirty, over
and above four or five and twenty left on the desperate account of the
Countries Factoridge, etc.

But first, The 13. objection.
to satisfy this desperate account of Factors, you may know, that their
returns in every ship of ours, likely, many men, (ten at a time, and
sometimes more) sent out in other Voyages, which I do never reckon, but only
give a true account of those that did proceed in the same ship. And so
besides those which Captain Best did leave abroad in Factorie, he put eight
into the Darling, (the Pinnace that attended on Sir Henry Middleton, and is now
discovering in the Indies) and four he lost by his accidental fight with the
Portingall, and yet brought home sixty and five. Who then can think this man
had any mind to publish truth, that would not once confer with Captain
Best, well known unto him, as it seems by his friendly commendation, and one
that could have told him both the truth of our men's dying, and that the true
cause (saving This place is vnhealthie to our people, as time has taught us.
So is Scandarone in the months of June, Iulie, and August, to those that go
into the Straights. We therefore change our Factorie from Bantam, where though
some (as Captain Saris 6. years) live well, yet more have died then in all
our other Factories, if we reckon not them that die of the etc. women.
Bantam) is their own disorder? Therefore

Certainly neither the dogged star of those Climates, nor that implacable
East India Neptune, nor that bloody field Bantam, is so fatal, so merciless,
so murderous, as the malice of this man, that to slander the East India Voyage,
has killed many that came home in safety, and some that were never there. But I
resolved to give you satisfaction, and not laugh at him. Know therefore,

It is the Merchants grief (and he that knows what hazard they do run,
that have their goods in Heathen Countries, in the hands of dying men, that
must expect rich ships to come from places so remote, so weakly mand, through
Seas of dangers, besides Pirates, will believe it is their grief) unspeakable,
that hitherto they cannot absolutely clear themselves from this (to them
indeed great) mischief. For though they put their wealth into the hands of
such as come by suit and friends into their service, though they give them
entertainment, and impressed for their provisions, beyond all other Merchants;
though they provide what ere it cost, all that the wit of man, helped by
continual experience, can invent, for victuals, clothing, physic, surgerie,
to keep them in good health, besides good Preachers, and the best Commanders,
all that may be to preserve them: yet if (as for the most part through their
own abusing of themselves, with the hot drinks and most infectious women of
those Countries) they come unto untimely death, the Merchants, that by that
means lose much of their goods, and hazard all, when they have paid the
friends or creditors not only all their due, but often times given more out of
charity to such as want, shall yet have such a man as this raise ghosts,
rather then they shall not be haunted.

But by the blessing of Almighty God, now that we are acquainted better with
that Voyage, and so taught to settle Factories in healthier places; now that
our Factors are more staid, and better known unto us, then many of those young
men were that first adventured on that then discovering Trade; now that our
common Mariners, in effect the food of that mortality, (as may appear by the
often Voyages of our Captains, Masters, Mates, and men of government) shall
neither be so long at Sea, nor stay longer on Land, then to unlade and lade,
and so return in fifteen or sixteen months, as in Straights Voyages; we are
in good hope that our ships will come as safe from loss of men, as the Consent
did first, and Captain Newport since, whose happy Voyages taught us the
experience. And so, Sir, our Pamphletter is now come ad Triarios, to his
Reregard, his last Refuge, his own Regiment, and that a ragged one.

Friends, The foureteenth objection.
Fathers, Widows, Children, Kinsfolks, and Creditors, out of poor Ratcleefe,
Limehouse, Blackwall, Shadwel, Wapping, and other Sea-Townes, clamoring for the
due of the dead, etc.

I Would some other poor, Answer.
yet honest business, could as well shake off this clamor, as the East India
purse does, that gives such extraordinary wages, and still paies so readily,
that men for many months out in this Voyage, in continual pay, although in
their return they chance to die, and leave perhaps to the suruiuors their
extraordinary gain by private Trade, yet the good money due soon dries the
eyes of friends and creditors, as it might do widows, but that the Merchants
careful choosing by their good wills none but single men, does for the most
part save that labor. For my part, I that often visit Sir Thomas Smiths house,
where the Company entertain and pay their men.
Philpot Lane, profess, I meet few sorrowful East India Clients, but such as
are refused to go the Voyage.

And though I would not wish the East India Merchants to answer this
imaginary clamor with setting truly down how many Hoggesheads of good Beef
and Porke, how many thousand weight of Biscuit they have given to the poor,
even in the parishes and places which he names; nor yet with telling what
proportion weekly in pottage, beef, and bread they send to the Fleet,
Ludgate, Newgate, the two Counters, Bedlem, the Marshalsea, Kings Bench, White
Lion, and Counter in Southwarke, besides good sums of money yearly to
relieve poor painful Preachers of the Gospel, whose means are small, and
charges great. For which and other works of charity, God has so wonderfully
blessed their labors. Yet if they should awhile forbear their alms, and let
the poor souls want it, because this man thus raild upon them, think then
but what an army of complaints and curses would fall on him and all his fained
rabble, which he brought to fight like Satan's seeming soldiers in the air.

Poor man, his case was desperate, and like the Captain of the Fort that
Monluc speaks of: he did but set up old clothes stuffed with straw, to win a
little time to run away: for hark, he is already in his violent retrait,
with

For certain there is want of Trade. The Hollander would grow greater, if he
had all this trade in his own hands: the Kings Customs are advanced: this way
Shipwrights are set a work, etc.

And so forth with a Misericordia, till he leave us to examine the Baggage --
Arguments remaining.

Inprimis, Complaint of the Straights Merchant, etc. Dead already.

Item, The fifteenth objection.
The foundation of this trade was laid in the ruin of a Carricke taken by Sir
James Lancaster, etc.

Sore wounded, Answer.
and not worth the knocking in the head. -- Yet for full satisfaction, it was
founded by Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, before Sir James Lancaster went
to Sea: and that I may set down her reasons in the Patent, for the honor of
her Realm of England, for the increase of her Navigations, for the advancement
of trade of merchandise, and for other important causes and reasons, etc. But
alas, she wanted this man's wisdom to assist her Counsel, etc. What have we
next?

The iollitie of this trade proceeded from Sir Henry Middleton his trade
coming out of the Mecha Fleet, The sixteenth objection.
whereby diverse Ships, as the Angel, durst not go after into the Straights,
etc.

FIrst then, Answer.
for iollitie of trade, the seventh, the eighth, and the ninth Voyages at
least, were gone to Sea before we heard one good word from the sixth, which was
Sir Henry Middletons: and before return of any goods, the tenth, the eleventh,
the twelfth were likewise gone, if not the thirteenth, with a resolution of the
settled great Joint stock. The iollitie I think he enuies. Nor find we fault
with Captain Middleton, although his Voyage prove one of our worst. But sure
the Heathen man that said, Tibi innocens sit, quisquis est pro te nocens, will
much condemn this man, that blemisheth, as much as in him lies, Sir Henry
Middletons good service for our Country, to take the part of Heathen men, that
have more conscience, that complain not, for they know the wrongs which they
had done our Nation, and that Captain, for whose valiant justice sake they use
our people better ever since. As for the fear of some one ship, if it were
true, we wey it not, since the whole body of the Turkey Company, on good
deliberation, were secure, as men that knew, Our Lidgier at Constantinople now
shall find a readier ear to all Complaints since that example taught them,
that our Nation can (as far as it is) stop up the mouth that gives them
sweetest sustinance.

But, their commodities are unnecessary, etc. The seventeenth Objection.


HE means not this, Answer.
I hope, by Indico and healthful drugges, though Callicoes, and Silks, and
peradventure Spice be censured. The truth is, in strict terms of need, our
Land that flows with food and raiment may Be, without all other Nations, but
to Be Well, to flourish and grow rich, we must find vent for our abundance,
and seek to adorn us out of others superfluities. So other Merchants bring in
Wines, and Sugars, Currons, Raisons, Oils and such like, that while we eat
them, do eat on us, and so of manufactures wearing: But I shall show you now a
Mystery of the East India Merchants merit of the Commonwealth, even out of
their unnecessary Wares.

In any of their Voyages, The Commonwealth pays nothing for the victuals nor
the wages of the men, nor for the work of Shippewrights, Smiths, Coopers,
Ropemakers, Porters, Lighter-men, etc. and such like infinite number of
Laborers which they have continually in pay; but has the employment of all
these, and the keeping of many Factors abroad, for the materials, out of which
they raise their shipping and provisions, so that there rests to reckon unto
her, only the stock of Merchandise and money sent to barter. This stock in
the greatest year, was but 36000. and The kingdom saues yearly in the price
of Pepper, Cloves, Mace and Nutmegs-70000. pounds besides al other wares.


This stock in two years does not rise unto the sum of that which yearly
since the East India Trade (as I shall show you by and by) the Kingdom saues,
in the price only, of the Spice it spends, so that the Commonwealth has more
then two for one, even in the first return for her Adventure. Now then mark
further, over and above that which was left to serve the Land, from
Michaelmasse 1613. unto Christmasse 1614. There was exported of East India
goods, out of the Kingdom.

As much In Pepper, as at two shillings the pound amounted to -- 2096231 --
14.s -- d Cloves, as at four shillings the pound amounted to -- 4338 -- 16 --
0 Nutmegs, as at two shillings eight pence the pound amounted to -- 740 -- 16
-- 0 Mace, as at six shillings the pound amounted to -- 3613 -- 4 -- 0 In all
218316 -- 10 -- 0


So that by the East India Merchants happy charge and industry, besides the
Custom paid for it to the Crown, and the employment of many Ships and
Mariners, in sending it abroad, into Germany, and the Netherlands, France,
Spain, Italy, Turkey, and other places, there was already in fifteen
months, out of four sorts of Spice only (not to speak of the Indico,
Callicoes, China Silks, Benjamin, Aloes-socotrina, etc. then exported) above
two hundred thousand pounds sterling, added to the stock of the Commonwealth,
to proceed for the enriching of the Kingdom in the nature of Cloth, Lead,
Tin, or any of our own Staple Merchandise. Which I hope was no unnecessary
commodity.

But you that read may judge by this what great Increase the Commonwealth will
have, now the Joint stock is settled, and are long, returns by Gods grace, to
be looked for yearly of many ships with many hundred thousand pounds worth of
Spice, Indico, Callicoes, China and Persia Silks both raw and wrought, and
other Merchandise, to serve our selves, and most parts of the World as we
begin already, and should more easily, if such busy men as this Pamphletor
would let the Martchant do it without noise. But

What have we the cheaper?

I Will show you Sir, and since I so began, in Spices only, The eightee^th
Objection.
which before our India Trade, Answer
were often accidentally sold dearer much, but constantly, the lowest price.

Of Pepper, was four shillings the pound, at which rate, fifteen hundred
bags, containing four hundred and fifty thousand pou^ds, (the smallest
quantity, that the Kingdom yearly is esteemed to spend) amounted to ninety
thousand pounds sterling. But since our trade, the highest price is but two
shillings the pound, so that the Kingdom saues in Pepper yearly half, that
is 45000l. 00s. 0d. Cloves, was eight shillings the pound, at which rate, two
hundred Hogsheads, co^taining fifty thousand pounds spent in the land)
amounted to twenty thousand pounds -- But till the Dutchmen interrupted that
part of our Trade, our greatest price was but four shillings, so as the
kingdom saved in Cloves 10000l.00s.0d. Mace, was ten shillings the pound, at
which rate one hundred Hogsheads, co^taining fifteen thousand pounds, the
Kingdoms spending came to seven thousand and five hundred pounds -- But we
have already brought the price to six shillings the pound, and so the Land,
in Mace saues yearly 3000l.00s.0d. Nutmegs, was five shillings the pound, at
which rate, four hundred Barrels, containing one hundred thousand pounds, our
yearly spending amount to twenty and five thousand pounds, but by our price
of two shillings and eight pence for a pound, the Kingdom saues.
11666l.13s.4d. So that this Trade in only Spice, does yearly save the Land --
69666l.13s.4d.


And if (as some perhaps for their particular advantage of returning Spices out
of Holland, would have us) we should trust unto the Dutch, and leave this
Trading for our selves, how soon the price would rise, you shall perceive by
this particular Example.

About some two years since, our Merchants brought in a good quantity of
Cloves, which to ship out again, they sold wet-dryed for two shillings and
eight pence the pound, and the dried for four shillings: But by our next ships
failing, we were forced to fetch from Amsterdam, where suddenly the Dutchmen
took the advantage, so that we could not get (as all men know) the very
wet-dryed sold by us so lately for two shillings and eight pence, under seven
shillings sterling for a pound. Judge then by this, how dear strangers would
quickly make us pay for all things, if we should give this Traffic over. But,

Look into the price of Uictualls, how that rises through their great
provisions, etc. The nineteenth Objection.


TO which I answer, Answer.
that no sober man can doubt, but that the mouths the East India Merchant sends
to Sea, would eat at home: but further, he that is acquainted with the
finding and the feeding men at Sea, knows well it would be riches infinite
unto this Land, and unto every private Master of a Family, if men would wast
no more in victuals here at home, then Seamen do abroad, yet since he
says this is the poores complaint, in truth a poor one, it shall have some
further satisfaction.

The greatest fleet that ever yet the Company set forth, was this last year
1614. the charge whereof amounted to one hundred thousand pounds.

In Shipping and their Furniture. 34000l.0s.0d. Victuals, impressed money and
other ordinary and extraordinary charges. 30000l.0s.0d. Native and foreign
Merchandise, and ready money, sent to Trade. 36000l.0s.0d.
More particularly this Cargazon of thirty and six thousand pounds, was:

In Bays, Kersies, and most broad clothes dyed and dressed to the Kingdoms best
advantage. 14000l.0s.0d. Lead, Iron, and foreign merchandise. 10000l.0s.0d.
Ready money, in all the ships, but 12000l.0s.0d.


And it is worth the noting that this twelve thousand pounds, was scant one
third part of that, which the Company paid that year for the Kings custom,
impost, and other duties, and not one third part of that which they paid
Mariners for wages: but for the victual, that is thus provided.

The Bread of corn sent for of purpose out of France.

The Drink, all in a manner Spanish Wines and Sider, little or no Beer.

The Flesh is Beef and Porke, proportioned into ship-messes, and that only
but for three days of seven in the week, and but for twenty months of
thirty, the other ten months, which proves often more, is provided in India,
or parts abroad.

Now then, if our Obiector be none of those, that rise up early to follow
drunkenness, and continue until night, till the Wine do inflame them, etc.
if he be free from Seneca his Foedissimum patrimonioru^ exitium culnia: if he
be no Fucus, and Piger, and Vorax, no unprofitable burden, that co^sumes the
good fruits of the earth, but labors not at all: yet in his best sobriety and
temperance, let him but consider his own mouth, and he shall find it iustlier
to be blamed for making victuals dear, then the provision of the East India
voyage, and yet this mouth will not be stopped, but how. How now?

What Monsieur Transportation of Treasure in the Rear, The twentieth Objection.
among the baggage? with the Victualler of the Camp? You that heretofore have
served so resolutely, before the King, before the Parliament, at the Council
Table; nay, almost every Table, now dying in a Ditch?

ALas Sir, Answer.
his dear brother in Arms Death of men, is run away wounded to death by
Captain Newport: what would you have him do? When he saw, that the
East India Company, by the Books of Entry with his Majesty's Officers, by
their own books of Accounts, besides a sudden and secret searching of their
ships, had manifested that they never in any year (no not when they went to
discover what of our Commodities would vent in those parts) carried nere so
much, as his Majesty's gracious Letters Pattents does permit. When he found
that some particular Merchants of that Company, did at one time bring into the
Kingdom more silver, then the whole Company together did at any time carry
out. When he perceived, notwithstanding, that the East India Merchant, to
avoid all color of scandal, did provide, That foreign It was ever the money
of foreign Nations, which they exported, and that which Merchants brought in
not our own coin.
coin, beyond the Seas, with much hazard (as lately at Sandwich) by bringing
of it over in small Pinkes, and paying dearer for it, then others, yea,
strangers here at home do buy it to steal over for want of their license.
When he beheld, to his great grief, such daily increase of broad clothes dyed
and dreft, with other merchandise, and such decrease of ready money, in the
Cargazon of stock they sent to Traffic. When last of all, he heard for
certain of a Factorie settled at Iapan, and of such store of silver there, as
is not only like to serve the Trade in all those parts, but to return perhaps
some good part hither, what would you have him do, but hide his head? And yet
you hear, he holds his manly words, he talks of murmuring and Out of Halls
Chronicle.
Charles the Fifth.

But sure, men will not murmr, when they know the truth, and would these
hasty Writers fill their brains a little better, ere they press them, by
reading the Records of Spain and Portugal, and better Stories then Hals
Chronicle for India matters, they might find reasons, to make more reckoning
of the East India Traffic then th'Obiector does; The sole fruition whereof
has yielded many Millions yearly to those Nations, and as they say themselves
was worth more to that Crown, then the West Indies. I am sure the sweet
thereof was such even in the Infancy, that By an agreement made at Zaragosa
22. of April, 1529
John the Third of Portugal, gave to that Charles the Fifth he mentions,
before his going into Italy, three hundred and fifty thousand Ducats, only
not to interrupt his Peoples then beginning Trade with the Moluccaes: Which
sum of money, a few Subjects in Castile, did offer to repay (on strange easy
conditions) rather then their Emperor should sell the hope they had of wealth,
from those rich countries.

But I have done, and now it may be mine Author, that in his first Page, called
himself, a Fresh Water Soldier, if he should chance to see the Martial order
his Objections have appeared in, might believe himself to be some great
Commander, whereas the Truth is he was but a Trumpet of Defiance to the
East India Merchant, according therefore to his duty, I would send him back to
take a view of all his Falsehoods, scattered in the field, which I persuade my
self, will show him his overthrow was shameful.

At least, Sir Thomas Smith, judge what it may be, if some able Merchant
undertake the Argument, when so much has been said (and more that comes too
near matter of State, secret of Merchandise, has been omitted) by your
faithful Friend and Kinsman, that wishes well to Trade and Merchants.

Dudly Digges.

Postscript to the Reader.
SInce he that may dispose of me, will have these rough lines printed for
your satisfaction, I that am neither ashamed of my love to the East India
Trade, nor the truth I have written, must (if but for fashion sake) say
somewhat unto you () Reader. It may please you then to know, that the substance
of this which you have read, was taken out of Custome-bookes, out of the
East India Companies books, out of Grocers, Warehouse-keepers, Merchants
books, and conference with men of best experience. As for errors of pen or
press, you will either not mark them, or can mend them; all I ask for my
pains. And so I leave you, to commend (if you list) piperi and scombris, that
Trades Increase to pack up fish, and this Defense of Trade to wrappe up spice:
a couple of Inke-wasting toies indeed, that if my hearty wishes could have
wrought it, should have seen no other light then the fire. So far from the
ambition of your acquaintance was

D. D.


