A DICTIONARIE FRENCH AND ENGLISH.

ANNO DO. M.D.LXXI.

decorative border NON VI SED VIRTVTE

C T



To the Reader.
Blind Bayarde is boldest to launch into the deep, and rash Soldier
readiest to give the first assault: Though wilful blindness, and headdy
rashness be vices intolerable, yet such blindness and such rashenesse (in
my judgment) is commendable, as either breaks the ice unto the better
seeing, or treads the path to the discret and cunning. This persuasion has
made me presume to English this work: and this mine onset hereafter may
provoke the skillful to perfect the same. In the mean while (good Reader) use it
to thy profit, so shall thou encourage me (according to my skill and leisure)
to further thy studies.

L. H.

A The first letter serves many times to express the Dative case: as, Ie l'ay
done a mon pere. J gave it to my father: Sometime it serves for the
preposition, To: as, Ie m'en vay a mon pere, J go to my father. Aage, Age.
Estre plus aage qu'vn autre, To be older than an other. Abaisser, seek
Abbaisser. Abandon, Bandon, license, liberty. Abandonner, to give over, or to
license, to cast off. Abandonne, given over, cast of. Abandonnement, a giving
over. Abandoneement, licentiously. Abastardir, corrompre, to corrupt or
abastardise, to counterfeat. Abbatre, to beat down, throw down, or hurl
down. Abbatement, a throwing down. Abbay, barking. Abbayer, to bark.
Abbayement, a barking. Abbayeur, a barker, a teller of faults. Abbaisser, to
abase or bring low. Abbaisse, abased, or brought low. Abbaissement de voix, a
speaking soft. Abbe, an Abbot. Un abbrege, an abstract, a short, sum.
Abbreger, to shorten, to abridge. Abbreuer les cheuaux, to water horses. Un
Abbreuoir, a watring place. Un a b c, an a b c. Abiller, seek Habiller.
Abolir, to abolish, to disalow, to abrogate. Aboli, horse d'vsage, abolished, or
out of use. Abolissement, an abolishing. Auoir en abhommation, to abhor, to
loath, to despise. Abonder, to abound, to flow, to be plentiful. Abondant,
abundant, plentiful. Abondance, abundance, plentifulnesse. Abondamment,
abundauntly, plentifully. Aborder, to ariue at, or common and talk with, to
land at any place. Abordement, an arriuyng or bordring. Aboutir, quand quelque
apostume aboutit, to draw to head or wax ripe, when an apostume draws to head.
Aboutir a quelque lieu, to draw to some place. Aboutisseme^t de terres, the end
or limittes of any ground. Abri, ou le soleil frappe tousiours, a sunny bank.
Abricot, a fruit called Apricot. Absent, absent, absence. Absenter, to absent,
to be absent. Absouldre, to absolve. Absouls, absolved. Absolution and
declaration de n'auoir commis aucune fault an absolution. Abstenir, to
abstain, to forbear. Abstinence, abstinence, forbearing. Abuser de quelque
chose, To misuse or abuse a thing. Abuser aucun, to misuse a man, or deceive
him. Abuse, misused, deceived, begiled. Abus, an abuse or deceyte. Abusement,
abusing. Abuseur, a beguiler, a deceyuer. Abysme, a bottomless pit.
Acariastre, to be mad, or out of our wit, to be furious. Acabler quelqu'vn,
to snarle or entrap a man. Accepter, to accept. Accez, Facile accez and entree
enuers aucun, easy coming or entry to any man. Accez de fiebure, a fit of an
Ague. Accession, access, sometime belonging to. Accident, pour circonstance, ou
qualite, and aussi aduersite, a hap, a chance, a fortune. s'Accointer d'aucun,
to become acquainted. Accointa^ce and familiarite qu'on a les vns auec les
autres, acquaintance and familiarity. Accoinctement, mot peu vsite, an
atonement. Accoiser, to assuage, to appease, to mitigate. Qui n'est point
Accoise, which is not yet appeased. Accoller, to coll, to kiss, to embrace.
vne Accollee doulce and amoureuse, a sweet and lovely embracing. s'Accommoder
au temps, To frame himself to the time. Accompaigner aucun, to company, to
keep fellowship. qui Accompaigne, a companion. Accompaigne, accompanied.
Accompaignement, keeping fellowship. Accomparager, to compare. Accomplir, to
fulfill, to finishe or end, to perform. Accomplissement, an accomplishing or
fulfilling. Acconsuyure, to follow. Accorder, to agree, to consent, to
grant. Accorder sa fille en marriage, ou son fills, to betrouth or make sure a
son or daughter. Un son accordant, a concord in tune. Accord, agreed on.
vne Accordee, a Maid made sure. Accord de sons and chooses differentes, agreing
of disagreing things. Accord and conuenance, a covenant or agreement. Accord
and consentement, an agreement or consent. Accord, paction, conuention, a
bargayne or composition. Accordance, agreement. Accordailles, a betrouthing or
making sure. on fera Accordailles, they shall be made sure. Accoster, to prop
or stay up, to rear. Accoste and appuye contre vne arbre, stayed up against a
tree, reared up. Accoucher d'enfant, to lie in child bed. Femme qui accouche
de son premier, she that lies in of her first child. vne Accouchee and
gisante, a child bed wife. Accouplre, to join, or yoke together. Accouplement
de boeufs, a yoking of oxen. Accourber, to crook, or make crooked, to bend.
Accourcir, to shorten. Accourir de toutes parts, To run from all parts.
Accourement and assemblement de gents, a running together, or assembly of men.
s'Accouster a l'oreille d'aucun to whisper in a man's ear. Accoustrer, to
deck, to triname, to dress. Accoustre, decked, trimmed. Accoustreme^t,
decking or trimming. Accoustumer, to custom, or to enure. s'Accoustumer, to
use, to custom himself. Accoustume, customed. Accoustumance, custom.
Accrocher, to graspe, or to catch. Accroire quelque argent, To trust money.
Accroistre, to increase, to augment, to multiply. Accroissement, an
increasing. Accreu, increased. Accueillir, to approach to a man, to come nere.
Accumuler and amasser, to gather together. Accuser aucun, to accuse. Acertener,
to certifye. De l'ache, Perselye, some say, Smallage. Acheter, to buy, to
redeem, to bargayne. Achete, bought, or redeemed. Acheteur, a buyer. Achet, a
bargayne. Acheuer, to end, to conclude, to finishe. Acheue and parfaict, ended
and perfect. Acheuement, an ending, a perfection. Vne achoise fort grande, a
very good occasion. Acier, steel. Acquerir, to get, to obtain. Acquis,
gotten, obtained. Acquisition de la Seigneurie, the gettyng of the lordshyp by
prescription. Acquiescer a ce qui est judge, S'accorder et obeir de la sentence,
to stand to the judgment, to agree to the sentence. S'acquiter, to be quit,
to dispatch, to rid or unburden. Acquitte de son serment, free or quit of an
oath. Fair quelque chose lascheme^t, and per manier d'acquit, seulement pour
en estre despeche to do a thing sleyghtly with riddance only to be dispatched
of it. Estre fort actif, to be active. Action and besongne, a deed or work.
Action and droict de poursuyure en justice ce qui nous est deu, an action in
law. Addition, an addition. S'addo^ner a fair quelque chose to be given or
bente to any thing. Addonne a Amor, given to love. Addoubeur de mauuaises
causes, a forger of evil causes. Addoulcir, to assuage, to appease, to
mitigate, to atone. Adoulcissement, an asswaging, an appeasing. Addresser,
seek Adresser. A denerer and apprecier a arge^t, to prise. Adiancer, to make
fit. Adiance, made fit. Adiancement, making fit. Adiection, an addition.
Adioindre, to join to. Adioinct, joined to. Qui adioinct, a ioyner to, an
adder too. Adionction, a joining to, an addition. Adiourner aucun, to summon a
man. Un adiournement, a summons. Adiouster, to add, to put to. Adiouste,
added. Adioustement, an adding. Adiuger, to adiuge, to give sentence.
Administrer and gouuerner vne province, to govern or rule a province.
Administrateur, an administratour, a governor. Administration, administration,
government. Admiration, wo^dring, maruayling. Admonester, to admonish, to
warn, to charge. Admoneste, warned, charged. Admonition, a warning or
admonishment Admonestement, a warning. Adolescence, youth or young age.
Adolescent ou Adolescente, a young man or maid. Adonc, than or at that time.
Adopter and prendre a fills, to adopt, or to make one my son. Adoption, an
adopting, Adorer, to worship, to reverence. Adoration, worshipping. Adresser
quel qu'vn au chemin, to set one in the right way, to direct. Vne adresse and
coursiere, a short or direct way. Advantage, seek auantage. Aduenant, comely,
handsome, decent, sitting. Aduenir, to happen, to chance, to betyde, to come to
pass. Il est aduenu, it happened, it chanced, it came to pass. Qui est
aduenu and commis, which came to pass, or was committed. Aduenement, a
chance, a hap. Adventure, a chance, a fortune, an adventure. S'aduenturer, to
adventure. Aduersaire, an adversary, an enemy. Aduersite, adversity,
mishappe, misfortune, ill success. Aduertir, to advertise, to warn, to
declare. Aduerty, monished or warned. Aduertissement, an admonition. A mon
adueu, on my word, on my fidelity. Aduis and opinion, advise, counsel or
judgment. Aduiser, to advise, to consider, to determine. Aduiser aucun, to
give one advise Bien advise, well advised, circumspect. Aduisement and esgard
qu'on a a fair quelque chose, taking advise or warynesse in doing any thing.
Aduisement, advisedly, warely, circumspectly. Un Adultere, an adulterer, one
that commits whoredom in marriage. Commettre Adultere, to commit adultery.
Aduocat, an Advocate, an attorney, a procurator. Aduocasser pour aucun, and le
defendre en judgment, to plead or stand in a man's cause. Aduouer quelque
crime and confesser l'auoir commis, to auouche a crime, or confess the deed.
Affable, gentle, courteous, loving, meek. Affair, business, affairs. C'est
ton Affair, it is thy matter, it stands thee upon. s'Affaisser, to be
ouerladen, to shrink. Affaisement de quelque gra^de chose pesante quand elle
s'est abaissee and affaissee, a shrinking under a great burden, an
ouerburthening, a quelling. Affamer vne ville, to famishe a town. Affame,
famished. Affecter de se mettre en la male grace d'aucun, to get the ill will
of any man. Affection, affection, desire, will, the disease of the mind.
Affectionne, affectionate. Affectueusement, affectuously, willingly,
desirously. Affermer, to affirm, to confirm, to assure. Affermir, to
fortify, to make firm, to stablish. Qui Affermit, which establishes.
Affetterie, sutteltie, craft, wiliness, dissembling. Affiert ou conuient, it
behooves or beseems. Affiller, to whet, to sharp. Affin, write afin, that, or
to the end that. Affiner les fins, to beguyle the crafty. Affineur d'or, a gold
fyner. Affins and alliez par marriage, kin or allies. Affinite, affinity or
alliance. Affiquets de nulle valeur, tryfles, toys, trinkets. Affirmation, an
affirmation, a soothing. Affliger and vexer, ou tourme^ter, to afflict, to
grieve or torment. Afflige and tourmente, afflicted and tormented. Affliction,
affliction. Affluence, plenty, abundance. Entreprendre de s'Affoler soymesme,
to go about to hurt himself. Affoiblir, to weaken, to decay. Affoible,
decayed, waxen weak. Affoiblissement, a weakening. Affoler pour blesser, to
hurt, to fell one down. Affranchir un seruiteur, and luy donner liberte, to
set a Servant at liberty. Affreux, roughe, horrible, grim. Affreusement,
grimly, stourdily. Affreusete, stourdinesse, grimlinesse. Affriander,
Affrioler, to cocker, to make likerishe, to pamper. Affronter aucun and Abuser.
to deceive. Un Affronteur and Abuseur, a deceyuer, a beguyler. Affubler, to
clothe, sometime to muffle. Affuble; clothed. Affublement and conuerture, a
clothing or covering. Agacer aucun, to egg, to stir, to provoke. Agacement,
a stirring or provoking. Agacement de dents, setting the teeth on edge. Agaric,
a moshrome. Agate pierre precieuse, an Agathe. Agencer to make fit, just, or
apt. s'Agenouiller, to kneel. Aggluer, to join, to glue, to souder together.
Aggrandir, to make great, to enlarge. Aggrauanter, to aggrauate, or make
heinous. Aggreable, aggreeable, acceptable, pleasant. Il n'Aggree point a
l'oreille du commun populaire, it lyketh not the common people. Aggreger, to
assemble, to gather together. Agir personnellement, to assign personally, or
to appoint. Agitation and esmouuement, moving, working, exercising, tossing.
Agite, moved, tossed, exercised. Agneau, a lamb. Agnelet, a little lamb. Vne
Agraphe, a boucle of a girdle, a claspe, a brace, a grapple. Agreslir sa voix,
to squeake out, or or sing shrill. Aguille a couldre, a sowing neelde.
Aguillon, a prick or goad, a sting. Aguillonner, to prick forward, to stir,
to provoke. Aguillonnement, a pricking forward. Aguillo^neur, a pricker
forward, a stirrer, a mouer. Aguiser, to sharp, to whet, to grind. Aguisement,
sharpening, Aguement veoir, sharp sight. Ahanner, to toil, or ouerworke.
Aheurte en fon opinion, obstinate in opinion, self willed, stifnecked.
Aheurtement, Le vice d'obstination, obstinacy, self willednesse. Ahy, mot qui
se dit quand on a peur, out alas. Aider, to help, to assist, to further, to set
forward, to succor. Qui Aid, a helper, or furtherer. Aid, help, succor,
furtherance. Un Aigle, an Egle. Aigremoine, Egrimony. Estre Aigre, to be sharp.
Aigret, tirant un peu sur l'aigre, tart, or almost sour. S'aigrir, to wax
sour, or tart. Aigrir and irriter aucun, to stir or move one to anger.
Aigreur, sharpness, tartness. Aigrement, sharply, sowerly. Les ailes qu'on
baille a un cheual, to give a horse the head. Aile d'oyseau, ou d'autre best
qui vole, the wing of a bird or any other beast that flies. Ailleurs,
elsewhere. Ailleurs enuoye, sent somewhether else. D'ailleurs, from some other
place. Vne pierre appellee Aimant, the load stone. Aimer, to love, to delight
in any thing. Aimant, a lover, a sweet heart. Digne d'estre Aim, worthy to be
loved. Aincois, ains, rather. Ainsi, even so, after the same manner. Ainsi
comme, even as, as it were. Air, the air. L'aire d'vne granche, the flower of
a barn. Longues Aires es iardins, a bed in a garden. Estre debonnaire, and
sans malice, to be gentle and without malice. Ais, a board. Aisance, ease,
commodity. Aisne, the first borne, or eldest child. Aise a fair, easy to be
done. Estre fort aise en son mesnage, to be well settled. Aise, pleasure, ease.
Il prend ses aises, he takes his ease. Aisseme^t, easily, with small pain.
Aisselle, ou les ailes, the arme-holes. Alaigre, nimble, active, lusty.
Alaigrement, lustily, actiuely, nymbly. Alebastre, aleblaster. Aleman, a
German. Vne alesne, an aule, a bodkin. Alicte perpetuelement de malady, he
that lies bedred. Aliener and estranger, to alienate, to make strange, to take
away. Aliene, alienated. Alienation, an alienation or making away. Aligneme^t,
a Card or draught, Prendre les alignements, and mesmes d'vne ville, to take the
draught of a town. Aliment and nouriture, food, nourishment. Alisier, a tree
that grows in Afrike, and is called a lote tree. Allaicter, to give suck.
Qui allaicte, She that gives suck. Allaictement, a giving suck. Alleguer
fausement and malieusement, ou mettre a sus quelque chose a quelqu'vn, to
allege falsely, or to lay to ones charge. Alleguer ses moyens, causes and
raisons, to allege the causes, Alleger, to heave up, to ease, to succor, to
lighten. Allegea^ce, an easing or succouri^g Allegeme^t, easing or succouring.
Aller, to go, to walk, to wend, to journey. Aller a pied, to go a journey on
foot. Aller a Cheual, to go by horse, to ride. Aller au deuant, to meet with.
Aller contre aucun par fureur, to go furiously against one. Aller apres aucun,
to go after one. Aller verse aucun, to go toward one. Aller ca and la de
cost and d'autre, to wander, to go hither and thither, to stray. Aller ius, to
run headlong, to decay. Allee, an alley, a path, a way. Allee ou Gallerie, and
autre lieu ou on se pourmene, an alley or gallerie, a walking place. Allure, a
going or walking. s'Allier auec aucun, to plight friendship with any, to join
with an other. Fort Allie and grand ami, very great friends. Peuples Alliez,
people confederate, brethren, fellows. Alliance, alliance. Fair Alliance, to
make alliance, to make peace. Alicher, to allure, to mitigate. Allichoir, an
entisement. Allichement, entisement, provocation, temptation. Allumer, to
lighten, to kindle, to inflame. Allumettes, matches made of brimstone. Alonger,
to lengthen. Alonge, lengthened. Alors, at that time, then. Alose, a fish named
a loch^. Vne Alouette, a lark. Aloy, money, alley or value of gold or silver.
Les Alps, montaynes in Italy called the Alps. Alterer, to increase thirst.
Qui est Altere, thirsty. Par Alternations and cha^gemens d'ans, by altering
and cha^ging of years. Aluine, wormwood. Alum, alum. Amadouer and apaiser de
belles parolles, to delight, to flatter with fair words. Amadoueur, a
flatterer, a fair speaker. Amadouement, flattery, fair speech, lulling on
sleep. Amaigrir, to wax lean. s'Amaigrir, deuenir gresle and menu, to wax
lean or thin. Vne Amande, an almonde. Un Amandier, an almonde tree. Amantele,
cloaked. l'Amarri ou matrice d'vne femme, the womb or matrix of a woman. Amas,
mo^ceau, and tas, a heap, a number, a sort, a rout. Amas de ble, a heap of
corn. grand Amas de bois, a great pile of wood. Amas de geus and assemblee, a
great number of people. Amasser, to gather together, to heap together.
s'Amasser, to agree or gather in one. Qui est Amasse and amoncele, which is
gathered and heaped. Amasseme^t, a gathering together. Amateur, a lover.
Amathyste, pierre precieuse, a precious stone called Amatist. Ambigueme^t
parler a deux ententes, dire parolles doubteuses, par lesquelles on ne scait
qu'ente^dre, to speak doubtfully, or with double understanding. Ambiguite,
ambiguitie. Ambition, ambition, desire of honor Ambitieux, qui brigue and
pourchasse honneurs, ambitiouse. Aller les Ambles, to amble, to go roundly.
Ambre, amber. Amend, an amercement, a fine. Condamner a l'Amende, to condemn
one to pay a fine. Amender, to correct, to amend. Amendment, a mending.
Demander l'Amendeme^t d'aucun mesfaict a le^co^tre d'aucu^, to demand
reco^pense of a man. Amener, to lead, to bring. Amenement, mot peu vsite, a
bringing in. Amenuiser, to make thin, to make slender. Qui est Amer, bitter.
Amerement, bitterly. Amertume, bitterenesse. l'Ame, the soul. Amesnager sa
maison, to furnish a house. Ami, a friend, a lover. Amiablement, lovingly,
frie^dly, gently, amiably. Amieller le peuple par doulces parolles, and luy
desrober le cueur, to entise the people with fair words, and to win their
hearts. Amignotter, to prank or to trim Amity, friendship, love, concord.
Gomme Ammoniac, gomme. Amoderer, to moderate, to aswage. Amoindrir, to lessen,
to diminish. Amoindrissement, a lessening. Amollir, to make soft. Amonceler, to
gather, to heap together. Racourci and amoncele, shortened or brought in less
room. Amoncellement, a gathering together, a heaping. Amorce, a bayte.
Amorcer, to lay bayte. Amor, love, frie^dship, charity. Un Amoureux, a he
lover. Amoureuse, a she lover. Amourachement, loving. Ample, ample, large.
Ampleme^t, largely, abundantly. Amply and augmente, increased or augmented.
Ampliateur and augmentateur, an augmenter. s'Amuser a veoir un danfeur par
dessus la chorde, to spend the time to see one dau^ce on a cor^^ Amuser aucun,
to set one in ^ domp, to busy one. An, ou annee, a year. Anatomy, an
anatomy. Les Ancesters, our ancestors. Ancien, ancient, old, of long
continuance. Les Anciens, the ancients. Anciennete, ancientie. Anciennement,
in time past. Ancoigneure, a wedge. Un Ancre a retenir les nauires, an ancre.
Ancrer au port, to cast ancre. Aneau, seek Anneau. s'Aneantir and ne tenir
compte de soy, to abase or not esteem himself. Aneth, an herb called Dill.
Ange, an Angel. Le bo^ and mauuais Ange que les Payens estimoye^t estre d'eux
dieux priuez, and familiers, qui s'appliquoye^t a un chascu^ des l'heure de sa
naissa^ce, a ghost. L'herbe qu'on appelle Angelique, an herb called Angelica.
Angle, a corner. Un Anglet, ou coing de toutes chooses, the corner of any thing.
Angler vne person, and serrer a l'estroict, to shut one up in a corner.
Angoisse, anguish, grief of mind Angoisser, to grieve. Angouste, a
grassehopper. Anguille, an eele. Animer and inciter a son de fleutes les gents
a frapper, to encourage, or harten men to fight by the sound of a flute. Animer
and bailler courage, to encourage. De l'Any, anniseede. Annals and chroniques,
yearly chronicles. Anneau qu'on met au doigt, a ring. Un Anneau ou cachet, a
sealing ring. Annelet qu'on met au doigt, a gimmew. Estre telleme^t Annichile,
qu'l n'e^ demeure point un, so vanished away, that nothing remain. Annuel,
yearly. Anombrer, to number, to tell. Anoncer, to show, to declare. Anoncer
deuant, to give warning before. Ano^cer quelque chose aduenir, to foreshowe a
thing. Anno^cement de quelque chose aduenir, ou aduertissement, the foreshewing
of a thing. s'Annonchalir, Aneantir, to pine away, to wear away. Anoblir, to
make noble. Vne Anse, a handle. Ansette, a little handle. La grand ta^te de
cost paternel the great aunt on the fathers side. Ante de iardin, seek Ente,
Anticiper, to prevent. Anticipe, prevented. Antidater vne obligation, to give
an antidate to an obligation. De l'Antimonion, a stone or earth called
Antimonium. Antique, ancient. Antiquite, antiquity. Un Antrac, ou charbon, a
coal, also a sore called a carbuncle, so^tim a precious stone so named Anuler,
to abolish. Aorner, seek Orner. Aoust, the month of August. Apertement,
openly, manifestly, plainly, without dissimulatio^. Aphrodille blanc, white
daffodil. Apointer, seek Appointer. Apostres, c'est a dire messangers, ou
ambassades, apostles, messangers. Apostume, an empostume, mattering, running.
Apostumer and meurir, to empostume, to run. Apoticaire, a Poticarie. Appaiser
and addoulcir aucun, to appease, to assuage, to please, to pacify, to quiet.
S'appaiser, to be quiet, to be pacified and aswaged. Appaise, appeased,
quieted. Appaisement, an appeasing. Aperceuoir, seek Apperceuoir. Appareil,
furniture, preparation. Appareiller, to deck, to trim, to furnish, to
prepare. Estre pressed, appareille, to be ready, or at a beck. Apparente, good
kindred, a man of a good house. Apparier, to couple, to match, to appoint
together. De l'Aparitoire, ou de la parietaire, herb croissant sur les' murs,
an herb called Parietory, commonly Pellitorie. Apparoir, ou Apparoistre, to
appear, to seem. Fair Apparoir vne chose and monstrer, to cause a thing to
seem or show. Apparoissance and appearance de valeur ou de vice qui reluit en
ieunesse, the show, disposition, or towardness of children. l'Apparoissance de
quelque chose qui pass oultre vne autre, the appearance or excellency of one
thing by an other. Appearance, appearance, signifification, sign show.
Apparation, an appearing. il Appartient, it behooves. Appartenance d'vn chacun,
the due or property of a man. Appast, a bayt, an allurement. Appasteler, to
feed. Appel, an appeal. Appeller aucun, to call, to who^^ for, to name. vne
Appentise contre vne maison, a penthouse. Apperceuoir, to perceive, to sp^^
out, to mark. Apperceuance, Knowledge or perceyuance. il Appart, it appecreth,
it is manifest. Appesanter, to burden, to press down. s'Appesantir, to wax
heavy. Appetisser, to diminishe, to lessen, to imbeasill. Appetissement, a
diminishing. Appetit, conuoitise, desire. Appeter and souhaiter, to desire or
wish for. Applanir and fair fort vni, to plane, to make smooth, to make even.
Applanissement, a planing. Appliquer, to apply, to give our selves to.
Appliquer son esprit a quelque chose, to give our minds to some thing.
Application, an application or applying. Applommer, to lull on sleep.
Appointer le bout de quelque chose, and luy fair un point bien ague, to
sharpen the point of any thing. Appointer and co^uenir de quelque affair, qui
estoit en doubt, to make agreement, to end a matter in controversy, to
decide. Appointe, decided, appointed, ended. Appointement and accord qu'on fait
enter aucuns qui auoyent este grans amiss, an agreement made between friends
fallen out. Appointeme^t que baille le magistrate sur l'estat de la possession
d'vn chose contentieuse. a sentence or decree which is given by the magistrate
for possession of any thing in strife. Apport, arrival, resort. Apporter, to
bring. Apposer vne peine a ceux que rompront l'alliance, to set a fine for
breach of covenants. Appose, joined to, set to. Appourir, to empouerish.
Appouris, to wax poor, Apprecier, to esteem, to prise, to value. Apprecier a
argent, to set a prise Apprehension, perceyuyng or understanding. Apprendre, to
learn, to conne. Apprendre par cueur, to learn by rote. Apprenant, learning.
Apprins and enseigne, taught, instructed. Nouueau and Apprenti, new, a
learner. Apprentissage, prentishod. Apprest, preparation, furniture. Apprester,
to dress, to trim to make ready. s'apprester, to make himself ready. Qui
Appreste and appareille, which trimmeth or makes ready. Appriuoiser, to tame.
Appriuoise, tamed. Approbation, approving or auouching. Approcher, to draw
nigh, to approach. s'Approcher, to come near, to arrive. s'Approchant, drawing
nere. Approchement, a drawing nere. Approprier, to make fit. Approprie, made
fit. Approuuer, to approve, to vouche, to sooth. Approuue par plusieurs gents
d'authorite, avouched by diverse credible men. Approuuement, an approving.
Appuy, a shore, a prop, or stay. Appuyer, to shore up, to underprop, to stay.
Appuye, stayed, propped. Estre couche and appuye sur quelque chose, to stay or
lean on a thing. Apres, after. en Apres, afterward, so then. Apuril, seek
Auril. Araignee, and la toil de l'araignee, a Spyder with her web. Arain,
Brass. Arbalestre, a crosbowe. Un Arbitre esleu par les parties, and amiable
compositeur, an arbitratour, an vmpire, a days man. Prendre un arbitre, and
s'accorder a luy, to put it to days men franc Arbitre, free will. Un Arbosier,
a tree so called. Arbor, a tree. Petit arbre, a little tree. Abrisseau, a
shrubbe. Un lieu ou il y a beaucoup d'Abrisseaux plantez, a thicket. Arc a
fleiches, a long bow. l'Arc au ciel, the rain bow. Arcs triomphans faicts en
memoire de ceulx qui auoyent este victorieux, Arches made in remembrance of
some great victory. Archier, an Archer. l'Archet d'vn rebec, ou autres tells
instruments, the bow of a vyoll, or such like instrument. Ardre ou ardoir, to
burn. Ardore de desir, to burn in desire Ardant, burning. Estre fort ardent
aux estudes, to be earnestly given to study. Fort ardant and bruslant, very hot
or burning. Ardeur, ardour, feruencie. Ardamment, ardently, greedily fervently.
Arene, ou Sable, ou Grauier, gravel. Arreste de poisson, the small bone of a
fish. Argent, silver, money. Argente, siluered or monyed. Argenter, to silver.
Argenteux, full of money Un Argentier and autre ayant charge de manier l'argent
de son maistre, a steward. herb appellee Argentine, an herb called Argentine.
de l'Argille, clay. Argument, an argument. Ari, qui a perdu son humeur naturel,
dried up. Arignee, seek Aregnee. Arithmetique est la science de compter and
nombrer, the art of numbering. Armaires, armourers. Armaires a mettre livers,
presses for Books. Armee, harneys, weapons. Armer, to arm. Arm, armed.
Armee, an army. Armure, armor. Armoise, Mugwort. Armoiries, arms,
cognizance. Arne, feeble backed. Arondelle, a swallow. demi Arpent, half an
Arpent, that is.900. foot of ground. Arracher, to root up, to tear up, to
pluck up by the root. Arracher and oster par force, to pluck out with
violence. Arrache, plucked up, torn away. Arracheur, a plucker up. Arrachement,
plucking up. Arranger, to place in order, to dispose. Arres, to leave earnest
for a thing. Arrester, to stay, to arrest. s'Arrester, to stay in a place, to
abide. s'Arrester de fair quelque chose, to forbear the doing of a thing.
Arrester les bestes, to stop wild beasts. Arreste toy, stand, stir not.
I'ay arreste, pense, and pourpe^^e J have stayed, bethought, and advised my
self. Arreste, stayed or settled. Arrest and determination de quelque chose,
laquelle apres auoir este disceptee and debatue est mise a fin, an ordinance or
constitution. Arrest du Senate, a decree of the Senate. Vne Arrest, and toute
chose de quoy on retient and arreste-on vne autre, an action. Arriere de nous,
far from us. Arrierages, rerages. Venir and Arriuer, to come or arrive.
Arrive a bourd, arrived at the shore. Arriuement, an arriving. des Arroches,
an herb called Orace. s'Arroger and attribuer trop, to be arrogant, to
overcome. Arroga^t, arroga^t, presumptuous. Arrogance, arrogance, presumption,
ouerweening. Arrogamment, arrogantly, presumptuously. Arrondir, to round.
Arrondissement, rounding. Arrouser, to sprinkle, to wet, to water. Qui est
arrouse, that which is watered. Arrousement, a watring, a wettyng, a
sprinkling, a moystening. Arruner, to make up, to dress, to form, to put in
order. Estre ards and brusle, to be burnt. Art, art, craft, workmanship. vser
d'Artifice, to use some craft. Artificiel, artificial. Artificiellement,
artificially. Artisan, ou artiste, a handycraftes man, a workman. Artere, an
artere or vain. Artichault, an Artichoke. un article d'vne loy, ou autre
chose, an article. Artillery, artillery, weapons for war. As tu cela? have
thou that? Asne, an Ass, a little Ass. des Asperges, Sparage. Aspergest, ou
goupillon, a holy water sprinkle. Aspergoutte mineur, an herb called in latin
Bubonium. Aspersion and arrousement, besprinklyng or bedewyng. des Asphodiles,
an herb called in latin, Hastula regia. Aspic, Spyke. Serpent nomme Aspic, a
serpent so named. Aspirer and respirer, to breathe, to aspyre. Aspre and rude,
soit a veoir, a ouir a gouster, ou a toucher, sharp either in seeing, hearing,
tasting or in touching. un homme Aspre, a sharp man, a bitter man. Asprir, to
sharpen, to exasperate. Asprement, sharply, bitterly. Asprete, sharpness,
bitterness, straightness. Assaillir aucun, to assail a man, to set upon him,
to invade him. l'Assault and assemblement de deux armees, ou un assault and
effort de gents de guerre, the assault or meeting of two armies, or an assault
or shocke of warriors. Assault qu'on baille a vne ville, the assault of a
town. Assaisonner, to season, to temper. Assaisonnement, a seasoning.
Assembler, to gather together, to assemble. Assemble, gathered together.
Assemblee de gents, an assembly of people, a company, a congregation.
Assemblement de gents, a gathering of people together. Assembleme^t de chooses
ensemble, a gathering, setting, glewing or packing things together. Assemblure,
a couchyng or joining together. Asseurer aucun en rua^t quelque chose, to hitte
one. Asseoir and mettre en quelque lieu, to set or plant in a place. Asseoir
son judgment sur quelque chose, to give judgment on a thing. s'Asseoir, to
sit down. Estre assis, to be set. Assiement, sitting. Vne assiette and
trencheoir, a tre^cher. Assesseur ou conseiller, a be^cher or counselor.
Asseurer and affermer, to assure and affirm. Asseurer and donner asseurance,
to assure or give assurance. s'asseurer and fair quelque chose to be assured
to do a thing, to take a good heart. Ferme and asseure, firm, assured, stable.
Asseure en bien, bold, without doubt. Asseure, ou il n'y a point de doubt,
assured, without fear. Asseurance, assurance, confidence. Asseurement and
hardiment, assuredly, hardily. Dire quelque chose asseureme^t, to tell a thing
boldly. Assez, enough, sufficient. Assieger vne ville, to besiege a town.
Estre assiege, to be besieged. Qui assiege vne ville, which besieges. Assiege,
besieged. Assiegement de ville, the besieging of a town. Assigner and bailler,
to assign, to appoint, to allotte. Assigner iour, to appoint a day. Assigner
lieu a quelque chose, to appoint a place. Argent assign, money assigned.
Assignation, an assignation. Assignation d'argent, an assigning of money.
Assister a la guerre, to be present at war. Assister a aucun, and luy aider,
to help one, to be present. L'assista^ce and assemblee de ge^ts d'authorite
qui assistent a leur amy, pendant qu'on plaide sa cause, the assistance of men
of authority to help their friend in pleading his cause. Associer, to
company. Associer auec autruy, to keep fellowship with one. Association,
fellowship, company. Asso^mer un home, to fell a man. Assopir, to assuage, to
appease. Assopir un guerre, to assuage a war. Assoubiectir, ou Assubiectir,
to subdue. Assouuir and contenter aucun, to satisfy or content any man.
Assermenter aucun, To bind by oath. Plein d'astuces and de finesses, full of
suttletie and deceyt. Coleur d'asur and d'eaue, a sure, or water color.
Athenien, of Athens. Atiner, to move, provoke. Attacher, to fasten, to tie, to
stick. Attache, fastened, tied. Attaindre, to attain, to bring to pass.
Attaindre and gaigner aucun en chemin, to overtake one in the way. Estre
attaints and co^uaincu d'aucun cas, to be attaynte of a crime. Atteler les
cheuaux, to spang horse, or fasten them to the charyot. Attelier, a shop or a
worke-house. Attendre, to look, to wait for, to tarry, to stay. Fair
attendre quelqu'vn, To cause one to tarry. s'Attendre aux promesses d'aucun,
to stay upon the promise of any. Attente, looking for, expectation. Attente
and desir, desire, hope. Attendrir, to soften, or mollify. s'Attendrir, to
wax soft or tender. Attenir, to withholde, to stay back. Atte^ter, to
attempt, to enterprise or take in hand. Attentif, attentive, diligent. Estre
attentif a quelque chose, to mark a thing advisedly, to ponder it diligently.
Attentiuement, attentively. Attenuer, to make thin. Attenurir, To make
thin, to make slender. Attestation, witness. Attiedy, soaked or tempered.
Attiffer, Orner, Accoustrer, to trim, to pranke, to deck. Attiffement,
pranking. Attirer ou attraire, to draw, to allure. Attiser and souffler le
feu, to blow the fire. Attoucher, to touch, to feel. Attouchement, touching,
feelyng. Les Attours d'vne femme, the attire of a woman. Attourneur on
Attourneresse, A waytyng servant, or a maid. Attraire, ou Allicher, to
entice, to allure, to provoke. Attraict, and Alliche, enticed or allured.
Attrayement, enticeement, or allurement. Attrapper, to snare, to entangle, to
catch. Attremper and gouuerner, to temperate, to mix, sometime to soake or
moysten. Attrempe and modere, tempered or moystned. Attrempement, a tempring,
or soaking. Attrempeement, tempereeme^t, and modereement, temperatly, coolely,
moderately. Attrempance, modesty, temperaunce. Attribuer, to attribute, to
impute s'Attribuer quelque chose, and en fair son propre, to attribute a thing
to him self. trop s'Attribuer, to attribute to much to himself. s'Auachir, to
wither away. Aualler, to swallow. Aualler sans mascher, to swalow down whole.
Aualler du hault en bas, to swalow down right. Aualle en bas, swallowed down.
Auallement de quelque liqueur the swallowing down of some licour. Auallement
do vin, swallowing of wine. Auancer, and haster, to set forward to hasten.
Auancer, mettre plus auant, to advance, to set forward. s'Auancer and
profiter, to go forward, to profit. s'Auancer d'aller and de marcher to mende
our pace. Auancer argent, to give money before hand. Auance, advanced,
promoted. Adua^ceme^t, adua^cing, promoting. Auant, deep or far in. bie^
Auant dedens, very deep in. venir en Auant, to come forth. Mettre en auant
quelque chose to put forth a thing. Auant le temps, before the time. d'ley en
Auant, from this time for ward. Auant que, before that. d'Auantage,
furthermore, besides this. Auoir l'auantage and estre superieur de l'autre, to
have the vantage, and to overcome the other. Bailler d'auantage, to give more.
Ie di d'Auantage, J say further. Estre plus Auantage que l'autre to excel
other. Auantcoureur, a forerunner. Auancourement, forerunning. Auant hier, this
other day, or the day before yesterday. Auanture, Auanturer, seek Adventure.
un Auanturier de guerre, a venturer in war. un Auanturier vagabo^d qui fait
la regnardiere de peur des coups, a hedgecreeper. Avarice, covetousness.
Auaricieux, covetous. l'Aube and poinct du iour, the dawning of the day.
Aubespin, ou Aube epine, selon que die^t aucuns, white thorn as some think.
Aubier d'vn arbre, the gomme or fat of a tree. Aubifoin, a precious stone
called a Turkise. l'Aubin d'vn oeuf, the gleare of an egg. Aucun, sombody.
Aucuns, some persons. En aucun lieu, some where. Aucunefois, sometimes.
Aucunement, somewhat. Audace, boldness. Audacieux, bold, stout, hardy.
Audience, audience. Auditieux, a hearer. Auditoire, an auditorie. Auec, with.
Auec soy, with him. Auec ce, with that. Aueindre, to reach out of a coffer, or
other such like thing. Auelaine, a filbert, a hasel nut. Digne and Auenant,
worthy. Aueneron, barren otes. Auerer quelque meschancete, to search out the
truth of any thing, to auoutch, to soothe. Chose cogneue and Aueree, avouched,
verified. Il Auesprist, il vie^t sur le vespre, it waxes dark, night draws
on. Aueugler, to hide, to make blind, to hide wink. Aueugle, blind.
Aueuglement, blindness. Augmenter, to augmente, to increase. s'Augmenter, to
wax great, to grow bigger. Augmente, increased, augme^ted. Augmentateur, an
encreaser, an amplifier. Augmentation, augmentation, encreasse, multiplying. Un
Auge, a troughe. Auget ou petit Auge, a little troughe. Auiner un vaisseau, to
season a vessel. Auiourd' huy, to day. Un Auiron, an oar, a scull. Auiser,
seek Ad uis. I'y aduiseray apres, J will bethink me afterward. Vne Aulne a
aulner draps, an elle to measure with. Un Aulne, arbre, an alder tree. Un Aul,
ou Ail, Garlike. Aumosne, alms. Demander Aumosne, to beg. Auolement, a
fleeing to. Auoine, ou Auene, Oats. Auoir, to have. Auorter, to abort, or when
a woman goes not her full time. Auortement, aborting. Auorton, that which is
brought forth before the time, a castling. Auouer, seek Aduouer. Aupres, nigh
to, at. Auquel, to whom. Aureilles, seek Oreilles. Auril, April. Auron, wild
Oats. Auronne, Southernwood. Aussi, also. Austere, straight, sharp.
Austerite, ou Asprete, straightness, sharpness. Austruche, an austriche.
Autant, as much. Autant qui ie puis, as much as I can, what lies in me.
Autant que peuuent prendre trois doigts, as much as three fingers could reach.
d'Autant plus, so much the more. Autant de fois, so often. Un Autel, an altar.
Aute^tique and approuue par plusieurs gents d'authorite, ancient and allowed by
authority. Autheur qui premier fait ou inuente quelque chose, an Author, which
first inuenteth any thing. Authorite, authority, gravity. Authorite and
seigneurie, authority, power. Authoriser, to authorize, to establish. Le vent
d'Automne ou de midi, the South wind. Le temps d'Automne, the harvest time.
Automnal, southerly. Autour, about. l'Autre, the other. C'est autre chose toute
diverse, it is an other manner of matter. Autre part, on the other side.
Autresfois, Le temps pasie, in times past, heretofore. Vne Autre fois, an other
time. Autrement, Sans cela, otherwise, or without that. Autrement que les
Stoiciens, otherwise than the Stoikes. Qui est d'Autruy, which belongs to an
other. l'Autruy, an other man. Auuent, an arbor, a shaddowing place. Ayant
beaucoup pleu, when it has rayned much. Ayeul, a grand father.
B ante A.
BAailler, to gape, yaske, to yawne. Baailler de sommeil, to gape for sleep.
Baaillement, a gaping. Qui a trop de Babil, which has to much talk.
Babillard, a bablar, a prattler, a clatterer, a tittle tattle. Vne Babillarde
and languarde, a prattling houswyfe. Un Bac a passer l'eaue, a ferrie boat. Un
ieune Bachelier en arms, a fresh water soldiour. Bachelage, Bpprentissage,
bachelership, prentishode. Bachot, a ship boat, a cock, a whirrie. Bacille
ou creste marine, Vne sort d'herbe dequoy on use es salades, Sampier. Badault,
Badin, a dolt, a fool. Le Bagage de gents de guerre, warriars carriage. Amasser
son Bagage, to gather carriage together. La Bague and pris de la iouste, and de
toutes autres ieux, the jewel or price of any game. Vne Bague qui se pend au
col, a jewel to hang about ones neck. Baguenaudeur, a trifler, a lingerer, a
loyterer. Un petit arbre dict Baguenaudier, a tree called Seney. Bahu, a chist,
a guard fiance. Bailler, to give, to deliver, to attribute. Baille and done,
given and granted. Baillement, a giving, a delivering. Bailleur, a giver.
Couleur Baillet, ou de paille, horse flesh coullor. Bailli, a Baylife.
Bailliage, a bayliwicke. Baillon, a gagge. Bain, a bath. Baigner en quelque
liqueur, to bath in any liquor. Baignoire, a bathing tob. Baiser quelqu'vn, to
kiss. Un Baiser, a kiss. Baisement, a kissing. Baisser, to bring low, to
stoop. Se Baisser, pour s'accouster a l'oreille oreille d'autruy, to stoop
too harken to one. Baisse contre terre, humble. Bal ou danse, dancing. Balance,
a pair of balance. La Balance d'vn orfeure, a goldsmiths balance. Un Baley,
a broom. Ballier and nettoyer, to sweep to make clean. Ballieur de maison, a
house sweeper. Les Balleures de la maison, the sweeping of the house. Vne Bale
a iouer, a ball. Vne Balaine, a whale. Balle de merchandise, a bale of any
ware. Banc ou siege, a bank, seat, bench, or form. Se Bander contre
quelqu'vn, to resist one of purpose, to assail one by force, to bend against
one. Band de gens de guerre, a ba^d of warriors. Band d'hommes, a company of
men. Vne Band and ligne, a band or string. Vne Band ou ruben de test, a
hear lace. Vne Band ou Bandelette, come celle dequoy on lie les petits
enfants, a swathel band. Bander, to tie, to bynd. Bander un arc, to bend a
bow. Band, bound with a lace. Un Bandeau ou fronteau, a fillet or headband.
Bandelette, a little string. Bandon, leave, license. Banir, to banish, to
exile. Un Bani, a banished man. Bannissement, a banishment. Horse la Banlieue, a
mile from the town. Vne Banne and grand panier, a maund. La Banque, the bank.
Banquier, a bankar. Fair Banqueroute, to play bank rout. Banquet, a feast, a
banquet. Un Banquet somptueux and magnifique, a sumptuouse and princely banquet.
Banqueter, to banquet, to feast. En Banquetant, banketing. Banqueterie,
banketing. Banquetement, a banketing. Barat, deceyt, sutteltie. Barbare and qui
n'est point de no stre la^gage, barbarous, strange, foreign. La Barbe tant
d'ho^mes que de bestes, comme boues, loups, and autres, the beard. Barbette, a
little beard. Barbet, a budding beard. Barbu, bearded. Barbute, a little beard.
Barbier, a he barbar. Barbiere, a she barbar. Barberie and ouuroir d'vn
barbier, a barbars shop. Vne herb appellee Bardane, the herb called Cloates,
that bears the green burre. Bardes de cheuaux, trappors or barbes for horses.
Barde, trapped or barbed. Bardeau a couurir maison, and aisselles, a shingle.
Bariquelle, a boat, or cock, a whirrie. Barque, a barque. Vne Bar ou
Barriere qu'o^ met au trauers de l'huis, a bar overthwart a door. Barreaux ou
treillis de quelque chose que ce soit, a bar, or lattise. Bares, Le ieu des
Bars, wrestling or barriers. Bas, humble. En Bas, ou mieux Embas, below. Un
Bas de chausses, netherstockes. Basane, dried up, withered. Basseur,
humbleness, lowness. Bascule a tirer l'eau d'vn puis qui n'est pas fort
creux, a scoope to throw water out of a shallow well. Baselic, serpent, a
cokatrise. L'herbe dicte Baselic, the herb called Basile. Un Bassin a lauer
les mains, a basen. Bassin a lauer les pieds, a foot basen. Le Bassin d'vne
fontaine, the basen or bole of a fountain. Des Bassinets, herb, an herb
called crowfoote, gold crap, or yellow crawe. Bas qu'on met sur vne best, a
pack saddle, a pannell, Bastard, a bastard, a whoreson. Bastards, ou
Bastardeaux qu'on fait en l'eau, piles in water work. Vne Bastardiere, ou
pepinerie, and lieu labor, ou fait d'ais en quarre, plein de terre, ou on
pla^te quelq^ plant ou semence, pour apres les planter en pleine terre, a wast
garden, or nurserie. Basteau Bastelier, seek Bateau. Basteleur, a iuggler, a
tumbler. Ieu de Basteleur, iuggling or tu^bling castes. Basteleuse, plays or
maygames. Mestier de Bastelerie and farcerie and autres mestiers se^blables,
light or fond pastimes, or games. Bastir, to buyld, to rear up. Bastisseur,
qui se mesle de fair bastir, a buylder, that is occupied or can skill of
buylding. Bastiment and edification, come massonnerie ou charpe^terie, a
buylding. Bastille ou bastillo^, and forteresse, a Bastillon, a forteresse,
Baston, a staf, a club, a cudgill. Bastonnet, a stick, a wand. Un donneur de
Bastonnades, a cudgiller. Batail de cloche, the clapper of a bell. Batailler,
to fight, to wage battle, to contend. La Bataille and combat, the battle,
the combat. Un Bateau, a boat. Un Batelier, a boat man, or whirry man. Batre,
to beat, to strike. Qui est batu, which is beaten. Bateur de ge^ts, a striker
of folks. Batement, a striking, a beating. Le Batement de la mer, the beating
of the sea. Un batoir, instrument de quoy on bat les aires des maisons and
granches, a pauing beetle. Vne ceincture and Baudrier a pe^dre l'espee, a sword
girdle. Baudroyeur, a currier of lether. Bauer, to trifle, jest, dally, toy,
glauer. Baueur, Bauard, a trifler, a prater. Bauerie, trifles, toys, mockes.
Bauffrer, to raven or eat greedily. Du Bausme, baulme. Un cheual Bay ou Bayart,
a bay horse. Bayer a la mamelle, to seek or baye for the dugge. Bayer
l'argent, to lay wait for money. Il Baye verse la Greece, he watches to
Greceward, or stands at a baye. Beau, fair, seemly, beautiful, comely,
honest. Bellot, pretty, handsome. Beauty, beauty, comeliness, fairness.
Beaucoup, much. Beaucoup moins, much less. Le Bec d'vn oyseau, a birds bill.
Becasse, a woodcocke. Un Bec figue, oiseau viuant de figues, a bird like a
nightingale feeding on figs and grapes. Un Bedon, ou Tabourin, a tabberet.
Becher la terre, to dig the ground. Beeller, to bleat. Beellement, a bleating.
Un Beffroy, ou eschauguette, a beacon. Begue, one that stutteth. Begueyer, to
stut, to stammer. Begayement, a stutting, a stammering. Bell, seek Beau. Vne
Belette, a wesell. Belistre, ou belitre, a poor knave, a beggar, a vagabond.
Belistrer, to beg. Un Belier, a ram. Bellement, gently, leasurely, softly.
Belliqueux, warlyke, valiant, courageous. Bend, Bender, Bendelette, seek
Band. Benevolence, a good will, benevolence. Benign, gentle, courteouse.
Benir aucun, to bless one, or wish one well. Benisson and bonne priere qu'on
fait a Dieu pour aucun, blessing or prayer, that is made to God for any. Du
Benioin, Benjamin. Le Berceau d'vn enfant, les langes and petits drapeaux, a
child's cradle, and swathelings clouts. Un Berceau de treille, an arbor. Besace,
a wallet. Besague, a twible to bor^ holes. Berger, a sheapherd. Bergerie,
sheepefold. Berlans, common tippling houses, houses of ill rule. Berlue, poare
blind, or sand bli^d. Bernage, carriage. De la Berle, herb, yellowe water
cresses. Beryl, pierre precieuse, a precious stone called Beryl. Vne houe ou
Besche, a pickax, a mattocke. Bescher, to dig. Il est besoing de fair cela,
it is needful to do that thing. Besongne, workmanship. Besongnette, little
work. Besongner, to work. Vne Best, a beast. Bestelette, a little beast.
Bestement and lourdement, beastly, and doltishly. Bestise and fault de sens,
beastlynesse, blockishnesse. Bestial, cattle. Des Bettes, beetes an herb. De
la Betoesne, bittonie. Beturre, a sinck hole. Beuf ou Vache, an Ox or Cow.
Beurre, butter. Breuuage ou bruuage, seek Boire. Un Bouuier, a neat heard. Un
bon Biberon, a bibber, a tippler. Biberon ou esguiere, an ewer. La BIBLE, the
Bible. Biche, a hind. Bien, well. Le Bien que le pere delaisse a ses enfants,
apres son trespass, the goods which the father left his children. Les Biens and
successions qu'vn chascun a a soy, meubles ou immeubles, the goods that any man
possesses. Tous Biens exterieurs, al worldly goods. La Bienseance and rapport
des parties l'vne a l'autre, well besitting. Vne Biere and coffret ou on met
les corpse des trespassez, a coffin or bierre. Biere beer. Vne Bieure, a beuer.
Biez, biace. Aller de Biez, to go a byace. Bigarrer, to differ. Bigarure de
couleurs, variety of colors. Bigile, to look a squint. Bigot, superstitious,
hypocrite. Par Bigotise, superstitiously. Bignets, vne facon de pain pour les
enfants, comme de goffres, waffer cakes for children, bunnes. Monnoye de
Billon, bullion money. Un Billot d'or, an ingot of gold. Un Billot de bois, a
billet, a log. Bimauue, ou Guimauue, a marshe mallowe. Biner les vignes, to cut
and trim vines. Bineur, a vine worker, a weeder. Binement, a vine working,
weeding. Bisayeul, le pere de mon pere grand, my grandfathers father. Biscuit,
biscit. Vent de Bise, the Northest wind. Bisexte, bisext. Blaffard, pale faced.
Blaireau, a graye, a brocke, a badger. Blanc, white. Blancheastre, whytish. Qui
est Blanchet, which is whitish. Blancheur, witness. Le Blanchissage ou
crepissure d'vne massonnerie, white lyming of a house. Blanchir and deuenir
blanc, to blanch, to become white. Blanchir quelque chose, to whit a thing.
Blandir a aucun, to allure one. Blandissement, alluring, flattery. Blasme and
reproach, blame, reproach, accusing. Blasmer aucun and luy reprocher ou mettre
a sus quelque cas, to blame, to reproach, to lay to ones charge. Estre blasme
and reprins, to be blamed or reproved. Blasonner aucun and dire mal de luy, to
blase out ones name, or speak evil of him. Blasphemer, to blaspheme.
Blaueoles, ou Aubifoins, the flower called blew bottels. Ble, corn. Toute
sort de Ble, all sorts of corn. Blesme, paale, bleake. Blesser, to hurt, to
grieve, to anoy, to wound, to offend. Bless, wounded, offended. Blesseure, a
hurt, a wound. Blette, espece de poree, spinach. Bleu, blewe. Blond, yellow
heared. Blondelet, yellowish. Un Bleut eau ou sas, a boleer. Bobans, riotte,
excess, superfluity. Bocage, a thicket or wood. un Bocal ou esguiere, an
ewer. Bosseau, Bosselet, seek, Boisseau. Boire, to drink, to bib, to quasse.
Buuerie, drinking. Buueur, a drinker. Buueter, to sip whole glasses full, to
drink often. Beuuette, Vin de despence, small household wine. Bruuage, drink, a
potion. le Bruuage de petis enfants, childrens drink as they call it, bum. Le
boire ou boisson, drink. Bois, wood. Un bois de pleasance, a pleasant wood or
grove. Vne mesure semblable a nostre boisseau, a measure like to our bushel.
Boisselet, a small bushel. Boiste de bouys, a box. La boiste des os, the pan
wherein the huckle bone falls. Boister, to halte. Boisteux, lame. Boistement,
haltingly. Bolieure, a lyppe. du Bombasyn, Bombasin, cotton. Bon, good, honest,
virtuous. Tenir bon, Estre ferme and constant, to stand in a matter, to be
firm and constant. Sentir bon, to smell well. Bonte, goodness, honesty,
virtue Bonasse ce'st a dire, Tranquillite de vent en la mer, a fair weather on
Sea. Les Bonds and ouuertures par ou on fait ouuerture a l'eaue, comme d'vn
estang, a channel or gutter from a pond. Bondir, to bound, to leap back. un
Bondon, a bung, a stopple. Qui est debonnaire and doulx de nature, which is
gentle and mylde of nature. Bonnairete, faithfulness, uprightness. Bonnairemet,
and a la bon foy, uprightly, in good faith. Pourueu qui bonnement tu le puisses
fair, so thou do it well. Bonnet a couurir sa test, a cap. Un bonnet de fer, a
scull, a sallet, Bonte, seek Bon. Le board d'vn habillement, the hem or
seluige. Le board de quelque chose que ce soit, ou le bout, the brim or end of
a thing. Le board de l'eaue, the water side or brimme. Le board and riuage de la
mer, ou riuiere, the sea shore, or river side. Border and couuir le board, to
border, to welt. Bordeur, and autres qui besongnent a l'esguille, an
embrouderer. Bordure d'habillement, a border or welt of a garment. Un bordeau,
a brothell house, commonly called the Stews. Bordellier and putier, brothels,
or whoorehunters. Bordelage, whoorehunting. Bordereau and petit cayer, a note,
a brief, a pamphlet. Borgne, one eyed. Borgnet, poare blind. Vne Borne, a
limit, a bound, a lot. Borner quelque chose, to limite out a place. Champ
borne, a field lotted out, or divided. Borneur, a limiter or parter forth
Bosquet ou petit bois, a thicket or grove. Vne Bosse en quelque party du
corpse, a wenne. La bosle and cabochon, ou es^eueure de pierre precieux, the
enbossing of a Jewel. Un bosle de terre, a Mollhill, or hillocke. Bossette, a
little heap of earth. Bossette d'os, de bois, ou de corn que les ancie^s
mettoyent sus le livers acheuez, the bosse of a Book. Bossu, down backed,
crook sholdred Lieu sort bossu, a holow or crooked place. Vne Bote come de
lattes, and sem blables, a faggot, a bu^dle of laths Bo^eau de fom, and autre
chose, a bottle of hay. Un Bouc, a Goat. Un Bouquin, a Kidde. Bouche, a
mouth. Les Bouches de la play, the entry of a wound. Bouchette, a little
mouth. Bouchee, a morsel, a mouth full. Boucher, seek Bouscher. Un Bouchier,
a Boucher. Boucherie, a bouchery, a slaughter. Vne Boucle, a buckle. Bouclier,
a bucklar. Boucon, poison, venyme. Boudin, a pudding. Boue and fange, dirt,
mire, mud. Boueux, ou plein de boue, dirtie, myrte. Bouffee de vent, a puff of
wind Bouffer de courreux and maltalent, to swell with anger. Bouffi, Harenc
bouffi, puffed up a full herring. Bouffo^s, flatterers for advantage. Bougie, a
Lamp. Se bouger, ou partir du lieu and place ou on est, to remove or depart
from a place. Ne se bouger d'vne place, and ne s'en partir, to remain, not to
stir Bougette de cuir, a bouget. Bouys, ou arbre de bouys, box, or Box tree.
Vne Boule, a Boule. Un arbre dit Bouleau, a Birchtree. Boulengier, a baker.
Boulengiere, a she baker. Boulengerie, a bakehouse. Vne bouleuert, a bulwark.
Boulie, gruell, pappe. Boullir, to boil, to perboyle, to seethe. Du boulli, ou
boullu, sodde^ meat Boullon, boiling or bubbling. Boulloner, comme quand sur
l'eaue ou urine se leuent des bouteilles, bubbles, such as rise in water.
Bouquet de fleurs, a nosegay. Un Bouquet de fleurs, ou po^me de senteurs, a
nosgay or po^ma^der Bouquin, seek Bouc. Bourbe, ou Bourbier, mud, or a muddy
place, a slow, a puddle. Bourdes, tales made, inventions, trifles. Ce sont
bourdes, thesee be but tales. Bourder, to bourd, to jest, to trifle Bourdon,
ou mousche gespe, a waspe, a drane. Le Bourdon d'vn pelerin, a pilgrims staff.
Un Bourdon dedens lequel est un estoc cache, a staff with a sword in it. Un
bourg and village estant en un plain, a borow, a town. Bourgeois, a citizen,
a burgess. La bourgeoisie, the citizens. Perdre le droict de bourgeoisie to
lose the freedom. Le bourgeon, ou bouton de l^ vigne, the budde of a vine.
Bourgeon de lain, a flock of wool. Bourgeon and bube que vient a la face, a
pimple in ones face. Bourgeonner and ietter surgeons and iettons, to bud out,
to spring. Un bournal and rayon du miel, a honey comb. Bourre, flocks of woll.
Bourreau qui done la gehe^ne and torture, a hangman, an executioner. Un
Bourree, a bauen. Bourroche, Bourage. Bourse de cuir, a leather pursse, a
pouche, a bag. Boursette, a little purse. Bouscher, to stop, to shut up. Le
fin bout de quelque chose que ce soit, the very point or end of a thing. Le fin
bout de quelque chose, comme d'vn montaigne, and d'vn bastiment, the top of a
mountain. Le bout d'vne place and rue, the farther end of the street. Le bout
de quelque baston, soit ague, poinctu, trencheant, ou mousse, the point of a
weapon. Les bouts, ou les poinctes des costez, the ends or upper part of the
sides. Bouter and pousser, to put or push De la premiere boutee, at the first
pushe. Un Boutefeu, a match. Bouteille, a bottle. Boutelier and faiseur de
bouteilles, a bottle maker. Estre bouteilier and eschanson, to be buttler.
Boutique ou ouuroir de marchand, a merchants shop. Le bouton ou bourgeon de la
vigne, the bud of the vine. Bouuie, Bouillon, seek Boeuf. un Boyau qu'on
appelle le long boyau, a bowell or gutte. le Boyau culier, the gut next the
bottom of the stomach. Boyau and entrailles, bowels and entrayles. Bracelet,
seek Brasselet. Bragard, a brag and dapper fellow. Bravery excessive,
excessive bravery. Braire, to roar, to bray, to groan. Brayant ou brayart, a
roarer. Brayement, a roaring. Brayeme^t qui font les petis enfants, the crying
of children. Brayement and escri qu'on fait de douleur and d'enuy qu'on a, the
gronyng or roaring in sorrow. Braise de feu, a burning coal. du Bran and son,
Branne. Branche, a branch. Bra^che vrsine, un sort d'herbe. Bear breche, an
herb. Branchette, a little bow. Branchu, bowy. Un branchage delie come
cheueux, thick branched. Brandon de feu, a fire brand. Bransler, to shake, to
nod, to wave Le bransle and maniement du corpse se rapportoit bien a la voix,
his gestures agree well with his words. Braquemar, a woodknife, a hanger. Les
bras, the arm. Bras de mer, the arm of the sea. Brasser and machiner a aucun
quelque mal, to brew or practice some evil matter. Qui a brass tout
l'affaire, the brewer of all the mischief. Brasselet and ornement de bras, a
bracelet. Brasselets and gantelets de fer, bracelets and manicles. Braueme^t
marcher, to go neatly. Vne braye ou muselier a cheuaux, an instrument set on
the nose of horses. Des brayes a luicter, breeches for wrastlers. Brayes,
breeches, sloppes, vpper-stockes. La brayette d'vne balance, the beam of a
balance. Vne brebis, a sheep. Brebiette, a small sheep. Brebaille, sheep.
Bresche en un mur, a breach in a wall. Breuuage, seek Boire. Breuet and tout
autre recognoissance par laquelle on confess deuoir, auoir receu, ou autrement
quelque chose d'aucun, a brief, a handwriting. Brichet, the breast, the
brisket. Un bride, ou la rene d'vne bride a bridle, the ranes of a bridle.
Brider un cheual, to bridle a horse. Brief, en Brief, brief, to be short. De
Brief, shortly. Brieuement, shortly, briefly, in few words. Brieuete,
shortness. Vne Brigandine and cotte de maille, a brigandine or coat of male.
Un Brigantin, a ship called a Brigantin. Brigue and course qu'on fait enuers
les vns and les autres, qua^d on brigue quelque office, running up and down
suyng for an office. Brigue pour estre Consul, suit for a Consulshyp. Briguer,
to sue or labor for. Brigueur, ou Brigand and destrousseur de gentz, a robber,
a thief. Brigander and destrousser, to rob. Briganderie, robbery. Brigandeau,
a young thief. Brimballer, to shake like the flesh of a foggie person. Brique,
Brick. Briqueterie, brick work. Briser, to beat, to bray. Vne Brisure, a
brouze. Un grand broc, a great pot or steane. Brocard and parolle de
mocquerie, a scoff, a floute. Brocarder aucun, to floute one. Broche, a
spitte, a broache. Brochette soit de bois, ou de fer, a pegge of wood or iron.
Brochet, a Pyke. Brodequin, a buskin, a star-toppe. Brodeur, Brodure, seek
Board. Brouet qui n'est point exquis, broth. Brouette, a wagon. Brouillars and
brouees d'hyuer, mist or fogge. Brouiller, to confound, to mingle, to tumble
together. Broulleur, ou qui Brouille, a tumbler together, a slubberer. Brouter
and manger, to brouze, to feed like an Ox. Broyer and casser bien menu, To
bray, to beat small, to punne. Broye, brayed, beaten small. Broyeur, a beater
small. Vne bruine qui gaste les arbres, a blasting of trees. Bruit, a brute, a
noise. Fair bruit, to make a noise. Bruit de quelque chose nouuelle, seem
enter le peuple, soit bon ou mauuais, a fame or report among people. Petit
bruit de ville and nouuelle, a tale or rumor, a talk. Le bruit est, the
brute is. Semer un bruit par tout and espandre, to spread a tale abroad.
Bruire, to make a noise, to sound, to rumble. Bruiment, a rumbling. Le bruime^t
de ports, the cracking of doors. Brun, brown. Brunet, brownishe. Brunette, a
nutbrowne wench. Brunir, to burnish, to fourbish. Se Brunir, to burnish
himself. Cheuaux qui brunchent, stumbling or tripping iades. Bruise, ou murte
souuage, wild brushe. Brusler, to burn. Brusle, burned. Bruslant, burning.
Bruslure, a burning. Bruslement ou embrasement, a burning. Bruuage, seek
Boire. Des Bruyeres, firsses, briars. Bube, ou Bubette, a wheale, a blister.
Vne Bouche de Bois, a stopple. Petites Bouchettes qui cheent des arbres,
feuilles ou fleures, the flower that falls from trees. Un Buscher, a pyle of
wood. Vne buffe, ou soufflette, a blow on the ear. Un buffette and dressoir,
a cubbard, a dresser. Un buffet d'or and d'argent, c'est a dire, la vaisseille
qu'il fault pour le service de la table, a cubberd of plate. Bufle, a beast
called a Buffe. Bugler comme font les boeufs, to low, to bellowe. Buglement, a
lowing. De la Buglosse, Buglosse. Vne buire a mettre l'huile, an oil glass, a
vyole. Vne buire ou buirette, A cruet. Buisart sort d'oiseau, a Bussarde.
Buisson, a thorn or bryer. Un buletin, pour estre franc du port, a bill, a
cocket. Vne habillement de bureau, ou autre drap meslange, de petit pris, don't
les serfs and menu peuple seuloit estre accoustre a coat of changeable colors
for servants, sleighte rugge, or pampilion. Un Burin, a grauing stick. But,
a scope, a but, a prey, or booty. Butiner, to booty, or prey. Herb qui nomme
Butoesne, Betonye. Buuetter, Buuette, Buuage, seek Boire.
C ante A.
CA and la, hither and thither. Courir ca and la, to run hither and thither.
Cabaret, a Tavern or vitling house. Herb qu'on appelle Cabaret, an herb
called Haselwort. Cabinet, a Cofer. Le Cabinet d'vne femme, toutes sorts
d'ornements, ioyaux and affiquets qu'elle a pour s'accoustrer, and attifer, a
woman's casket. Les cabinets des femmes, women's caskets. Cabochon de pierre
precieuse, quand la pierre est taillee en bosse, the bosse or rising of a
precious stone. Cacher, To hide, to conueye away. Cache, hidden. Vne cachette,
a corner, a close place. En cachette, privily, closely, hiddenly. Cachement, a
hidyng. Cachet, a signet or seal. Un faulx Cachet, ou seau contrefaict, a
counterfeat seal. Cacheter des lettres, To seal letters. Calcidoine pierre
precieuse, A precious stone so named. La cadence des mots, the round uttering
of words. Caduque, transitory. Cafart, a flatterer, a glauerer. Cafardie,
Flatteryng, dissimulation. Vne cage, a Cage. Caignard, a Mycher, a
hedge-creeper, a common beggar. Cailler le Laict, to turn or curd milk. Vne
caille, a quayle. Un caillou, a big stone. Caima^der and amasser a la boiste,
to beg at the grate. Call, hardness of the hands or fete. Auoir de Calls es
mains, ou aux pieds, de force de trauail, to have hard hands or feet with
labor. Calamite, miserye, wretchedness. Calculer, to count, to reckon.
Calende ou chatepeleuse, petite best qui ronge le froume^t, a little beast
that eats corn, called a myte or weauiil. Cale^drier, par lequelle on
pouuoit cognoistre les iours festes and non festes, a Calendar. Caller and
abaisser les voiles, to strike sail. Un Calmar and estuy, a case, a pennar. La
mer calm, and sans tormente, the calm sea. Calomnie, quand faulsement and
mauuaisement on allegue, ou met on a sus quelque chose a quelqu'vn, a false
accusation a forged crime. Calomniateur, a false or malicious accuser. Qui'est
cambre, ou courbe dehors, and contremont, bowed outward, or upward. Habillement
camelote, a chambler coat. Camomille, Camomill. Le camp, the camp. Camper, to
camp. Vne compaignie, a company. Camus, flat nosed. Cannall, a cundite
pipe, a cannell. Le cannal' d'vne riuiere, the channel of a river. Canaille,
dogs, a cannell of hounds. Caceler and mettre a neant quelques lettres, to
cancel a bill. Cane ou canard, a ducke. Le vray canelle, Synamom. Vne Canepin
bien delie qui est prins du dedens de l'escorce du tillet ou bouleau, en quoy
les anciens escriuoyent, the inner part of the bark of a tree, which the men
in ancient time did write on. Un caniuet, a penknyfe. Can ou rouseau, a
reed, or Cane. Habilleme^ts couuerts de Cannetilles, Guarded or purfled
garments. Canonizer, to canonise, to make a Saint. Cantharide, vne sort de
ver venimeux and verd, qui s'engendre au sommet des branches du fresne and de
l'oliue, a kind of fly or venomous worm, called Cantharides. Capable,
capable, receyuable. Capacite, capacity, or receyuablenesse. La capacite and
portee d'aucun, the capacity or understanding of any man. Pomme de capendu, ou
carpe^du, quasi qui diroit court pe^du, a kind of pepon. Captain, a
captain. Cappe, a cloak, a spanish cape. Des Cappres, capers. Captif, a
bondsman. Captivity, bondage. Capuchon, a coule or hood. Caquesangue, the
blouddy flyx. Caquet, prattling, babbling. Caquetter, to prate, to babble. Car,
for. Carchiophe, Artichault, an artichocke. Carder la lain, to card woll.
Cardeur de lain, a woll carder. Caresse, chearing, welcoming, making much of.
La Carine and fond de la nauire, the keele of the ship. Carme, vne sort
d'arbre, a tree so called. Les Carneaux d'vne muraille; battlements of walls.
Un Carolus, a piece of french money. Carole, carret roots. Carpie, ou Carme,
vne sort d'-arbre, a tree so called. Carquois, a quiver for arrows. Carreau,
seek Quarreau. Carrefour, seek Quarrefour. Carillon, a chyming of bells,
courfewe. ^arbre du Carrobe, a tree so named. Cartamus syluestre, a tree so
named. Cartilage, a gristle. Cartilagineux, gristly. Carui sauuage, herb,
wild carewayes. Cas, a case, a matter. Un Cas and meschant faict, a
mischievous matter. Un Cas aigre, and qui est trouue fort mauuais, a heinous
matter. Afin qu'on face Cas de toy, that thou may be esteemed. Mets le Cas
que, etc. put the case that. Pren le Cas qu'il soit vaincu, put the case he be
overcome. Casquet, the viser of a hedpeece. Casuel, casual, transitory. Case
en laquelle on apporte merchandise, a case. De la Casse, Cassia, a fruit of
India. Casser, to break, to crush in pieces. Casser les ge^ts de guerre, to
put soldiers out of wages. Casse, failed. Casse and rompu, broken. Cassant
and aise a Casser, easy to be broken, frail. Un Castor, a beuer. La Cataracte
en l'oeil, a web in the eye. Catarrhe, and distillation d'humeurs, the
Catarre, or falling down of humors. Cauer, to dig in, or make hollow.
Cave, made hollow. Cave a vin, a wine seller, or vaut. Cauerne, a cave or
privy corner. Cause qui faict fair quelque chose, the cause of any thing. A
Cause, for because. Dire la Cause, to give a reason. Auoir Cause and occasion,
to have cause or occasion. Vne Cause and process, a matter or process. Plaider
sa cause, to plead his matter. Causer and auoir noise l'vn a l'autre, to
contend, or strive together. Cault and fin, subtle, crafty, deceitful, wary.
Cautement, suttlely. Cauteleusement, suttlely, craftily. Cauterisation, the
searing up of a wou^d, called by the Surgions Cautering. Pleige and Caution,
pleadge, surety. Caution bourgeoise, a Citizen surety. Ce, that. Et ce des
long temps, and that long agone. C'est, pour ce est, that is. Ce signify, que,
etc, this does signify, that. Est-il ceans? Is he within? N'est-il pas ceans?
Js he not here within? Cecy, this. Cecy mesme, this very thing. Ceder a aucun,
to grant or give place to one. Ceder and transporter quelque heritage, to
grant or make over an heritage. Ie te Cede, I give place to thee. Un Cedre, a
Ceder tree. Cedule, a sedule, a brief, a handwriting. Ceindre, to gird. Ceinct,
girt. Ceinct, ou Ceincture, a girdle, a girthe. Ceincturette, a little girdle.
Cela, that. Celer, to hyd, to disse^ble, to cover Celier, un lieu soubs terre,
come cave, and semblables, to seller any place under the earth. Celeste, qui
est du ciel, heavenly, of heaven. Celeste, habitans au ciel, heavenly, dwelling
in heaven. Celuy, he. Celuy la, the same man. Cemetiere, ou dortoir, que les
Chrestiens appellent ainsi, a cause de l'esperance de la resurrection, a
churchyard. Cendre, ashes. Cendree sauuage, sauerie, margerome, penyroyall.
Cens ou cense, and rent, a rent, a yearly reuenew. Cense, ferme, ou metairie,
a farm. Censeur, a Cesser, a high Constable. Cent, a hundredth. Mettre par
Centeines, to put by hundreths. Centenier, a Centurion or captain of a
hundredth men. La centauria maieur, herb, an herb called ce^turie the greater
La Centauria mineur, the less centurie. Centinodia, and corrigiole, herb,
knot grass. Center, le poinct du milieu de toutes chooses, the center or middle
point. Cep, vne sort de tourment de bois, dede^s leq^l on met le col and les
pieds des malfaicteurs, an instrument of torment made of wood, a timbrel, a
pillorie, a pair of stocks. Cercher diligemme^t, to seek out, to boult out,
to search diligently. En cerchant, in seking diligently Cercheur, a seeker.
Cercheresse, a she seeker. Cerchement, a seeking, a boulting out, an
inquisition. Vne Cercelle, a waterfoule called a Teale. Cercle, a circle, a
compass. Cerf, an heart, a stagge. Cerfueil, Charuell. Vne cerise, a cherry.
Cerisier, a cherry tree. Cerne est autant a dire comme cercle, a circle. Fair
Cerne en terre, to close a ground in. Cerner and enciser les arbres, to cut
trees round about. Cerner des noix, to crack nuts. Un Cerneau, cela qui est
bon a manger d'vne noix, amend, and semblables, the carnell of a nut, almond,
or any other thing. Cerot, a sere cloth. Certes, certainly, truly, verily.
Certain and asseure, certain, sure, without doubt. Il est certain, it is
certain, it is doubtless. Certainement, certainly, verily, truly, surely. Vne
certification qu'escriuent ceux qui sont francs des imposts, and l'enuoyent aux
fermiers, a certificate. Auoir quelq^ certitude and asseurance de quelque
chose, to be assured of any thing. Ceruelle ou cerueau, the brain. De la
Ceruoise, bear, or ale. De la Ceruse, ou fard, whitlead. Ces, ou ceux la,
these or those. Cesser, and s'arrester, to cease, to stay, to forbear.
Cesser and se deporter de fair quelque chose, to stay from doing a thing.
Cesse, a ceassing, a forbearing. Declairer Cessation des plaids, to stay a
matter. Fair cession, to give goods over. C'est, seek Ce. Ceste cy, Le
feminin de cest, ou cestuy, this woman, the feminine of cest, or cestuy. Cestuy
cy mesme, this same man. Cestuy-cy qui est aupres de moy, this fellow by me.
Cestuy-la qui est aupres de toy, that fellow by thee. Cestuy-la Chrysippus, the
very same Chrysippus. Ceues ou ceuots, onyons. Un chable, a cable. Chacieux,
qui a de nature les yeux pleurants, bleare eyed, or running eyed. Chagrin and
soucy, grief, care, waywardness. Chagrin, soing and solicitude pour autruy,
carfulness. Chagrigner, to grieve, to trouble a man. Chagrigner quelqu'vn,
and le mettre en soucy, to fill one with care. Le chaignon du col, the hinder
part of the neck. Vne chain, a cheyne. Chair, flesh. Chaircutier, a cook.
Charnier, le lieu ou on met les os des trespassez, a charnell house. Charnu,
fleshye. La charnure d'vne person, the flesh or braune of one. Vne charongne,
a careine, a corse. Vne Chair, a chair. Chaleur, heat. Ne se chaloir plus de
quelque chose, not to pass for any thing. Ne se chaloir de rien, to care for
nothing. Chalumeau, a reed, a pipe. Vne chamarre, a shepheardes pelt.
Chambellan, Chamberlain. Chambriere, a maid servant. Vne Chamber a coucher and
a dormir, a bed chamber. Chamber haulte, a high chamber. Chamber secrette, a
secret chamber, a celle. Chambrette, a little chamber. Un Chameau, a camel. Un
Champ, a field. Un Champ and pieces de terre sans bastiment, ou auec bastiment,
a plot of ground. Sur le Champ, immediately, at that instant. Champart, field
rent. Champestre, fieldish. Un champignon ou potiron, a toadestoole, a
musherome. Vaillant champion, a valiant champion. Chanceller, to stagger, to
reele, to waver. Chancellement, a staggering, a stutting. Chancre, a cancre.
Chandelle, a candle, a light. Un chandelier, a candlestick. Chanfrain creux, ce
sont come goutiers engrauees du long des colo^nes de pierre, a gutter or
furrow made in a pillar of stone. Changer, to change, to alter, to scorse.
Cha^ger quelque chose auec aucun, to scorse with one. Changer and innouer, to
change, to renew. Change, changed. Change, a change. Cha^geur, a changer, a
toll taker Changeme^t, chopping and cha^ging. Changement de propos, to change
his talk. Chansi, mouldie, filthy, rotten. Chansissure, mouldinesse.
Chanteau, a cantle, a gobbet, Chanter, to sing. Chantonner, to chaunt. Chant,
song. Chanson, a song. Chansonnette, a little song. Chantre, a singer.
Chanteresse, a woman singer. Chantement, singing. Chanterie, Music. Vne
chantepleure, a garden pot, a watering pot. Du chanure, Hemp. Vne chapeau ou
bonnet a couurir la test, a hat or cap. Chapeau faict d'espics de ble, a
garland of corn eres. Un chapeau de fleurs, ou bouquet, a garland of flowers.
Petit chapeau de fleurs, a little garland of flowers. Chapelier, ou chapeliere,
a garland maker. Chapelle, a chapel. Chapeler du pain, to chip bread.
Chaperon, ou vne cappe que les femmes portent par temps de pluye, a french
hood. Le chapiteau d'vn pilier and colomne, the top of a pillar. Un Chapitre de
liver, the chapter of a book. Chapon, a capon. Un charbon, a coal. Du charbon
esteinct, ou allume, dead or quick coals. Un charbonnier, a collier.
Charbonnee, petite piece de chair, and semblables, a collop. Chardon, a
thistle. Un chardonneret, a little bird that feeds on thistles.
Chardo^nette, vne sort d'herbe, a stinking weed of the kind of thistles.
Charge ou fardeau, a burden, a fardle, a charge. La charge qu'on baille a
aucun pour fair quelque chose, the charge that is given to one in any
business. Bailler ou do^ner charge and commission a aucun de quelque affair,
to give charge or commission to any. Charger, to burden, to charge. Charger ou
greuer aucun, too charge or burden any man. Chargeant, burthenouse,
chargeable. Charge, charged, burdened. Charity and amor enter les ho^mes, the
charity and love that is between men. Charmer, too enchaunt, too charm.
Charnu, charnure, charongne, seek chair. Charpentier, ou qui fournit de bois a
fair quelque edifice, a carpentar. Maistre charpentier, a master of works,
or Master carpentar. Charpenterie, carpentrie, or carpenters work. Charpie,
linen, or that is made of flax. Char, chariot, a cart, a chariot, a waggen.
Charrette, a little cart. Charier, to carry by cart. Chartier, a cartar, a
wagener. Charoy, ou par eaue, ou par terre, carriage by water or land. Chartez,
seek, Cher. Vne chartre, ou prison, a prison. Venir ou estre en Chartre, and
tout sec, to wither away. Vne Charue, a ploughe. Charui, seek Cheruiz. Un
chacun, each man, every man. Chacune, each woman. Chasiere, a cheese press. Un
Chaslit, ou les costez d'vn chaslit, a bedsteed. Chasse qu'o^ port sus les
espaules es processions, a shrine. Un herb nommee Corneole, aucunefois Soulcie
aquatique, Les Manceaux l'appellent chasse bosse, ou Chasse peste, an herb
called in latin Acesis. Chasser horse, ou arriere de soy, to drive out, to cast
out, to exclude. Chasse and iecte horse, cast out. Chasse, chase or hunting.
Chasser aux bestes sauuages, courir aux Cerfs, to hunt wild beasts, to hunt
the stagge. Chasseur, a hunter. Chassieux, seek, Chacieux. Chastaigne, ou
chastaignier, a chestnut. Chaste, chaste, honest, shamfast. Chastelamerie, a
village, a farm-house. Chastete, chastity. Chastement, chastely. Chasteau, a
castle. Chastier, to correct, to punish, to chastise. Chastiment aspre and
rude, sharp correction. Chastrer, to geld. Chastre, gelded. Chastrement, a
gelding. Un Chat, a cat. Chatepeleuse, ou Calendre, vne petite best qui ronge
le froument, a caterpiller. Chathuant ou hibou, an owl. Le Chaton, dedens quoy
est la pierre precieuse enchassee, the broad part of the ring where the stone
is set. Chatouiller, to tickle, to clawe. Chatouillement, a tickeling. Un
Chaudeau, a caudle. Un Chaudro^ de cuyure, ou marmite, ou vne chaudiere, a
caudron, a kettle, Chaudronnier, a Copper smith. Chauffer, to chafe, to heat,
too warm. Chaufournier, a lime kill. Chaume, straw. Chault, hot. Tenir
chaudeme^t quelq^ chose, and l'entretenir en sa chaleur, to keep hot, or to
maintain a thing in heat. Conseil prins chaudement, advised council. De la
Chaulx, lyme. La Chassee and leuee d'vn estang ou riuiere, the causey of a pond
or river. Chausser, to hose on. Chaussure, hosing. Chaussetrappe, a calthrop
for war, made like three iron pricks, so joined, that being thrown, one
always stands upright. Vne herb qu'o^ appelle chaussetrape: c'est aussi un
fruit qu'o^ appelle Chastaigne de riuiere ou truffes, ou faligots, a bra^ble
Chauue par deua^t, bald headed. Chauuete, baldness. Chauuesouris, a Back,
some call it a Batte. Le Chef, the head. Mettre a Chef quelque haulte
enterprise, to bring some great enterprise to pass. Venir a Chef de ses
besongnes and enterprinses, to bring the work and enterprise to an end Fair
Chef d'oeuure, to make a pincipal piece of work, too make a masters piece.
Celidoine ou esclere, an herb called Selandine. Chemin, a way, a path, a
street. Chemin, ou rue, a way or street. Cheminer, to walk, to journey, to
go. Cheminee, a chimney. Vne chemise, a shirt. Chenets, ou Landier, Andiro^s.
Cheneui, hempeseed. Chenille, a worm with many feet that eats vines, also a
snayle. Chenille de vigne, Jdem. Chenu, horeheared, gray heared. Cheoir, to
fall. Cheant ou tombant, falling or decaying. Cheu, fallen. Cheute, a fall.
Cher and fort aim, dear and well beloved. Vne chose chere, a dear thing.
Cherte, deerth. Chercher, seek cercher. Chere, Trongne, Mine, cheer,
countenance. Fair grand chere, to make good cheer, to be merry. Des cheruis,
a root called Skirwike. Cheruis sauuages, wild Skirwike. Un chesne, an oak.
Un cheual, a horse. Cheuaucher, to ride. Un cheuaucheur, a ryder.
Cheuauchement, ryding. Cheualier, ou homme d'armes, a Knight, or man at arms.
Cheualier de l'ordre, a Knight of the order. La cheuance d'aucun, richesse, or
goods. Vne cheueche, a shreeche owl. Cheueul, ou poil, ou perruque, a hear.
Cheuelu, hearie, roughe with hear. Cheueleure, the hear. Cheuet, ou trauersin
d'vn lict, a bolster. Cheuestre, ou licol, a halter. Cheuille, a peg, a pin.
Cheuir auec aucun, to make an end with one. Vne cheure, a goat. Cheureau, a
kid. Cheurette, a little goat. Un cheuron, a wild goat. Esguillettes de
cheurotin, cheuerell points. Un cheuron, a cheuron, a rafter in the house that
bears up the roof. Chez moy, with me, at my house De Chez moy, to me.
Chiche, a niggard, a pinch pe^ny. Chichement, nigardly. Chichete,
nigardlinesse. Chichoree, seek cichoree. Un Chien, ou vne chienne, a dog, or
bitch. Chier, to go to the stool, to do our ease. Chimere, a dark or subtle
imagination. Chiquaneur, a Somner. Chirurgien, a Surgeon. Le Choc de gents de
guerre, a shock or brunt of warriors. Chocquer, to strike, or knock together.
Chois, choice. Choisir, to choose. Cholere, choler, anger. Cholorique, colerik,
angry, testy. Chomer, to tarry for, to make holy day for lack of work. Choper,
to stumble, to offend. Vne chopine, a measure containing about a quart. Chorde,
seek Cord. Chose, a thing. Des choux, colewortes. Choux cabus, cabages. Chou
pour chou, like for like. Chouette, a howlet. Chouquet, a block. Choyer, ou
contregarder, To spare. Chroniques and Annals, Chronicles. Chucas, sort
d'oyseau, a chough a dawe, a cadesse. Cicatrice, a scarre. Pois cices, dried
pease. De la cichoree, Sichorie, an herb Vne cicoigne, a storke. Le Ciel, the
heaven, the sky, sometime the seeling of a bed. Cy ens, here within. Cigale,
a Grasshopper. Vne Cygne, a swan. Cil, pour celuy, he. Le ciel and peau qui
couure les yeux dessoubs and dessus en les clignant, the eye liddes. Ciller a
quelqu'vn, to wynke on one. Ciment, sement. Cinq, five, fifth. Cinquante,
fifty. Un circuit, a circuit, a compass. Circution de parolles, a co^passing
in with words. Lieu circonuoisin, place bordering about. Cire, wax, cirer, to
wax. Cirement, a waxing. Un ciron, a worm in a man's hand. Ciseau de quoy
on fait incision cissers to make incision. Ciseaux, ou forces, cissers or
sheares. Ciselet, small cissers. Vne cisterne ou l'eaue du ciel chet, a
cesterne. Cite, a City. Citoyen, ou citoye^ne, a Citize^. Des citrons,
Citrons. Civil, qui scait bien son entregent, civil, or one that knows good
behavior. Ciuilement, ciuilly, courteously. Vne ciuiere a col, a porter
images, and relics, and autres chooses sacrees, a collar about ones neck, to
carry relikes or images on. Ciuois, a bed of Onyons. Clabaux, a mastiue, a
curre. Clabauderie, Bawlyng, barking. Clair, Clairement, seek cler. Clapier,
and tanier, a Coneyhole. Claquer des mains en sign de faueur, to clap the
hands. Claqueter des dens, to chatter with the teeth. Claquette comme celle
des ladres, a clapper. Clause, a clause. Claye dosier, a lattisse of wick^r, a
hurdle. Clef, a kay. cler; clear. Cler, manifest and evident, de quoy on n'a
point de doubt, clear, manifest, evident. Fair cler, to make light.
Clerement, clearly, openly, manifestly. Clerte, ou clarte, Cleerenesse,
brightness. Un clear qui sert pour escrire, a Clarke. Il est bon Clear, He is
learned, he is a good Clarke. Client, qui s'est done en la tutelle and
protection de quelque grand seigneur, lequel prend la defense de toutes ses
affairs a l'encontre de tous, A Client. Cligner les yeux, to wink, to twinkle
with the eye. Clignement des yeux, winking. Climat and division du ciel,
climate or division of heaven. Cloche, a Bell. Clochette, a little Bell.
Clocher d'esglise, a steeple. Clocher, to halte. Un cloistre and lieu enuironne
de pillars, a Cloister. Cloporte and un espece de vermin se procrea^t es lieux
humides and vapoureux comme bains, a worm having a great many of feet, a
palmer. Clorre, to close up, to shut up. Clos, enclosed. Un clos, a close. Ce
qui est clos, that which is closed. Tout closture, an enclosement. Closture de
hayes, a closing in in with hedges. Cloison fait du mortier, a mud wall.
Cloison faicte d'ais de bout and trauersants, a bourd wall. Closser, seek
Glosser. Un clou, a nail. Un clouette, a little nail, a sprig Clouer, to
nail. Clouer contre un croix, to nail on a Cross. Un clistere, a clyster. Un
coche ou cren, A nicke, a notche. Coche, ou truye, a sow. Un cochet, a
cockrell. Un cochon, a pyg. Cocque d'oeuf, an egg shell. Coeppeau, a chip. Un
coeffe, a Coyfe, a night cap. Coeffe, coyfed. Coetiuer, eschauffer, and
entretenir en chaleur, to keep warm to maynteyne in heat. Coetiuement, a
keeping warm. Coenne de lard, a bakon skin. Coffre, a chest, a coffer. Coffret,
a little coffer. Cognoistre, to know, to perceive to discern, to understand.
Bailler ou donner a cognoistre and a entendre manifestement, to give to
understand, to declare. Cognoistre parfaictement ou vrayement vne chose
d'entre vne autre, to know one thing from an other. Cognoissant, knowledging,
understanding. Cogneu, known. La cho^e est sceue and cogneue, that which is
known and come to light. Cognoissance, knowledge, understanding, wisdom,
science. Coi, seek cov. Un coignee and hache, a hatchet. Coigner, to coin in,
to drive in. Le coing de toutes chooses, the corner of any thing. Un coing a
fendre bois, a wedge to cleave wood. Vne pomme de coing, a quince. Coings
sauuages, wyld quinces. Un coignier, a quince tree. Des coignasses, a kind of
quince. Coint and ioly, coye, fine, quaint. Le col, the neck. Un collet, ou
gorgias de quoy les femmes couurent leurs poictrines, a partlet. Collier and
autre bague pendant au col, a collar or carket. Un collier qu'on met aux
chi^^s, principalement de chasse, A dog collar. Un collier a cheuaux, A horse
collar. La colique, a colla^der, a strainer Collique passion, the Collike.
Collation and taille, a joining together, a tail. Collation, Banquette
d'aupres soupir, a collation, a bankee after supper. Collauder, to praise.
Collaudation, a praising. Colle, glewe, paast. Collar, to glewe. Colleme^t, a
glewing or coupling together. Collection, a collection, a gathering together.
College, a college. Colloquer, to place together. Colluder and fair semblant
de plaider co^tre aucun, and neantmoins s'entendre auec luy, to make semblant
to do a thing, and do clean contrary. Collusion, collusion, sometime
deceyte. Un colombier, a dove cote. Vne colomne, a Dove. Coloquinte, ou courge
sauuage Colloquintida. Colporter, porter sur le col, to carry a coarse to
burial. Le combat and battaille, ou debat, the combat or battle, the strife.
Presenter ou donner le combat to bid the combat. Combatre and batailler, to
fight together, to battle. Combatre en quelque maniere que ce soit, to fight.
Le comble, ce qui est adiouste oultre la just mesure, abundance, or that
which is more than the just measure, sometime fullness. Combler, to fill full,
to ouerheap. Combien que, although that. Combien estes vous? how many are ye?
Combien de fois? how often. Combien penses tu auoir tossed faict? how soon
think thou to have done? Combien y a-il? how long is it agone? Comedy and
farce, a Comedy, a play, an interlude. Comete ou estoile cheuelue, a Comete or
blasing star. Comin, vne sort d'herbe, Comin, an herb. Commander and
ordonner, To command, to appoint, to establishe. Commander de fair, to
command, to enjoin. Command and publie, commanded, proclaimed. Commandment
and ordo^nance a commandment, an ordinance. Comme, even as. Comme i'espere,
as J hope. Comme on dit, as men say, as it is reported. Comme si ie y eusse
este, even as though J had been there. Comme s'il estoit faict, as if it were
done. Commencer a fair quelque chose, to begin a thing, to take a thing in
hand. Commence, begone. Commencement, a beginning. Commensal, qui boit and
menge ordinairement auec nous, a daily companion at table. Comment? Qui? How?
Comment cela? How so? Comment te ports tu? How do thou? how farest thou?
Commettre quelque chose a au cun, Le commetre sus quelque affair, to commyt a
business to one. Commetre quelque vilain ou meschant cas, to commit a wicked
crime. Commis sus quelque affair, appointed to some business. Commission, a
commission. Le commissaire done par le Magistrate pour cognoistre and iuger
d'vne cause, a Commissioner appointed by the magistrate to hear and judge a
matter. Donner commissaire, To appoint a commissioner. Commodite, commodity,
profit, Commune, common, vulgar. Commun and appartenant a tous common to all.
Un commun dict du temps pass, A common saying of old time. La commune, the
common people. Communaute, the Comminaltie. Communion, communion, a fellowship
or knitting together. Communiquer, to communicate, to make partaker, to
confer. Comunication, a communication. Compaignon a apprendre, ou
d'apprentissage, a schoolefelow or fellow in house. Compaignon de table, a
table fellow. Compaignon a cheminer, A walking mate. Compaignon de table a
boire and a manger, and a iouer, a companion both at meat and at play.
Compaignon en tous labeurs and peines, a fellow in all troubles Compaignie,
company, fellowshippe. Compaignable, one whose company is easy to be gotten.
Se comparer a un autre, to compare with an other. Comparager and paragoner, To
compare, to lyken. Comparaison, a comparison, a likenyng. Comparer vne fault,
and payer bien cher, to punish a fault. Comparoir au iour de la monstre, to
appear in muster. Comparoistre en judgment, to appear in judgment. Ne
comparoistre point au iour de l'assignation do^ne par deuant le Magistrate, not
to appear at the day appointed by the magistrate. Compass, a compass.
Compasser, to compass. Compassion, compassion, pity, mercy. Compenser, to
recompense, to make amends. Compense, recompensed. Fair cher comperre
l'offence, to abye for the offense deerly. Competer and appertenir, to belong
or appertain. Competiteur, a suter for right. Se complaindre, to complain, to
find himself grieved. Se complaindre a son amy, To complayn to his friend.
Complaint, a complaint or moan making, or bewayling. Complaint qu'on fait a
aucun, d'vn autre, a complaint of an other, a tell tale. Complaire, to please,
to like. Un complant, a young Vineyarde. La complexion d'aucun, the complexion.
Mal complexionne, ill manered of ill behavior. Complice, a companion in
wickedness. Complot and intelligence qu'on a l'vn auec l'autre, agreement.
Accord and complot faict enter plusieurs, agreement between many. Par complot,
upon agreement. Composer quelque liver, To make a book. Composer and escrire
des verse, to make verses. Composer auec aucun, to compounde with one. Compose
and faict de deux natures, compounde and made of two natures. La composition de
quelque liver, the making of any Book. Composition and confection, a compound,
a confection. Composition and accord, a composition and agreement. Comprendre,
to comprehend, to perceive, to compass, to understand. Estre comprins au
nombre des bienheureux, to be comprised in the number of the happy.
Compromettre and se rapporter au judgment de quelque arbitre ius quelque
different, to put the difference in arbitreme^t. Comprins, put in arbitrament.
Compter, to count, to reckon, to number. Tout comptant, ready told. Vne count,
a count, a reckning. Compte and payement, a reckening, a payment. Abbreger son
count, to cut off his reckening. Qui tient le compte, that keeps the
reckening. Dresseur de compte, an account caster. Compteur, a reckener.
Comptoir and table, ou ancie^neme^t les argentiers comptoyent, a counter, or
table to cast account on. Comptement, a telling. Conceder, to grant. Cela
concern l'vtilite public, that concerns the public weal. Conceuoir en
son esprit, to conceive with himself. Ce qui est conceu, that which is
conceived. Conception, a conceyte. La conception de nostre ente^dement, the
sense, feeling, or perceiving. Un co^cierge ou portier, a porter Conciergerie
and prison, a prison Conciter, to move, to stir. Conclure, to conclude.
Conclusion, a conclusion. Fair bonne concoction, to have good digestion. Vne
concombre, a coucomber. Concord, concord, agreement. Concubine, a concubine.
Concupiscence, concupiscence, fervent desire or appetite. Concurrence, a
running together, or agreement. Condemner, to damn, to condemn. Condemnation,
a condemnation. Condemnation d'amende, An amercing, or putting to fine.
Condescendre and s'accorder a quelque chose, to condescende or agree to a
thing. Condition, a condition, a covenant. Basse condition, of a poor stock.
Soubs and par tell condition, on this condition. Conditions d'vne homme bonnes
and mauuaises, the conditions or qualities of a good or evil man. Conduire, to
conduct, to govern, to lead, to train. Co^duit a mener l'eaue en quelque
lieu, a Cundyte. Conduite, leading, trayning, co^ducting. Tu es le conducteur
de c'est affair, thou art the master of all this mischief, or this work.
Confiction ou confiture, a confection or confiting. Conferer ensemble, to
confer together. Confermer, to confirm, to establishe, to auoutche.
Confermer son opinion, to confirm his opinion. Confirmation, a confirmation,
an establishing. Confesser, to confess, to beknow. Confesser franchement and
sans contrainte, to confess freely, and without constraint. On confess bien
qu'il est vray, it is confessed to be true. Confession, a confession. Par la
confession d'vn chas^^^, sont deshonnestes, they are dishonest by the confession
of all men. Se confier, to trust, to put confidence in. Confiance and
asseurance, Confidence and assurance. Co^finer aulcun en quelque lieu and le
bannir, to limite one within certain bounds. Confire, to confite. Confiture,
confiting. Confitures, Confites. Confisquer les biens d'aucun confiscate ones
goods, to sease on forfayte them unto the Prince. Confiscation, ou biens
confisquez, and publication des biens d'aucun, ou de plusieurs, A confiscation.
Vne conflant, ou deux riuieres s'assemblent, a place where two rivers mete
together. Conflit and combat, a conflict or combat. Confondre, mesler ensemble,
and brouiller, to confound, to mingle, to tumble together. Se confermer and
accorder a aucun, to conform, or to become agreeable to an other. Confort,
comfort, solace, encouraging. Conforter, and co^fermer les ge^ts (...) guerre,
to comfort and encourage warriors. Confronter l'vn a l'autre, pour en voir la
comparaison, to compare one by an other, to see the difference. Confus, qui
n'est point divise ne separe, co^fused, not distinct Estre confus, to be
confused, or amazed. Confuseement, confusedly, indistinctly. Confusion and
trouble, ou desordre de toutes chooses, confusion, trouble, or disorder in any
thing. Confuter, to confute. Conge, leave, license, permission, grant. Sans
mon conge, without my leave. Congedier vne armee, to break up an army.
Congnoistre, seek cognoistre. Congre, poislon, a Conger. Il se congrege en
pierre precieuse, It grows to a precious stone. Coniecturer, to conjecture.
Conjecture, a conjecture. Conioindre, to join together, to glewe together, to
past together, to fasten. Conioinct, joined together. Conjunction, a joining
together, a conjunction. Conioinctement, jointly, wholly. Coniurer and adiurer
aucun, Le prier pour l'amitie, ou autres chooses, to entreat one, on all
friendship to utter some thing. Coniurer, Iurer ensemble pour mal fair a
aucun, Fair conspiration, to conspire. Coniuration, a conspiracy. Un connin,
ou connil, a conny, a rabbet. Conquester, to conquer, to win. Conroyeur, a
courrier. Consacrer, to consecrate, to dedicate, to hallowe. Consacre a Dieu,
dedicated to God. Consacre, ou saint, dedicated or hallowed. Conscience,
conscience, knowledge, remorse. Dire en sa conscience, to say of conscience.
Fair Conscience de quelque chose, to make conscience of a matter, to stick at
a matter. Conscientieux, devout, scrupulouse. Conseil, counsel, advise.
Demander conseil, to ask counsel. Donner conseil, to give advise. Conseiller,
to council, to warn, to charge, to advise. Se conseiller de quelque affair,
to consult on a matter, to take aduisement. Co^seillier de ville, a counsailour
of a City. Co^seillier de la ville de Rome, a Counsailour of the City of
Rome. Estre Consul, to be Consul. Consulter, to consult, to take advise.
Consultation, consultation, deliberation, aduisement. Consentir a aucun, to
consent to one, to agree. Consentement and accord, consent or agreement.
Consequemment, consequently, by the sequel. Chose grave and de consequence, a
matter of weight and consequence. Conseruateur, a conseruer, a mayntayner.
Conservation, conservation. Considerer quelque chose, too consider, to weigh,
to ponder. Consideration, consideration, marking, pondering. Consigner, to
appoint, to exhibit, to present. Consister, to consist, or to be. Cecy
consiste a chercher la verite, this consists in searching the truth.
Consoler, to comfort, to chearish, to solace, to cheer. Consolation,
consolation or comfort Consolateur, a comforter. Co^sommer and parfaite, to
make perfect, to end, to fulfill. Conspirer and estre de co^mun accord, se vnir
and allier ense^ble pour fair quelque chose, soit bonne ou mauuaise, to
conspire, to consent, to agree. Conspiration, a conspiracy. Constant,
constant, firm, stable, settled. Estre constant, to be constant. Constance,
constancy, perseverance, setlednesse. Constamment, constantly. Constellation
and assemblee d'estoilles ensemble en quelque sign, a gathering together of
stars into some sign. Constituer aucun consul sus le peuple, to choose or
apointe a Consul over the people. Constitu, arrest and determina^ce de quelq^
chose, laquelle apres auoir este disceptee and debatue, est mise a fin, a
constitution, an ordinance. Consumer, to consume, to wast, to wear away.
Consumption, a consumption. Co^suiure and atteindre, to follow, to overtake, to
get, to obtain. Contaminer, to spot, to stayne, to defile, to corrupt. Conte,
ou contesse, an Earl, a Contesse. Vne conte, a tale. Vne conte, deuis and
propos, soit vray au faux qu'on fait a plaisir, a fable. Conte des chooses
veritables, a story. Conter, to tell. Un conteur de contes, fables and
sornettes, a tale teller. Co^temner, to despise, to disdain, to neglect.
Contemnement, a contempt, or disdain. Contempler, to vewe, to behold.
Conte^plement, quand on pense soigneusement a vne chose, to muse on a matter.
Contenir and compre^dre, to contain, to comprehend. Co^tenir and garder de
fair oultre, to restrain, to with hold. Se contenir and moderer, too
forbear, to moderate. Contenu, contained. Continence, continence. La
contenance, the gesture, co^tenance, or behavior. Content, content, well
pleased. Estre content de ce qu'on a, to be content with that we have. Ie suis
content, I am content. I'en suis content, J am content. Mal content, not
content, displeased, offended. Contenter aucun, to please or satisfy one.
Contentement de peu and abstinence de voluptez, to be content with a little.
Prendre contentement, too delight in. Co^tester cause sus quelque different, to
make protestation of suit before the Judge. Par un co^texte, Tout d'vn train,
Sans rien mesler, continually together. Continence, seek contenir. Continu and
entier, continual, for ever. Continu a quelque chose fair comme s'il estoit
tousiours soubs le ioug, the continuance of a thing. Continuer, to continue, to
go forward, to last. Continuel, continual. Continuellement, continually.
Continuation, a continuing. Contract, a contract, a covenant, a bargain.
Contracts and conuentions redigees par escript, agreements or conuenants put in
writing. Contracter, to contract, too bargayne, to agree. Contradiction, a
contradiction. Contraindre aucun, to co^straine, to enforce, to compel. Estre
contrainct, to be constrained. Estre contrainct par necessite, to be
constrained or driven by necessity. Contrainct, a constraint. Sans
contraincte, without constraint, freely, willingly. Contraire and nuisant,
contrary, hurtful. Au contraire, contrariwise. Contrariete, contrariety,
difference. Contre, against. Contrecedule, the counterpane of a writing. Il me
vient a contrecueur, it goes against my mind. Contredire, to gaynsay, too
murmour, to withstand. Contredisant, ou qui contredit tousiours, a gaynsayer.
Contree and pays, a land or country. Contrefaire, to counterfeat, too make
like. Contrefaire quel qu'vn, to counterfeat a man. Se co^trefaire, to disguise
himself, Contrefaict, counterfeat. Contregarder, to keep, to preserve. Se
contregarder, to keep himself, to spare himself, to look to himself.
Contremettre, to lay against. Contremont, upward. Contrepois, a counterpease.
Contrepoison, a counterpoyson. Contreporteur, a cariar about of letters or
other things. Contrerouleur, a Controller. Contreuenir au droict, to withstand
the right. En contreuenant, in withstanding. Contribuer, to contribute.
Contrister aucun, to make one sorrowful. Se contrister, to be sorrowful, to
be careful. Controuerse ou debat, controversy or strife. Controuuer and
feindre, to invent or faigne. Controuuer quelque chose en son esprit, to
imagine out of our own brain. Chose controuuee, a thing feigned, or invented.
Controuueur de mots, an inuentour of words. Co^trouueur de parolles and
me^teur, a fayner, a liar. Controuuement and fiction, fayning, lying.
Conuaincre, to convince, to overcome. Conuenir and s'assembler, to gather
together. Conuenir and apointer de quelq^ affair qui estoit en doubt, to
agree on things in controversy. Fair bien conuenir, to make them well agree.
Bien conuenant, fit, apt, handsome. Conuenant a quelque affair, fit for a
thing. Il conuient, it behooves, it is convenient. Conuenant, seemly.
Co^uenable, Propre ou sortable a quelque chose, convenient, apt, meet for a
thing. Conuenablement, conveniently. Conuenance, agreement, consent.
Co^uenancer, to promise, to make covenant. Conuention, a bargayne, an
agreement. Un conuers, nouueau a la foy, a convert, one new come to the faith.
Conuerser auec quelqu'vn, to be conversant with one, too keep company.
Conversation and familiarite, conversation and familiarity. Se conuertir, to
be converted, to turn. Co^uertir inimitiez en amitiez, to turn enimitie into
frie^dship. Se conuertir en liqueur, to be converted into liquor. Se conuertir
en sell, to be converted into salt. Conuerti, converted. Conuier, Semondre a
souper, to bid to supper. Conuoiter, to desire, to covet. Conuoitant, coveting,
greedily desiring. Conuoite, desired. Conuoiteux, covetous. Conuoitement, a
greedy desiri^g. Conuoitise, covetousness, greediness. Conuoitise qu'on a
tant de bonnes chooses, que de mauuaises, concupiscence. Conuoquer, to call
together. Conuoy, a following or waiting on. Co^uoy des obseques d'vn
trespass, to follow the dead corpse, or to bring him home. Conuoyer, to bear
company. Conuoyer aucun par honneur, to bear one company home. Cophin, ou
panier d'osier, a basket. La copy and le double de quelq^ escripture, the
copy of a writi^g Abo^dant and copieux en scauoir de diuerses chooses,
abundant and plentiful in knowledge. Copier, to copy or write out. Un coq, a
cock. Du coq, herb, an herb called costmarie. Coquelourdes, an herb called
of some Rose perseley. Le coqueluchon d'vne cappe, and la cappe que les semmes
portent sur leurs testes pour la pluye, a cocks comb on a hood. Un coquemart
ou vne chaudiere, a caudron. Des coquerets, herb, an herb called Alkakengie.
Des coquerettes, Idem. La Coquille d'vn limacon and se^blables, the shell of a
snayle or shell fish. Les coquilles de la noix, nut shells. Les coquilles
d'oeufs, egg shells. Coquetier, cotqueane. Coquin, a needy fellow, a beggar.
Corail, coral. Corbeau, a raven. Vne pierre qu'on appelle Corbeau sortant de
la muraille pour soustenir vne poultre, a corbell, a stone set out of a wall to
bear weight on. Corbeille ou on met la pasture des bestes, a basket to carry
beasts meat in. Corbeille faicte d'osier, a basket of oysers. Corbeille faicte
de genest, a mau^d. Corbeillon, ou Picotin, a little basket. Cord, a cord, a
band. La ligne ou le cordeau du charpentier, the carpentars ligne. Cordelette,
ou cord moindre qu'vn cable, a string, a pack-threed, a cord. Cordeur de
terres, a bounder of lands. Cordialeme^t aimer, to love heartily. Cordouannier,
a shoemaker, a cordwayner. Cordouannerie, shoemaker row. Coriandre herb,
Coriandre. Corme, a fruit called Service. Un cormier, a Service tree. Un
Cormorant, a fish called a Cormorant. Cornaline, pierre precieuse, a stone
called a Corneline. Corn, a horn. La Corn du pied d'vne best, a beasts
hoof. Cornet, ou trompe, an instrument called a cornet, a horn. Cornet a
ancre, an inckehorne. Un Cornet de papier comme d'apoticaire, a cornet or
coffin, such as Grocers make of paper to put spice in. Cornu, ou qui port des
corns, horned, or that wears horns. Corner, to play on the cornet, to blow
in a horn. Corneur, a horner. Vne Corneille, a crow. Corneole, herb, seek,
chassebosse, an herb so called. Vne Cornette des cheuailliers, a cornet or
standard of horsemen, commonly a hundredth. Corniche qu'on met par dessus les
colomnes, a cornish on the top of a pillar. Un Cornillier, a tree whereof there
is male and female, the male is not in England, and may be called long cherie
tree, the female of some is called dog tree, such as butchers make priks of.
Corniles, ou cornoilles, the frut of the aforenamed tree. Le Corpse, the body.
Bie^s corporels and appertena^s au corpse, bodily or corporal goods Corsu, ou
Corporu and fourny, corsif, gross, fleshy. Corpulence, fleshinesse. Le
Corsage, the body or corpse of a thing. Corriger, to correct, to amend.
Correctement, diligently, or without fault. Correcteur, a correctour, a
controller, a fault finder. Correction, a correction, an amending. de la
corrigiole, autreme^t dicte Saguinaria, qui croit es montaignes, way grass,
knot grass. Corrompre and gaster, to corrupt to mar, to wast, to pervert.
Corrompre and gaster aucun, too mar one. Qui Corrompt and gaste, a corrupter.
Cast and corrompu, marred and corrupt. Corrompure and perte, corruption,
loss. Corruption, a corruption. Corrompeur de femmes ou de filles, a defyler
of women, a deflourer of maids. Corrosif, putrifactiue, corrosife. Du cost, ou
coq, herb, an herb called costmary. Vne Cost, a ribbe. Le Cost, the side.
De Cost, sideling. de l'autre Cost, at the other side Des tous Costez, on
every side. Estre du Cost d'aucun, and soustenir son parti, to take parts, to
hold on ones side. Vne Cost d'armes, a cote armor. Cottir, to rush together,
to iastle. Du Cotton, cotton, bombasin. Couard, a coward. Couardement,
cowardly. Couardise, cowardlynesse, faint-hartednesse. Vne Couche, a bedsteed.
Couchette, a couche. Se coucher par terre, ou estre couche, to lie along.
Coucher pour dormir, to go to bed. Coucher, ou rediger par escript, to coutch
in writing. Estre Couche, to be laid along. Couchement, a lying done, a
couching. Un coucou, a cuckoo. Vne couille, a man's yard, a tail. Couillon,
the coddes. Le Could, the elbowe. Vne couldee, a cubite, Vne couldre, arbre, a
haseltree. Couldre, to sow. Cousu, sewed. Coulture, sewing. Color, to run
like water, to flow, to glyde. Coulant, flowing. Un couloir, ou vne couloire,
a strainer, a coullander. Coulement d'eaue, a running of water. Couleur,
color, hew. Coulourer, to color. Couleuree, wild vine. Vne Couleuure, an
adder, or snake. Un Colomb, ou pigeon, a dove, a pigeon. Un colombier, a
douecot, a pigeon house. Coulpe, fault, blame. Coulpable, blame worthy. Le
coultre d'vne charrue, the coultre of a plowe. Un Coup, a blow, a stroke.
Coup de de, a cast at dice. A touts Coups, at every time, at every blow. Tout
a un Coup, all together. Couper, to cut, to hew, to fell. Coupure, cutting,
shreddes. Vne Coupe, ou vne Taste a boire, a cup, a goblet, a boll. Le Coupeau
d'vne montaigne, the top of a hill. Couperouse, coperose. Le Coupet d'vn
edifice and autre tree chooses, the top of a house, the ridge. Le Coupet de
quelque chose, the top of any thing. Vne Couple, a couple, a pair. Courage,
courage, stoutnesse, boldness. Bon Courage, good hope, cheerfulness.
Couragieux and hardy, hardy, courageous. Couragieusement, courageously,
stoutly. Couramment, visteme^t, promptement, sans faillir, runningly, swiftly,
redily. Courbe, crooked. Courber, Plier, Affaisser, too crook, to plye, to
bend, too bow. Courbe, bowed, bended. Courbement, crookedly. Vne courge, a
goorde. Courre, courir, to run. Courir les bestes sauuages and chasser, to hunt
wild beasts. Courir quelque chose legierement, to run over a thing
slightly. Courant, running. Coureur, a runner. Coureurs and cheuaucheurs
d'escuirie, horse coursers, ryders. Courement ou course, a coursing, a running.
Courement ca and la, a running hither and thither. Course, a course. Course, a
small waggen, a course, a flight. Couronne d'or, a crown of gold. Couronner, to
crown. Courroye and grande and long, a lethren thong. La courroye d'vn
soullier, the latchet of a shoe. Courroucer fort aucun, to anger one, to
displease one. Courrouce, angered, displeased. Courroux, anger, wrath, stomach.
Coursaire de mer, a rouer, a pirate, a sea these. Court, short. Pour le fair
court, to be short. Courtement, shortly. Vne cour de maison, a court. La cour
d'vne metaire, ou autre grande maison, the Court of a farm or great house. Vne
cour souueraigne, the high Court. La cour du prince, the Princes court. Un
courtizan, a Courtier. Courtois, courteous, gentle, loving, tractable, meek.
Courtoisie, curtesy, gentleness. Courtoisement, courteously. Vne courtier and
faiseur de messages, qui va and vient a la post and volunte d'autruy, a
currier, a messanger. Un courretier de quelque chose que ce soit, qui moyenne
and va and vient de l'vne party a l'autre, pour fair quelque march, a
curretter, a broker. Courretier de cheuaux, a horse coarser. Couruee, ou
Coruee, a quiting of gentleness, a thanking. Courtine, a courteyn, a veil.
Deux cousins germains fills des deux freres, ou de deux soeurs cousin germaynes.
Un cousin ou coussinet, a coushin. Coust, cost, charge. Il couste la moitie
moins, it cost half less. Qui couste beaucoup, that costeth much, dear.
Coustange, cost. Cousteau, ou espee, a knyse, or a swoorde. Coustelet, a
penknife. Coutillier ou escuyer, an Esquire. Un Coustume ou maniere de fair
qu'on a, a Custom or manner. Les customs particuliers des chasque ville and
cite, the private custom of every city. Les loix and coustumes qui sont
propres a un chacun peuple, the laws and customs of a people. Selon la
coustume, according to the custom. Comme il est de coustume, as it is commonly
seen, as it commonly falls out. Auoir de coustume, to use, or to be wont.
Lever vne coustume, to begin a custom. Prendre vne coustume, to take a
custom. Chose customiere, a commm thing. Cousturier, a tailor. Cousturiere, a
she tailor. Coutaux, hillocks, little hills. Un coutil, ou coiste, a
mattresse, a pallet. Couuer, to keep warm, to hatche. Couue, kept warm,
hatched. Couuee de poulsins, hatching of chickens. Fair le couuade, to trench
or defend the camp. Couuement, a sitting, or hatching. Couurir, to cover, to
hyde, to ouerspreade, to close. Couuert, covered, hidden. Couuerture, a
covering. Couuerture de lict, a couerlet of a bed. Couuercle, a cover, a lyd.
Un couurechef, a kerchief. Couurement, a coueryng. Couuertemet, covertly,
secretly, wisely, closely. Couoiter, seek conuoiter. Vne homme fort coy, a
still man, a quiet man. Coyement, quietly, stilly. Cracher, to spet. Cracheur,
a spetter. Crachat, spettle. Crachement, spetting. Craindre, to fear, to
dread. Craignant, fearing, dreading. Craintif, fearful, dreadful. Crainte,
fear, dread. Auec crainte, fearfully. Sans crainte, without fear. Velours
Cramoisi, Crimsin velvet. Les gouttes Crampes, the goutish crampe. Crampon, a
cramp of iron. Crapault, a Toade. Crasse and grand amas d'ordure sus quelque
chose, sluttishnesse filthiness. Crasseux, filthy, sluttishe. Craye, seeeke
Croye. Vne creance, credit or trust. Un creancier, A creditoure, a truster.
Createur, seek creer. Crecerelle, A Tymbrell, a rattell. Le credit d'aucun,
the credit or authority of a man. Credulite, light belefe. Creer, and donner
estre a quelque chose, and mettre premierement a nature, to create to make, to
give the first being. Creation and establissement, the creation of a
magistrate. La creiche, auge, ou mangeoire d'vne estable, a Cratche or maunger.
Cremailliere, ou cremeillee, A hook to hang any thing on. Un Cren, ou crenne,
a notche, a nocke in a bow or shafte. Frange and crene, fringed. Crepets, wafer
cakes, fritters. Crespe, Sindall, Cipres. Crespu, slyked, curled. Cheueux
crespus, curled hair. Crepir, To pargette, to curle also. Cresson,
watercresses. Vne creste, a crest. La creste des oyseaux, a birds comb or
crest. Se creuer and rompre, to burst. Creuer les yeux a aucun, to put out ones
eyes. Creuer de despit qu'on a, To burst with anger. Vne creuasse, a chynke, a
cleft, a creuyse. Se creuasser, to cleave, to choppe, to parche. Creux,
hollow. Creuser, to make hollow. Un Crible ou sas, a cribble, a sieue. Cribler
and sasser, to sifte. Criblure, a siftyng. Cry, a cry, a shoute, a shrieke.
Crier, to cry, to shoute, to shrieke to hallow. Un crieur, a crier. Un crieur
public, A common crier. Crieurs de trespassez, cryers at a funeral arrayed in
black. La criee du crieur, The Cryers cry. Par leur fascherie and crierie,
with their grief and crying. Un criard, An outcryer, a brawler. Criarde, a
unquiet woman, a Skolde. Criement, a crying. Criement a l'encontre de quelque
chose, a reclamyng, a crying against. Crime, a fault. Les crins d'un cheual,
qui luy pendent sus le col, ou d'vn Lion, the mane of a horse, or Lion.
Criqueter, to creake, to crackle the fingers. Criquement de fueilles seiches, a
rustling of dry leaves. Un grand Croc, a Grapple, a hook. Croc a accrocher
nauires, A grapple of a ship. Un crochet, a fishooke. Crocher a houer la
terre, A pyckaxe. Donner le crochet a aucun, and le ruer par terre, to tryppe
one. Crocheteur, a common porter, a burden bearer. Crocheter, to fasten up.
Crochu, crooked, hooked. Crochure, crookedness.. Crochement des dents,
crokednesse of teeth. Un Crocodile, best d'Egypte, a Crocodyle. Croire, to
believe, to think, to trust. Croire aucun, to believe one. Qui croit de legier,
light of belief. Croire quelque chose, to believe a thing. Un ferme croyance
qu'on a de quelque chose, a firm belief, or sure persuasion. Croyable,
credible, worthy to be believed. Croisser, to cut ouerthwarte, or crossewise.
Croistre, to grow, to increase, to wax big. Croissant, growing. Croissance,
increase. Vne croix, a cross. Croupir, to bow down, to coure down.
Crucifier, to crucify, or hang on the cross. Le cropion, the rumpe. Crosler,
ou crouler, to brandish, to shake, to wagge. Crosle and ebransle, shaken,
wagged. Crottes, daglings. Crotte, bedagled. Un croupiere du cheual, a crouper.
Crouste, a crust. De la croy, ou cray, chalk. Cru, raw. Cruaute, seek cruel.
Cruete, rawnesse. Crudite, vnripenesse. Cruche a porter eaue, a water crocke, a
steane. Crucifier, seek croix. Cruel, cruel, fierce, ungentle, intractable.
Cruaute, cruelty, vnmercyfulnesse. Cruellement, cruelly, tyrannously,
horribly. Crystal, Crystal. Cueillir, to gather together. Cueilleur ou
vendangueur, A gatherer of grapes. Cueillette, a collection, a gathering
together. Le cueillement, The gatheryng together. Cueur, ou Coeur, a heart. Mon
petit cueur, my little heart, my sweet heart. Par cueur, by heart, by rote,
without book. Dire ce qu'on a sus le cueur, to utter a man's mind, to
discharge his stomach. Grand cueur and honneste, a noble heart. Gros cueur, a
stout stomach. Contre son cueur, dissemblingly, or against his heart. Au fin
cueur d'yuer, in the heart or midst of winter. Cuider, to think, to ween.
Cuidereau, a pretty hardy fellow spoken in mockage. Vne cuellier, a spoone. De
cuir, a hyde, leather. Cuire, ou fair cuire, to sees. Cuict en eaue, sodde in
water. Cuisson, a seething. Cuisine, a kitchen. Cuisinier, a Cook. La cuisse,
the thigh. Cuissinet, seek Coussin. Cul, an arse. Qui font la culbute,
tumblers. Cultiuer, to till. Cupidite, covetousness, greedy desire. Curage, an
herb called in English Arssmart. Vne cure ou paroisse, a Cure or parish. Un
cure d'vne paroisse, the Curate of a parish. Cure ou guarison, a cure, or
restoring to health. Vne curette a nettoyer le coultre de la charrue, the iron
wherewith the plowman cleanses the Coulter. Vne curedent, a toothpyker. Un cure
oreille, an ear picker. Cure and soing, Care, thought, study, diligence,
work, labor. Curateurs, such as have charge of any thing. Mettre en
curatelle comme furieux, to lay one in hold. Curiosite, curiosity.
Curieusement, curiously. Curialiste, ou courtisan, a Courtyer. Cuues dedens
lesquelles on port la vendange au pressoir olives and semblables, tubbes,
such as they carry grapes to the wine press in. Vne cuue a cuuer la vendange,
a tubbe. La cuue dedens laquelle le vin du pressoir se recueille, A receiving
tubbe. Un cuuier, ou vne cuue a se baigner, a bathing tubbe. Cuyure, copper.
Cy, ou ie suis, here, in this place. Cygne, seek Cygale. Cymbale, a Symbale.
Du cypres, Cypress.
D ante A.
DActes, le fruit de la Palm, Dates, the fruit of the palm tree. Vne Dague,
ou poignard, A dagger. Ne Daigner regarder aucun, to vouchsafe, to dayne. Un
daim, a fallow dear. Dam, ou dommage, loss, hinderance, damage. Habillement
damasse, a damask coat. Dame, ou maistresse, Dame, maystresse. Danger,
danger, peril, ieoperdie. Sans danger, without danger. Mettre quelqu'vn en
danger, to put one in ieopardie. Se mettre en danger, To ieoparde a joint, to
adventure, to hazard. Il y a danger que. etc. It is to be feared least.
Dangereux, dangerous, perilous. Dangereusement, daungerously perillously.
Danse, a dance. Danser, to dance, to hop, to leap. Danseur, a dauncer.
Danseresse, a woman dauncer. Dansement, a dancing, a hopping, a moving. Tout
sort de dard, a Darte, Darder, to throw a dart. Dardeur, a thrower of a dart.
Dartre, ou Feu voulage, a tetter or ring worm. Datte, seek Dactes.
D'auantage, seek Auantage. Un Dauphin, a Dolphin. De, seek Det. Un de a
couldre, a thimble. Ouy dea, yea verily, yea many. Debatre de parolles auec
aucun and noiser, to cavil, to brabble, to quarrel. Debatre quelque propos, to
debate a thing. Debat and different de quelque chose, a Debate, a strife, a
contention. Fort debile and foible, very weak very feeble. Debilite,
weakness. Debiliter, to weaken. Debilitation de veue, short sighted, weak
sight. Estre, ou se tenir debout sus ses pieds, to stand upright. Debouter, To
depose, to put out. Debouter loing des siens, to separate far from
acquayntance. Le deuoir, duty, office. Ne fair plus son deuoir, Laisser ou
delaisser a fair son deuois To leave his business, to neglect his duty.
Deuoir quelque chose, to owe. Deu, due, debt. Vne debt, a debt, Payer ses
debtes, to paye-dettes, to discharge the due. Remettre un debte a quelqu'vn Luy
quicter and do^ner la debte to forgive a debt. Un debteur, a d^tter. Deca le
Rhein, On this side the Rhyne. Dec, dela, from hence, from thence. Deca and
Dela, hither and thither Par Deca, par Dela, on this side, on that side.
Deceuoir ou abuser quelqu'vn, to deceive, to beguyle, to disappoynt. Deceu,
deceived, beguiled, betrayed. Un deceueur, a deceiuer, a beguiler, a crafty
fellow, a subtle fellow. Deception, deceit, suttletie, craft wiliness. Decez
and trespass, deceasse, or departing out of the world. Dechasser, to drive
away, to expulse. Dechasse, driven away, expulsed Dechassement, a driving
away. Dechiqueter, seek Deschiqueter. Dechirer, seek Deschirer. Decheoir
petit a petit, and venir a decadence, to fall away, to decay, to lessen. Cela
est Decheu de la moitie, it is lessened by the half. Decider and mettre fin,
to decide, to end. Decimes, tenthes. Declamateur, a Declaymer, a mooter.
Declarer and exposer, to declare, to set forth, to expound. Declarer son
courage, to declare or show his courage. Declarer vne accusation and delation
faict d'aucun a l'encon tree d'aucun non receuable, to declare against one.
Estre declare, to be declared. Decliner, To decline, to bow from. Declin de
l'aage, in decaying age. Decoction, a decoction, a seething. Decouler, To
flow, to run downewarde. Decoulourer, To stayne, to lose color.
Decolourement, a staining. La decours de la Lune, the wane of the Moon.
Decroistre, to decrease, to wear away, to wax less. Decroter, Decrotoire,
seek Descroter. Dedens, within. Dedier, to consecrate, to dedicate Dedie,
dedicated. Deduire and rabatre d'vne so^me, to deduct, to abate of a sum.
Deduction and rabat d'vne sum, an abating, a diminishing. Deduit and plaisir
qu'on prend a quelque chose, delight, pleasure. Deesse, a she God, a goddess.
Defaillir, to languishe, to wax feeble. Defaillir and se passer, to wear
away, to wither away. Bien ne me deffault, I lack nothing. Default de quelque
chose, want lack, penury, scarceness. Defaillance and langueur, defayling,
languor. Defaillance de courage, want of courage, faint hartednesse. Defendre,
to forbid. Defendre quelque chose a aucun, to forbid the doing of a thing.
Defendeur, a defendant. Defense de ne fair quelque chose, forbidding. Deferer
d'aucun d'auoir faict aucune crime and forfaict, To accuse one, to lay to ones
charge Delateur ou deno^ciateur, a privy accuser, a tale teller. Deffaire,
seek Deffaire. Deffier, seek Deffier. Deffier aucun, To defy, to provoke, to
challenge. Defigurer aucun, to disfigure, to misseshape, to disfame. Defigure,
misseshapen. Defigurement, a misseshaping. Defleurer, to defloure. Defluxion ou
catharre, a rheum a catarrhe. Defrayer toute la viande, to provide cates. Un
defrayeur qui nous fournit de tout ce qu'il nous fault par les chemins, a
Cater, a Stuarde. Defricher la terre, to work nd till ground to make it
fertile. Degast, waste, loss. Degastement, wasting. Degeler, to sever, to put
away. Les oiseaux se desgoisent, birds chatter or chirpe. Degoisement, a
chattering, a chirping. Degoutter, To drop out, to destill. Degouttement, a
distilling. Degree ou march, a step, a stair De degree en degree paruenir a
honneur, from degree to degree. Esleuer en hault degree d'honneur, to advance to
high degree in honor. Estre deshonte, to be shameless. Dehors, abroad,
without. Deiecter and debouter, to reject, to cast away, to shake of. Deiecte
and mis au bas, cast of, forsaken. Deite, divinity of the godhead. Dela,
beyond. De la la mer, beyond the sea. Delaisser quelqu'vn, to forsake one, to
leave one of. Delaisse, de qui on ne tie^t co^pte a forsaken man, an abject.
Delaissement, a forsaking, a castyng off. Delateur, seek Deferer. Delay, a
delay, a putting off, a deferring. Delayer, to delay, to defer. Delayement, a
deferring, a putting off. Delecter, to delight, to please, to solace. Delectable
and doux, delectable, sweet. Delectatio^ and plaisir ou deduit qu'on prend a
quelque chose, delight, pastime, pleasure. Deliberer, to determine, to purpose.
Delibere toy, determine, make thy self ready. Deliberatio^ and propos de
mourir, determination or purpose to dye. Ie cognoy la Deliberation de Clodius,
I know Clodius purpose. Homme delicat and de petite complexion, a dainty man,
a tender man. Delicatete, quand on fuit les labeurs, fascheries and ennuis,
daintiness, tenderness. Delices and ebatz, delites, sportes, pastimes,
pleasures. Delicieux, delicious, pleasant. Delicieusement, deliciously,
pleasantly. Delier and menuiser, to make thin. Delie, thin, slender.
Deliement, thinly, slenderly, scantly. Delire, to choose, to pick out, to
cull. Deliurer, to deliver, to dispatch, to lose. Deliurer aucun and sauuer, to
deliver or save one. Deliurer au plus offrant, to deliver to him that offers
most. Deliurance, a delivery. Deluge, a flood. Demain, to morrow. Le Demaine,
ou Domaine and reuenu du peuple and de la ville, toll or custom, due to any
people or town. Vne Demand, a demand, a question, a petition. Demander, to
ask, to crave, to beg. Demand, asked. Le Demandeur en matiere de justice,
the plaintiff, the demandant. Se Demanger fort, to itche. Demangement, itching.
Demener, Tempester, Esmouuoir, to toss, too tormoyle, too tumble, to wallowe.
Demener joy, to lead great joy. Demesler, seek Desmesler. Demettre, seek
Desmettre, Lieu de Demeure, dwelling, abiding place. Longue Demeure, long
tarrying Demeurer en quelque lieu, to dwell in a place, to remain. Le
Demeurant du souper ou du disner, the remnant of dinner or supper. Au
Demeurant, in the rest. Demeurance, remaining. Demi, half. Demolir vne maison,
to break down a house, to destroy. Demolition, destruction, Demonstrer and
fair bien ente^dre quelque chose, to declare, to show at large. Demonstrance,
a declaration, a demonstration. Demeurer, Demoura^t, Demourance, seek,
Demeure. Un Denier ancien valliant dixliures d'argent, an ancient piece of
monye being in value six pound of silver. Denier vaillant quatre petis
sesterces, c'est a dire trois sols six deniers, an ancient Romain penny. Les
deniers co^muns d'vne ville, the town treasure. Denier quelque chose, a
denial. Denombreme^t, quand anciennement chascun bailloit aux Censeurs le
nombre de ses biens, an inventory of goods, a numbering. Deno^cer par attaches
affichees es lieux publiques, to declare, to publish, to proclaim. Denoncer and
fair a scauoir a vne femme qu'on la quicte, to signify, or declare
deuorsement. Denoncement, a signifying, a declaring. Denonciation de guerre, a
denouncing of open war. Denree, ware, merchandise. Un Dent, a toothe. Se
Departir and s'en aller de la maison, to depart from home. Se Departir de
quelque lieu, too depart from a place. Departir and deviser, to part, to
divide. Qui Departit, a diuider, a distributer. Depart ou departie and
eslongnement, departure. Departement, a departing. Departissement, a
distribution, a partition. Depestrer, seek Desprestrer. Se Deporter, too
forbear, too leave off. Deposer and porter tesmoignage par deuant un judge, and
examinateur, to depose, to bear witness. Deposer and priuer de la couronne
imperialle, to depose or put beside the crown. Renier un depost, to deny a
gage Deposition de tesmoings, a deposing of witnesses. Depuis, since, Depuis ce
te^ps la, since that time Deputer Judge pour cognoistre de quelq^ matiere, too
ordain or apoynt a Judge in a matter. Auoir Dequoy, to have wherewithal to
help our selves. Dequoy me sert cela? whereto does that serve me? Derechef,
again. Derision, derision, mocking, flouting. Deriuer, to drive from one to
another. Tout le Dernier and le plus recule de nous, the uttermost, the last,
the farthest of us. Au Dernier, at the last. Derniereme^t and le plus
freschement, lastly, lately. Derompre, to break, to brust, to riue. Mur
Derompu, a riuen wall. Derompement, a breaking, a ryuing. Derriere, behind,
backward. Par Derriere, behind, on the backepart. Dertre, seek Dartre. Des le
commencement de ma ieunesse, from my youth hitherward. Des le fin poinct du
iour, from the dawning of the day. Desaccorder, to disagree, to jar
Desaccordance, disagreement. Desaccoupler, ou descoupler les boeufs, to
uncouple, to unyoke. Desaccoustumer, to vnaccustome, to disuse. Se
Desaccoustumer, to unwont. Desaccustome, unaccustomed, unwonted.
Desaccoustumance, disuse. Se Desagenouiller, to rise up from kneeling.
Desalterer, to slake thirst. Desancrer and partir du port, too hoise ancer, to
depart the haue^. Desapprendre autruy, and l'e^seigner tout au rebours qu'il
n'a apprins, to new teach, to teach otherwise than one was taught before.
Desappre^dre and oublier ce qu'o^ a apprins, to forget, to unlearn. Se
Desarmer, to unarm, Desarme, unarmed. Desassembler, to scatter, to disperse.
Desauouer, to disallowe. Desbaucher aucun, to bring one to wickedness, or to
loose life. Se Desborder, to ouerflowe, too run over. Desboitemet des os, bones
out of joint. Desboucher, to unstop, to set on broache. grand D'esbourseme^t
d'arge^t, a great vnpursing of money. Descapiter quelqu'vn, to behed one.
Desceindre, to vngird. Desceinct, ungirt. Desceler, to discover, to betraye.
Descendre, to descend, to go down. Desce^dus de la ligne des Albanois,
descended of the ligne of Albanois. Descente, a going down, a descending.
Descendement, going down. Deschant, descant, sometime a recantation.
Deschanter, to descant. Descharger aucun, to discharge, to unburden. Descharge
and deliure de beaucoup de soing, discharged of much care. Descharner les os,
to tear the flesh from the boanes. Descharongner, to tear in pieces.
Descharongnement, tearing of the flesh. Deschausser, to pull of ones shoes, to
vnshoe. Dechaussement, an vnshoing. Descheuelee, a woman with her hear about
her ears. Deschiqueter, to pink, to cut full of holes, to mangle, to shred in
pieces. Deschiquitement, a mangling. Deschirer and mettre en pieces, to rent,
to tear in pieces. Deschire, rent, torn. Deschirure, a rent. Deschirement,
renting, tearing in pieces. Descoller, to vnglewe. Descoler, to behead.
Desconfire un exercite, to discomfite or overthrow an army. Desconfiture de
guerre, an overthrow in wars. Fair Desconfiture de gents de guerre, to
discomfite Soldiers. Se Desco^forter and desoler, to discomfort, to lament.
Desconseiller, to diswade, to council the contrary. Desconseille, disuaded.
Dire fa Desconuenue a quelqu'vn, to show his greef to one. Descouldre, to rip,
to vnsewe. Se Descourager, to be discouraged, to distrust. Descourager
quelqu'vn, to discourage one. Descourage, discouraged, out of heart. Descouurir,
to uncover, too vnhele, to make naked. Descouuert, evident, manifest,
uncovered, discried. A Descouuert, openly, manifestly. La Descouuerte de
quelques gents ayants co^mis quelque malefice, the disclosing or finding out of
malefactors. Descrier quelque chose, and fair trouuer maunaise, to discredit a
thing. Descrire quelque chose, to describe, to declare at large. Description, a
description. Descroistre, to discrease, to diminish. Descroter sa rob auec
des descrottoires, to rub with a rubbing brush, to vndyrt. Vne Decrottoire, a
rubbi^g brush. Desdaigner quelqu'vn, too disdain, to despise. Desdaing,
disdayn, despite, squemishnesse. Desdaigneux, squemish, coye, disdaynfull.
Desdaignement, a disdayning. Desdier, seek Dedier. Se Desdire de ce qu'on a
dict, to unsay, to recant. Sans se Desdire, without unsaying it. Desdommager,
to make amends. Desdommageme^t, a repayring, an amends making. Desduit, seek
Deduit. Se Desembucher, to rush out of embush or laying wait. Desempestrer,
to rid himself of a thing. Desemplir, to empty, to lade out. Desendormir,
seek Endo^rmir. Se desenfler, to vnswel, to assuage Se Desenfrongner and fair
bonne chere, to leave frowning, to look cheerfully. Desenger to pluck up by
the root Desenhorter, to disuade. Desenuyer, to drive away weariness, to pass
the time. Desenroule, put out of wages, or out of the number. Desensoroeler, to
vnwitch. Desenyurer, to make sober again. Desert, a desert, a wilderness.
Deseruir, to deserve, to earne. Deseruir sus table, to take up the table. Se
Desesperer, to despair. Desespoir, desperation. Desfaire and ro^pre ce qui
estoit faict, to break or undo that which is done. Se Desfaire soymesme, to
make himself away, to kill himself. Desfaicte, ou perte de bataille, the
defeat or overthrow of a battaill. Desfacher, to take away grief, to put
away anger. Se Desfier, to mistrust. Desfiance, ou diffidence, mistrust,
diffidence. Desfigurer, seek Defigurer. Desfiler, to untwist, to unweave.
Desfleurer, to defloure. Desfrayer, seek Defrayer. Desfricher, to rid a
ground of roots and thistles, to make it arable. Heu Desfriche, an arable
ground. Soy Desfuler, to put off ones cap, to make obeisance. Desgager, to
fetch out of pleadge. Desgaigner un glaiue, too vnsheth, to draw a sword. Se
Desgarnir de son armee, and la bailler a un autre, to unfurnish. Desgarni and
descouuert, unfurnished or lying open. Se Desgeler, to thawe. Desgluer, to
vnglue, to lose. Se Desgorger, to vomit, to spue out his venime. Aise a
Degouster, and pour peu de chose, one that will easily loath a thing: a nice or
dainty person. Desgoutement de viandes, lothsomnesse of meats. Desgrader, to
degrade, to vnhallowe. Deguiser, to disguise, to alter. Feincts and Desguisez,
feigned, countersete, disguised. Desguisement de merchandise, counterfeat or
untrue wares. Desheriter, to disherite. Desherite and prive de la succession,
disherited, put from possession. Desheritement, a disheriting. Deshonnorer, to
dishonor. Deshonneur, dishonor, shame. Deshonneste, dishonest, unseemly,
unsitting. Deshonnestete, dishonesty. Deshonnestement, unhonestly. Il est Desia
tard, it is late. Desieuner, seek Desiuner. Desioindre and separer, to sever
to separate. Desioingnement, a separating. Desir, desire, affection, appetit,
lust Desirer, to desire. Fort desire, much desired, in good estimation.
Desirant, desiring. Desister, to leave off. Desiuner, to break ones fast. Le
Desiuner, breakefast. Se Delasser, to weary himself. Desleer and destramper,
to soake, to deleye. Deslier, to unbind, to lose. Deslie, lose, unbound.
Desloger, to depart from home, to vnlodge. Deslogeme^t, departing from home
Desloyal, unfaithful, untrusty. Desloyaute, unfaithfulness, treachery,
falshode. Desloyalement, falsely, unfaithfully. Desmaintena^t, from henceforth.
se Desmarier, to vnwed, to divorce Desmembrer, to dismember, to tear in
pieces. Desme^bre, rent, torn in pieces. Desmembrement, a tearing in pieces.
Il l'a Deme^ti, he told him he lied. Desmesler, to rid, not to meddle with a
thing. Desmesure, immeasurable. Vne grande Demesure, without all measure
Demesureme^t, vnresonablenesse. Demesureement, vnmeasurably, without all
reason. Desmettre quelque member horse de son lieu, to put out of joint, to
misplace. Members Desmis de leur lieu, and desnouez, members put out of joint
or place. Se Desmouuoir de sa constance, to remove from his constancy.
Desnoer, to unknit, untie. Se Desnouer quelque membre, to unknit a bone, to put
out of joint. Desnuer, to make naked, to spoil Desnue d'amis, void of friends.
Desobeir a son maistre, to disobey, to be stubborn. Desobeissant, disobedient,
stubborn. Desobeissance, disobedience. Desolation ou desolement, desolation,
overthrow. Desoleement, comfortless, desolately. Desordonne, disordinate,
without measure or order. Desordonnement aymer, too love without measure.
Desordre de toutes chooses, confusion, disorder. Desormais, but yet, for all
that. Despecer, to cut in pieces, too break on sunder. Despece a grans coups
d'iniures, shaken up with reuilings, ratled. Despecement, a re^ting in pieces.
Despendre, to spend, to consume, to wast away. Despendre, dissiper, gaster, and
consommer ses biens ou son patrimoine, to spend away all his inheritance. La
republique Despend de Brutus, the public weal depends on Brutus. Despens,
expenses, cost. A ses Despens, at his own charge or peril. Despense, expense,
charge. Despense and perte, cost, or loss. Despenseur, qui a la guard de la
viande, a spencer. Fair bonne despeche and se haster, to dispatch, to make
have. Se Despecher, to make short. Desespessir, esclarcir vne chose trop
espesse, to make thin, too clarify. Despestrer aucun and deliurer, to rid one
out of troubles, Despeupler, to unpeople, to wast to spoil. Despit, qui fe
courouce aisement, a spiteful fellow. Despit, spite, stomach, hatred. Se
Despiter, to spite, to anger. Despite, spited, angered, vexed. Despiteux, angry,
wayward. Desplacer, to displace. Desplaire, to displease. Ie me Desplay, it
greeueth or displeases me. Estre Desplaisant de quelq^ chose, to be
displeased with a thing. Fair Desplaisir, to do one a displeasure, to offend
one. Desplaisance, displeasure, greef of mind. Despla^ter, to pull up by the
root. Desplier, to unfold, sometime to make manifest. Desplie and estendu,
vnfolden, spread abroad. Despliement and maniement de iambes, the folding or
turning of the legs. Despoiller, to spoil, to unclothe, to put off.
Despouille, unclothed. La Despouille des ennemis, the spoil of enemies.
Despouillement, a spoil. Despouruen, seek Desprouuen. Despraue, ou Deprave,
depraved, marred, corrupted. Despriser, to dispraise, to blame, to contemn, to
despise. Desprise, dispraysed, dispisid. Despriseur, a dispiser. Despris,
contempt, dispising. Desprisable, dequoy on ne doit fair compte, dispraysable.
Desprisement, a dispraysing, a co^temning, a setting at naught. Desprouuen,
unprovided. A Desprouueu, unprovided for, unawares. Despuceler vne vierge, too
defloure a maiden. Desraciner, to root out. Desracinement, rooting out.
Desraisonnable, unreasonable. Desrange, out of order. Desreigle, unruly,
unmannerly, mallapart. Desreiglement, unruliness. Desreigleement, vnruledly.
Desrideme^t, the wrinckli^g of the skin. Desrobber, to steal. Chose Desrobbee,
stolen goods. Desrobbeur and pilleur, a thief, a robber, a picker, a pilferer.
Desrobement, stelthe. A la Desrobee, privily, secretly, by stelth. Desrompre,
seek Derompre. Desrondir quelque chose, to bring out of compass. Desrouler,
to scour, to furbish, to get out rust. Desrouiller, to roll out, to declare.
Desroute, a putting to flight. Desrune, out of order, taken down, taken in
pieces. Se Dessaisir, to forgo, to let lose. Desserrer, to releasse, to
unshut, to open. Desseruir sus table, to take up table. Desserte de table, the
banquet or after course. Dessoubs, beneath, below. Dessoulder, to dissolve, to
lose. Dessus, above, aloft. Le dessus de toutes chooses, and comme la face, the
upper part of a thing. Desteler les cheuaux, To loase horses, or vnspang them
from the carte. Destendre, to stretche out, to spread. Destendu, stretched or
reatched forth. Destiltre, to unweave. Destiner chooses en soymesme and
proposer, to apoynt, to purpose. Destine a la mort, appointed to die. Vne annee
destinee and fee a la destruction de la ville, a year appointed to the
destruction of the town. Destituer un chose comme^cee, to disappointe or make
destitute. Destitution and delaissement, destituting or disappointing.
Destordre, to wring or writhe. Destorse, ou destordement, wroong or writhed.
Destorse, and fouruoyement, to stray, to wend out of the way. Destour, lieu
enter les montagnes ou on se retire, a by place between hills, where men may
hide them. Destourber, to trouble, to disturb, to hinder. Destourbier, ou
destourbement a trouble, let, hindrance. Un distourbeur, qui par son caquet
empesche and destourbe aucune chose, a troublesome man, a prating fellow.
Destourner aucun, to dissuade a man from his purpose. Destourner aucun chose,
and la desrobber, to convey a thing away. Se destourner d'aucun, To forbear
ones company. Destourne, dissuaded, turned from his purpose. Lieux destournez,
by places. Qui destourne par parolles, A dissuader. Destournement, a
dissuading. Destournement d'eaues, a tu^ning of the course of water an other
way. Destrancher a coups de langue, To rebuke one sharply, to rattle up.
Destranche and despece a gran^ coups d'iniure, rattled up with reuilings.
Destremper and mesler ensemble, and ramollir, To soften, to mollify, to allay
as wine with water, to soake. Destrempe and mesle parmy d'autre, soaken,
softened. Destresse, distress, grief, anguishe. Un destroict, a straight, a
narrow place. Le destroict des chemins, A straight in the way. Destrousser, to
spoil, to rob. Destrousseur des gents, a robber Destroussement de gents, a
robbing of men Destruire, to destroy, to wast, to overthrow. Destruisant,
destroying, wasting. Destruict and gaste, destroyed, and wasted. Destruiseur, a
destroyer. Destruction, destruction, wast. Desueloper, to unwrap, to show
forth, to unfold. Desuelope, vnfolden. Desuelopement, an unfolding. Desuestir,
to unclothe. Desuisager aucun, to disfigure one. Se desuoyer, to err, to
straye, to wander. Desuoyement d'estomach, weakness of the stomach. Un det a
iouer, a dye, a pair of dyce. Detailler and mettre en pieces, to hew in
pieces. Detenir, To hold, to detain, to occupy. Determiner, To determine, to
conclude. Determinance de quelque chose, laquelle apres auoir este disputee and
debatue, est mise a fin, The determining or ending of a thing. Deterrer, to dig
out of the ground. Detester, to detest, to abhor. Detestable and abominable,
detestable, abominable. Detracter and mesdire d'autruy, to backbite, to speak
evil behind ones back. Detracteur, a backbiter, a slanderer. Par detraction,
slanderously. Deu, debt, due, seek Deuoir. Deument, duly, ryghtly. Deualler,
To let down, to tumbled down. Deuancir aucun a courir, To out run one. Deuant
quelqu'vn, before one. Deuant and derriere, before and behind. Deuant que,
before that. Un deuantier, an apron. Deuenir corpse, to wax a body. Deuenir
rich, to become rich. Regard deuers moy, ^wardes me. De deuers Orient,
toward the East. Deuider du fill par pelotons, To wind up threede in bottomes.
Un deuideur, ou deuidoir, a rele to wind threede on. Un deuin, a soothsayer, a
gesser. Deuiner, to soothsay, to guess. Deuinant, gessyng, soothsaying.
Deuineresse, a woman sothsayer. Diuinement, coniecturing, divination,
soothsaying. Deuisager, seek Desuisager. Deviser, to talk, to devise, to
comfort. Deuis and parliament, a talking together. Un deuis and ordonnance, a
devise or appointment. Deuoir, seek Debuoir. Deuorer, to devour, to swallow
up. Devotion, devotion, religion. Deuot, devout. Deux, two. Deux a deux, two
by two, by couples. Tous deux, both. D'eulx, pour De eux, of them; or from
them. A dextre, on the right hand. Dexterite, nimblenesse, handesomnesse.
Diable, the devil, a fiende. Dialectique, ce'st a dire, l'art de bien
disputer, Logike, or good order of disputation. Un Diamant, a Diamant. D'icy,
ou Des icy, from hence. Dicy a queltemps, How long? in what time. Dicy en
auant, from hence forward. Diete and regime de viure, Diet daily fare. Dieu,
GOD. Diffame, evil name, evil report. Diffamer quelqu'vn, to defume one, to
slander one, to take away ones good name. Estre disfame, to be defamed.
Diffamation, a slander. Differer and delayer, to defer, to delay, to drive
off. Differer d'vn iour, to defer from day to day. Dilation and dilayement,
deferring, delaying. Un different and debat, a debate, a strife; a contention.
Estre en different and discord, to be at variance, to disagree. Difference,
difference, diuersiti^. Differemment, distinctly. Difficile, hard, difficile.
Difficulte, difficulty, hardness. Difficilement, hardly, scantly, with much
a do. Defforme, unseemly, filthy, out of fashion. Defformite, vnseemelynesse.
Digerir quand l'estomach cuit bien la viande qu'il a receue, to digest.
Digestion, digestion. Digne de loyer, worthy reward Dignite, worthynesse,
honor. Dignement, worthyly. Digression, digression, by walking. Dilation,
seek Different. Diligent and soigneux a fair quelque chose, diligent,
careful, studious, circumspect. Se diligenter, to make haste. Diligemment,
diligently, circu^spectly, carefully. Diligence, diligence, industry. Le
Dimenche, Sunday. Diminuer, to diminish, to lessen. Diminution, a lessening, a
diminishing. Dinandier ou Maignen, a copper smith, a tinker. Dinanderie, a
place where copper wares are sold. Dire, to say, to speak, to show, to talk.
On Dit, it is said abroad. Dict commun, a word, a common talk. Mon Dire
touch plusieurs, my talk touches many. Un dicton de bon enseigneme^t, a
sentence. Vne Diction, a saying. Dicter and nommer a un autre quelque chose
qu'il escriue, to endite letters. Discerner, separer l'vn d'auec l'autre, to
discern, to separate the one from the other. Discretion ou separation,
difference or separating. Discret, discrete, wise, advised. Discretement,
discretely. Disciple, a scholar. Discord ou dissension, discord, strife,
dissension, disagreement. Discorder, to disagree. Discordant, disagreeing.
Discourse desprit de tous costez, qua^d il pense a quelque chose, to consider
well, to cast every way. Fair discussion sus les biens de Debteur, assauoir
s'il est soluable, to value the goods of a detter, to know whether he be
able to pay, Un Disenier, a Captain of ten men. Disette, dearth, need,
penury, poverty, lack. Diseteux, needy. Disionction and separation, to
divide, to sever. Prendre les dismes, to receive tenthes. Le Disner, dinner.
Disner, to dyne. Dispenser, to dispense. Dispenser de la loy, to dispense with
the law. Dispense, dispensed. Dispensation, a dispensation. Disposer and
mettre par order, to dispose, appoint, or set in order. Il est ainsi dispose,
It is so appointed. Disposition, a disposing. Disposition and accidens,
dispositions or inclinations of the heavens. Disputer, to dispute, to reason,
to debate. Disputation, a disputation. Dissemblable, unlike. Dissension,
dissension, strife. Dissimuler and cacher quelq^ chose, to dissemble or cover a
thing. Dissimulation, dissimulation, hypocrisy. Dissiper, to scatter, to
disparse. Dissipation, a scattering. Dissouldre and abatre ou rompre
l'entreprinse d'aucun, to break or dissolve thenterprise of other Dissolus and
maluiuans, of retchlesse life, dissolute. Distance ou espace, a distaunce or
space between. Distiller, to distill. Distillement, a distilling. Distillation
d'humeurs, a distilling of humors from the head, a catharre. Distinguer, to
divide, to separate Distinctement, distinctly. Distraire, to withdraw, to
dissuade. Distraction, a withdrawing. Distribuer, to distribut, to divide
Distribution, a dividing. Diverse, diverse, unlike. Diuersement, diversely. Tapis
a l'esguille Diuersifiez de couleurs, tapistrie set forth with diverse colors.
Diversity and difference, diversity, difference. Diuertir aucun de son propos,
to turn one from his purpose, to change their mind. Divine, holy, godly.
Diuinement, holyly, godlily. Divinity, divinity. Divine, Diuiner, seek Deuin.
Diuinance, foreshewing, gessing. Divination, a gessing. Diuiser, to divide, to
disparse. Diuiser and separer, to divide, to separate, to part. Diuiser par cy
and par la, To divide hither and thither. Divise and parti, divided, parted.
Division and separation, a division, a separation. Diuiseement, diuidingly.
Divorce, a divorce. Diuulguer quelque secret, to open a secret, to blabbe.
Dix, ten. Dix ans, ten years. Dixieme, the tenth. Dixsept, seuentene. Dixhuit,
eyghteene. Dixhuitieme, eightenth. Dixneuf, nyneteene. Dixneufieme, nynteenth.
Dizain, that contains the number of ten. Vne dizan, a tenthe. Docte and
scauant, a learned man, a man of knowledge. Estre docile, easy to be taught.
Doctrine and enseignement, doctrine, instruction. Un doigt, a finger. Un
doigtier, a thimble, a fingerlyng. Doler du bois, to hew or square timber.
Dolent, sorrowful, heavy, paynefull, grievous. Doleur de corpse and d'esprit,
sorrow of mind, pain of body. Auoir douleur, to have pain. Fair douleur, to
grieve. Appaiser la douleur d'aucun, to assuage ones grief. Se dolouser, to
moan, to bewail. Domestique, homely. Domicile, a house, an abydyng place.
Dominer, to govern, to rule. Dominateur, a ruler. Domination, rule, power,
government. Dommage, loss, hinderaunce, damage. Dommageable, hurtful.
Dommaine ou Doumaine, seek Demaine. Donq, ou Donques, then, therefore, Ergo.
Donner, to give, to deliver, to grant. Done la premier de Ianuier, given the
first of Januarie. Don, a gift, a grant. Donaison, a Donation, a Donaizon.
Donation, a gift. Donnement, a gyuing. Don't, whence, or whereby. Donter, to
subdue, to overcome, to rule, to tame, to daunt. Donte, tamed, daunted.
Dontement, a taming. Dorade, pois^on, a fish of some thought to be called a
Gyltehead. Dorer, to gylde. Door, gilt. Dorure, gilting. Dorenaua^t, from hence
forward, hereafter. Dormir to sleep, to slumber. Le Dos, the back. Do
qu'vne femme baille a son mari pour son marriage, The dowry that the wife
gives her husband in marriage. Douaire qui le mari baille a la femme, The
dowry or ioynter that the husband gives unto the wife. Double, double Le
double de quelque escripture, The copy of a writing. Le Double, the double.
Doubler, to double. Doublement, doublely. Un doublement, a doubling. Doublement
d'escripture, a copying out of a writing. Doubt, doubt, suspicion, fear.
Mettre quelque chose en doubt to put a thing in dout, to bring a matter in
controuersis. Doubtement, a douting. Doubter, to doubt, to fear. Doubteux,
doubtful, uncertain. Vne chose doubteuse, a doubtefull thing. Doubteusement,
doubtfully. Douillet, Delicate, dayntie, neshe. Doux, gentle, loving, sweet,
tractable. Doucet, somewhat sweet. Douceastre, sweetishe. Douceur, sweetness,
gentleness, courtoisie, myldenesse. Doucement, sweetly, gently, lovingly,
myldly. Douleur, seek Dolent. Douze, twelve. Un douzain, a shilling, in France
a soulz. Un doyen, a Deane. Dragee, dredge, iunket. Dragee aux cheuaux,
Prouender for horses. Un Dragon, a Dragon. Drap, woollen cloth. Petit Drapeau ou
Drapelet, A cloute. Draperie, a draperie. Drapier, a Draper. Dresser, to
direct, to set up. Se dresser, to stand up. Dressoir ou buffet, a Dresser, a
court cubborde. Tout drogue bon ou mauuaise, drougs, poticary ware. Droict,
right. Tout droict, right forth. Droictement, directly. Droictement a l'heur,
just at that hour. Droict and raison, Right and reason. Bon droict, good
right. Droicture and raison, Right and raison. A bon droict, rightly. Conseil
droicturier, and qui va a la rigueur du raison, straight counsel. Droictement,
rightly, justly. Dru and espez, thick, as the falling down of rain. Dru,
comme il cheent dru, they fall thick. Du milieu, from the midst. Du chemin,
from the way. Duc, a Duke. Duel, the combat between two. Dueil, dole, sorrow,
heaviness, grief. Auec Dueil, with grief. Duquel i'auoye achete ceste maison,
Of whom J boughte this house. Dur, hard. Homme dur and rude, A hard man.
Coucher sur la dure, to lie on the ground. Duret, hardish^. Durete, hardness.
Durement, hardly, strayghtly. Durcir, to wax hard. Durer, to harden, to
continue, to last long. Durant ces iours la, during that time. Longue duree, of
long during or lasting. Qui est duree, durable. Se duire and accoustumer, To be
enured with a thing. Duire quelqu'vn a quelque chose par accoustuma^ce, to
enure one by custom. Duict a render l'equite, brought to yield to right.
Duisant and conuenable, fit, conuement. Duisable, fitly, profitable. Duisson,
an accustoming. Duuet, down, soft feathers. Disenterie, ou flux de ventre auec
le sang que les Italiens appellent Caquesangue, a perilous kind of flixe.
E.
EAge, seek Aage. Eaue, water. Eclypse de Lune, Eclipse of the Moon. Edenter,
to dash out ones teeth. Edente, toothlesse. Edict, ordonna^ce, ou commandment
faict par le prince ou magistrate, an ordonnaunce, a commandment, a
proclamation, an iniunction. Edifiet, to build, to edify. L'edifice qui fait
la masson and charpentier, the Mason and carpenters building. Edification,
buylding. Effacer, to blot out, to deface. Effacement, a defacing or blotting.
Effassure, a blot, a blurre. Effaroucher, to become fierce, to become wild.
Effaict que l'art faict, the effect of the workmanship. Effect and pouuoir,
Effect and power. Mettre en effect, to bring to effect Esprouuer par effect,
To prove in effect. Effeminer, to effeminate, to make womanish. Efficace,
force, strength, virtue, efficacy. Effigy, an I mage, or likeness.
Effundrer, ou efuentrer, too vnbowell, to draw a fish. l'Effort qu'o^n met a
fair quelque chose, the endeavor, or good will that one has to do a thing.
s'Efforcer, and trauailler a fair quelque chose, to enforce, or labor to do a
thing. Effray, fear, astonying, abashing, amasing. Effrayer, to fear, to
amase. Effrayant, fearful. Un Effronte and eshonte, brazen faced, shameless.
Effusion d'eaue, pourging out of water. Egratigner, to scratche. Egal, equal,
like, pair. Egaler, to make equal. Egalement, equally. Egalizer, to make
even. Egalizement, a making equal. Eguillon, a prick or sting. l'Eine, qui
est vne party du corpse, the gryne. Electeur, a chooser. Election, a choice.
Elegamment, eloquently, handsomely, trimly. Element, the Element. Un Elephant,
an Elephant. Elevation, a heauing up. Elle, C'est le feminin de Luy, she, the
feminine of he. Elle, comme Bailler les else a un cheual, to give a horse the
head. Eloquent, eloquent, well speaking. Eloquence, eloquence. Emaillures d'or
ou d'argent, bullions or riuets of gold or silver. Emanciper, to give over, or
set at freedom. Emancipe, given over. Embabouiner, to deceive, too bring into
fools paradise. s'Embarquer, to embark, to take ship. Embarquement, a
shipping. Embas, ou En bas, below. Embassade, a message. Embassadeur, an
ambassador, a messanger. Embaumer des corpse morts, to embaulme dead corpses.
Embellir, to deck, to trim, to furnish, to set forth. Embesongne, occupied.
Embler, to steal. A l'Emblee, stealingly, privily. Emboucher quelqu'vn, too
instruct one before hand, too tell him his lesson. Emboucler, to boucle, to
clapse together. Embouer, to bedirt, or bemudone Embraser, to set on fire, to
inflame. s'Embraser, to kindle. Embrase, kindled, set on fire. Embrasement,
firing, enflaming. Embrasser, to coll, to clip, to embrace. Embrassement, a
colling, a clipping. Embrener, to beshite one. Embrocher de la chair, to spitte
meat. s'Embrouiller en quelq^ affair, to co^ber himself with a matter.
Embuches and espies, privy waytings, snares. s'Embucher, to lie in wait or
embushe. Embuscade, embushment. Emendation, an ame^ding, a correcting. Emmener
auec soy, to lead with him, to carry abroad. Emmener par force, to lead away
by force. Emmeubler and amesnager sa maison, to furnish a house with stuff.
Emmont, upward. Emolument and proffit, profit, gain. Emoucer, to make dull or
blunt Empenne, fethered. Empecher de fair quelq^ chose, to hinder, to let, to
withstand. Empesche, hindered. Empescheme^t, a hindera^ce, a l^^. Empestrer
quelqu'vn, to pester, to trouble, to let, to hinder one. Empire, Empire, rule,
government. Empereur, an Emperor, a head commander. Empieter, to tread under
foot. Empirer, to make worse, to decay, to empayre. s'Empirer, to wax worse
and worse. Un Emplastre, a plaster. Emplir, to fill. Empli, filled. Un Employ
iournel, qua^d on se sert tous les iours d'vne chose a daily business or
occupatio^. Employer and despendre a quelque chose, to bestow, to lay out on
a thing. s'Employer a fair quelque chose, to give himself to do some thing.
Ne s'Employer point, not to do his endeavor. Employer tout le iour, to bestow
all the day. Employe, bestowed. Employement and despense, charge. Enuoyer a
l'Emplete, trafiquer ca and la, to send about his business. Empoigner, to lay
hands on, to catch. Mal Empoint, in ill plight. Empoiso^ner, to poison, to
venim Empoysonneur, a poysoner. Empoisonnement, a poisoning. Empoisser, to
cover with pitch. Empoisse, pitched. Emporter, to carry away, too take away.
Emportement, a carrying away. Empoule, a wheale, a blister, a pushe, a bubble.
Empreindre, to print in, to press in. Empreinct, printed, signed. Empreincte
and marque, a print or mark. Empresser, to press out, to thrust together, to
squise. Emprisonner, to emprison, to lay in prison. Estre emprisonne, to be
laid in prison. Emprunter, to borrow. Emprunt, borrowing. Emputer, to dilate or
drive off the time. En apres, afterward. En ce, in that. En chemin, in the way.
En iouant, in jest, in play. En oultre, furthermore. Enaser, to cut of ones
nose. Encant, comme vendre a l'Encant, port sale. Encauer, to make hollow.
Encauer les nids des poulles, to make hens nests in a wall. Enceindre and
entourer, to girt in, to compass about. Encens, frankincense. Encenser, to
sense. Encensoir, a censor. Encensiere, herb, a kind of Sauerie. Enchainer,
to enchayne. Estre Enchaine, to be tied on a chain. Enchanter, to encha^t, to
bewitch, to charm. Enchantement, enchanting. Encharger quelque chose a aucun,
to charge, to enjoin one the doing of a thing. Enchasser en or, to chase in
gold. Mettre a l'Enchere, to raise the price, to make dear. Encherir les
viures d'vne armee, to raise the vitayles in an army. Encherisseur, a rayser
of price. Encheuestrer, to halter, to mosel. Encirer, to waxen. Enciser les
arbres, to cut trees about. Enclin, inclined, given, bent. Encliner, to
incline, to bend too. s'Encliner, to incline too. Incline verse terre, bent to
the groundward. Enclore, to enclose, to park in. Enclos, enclosed, enparked.
Enclosture, ou Clos, a close. Vne Enclume, an anueld. Les Encoigneures des
parois, the corners of a wall. Estre encombre de dueil and d'ennuy, to be
compassed with sorrow and care. Encombriers, troubles, combres. Encommencer,
to begin. Encommencement, beginning. Enco^tre, a chance. De bonne Encontre,
good luck. Encore, yet. Encore d'auantage, yet further. Encourir des honneur,
to run in ill name. Encre dequoy on escrit, writing ynke. Encre, ou noire
peincture, blacking. Encrouster ou crespir, to perget, to make hard in a crust.
Encuser, to disclose, to appeache, to bewraye. Encuse, a bewraying. Encusement,
disclosed. s'Endebter, to become endetted. Estre endebte, to be endetted, to
enjoy other men's goods, to be in other men's danger. Endesuer, to be mad, to
rage. Enditer, to endite, to accuse. Endommager, to hurt, to hinder to dommage.
Endommagement, hindrance. Endormir, to lull a sleep. Endormi, sleapy, drousy.
Se desendormir, to fall on sleep. Endormissement, sleapinesse, sluggishnesse.
Endormisson and estonneme^t de members, the sleaping or benomnesse of the
members. Endouille, a sausige. Endroit la maison, about the house. Enduire, to
anoint, to besmere. Enduict and frotte, anointed, rubbed. Enduisson and
frotteme^t de quelque liqueur, an oyntement. Enduit, ou Enduisso^, soit de
plastre, ou de chaux, and sable, the plastring of a house. Endurcir, to harden.
Endurer and souffrir, to endure, to suffer, to bear. Endurement, a suffering,
a bearing. Endurant, suffering, bearing. Enfant, a child. Enfance, childhode.
Enfanter, to bring forth child. Enfante, brought forth. Enfantement, a
childing. Enfermer, to shut up. Estre Enferme a la clef, under lock and kaye.
Vne Enfermerie, a closet, a lodging for a sick man. Enfermement, a closing or
shutting up. Enferrer, to lay in yrons. Les Enfers, hell. s'Enfierir and
s'enorguillir, to wax proud, to wax lofty. Enfieris, become lofty. Enfiler vne
aiguille, tothreed a needle, Enflamber, to inflame, to kindle. Estre Enflambe,
to be enflamed. Enflambement, an inflammation. Enfler, to swell. Enfle,
swollen. Enflure, a swelling. Enflement, swelling. Enfondrer les nauieres, to
sink ships, to drown. s'Enfondrer, to be sonke, too be drowned. Enfondre,
sonke. s'Enfonser, to sink to the bottom. Enforcir, to enforce, to stre^gthen.
s'Efforcir, to wax strong, to take a good heart. Enfouir dedens terre, to dig
under the ground. Enfoui and enterre, dug and buried. s'Enfuir, to flee, to
run away, to shun. Enfumer, to smoke. Enfume, smoked. Engager, to gage, or to
lay to gage. Engarder and empescher q^ quelque chose ne se face, to withhold
the doing of a thing. Engeance, the seed or race of any thing. Engendrer, to
engender, to begette. Qui Engendre, which enge^dreth. Engendreur, an engendrer.
Engendrement, a begetting, Engine and instrument, an engine or instrument. Engine
and entendement, understanding, wit. Malengin, deceitful dealing. Engle,
Engler, seek Angle. s'Engloutir, seek s'Engloter. Engloutir, to swallowe up,
to devour. Englue, burdlimed. Le vent s'Engouffre en ce lieu la, and
s'entonne, the wind whirleth in that place. Engouler, to devour. Engourdi de
froid, benoom with cold. Engraisser, to fatten, to cram, to graze. Engraisser
vne best, to fatten a beast. Engraissement de bestes, too graze or fatten
cattle. Engrauer, to grave, to cut. s'Engreger, to wax heavy. s'Engrossir, to
wax gross, too wax thick. Engrossi, grown. Engrossissement de femelles, to
be with child, to be with young. Fair Enhair and trouuer mauuais quelque chose
aux citoyens, to bring the people in hatred with a thing. Enhardir, to harten,
to bolden, to encourage. s'Enhardir, to wax hardy, too trust. Enhault, above,
aloft. Enhorter, to exhort, to persuade, to require. Enhorte and incite, moved,
exhorted, stirred. Enhorteur, a persuader, an exhorter. Enhortement, an
exhortation, a persuasion. Enhui, ou auiourd'huy, to day. Enioindre quelque
chose a fair to apoynt any thing to be done to enjoin, to command. Enioue,
wanton, full of toys Enlacer, to snarle, to entrap. Enlaidir, to make soul,
to make filthy, to raye. Enlaidissement, a dishonesting, a distayning, a
defiling. Enleuer, too raise up, too heave up. Petite Enleueure, and come
ensleure qui se leave sus le pain en cuisa^t, a little bladder that rises on
bread while it is baking. Ennemi, an enemy, a foe. Ennombrer, seek Annombrer.
Ennuy and fascherie, heaviness, sorrow, trouble, anger. Ennuyer, to molest, to
trouble, to weary one. s'Ennuyer and fascher, too be weary of a thing. Ennuye
and fasche, heavy, sorrowful. Ennuye de viure, weary of life. Ennuyeux,
tedious, wearisome. Enombrager, to shadow, to cloak s'Enorgueillir, to wax
proud. Estre Enosse, to have bones taken out. Enquerir, to enquire, to ask,
too demand. s'Enquester, to make inquiry. Enqueste, a quest, an inquiry.
Estre fort enracine, to be rooted in. Enrage, to rage, to wax mad. Enrage,
raging mad. Estre Enrage, to be stark mad. Enregistrer, to enroll, to register,
to chronicle. Enregistrer ce qu'on a receu, and en tenir compte au chapitre des
receptes, to keep a reckoning in writing. Enregistre, enrolled, registered.
Enregistrement, an enregistring. Enrichir, to enritche, to make wealthy.
s'Enrouer, to be hoarse. Enroue, hoarse. Enrouement, hoarsenesse. s'Enrouiller,
to rust, to canker. Enrouille, rusty, cankred. Enrouillure, canker. Enrouler
aux bands, to be entered in the roll of the band. Enrouler, enrolled.
Enrouser, to water ground. s'Enruisseler, s'Escouler per ruisseaux, to ru^ out
in little channels. Ens, pour Dedens, within. Cyens, here within. Ensanglanter,
to bebloud. Ensanglante, gore bluddie. Vne Enseigne qu'on pend es maisons, a
sign. Enseigne de recognoissance, a token of remembrance. Appare^ce and
Enseigne resta^t de queq^ chose, a mark or sign. Ie vous diray les Enseignes,
I will tell ye the tokens. Do^ner Enseignes, to give marks Enseignes, signs,
tokens, marks, notes. Enseigne and Estendart, a standart, an enseigne.
Enseigner, to teach, to instruct. Enseigne, taught. un Enseigneur qui en a un
autre par dessus luy, a vsshier of a school. Enseignement, instruction,
doctrine, teaching. Enseignements and papier, instructions. Ensemble, likewise,
also. Ensemblement, together. Ensemencer un champ, to sow a field. Enseuelir,
to burte. Enserrer quelqu 'vn, to close one in, to keep one fast. Enserrement,
a closing. Ensorceler, to bewitche. Un Ensorceleur, a witch. Ensorcelement, a
bewitching. Ensorcelerie, witcherie. Ensuyure, to follow, to do the like.
Entablement, setting in a table. Entache, seek Entiche. Entailler and grauer,
to grave, to carue. Entaille, carved, graven. Entaillure, a grauing, a caruing.
Entamer, to break up meat. Entamure de peau, a breaking of skin. Entant que,
in as much as. Entasser, to gather into heaps, to pyle, to pack. Entasse,
piled, packed. Entassement, heaping, a piling. Vne Ente, a graffe. Enter les
arbres, to graffe trees. Entement, a graffing. Entendre, to hear, to
understand. Entendre diligemment, to mark diligently. I'entens, I understand.
Entendu and cognoissant, of understanding, witty. Entendeme^t ou esprit que
l'ho^me a de nature, wit or understanding, conceit. Perdre l'Entendement, to
lose his understanding. Mettre son Ente^te a fair quelq^ chose, to intend to
do a thing. Entendiblement, understandingly, learnedly. Ententiuement fair
quelque chose, to do a thing inte^tiuely. Ententif, intentiuely. Enter,
Entement, seek Ente. Enterrer, to bury, to lay in earth. Enterre, buried,
covered with earth. Enterrement, a burial. Entiche and corrompu, corrupt.
Entier, whole, unbroken. Entierete, wholenesse, sincerity. Entierement,
wholly, faithfully, sincerely. Entonnoir, a funnell. Ento^ner, to tonne wine,
or pour it into tonnes. Entortiller, to writhe about, too wriggle, to wrap
together. Entortille, writhed. Entortilleme^t comme d'vn serpent qui se plie en
rond, a writhing like a snake. Entouiller, to snarle, to combre, to entangle.
Entour and circuit, about, round about. Entourer, to compass about.
Entourement, a compassing. Entournure, a rundel or circle. s'Entr'aider, to
help one another. Entrailles, the entrails, the guts the inwards.
s'Entr'aimer, to love one another. Entrainer, to draw away. Enter les gens de
bien, among good men, between good men. Entrebaaille, chapped or chinked,
cloven, gaping. s'Entrebatre, to fight together. Entrecognoistre, to know one
another. s'Entr'embrasser, to embrase one another. Nous nous Entrecognoissons,
we know one another. Un Entredeux de murailles, a space between two walls.
l'Entredeux de quelque chose, the space between any two things Ils
s'Entr'entendent, they understand one another. sus ces Entrefaictes, in this
mean while, while this was in doing. Qui scait bien son Entregent, one of good
behauioure, that knows good fashions. Ils s'Entrehantent, they haunt
together. Ils s'Entrehayent fort, they hate one another to the death. Les
moutons s'Entrehurte^t, the rams butte together. Entreiecter, to cast
between. Entreiect, a putting or casting between. Entreioindre, to join
together. s'Entreiouer, to play together. Entrelaisser, to interlace, too put
between. Entrelasse, interlaced, put between. Entrelasseme^t, a putting between
Entreluire, to shine together. Entremander, to send together. Entremesler, to
mingle together. s'entremesler de quelque guerre, to intermedle with wars.
Entremettre la besongne, la lais ser pour un temps, to cease, to leave off
work for a time. Entermesse, intermedled, mi^gled. Un entremetteur and
moyenneur a spokesman, a broker, an interpreter. Ces chooses s'entrenuisent,
these things hurt one an other. Entr'ouir, to hear here and there a word.
Entroupeter, to gather in companies. Entr'ouuert, chapt, cloue^, opened. Estre
fort entr'ouuert and entrebaallie, to be very much chapt. Entreprendre, To
enterprise, to take in hand. Entreprinse, begone, taken in hand. Entreprenant
and hardy, bold, of high enterprise. Entreprins de ses members, benomme of his
members. Entreprenneur, an enterpriser. Entrer, to enter, to go in. Entreme^t,
an entering, a going in. Entree, an entrey, an alley. Il s'entregardoyent, they
looked the one on the other. Entrerompre, to break off. s'Entresaluer, ou
quand plusieurs saluent un tiers, to salute one an other. Chose qui
s'entresuit, ou s'entre tient, that follows one an other, a continuance.
Entretaillir, to hew one an other. Entretenir un amor, to maynteyne love.
s'Entretenant, cleaving one to an other, holding one an other. Estre entretenu,
to be maynteyned, to be entertained. Entretenement, an entertaining, a cleaving
one to an other. s'Entretoucher, to touch one an other. Entretouiller, to
tumble or wrap up one with an other. Entretenir ou suruenir, to come on a
sudden. Enuahir par trahison ou autrement, to invade, to set upon. Enueloper,
to wrappe up, to fold up. Vne enuelope and couuerture, a wrapper. Enuelope,
wrapped up. Enuelopement, a wrapping. Enuenimer le boire d'aucun, to poison
ones drink. Don enuenime, a poisoned gift. Envy, sorowfully, against my will.
Envy, envy, hatred, malice. Enuier l'autruy, to hate another. Enuieux,
envious, hateful, malicious. Enuieiller, to wax old. Euuiellissement, a
waxing old. Enuers toy, toward thee. Tourner a l'enuers, to turn vpside
down. Enuiron dix iours, plus ou moins, about ten days. Enuiron trois mill,
about three thousand. Enuiron ce mois la, About that month. Tout a l'enuiron,
round about. Enuironner, to compass about, to enuiron. Enuironne, compassed.
Enuironnement, a compassing. Enuoyer d'auec soy, to send away, to put away.
Enuoyer quelque chose, to send a thing. Enuoy, message, sending. S'enuoler, to
flee away. Enyurer, to make drunk. Epeler, seek Espeler. Epilepsie, Mal
caduque, the falling sickness. Epistre and lettre missiue, an Epistle, a
letter. Epitaphe, an Epitaph, verses on ones death. Equalite, equality,
comparison. Equaliser, to compare. Equierre, ou Esquierre, a Carpenters squire.
Equiparaison, lykening, comparing. Equiper nauires, to trim or make ready
ships. A l'equipolent, of like value. Equite, equity, vprightnes, justice
Equivalent, like, of like value. Erable, a tree, which some think to be Maple.
Erain, seek Arain. Ergots de coqs, a cocks spur. Ermite, an hermit, one
that dwells in deserte. Ermitage, an hermitage. Vne Ermine, a beast called
an Ermyne. Errer, to stray, to err. Aller errant par cy par la, parmy les
champs sans tenir order, to wander hither and thither. Es, tu es, seek Estre.
S'esbahir, to marvel, to wonder. Esbahy, abashed. Esbahissement, abashing.
s'esbatre auec quelqu'vn, to play with one, to pass the time. Esbat and
recreation d'enfants, childrens play. Esbats, plays, pastimes, recreations.
Prendre ses esbats, To take his pleasure. Par Esbat, in pastyme. Esbatement,
pastyming. Erberger, ou Heberger aucun, to lodge one, to harbor. Esblouir les
yeux, To glimmer the eyes, to dasell. Esboulissement, daseling, Esboucher, To
rough hew, to square out. Esborgner, to make poare blind, to look a squint.
Esburgeonner la vigne, to pluck off the buds of a vine. Esbrancher un arbre, To
loppe a tree. Esbransler and fair trembler, to shake, to waver. Esbranslement,
shaking, wavering. Escacher, to break in pieces, to brouse. Escachement and
froissure, a breaking, a brousing. Escailler poisson, to scale fish. Vne
escarboncle, a Carbuncle. Escarlat, scarlet. Escarmouche, Fair des
Escarmouches, to skirmish. Escarpins, pumpes, single soaled shoes. Escerner
autour, To scrape on cleanse round about. Esceruele, Hare brayned, cock
brayned, braynlesse. Un eschaffault, ou sont ceux qui regardent iouer, a
scaffolde or stage. Eschalas, a prop for a vine, commonly the stay that is set
for a vine to creep up upon. Eschalasser vne vigne, to set up those stays in
the vine. Eschalotte, a Scallion. Eschanger, to exchange, to chop, to scorse.
Eschanson qui fait l'essay du boire and du manger, A taster of meats to kings
or other. Eschantillon and mo^stre de quelque merchandise, a scantlin.
Eschapper, to escape, to slipaway. Eschappe, slipte away, escaped, saved. Un
eschappatoire, A starting hole, a bypath. Un escharbot, a scarabey.
Escharcement viure, To live scantly, to live hardly, niggishly Eschasses,
crouches, stiltes. Eschabouillure, a push, a wheale. Eschauffer, to warm, to
heat, to chafe. Estre eschauffe, To be warmed, to be chafed. Eschauffement,
chafyng, warming, heating. Eschaugette, a Beacon. Un eschelle, a ladder.
L'eschelle d'vn nauire, a ladder in a ship. Escheller les murs, to skale the
walls. Eschemer, comme les mouches a miel escheme^t, and font leurs petites
mouches, To swarm like Bees. Escheoir, to happen, to chance, to fall out.
Escheoir comme par sort, to fall by lot. Des Eschez, the Chessemen. Eschiquier,
a checker, a Chesse bourde. Escheuin, conseillier de la ville, Sheriff of a
City. Escheuissement de dommage, a escape from hurt. L'eschine, soit de l'homme
ou bestes irraisonables, the Chine bone, the back bone. Les os de l'eschine du
dos, and semblables, the bones in the chyne. Eschiner, rompre l'eschine, To
chine, to break the back. A bon Escient, in good earnest, in good faith.
Esclair, Esclairer, Escaircir, seek Escler. Esclaire, herb, Selandine.
Esclandre, a thunder clappe, a slander. Esclat ou latte, a shingle, a lath.
Son Esclatant, a rattling noise. Esclaue, a slave. Escler, qui fait le tonnere,
The lightning of the thunder. Esclercir, to make clear. Esclercissement and
reparement, cleeryng, plain showing forth. Esclisse ou on met le fourmage pour
prendre sa form, a chese press. Esclope, maimed. Esclorre des oeufs, To
clock, to hatche eggs. Escole, ou college, a Schole, a College. Maistre
d'escolle, a scholemaster Un escolier, a scholar. Estre esconduict, to be
denied a request, to have repulse. L'escorce de l'arbre, the bark of a tree,
the rind. Escorcer, to bark trees, or rather to vnbarke, to pill.
Escorcement, a barking of trees, a pilling, a rinding. Escorcher, to flay, to
bark, to pill. Escorcheure du siege, the pildenesse of the seat. Escorchement,
a flaying. Escort, dapper, hansom, trim, furnished. L'escosse ou gonsse de
febues, pois and semblables, the codof pease, bean, or other pulse. Escot, a
schot. S'escouler, to slide down, to glide. Escoulement d'eaue, a slidyng
down, or soft running of water. Escourgee, a thong of leather, a latchet, or
scourge. Escouter, to hearken, to listen, to give ear. Escouteur, ou un
Escoutee, A hearkener, a scoute, an eaues-dropper. Escoutement, hearkening.
Escouer, to shake off, to fan out, to brushe. Escouuette, a brushe.
Escouuillon, an oven sweeper, a daflin. Fair Escran contre le vent, too set
the nose against the wind. Un Escreuisse, a crab, a creuise. Escrimeur, Ioueur
d'espee, a master of fence, a fencer. Un Escrin, coffret ou cabbinet, a
casket, a little chest. s'Escrier, to cry, to roar out. Escri, ou escrieme^t,
a crying out. Escrire, to write. Escripture, writ, scripture, writing.
Escripteau, a writing. Vne Escriptoire, a pennar. Les Escrouelles, the kings
evil. Un Escu, a crown of gold in money, a scutchion, a shield. Escuelle, a
porenger, a dish. Un Escuiel plein de rochers, a rockie place. Escume, scum,
dross, foam. Escumer, Iecter escumes, to foam to scum. Ecumeur de mer, a
pirate, a sea thief. Un Escurieu, a squirrell. Un court Escusson ou bouclier,
a scutchion or buckler. Escuyer d'escurie, a horse keeper. Escuyer ou
coustiler, an esquire. Escuyer ou eschanson, a squire to the mouth. Esgard
qu'on a de fair quelque chose, the regard, wariness, and advise that we have
to do a thing. s'Esgarer, to stray, to wander. Un Esglantier, eglantine, sweet
briar. Eglise ou temple, a church, a temple. Esgorger, to cut ones throat.
Esgorgement, a cutting off ones throat. Un Esgout qui chet de hault, a drop.
l'Esgout d'vne ville, the sink of a town. Esguiere, an ewer. Esguille, seek
Aguille. Un Esguillon, a prick, a stir. Esguilloner, to stir, to move, to
provoke. Esguillonne, stirred, provoked. Esguillonnement, a stirring.
Esguillonneur, a prouoker, a setter on. Vne Esguillette, a point. Eshonter, to
be shameless, to set a good face on it. Eshonte, shameless, impudent.
Eshontement, shamelessness, sausinesse. s'Esiouir, to rejoice, to be glad, to
be merry. Qui s'Esiouist, joyful. s'Esiouissant, rejoicing. Esiouissance,
joy, gladness. Esiouissance qu'on fait du bien and prosperity qui nous est
venue, ou a autruy, the joy that we have in prosperity. Eslargir, to enlarge,
to stretch out Eslargi and plein, a qui le ventre tire, stretched out full.
Esleuer, to take away, to carry away, to lift. Esleue en hault, heaued up,
lifted up. Esleuer ou nourrir, to bring up, to rear. Eslire, to choose, to
cull, to pyke out. Esleu enter les autres, picked out. Eslite, choice,
election. Eslocher and esbransler, to shake, to wag, to wave. Esloigner, to
send aloof, to convey away, to keep far off. Esloigne, kept aloof.
Esloignement, a conueying away. s'Eslourdir, to be astonnyed, to be amazed.
Esmail, ammell. Un Esmeraude, an Emeraude. Esmerillo^ne, and fort vif d'esprit,
lively, quick. S'esmerueiller, To marvel, to wonder. Esmerueillable,
wonderful. Esmerueillement, a wondryng, a gazing. L'esmeut d'vn corbeau and
fiente the muting of a foul. Esmeute, seek Esmouuoir. Esmier, To crumme or
break small. Esmonder, to cleanse, to sweep, to make clean. Esmondement
d'arbres, and taillement de vignes, a prunyng of trees, cutting of vines.
Esmoucher and refouler un trenchant, To make blunte that is sharp. Esmoudre un
cousteau, to grind a knife. Esmouuoir, to move, to provoke, to stir. Esmeu,
stirred, provoked, moved. Esmeute, a commotion, a tumult, a rising. Esmotion, a
motion, a stirryng of the mind. Esmouuement, a moving, a tossing. Esmoy ou
soulci, care, sorrow, pensiveness. Toute espace and distance, space,
distance. Espace de temps, space of time. L'espace and certain mesure de terre,
comme vinct ou trent pas, and semblables, a space or measure of ground.
Espancher, to scatter abroad. Espandre, To sheade, to spill, to pour out.
Espandu, spilled, poured out. Espandement, a sheding, a pouryng out. La rose
s'Espanit, ou desploye, ou s'estend, to blow out like a Rose or other flower.
Espardre ca and la, to scatter. Espars, scattered, disparsed. Espardement, a
scattering. Chooses dictes esparseme^t, words spoken scatteringly. Espargner,
to spare, to save. Espargner la despense, To save charges. N'espargner
person, to spare no man. Espargnant and qui n'a cure d'argent, and aussi
s'abstient de les autres voluptez, a near fellow, a wary man. Espargne,
scarsitie. De l'espargoutte ou apparitoire, Pellitorie, an herb. Vne Espatule
ou Spatule, A slice. L'espaule, the shoulder. Espauliere, a hoode to wear on
the shoulder. Espeautre, Espece de ble ainsi appelee, a kind of barley as some
think. Espece un espece de malady, a kind, a kind of disease. Par especial,
especially. Espee, a sword. Espeler, to spell, as children do. Espelement des
syllabes, a spelling of sillables. Esperdu, lost, a forgone man. Esperer, to
hope, to trust. Esperance de bien, Hope of goods. Espoir, hope, trust. Esprit
and entedeme^t qui l'ho^me a de nature, wit and understanding that a man has
of nature. Esprit sans repos, A restless mind. Un Esperon, a spur.
Espessir, to thicken. Espessi, thickened. Espez, thick. Espesseur, thickness.
Espessement, thicklie. Espessissement, a thickening. Espi de ble, an ear of
corn. Espices ou espicerie, spice. Espier and guetter, to spy, to watch, to
mark. Un Epsy ou espion, a spy. Espies, snares. En espiant, espyingly.
Espieur, a spyer, a pryer. Espiement, a spying. Espine, a thorn, a bryer.
Espineux, thorny, bryerie. Espingle, a pin. un Espion and Brigantin, a
Brigandine. Esploure, beblubbered with weeping, bewailed. Esplucher, to cull
out. Esplucher chasque lettre d'vne Loy, to search every clause of the Law.
Espoindre, to prick, to stir, too provoke. Esponge, a sponge. Espouuanter,
to make afraid, to fear. Espouuente, feared. Un Espouuentail, chose
espouuentant, a thing to be feared. Espouuentable, fearful. Espouuantement, a
fear, a dread. Espouser vne femme, to marry a wife. Espouser un homme, to
marry a man. l'Esposee, ou l'sEpousee, the bryde. Espousailles, brydall,
marriage. Espreindre, too press out, to wring. Espreindre le just, to wring out
the juice. Espreinte, pressed out. Tout a Espreu, with diligence. Un Espreuier,
a hawk. Estre Espris de folly, and estre come insense, too be taken with
folly. Esprouuer, to prove, to assaye. Esprouue, a proof. Vne petite
Esprouuette, a small instrument wherewith Surgeons do search wounds, a probe.
Espuiser, to draw out, as out of a well. Espurge, herb, an herb called
spurge. Espurger and oster les neuds des arbres, to prume trees, to cut away
the knots. Esquarrir, to square. Esquarteler, to quarter. Fair Esquarter, and
espandre ca, and la, to shed, to throw about, to scatter. Vne Esquierre, a
squire. Esquinancie, the squincie. Equipper, seek Equiper. Qui est Essarde and
altere, which is always dry. Esserter un bois, to make a glade in a wood.
Essayer, to assaye, to prove, to attempt. Essay, an essay or proof. Esseulez,
cast off, given over, left alone. Un Essi eu, an axeltree. Essimer, to take
away fat. Essorer, to dry up. Essorille, deaffe. Essuyer, to wipe, to rub. Il
Est, seek Estre. Estable a cheuaux and autres bestes semblables, a stable, a
stall, a fold. Establir un Roy, too establishe a King. Establissement, an
establishing. Establier ou estail a boucher, a butchers stall. Un Estage de
maison, a loft of a house. De l'Estain, tin. Estaimmer, to lead, or tin.
Estaimme, leaded, as they lead pots. Estain de lain, woollen yarne. Estaler, to
stall out, or show wares. Un Estalon, a stallion, a horse to cover mares.
Estamine, chamblet, grogran. Estancher la soif, to slake thirst, to stanche
blood. Estanchement de soif, slaking of thirst. Estang and viuier, a pond. Un
Estanson, a prop, a forke, a shore. l'Estape, the wine market or staple.
Estarnuer, seek Esternuer. l'Estat and condition des hommes, the state and
condition of men. Vne Estaye, a prop. Estayer, to shore up. Estayement, a
shoring. l'Este, Summer. Esteindre, to quench, to slake fire. Esteingnement, a
quenching. Estele, starred. Esteler les cheuaux, to spang in horses to the
cart. Estendart and enseigne, a standart, an enseigne. Estendre, to set forth,
too show forth, to stretch forth, to spread abroad. Estendu, stretched forth,
spread abroad. Estendement, a stretching forth. Esternuer, to sneese.
Esternuement, a sneesing. Vne Esteule ou estouble, straw, stouble. Esteuf, a
tennis ball. Estimer, to esteem, to value. Penser ou Estimer and iuger, too
think, to esteem, to judge. Estimer, priser and lover, to esteem, to praise,
too allow, too regard. Estre Estime, to be esteemed. l'Estime qu'on a de
virtue, the estimation of virtue. Estimation, estimation. Judge and Estimateur de
quelque chose, a Judge, an esteemer of a thing, a prezer. Estinceler, to
sparcle, to twincle. Estincelle, a spark. Estincellement, a sparkling. l'Estoc
and le tronc d'vn arbre, the body of a tree, the stock. Estoffer, to engraue.
Estoffeur, an engrauer. Estoile, a star. Estomach, the stomach, the belly.
Estonner, to astonish, to amaze. Estonne, amazed, astonished, aghast. Estonnement
du corpse, ou des parties d'iceluy, prouena^t d'vne vne catarrhe, benoemnesse of
the body, to be taken. Eftorsement, a wresting or writhing. Estouffer
quelqu'vn, to smother, to stiffle, to strangle. Estouffement, smothering.
Estoupe de lin, ou de chanure, flax or towe. Estouper, to stop up. Un
Estoupillon, a stopple. Estourdir, to astonish, to trouble ones head. Estourdy,
blunt, blockishe, dull witted, foolish, giddie. Estourdissement, amazedness,
giddiness. Un Estourgeon, a sturgeon. Estourneau, a bird called a stare.
Estrain, ou foarre, straw. Estranger, to make strange, to alienate.
s'Estranger de quelqu'vn, and oster sa fantasy, ou amor, to become strange,
to draw away ones heart from one. Estrange, straunged, alienated. Moult
Estrange, very strange. Un Estranger, a stranger, a foreign. Estra^gement des
autres, quand on se met a part, to wax strange, to shun company. Estrangler,
to strangle, to choke Estrangle, strangled. Estanglement, a strangling. Donner
Estre a quelque chose, to give being to a thing, too create. Estre, to be. Tu
Es, thou art. Il Est, he is. Estrecir, to make narrow, or straight.
Estreindre, to straigne, to make straight, to make narrow, to thrust together.
Estreint and serre, streigned, thrust together. Estreignement, a streigning.
Estreines, presents, new years gifts. Estrier, a stable forke. Estreiller
cheuaux, too currie horses. Estriuer and debatre co^tre quelqu'vn, to strive,
to contend. Prendre Estrif and debat a l'encontre d'aucun, to be at strife with
one. Estroict, straight, narrow. Estroictement, straightly, narrowly. Estrone,
a turde. Estudier, to study, to plye ones book. Vne Estude, a study. Estudes
de lettres, study of learning. Mettre tout son Estude a apprendre, to set all
his mind on learning. Estudie de sapience, philosophy, study of wisdom. Un
Estudiant qui ne se mesle point des affairs publiques, a scholar. Estuuer vne
play, to bath or soake a wound. Estuuer ses yeux, to soake the eyes. Estuues,
stews, hot houses. Estuuement, a soaking. Estuy de quelque chose que ce soit,
a case, a shethe. Un Estuy d'escriptoire, a pennar. s'Esuanouir, to vanish, to
fade away, to swoune. Esuanoui, vanished. Euanouissement and pasmoison,
vanishing, swouning. Esueiller, to waken, to raise up. s'Esueiller, to wake.
Estre Esueille, to be wakened. Esuenter, to fan, to winowe. Un Esuentoir, ou
Esuentoire, a f^n. Vne Esuentoire, a chasser les mouches, a flap for flies.
Esuentement, fanning, winowing. Esuier, a sink, a place to void water. Esuole
and eshonte, shameless. Et, and. Et aussi, and also. Eternel, everlasting,
ayduring. Eternellement, everlastingly. Deuenir Etique, to grow into a
consumption. Euacuer, to void, to empty. Euacuation de manuaises humeurs,
voyding of evil humors. Euader, Eschapper, to escape, to slip away.
Euenement, a hap, a chance, a coming to pass. Euentrer poissons, to draw or
vnbowell fish. Euertuement il besongne a cecy, he works lustily. Un
Euesque, un Prelat, a Bishop. Euf, seek Oeuf. Evident, plain, evident,
manifest. Evidence, an evidence. Euidemme^t, clearly, apparently, manifestly.
Euiter, to avoid, to shun, to shrink from. Euitement, a shunning, an
escheuing. Euoquer au peuple vne chose estant par deuant certains iuges, to
bring trial of the matter from certain judges to the people. Eupatoire,
herb, an herb called Agrimonie. Eur, Eureux, seek Heureux. si tu n'Eusses
este, ou si ce n'Eust este toy, if thou had not been, if it had not bin for
thee. Sans toy, without thee. Euure, seek Oeuure. Exalter, to praise above
measure, to exalt. Examiner quelque chose, to examine, to weighe, to ponder.
Examination, an examination. Exaulcer, to hear gently, to grant. Exaulser and
esleuer, to exalte, to praise above measure. Excellent, surmou^ting, excelling,
passing. Excelle^ment, excellently, passing well. Excellence, excellency,
worthiness Excepter, to except. l'Exceptio^ d'vne generalite, the exception of
a generality. Excez, excess, superfluity, riot. Excessif, passing measure,
excessive. Excessiuement, excessiuely. Exciter, to stir up. Excuser, to excuse.
Vne Excuse, an excuse. Excusation, making an excuse. Excuseur, qui excuse
quelqu'vn, an excuser. Execrable and detestable, hateful, to be abhorred.
Execration, blasphemy, cursing beyond measure. Executer, to streigne for
debte. Mettre en Execution qu'on nous a encharge, too execute our charge.
Exemple, an example. Exemplaire plein de faults, a false sampler. Auoir
l'Exemplaire and patron, to have a sample. Exempter, to exempt. Exempt, qui n'a
nulle part, exempt, he that has no part. Exempt de fair aucune charge exempt,
free from the charge. Exemption, liberty, freedom. Exercer quelque art, to
exercise an art. s'Exercer, to exercise him self, to enure. s'Exerciter a
escrire, too use to write. Exercice, exercise, use. Exercitation, exercising.
Exhalation de la terre, the damp or vapors of the earth. Exiger ou demander, to
demand or exact a thing. Exil, banishment, exile. Exonniez par malady, ou
autre encombrier, discharged soldiers. Expedier quelque affair, to hasten or
dispatch a matter. Expedition and acheuement, an expedition, a riddance.
Experimenter, to prove, to try, to examine, to assay. Un homme experimente, A
man of experience. Expert and scauant, expert, cunning. Experience, experience,
knowledge, cunning. Expirer, to breath out, to yield up the ghost, to end. Le
temps est expire, the time is ended or expired. Expliquer, to expound, to
unfold. Explique, Expounded, interpreted. Fair Exploiter besongne, to rid
business. Qui n'exploite guere, slack in business. Exposer quelque chose aux
enfantz, to bequeath or give over to his children. Un lieu expose and turn au
soleil, placed directely against the son. Exposition, an exposition, a
declaration. Dire par expres, chiefly or expressly, to tell. Expressement,
expressly, namely. Exquis, exquisite, singular, fine, perfect. Extorsion pour
tort, wrong, extortion. Extraordinaire, extraordinary, unwonted.
Extraordinairement, extraordinaryly. Extraire and transcrire, to draw out, to
write out. Extrauaguer bien loing, to wa^der far. Extremement, without
measure. l'Extremite and board ou bout de quelque chose, the brinke or top of
any thing.
F ante A.
FAble, a tale, a fable. Fabloyer, to fable. La Face, the face. Facile, easy.
Facileme^t, easily, redily, quickly. Facilite, easiness. Faciliter vne chose,
To bring a thing to easiness, to make it a slight. Facon, fashion, form,
making, workmanship. Faconner, to fashion. Facteur, a factour, an agent. Le
facteur d'vn Marchand, a merchants factour. Un fatiste, a player, a Poet.
Fruicts qui sont fades, unsavory fruits. Un faggot, a faggot. Fague, the neck
piece of a Bore, the fag piece. Faictiz, counterfeat, forged. Faillir, to
fail, to err, to lack. Faim, hunger, famine. Faindre, Faintise, seek
Feindre. Fair, to do, to go about. Fair quelq^ chose, to do a thing. C'en est
faict, it is done. Faicture, workmanship. Un Faisant, a Phesant. Un Faisceau de
quelque chose que ce soit, liee ensemble, a bunche, a bundle. Faidardise and
paresse, slothfulness, sluggishnesse, drowsiness. Un faix, a burden.
Fallacieux, deceytfull. Il Falloit vser de plus long exemples, it behooved to
use longer examples. Fallot, a cresset light. Il Fault, it must, it behooves.
Familier, domestique, familiar, homely. Familiarite, familiarity.
Familierement, familiarly. La Famille and race, the house, kindred, the family.
Famine, hunger, dearth. Un Fan de biche ou autres bestes, a faune. Se faner, to
rotte, to putrify, to corrupt. Fange, mudde, dirt. le Fanon d'vn boeuf, le
peau qui luy pend soubs le long du col the dew lap of a rudder beast, hanging
down under his neck. Fantasy and volonte d'vne person, the fantasy and
mind of a body. Fantastique, fantastical, inuentiue. Faon, seek Fan.
Faonner, to faune as does do. Vne Farce, a play, an interlude. Farceur, a
player of such plays. Iouer de Farces, qui represente^t contenances selon
l'estat des persons, a player, a counterfeater of personages. De la Farce, a
liuering, a pudding Farcir and remplir, To stuff, to frank, to feed. Fard,
white lead, painting colors. Farde, painted, as some women use to paynt
themselves. Fardement de vielles chooses, pour le mieux vendre, a painting or
setting forth old things to the show. Vne Fardeau, a fardell, a trusse, a
burden. Farine, meal. Farouche, fierce, outrageous, cruel Fascher ou ennuyer
quelqu'vn, to anger or displease one. Tu me fasches and ennuyes, thou troublest
me. Fasche, troubled, angered. Fascheux and ennuyeux, troublesome, grievous.
Fascherie, anger, grief, trouble, vexation. Faseoles, a kind of small pulse.
Fau, un arbre, a Beche tree. Faucher, to mow the ground. Faucheur du prez, a
mower. Faueur and support, favor, supporte. Fauori, ou fauorise, in favor,
favored. Fauourablement, favorably. Vne Faucille ou crochet, a sicle, a
hook. Faucon, oyseau de proye, A Falcon. Faudra, seek Falloir. Faulsaire, a
falsifier, a counter-feater. Faulser des lettres, to counterfeat letters.
Faulsement, falsely, untruly. Qui fait Faulsetez, he that commits falshode.
Fault, seek Falloir. Fault pour peche, fault, blame, offense. Fault ou
disette, want, lack, scarsitie. Faulx, homme Faulx, A false man. Vne Faux ou
Faucille, a Sickle, a Sithe. Faulxbourgs, the Suburbs. Fauue, ou Fauueau, a
deep yealow, a bay. Feal, faithful, trusty. Feaute, faithfulness. Fealement,
faithfully. Vne Febue, a bean. Vne petite chose noire qui est au cul d'vne
Febue, the black spot at the tail of the bean. Un Fauat de Febues, a stacke
of beans. le Faiture de quelque chose par laquelle on la met a estre, the
making or workmanship of a thing. Fee, destinate, appointed. Fee, and qui doibt
aduenir par necessite, appointed, that must needs come to pass. Par Feerie
and destinee, by Destiny. Feindre, to feyne, to dissemble. Se feindre, to
feign himself. Feintise, faynednesse, hypocrisy, dissimulation. Feintement,
faynedly, dissemblingly. De la Feine, beeche mast. Du Feign, seek Foin, hay.
Felicite, happiness. Fellure en pierre precieuse, the veins in a precious
stone. Felon, fell, testie, outrageous. Felonnie, felnesse, vnmercyfulnesse.
Femelle, the she of any thing. Femelin, made womannish. Femme, a woman, a
wife. Femmelette, a little woman. Fendre, to cleave. Fendu, cleft, chapt. Fendu
en deux, cleft in two. Fendement, a cleaving. Fente, a cleft, a rift, a rent.
Fener ou fletrit, To wither away. Fenestre, a window. Fenestre and perce,
windowed or pierced through. Un fenil ou on guard le feign, A hay lofte. Du
Fenoil, Fenell. Fer, iron. Ferrement, iron work. Ferrailles, old iron. Ferrer
muls and cheuaux, To shoe-horses or moyles. Far, shod. Feries and iours de
cessation, holy days, wakes. Ferir, to strike. Un fermaillet qui se pend au col
pour preserver de poison, a preservative to hang about ones neck against
poison. La ferme du prince ou demaine the kings revenue. Vne Ferme, a ferme, a
Manor. Le Fermiers du prince, the kings fermers. Ferme, firm, stable, sure.
Estre ferme and constant, To be stable, to be constant. Fermete, stablenesse,
constancy, steadfastness. Fermement, constantely, steadfastly. Fermer, to shut
up, to close up. Ferme, shut, closed. Fermement and closture de bouche, a
stopping ones mouth. Fertile, fruitful, well yelding, fertile. Fertilite,
frutefulnesse. Fertilement, frutefully. Fervent, earnest, fervent. Feruemment,
earnestly. Les ^esses, the Buttockes, the breeche. Fesser, to breeche boys, to
scourge them. Feslu, well buttocked, Well breeched. Le Feste d'vn edifice, the
ridge of an house. Feste, holyday. Fester, To keep Holydaye, to feast.
Festin, a feast, a banquet. Festoyer aucun, to feast one, to cheer one. Un
Festu, a straw or rushe, a mote. Le Feu, fire. Feuchiere, ou Foiguere, fern
brakes. Feue, seek Febue. Feurre, seek Foarre. Fiance and asseurance, trust,
affiance, troth. Fiancer vne fille ou vne femme, to betrouth, to make sure,
too handfast. Vne Fiancee, bethrouthed, handfasted. Ficher, to fasten, to
stick in, to set fast. Fiche and arreste, steadfast, stablished. Fiction and
controuuement, a thing feigned, an imagination. Fort Fidele and seur,
faithful, stable. Fidelete, faithfulness. Fidelement, faithfully, unfeignedly.
Fiebure, ou Fieure, an ague, a fever. Fiebureux, subject to an ague. Fiel,
gall. Fiens, dong. Fiens a fumer la terre, dong to dong the earth. La Fiente
and ordure d'vne best, the dong of a beast. Soy Fire a quelqu'vn de quelque
secret, to trust one with some secret talk. Fire and arrogant, proud, lofty,
high minded. Fieret, somewhat lofty. Fierement, loftily. Fierete, hautnesse,
loftiness, pride. Fieure, seek Fiebure. Sang Fige, blood cluttered. Vne
Figue, a figue. Un Figuier, a figue tree. Figure, a figure, an image. Figurer,
to figure. Figurement, a figuring. Fill, ou Filet, a threede. Un File and verueu
a pre^dre poissons, an angle or bayt to catch fish. Filet a Filet, thread by
thread. Filer, to spin, to twist. Filure and tissure de layne ou de soye,
spinning. La Filace qu'on met en la quenouille, the flax that is put on the
distaffe. Les Filamens des veins, the strings on veins. Fills, a son, a boy.
Vne Fille, a daughter, a wenche. Fillette, a girl, a wenche. La Fin de quelque
chose que ce soit, the end of a thing. A Fin que ie ne, etc. to the end that.
etc. En Fin, in the end. Finer, to end, to determine, to conclude. Fine,
ended. Finablement, ou Finalement, finally, in sum. Fin homme, a subtle,
crafty or beguyling man. Finesse, suttletie, craft, deceyte, guyle. Finement,
suttely, craftily, deceitfully. Finances, treasures, goods. Fins and limits,
bounds, limits, borders. Fistule, a pype. Un Flaccon, ou boutaille, a flagon,
a bottell. Flageolet, a whistle, a pype. Flagorneur and rapporteur, a blab, a
tale teller, a tale carrier. Flairer, to smell, to sent. Flaireur, a smeller.
Flairement, smelling, senting. Flambe, ou Flamme de feu, a flame of fire.
Flambeau, ou torche, a torche, a link. Flamboyer and reluire, to flame, to
shine. Flammeche ou estincelle, a sparkle. Les Flancs, the flanks. Flater, Qui
est un mot propre quand les chiens blandissent de la queue, too flatter, to
faune as a dog does. Flateur, a flatterer, a glauerer. Flaterie, flattery,
fauning. Flateresse, a she flaterer. Flatrer au front d'vne lettre chaulde, to
mark one in the forehead with a hoate iron. Flatre, marked for a naughty
pack. Le Fleau and tendon ou ville de la vigne don't elle s'attache, the
branche or shooting out of a vine. Vne Fleche and un traict, a shaft, an
arrowe. Flechir and ployer quelque chose to bend, to bow a thing. Flechi and
ploye, bent, bowed. Flechissement, a bowing, a bending. Flechissure, bought, or
bowingnes. Phlegm, ou Fleume, fleame. Flegmatique, flegmatike. Se Flestrir, to
wither away, to dry up. Flestri, withred. Flestrissure, withring. Vne Flette,
a lighter, a small boat. Fleume, seek Phlegm. Fleur, a flower. Fleurette, ou
Fleuron, a little flower. Fleurir, to flower. Fleurissant, flourishing, or
flouring. Fleute, ou Flute, ou Flageolet, a flute, a whistle, a pype, a fife.
Fleuteur, ou Fluteur, a pyper, a fluter, a fife. Fleuue ou riuiere, a floude or
river. Un Floc and bouton de lain, a flock of wolle. Flot, a flood. Le Flot
de la mer, the flowing of the Sea. Flotter, to flote, to swim. Flottement, a
floting. Flour, Flourir, seek Fleur. Flute, Fluteur, seek Fleute. Flux, ou
Fluxion, a flood. Flux de ventre, the flyxe, the laske. Foarre, straw. Foible,
weak, feeble. Foiblesse, weakness, feebleness. Foiblement, weakly,
feeblely. Foin de pre, grass of the pasture. Foires d'vne ville, the fair or
mart of a town. Foire, thin dong. Foireux, beshitten. Vne Fois, once. Foison,
plenty, abundance. Fol, a fool, an idiot. Folatre, a wanton. Folatrer, to
play the wanton. Folatrement, and ragement, wa^tonnesse, folly. Folly, folly,
unadvisedness. Folement, folishly, fondly, childishly. Fomentation, a plaster
that assuageth heat. Le Fond de quelque chose que ce soit, the ground of a
thing, the bottom. un Fond, champ and piece de terre, soil, a piece of
ground. Fonder, to ground. Fond par dessoubs, founded underneath. Un
Fondement, a ground, a foundation. Fondateur, a buylder, a founder. Vne Fond,
a bottom. Fondre, to melt, to cast. Se Fondre, to melt away, to consume.
Fondant, melting. Fondement, a melting. Fondriere, a quagmyre, a bog. Font,
casting or melting. Vne Fontaine, a spring, a fountain. Un Fontenier, a digger
of wells, a seeker of springs. Force, strength, force, power, virtue. Force
and puissance, might and power. Force and Virtue, strength and virtue. De toute
ma Force, with all my power. Par Force, by force, violently. Forceur, a
Conqueror, an enforcer. Forcene, mad, furious, out of his wit. Forcement,
madness. Forces, ou ciseaux, sheares or cissers. Forcette, small sheares.
Forclorre, to exclude. Forer, ou percer, to boar a hole. Forer, an auger, a
percer. Vne Forest, forest, a wilderness. Lieu Forestier and sauuage, a woody
and wild place. Forfaict, fault, crime, forset. Auoir Forfaict contre quelque
loy imposant peine, to forfait against the law. Forge a fer, a smithes forge.
Forger and marteler, to forge or frame. estre Forge, to be forged. Forgement, a
forging. Forgeron, a forger, a smith. Forgeur, a forger, a framer. Forligner,
to degenerate. Forlignant, degenerating. Formage, seek Fourmage. La Form,
faco^ and traict de quel que chose, the form, fashion, or draught of a thing.
Former, to frame, to fashion. Fors toy, but only thee. Fort robuste and
puissant, very strong and mighty. Fortelet, somewhat strong, waxing strong.
Fortifier to fortify, to strengthen. Fortification, fortification.
Fortifiement, a fortifying. Forteresse, a fortress, a hold. Un Fort and camp
arreste, a fort or settled camp. Fort, pour Beaucoup, very much. Fort bien,
very well. Fortune, fortune, hap, chance. Fortuneement, happily. Vne Fosse, a
pit, a diche, a grave. Fossette, a little pit. Fossoyeur, a grave maker. Fouet,
ou escourgee, a whip or scourge. Fouetter, to whip, to scourge. Fouiller and
cercher soigneusement, to search diligently. Fouillement, a searching.
Fourgere, ou Fouchiere, fern brakes. Fouine, ou chat, selon aucuns, a beast
called a foyne. Fouir la terre, and creuser, to dig or delue the earth.
Fouisseur, a digger. Fouissement, digging, deluing. Fouldre, lightening.
Fouldroyer, to lighten, to thunder. Fouldroye, strike^ with lightning. Foul de
peuple, a throng of people. Fouler aucun, to oppress one, to tread under
foot. Foulement, oppression. Foulon, a fuller. Un Four, an oven. Fournier, one
that keeps an oven for folk to bake in. Fourbir, to fourbish, to pollish.
Vne Fourche, a forke. Fourche, forked. Fourcher, quand la langue fourche, to
stutte, to trip with the tongue. Fourchette, a little forke. Un Fourgon, an oven
rake. Fourmage, cheese. Fourment, seek Froment. Fourmy, an ant, an emmont, a
pismere. Vne Fournaise, a fournays. Fournier de quelque chose, to furnish, to
make up that wa^teth Fournissement, furnishing. Fourniture, furniture.
Fourrage, forage for horses. Fourreau, a scabbard. Fourrer, ou Iecter dedens,
to thrust in, to throw in. Fourrer robbes, to fur gounes. Fourreur, a furrier,
a skinner. Fourriers qui ordo^nent les quar tiers, they that apoi^t out ground.
Se Fouruoyer, to stray, to err. Fouruoyement, a straying. Le Fouyer de la
maison, fire. Foy, quand on tient sa promise, faith. Le Foye, the liver.
Fragile, frail. Fragilite, brittlenesse. Frain and mords d'vne bride, the bit
of a bridle. Frais, Fraischement, seek Frez. Fraiz and despens, charge, cost.
Frayer, to bestow cost. Les Fraises, strawberyes. Fraisne, seek Fraine.
France, France. Franc, qui ne doibt point de tribut, free, at liberty,
frank. Franc and liberal, liberal, free, frank. Franchement and sans
crainte, freely, without fear. Franchise, freedom. Frange, a fringe. Frange
and crene, fringed. Frapper, to strike, to knock, to beat. Frappe, stricken,
knocked, rapt. Frappement, a striking. Fraternel, seek Friar. Fraud, deceit,
guyle. Frayer, and heurter contre la riue, to rap against the shore. Chemin
Fraye, a beaten way. Frayeur, fear, fryting. Frelon, seek Froilon. Frenaisie,
fransie. Frenetique, frantike. Frequenter, ou hanter quelque lieu, to frequent,
to hant, to use a place. Friar, a brother. Fraternel, Belonging to a Brother.
Fraternellement, brotherly. Fresaye ou cheueche, a shreech howl. Freschement,
seek Frez. Fresle ou Fragile, frail, brittle. Fresne, arbre, an ash tree.
Fressure ou Fresure, the inwards or entrayles. Freter vne nauire, to freighte a
ship. Fretiller, to wave, to move, to wagge, to waver. Frez and nouellement
faict, fresh, new done. Un Friand, Friolet, a likerouse fellow, a sweet lips.
Friander, to feed likerously. Friandise, likerouse things. Fricasse, fried.
Friche, comme, Terre delaissee en Friche, fallow, ground that lies fallowe.
Frilleux, chill, cold of nature. Vestements Fripez, clothes that have bin
worn. Un Fripier, a Seller of old clothes. Vne Fripiere, a woman seller.
Frire, Fricasser, to frye. Frisson, quaking for cold. Frissonner, to quake for
cold. Friuole, vain, trifling, of no value. Froid, cold. Froidement, coldly.
Froidure, coldness. Auoir Froid, to be a cold. Froilon, ou Frelon, a hornet.
Froisser, to break in pieces, to quashe asunder. Froissement, a crashing in
pieces Froissis, knocked together. Un clou ou Froncle, a byle. Le Front, the
forehead. Un Fronteau, a frontlet, a forehead cloth. La Frontiere d'vne bride,
the face part of the bridle. Les Frontieres d'vn pais, the frontiers of a
country. Frotter de quelque liqueur, too rub with a water, to chafe, to
soake. Frottement, a rubbing, a chafing. Froument, wheat. Froumentee,
fourmentie. Froyer, seek Frayer. Fruict, fruit. Fruictier, that bears fruit,
an orchard. Frustrer and priuer aucu^ de quelque chose, to frustrate, or
disapoint one. Estre Frustre de son esperance, to be frustrate of the hope
conceived. La Feuille des arbres, the leaves of trees. Fueille, tant d'arbres
que d'herbe, the leaves of trees or herbs. Fueillet, an arbor. Fueiller, ou
iecter fueilles, to bring forth leaves. Fueilleux, full of leaves. Les Fueilles
d'vn liver, the leaves of a book. Fueilletter les livers, to turn over
books. Fugitif, ou Fuitif, fugitif, runne-away. Fuir, to flee, to run away.
Fuir and euiter, to flee, to shun, to avoid. Fuyant, fleeyng. Fuyeur, a run
away. Fuite, a flight. Fumee, smoke. Fumer, to smoke. Fumier, a dunghill.
Fumerles Oliuiers, to dong Olyue trees. Fumement de terre, donging of ground.
Fumetere, herb, fumitorie. Funerailles, burial, funeralles. Un Furet, a
ferret. Fureur, fury, rage. Furieux, furious, raging. Furieusement, furiously.
Un Fuseau, a spindle. Un Fusil, a fusill to strike fire in a tinderboxe. Un
Fust, a staff, a stake. Vne Fuste legere, a foyst or light ship. Fustoine, ou
bombasin, and toute autre chose faicte de cotton, fustian. Fut, seek Estre. Il
fut, he was.
G ante A.
GAbelle, toll, tribute, Gaber, to mock, to floute. Gaberies, tales, mockes.
Gabeur, a mocker, a flouter. Gabion, a basket of earth, such as they use for
defense in war Gage, loyer and salaire qu'on do^ne pour la besongne, wages,
reward in respect of work. Le Gage qu'on met on ieu, a gage, a paune. Les
Gages des Gensdarmes, soldiers wages. Gager contre aucun, to lay a wager, to
gage. Fair Gageure and mettre en ieu, to wage, to paune. Gaigner, to win, to
gain, to profit. Gaigner un mal, to get a disease. Gaignedenier, a porter,
a win-pennie. Gaillard, lusty, frolic, gallant. Gaillardement, gallantly.
Gaing, gain, gettings. Gaigne, a shethe. Gaiure, ou Gageure, seek Gage Du
Galbanon, a kind of gum, issuing out of an herb. Galle, a galling, a
fretting, a rubbing of the skin. Galler, to galle, to chafe. Galleux, scabbed,
itchie. Gallee de trois raines pour ba^c, a galley with. 3. rewes of ores.
Gallee de cinq rames pour ba^c, a galley with. 5. rewes of ores. Galleres,
Galleyes. Gallion, ou Brigantin, vne sort de nauiere ainsi nommee, a Galliot,
a Brigandine. Gallerie, ou on se pourmene, a gallery, a walking place.
Galloches, a ki^d of shoe, a pattin Gallonner and frotter fort en agminotant,
to clap on the back, to cherish. Gambades, gambaldes. Un Gant, a glove.
Gantelets de fer, gantelets. Garance, herb, madder which Diers use. Grant, a
grant. La Gara^tie, wara^tise, authority. La Guard, ward, custody. La Guard
du corpse d'vn prince, a Kings guard. La Guard du corpse d'vn captain, a
Captains ward. Garder, to ward, to keep, to defend, to sheeld. Bailler en
Guard, to give in ward to commit. Guard que, etc, take heed that, beware least,
etc. Gardeur de bestial, a heard, a pastor. Gardien ou Gardienne, a warden, a
keeper. Un Gardemanger, a cubbord, an aumbrie. Garderobbe, a wardrobbe. Gardon,
poisson, a goodion. La Gargouille ou siflet, a whistle Gargouiller, to gargle.
Gargouillement, a gargling. Garnir d'or, to garnish with gold Garnir sa maison,
to furnishe or trim a house. Garny, garnished. Qui Garnit, which garnisheth.
Garnison store, preparation. La Garnison qu'on met en vne ville, the garrison
of a town Garson, a boy. Garson fillette, both boy and wench. Garso^ner la
femme d'autruy, to have to do with an other man's wife. Vne Gasche, an oar, a
skull. Gascher, to row. Gascher du plastre, to spread a plaster. Gaschement, a
rowing. Gaspiller son propre and despendre follement, to waste and spend away
his goods. Un Gasteau, ou tourteau, a cake. Gaster, to mar, to spill, to wast
to consume. Gastement, a marring. La gauche ou main senestre, the left hand.
Gaucher ou tortuer, To wring or bend. Gauchi, ou Gauche, wroong. Gaudir and
fair gross cher, to be frolyke, to be lively. Se gaudir d'aucu^, to jest with
one to floute. Gaudisseur, a iester. Par gaudisserie, in jest, or floutingly.
Gauffre, seek Goffre. Le Gauion, the throat boll. Vne Gaul, a staff, a
cudgel. La Gaul Celtique, The farther part of France. Un Gay, a Jay. Gay and
ioyeux, merry, lusty. Gayeme^t and ioyeuseme^t, cherefully. Gayete, mirth.
Gazouiller, To whistle, sing, chirp, or warble, as birds do. Geant, a Giant.
Gect, ou Iect, a throw or cast at dice. Gectons, seek Getter. Geene, ou
Gehenne, torture ou question, a rack, a place of torment. Geiner, ou
Geheinner, quelqu'vn, to rack one. Gelee, frost. Geler, to freese. Gelement, a
freesing. Gelure, Jce. Geline ou poulle, a hen. Gelinier, a hen house, a
roust. Gemeau, a twinne. Gemir, to sigh. Gemissement, a sighing. La Genciue,
the gummes. Gendre, my son in law, my daughters husband. General, general.
Generalement, generally, comprehending all. Generation, begetting, ingendring.
Du genest, an herb so called. Geneure, Juniper. Genisse, a heffer. Genouil, a
knee. Genouillet, a little knee. Genre humain, makinde. Un Gent and nation, a
nation, a kin^ed. Un Gendarme ou homme de guerre, a soldier. La Gendarmerie,
the rout of soldiers. Gent miste and propre, a propre man, a coint fellow.
Gentement, seek Gentil. Gentienne herb, an herb called Gentian. Gentil,
feate, proper, comely. Gentillement, Gentiment, ou Gentement, handsomely,
proprely, featly. Gentilesse, nobility. Geolier, a Jayler, a keeper. Gerbe de
ble, an ear, an ear of corn. Germain, engendre de mesme germe, come of the
same stock that J am. Germandree, an herb called Germander. Gemence and
semence des arbres, The sprigs or sproutes of trees. Germer, to bud out, to
sproute. Germement, a budding, a sprouting. Gesir aupres, to lie by. Sa femme
gist, his wife lies in. Gesine, a lying in. Geste, maintien, contenance, mine,
gesture, behavior, demeanor. Getter quelque sum, to cast a sum. Gettons
and mereaux pour compter, counters. Gibbeciere, a pouche, a bag, a purse.
Gibbet, a gibbet, a pair of gallows. Gibbier, all kind of flesh meat.
Gingembre, ginger. Gist, seek Gesir. Giroslee, a gillofer. Le Giron, the
bosom. Glace, Jce. Glacer, to freese. Glace de tous costez, yeed, or frosen
about. Gladiateur, iouer d'espee, ou escrimeur, a master of fence, a fence
man. Glais, ou Glayeul, herb, an herb so called. Vu glaiue, a sword, a
glaiue. Gland, mast, acorne. La Glane qu'on a amasse, apres moissonieurs,
gleaning. Glappir comme un chein ou regnard, to bark like a dog or fox.
Glappissement, a barking. Gletteron, ou Glouteron and Bar dane, herb, a burre.
Glason ou motte, a turfe, a clod. Glisser, to slide, to slip. Glissement, a
slipping, a sliding. Gloire and louange par bie^ fair glory, praise.
Glorieux, qui fait tout pour auoir gloire, glorious, proud. Estre Glorieux, to
be proud, hautie. Glorieusete, hautinesse, pride. Gloriette, small glory,
somewhat glorious. Se glorifier and vanter, to brag, to boast. Glorieusement,
gloriously. Glosser comme les gelines, to clock like a hen. Glossement, a
clocking. Un clouteron, a burre. Glout, a glutton. Gloutement, gluttonously.
Gloutonie, gluttony. Glu, glewe. Gluer, to glue. Gluant, gluy, clammy.
Gluement, a glewing. Gluon, a lime twig. Gobelet, a goblet, a cup. Gober, to
swallow up, to devour Un godet and tout autre vaisseau de terre cuict, a
Goddet, a stone cup. Goffre and semblable qu'on bail le a petits enfants, a
wafre. Un golfe de mer, a gulf. Gomme, gum. Gommement, a gumming. Les gons
d'vne port, the hooks of a door. La gorge, the throat. Gorgerette, a gorget,
a Lawne wherewith women cover their pappes. Un gorgias ou collet de femme a
gorget. Qui est Gorrier, trim, fine, feate. Le Gosier ou Gauion, the throat.
Gouffre, a gulf. Un Gouiat, a soldiers boy. Gouion, poisson, a godioy. Goulu,
a glutton. Deuenir gourd and roide de force de froidure, crainte, ou autre
adventure, to wax stiff with cold. Gourmand, a glutto^, a bellygod.
Gourmandise, gluttony, papring Gourmander, to raven, to glut. Gourmanderesse, a
she glutton. La Gourme qui vient aux cheuaux, horses fomyng at the mouth.
Gousse de febues, a bean cod. Le Goust, taste, savor. Gouster, to taste, to
savor. Le Gouster, ou reciner, an after noones banquet. Vne Goutte, a drop.
Gouttes nouees ou crampes, the gout, the crampe. La Goutte es mains, the gout
in the hands. La Goutte es pieds, the gout in the feet. Goutteux, goutie. Un
Gouteron, ou burette, an ewer, a cruet. Gouttiere, gutter. Le Gouuernal d'vne
nauire, the rudder of a ship. Gouuerner, to govern, to rule, to guide.
Gouuerneur, a gouerner, a ruler Gouuernante, ou gouuerneresse, a gouernesse, a
woman ruler. Gouuernement, a ruling, a governing. (...) Guarison, health. Un
Gue, a foorde. Gueer, to wade. Guepiillon, a holy water sprinkle. Guerdon,
reward, recompense, meede. Guerdonner and recompenser, to reward, to
recompense. Guerdonnement, a rewarding. Guere, little, small. Guerir seek
Guarir. Se guermenter, To lamente, to groan. Guernier, seek Grenier. Guerpir
son pais, and s'en aller habiter en terre estrange, to, forsake the country.
Guerre, war. Guerroya^t and noysif, warryng, fighting. Guerroyeur, a warrier,
a fraymaker. Guesde, woad, such as diers use. Des guestres, high shoes,
startops. Le Guet de nuict, The night watch. Vne guette ou epsy, a watchman,
a spiall. Guetter, To watch, to mark, to spy, to pry. Guetteur, a watcher.
Guetteur de chemins, a robber by the high way. La Gueule, a beasts mouth.
Gueule be, with open mouth. Du gui, byrdlime. Guichet, a wicket, a hatche. Un
Guide qui meine autruy, a leader, a guide, a lodesman. Guider, to guide.
Guilhedin, ou hacquenee, A gelding. Vne Guilee, a shower of rain. Des
guimauues, wild mallows. Guines, a kind of cherries. Viure a la guise
d'autruy, guyse, manner or fashion, to live after the manner of other.
H ante A.
HA, ha, A, ha. Qui A, seek Auoir. Habile, able, handsome, nimble, cunning.
Habilite and aptitude, nimblenesse. Habilement, handsomely, cunningly.
Habiller, to cloth, to trim, to furnishe. Habillement, clothing. Habiter, to
remain, to dwell, to inhabit. Habit, inhabited. Les habitants d'un pays, the
inhabitants of a country. s'Habituer, to settle. s'Habituer and accoustumer,
to settle, to enure. Hache, an axe. Hacher menu, to chop in pieces, to shread.
Hachette, an hachet. Hachis, a gall^malfrey. Vne hay, a hedge. Un haim, ou
Hamesson, a hook. Haine, hatred, malice. Hair, to hate. Hai, hated. Hair,
sick Here. Un Hairon, a hearonsew. Haleine, breath. Halecret, and toute armure
de corpse, a corslet. Halener, to breath. Haler pour tirer en amont, To pull up,
to hale. Haleter, to gasp, to draw the breath. Hamesson, a hook, seek Haim.
Hauap ou tasse a boire, a Tankarde, a jack. La Hanche, the hanch. Hanebane,
herb, henbane. La Hante ou fuste d'vne iaueline, ou autre baston, the staff
of a iauelyne or other weapon. Hanter, to haunt, to frequent. Haquebutiers, ou
Harquebuzieres, harquebuziers, gonners. Haquenee, an ambling gelding. Vne Har,
Hars, ou Heart, a with made of a green stick. Haran, a herring. Harangue, a
declaration, an oration, a tale. Haranguer, to declare. Harangueur, an orator.
Un Haras, a heard of horses and mares. Harceler, to vex, to trouble, to
annoy. Hardes, stuff, implements. Hardi, bold, courageous, stout, hardy.
Hardiesse, boldness. Hardiment, boldly, stoutly, courageously. Harer les
chiens, to cherish dogs to set them together by their ears, to clap their
backs. Hargneux, wayward, froward, peuishe. Harnois d'hommes d'armes, a
harness. Harnois a la legere, a light harness. Harondelle, seek Arondelle.
Vne harp, a harp. Hasard, hasarde, venture. Hasarder, to venture. Hasle,
sunburning. Un home tout hasle, a man all to be sunburned. Un hasle, a spit or
broache. Haste, haste, speed, swyftenesse. A la Haste, in have. Haster, to
hasten, to quicken. Se Haster d'aller, to make have, to make speed. Hastif and
soudain, hastye, sodeine. Hastiuete, hastiness, sodeinnesse. Hastiuement,
hastily, swiftely, spedily. Hau, a manner of calling, a how; Hau, c'est
tresbien fait, How, well done. Hau mon pere, Haw father hear ye? Hauet, a
hook. Haui and tout-brusle, parched. Hault, high. Hautain, lofty, higher in
the in-steppe. Hautainete, loftynesse. Hautainement, loftily. Haultement
prononcer quelque verse, to pronounce a verse aloude. Haulteur, height. Haulser,
to set up, to set aloft. Un haure, a haven, an harbor for a ship. Vne hay,
a hedge. Hayer, Hay, seek Hair. Un heaulme, a helm. De l'Hebene, a wod called
heben Herberger, seek Esberger. Hebete, dullness, blockishnesse. Helas, alas.
Hennir, to neigh like a horse. Heraux d'armes, heraldes. Herb, an herb. Un
Herbier, A gardener. Toute sort d'herbe, All sorts of herbs. Un here, ou
estamine, ou saz, a boulter. Heredite, heyrehod. Hereste, seek Areste de
poisson. Hergne, burst in the coddes. Herisson, an Hedgehogge, an yrchon.
Heritage, inheritance. Heritier, to inherit. Heritier, an heir. Heremite,
seek Ermite. Heron, seek Hairou. Vne Hearse, a harrowe. La Hearse de la port
d'une ville, a port eulleys. Herser and couurir la semence, to harrow the
ground. Herseur, a harrower. Hersement, a harrowing. Hersoir, yesternight. Se
heruper, to set up the bristles. Hestoudeau, a cockrell, a caponet. Heur,
fortune, hap, chance. Bon Heur, good hap, good fortune. Heurete, happiness.
Heureux, happy, fortunate, cheeuing. Heureusement, happily, fortunately.
Heureusete, happiness, blessedness. Heure, hour. A ceste Heure, at this
time. A l'Heure, at that hour. Heurler, seek Hurler. Heurt, a blow, a dashe,
a stroke. Heurter ou frapper a la port, to knock at the door. Heurter and
trebucher, to strike down, to overthrow. Heurtant, striking, knocking.
Heurte, stricken, dashed. Heurtement, a striking, a dashing. Un Hibou, an howl.
Hideur, a fear, a quaking. Hideux, hideous, terrible, fearful. Vne Hie de
quoy on bat le paue, and enfo^se on les pilotis en terre, a pauiers betle. Qui
est Hie, stamped down. Hiebles, an herb called walwort Hier, yesterday.
Hierce, vne sort de liarre, yuie. Vin Hippocras, hypo^crase. Hipothequer and
aslubiectir au payement d'aueune chose, to lay a paune to gage. Hisnel, eger,
sharp, tart, sower. l'Histoire des chooses saictes d'an en an, a story, a
cronicle. Historien, a cronicler. Hobin, a horse called a hobbie. Hocher, to
shake, to wag. Hode, c'est a dire, Las ou less, weary. Hoqueton, a iacket.
Ho, ho, si tossed, what so soon? Hoir, an heir. Hoitie, heritage. Hola, hola,
soft, soft. Homicide, ou meurtre, a manqueller, a murderer. Homme, a man.
Homologuer, to establish, to approve. Hon, hon, qua^d on a petit a petit
apperceu quelque mal, a ha? Honneste homme, louable, and de virtue, de bonne
reputation, an honest man, and of good name. Honneste ho^me and courtois, an
honest and courteous man. Honneste mignon and ioli, an honest compaignon.
Honnestement, honestly, woorthily. Honnestete, honesty. Honneur, honor.
Honneur and reverence, honor, reverence. Honorable, honorable, reverend,
worshipful. Honorablement and orneement, honorably, worthily. Honorer, to
honor, to reverence. Estre Honni and a deshonneur, to be defamed, to have
ones honesty stained. Honte, shame. Le Hoquet, the hick op, yexing. Hoqueter,
to hickop. Horloge, a dial, a clock. Hornus un tell, excepting such a one.
Horreur, horror, fear with trembling. Horrible, horrible, fearful. Horse,
without. Hospital, hospital. Hospitalite, hospitality. Un Host ou Hostelier,
an host. Un Hostel, a lodging. Hostel de ville, a town house, a guyld hall.
Hostelier, an hosteler. Hostelerie, an Inn, a table house, a tavern.
Hostess, an Hostess. Hot, a basket, a dossar. Vne Houe, ou besche, a
pickax. Houer la terre, to dig the ground, to delue. Houeur, a deluer.
Houement, digging, deluing. vne Houllette, a shepherds hook. Des Houseaux,
boots. Vne Housse, the harness of a horse. Houstil, seek Outil. Un Houx, a
holly tree. Un Hoyau, a spade. Vne Huche, a hutch, a cheste. Hucher, to call.
Huche, called. Huile, oil. Huileux, oyleye. Huilier, a seller of oil. l'Huis,
the door, the porche. d'Huis en Huis, from door to door. Huissier, ou Sergeant,
an husher, a sergeant, a porter. Huissiere, a woman porter. Huict, eight.
Huitieme party, the eight part. Huitres, ou mieulx Ouistres, Oysters. Humain,
human. Humble, humble, lowly, meek. Humilite, meekness, lowliness. Humer,
to sup. Humement, a supping. Un Humet, a broth, a supping. Humeur, humor,
moisture. Humide, moist. Humilite, seek Humble. Hupe, a bird called a houpe.
Hurler, to howl, to shreeke. Hurleme^t, a houling, a shreeking Huyer, to cry,
to shout. Hydropisie, dropsy. Hydropique, one that has the dropsy.
Hypocrite, an hipocrite. Hypothequer, seek Hipothequer. De l'Hyssope, Jsope.
I ante A.
IA, comme, Il y a Ia deux Ans que, etc. already: It is already two years.
Iasoit, although that. Vne Iachere, terre qu'on laisse reposer en friche,
fallowe ground. Vne Iacinthe, a precious stone called a Iacinct. Iadis, ou le
te^ps Iadis, heretofore Ialoux, qui craint que ce qu'il aim ne soit commun a
autruy, ialous. Ialousie, ialousie. Iamais, never. A Iamais, for ever. La Iambe
depuis le genouil iusques en bas, the leg from the knee downward. Iambette, a
little leg. Un Iambon, a pestle of porke, a gammon of Bacon. les Iantes d'vne
roue, the spokes of a wheel. Le mois de Ianuier, the month of Januarie.
Iapper, to bark. Iarcer, Se Iarcer, too cleave, to rent. Iardin, a garden.
Iardin a herbs and arbres, a kitchen garden. Iardin ou petit verger, a little
garden. Iardinier, a gardener. Iargon, a counterfeat speech, pedlers French.
Le Iarret, the houghes, the hammes. Iartier ou Iartierre, a garter. Iaser, to
talk, to chat, to prate. Iaseur, a prater, a babbler. Iaserie, prattling.
Iasement, a babbling. Iaspe, a Jasper stone. Vne Iatte, a boll. Iau, ou
roussette, a barbell. Iaueline, ou pique, a iaueline. Un Iauelot a darder, a
dart. Iauelle, ou boteau, a bockle, a trusse, a bundell. Iaulne, yellowe.
Deuenir Iaulne, to become yellowe. Iaulnir, to wax yellowe. Iaulnisse, the
disease called the iaundise. I'ay, pour Ie ay, J have. Iceluy, the same man.
Icy, ou ie suis, there where I am. Idiot, an Jdeot, a simple person. Vne Idol,
an ydoll. Ie, comme, Ie feray cela, J, J will do it. Iecter, to throw, to
cast, to fling. Iectement par dessus, a throwing over. fair Iectees, to
fling. Iectement, a throwing, a casting. Un Iecton and scion d'arbre, a twig or
scient of a tree. Vne Ienice, a hegfer, a young cow. Ieu, play, game. La Ieune,
ou June, fast. A Ieun, ou Iun, fasting. Ieuner, ou Iuner, to fast. Un Ieune
garson, a young boy. Ieunesse, youth, young age. Ignorer, not to know, to be
ignorant. Ignorance, ignorance, lack of knowledge. Ignorant, ignorant, rude,
unlearned. Il, he. Il est ainsi, it is so. Il fault, it behooves. Iliaque
passion, Malady quand un patient rend ses excrements par la bouche, a disease
which causes the pacient too void his excrementes at the mouth. Illec, there,
in that place, thither. Par Illec, that way. Illicite, unlawful. Illusion,
deceyt, fantasy, begyling. Image ou resemblance and pourtraict faict sus le
vif, an image, a likeness to the quick. Imagette enleuee, an embossed Jmage.
Imaginer, to imagine, to conceive. Imagination, imagination, conceat. Imiter,
to follow, to do the like. Imitation, following. Imitateur, a follower, a
counterfeater. Immediatement, immediately, forthwith. Immisericorde,
unmercifulness. Immisericordieux, unmerciful. Immobile, immovable. Immodere,
immoderate, out of temper. Immole, offered. Immundice, filth, uncleanness.
Immortel, immortal, everliving. Immortalite, immortality. Immuable,
unchangeable, immovable. Immunite and exemption qu'on a merit de la
Republique, exemption from business. Impatient, impatient. Impatiemment,
impaciently. Imparfaict, imperfect. Imperfection and corruption, imperfection
and corruption. Impatience, impatiencie. Impetrer, to obtain by request.
Impetration, obtaining, getting. Impetueux, violent, of mighty power.
Impetuosite, violence. Chose d'Importance, a matter of weight, a thing of
importance Importuner, to desire earnestly, to be importunate. Importuner
quelqu'vn de force d'oultrages, to enforce one by brauling. Importunite,
vntimelinesse, unreasonableness. Imposer, to lay to, to put too. Fair Impost,
to leuye a Tribute. Impossible, impossible. Imprimer, to print. Imprimeur, a
PRINTER. Improprement, improperly. Imprudent, unwise, foolish, fond.
Imprudemment, unwisely, foolishly. Impudence and effrontement, shamelessness.
Impudique and pallard, shameless, a harlot. Impudiquement, shamelesly.
Impudicite, shamelessness. Impuni, unpunished. Impunite, lack of punishment.
Imputer quelque chose a aucun a folly and a blasme, to impute a thing to ones
folly. Lieu inaccessible, a place that can not be come by. Inaduertence,
unadvisedness. Incomprehensible, incomprehensible. Uncertain, uncertain,
doubtful. Incertainete de ce qu'on doibt fair, to doubt of our business.
Incertitude and doubt, doubt. Incertainement, doubtfully. Incessamment,
continually, incessantly. Inciser, to cut up, to make incision. Incision, an
anatoming. Inciter aucun a fair quelque chose, to stir, to provoke, to
allure, to entice, to enforce. Incitant, provoking. Incite, provoked.
Incitement, a stirring, a provoking. Incitation, provoking, stirring, moving.
Inciuilite, vnmannerlynesse, vncurtesie. Inciuilement, discourteously. Incliner,
to incline, to bend to. Inclinant a la verite, inclining to truth.
Inclination, inclination. Incognu, unknown. Incommodite, incommoditie,
dommage, displeasure. Incomparable, incomparable. Inconsiderant, vndiscreat,
unadvised, rash. Inconsideration, rashness, indiscretion. Inconsta^ce,
unstableness, lightness. Inconstant and volage, unstable, shittle witted.
Inconstamment, inconstantly. Incontinent, incontinent, at that present, by and
by, immediately Incontinent quand aux femmes, unchaste. Incontinemment,
unchastly. Inconvenient, misfortune, an inconvenience. Liver Incorrect, a
faulty book Incorrectement, faultily. Incredible, incredible. Incrediblement,
incredibly. Incredule, misbeleeuing, misdeeming. Incredulite, misbeleef.
Incurable, incurable. Indifferent, indifferent. Indifferemment, indifferently.
Indigent, needy, poor. Indigence, poverty, need, lack. Indigestion,
rawnesse, lack of digestion. Indignation, anger, wrath, chafing, fuming.
Indigne, unworthy. Indign^ment, unworthily. l'Indisposition du temps,
vnte^peratnesse of weather. Indiscret, vndiscreat, rash. Par Indiuis, as not
divided. Indocile, intractable, unteachable. Indocte, unlearned. Indoctement,
unlearnedly. Indubitable, undoubted, most certain. Indubitableme^t,
undoubtedly. Induire aucun a quelque chose, to bring one to the doing of a
thing. Induict, brought in, allured. Induction, an alluring. Inegal and mal
vni, unequal, uneven. Inegalement, unequally. Inequalite, inequality.
Inexcusable, inexcusable. Infame, infamous, of ill name. Infamer, to defame, to
slander. Infamy, defamation, slander. Infecter tout un lieu de mauuaise
odeur, to infect a place with stink. Inferer, to gather together, to put
together, to bring in. Inferieur, underling. Infertile, unfruitful.
Infertilite, vnfrutefulnesse, barrenness. Infidele, unfaithful, untrusty.
Infidelite, unfaithfulness. Infini, endless, infinite. Infinite, endlesnesse.
Infiniement, without end, for ever. Infirmite, weakness, infirmity. Vne
inflammation, a swelling, an inflammation. Inflexible, vnbowable. s'Informer de
quelque chose, to inquire of a thing. Informateur, an enfourmer, an
inquisitour. Information, information. Ingenieux, qui a bon esprit and
entendement, witty, of good understanding. Ingenieusement, wittely, wisely
s'Ingerer de fair quelque chose, to thrust him self in to do a thing. Ingrat,
unthankful. Ingratitude, unthankfulness. Inhabile and non suffisant,
unable, insufficient. Inhabitable, wild, inhabitable. Inhiber and defendre, too
forbid. Inhibition, forbidding. Inhumain, discourteous, vnge^tle. Inhumainement,
discourteously, ungently. Inhumanite, ungentleness. Inimitie, enimitie, hatred,
displeasure. Inique, wicked, naught. Iniqueme^t, wickedly, naughtily. Iniquite
and injustice, iniquity, injustice, wickedness. Iniure, wrong, injury.
Iniurier aucun, too wrong one, to do one injury. Iniurieux, hurtful,
hindersome. Unjust, unjust. Iniusteme^t, unjustly, wrongfully. Injustice,
injustice, wrong. Innocent de quelque chose, hurtlesse, innocent, giltlesse.
Innocemment, innocently. Innoce^ce, hurtlesnesse, innocency Innumerable,
innumerable, beyond all number. Innumerablete, innumerablenes Inopine, sudden,
unlooked for, unawares. Inquieter, to trouble, to molest. Inquisition, an
inquiry, a search Insatiable, insatiable, that can not be filled. Vne
Inscription, a superscription, an epigram. Insense, mad, witless. Insensible,
insensible, that can not be felt. Insolence, carelessness. Estre Inspire de
l'esprit divine, too be inspired with the holy ghost. Inspiration, inspiring.
Instable, unstable, fickle, chaungeable. Instabilite, unstableness.
Instamment, instantly. Vne petite Instance, a little point depe^ding on the
pri^cipal. En un Instant, in a moment, in an instant. Instinct and Inspiratio^,
instinct, or inspiration, inward motion Instigation, a stirring, a provoking.
Instruire, to instruct, to teach. Instruict and enseigne, taught, instructed.
Instruction, an instruction, a teaching, a learning. Instrument a fair quelq^
chose q^ ce soit, an instrument, a tool. Insupportable a cause de sa
puissance, He that is not to be borne with. Integrite, innocence, pureness.
Intelligence, knowledge, understanding. Intelligible, easy to be understand,
clear. Intemperance de l'air, the grosnesse of the air. Intenter, action de
bonne foy, to attempt vprightely. L'intention, fantasy, and volonte d'vne
person, the intent mind, purpose. Interest, interest, exchange. Prendre a
interest, to take money at interest, to receive at exchange. Tu y as interest,
thou haste title to it, thou haste interest. Fair intermission d'escrire, to
leave of writing for a time. Estre interesse, to be hindered. Interposer son
judgment, to give his judgment, to allow. Interposement, a putting or setting
between, a pause. Interpreter and do^ner a cognoistre, to interpret, to
expound. Interroguer, To question, to demand. Interrogation, a questioning.
Interruption, interruption, a breaking one of his tale. Un intestin qui va
depuis le roignon dextre iusque au senestre, en passant sus le fond de
l'estomach, a gut that passes fro the right kidney to the left, an inward. Les
intestins, the inwardes, the bowelles. Intituler, to name, to title.
Intolerable, intolerable, that can not be borne. Intraictable and farouche,
intractable, outrageous. Intriquement, darkly, intricatly Introduire, to bring
in. Inualider, To weaken, to make sick. Inuenter, to invent, to find out, to
devise. Inuenteur, a deviser, an inue^ter. Invention, an invention, a devise
Inuentaire, an inventory, a register. Invincible, that can not be ouercommen.
Inuiter, inciter, and prouoquer aucun, to bid, to provoke. Inuiter a soupper,
to bid one to supper, to desire. Inuitement, ou inuitation, A bidding, a
desiring. Inuoquer Dieu a son aid, To call upon God. Inutile a toutes chooses,
unprofitable. Inutilement, unprofitably. Ioindre, to join, to couple. Ioinct,
joined, coupled. Ioignant and aupres, a joining to, hard by. Ioincture, a
joint. Ioli, ioyly, lusty, preatie, lively. Ioliet, pretty, fine, nice.
Ioliement vestu, bravely clad. Ioliuete d'accoustremens trop exquise, finenesse
in apparel above measure. Iombarde, ou Ioubarbe, vne herb, housleeke. Vne
ionc, a rushe. Ionc marin, a bull rushe. Ioncees, a bundle of rushes. De la
iotte, Beetes, an herb. La jove, the cheek, the ioll. Iouee, quand on frappe
aucun de la main sus la jove, ou de poing, a blow on the ear. Iouer, to play.
Ioueur, a player. En se iouant, in sport. Ioueur de fleute, a player on the
Flute. Ioufflu, fat cheeked. Un ioug, a yoke. Le iour, the day. Iournellement,
daily. Le iour d'vne peincture, The light that is given to a Picture, the
painters call it a shadow. Iournee fort doulce, pleasant day, a fair day.
Papier iournal, a day book. Iouir, to enjoy, to possess. Estre iouissant de
quelq^ chose, to possess a thing. Donner iouissance de volupte, to enjoy
worldly lust. Ioustes, iustings, tourney. Iouuenceau, a young man, a stripling,
a springall, a lad. Joy and liesse, joy, comfort, glee, mirth. Ioyeux, merry,
iocund, cherefull. Ioyeusement, joyfully, cheerfully, merrily. Ioyeusete,
cheerfulness, merrinesse. Il n'en Ira point ainsi, it shall not go so. Ire,
wrath. Qui est ire, angry. Ireux, wrathful. Irraisonnable, unreasonable, out
of reason. Irreprehensible, faultlesse, blameless. Irriter, to provoke, to
stir. Chose irritante, prouokement. Irritation, a provoking. Irrite, provoked.
Vne isle, an Jslande. Isser horse, to come forth, to issue out. Issu de bas
lieu, borne of poor kindred. Un Item, article, ou party, an Jtem, an article.
Par petits Item, ou parties, by parcelles. Le Iubile, the Jubilie, the Popes
pardon for forgiveness of sin, given every hundredth year. Iucheoir, a
pearche, a roust. Iue muscate, herb, an herb called yuie. Un Judge, a judge.
Iuger, to judge. Un judge and arbitre, a judge, an arbitratour. Judgment,
judgment, opinion. Iugeoline herb, a white grain growing in Jndia. Iuif, a
Jewe. Le mois du Iuillet, July. Iuiubes, herb, an herb so called. Vne iument,
a mare. June, Iuner, seek Ieune, Ieuner. Iuoire, ou Yuoire, yuorie. Iurer, to
swear. Iurement, an oath. Jurisdiction, jurisdiction. Iuriste, a Lawyer. De
l'Iuroye, darnell. Mettre Ius le say, to put of his coat. Ruer Ius, to throw
of. Iusques a ce lieu la, To that place. Iusques a maintenant, till this
present. Du just, ou mieulx Ius, ou brouet, ou potage commun, qui n'est point
espez, juice, broth pottage. Just, upright, just. Iustement, justly,
uprightly. Justice, justice. Se iustifier and lauer, To purge himself, to
justify the cause. Iustifier and esgaller, to make even, to match.
L ante A.
LA, this article La, is sign of the feminine gender. La femme, the woman. La
ou tu es, there where thou art, in that place. Labeur, labor, toil, work.
Labeur and trauail, labor, diligence. Laborieux, diligent, painful. Labeur
ou Labourage, tylthe. Labourer, to labor, to work, to toil. Labourer la
terre, to tylle the ground. Laboureur, a husbandman, a hynd. Un Lac, a snare, a
ginne. Laceron, ou Laicteron, herb, a sowthistle. Ladrerie, leaprie,
meseldensse. Du Laict, milk. Lactaiges, ou toutes chooses qui rendent laict
d'elles mesmes white meats, all things that have milk in them. Laictiere qui
rend du laict, an herb that has milk in it. Laictue, Lettyse. Laictue
Pommee, Cabbige lettise. Laid and difforme, misshapen, ill favored, foul,
filthy. Laidement, ill fauouredly. Laideron, somewhat ylfauoured. Laideur, ill
fauourednesse, filthiness. Laidoyer, ou laidenger aucun, to rail, and to
stain ones honesty. la Lain, wool. Lain auec le sein, unwashed wool.
Laisarde, a Lizard. Laisser, to leave off, to forsake. Laiton, latten, brass.
Un Laiz, a legacy Le Lambeau d'vne rob, A purfle or guard. Lambris, a
seeling, wanscotting. Le Lambris du comble ou pla^che d'vne maison, The roof
of a house, the seeling of a house. Lambrisser, to wanscot walls. Vne lame, ou
table de cuyure, estain, ou plumb, and semblables, a plate of copper, tin,
lead or other metal. Lamentation and devil, wailing, lamenting. Lamenter, too
wayle, too lament. Lamp ou luminaire, a lamp, a light. Lamproye, a lamprie.
Lance, a spear. Lancer ou darder, to launche forth, to throw forth. Lancette,
ciseau, ou autre instrument dequoy on fait incision, a surgeons lancet.
Landier, an andyron. Langage, language, speech. Grand langageur, a man full of
words, a pratler. Les langes and petits drapeaux d'vn enfant, Childrens
cloutes. Langouste, ou sautereau, A grasshopper. Langue, a tongue. Languette, a
little tongue. Languette de balance, the tongue of a balance. Languard, a
pratler, a prater, a babbler. Languarde, a tittle tattle, a chatting dame.
Langueur, languor, tediousness. Languir, to languishe, to pyne away.
Languissant d'amour, forespent with love. Langoureux, languishing, sorrowful.
Lanieres ou longes a tenir les oyseaux sus les poing, hawks iesses. Vne
Lantern, a lantarne. Lapider, to stone. Lapidaire, a ieweller, a lapidarie
Lapper comme les chiens, to lap as dogs do. Un Laqs, a snare, a gren, a gin, a
trap. Un Laquey, a Lackie. Laquelle chose, the which thing Du Lard, lard,
bacon, porke. Larder des fleches, to pearce with arrows. Un Lardon and
broquard, a skoffer, a iester, a flouter. Large, large, wide. Largement,
largely, bountifully, liberally, abundantly. Largess, largess, liberality,
bou^tifulnesse. Largeur, breadth, largeness. Largeur d'vn poulce, an inche
broad. Vne Larme, a tear. Larmette, a little tear. Larmoyer and plourer, to
wayle, to weep, to lament. Larmoyement, a weeping. Le Larmier d'vne muraille,
the copping or water table of a wall. Larron, a thief. Larronneau, a little
thief, a micher. Larrecin, theft. Las, ou Lasset, a snare, a grin. Las, ou
Less, tant d'esprit que de corpse, weary. Lasser, to weary. Less, wearied.
Lassete, weariness. Lasche, slow, slack. Laschement, slowly, cowardly,
fainthartedly. Laschete, slownesse, cowardlynesse. Lascher les chables des
nauires, to lose the cables. Lascher d'entre ses mains, too lose out of ones
hands, to let go. Estre Lasche and deliure, too be released, to be let lose.
Cords Lasches, losed cords. Lasche, and tenu a un laqs, entrapped, snared.
Lasser, Less, Lassete, seek Las. Vne Late, a lathe. Latin, qui est du pays
des Latins, Latin, or of the Latins country. En Latin, in Latin. Latiter and
se cacher de crainte, to lurk, to ly hidden, to mich. Latitude, ou largeur,
breadth or wideness. Latrine, the priuye, the iaxe. Lauande, lauender. Lauer
and nettoyer, to wash, to cleanse, to rense. Laue, washed. Laueme^t, a washing,
a clensing. Un Lauoir a lauer les mains, a lauer. Un laurir, a Baye tree, a
Laurel. Lay, of the laytie, profane. Layette, a box. Le, an article put
before the masculine or neuter gender. Le, le Le d'vn drap, the breadth of a
cloth. Leans, on Liens, in that place, there. Leicher, Leischer, Licher, to
lick. Lecon, a lesson. Lecteur, Lecture, seek Lire. Legal, lawful. Legate, a
Legate, an Ambassador. Legataire, he to whom any thing is bequeathed. Legiere
ou Ledger, light, swifte, quick, slight. Legierement, swiftly, quickly,
lightly. Legierete, lightness, swiftness, quickenesse. Vne legion contenant.
12500. hommes de guerre, a Legion containing. 12500. men of war.
Legislateur, qui fait vne loy, a lawmaker, a law writer. Legitime, lawful.
Legitiment, lawfully. Leguer, ou laissir, to give by legacy, to bequeth.
Legumage, all manner of pulse. Fair vendre a l'encant, to make port sale. Vne
Lend, a ground or land. Le Lendemain, the next day after. Un Lentif, an
asswager. Qui est Lent de nature. slow of nature. Lentement marcher, To go
slowly. Vne Lent, ou Lentille, a kind of pulse, called lintils. Le^tisque,
arbre, the mastik tree. L'enuers de la robe, the inside of the garment.
Leoparde, best enge^dree d'vn Lion and d'vne Panthere, A lybert. Lepre, rongne
and galle, scabbe, scall, leprosy. Lepreux, leprous. Lequel, the which. Lequel
de deux qui ce soit, which of the two so ever it be. Lesquels deux, which two.
Lequel est plus digne, which is the worthier. Lose majesty, high treason.
Condemn de Lose Majesty, condemned of treason. Mener en Less, to lead dogs
in a leashe. Lethargy, vne malady, the letargie, a drousie disease. Du Leton,
a metal called latten Vne Lettre, a letter. Lettres missiues, letters,
epistles. Letres patentes du Roy, The kings letters patents. Lettre, learned.
Leuain, leuyn. Pain sans leuain, unleavened bread. Leu, ou Lu, red or perused.
Un Leuee d'vn estang, the bank of a pond, the pits brinke. Leuee qu'on faict
pour guard que la riuiere ne desborde, a bank or a causey. Lever, to heave up,
to lift up. Leave, lifted up. Leuement de deniers, a leuying of money. Leuesche,
ou leuesse, herb, an herb called Lombardy louage. Un Leuier, a lever. Un
Leurault, a leueret, a young hare. Les Leures and bolieures, the lips Un
Leurier, a Grayhounde, a hound for the nones. Lexiue, lie, such as they wash
buckes with. Lez, c'est a dire pres, ou aupre, nigh to. Liaison, a baud. Un
Liard, a band. Un Liard, a piece of french money containing in value somewhat
loss than our halfepeny. Du Liarre, yuie. Libelle diffamatoire, a libell of
defamation. Liberal, liberal, free hearted, fra^k Liberalement, frakly,
liberally. Liberalite, liberality, bountyfulnesse. Liberte and franchise de
parler and viure come on veult, liberty, fredom, to live as one will.
Libraire, a bookeseller. Librairie, a bookesellers shop. Librement, freely,
without controllement. Vne Lice, a listes for men to ride horses in. License
and permission, license, liberty. Licher, to lick. Lichement, a licking.
Licharder, to lick daintily. Il est Licite and permis, it is laufull and
sufferable. Licol, a halter. Vne Licorne, an unicorn. Un Lict, ou autre Lieu a
se coucher, a bed or other place to lie in. Un Lictiere, a horslitter. La Lie,
bourbe and limon, lies, dross or scumme. La lie de l'huile qui est par dessus,
oil lies. Du liege, cork. Un lien, a line, a band, a leash. Lier, To bind,
to tie, to make fast. Lie and attache, bound or fastened. Liement, a bindyng,
a making fast. Liesse, joy, mirth. Liement, joyfully. Lieure, ou Liaisson, a
band. Lieu, a place. Petit Lieu, a little place. Au Lieu, instead, or in
place of. Dire en Lieu, to speak in place. Vne Lieure, a hare. Un Lieutenant,
a lieutenant, a deputy. Lieutenant civil, a Judge of town matters. Lieutenant
criminel, a judge of crimes. Lignage, lignage, kindred, offspring. De grand
Lignage and parente, of great kindred, of noble parentage. Ligne ou traict, A
line, a draught. Ligne partissant quelq^ figure que ce soit tout au trauers, an
overthwart line. Un ligne d'escripture, a line, a verse of writing. Fait a la
ligne ou cordeau, made by line and level, perfectely done. Lignee, lineage,
kindred. Lignier and tas de bois, a pyle of wood. Vne ligue ou band, a faction
or company divided. Limace, ou Limacon, a snayle. Limaille, the dust that
comes of filyng. Vne Lime, a file. Limer, to file iron or other thing.
Limure, file dust. Vne Limier, a blood hounde. Limiter and borner, to limitte,
to bound. Limite, determined, bound. Les Limits and bornes, the limiters and
bounds. Limitrofe, and voisin, he whose ground lies next to mine. Le Limon
d'vne chariot, chariotte, and autres, the beam where on the iron hangs. Limon
and d'ordure, dross, filthiness, off all, earth, Eaue Limonneuse, pudly water
Du Lin, linen, flax. Fin Lin, fine linen. Vne Ligne fort delie, a small line
Un Lingot, a ingot, a lu^p, a mass Linot, a bird called a Lynet. le Linteau de
dessus l'huis, the transom or lintell over a door. Un Lion, a lion. Lio^ne, a
lio^nesse Lip, a lip. Lippu, thick lipped. Liqueur, liquour. Liqueur
espreincte, pressed licour, juice. Lire, to read. Liseur, a reader. Un lis, a
lilly, a flouredelice. Liseron, an herb of which there are.ij. kinds, the one
is called pery winkle. Liset qui rongne la vigne, A worm that eats vynes.
Lisiere, to list or border any thing Lisieres, bounds, borders. La Lisiere and
Limite du monde, the bounds of the world. Lisse, seek Lice, a Lystes for
iustlers. Litige, debat, strife, debate. Vne Liver de poix, A pound weight. Un
Liver, a book. Liuret, a pamflet. Liuree, a liuerie. Liurer, to deliver.
Locatif, ou Louagier, He that iourneyth. Lodier and couuerture de lict, a
couerlet, a blanket. Un Loge, a lodge, a Cabin of a ship. Logette, a little
lodge, a cotage. Logis, A lodging, an abydyng place, a dwelling. Loger, To
lodge at a place, to host, to inn. Loing, far off. Chemin Loingnet, a
metely long way. Fort loingtains, very long. Lieux loingtains, far places.
Loingtainete, great distance, farnesse off. Un Loir, a dormouse, a batte. Il
est Loisible, it is lawful. Qui n'est pas loisible de fair, that is unlawful
to be done. Loisir, leisure or time to do a thing. Loisir quand on cesse de la
besongne, leisure, when one rests from work. Qui loist, and n'est point
desplaisant a Dieu, a pleaser. Long, long. Longuement, of long time. Assez
longuement, of meetely long time. Longueur, length. Long de veau, a loine of
veale. Longes ou lanieres a tenir les oise aux sur le poing, I ^^els, or gesses
ha^ging at hauks legs. Lopin, a lump, a gobbet, a luncheon. Qui suit les
Lopins, a smelfeast. Un Lopin du Lain, a lock of wool. Lors, then, at that
time. Lossec le lieu de la nauire, ou se retire toute l'eaue and toutes
immondices, That place of the ship whither all the filth draws, a sink.
Lot, a lot. Mon Lot, my lot. Lottir, to cast lots. Lots and ventes, gains that
rise on lands besides the rent. Louable, Louablement, seek Lover. Louche and
bigle, he that looks a squint, goggle eyed. Lover vne maison, to hyre a house.
Lover and marchander la peine d'aucun, to hyre ones labor by the day or
otherwise. Qui est Love, he that is hired. Louage, hyring. Louagier, a
hyreling, soiourner. Lover aucun, to praise, to commend, to allow. Love,
praised, commended. Louange, praise, commendation, glory. Louable, praise
worthy, allowable, laudable. Louablement, laudably, praise worthily. Loueur, a
prayser. Loueresse, a she prayser. Un Loup, a wolf. Louue, a she wolf.
Louueteau, a wolves whelpe. Loupe, the roll of a weauers loome. Lourd,
blockish, lompish, vnha^dsome, lowtish. Lourdault, a lout, a lob, a groutnoll.
Lourdement, loutishly, vnhandsomlie. Un Loutre, vne best qui vit en l'eaue,
and en terre, an Otter. Louue, seek Loup. Loy, Law. Selon la Loy, Lawfully.
Loix, Laws and ordonnances. Loyal, faithful, trusty. Loyalement, faithfully,
trustily. Loyaute, faithfulness, trustiness. Loyer, hyre or reward. Loz qu'on
attend, and qui est desia quasi deu, praise looked for. Lozenge, any square
thing, as a dye or such like. Lu, ou Leu, Il ny a ne Feu ne Leu, light, There
is neither fire nor light. Un Luc, a lute. Lueur, light, brightness. Luicte, a
wrestling place. Luicter, to wrestle, to struggle. Luicteur, a wrestler.
Luictement, wrestling. Luire, to shine, to glimpse. Luisant, shining, bright.
Luiton, a wicked spirit. Lumiere, a light, a brightness. La Lumiere du iour,
the light of the day. Luminaire, a Lamp or other light. Lundi, monday. Lune,
the Moon. Lunatique, lunatike. Lune fort resplendissante, a bright shining
moon. Lunettes, spectakles. L'vn and l'autre, both the one and the other.
Luxure, lust. Luxurieus, lustful, given all to voluptuousness. Luy, he, the
same man.
M ante A.
MAcerer, macerer son corpse to make lean, to punish ones body. Machefer, ou
escume de fer, the dross of iron. Dent Mascheliere, the eye toth. Machiner
quelq^ finesse, to devise or go about some sutteltie. Machiner a aucu^ quelque
mal, to practice some mischief against one. Machinateur, a master of
mischief. Machination and tromperie, circumuention or sutteltie. Marquereau,
seek Maquereau. Macule, a spot, a blot. Maculer, to spot, to blot. Maculatures
and meschants papiers, foul or waste papers. Tables de bois Madre, speckled
wooden tables. Magicien, a magitian, a wisema^ Art Magique and d'enchanterie,
the art magike, or enchanting. Magistrate, qui a jurisdiction and empire, a
magistrate, a ruler. Magnifice^ce, magnifice^ce, bringing of great things to
pass. Magnifique, great, honorable, somptuous. Magnifiquement, honorably,
bountifully. Majesty, majesty, or power. Maieur, a Mayor. Maiguen ou
chandronnier, a Thinker, a Copper smith. Maigre, lean, thin. Maigrete,
leanesse. Maigreur, leanness. Maigrement, leanly. La Maille en l'oeil, a web
in the eye. Maillet, a mallet. Le Maillot des petits enfants, a childs
swathell band. Main, a hand. De Main en main, from hand to hand. Mainsne, the
younger. Maint homme, Maintes gents, many men, diverse people. Maintenant, now,
at this present Maintenir aucun estre de franche condition, to maintain or
bear one out. Maintenir son opinon, to maintain or defend his opinion. Estre
Maintenu en son order, to be maintained in his order Maintesfois, often times.
Maintien, gesture, countenance, behavior. Maire, Maieur, a Maiour. Mais, but.
Ie n'en pris mais, I can not do^ with all. Vne Maison, a house. Maisonnette, a
little house, a cottage. Maistre, a master. Maistresse, a mistress, a Dame.
Maistrier, ou Maistriser, to rule to govern, to master. Maistrise, mastrie.
Toute sort de Mal, all kind of evil. Fair Maux, to do evil, to do shrewd
turns. Malade, sick, evil at ease. Maladif, sickly, accrased. Malady,
sickness of the body, disease. Maladerie, a spittle or hospital. Homme Mal
adroict, a fond man an unhandsome man. Maladuenture, misfortune, mishap,
mischief, mischaunce. Maladuis, unadvisedness, indiscretion. Malaise a fair,
hard to be done. Malaiseement, very hardly, very painfully. Malaisance,
hardness, difficulty Malauenant, unseemly, uncomely, unsitting. Estre Mal
content de quelque chose, to be angry or displeased with a thing. Auec
Malcontentement, in displeasure, unwillingly. Male, a male. Malette, a bouget,
satchel, or wallet. Un Malier, a horse that carries a male or tronke.
Malencontre, ou Mal'encontre, misfortune, mishap, il luck. Malengin, fraud,
craft, subtilty, deceit, treachery. Sans fraud ne Malengin, without deceit, in
good faith. Malfaisant, a wicked or hurtful person. Malfaicteur, a malefactor,
a guilty person. Un Malfaict, a shrewd turn, a mischief. Malegrace,
displeasure, out of favor. Estre en la Malegrace d'aucun, to be out of ones
favor. Mettre en la Malegace and haine, to bring one out of favor, or to
displeasure. Mal hardi, cowardly, fearful. Malheur, mischief, misfortune. A la
Malheure, unhappily, in an ill hour. Grande Malheurete, great misery, great
mishap. Malheureux, unhappy, unfortunate, wretched. Maiheureusement, unhappily,
vnluckely, mischeuously. Malice, malice, subtlety, deceit. Malicieux,
malicious. Malicieusement, maliciously, hurtfully. Maling and mauuais, wicked,
mischeuous, hurtful. Malignite, mischeuousnesse. Mal traictement d'hoste, an
Host that makes his gests ill cheer, ill entreating. Malueuillant, an ill
willer. Malueuillance, ill willingness. Mammelle and tette, a dugge, pappe or
breast. Manans and habitans, dwellers or inhabiters. Le Manche de quelque outil
que ce soit, the haft of a tool, a helue. La Manche d'vn habillement, the
sleue of a garment. Mancherons, bracelets. Manchot, benom, taken, maimed, or
that lacks one hand, imperfect. De la Mandragore, an herb called Mandragon.
Mander quelqu'vn, to send one on an errand. Qui est Mande a venir, he that is
sent for. Mandement, a sending for, a commandment. Manger, to eat, to feed.
Un grand Mangeur, a great eater, a glutton, a deuourer. Mangeaille, meat, food.
Manier, to handle, to use. Endurer d'estre Many, too suffer to be handled.
Maniable, tractable, that will be handled. Maniement, a handling, an using, an
entreating. Maniere, a manner, a way, a guyse. La Maniere de parler, manner of
speech. ceste Maniere de gents est tresmeschante, this manner of people is
very wicked. La Maniere d'escrire, style, form or manner of writing. Maniere
and facon de fair, manner of behavior. A la Maniere, after that sort. Par
Maniere de fair, after a fashion. Manifest, manifest, plain, open, clear.
Manifester, to manifest, to show abroad, to declare. Manifestement, manifestly,
plainly, openly. La manne du ciel, Manna or heavenly food. Vne Manne, ou banne,
ou panier, a basket, a maunde. Mannequin, a tankard, or pot made with
bulrushes. Manoir, a dwelling place, a mansion. Mannouurier, a handy crafts
man. Vne Mante velue, a roughe ma^tle, an Jrish mantle. Manteau, a cloak.
Manumission, a letter of ones hand, a sending for by letter. Maquereau, a man
bawd. Maquerelle, a woman bawd. Maquerelage, bawdrie. Maquignon, a horse
corser. Marastre, a stepmother, a mother in Law. Marbre, marble. Un Marc de
pois, a weight containing eight ounces. Le Marc de toutes chooses, the lies or
grounds of any liquor. Le Marc des raisins, the mother of the wine. Marchand, a
merchant, a chapman, a copesman. Marchander, to cheapen, to bid money for any
thing. La Merchandise, merchandise, commodity, ware. March, a market place, a
fair. Bon and grand March de toutes chooses, good cheap ware. March ou
degree, a stayre, a step, a degree. Un Marchepied, a footepace, a threshold, a
groundsill. Marcher, to walk, to go, to step, to pase, to march. Le Marcher
d'aucun, a man's pase. Marcheme^t plus oultre, a stepping forward. Marchure, a
going, a marching. Mardi, wednesday. Vne Mare, a fish pond, a poole. Marez and
Marescage, marshes or fennes. lieu Marescageux, marshy ground Maree, sea fish.
Un Marshall, a ferrier, a horse smith. Marshall, ou Connestable, a marshall
or Constable. Les Mareschaux, the marshals. Le Marshall du Camp, the marshall
of the field. La Marge d'vn liver, the margin of a book. Marguiller, qui a la
charge des chooses qui sont dedens quelque lieu, comme temple, ou autres, one
that has the custody of any thing, a churchwarden. Un Mari, a husband. Le
Mari de ma mere, my mothers husband. Marriage, marriage, wedlock. Marier, to
marie, to wed, to give to wife. Se Marier, to be married. Mariable,
mariageable. Auoir faim d'estre Marie, one that would feign be married, to long
to be married. Nouueau Marie, the bridgrom, the new married man. Mariee, the
bride, the spouse. Mariement, a marriage, a wedding. Marin, of the sea.
Marinier, a mariner, a shipman. Mariolaine, an herb called maierome. vne
Marmite, a pot to sees meat in, a caudron. Marmoner enter fes dents, too
mumble between the teeth, to mutter, to murmour. Un Marmot, a Marmoset, a
munkey. Marmouset faict en faco^ d'vne mammelle en vne fontaine, par lequel
l'eau sort, the cock of a cesterne or fountain made like a dugge, out of
which the water runs. Marmousets tells qu'on voit es fontaines iectans
l'eaue, the cocks of fountains. Marne, sort de terre blanch, a kind of earth
called Marle, such as husbandmen use too dong their ground with. Maronnier,
seek Marinier. Marque, a mark, a sign, a note a token. Marque faicte en un
liver, a note, an annotation of a book. Marque and enseigne, a mark or spot.
Marqueur, to mark, to note, to sign. Marque, come d'vn fer chault, marked as
with a hot iron. Marqueter, tacheter and moucheter; to mark out, too divide,
to bespot. Marquete d'estoiles, bespotted with stars. Marquote and rossette,
the twig or branch of a vine. Marein dequoy on bastit, timber wood. Se Marrir
and couroucer, too be grieved or angry. Estre Marry and dolent de quelq^
chose, to be grieved with any thing, to take the matter heavily, to be sorry.
Marrisson, grief, sorrow. Un Marron, a kind of round chestnut. Le mois de
Mars, the month* of March. Marsouin, a sea hog. Vne Mart, a beast called a
Marten. Marteau, a hammer. Marteler, all to be beat or peale with a hammer.
Martelet, a little hammer. Martinet oyseau, a bird called a Martlet. Mas de
nauire, seek Maz. Mascher, to chawe or chewe. La Maschoire, the chall, or
iawe. Les dens Maschelieres, the eye teeth. Masle, the masle or he of any
beast or foul. Vne Masque, a mask, a mumery Masque, masked, disguised.
Massede quelque chose que ce soit, faicte en form de pain, a mass of any
thing, a lompe, a loaf. Massif, massife. Massiuete, massiuenesse. un Masson, a
mason, a bricklayer Maistre Masson ou charpe^tier, the Master mason or chief
master of the works. Vne Massue, a club. Du Mastic, a gum called mastike.
Vne Masure, a mazer. Materaz d'arbaleste, the quarrels of a crosbowe. Materaz a
coucher, a matterase bed. Toute sort de Matiere, al sort of stuff, matter or
metal. Un Matin, a mastife, a great curre. Le Matin, the morning, the dawning
or twilight. Homme qui est Matineux, an early riser. La Matrice d'vne femme,
seek Amarry. Matrone, femme d'honneur, a Matrone, a woman virtuous and praise
worthy life. Maturite, rypenesse in all things, good season, time convenient.
Maturation, pruning of trees. Maudole, ill favored, misshapen. Mauduict, and
mal conditionne, mischeuous, unhappy, accursed Mauldire aucun, to curse one, to
warry, to forspeake, to ban. Mauldisson, blasphemy, cursing. Maugratieux,
combersome, without grace, loutish, unhandsome. Maulgre que i'en aye, in spite
of my teeth, against my will. Maulgre eux, in despite of their teeth, whether
they will or no, against their wills. Maulue, herb, an herb called Mallows.
Maulx, seek Mal. Maunet, slouenly, filthy, vnclenely. Maupiteux, cruel,
unmerciful. Mauplaisant, lompish, unpleasant, without grace. Mauplaisance,
lompishnesse, heaviness. Mauprest, unready, vnha^dsome. Mauplaisamment,
vnhandsomly. Mausade, loutishe, rude, unmannerly. Mausadement, il fauouredly,
rudely. Mausadete, rudnesse, barbarousnesse. Mauuais, evil, wicked, hurtful,
perverse, unhappy, mischeuous naught. Mauuaiseme^t, wickedly, naughtily.
Mauuiasetie, wickedness, unhappiness. Vne Maxim, a proposition, a maxim.
Vne May a pestrir pain, a kneding troughe. Le mois de May, the month of May.
Un May, a bough. Le Maz d'vne nauire, the mast of a ship. Mediateur and moyen
en quelq^ affair, Moyenneur, a moderatour, an vmpier, a stickler. Medicamen, a
medcine. Medecin, a he Physician. Medecin, a she Physician. Medicinal,
medicinable, healthful Medeciner, to heal, to cure, too remedy. Medecinement,
a healing, a curing. Mediocrite attrempee, a moderation, a temperature.
Meffaict, a misdeed, a shrewde turn, a fault. Messaire a aucun, to misuse one,
to do one a shrewd turn. Megisseir, a white tawyer. Megisserie, a tawe house.
Meiche de lamp, ou cha^delle, the match of a lamp or candle Meilleur, better,
worthier. Le Meilleur de tous les autres, the best of al other, the chiefest.
Melancholy, melancholy, black color. Melancholique, melancholyke, peevish,
wayward. Melilot, an herb called Melilot. De la Melisse, an herb taken to be
sweet Baulme. Melody, melody, sweet tune. Melons, a fruit. Membre, a member
or part of any thing. Vne Membrure de bois, a shingle of wood, a cloven board.
Memoire, memory, remembrance. Menace, threatening, menasing. Menacer, to
threatten, to menace Menacant, full of threatening. Menacement, a threatening.
Mendier, to beg, to ask for Gods sake. Mendiant, a beggar. Mendicite,
beggerie. Mener, to lead, to guide. Tout est Mean and gouuerne par le vouloir
de Dieu, all thing is lead and governed by the will of God. un faiseur de
Menees, a busy body, a seditious person. Menage, carriage. Menestrier, a
minstrell. Menotes, mannacles. Mensonge, an untruth, a lie, a fable. Mensonger
and faulx, full of lies. De la Mente, an herb called Minte. Menterie, a lie, a
tale, an untruth. Menteur, a liar, a fabler. Mentir, to lie, to tell a false
tale. Mention, mention or remembrance of. Le Menton, the chinne. Menu, small,
thin, fine, slender. Menuet, little, preaty. Menuisier, a Joyner. Menuisete,
thinness, slenderness Menuisement, thinly, scantly. Menuiserie, ioyners
work. La mer, the sea. Mercerie, ware, mercerie. Mercier, ou autre que demeure
en petites logis d'ais, mercers or such as keep bouthes. Mercy, pity, mercy,
softhartednesse. Se render a la mercy d'aucun, to stand to ones mercy. Mercir
and remercier aucun, To thank one, to give gramercy. Mercredi, wednesday.
Mercuriale, herb, an herb called Mercury. Merde, man's dong, a tourde. Mere, a
mother. Des Mereaux ou gettons, counters to cast with. La mere goutte, vin qui
prouient des raisins auant qu'ils soyent foulez, vnpressed wine. Meriter, to
deserve, to earne. Merlan un sort de poisson, a whiting. Un Merle, a bird
called a Merlyn. Merlu, ou Stocfiz, Stockefish. Merueille, a marvel, a wonder.
Merueilleux, marvelous, wonderful, passing. Merueilleusement, meruailously,
wonderfully, passingly. Mes de table, a measse, a dishe of meat. Mesaduenance,
vncomlynesse, vnhandsomnesse, vnseemelynesse. Mesaise, diseased, ill at ease,
out of quiet. Mesange oyseau, a bird that does eat bees. Meschancete,
Unhappiness, wickedness, mischeuousnesse, dishonestie. Meschant, a wicked
one, a naughty pack, an ungracious graffe, a hook unhappy. Il luy Mescherra
de ce, this chances to him unhappily. Vne meschine, ou petite cha^briere, a
girl or wenche. Se Mescognoistre, to forget him self. Mescognoissant, a
unthankful person, a churl. Se mescontenter, to be discontent, to be
displeased. Mescontentement, offense, displeasure. Mescreant, a miscreant, a
faithless fellow. Mesdire and detracteur de quelqu'vn, to missay of one, to
bakbite, to slander, to misreport, to detract. Mesdisant, an evil tongued
man, a slaunderer. Medisson, ill speech, slander. Meseau, ou Mesel, a Leapre,
a Lazar man. Mesgard, comme, Ie l'ay faict par mesgard, ouersighte, unwittingly
to do a thing. Mesgnie, household, meygnie. La Mesgnie and la Famille des serfs,
the household or meignie servants. Mesgue, whey. Meshuy, to day, this day.
Meslange, a medley, a mixture, a mingling. Mesler, to mingle, to mix, to
meddle, to occupy. Mesle, mingled, mixed. Se mesler de medecin, To occupy
physike. Meslier, ou Nefflier, arbre, a Medlar tree. Mesliers, vines mingled.
Cemesme, the very same thing, the same. En ce lieu la mesme, in the very same
place. Mesmement que la premiere chose. etc. namely or especially when the
first. etc. Le Mesnage, household. Bon mesnager, a good husband, one that
looks well to his business. En bon Mesnager, like a good husband. Mespre^dre
and fair contre son debuoir, to mistake, to do contrary. Mespris, disdain,
contempt, squemishnesse. Par Mespris, disdainfully, squemishly. Mespriser, to
despise, to disdain. Mesprise, dequoy on ne tient co^pte, disdained, naught
set by. Mesprisement, a despising, a contempt. Mespriseur, a disdainer, a
despiser. Mespriseresse, A coye dame, a squeamishe mistress. Un Message, an
errand. Messager, a messenger, a post, an Apostle. Messagere, a woman
messenger. Messeant, unseemly, uncomely, unsitting. Per Messeace, through
rudenes. Messeamment, unmannerly, unseemly. Cela Messied, that is unseemly.
Mestier, an occupation, a craft. Gens de mestier, ha^dy craftsme^ S'il en est
mestier ou besoing, if he be in need or want. Mesure, a measure. Mesurer, to
measure, to met. Mesurant, meting and mesuring Mesurement, Mesurage, a
measuring or meeting out. Mesureur and cordeur de terres, a measurer of lands.
du Metail, all kind of metal. Metairie, A country house, a farm. Metaire
ou fermier, a farmer. Metal, metal. Metal d'argent, silver metal. Methridat,
Mithridat, triacle. Metiz, Enge^dre de diverse genres de bestes, mongrels.
Mettre, to put, to place, to set. Mettre a fin, to bring to end. Se mettre a
quelque chose, To fall to some thing. Se mettre a bien fair, to fall to to do
well. Un Mets and viande qu'on port and met on sus la table, any kind of meat
set on the table. Meu, seek Mouuoir. Le Meubles d'vne homme, mouables,
household stuff. Vne Meule, a Myll. Meur, ripe. Se Meurir, to wax ripe.
Meurete, ripeness. Vne Meure, a mulbery, or blackbery. Vne Meurier, a mulbery
tree. Meurler, to bellowe like a cow or bull. Les Meurs, ou moeurs, manners,
behavior. Meurte, arbre, a myrtle tree. Meurtrir, to murder. Meurtre,
murder, ma^slaughter. Meurtrier, a murderer. Meurtrisseur, a broofing of the
flesh Un Meusnier, a miller. Vne Meusniere, a woman miller, Vne Miche, a worm
that fedeth on bees. Le Midi, ou Mijour, midday or noone. Mie de pain, the crum
of bread. Miel, honey. Mien, mine. Miettes and toutes tells chooses qui cheent
de la table, crommes of bread. Mieulx, better, best. A qui Mieulx, mieulx, the
best^ take it. I'aime mieulz, J had rather. Mignard en parolles, A fair
speached man. Dire Mignardement, to speak trimly. Mignardise, trim, feate.
Mignon, mynion, trim, feat, fine. Ma Mignonne, my mynion, my trulle.
Mignonnement vestu, mynionly cladde. Mignonneite, trimnesse, neatness,
finenesse. Mignotise, niceness. Migraine mal, the Meagrim in the head. Mil, ou
Millet, a pulse called millet. Un Milan, a kite, a puttocke, a glead. Milieu,
the midst. Qui est au milieu, which is in the midst. Milieu de quelque
chose, The midst or center. Mill, a thousand. Mill foix a thousand times.
Mill fueille, herb, an herb called Millfoyle, yarrowe, or nosebleed.
Millepertuis, an herb called S. John's wort. Mince and delie, fine and small.
Mine, mesure, a measure so called. La Mine d'aucun, The countenance of a body.
Mine de metail, ou miniere, a mine of metal. Mineral, metal. Mine qu'on fait
soubs la terre, a mine or cave under earth. Miner, to mine or dig under
earth. Miner and vser, to wear away. Un Mineur de douze ou quetorze ans, a
minour or one in the age of minority. Miniere, a quarrie or mine. Un minister
and seruiteur, a minister, a servant. Ministrir and seruir, to minister, to
serve. La minuict, midnight. Vne minute, a minute, a copy. Mipartir, to part in
half, to divide in two. Miracle, a miracle, a marvel, a wonder. Vne miroire,
a looking glass. Se mirer, to toote in a glass. Miserable, miserable,
wretched. Miserablement, en sort qu'on fait pity a aucun, miserably,
wretchedly. Misere, misery, wretchedness. Misericorde, mercy, pity,
compassion. Misericordieux, merciful, pitiful Missiue, letters sent. Miste and
propre, neat, fine. Mistion, a mingling, a mixing. Mistionner, to mingle, to
meddle. Mistionne, mingled, mixed. Mistionnement, a minglyng, a myxing.
Mitaines, mittens, winter gloves. Mites qui naissent es fourmages, and febues,
Mytes that bread in Cheese. Mitre, a Miter. Mitrer quelqu'vn, and le mettre a
l'eschelle, to make one wear a paper, to myter one. Se Mocquer de quelqu'vn,
To mock, to floute, to laughe to scorn, to disappoynt. Mocque, mocked,
disappointed. Mocqueur, a mocker, a flouter, a deceiuer. Moquerie, a mock, a
floute, a scoff, a deceit. La Mode ancienne, the old manner or fashion. A la
nouuelle mode, after the new fashion. Moderer les tributs, to moderate, or to
ease payments. Estre fort modere and constant, to be moderate and constant.
Modereement, moderatly, temperately. Sans moderation, immoderatly, rashely.
Modeste, modest, discrete. Modestete, ou modesty, modesty or discretion. Les
gros moignons de chair and des muscles, lumpes of flesh. La gross charnure,
the brawn. La moelle qui est dedens les os the marrow that is within the bones.
Moilon, mortar, cement, rubbish. Moindre, least. Moineau, a sparrowe. Moins,
less. Tout au moins, A tout le moi^s Pour le moins, at the least. Mois, a
month. Se moisit, rancir, to wax moldy or mustie. Moisi and ranci, moldy,
mustie, stinking. Mossissure, mouldines La Moisson, ou le temps de la Moisson,
the time of harvest. Moisso^ner, to work in harvest, to reap. Moissonneur, a
harvest man. Moite, moist, soaked, stieped. Lieu moite and relant, a moist or
dampish place. Moiteur, moisture. Naturelle Moiture de la terre, the moisture
or fat of the earth. La moitie, the one half, equal part. Mol, soft.
Mollement, softly. Mollet, soft, tender, delicate. Mollesse, softness.
Moleste, troublesome, combersom Molester quelqu'vn, To trouble one, to comber
one, to be burthenous to one. Un Moment grand ou petit, a moment or space of
time. Mon, mine. Monastere, an abbay. Monceau, a heap. Le Mond, le ciel, and
tout le contenu en iceluy, the world. Mondain, worldly. Monnoye, money, coin.
Un monnoyeur, a coiner, a mint man. Monnoyer, to coin. Monopoles and
assemblees factieuses, private assemblies, insurrections. Un monstre, a
monster, a rare sight. Monstreusement, monstrously, very strangely. La Monstre
de quelque chose, and eschantillon, a pattern, a scantlin, or show of any
thing. Fair monstre generale de tout son armee, to make a general muster of
the army. Monstre, to show, to declare, to signify. Se mo^strer and
presenter, to show or present him self to stand forth, to appear. Monstrer
beau sembla^t, to show a fair face, to dissemble. Monstrement, a showing, a
declaring. Un Mont ou Montaigne, a hill or mountain. Montaignard, a mountain
man, or that dwells on the hills. Vne montaignette, a hillocke, a little
hill. Vne montioye, a heap of stones or other mark to show the high way. Un
pays montueux, a hilly country. Monter, to mount, to go up, to ascend. Vne
montee, an asce^ding or rising. Le montant d'vne tertre, The rising of a bank
or hillock. Un morceau de quelque chose, a morsel, a gobbet, or lump of any
thing. Morceau de pain, ou autre chose, a morsel of bread. Morcelet and petit
morceau, A little morsel, a bitte. Mordre, to byte, to nippe. Mords de bride,
bit of a bridle. Morsure, a biting. Moreau, ou Morel, a black horse or morrell.
Morelle, herb, an herb called nyghteshade. Se Morfondre, To chatter for
cold, to catch cold. Morfondu, almost dead of cold. Morgeline, herb, an
herb. Morgue, comme, Qui fait la morgue, he that makes a countenance, or
sets a good face on the matter. Qui est bien morigine, well manered,
mannerly. Un danseur de morisque, a moresque daunser. Morn, comme sot, and
sans aduisement, amazed, or at ones wits end, sometime pe^siue, heavy. Temps
Morn, a louring wether Moron, herb, an herb called Pimpernell: some take it
for Chickwede. Bailler un Mords pour donter, to bridle one. Morsure, seek
Mordre. La Mort, Death. Mortel, deadly, mortal. Mortellement, mortally, deadly
Mortalite, death, mortality. Appartena^t a mortuaire, belonging to mortuaries,
or burials. Vne Mortiere, a mortar. Du Mortier, mortar to plaster withal.
Morue, Mouolue, poisson, A fish called Codde. Morue ou Morueau, snot, sniuel.
Morueux, snotty, snyuelly. Un Mot, a word. A son Mot, at his word. Un Motet,
a verse. Motif, a motion, a cause. Motte ou glason, a clod of earth a turfe.
Motte, a butte to shoot at. Moucher, to wype ones nose, to blow ones nose.
Mouchoir, an hankerchief. Moufles, seek Mitaines. Mouiller, to wet, to soke, to
stiep. Mouille, wette, steeped, soaked, moystned. Mouillure, weatnesse,
moistness. Moule de bois, a block of wood. Mouldre, to grynde. Moulin a eaue,
ou a bras, a watermill, or a handmill. Un Moule, a moulde, a form of wood.
Moulinier, a Milner. Moulture, gryste, or that is ground. Le Moule de quoy on
fait des images de terre enleuees, a moulde such as images ar formed in. Moult
different, far contrary, very different. Moult fort, very strong, exceeding
Mourir, to die, to depart this life, to rest in the Lord, to give up the
ghost. Fair Mourir aucun, to put one to death. Qui est mort, he that is dead.
Iouer a la mourre, to play with the fingers. Vne Musche, a fly. Mouches a
miel, bees. Moucheguespe, ou bourdon, a waspe. Moucherons, musherons, such as
we call toade stools. Mouscheter and tascheter, To mark out, to divide, to
separate Moucheture de pres, small spots or marks. La Mousse des arbres, Moss
such as grows about the roots of trees. La Mousse qui vient sus aucuns
fruicts, comme sus pommes de coing, semblable a menue lain and coton, the down
on some fruits, as on peaches, and quinces, like a fine cotton. Mousse qui
vient sus les branches des arbres, Moss that grows on the branches of
trees. Du Moust, new wine, new ale, or any new drink. Moustarde, mustarde.
Mouton, a sheep, a weather. Espaule de mouton, a shoulder of mutton. Mouuoir,
to move, to stir, to remove. Estre Meu, to be moved, to be stirred.
Mouuement, a moving. Moy, J. Moymesme, J my self. Chose moyenne, a mean thing.
Moyennement, meanly. Moyennete, ne trop ne trop peu, meannesse, neither to
little, nor to much. Moyen and manniere, a mean, a way, a manner. Moyenneur de
quelque chose enter les parties, a mean between two parties in controversy,
a moderatour. Le moyeu d'vne oeuf, and le iaune, the yolke of an egg. Le Moyeu
d'vne roue, the naue of a wheel. Muer, to change, to alter. Estre mue en
masle, to be changed to a male. Muable, changeable, unconstant, Home muable, an
vnco^sta^t man. Muablete, fickleness. Mueme^t de form en autre, altring of
one form into another. Mutation, changing, chopping, altering. Muet, dombe,
speechless. Render muet, to make one do^be, to stop ones mouth. Mugereul,
poisson, a fish so called Un Muguet, a lover, a wower. Muguet, herb, an herb
so called. Muguet, ou Muscade, a nutmuk Vne Mule, a Mule. Vne Mule aux talons,
a kibd^ hecle. Mulet, a Mule feale. Muletier, a mule keeper. Un Mulon de foin,
a hey cock. Mulot, a field mouse. Multiplier, to multiply, to increase.
Multipliement, an increasing, a multiplying. Multiplieur, a multiplier.
Multitude and assemblee de ge^ts a multitude or assembly of people. Munir, To
fortify, to defend, to shield. Munition and garnison, a garnison or ward.
Munition de viures, munition of vitayles. Mur, a wall. Les Murs d'vne ville,
the town walls. Vne Muraille, a wall. Mure, walled. Murmr, murmr,
muttering, repyning. Murmurer, to murmr, too repyne. Musard, a lingerer, a
pauser. Musc, muscke. Muscade, a nutmuke. Muscadet, ou muscadel, Muscadell. Le
Muscle, c'est a dire, la party charnue de tout le corpse, en laquelle gift la
force, soit es cuisses, ou es bras, the muscles of the flesh, the braune. Le
Museau, ou trompe d'vn Elephant, the snoute or mousell of an Elephant. Le
Museau d'vn chien, a dogs snout. Museliere de cheual ou mulet, a mousel for a
horse or mule. Muser, to take pause, to muse, to bethink. Music, music, or
harmony of instruments. Musicien, a musician or player on instruments.
Musnier, seek Meusnier. Musser, to hyde, to convey away. Musse, hidden,
conveyed. Mutation, seek Muer. Mutiler, to mayme, to cut off. Mutile, mayned,
imperfect. Mutin, a sedition, a tumulte, an uproar. Mutinerie, sedition,
tumult. Un Muy, a tonne, a vessel. Demi Muy, half a tonne. Myrabolan fruict,
a fruit called Mirabolan. Myrrh, a gum called myrrh. Mytridat, a kind of
triacle, called Mithridatum. Mystere, a Mystery, a secret thing.
N ante A.
NAbot, Vsez des formules de Nain, sometime taken for a dwarffe. Nager,
proprement dict des poissons, to swim. Nare, the nosethril. Nagement, a
swimming. Nagueres, not long since, now of late. Natif, borne. Naif, lively,
proper. Un Nain, ou Naintre, a dwarf Naistre, to grow or be borne of, to
spring or bud out. Naissant, being borne, growing or springing out. Naissance,
birth. Qui est Ne, which is borne. Ne and Natif de ce lieu, borne in such a
place. Natiuite, nativity, birth. Nantir, vsez des formules de Saisir, to
seize on, to lay hold on. Nappe, a napkin. Narcisse, herb, an herb so called,
some think Daffadil. Nard, herb, an herb called Spyke. La Narrine, the
nosethrill. Naseaux, the snout of a beast. Nasquir, c'est a dire naistre, too
be borne, to have first being. Vne Nasse, a weyre to catch fish in. Vne
Nasselle, a small boat, a cock boat. Un Nation, a nation kindred or people.
Natiuite, seek Naistre. Natte, a matte. Nature, nature. La Nature and maniere
de fair, qu'vn chacu^ a de nature, nature or inclination. Naturel, natural,
kind. C'est vne chose Naturelle, it is a natural thing, it stands by reason.
Naturelleme^t, naturally, kindly. Bailler lettres de Naturalite, to give
testimonial of birth. Nau, seek Nauire. Un Nauet, a rape or turnup. Vne
Nauetiere, a rape field. De la Nauette, a turnup. La Nauette d'vn Tisserand, a
weauers shittle. Nauiger, to sail, to fleet. Navigations, navigations, sailing.
Nauire, ou Nau, a ship. Naurer, to hurt, to wound. Naure, hurt, wounded.
Naurure, a hurt, a wound. Nautonnier, a Maryner, a shipman. Qui est Ne, seek
Naistre. Ne cecy ne cela, neither this, nor that. Ne a ceste heure mesme, not
at this present hour. Ne aussi, nor also. Ne cela aussi, nor that either.
Neant, nothing. Un faitneant, an idle person. Neantmoins, nevertheless.
Necessaire, necessary, needful. Necessairement, necessarily. Necessite,
necessity, need. Les Necessitez de nature, the necessities of Nature, the
needs. Nef, a ship. La Nef d'vne Eglise, the ridge of a Church. Vne Neffle, a
fruit called a medlar. Un Nefflier, ou Meslier, a medlar tree. Negligence,
negligence, carelessness, retchlesnesse. Negligemment, negligently, carelessly.
Negligent, negligent, careless, retchlesse. Negoce, and affair, business or
affairs. Negriez, and Vigne sauuage, wild vine. Neige, snow. Neiger, to
snow. Neueu, a Neuewe, a Brothers son. Nerf, a synewe. Nerueux, full of
synewes, or strong. Nettoyer, to cle^se, to make clean to wype, to rub, to
purge, too scour. Net, clean, neat. Nettement, cleanly. Nettete,
cleanliness. Neud, a knot. Nouer, to knit, to tie. Noueux, knitting together.
Nouuement, a knitting. Neuf, nine. Le Nez, the nose. Ni, For Ne, before the
vowels, neither, nor. Un Nid d'oyseau, a birds nest. Nicher, too nestle, too
build nests. Vne Niee de poulsins, a brood of chickens. Niece, a Niece, or my
brothers daughter. Nielle, vne malady qui vient aux bleds par trop d'humeur,
blasting of corn. Estre Nielle and gaste du temps, to be blasted. Nier, to
deny, to gaynesay. Niant, a deniar. Niement, denying. Niez, an idiot, a peke
hoddie, a simple soul, a snekesbye. Nigelle, herb, an herb so called.
Nimbot, a dwarf, a little man. Niquet, Ie n'en donneroye pas un Niquet, a
thing of no value, a knicke made with the thombs, nail and the tooth. Un
Niueau ou plomb, a plo^bet. Niueler, to sound with a plo^bet. Niuellement, a
sounding. Noble, Noble, of gentle blood. Noblement, nobly. Noblesse, nobility.
Noir, black coulor. Noirastre, blackish. Noiret, ou Noirault, swart. Noirte,
seek Noirceur. Noircir, to black. Noirci, blacked. Noircissure,
blackishnesse. Noirceur, black. Noise, contention, strife, brawle, noise,
desagreement. Noiser, to strive, to contend. Gents Noiseux and malfaisans,
troublesome fellows, brablers. Noisif and quereleux, troublesome and full of
quarrels. Noix, a walnut. Noisette, ou Noifelle, a filberd or haselnut. Un
Noyer, a nut tree. Noyer en l'eaue, to drown. Noye, drowned. Le Nom de quelque
chose, the name of a thing. Les Noms and debtes, the names and debtes. Nommer
aucun, to name or allege a man. Nommer and bailler nom a aucun, to name or
give name to one. Nombre, number. Nombrer, to number, to tell, too coumpt, to
reckon. Nombre, numbered, told. Nombrement, a numbering, a tale. Le Nombril, the
navel. Non, not, nay. Non seulement, not only. Nonante fois, nynetie, or
fourscore and ten times. Nonante, ninety. Nonchalant, careless, retchlesse,
negligent. Nonchalamment, negligently. Nonchalance, carelessness. Nopces,
marriages, wedding, brideale. Nonnain, ou Nonne, a nonne. Nostre, ours. Notable,
notable, worthy of marking. Notaire, a notary, a scriuener. Noter, to note, to
mark, to sign. Estre Note, to be noted, or of ill name. Note and marque, noted
or marked. Notoire, notorious, plain. Chose Notoire and certain, a thing
manifest. Nouembre, the monethe of November. Nourrir, to rear up, to nourish,
to feed, to bring up, too find at board. Qui est Nourri, fed, nourished.
Nourrissier, a nourserie. Nourrisse, a nourse. Un Nourrisson, he or she that
is brought up as a child. Nourriture, meat, food. Nourrissement, bringing up,
finding. Nous, we, Nousmesmes, we our selves. Nouueau, new, fresh. Nouuelet,
fresh. Nouuelle, news. Nouuellement, newly, of late. Nouueaute, newness, of
late. Le Noueau d'vn fruict, the kernel of any fruit. Nud, naked. Nudite,
nakedness. Mettre a Nud, to strippe stark naked, to unclothe. Nue, a cloud.
La Nuict, the night. Nuire, to hurt, to offend, to annoye. Nuisant, hurtful,
full of shrewd turns. Nuisance, hurt, anoyance. Null, none, no man. De Nulle
valeur, of no value, nothing worth. Nulle part, in no place, on no side.
Nullement, nothing at all.
O ante B.
O Moy ho^me perdu, O perdu que je suis, O wretch that J am. O la hardiesse, O
what boldness O lusty courage. Obeir, to obey, to give place, to be subject.
Obeissant, obedient, seruisable. Obeissance, obedience, subjection. Obedience,
Idem. Obediemment, obediently. Obeyr, ou opier, arbre, a wych hasell, as some
think. Obijcier, ou Obiecter and reprocher, to lay to ones charge, to hit one
in the teeth. Oblatio^, an oblation, an offering Obliger, to bynd one. Estre
Oblige par promise, too be bound by promise. Obligation, an obligation, a
bond Obmettre, seek Omettre. Vne obole, qui est vne piece de mo^noye vallant
sept deniers tournois, a half penny English or thereabout. Obscur, darcke,
obscure, duskish Obscurcir, to darken. Ombre Obscurcissant, a dark shadow.
Obscurcissement, a darckning. Obscurement, darkly, obscurly. Obscurite,
obscurity, darkness. Obsecratio^ and priere affecteuse, an earnest prayer, a
special desire. Obseques, burials, obsequies, funerals. Observance ancienne,
an ancient custom, an observation. s'obstiner a l'encontre de tous to stand
stiffly against al men. Obstine, obstinat, stiff necked, selfewilled.
Obstinement, obstinately, stifeneckedly. Obstination and aheurtement,
selfwillednesse, stubburnesse. Obstination and fermete de propos, co^sta^cie in
that they stand. Obtemperer and obeir, to obey, to yield too. Obtenir and
impetrer ce qu'on demand, to obtain or get that which we demand. Obtenue,
that which is gotten. Obtrectation, il report, disdayning, backbyting,
slandring. Obuier que quelque chose ne se face, to prevent the doing of any
thing. Occasion, occasion. Occide^t, the west, or sun setting. Occire, to kill,
to slaye. Chose occulte, hidden things, privy things. Occultement, hiddenly,
secretly, privily. Occuper and empescher, to let or hinder. Occupe and addonne,
given to any thing. De l'ocre, Okre, such as painters use. Octante, eighty or
four score. Le mois d'octobre, the month of October. Oculaire, qu'o^ voit a
l'oeil, that which is scene, evident. Octroyer, to grant. Odeur, savor, scent
or smell. Odorer and flairer, to smell. Odorement, a sce^ting or smelli^g.
Odoriferant, sweet smelling. Odieux, odious, hateful. Oeil, the eye.
Oeillades, wanton eyes, sheep eyes. Les oillieres, the eye teeth. Un oeuf, an
egg. Oeuure, seek oeuurer. Of, Mot que die^t ceux qui sont estonnez and
espouua^tez, Oh, a word that men use that are afraid or astonished. Offenser
aucun, to offend or hurt one. Offense, an offense, a hurt. Office and charge
qu'o^ saict, the office or charge that a man has Officier and sergent, an
Officer, a Sergeant. Offrir, to offer. Offer qu'o^ a faicte a aucun, an offer
made to one, a condition. Vendre au plus offrant, to sell to him that offreth
most. Offrende qu'on faict a Dieu, the offering to God. Ohie, un homme ohie de
son corpse, ill at ease, one whose body is out of temper. Ohe, is it so? is that
true? Oignon, an onion. Oignonnette, scallions. Oindre, to anoint, to besmeare.
Oinct, anointed. de l'oing, swynes grase, or others Oignement de nard, Oil of
Spyke. Onction, an anointing. Onguent, an ointment. Oiseau, a bird, a foul.
Oiselet, a small byrd. Oiseleur, a Fouler or bird catcher. Oiselerie, fouling.
Oiseux, slouthful, slack. Oisif, Jdem. Oisiuete, slothfulness, slacknes Un
oison, a green goose. Vne olive, and un oliuier, an Olive, an olyue tree.
Ombre, a shadow, a color. Soubs ombre d'alliance, under color or pretense of
friendship. Ombrager, to shadow. Ombrage, shadow or covert. Ombrageux, skittish
as horses are. Ombragement, a shaddowing. Omettre quelque chose, to omit any
thing, to leave a thing undone. Omis, left undone. On dit, it is said, men
say. Vne once, an ounce. Once a once, by ounces. Pesant vne once, weighing an
ounce. Mon oncle friar de mon pere, mine Uncle. Mon oncle, friar de ma mere,
Idem. Oncques, ever. Onde, a floude, a water. Ondoyer and flotter, and fair
gra^des vagues, to flow or make great waves. Ongle, the nails of the fingers
or tooes. Onglet, a small nail. l'Onglee au bout des doigts prouena^t de grand
froid, the aki^g of the fingers ends of cold Onze, eleven. Onzieme, the
eleventh. Operations naturelles, natural operations or workings. Opiner, to
ween, to deem, to hold opinion, to think. Opinion and aduis, opinion,
advise, sentence. Opinion and judgment, opinion and judgment. Opiniastre,
selfewilled, standing in opinion, froward. Opiniastrer, to make one obstinate.
Opiniatrise, obstinacy, co^tumacy Opiniatreme^t, frowardly, stubbornly.
Opportu^, in good season or time. Opportunite, opportunity, while the time
does serve. s'opposer a quelque chose, too withstand a thing, to stand against.
Un opposant, one that hinders or lets a matter. La party opposite and vis
a vis, the party over against. A l'opposite, contrary wise, on the contrary
part. Opposition, a withstanding, a gaynesaying. Oppresser, ou Opprimer, to
oppress, to thrust down. Opulent, rich, weithie. Or auant, Or sus, on
forward, go too. De l'Or, gold. Un Oracle, c'est a dire, conseil and response
donnee, an Oracle or answer from God. Orade, ou Dorade, poisson, a fish
called a gilt head. Orage, Fouldre, Tempeste du ciel, a tempest, a storm.
Oraison, a prayer. Orateur, an Orator. Orbatteur, a gold beater. Orchanette,
herb, an herb so called. Ord and sale, unclean, filthy, nastie, slouenly.
Ordelot, one that is somewhat slouenly. Ordir, to soil, to beraye, to slubber.
Ordure, filth, vnclenlinesse. Ordement, uncleanly, filthily. Ordinaire and
accoustume, ordinary or usual. Order, order, disposition. Par Order, orderly,
or by order. Sans Order, unorderly, confusedly. Ordoner, to ordain, to
dispose, to appoint. Ordonner and disposer, to ordain, to appoint. Ordonner
and mettre en order ses besongnes, to set things in an order. Ordonne par le
commun aduis ordained by the common advise. Ordonnance and Order, ordonnance
and order. Ordonnance and constitution, ordonance and constitution. Par
l'ordo^nance des Prelates, by ordonance of the Clergy. Par Ordonnance de la
cour, by order of Court. Ordonnances Royaux, The Kings ordonances.
Ordonneement, Orderly, by order. d'Ordre, of order. Ordure, seek Ord.
l'Oreille, the ear. Qui a les oreilles lasches and pe^dantes, hanging ears or
sloutch eared. Ores, now. Oreillier, a pillowe. Orfante, barrenness or want
of children. Orfelin, a child fatherless and motherlesse. Orfeure, a
goldsmith. Orge, barley. Orgemonde, Barley water, tysant. Orgueil, pride,
hautinesse, loftiness. s'Orgueillir, to wax proud. Orgueilleux, proud, high
minded. Orgueilleusement, proudly. Orgues a flutes, qui sonnent a soufflets,
recorders. l'Oriens and soleil leuant, The east or Sun rising. chose Orientale,
any thing from the East. l'Oriere, ou l'Orce d'vn bois, the wood side, or
entering into the wood. Orifice, the mouth or entering of any thing. l'Original,
the first copy of a writing. Origin, the beginning. Orillier, seek
oreillier. Ormaire, ou Armaire ou on reserre les livers, a place where writings
are kept, the Rolls. Orme, an elm tree. Orner, to deck, to trim, to set
out, to adorn. Orner, deck, trimmed, set out. Ornement, a decking, a
trimming. Orneement, trimly, neatly. Vne Orniere, the rut or tracke of a
wheel. Orpin, a yellowe color called Orpment. Or primes, now again. Les
Ortils des pieds, the toes of the fete. Ortie, a thistle. Oruale, herb, an
herb called Clarie. Un Os, a bone. Osselet, a small bone. Oser, to dare.
Osier, an osier. Vne Osseraye, a plat of Osyer trees. Osselet, seek Os. Un
ost, an host, an army. Ostage, ou Hostage, a hostage, a pledge. Bailler
ostages, to give pledges. Prendre ostages, to take pledges Oster, to take away,
to remove. Oste, taken away, removed. Ou, where, or whither. Ou vas tu? whither
go thou? D'ou, from whence. Ou aussi, or also. Oublier, to forget. Estre
oublie, to be out of mind, or forgotten. Oubliant, forgetful, obliuious.
Oubliance, forgetfulness. Oblie, goffre and semblable, qu'on baille aux petits
enfans, a waffer cake. Oublieur, a waffer baker. Ouy, J, yea. Ouy vrayment, yea
verily. Ouir, to hear, to understand. l'Ouir, the hearing. l'Ouy, ou l'oreille
des poissons a fish his gilles. Oultrage and parolle de despris, outrage or
spiteful words. Oultrager aucun, to revile one. Outragement des parolles,
reuiling words. Oultragieux, outrageous, importunate. Oultogieuseme^t,
outragiously. Oultre la fleuue, Beyond the water. Oultre ce, besides. Oultre
plus, furthermore. Oltrecuide, arrogant, ouerweening, presumptuous.
Oultrecuidance, arrogancy, over weening. Oultrepasser, to carry over.
Oultrepassement and saillie, far exceeding. Ourdir de la toille, to begin a
web of cloth. Un Ours, a he bear. Vne Ourse, a she bear. un Oustarde, a
kind of Owl. Outil, a tool or instrument. Toutes sorts d'outils, a kind of
tools. Ouurer, to work. Ouurage, handyworke. Oeuure, work, sometimes duty.
Ouurier, a workman. Ouurier, a workewoman. Ouurir, to open. Ouuert, open,
plain. Ouuertement, openly, plainly. Ouuerture and trou fait en quelque lieu,
an opening or clefte made in any thing. l'Ouuroir d'vn chacun mestier, ou on
besongne, a working place, a shop. Ouystres, seek Huystres. de l'Oximel, vne
composition faicte de Miel, cave and vinaigre, oximel, of honey and vinegar un
Oye and Iars, a goose or ga^der. De l'Ozeille, sorrel. Ozeille sauuage, wild
sorrel.
P ante A.
PAcifier, to pacify, to assuage, to appease. Pacifique, peaceable, quiet. Un
pact ou paction, a bargayn, an agreement, a compact. Un Paeile de fer a porter
feu, a fire shouell. Paelle a frire, a frying pan. Paelle a mettre le pain a
four, a pele to put bread in the oue^. Un Paellonnet d'arain, a skillet. Le
Page d'vne liver, the page of a book. Page ou seruiteur, a Page or servant.
Paier, ou payer, to pay. Payement, a paying. Paillace, an arbor of bows.
Paillard, a whorehu^ter, brothel. Vne Paillarde, a whore, a harlot Paillarder,
to commit whoredom. Pailla^dise, whoredom. Paille ou balle, chafe. La Paille
de l'orge, Chafe of barley. Un Paillier, a place where chafe is kept. Pain,
bread. Gros Pain, broune bread. la Panetterie, le lieu ou on serre and guard on
le pein, a pantry. Vne pair de quelque chose qui ce soit, a pair or couple of
any thing. Pais, ou pays, a country or kingdom. Un Paisant, ou paysant, a
countreyman, a husbandman. Paisseau, pieu, ou eschallas, a prop such as they
stay vines by Paisseler, ou eschalasser, to stay or prop up. Paistre, to feed
as cattle do, too go to pasture. Le Paissage ou paissement de bestes, feeding
of beasts. Paix, peace, rest. Paisible and coy, qui ne se courrouce point
peaceible, quiet, still. Paisiblement, peacibly, quietly. Paisiblete,
peaciblenesse, quietness, tranquillity. Le Palais and la maison royale, a
palace, a King or Emperors place. Le Palais de la bouche, the palate of the
mouth. Palet a iouer, a small beetell too play at ball with. Un Pal, ou pali,
ou pieu, the pale of a park, a pale. Pallier ou farther un cause, To cloak or
color a matter. Se pallir, deuenir palle, to wax pale, to lose color. Palle,
pale colored. Ancunement palle, palish, wan, bleak. Un Palletoc, a kind of
garment like a short cloak. Un Pallissade, a pale of defense used in wars.
Palm arbre, a palm tree, or date tree. Palumbe ou pigeon ramier, a woodculuer
or ringdoue. Un Palu and marescage, a marsh or quagmire. Pa^pre ou pa^pe
fueille de vigne the tender stalk of a vine leaf. Pan ou Panneau dequoy on en
ceint and on entoure un bois pour pre^dre bestes sauuages toils or such nets
as are set to catch dear in. des Panaiz, an herb called carot Pance, the maw,
the panche. Panceau, ou pansu, a Gorbelly, he that has a great belly. Pancher,
ou pencher, to hang as building does that is not upright Penche sus le deuant,
to hang forward. Panchement, a hanging, a declining. Le Pan d'vn habilleme^t
and le plis, the hemme of a garment. Pandects, c'est a dire livers co^tenants
toutes chooses, books containing all things. Panicant, herb, a kind of
thistle called Huluer, or seaholy. Panicles, little loaves. Un Panier, a small
chest. Un Panier d'osier, a hamper, a basket. Du paniz, semblable a millet, a
kind of pulse called Mill. Pan, a skin, a fell, a hyde. Panneau de
menuiserie, a coffer of ioyners work. Panthere, best, a beast called a
Panther. Vne Pantoufle, a slipper a pantofle. Paour, seek Peur. Un Paon, a
Pecocke. Un Pallissade, a pale of defense, used in wars. Paoure, seek Pour.
Un Papegay, a Parrot, a Popingay. Papier, paper. Papiers de marchands, and
autres se meslans de trafique, all kind of writings of merchants or occupiers.
Un Papillon, a butter fly. Du Papin, pappe for children Un Paquet, a packet, a
bundell. Par moyen, ou par mon moyen, by my mean. Par ou, which way? Par cy
par la, This way, that way. Par derriere, behind, or backewarde. Par dessus,
upward. Par la, that way. Parabole, a parable, a similitude, a comparison.
Paracheuer, to make an end, to finishe. Paracheuement, an ending, a finishing.
Paradis and iardin, a Paradyse, a garden. Paragon, ou Parangon, an example, a
proof, a comparison. Paragonner and comparager, to compare, to confer.
Paralytique, one that has the palsy. Paralysie, the disease called the
palsy. Parastre, ou beau pere, a father in law, or stepfather. un Parc, a
park. Parcelle, a little park, sometime called a garden. Parchemin,
parchement. Parcreu and horse de croissance, full grown, past growth. Pardon,
pardon, forgiveness. Pardonner, to pardon, to forgive to remitte.
Pardonnement, a pardoning, a forgiving. Parefrenier, an hostler, a horse-keper.
Pareil, like, equal, paires. Pareillement, likewise, also. Pour la pareille,
for the like good turn again. Pareille, herb, an herb called Sorell. Parens
and alliez, kinsfolk and alliance. Parente, kindred, of one blood. Parentage du
cost du pere, kindred on the fathers side. Parer, to deck, to dress, to trim.
Parer aux coups de son ennemy, to ward the enimes blow. Parement, decking,
trimming. Paresse, sloth, sluggishnesse, lazynesse. Paresseux, a slothful,
lazy, or loytring fellow. Paresseuseme^t, slothfully, slowly Parfaire, to make
perfect, to end, to finishe. Parfaict and acheue, fully ended. Parfaictement,
perfectly, redily. A la Parfin, in the end, at the last. Parforcer, se
parforcer de quel que chose, to enforce himself, to do his uttermost.
Perfournir les legions, to perform up the number of the ba^ds. Parfum, perfume,
sweet odor. Parfumer, to parfume, to sweten. De la Parietoire, an herb called
paritorie, commonly pellitorie. Se Pariurer, to forswear. Pariure, a forsworn
man, a periure. Pariurement, for sweri^g, perjury Parler, to say, to speak, to
utter. Parler a quelqu'vn, to speak to one, to talk with one. Le Parler de
l'ho^me, ma^s spech. Parlant, speaking. Un beau Parleur, a fair spoken man, a
smooth tongued fellow. Parliament, a talking together. Un Parliament, ou un
Plaide, a parliament, a court. Parlementer auec aucun and diuiser, to talk or
common with one Parole, a word, a saying. Parlire, to read through, to read
over. Qui est a tout par luy, Qui se gouuerne par soymesme, which is of
himself, which rules himself. Parmy, amongst. Parmy la fenestre, ou le
guichet, out at the window, or wicket. Parmy les rues, abroad in the streets.
Paroiche, ou Paroisse, a parish. Paroy, a wall. Parquer, to park or hedge in.
Un Parquet ou sale d'audience, a hall or place of hearing. Parrins, and
Marrins, godfathers, and godmothers. Parquoy, wherefore, or through the which
cause. Parsomneur, a partner. Par ou portion, a portion, a part. Quelque part,
somwher, or some part. Apart, alone, apart, by himself. Partage, seek
Partir. Un Parterre, a piece of ground, a plat of ground, a close. Un party
and co^ditio^, a part and condition. Participant, taking part. Propre and
particuliere, propre peculiar, or that is a ma^s own. Particulierement,
particularly, specially. Sans rien Particularizer, without particularitie,
generally. Party, a part, a piece. Party adverse, an adverse party, or one
that laweth against other Partir, to part, to divide. Party en trois, divided
into three Partage, a dividing, or parting. Partieme^t, a dividing. Partisseme^t
and division, a distribution. Se partir de quelque lieu, to depart from a
place. Paruenir en quelq^ lieu, to come to a place at the length. Paruenir au
port, to arrive at the haven. Pas, for point: As Pas trop mal, not very ill. Un
Pas, a pace, a step. A chasque pas, at every step. Pas a pas, foot by foot.
Se Pasmer, to fall in a sown. Pasmoison, a sowning. Pasquette vne herb, an
herb called honey suckle. Pasquis, lieu ou les bestes paissent, pasture,
ground. Passuer and cheminer, to pass, to go. Passer deua^t, to go or pass
before Passer la mer, to pass the sea. Passer tout oultre, to pass over, or
through. Passer un liqueur par un linge ou estamine, to strain any kind of
licour. Oultrepasser, to excel, to pass any other. Passer quelque chose,
Laisser quelq^ chose a dire ou fair, to pass over, or leave to speak of a
thing. Passer aucu^, and estre plus excellent, to pass any other, to excel.
Passer aucun en cheminant, to ouergo any other. Passer le temps, to pass the
time Le iour est pass, the day is past. Il se pass a peu de chose, he is
content with a little. Pass, passed by. Un Passa^t qui pass son chemin a
wayfaring man. Passeur, he that carries folk from haven to haven, a passenger.
Passement, a passing over. Passable, a thing that may be passed over.
Passablement, tollerably, that may be borne withal. Passage, a passage,
so^time a place Fair un passedroict, To give over right. Passesillons, curled
or broided hair. Ioueur de pass pass, a Juggler. Passefleurs, herb, an herb
which some take to be rose persly. Passemens, comme robbes couuertes de
passemens, al kind of pasment lace. Vne Passeporte, a passeport, a
safecondite. Passereau, a sparowe. Passetemps, pastyme. Passeuelours, herb, a
flower, Some call it Flower gentle. Passion and accident d'esprit, a passion or
motion of the mind Paste, paast or dough. Un Paste, a pastie, a pie. Un
pastiseur, a pyebaker. Pastel de Languedoc, woad of Languedock. des Pastenades,
parsneps or carot roots. Pasture and nourriture qu'on baille aux bestes,
fodder that is given to beasts. Pasturer, to feed, to fodder. Pasturage,
pasture ground. Pasteur, a pastor, one that has the charge and keeping of
beasts Un Patelin, a flatterer. Lettres patentes du roy, The kings letters
patents. Paternel, of the father, fatherly. Patient, pacient. Patience,
patience, ab ding. Ouir Patiemment, to hear patiently. Porter patiemme^t, to
bear pacientely, to suffer willingly, to abide constantly. le Patin ou patte
d'vne colo^ne, the foot of a pillar. Patrimoine, patrimony, or that falls to
one on his fathers side le Patron de quelque chose, a pattern or example of any
thing. Un Patron de nauiere, the patron of a ship. le Patron d'innocence, an
example of innocence. Patronner quelque chose, To pattern out a thing. vne
Patrouille, an oven rake, or oven sweeper. Patrouilleur, a carper at every man's
work. Patte de best, a beasts pawe. Un Pau, A stake or pale in a hedge. le
Paue d'vne place, the pauement of any place. Pauer, to paue with stone.
Pauement, a pauing. un Pauillion and tente, a pauillion, a tent. La mesure
d'vne Paulme, A hand breadth. La paulme de la maine, The palm of the hand. Le
ieu de la paume, the Tennys play. Les paupieres des yeux, the eye liddes. Un
Pauois, a buckler. Un Pauois en facon de croissant, a shield. Du Pauot, an
herb called poppy. Payer, to pay. Payement, a paying. Les mortes pays, dead
pays. Peage, a toll. Peau, a skin. Peau de parchemin, a skin of
parchement. Peaucier, a skinner. Peautre, the stern of a ship. Peche, sin.
Pecher, to sin. Peculier and propre, peculiar, a man's own. Un Peigne, a
comb. Peigne, combed. Peigner, to comb. Peindre, to paint, to set forth in
colors. Peinct, painted. Peintre, a paynter. Peinture, a painting, a picture.
Peine, pain, labor. Mettre Peine, to take pain in a thing. Peine perdue,
lost labor. A Peine que ie die, scantely can J say. Perdre sa peine, to lose
labor. Prendre peine, to take pain, to labor, to strive to do a thing.
Peiner, to enforce to do a thing. seek Mettre peine. Chose Penible, a peinfull
thing, a laboursome work. Peler, to pill, to pull of the hair, to skalde,
Pele, pilde, or balde. Pelerin, a stranger, a pilgrim. Pelegrinage, ou
Peregrination. a pilgrimage. Pelure de quelque fruict, The pill or skin of any
fruit. Un Pelican, a bird called a pelican. Pelle, seek Paelle. Pelletier, a
skinner. Pelote a iouer, a bal to play with Peloter, to play at ball. Peloton,
a bottom of threde. Pelu, ou velu, hairye, or full of small hair. Pendre and
estrangler, to hang and strangle. Pendant cela, Jn that mean while. Pendant, a
pendant or thing that hangs. Estre pendu, to be hanged. Pendu, hanged up.
Pendement au gibet, hanging on the gibbet, or gallows. Un Pendereau, a
crackrope, a gallowclapper. Penderie, a hanging. Pendant que i'iray and
viendray, whilst I go and come. Penetrer, entrer bien auant, too pearce in, to
enter deep in. Penetratif, pearcing. Peneux and piteux, out of heart,
discouraged. Penil d'homme, ou de femme, la motte, the secret place of man or
woman. Vne Pensee, a thought, a meaning. Penser, to think, to imagine, too
guess, to esteem. Pensement, a thinking, a meditating. Se Penser, and fair
grand chere, to feed him self, to make much of one. Pension, a pension.
Pepins, carnels or seeds. Pepinerie, an murserie in an orchard where they sow
carnels. Les Pepins des raisins, the stone or carnell of the grape. Per ou nom,
vne sort de ieu, pair or not pair, a play called even or odd. Per ou
compaigno^, a peer, ones like or fellow. Percer, to pearce, to thrust through.
Perce tout oultre, thrust thorrow. Percher ou iucher sur un arbre, to perch as
fowls do on trees. Percement, a percing, a thrusting through. Vne Perch, a
pearche, a long poll or rod. Un poisson qu'on appelle Perch, a fish called a
perch. Perclus de ses members, he that has not the use of his members, we
say he is taken. Perdre, to lose, to forgo. Perdu, lost, forgon, cast away.
Perdition, loosing, forgoing. Perte, loss, damage, detriment. Vne Perdris, a
partrige. Perdurable, everlasting, ayduring. Pere, a father. Pere grand, grand
father. Pere, Breuuage faict de Poires, perry, a drink made of the juice of
pears. Perfection, perfection. Perfums, parfums, sweet smells. Perfumer, to
perfume. Perfume perfumed. Perfumement, a perfuming. Perfumeur, a perfumer.
Peril, peril, danger. Perilleux, perilous, dangerous. Perir and estre gaste,
to perish, to be marred. Vne Perle, a pearl. Permettre, to permit, to suffer.
Permis, permitted, suffered. Il est Permis, he is permitted, he is licensed.
Permission and conge, permission or leave. Pernicieux, do^mageable, hurtful,
pernicious. Pernicieusement, perniciously, hurtfully. Pierre de pernis, stones
that pass thorough a wall for strength. Perpetrer un meurdre, to commit a
murder. Perpetuel, perpetual, for ever. Pertuer, to leave to perpetual
memory. Perpetuite, euerlastingnesse, perpetuity. Perplex and doubteux, in a
doubt Perplexite, perplexity, doubtfulnesse. Un Perroquet, a Parrot. vne
Perruque ou cheuelure, the tresse, long hear. Pers, ou Couleur perse, sky
color. Persecuter, to vex, to afflict, to persecute. Persepierre, herb, an
herb called Sampier. Perser, seek Percher. Perseuerer, to persevere, to
continue. Perseuera^t en son propos, perseuering in his tale. Perseueramment,
constantly, stoutly. Perseverance, perseverance, patience, continuance. Persil,
an herb called Persly. Persil bastard, bastard persly. Persister, to persist,
to continue. Persister tousiours en son opinion, to persist in opinion. Grand
ou excellent personnage, an excellent personage, or high estate. Personnage
d'vne farce, a personage in a play. La Person d'vn chacun, every person.
Persuader, to persuade. Pertinent, Ce que tu dis n'est point pertinent,
belonging, that which thou speak belongs not to the matter. Un Pertuis, a
hole. Perturber aucun, to trouble one, to disturb. Peruenche, herb, an herb
called Perywincle. Peruers, overthwart, peruers. Peruertir, to pervert.
Pescher, to fish. Pescheur, a fisher. La Pesche, the draught of the net.
Pescherie, a fishing. Peschement, fishing. Vne Pesche, a fruit called a Peche.
Peschenoix, a peche stone. Peser, Pesant, Pesanteur, Peser, seek Poix. Pesle
mesle, confuseement, all on a heap, one with an other, confusedly. La Peste,
the pestilence, that which we call the plague. Pestifiere, qui a la peste,
pestilent, or infected with the plague. Pestilentieux, plagie. Pestrir la
paste, to kned dough. Pestrisseur, a knedder, a baker. Un Pet, a fart. Peter,
to fart. Petiller, to stamp, to trample. Petit, small, little. Le plus perit,
the least. Petit a Petit, by little and little, fair and softly. Petiteur,
smalnesse, littleness. Petitesse, Jdem. Petitement, scantly, smally. Petition,
ou demand, a request a petition. Peton, seek Pied. Petocules, poissons, a
fish called a Scallop. Petrir, Petrisseur, seek Pestrir. Petteler and fouler
aux pieds, to trample, too stamp with the feet. Peu, very little, scant any,
small. Peu s'en fault, ou a Peu pres, scarce enough, almost. Peuoesne, herb, an
herb so called. Un Peuple and nation, a people and nation. Le menu Peuple
d'vne Ville, the commons of a Town or City. Se Peupler, to increase with
people. Peuplement de vigne, an increase of vynes. Peuplier, arbre, a poplar
tree. Peur, ou paour, fear, terror. Fair Peur, to fear, to fraye, to
fright. Poureux, fearful, timorous. Poureusement, fearfully, timerously.
Fantasy, fantasy, imagination. Phasiole, espece de poix, a kind of peaze.
Philosophe, a lover of wisdom, a Philosopher. Estudier en Philosophy, to
study Philosophy. Phiole, a viol, a small glass. Phlegm, phleame.
Phlegmatique, phlegmatike. Physicion, a Physician, a natural Philosopher. Pic,
nom d'oyseau, Piuert, a bird called a Speicht. Vne Pie, a bird called a Pie.
Piece ou morceau qu'o^ a coupe de quelq^ chose, a piece cut off from any thing.
En Pieces and morceaux, ou par parties, in pieces, morcels or parts. Il y a
longue Piece, it is a good while since. Le Pied, the foot. A Pied coy, with
soft foot, with soft pace. Le Pied de la montaigne, The foot or bottom of a
hill. Pied de milan, herb, an herb called kitesfoote. Piedestal d'vne
colomne, The foot of a pillar, a piedestal. Un Peton, a little foot. Un
Pieton, a footeman. Un Piege, a snare or grin, a pitfall. Vne Pierre, a stone.
Pierre precicuse, a Precious stone. La Pierre, ou grauelle, malady, the
disease of the stone. Pierrette, a small stone. Pierreux, stony, rockie.
Pietrer, to trample underfoot, to tread down. Un Pieu, a stake or post.
Pigeon ou coulon, a Pigeon, a dove. Pigeon ramier, a stock dove. Pigeonneau, a
young dove. Vne Pile, ou Pelote a iouer, ou esteuf, a ball to play with. Piler,
a pile to beat. Un Pilon, a pestle. Piler en un mortier, to stamp in a
mortar. Un Pillier, a pillar, a collume. Gaster and piler tout and fair
degast, to wast, pyll, and spoil all. Pilleur, a pyller, a poller, a spoyler.
Pillage, preye or pillage. Pillars, filchers, pilferers. Pillerie and
rauissement, pylling or rapyne. Pillement, a pilling or polling. Le Pilori, a
pillorie. Pilot and patron d'vne nauire, a Pilot or guyder of a ship. Pilotis,
a pyling with timber in water works. Pilules, pillules, or as we call the^
pills. Pimpernelle, an herb called pimpernel. Un Pin, a pyne tree. Un
Pinceau, a pensil. Un Pinsemaille, qui n'a esgard que a amasser argent, a pinch
penny. Pinser, to pynche. Des Pinsettes, pinsers. Pint, a pint. Pionnier, a
Pioner, a digger in wars. Piper, to beguyle one, to deceive one. Pipeur, a
deceyuer, a beguyler. La Pipette and petite queue de lain qui est au sommet
d'vn bonnet, the knop on a man's cappe. Pique ou Iaueline, a pique or iauelin.
Piquer, to prick, to lace, to spur, sometime to quilt. Piquer aucun de
parolles, too nip one in words. Le Piquant d'vn fer, the point or prick of
any iron. Pirate, ou larron and escumeur de mer, a Sea thief, a Pyrate. Pire,
worse. Pirouette, a wharle for a Spindell. Pis, worst. Pirouetter, to turn
round or to go about. Pisser, to piss. Pissat, piss, urine, stale. Pitance,
Toute viande oultre le pain and le vin, all meat besides bread and drink, a
pittance. Pity and compassion qu'on a de la misere d'aucun, pity and
compassion. Chose Pitoyable a voir, a pitiful thing to behold. Piteux, one
that is to be pytied, a wretch. Piuerd, oy seau, a bird called a Speicht. Le
Piuot d'vn huis, ou port, the heudges of a door. Vne gra^de place sans
maisons, a great place. vne place ou le peuple s'assemble, a place where people
do meet. Fair Place, to make room, to give place. Mettre aucun en sa place
pour fair son office, too put an other in his steed or place to execute his
office. Played, debat, question and procez, pleading, strife, debate, Plaider,
to plead, to declare the matter. Plaider, Auoir process, to go to Law. Un
Plaideur, a pleader, a Lawyer. Plaidereau, a contentious fellow, one that will
go to Law for every thing. Un Playdoe, ou playdoyer, A plea or oration made to
the Judges. Un Playdoyeur criard, a prattling Lawyer, an importunate prater.
Plein and vni, plain, smoth, even. Vne Plain, a plain field or leuel ground.
se Plaindre, ou complaindre, to plain or complain. Qui Plaind sa pain, he
that grudgeth his pain. Pleinte, ou Compleinte, a complaint. Plainte, ou
Plaintiff, a plaintiue or accuser. Plaire, to please. Plaisant homme, a pleasant
or merry fellow. Plaisance, pleasure, delight. Plaisanter, to jest, to scoff.
Plaisanteur, a iester, a scoffer. Plaisanterie, iestes, skoffes. Plaisamment,
pleasantly, merrily, iocundly. Plaisir mondain and charnel, worldly pleasure or
lust. Plaisir qu'on prend a quelque chose, pleasure or delight. Plaisir
desordonne, disordonate pleasure. Plaisir and service qu'on a faict, the
pleasure and service that one has done. Plaisir qu'on faict les vns aux
autres, the pleasure which one does to another. Auoir plaisir and esbat, to
have pleasure, joy, or delight. Au plaisir de Dieu, and it please God. Fair
Plaisir a aucun, to do one a pleasure, to do one a good turn, to gratify
one. Pre^dre plaisir a l'estude, to delight or take pleasure in study. Prendre
Plaisir a lire vne lettre to take pleasure in reading a Letter. Vne Planche, a
planke, a thick board. Plancher, a floor of boords. Plancher ou pauer d'ais,
Too floor or planke with boords. Plane, nom d'arbre, a Plane tree. Planete, a
Planet. Planir and vnir quelque lieu, too plain or smothe a place. Du
Plantain, an herb called Plantine. Un Plantal, Un sion and iecto^ d'arbre, ou
d'herbe qu'o^ plant en terre, a plant or syon. Vne Plant d'herbe, ou
d'arbre, A plant of any tree, a set. La plant du pied, the sole of the
foot. Plant and abondance, plenty, abundance. Planter, to plant, to set.
Plant, a graffe. Plantage, a graffing, a setting. Plantement, graffing,
setting. Planteur, a graffer, a setter. Plantureux, plentiful, abundant.
Plantureusement, plentifully, abundantly. Plaquars, placards, writings from
higher powers. Plaquer contre vne paroy, too dawbe against a wall. Platras,
rubbish. Platre, plaster or mortar. Platrer, the plaster. Plat ou escuelle, a
platter, a dish. Plat and bien vni par dessus, flat and smooth. Vne Play, a
wound. Pleige ou respondant, a Suertie. Pleiger aucun, to be suertie for one.
Plein, full. Pleinement, fully. Pleurer, to weep, to wayle, to lament, to shed
tears. Pleurant, weeping. Pleure and regrette, beweept, bewayld, bemoande.
Pleureur, a weeper. Pleur, a tear, a tricle. Pleurement, a weeping, a wayling.
Pleuresie, a disease called the pluresie. Pleuritique, one that has the
pleuresie. Pleust a Dieu qu'il fust venu, I would it pleased God that he were
come. Pleuuir vne merchandise bonne and loyale, to warrant ware marchantable.
Pleuuine, Bailler quelque chose en Pleuuine, too deliver ware on trust or upon
warantise. Plier, to plite, to fold, to bow. Pliement, a pliting, a bowing.
Plieure, folding or bowing. Plis de robbes, the plites of garments. Vne Rob
Plissee, a plitted gown. Plomb, lead. Le Plomb d'vn masson ou carpentier, a
Carpenters plombet. Plomber, to plombe or sound the depth of a thing. Vne
Plombee, a plombet of lead. Plonger en l'eaue, too diue, too plonge in the
water. Plongeon, oyseau, a foul called a Cormorant. Un Ploton de fill, a
bottom of threede. Plourer, seek Pleurer. Plouuoir, to rain. Plouminer, and
fair un petit vent, to misle and blow. Pluye, rain. Pluuieux, raynie. Vne
Plume a escrire, a pen. un Plumart, a plume of feathers. Un Plumassier, a
feather maker. Plumer, to pluck or to plume. Plus, more. Au Plus, at the most.
Plus de fois, oftener, or more times. Plusieurs, many. Plusieurs fois, many
times. Pluuir, seek Pleuuir. Pluye, Pluuieux, seek Plouuoir. Poale a frire, ou
autre chose, seek Paelle. Poalon, a skillet. Vne Poche ou pouchette, A poket.
La Poche d'vn oyseau, the craw of a foul. Pocher, to thruste out with the
finger. Pocher l'oeil a quelqu'vn, too thrust out ones eye. Vne Poelle and
estuues, a stue, a hoatehouse. Un Poet, a Poet. Des Poetrons, ou prunes
iaunes, white plums. Poictrail de cheual, a horse petrel. La Poictrine, the
breast. Poignard, seek Poing. Poil, hear. Un Poille, a stew or hoatehouse. Un
Poinct, a point, a prick. Le Poinct du iour, the dawning of the day. Le Poinct
de la matiere, the point of the matter. Pointu, sharp pointed. Vne Poincte, a
bodkin. La Poincte and asprete d'vn Rocher, the point or top of a rock La
poincte de l'oeil, the corner of the eye. La Poincte de quelque chose ague, the
point of any thing. En ce point, ou par ce poinct tu m'ostes toute esperance,
in this point, or through this point thou take al hope from me. A poinct and
conuenablement, very aptly and fitly. Bien a Poinct, in good time. Bon Poinct,
ou mauuais Point, good plight or ill plight. Qui est en bo^ Poinct and en
order, that is handsome and in good order. Poindre, to prick, to stick, to
lanche. Poignant, pricking, Poignement, a pricking. Le Poing, the fist. Vne
Poighee ou iauelle, A handful. Un Poignard, a Poynado, a Daggar. Le Poignet de
la main, The grasping of the hand. Poinson d'attourneresse, a bodkin to frisell
hear withal. Poinson de ser, an iron bodkin or ponsion. Point, ou nullement,
not. Point trop, not to much. Point encore, not yet. Vne Poire, a pear. Un
Poirier, a pear tree. Un Poireau, ou verru, a wart. Poireux, Poire, seek
Porreau, Porree. Un Pois, a peyse, a weight. Pois don't vie^t Poser, seek Pois.
Poison, poison, venim. Poister, seek Poix. Poisson, fish. Poissonnet, a
little fish. Poissonnier, a fisher, a fishmonger. La Poissonnerie, the
fishmarket. Le poise a peser quelque chose ou le poix d'vn liver, a weight to
wey with. Peser, to wey, to peyse. Peser and considerer diligemment quelque
chose l'examiner, to consider a thing diligently, to ponder a matter. Pesant,
weighty, heavy, burthenous. Pesanteur, weight, heaviness. Peseur, a weigher.
Peson, a wharle to put on the end of a spindle. De la Poix, pitche. Poisser,
to pitche. Vaisseaux poissez, pitched vessels. Poissement, a pitchyng with
pitche. Le Pol arctique, the north pole. Police, le faict and government d'vne
Republique, the government of a common wealth. Citez bien policies, ou il y a
bonne police, cities well ordered or governed. Polir, to polishe, to cleanse, to
make clean, to scour. Poli, polished. Poliement and orneme^t, smothly and
brightly. Polissement, a polishing. Polissure, polishing. Polluer, to defyle,
to spotte, to pollute. Pollu, defiled. Pomelee, ou patte de lion, herb, an
herb called bearefote. Vne pomme, an apple. Pommes de senteurs, sweet balls,
pomanders. Pommiers, apple trees. Un Pommeraye, un lieu plant d'arbres
fruictiers, an Orcharde. Un cheual pomele, A round horse. Pomp and appareil
solennel, pomp or great solemnity. Il march pompeusement, he goes
pompously. Pompeux, pompous, magnifical. Pompon, a pompion. Pierre ponce, a
pomise stone. Poncer, to pounce. Pondre, to lay eggs. Un Pont, a bridge. Un
Pont leuis, a draw bridge. Un Pontife, a high priest. Un Porc ou porceau, a
hog, a swyne. Porc espi, a hedgehog. Porc sanglier, a wild bore. Porcelet,
ou cochon, a pigge. Un Porchier, a swineherde, a hogherde. Porcelaine, Un
grande coquille de mer faicte comme vne corn, a great shelle of a fish made
like a horn. Porcelaine ou pourpier, An herb called Purslane. Un Porche, a
porche. Un Porreau, a leeke. De la Porree, ou iotte, an herb called Beetes.
Vne Port, a haven. Un Port, a gate. Portail, an entry, a portall. Portier, a
porter. Portiere, a she porter. Porter, to bear, to carry. Se porter bie^, to
be in good health Porter patiemment, to bear patiently, to suffer. Port
enseigne, an enseignbearer Port faix, a porter, a burdeyn bearer. Port
panier, a basket bearer. Qui est port, which is carried. Porteur, a bearer, a
carrier. Portage, a bearing. Le fruit and portee d'vne best, the fruit or
burden of any beast Vne portiere femelle qu'o^ guard pour porter des petits,
any female kept to bear young. Port, ou Portement, a bearing, a carrying. La
capacite and Portee d'aucun, the capacity or understanding of any. Portion, a
part, a portion, a deal. La Portion, a portion of any vitayle. Portionner, to
deal, to part, to divide. Poser and asseoir, to stay on, or set down. Mis
and Pose, placed or situate. Homme pose and rassis, a sober or discrete man.
Pose le cas que. etc. put the case that. etc. Pose le cas qu'il soit vaincu,
put the case he be overcome. Pose and repos qu'on prend, rest or pause.
Posement, a placing, setting or disposing of any thing. Position and situation,
placyng and situation. Posseder, to possess, to enjoy. Possesseur de quelque
chose, an owner of any thing. Possession and heritage, possession or heritage.
Possible, possible, that may be. Autant qu'il est possible, As much as is
possible. Post, a post or messenger. Cheual de Post, a post horse. Courir la
Post, To ride in post. Le posteau d'vn huis, the post of a door. Postuler,
ou plaider, aduocasser to plead or to demand a thing. Un pot a boire, comme
voirre, gobelet, ou coupe, a pot to drink in. Un pot a pisser, ou de
chamber, a chamber pot. Pot a cave, a water pot. Un Potier de terre, a potter.
Vne Potiere, ou Potierie, a pot markette. Potage co^mun qui n'est point espez,
potage or broth. Homme potieux, malaize a contenter and difficile, a waywarde
man. Un Potiron, ou champignon, a toadstoole, a musherom. Poulain, a colte.
Malady es aines qu'on appelle les poulains, botches in the gryne. Le poulce,
the thumb. Pouldre, dust. Pouldrer, to dust Pouldrer de sell, to powder with
salt, to seazon. Pouldrette, fine powder. Pouldreux, dusty. Poule, a hen. Un
Poulet, ou poullette, a young hen. Un Pullier, Poulaizier, ou Gelinier, a
hen house, a place where poultrie is kept. Un Poulallier, a poulter. Poulie,
a pulley. Pouliot, herb, penyroyall. Le Poulmon, the lungs or lights
Poulpitre, armaires a livers, a press to set books in. Un Pouil, a louse.
Pouilleux, lousy. Poulser, To pushe, to thruste, to iustle. Poulse, being
thrust, or enforced. Le Pouls, the pulse. Poulsement, a pushing, a thrusting
Poulsif, poussiue, short winded. Poulsins, chickens. la Poulsinerie du ciel,
the seven stars. Poultre ou tref, the beam of a house. Pouoir fair quelque
chose, that can do a thing. Tant que ie Peu, as much as J ca^ Ne Pouoir, that
can not. Il Peut estre, it may be. Pouoir, force and puissance, power, strength
and might. Pouoir and authorite, ou seigneurie, power, authority, or
government. Bailler pouuoir and puissance, to give power and authority. Le
Pouoir, and puisance enbiens, power, or ability in goods. Poupe, ou Poulpe,
malady dede^s le neze, a disese in the nose. Un Poupee, a young wench, sometimes
a puppet. La poupe, and derriere de la nauire, the poope of a ship. Pour, for.
Pour ma part, for my part. Il a judge pour toy, he has given sentence on thy
side. Pource, because, for that cause, therefore. Pour neant, and sans rien
bailler, for naught, for nothing. Pour un parole, for one word. Pourcelaine,
seek Porcelaine. Pourchaser a quelque chose, to seek to get a thing, too
desire to compass a thing, too sue to one for a thing. Purchasser sa vie
d'huis en huis to get his living from door too door. Pourchas, a purchasing, a
getting, a soliciting. Pour, poor, bare, needy. Pouret, a poor soul.
Pourete, poverty, need, necessity, bareness, want. Mener ou mettre a
pourete, to bring one to poverty to undo one. Pourement poor, simply.
Poureux, Poureusement, seek Peur. le Pourfil de l'ho^me, the shape of a man.
Se pourmener, to walk. Pourmenement, walking. Pourmenoir, a walking place.
Pourpenser, to bethink one, to devise on a matter. Pourpier, an herb called
pursla^. Pourpoint, a doublet. Pourpre, and le poisson don't se prenoit la
teincture de pourpre, a shell fish called a purple. Un pourpris and closture,
an enclosure, a cloister. Pourquoy? why? wherefore. Pourquoy non, why not?
Pourrir quelque chose, to rotte a thing. Se pourrir, to rot or wax rotten.
Estre Pourri and gaste, to be rotten and marred. Il sent le pourri, It
smells of rottenness. Pourriture, ou pourrissure, rottenness. Poursuiure,
to pursue, to follow a matter. Poursuitte, ou pourchas, a pursuit or
following. Pourtant que, forasmuch as, because that. Pourtraire, to draw out,
to portraye. Un Pourtraict, a draughte or portraicture. Le pourtraict, patron
and ordo^nance d'vn edifice and autres chooses, the portraiture or model of any
building. Pourueu que tu le puisses, So that thou can not do it. Pourueu
qu'il soit vray, so that it be true. Poruingner, seek Prouin, Pouruoir,
Pourueu, Pouruoya^t, Pouruoyance, Pouruision, seek Prouuoir. Poussier, seek
Poudre. Poussif, seek Poulsif. Pouuoir, seek Pouoir. Poyure, pepper.
Poyurette, Nielle ou Nigelle, an herb called Gyth. Practiquer ce que nous
enseignons, to practice or put in ure that which we teach. Bons Practiciens,
ge^ts qui scauent bien les loix and les coustumes, one of great practice in the
law. Par practique, by practice or subtlety. Preallableme^t, foremost, or
first Un Pre, a field, a meadow. Preau, ou petit pre, a close or first meddow.
Preceder, to go before, to be first. Precedent, going before. Predecesseur, our
predecessor. Predication, a preaching, a sermon. Predire, to foreshew.
Preminence, preeminence, prerogative. Preface and prologe d'vn liver, propos
iteratif de ce q^ nous voulons dire puis apres, the preface or prologe of a
book, a short declaration before what we will say after. Preferer and plus
estimer, to prefer, to esteem above, to like better. Prefiner, borner, and
arrester, to determine before, to appoint before what shall be done after. A
iour prefix, at a day appointed Prejudice, prejudice, hindrance. Prelat, a
prelate. Premier, first, or primate. Premier que ie. etc. Before J talk. etc.
Tout Premierement, first of al. de Prime face, at the first show. Primerain,
that which has none other beginning. Prendre, to take, to catch, to
apprehende. Prins, caught, taken. Prinse, a catching, a prize. Preparer, to
prepare, to set in a readiness. Preparation, and appareil, preparation, making
ready. Preparement, a preparation, a preparing. Prerogative and aua^tage,
prerogative or advantage. Pres ou aupres, nigh. Estre aupres, to be present. A
peu pres, almost, within a little. Prescher, to preach. Prescheur, a
preacher. Prescrire, to prescribe, to apoint. Qui est present, which is
present, or hard by. Estre Present, to be present. Presence, presence. En
Presence, before or in presence. Presentation, a setting forth. Presentement
and tout a l'heure presentely, at that very instant. Presenter, to present, to
offer. Se presenter deuant quelqu'vn, to present him self to any, to make a
show. Un present, a present, a gift. Preserver and garder quelqu'vn qu'il
n'ait mal, to preserve, to defend or keep one from harm. Estre preserve, to
be preserved or defended. Un Preseruatif, a preservative. Presider a quelque
affair, to be chief in any business. President, a president or chief
officer. Presque, almost, welnigh. Presque tous, almost all, the most part.
Presser quelque chose, to press a thing. Presser aucun de fair quelque chose,
to press or enforce one to do a thing. Pressant, ou pressif, enforcing or
urgent. Chose pressiue, an earnest or urgent business. La Press, a preace of
people. Un Press, a press, to press or print any thing in. Pressement, a
pressing. Des Presses, fruicts, a fruit called a peache. Un Pressoir, a
presser. Pressoirer, to press out licour. Un Pressoireur, a presser.
Pressoiree, that which is pressed Pressed and apparaille, ready or pressed
Presteme^t, readiness, promptnes. Prester, to lend. Prester l'oreille aux
flatteurs, to give ear to flatterers. Un Pressed, a loan. Prestre, a priest.
Prestresse, a she priest. Presumer de soy, to presume. Presomptueux,
presumptuous or arrogant. Presomption, presumption, malapertnesse.
Presomptueuseme^t, malapertly, presumptuously. Presupposer, Presuppose qu'ainsi
soit, to presuppose, to wene Presure, curdes. Il pretend a cela, his pretense
is thereto. Pretieux, precious. Preu and vailla^t cheualier, a valiant or
courageous knight. Preudhomme feal and loyal, a faithful man. Preudho^mie,
feaute and loyaute, faithfulness, trustiness. Preuaricateur, a double dealer
or deceytfull person. Preuenir, to prevent. Preuenu, prevented. Preuenement, a
preventing. Preuoir, to foresee. Tu as tout preueu, Thou foresawest all.
Preuoyance, foresight. Preuost de la ville, the provost or chief of a town.
Un Preuost de Mareschaulx, a provost Marshall, that has in charge to hang up
thieves. Prent, comme, en prent, first, or first of all. Prier, to pray, to
require, to desire, to beseech. Ie te pry, J pray thee. Ie vous en Pry, J
heartily pray you. Priant, praying. Priere, a prayer. Par Priere, by prayer. Le
Prieur, Prieure, the Priour or prioresse. Prime, seek Primeur. Primogeniture,
the first birth. Prince, ou princess, a prince or princess. Estre principale
ou plus excellent, to be principal and chief. Principal de college, the
principal of a college. Tout le principal de l'affaire gist en tesmoings, the
chief of the matter stands upon witnesses. Principalement, chiefly,
especicially, principally. Principaute and seigneurie, principality or
lordship. Dire de Plainsault and inco^tine^t to tell immediately, redily, or at
the first choppe. Printemps, Springtyme. Pris and valeur, price and value.
Mettre Pris, to set a price. Mettre a pris, To bring to dearth. Priser and
estimer, to praise, to esteem, to like. Prise, prised. La Prizee, the praising
or estimation of a thing. Priseur, a praiser, a price setter. Vne prison, a
prison. Prisonnier, a prisoner. Un prive and retraict, a privy, or Jakes.
Prive auec un autre, familiar with one. Vne person priuee qui n'a nulle
charge de la republique a private person that has no charge in a common
wealth. Bestes priuees and traictables, tame and tractable beasts. Priueeme^t,
privately, familiarly. Priuoite, acquaintance, familiarity. Priuer aucun de
son estat and office, to deprive one from his office or charge. Prive de
quelque chose, deprived or bereued of a thing. Privation, a depriving.
Privilege, c'est a dire un loy particuliere pour ou contre aucun, a privilege.
N'estre point plus priuilegie qui les autres, to have no more privilege or
prerogative than an other. Probable, seek Prouuer. Proceder and aller auant,
to proceed or go forward. Process, process or strife in law. Process criminel,
judges in causes criminal. Processions, processions. Prochaine parent, nighe
kinsman. Prochainement, nighly. Prochainete, nighnes or nerenes Procurer la
paix, To procure peace. Procuration charge and administration qu'on a des
affairs d'aultruy, attourneyship. Procureur, an attorney or proctoure.
Prodigue, riottous, prodigal, lavish, wastefull. Prodigaleme^t, prodigally,
wastfully. Prodigalite and degast de biens, consuming of goods. Proditeur ou
traistre, a traitor or betrayer. Produire, to bring forth, to allege.
Produire and mettre horse son fruit, to bring forth fruit. Produire and mettre
en auant, to bring forth, or set before ones eyes. Qui Produit beaucoup, That
brings forth much. La Production d'vne party, that which a party brings
forth to justify his cause. Proeme ou preface, a prologue, or preface.
Profaner, se seruir en commun usage des chooses consacrees, to profane, or put
holy things to common uses. Proferer and prononcer, to pronounce or allege.
Prolation, the pronouncyng of letters. Professeur qui se mesle d'enseigner, he
that professes to teach any thing. Fair Profession de quelq^ chose, and s'en
mesler publiquement, to profess any thing, or to teach publicly. Profond,
deep. Profondement, deeply. Profondeur, ou profondite, height or depth.
Progenier, fair des pe^^is, too bring forth young, or progeny. Prohiber and
defendre, to forbid to prohibit. Prolonger, to prolong, to tract time, to
defer. Prolonge, prolonged, deferred. Prolongation ou prolo^gueme^t a
prolonging, a deferring. Promettre, to promise. Promis, promised. Promise, a
promise. Accomplir sa Promise, to fulfill promise. Tenir sa Promise, to keep
promise, to stand to his word. Prompt, pressed and appareille, prompt, ready.
Promptement, readily. Prononcer, to pronounce. Vne Prononciation, a
pronouncing. Prophet, a Prophet. Prophetie and annoncement des chooses
aduenir, a prophecy, or foreshewing of things too come. Prophetizer, to
prophecy. Propice, merciful. Proportion, proportion. Propos and intention, a
purpose and intent. Propos and deuis, a speech, a talk. Tout a Propos, of
purpose. A quel Propos dis-tu cecy? ou tend ce Propos? to what end or purpose
speak thou that? Parler bien a Propos, to speak to the matter, or to the
purpose. C'est bien a Propos, it is very apt. De Propos delibere, of a set
purpose, determinately. Proposer en soymesme, to purpose in him self. Proposer
and mettre au deuant sa vie aux ieunes enfans pour le suyure, to set forth his
life for other to follow. Propre and appartenant a aucun proper or belonging to
any. De ma Propre malice, of mine one proper malice. Propre and peculier,
proper and peculiar. Fort Propre and conuenant, very proper and fit. Mal
Propre, unhandsome. Proprement, properly, aptly, decently, comely. Propriete
and seance, neatness, fitness. Propriete and appertena^ce, propriety or
owning. Proprietaire, an owner. Propriete de quelque chose acquise par
prescription, a propriety gotten by prescription. Proroguer, ou Prolo^ger, to
prorogue, to prolong, to defer. Prorogation ou prolongeme^t, deferring.
Proscrire and mettre en criee, to put to port sale. Proscription, an attainder.
Prose, prose. Prosperer, to prosper, to thrive. Prosperity, quand les chooses
nous viennent a souhait, prosperity. Prosterner and ruer par terre, to fall
flat to the ground. Demourer en la Protection and sauuegarde du peuple, to
remain under the protection and safegarde of the people. Protester, to
protest. Prothocolles, the first coppyes or original of writings. Prou,
I'endure Proud maux, much, as, J have suffered much sorrow. La Prove, ou le
deua^t d'vne nauire, the stern of a ship. Proverb, a proverb, an adage Les
Prouesses and haults saicts de quelqu'vn, the prowess or noble acts of one.
Proufit, profit, gain, commodity. Il y a du Proufit en ces chooses la, there
is profit in those things Proufiter, to profit, to gain. Proufiter en bie^s,
to wax rich. Vtile and Proufitable, profitable, commodious. Proufitablement,
profitably, commodiously. Un Prouin, a young branche of a vine. Prouigner vne
vigne, to plant a vine. Prouignement, a planting. Province, a Province.
Prouoquer, to provoke, to stir, to move. Prouoque, provoked. Prouuer, to prove,
to approve. Prouuer faulsaire, to prove one false. Prouuer nostre dire, to
approve our sayings. Probation, proof. Prouue, a proof, a say, a trial.
Prouuoir a quelque chose, too provide for a thing. Prouuoir and se donner
guard, to forsee and beware off. Il t'est Prouueu, Thou wast ware of it.
Prouuoyant a ses affairs, providing for his business. Prouuoyance, provision.
La Provision de la maison, the provision belonging to a house. Fair provision
d'argent, to provide money. Proye, a preye. Prudence, quand quelqu'vn scait que
c'est de bien and de mal, wisdom, prudence. Prudent and sage, wise, sage.
Prudemment, wisely. Prune, a prune, a damson. Un Prunier, a damson tree. Vne
Prunelle, a wild slow. La Prunelle de l'oeil, the apple of the eye. Publier,
to publish. Publie, published. Public, public, common. Publication de livers,
a publishing or setting forth of books. Publiquement, publicly, openly.
Pucelle, a maid, a virgin. Pucellage, mayde^hod, virginity Puir, to stink.
Puant, stinking. Puanteur, on Puantise, stinche or stink. Puis apres, then
after. Puis que ie, etc. seeing that J. Puis qu'ainsi est, ie, etc. seeing it
is so. Depuis, since. Depuis le matin, since morning. Puisne, the younger borne.
Un Puits, a well. Puiser de l'eaue, to draw up water out of a well. Puisement,
a drawing out. Pouoir and puissance, power, might. Force and puissance,
strength. Puissance and authorite, power and authority. Puissant, mighty,
strong, valiant. Puissamment, mightily, strongly, valiantly. Vne Pulce, a
flea. Pulluler, and bourgeonner, Too bud out. Pulueriser, to beat to powder.
Punaise, a weak louse. Un homme Punais, a slouen. Punir, to punish, to
correct. Punition, a punishing, a correcting. Pupile ou mineur, an vnderli^g.
Pur, pure, clean, neat. Pur and entier, pure and whole, perfect. Purement,
purely. Purete and innocence, pureness and innocence. De la Puree de poix,
Pease strained. Purer, quand vne apostume re^d de la boue, to cast out matter
as a sore does. Purger, to purge, to cleanse. Purge, purged, clenzed. Purgation,
purgation. Purifier, too purify, too make clean. Pusillanimite, faint
hartednesse, or cowardice. Vne Putaine, a whore, a harlot. Putier, a whore
hunter, a ruffian. Putrefaction, rottenness.
Qu ante A.
QVadran au soleil, A Sun Dial. Quadrin, Un Liard, a piece of French money
better worth than a farthing. Quadruple, quatrefois autant, four times as
much, foure-folde. Qualite, quality. Quand se-race? when shall it be? D'icy a
Quand? how long? Quand a ce, etc, as for that. Quantesfois? how often?
Quantiesme? how many? Quantite, quantity, muchnesse. Quaquet, prattling,
babbling, chat. Quaqueter, to prate, to chatte. C'est assez Quaquete, thou have
prated enough. Quaquetement, a prattling. Quaqueteur, a pratler. Quarante,
forty. Quarantieme, the fortith. Un Quarquan, ornement and bague qu'on pend au
col, A jewel to hang about the neck, a karket. Quarquan a mettre le col des
malfaicteurs, a pillory. Quarre, four square. Un Quarre, a square. Quarrier,
ou escarcir, to square out. Quarrefour, A four cornerd street. Quarreaux des
iardins, beds in gardens. Quarreler des souliers, to coble shoes. Quarreleure
des souliers, a coblar. Quarrieres, quarries of stones. Un Quarrier, a stone
hewer. Le Quart ou quatrieme, The quarter or fowerth part. Quarte a vin, a wine
quart. La Quatre party de la iournee d'vn iour, The quarter of a days work.
Un Quartier, a quarter. Les Quartiers d'vne ville, The quarters of a town.
Quasi, presque, almost. Quasser and briser, to break, too quash in pieces.
Quatorze, fowerteene. Quatre, four. Quatre fois, four times. Le Quatrieme,
the fourth. Quatre fois autant, four times as much. Que fais tu? what do
thou? Qu'est cela? what is that? Qu'en est-il? what is it? Que veux tu? what
would thou have? Quel? what manner of thing? Quel homme? what man? En Quelle
maniere? in what manner? Quelque, something. Quelcunque, chacun, whatsoever.
Quelqu'vn, some man. Vne Quenouille, a dishstaffe. Quenouillee, a dishstaffe
full of flax. Vne Querelle, a quarrel, a debate, a strife. Quereleux, a
contentious fellow, a wrangler. Querir, to seek. Un Quorquois ou trousse, a
quyuer. La Queste ou enqueste que fait un judge en vne cause, the inquiry or
enquest that a Judge makes on any matter. Quester, to beg. Question ou
doubt, a question or doubt. Souldre vne Question, to assoyle or resolve a
question. Bailler la question, gehenne and torture pour scauoir d'vn faict, to
put one on the rack or pinbancke. Questionnette, a little question La Queue,
the tail. Queue d'aronde en matiere de charpenterie ou menuiserie, a fastni^g
of boordes together in manner of a doves tail. La Queue d'vne poire, and
autres fruits, the stalk of a pear or other fruit. Quoue, qui a vne queue,
one that has a tail. Queue a aguiser ferrements, a whetstone. Qui suis-ie?
who am I? Quiconque, whosoever. Quicter, to acquit. Quicter la place, too
leave the place. Quictance, an acquitance. Bailler Quicta^ce, to give
acquitance. Un Quinquaillier, a peddler. Quintefueille, herb, an herb called
Cinkefield. Quinze, fifteen. Un Quote, ou quelque party, a part, a portion.
Quoter and marquer l'article q^ on veult impugner, to quote or mark in the
margin. Quoy, qu'est cela? what? what is that? Quoy, qu'on l'achette, how
dear so ever it be bought. Quoy qu'il en soit, what soever it be. Auoir bien
dequoy, Too have somewhat to take too, to be rich.
R ante A.
RAbaisser vne person qui s'esleuoit trop, to pluck one down that was to
presumptuous. Rabais, abatement. Rabbatre du pris, too abate the prise.
Rabbatre de la sum and dimi nuer, to abate of the sum. Rabailler and
racoustrer un habillement, to mend a garment. Rabillement, mending. Rabiliter,
ou Reabiliter, to repair, to amend. Un Rabble, ou rabot a mesler l'arene and le
sable parmi la chaulx, A sieve such as plastrers use to sift their lime in. Le
Rabble d'vn lieure, the loyne of a hare. Le Rabble d'vn sa^glier, the loyne of a
wild bore. Rabot, a ioyners plane. Raboter, to plane, to make smooth. La
Racaille du peuple, the rascal sort of the people. Se Racorder and raillier,
to agree again together. Se Racourcir, to shrink together or to stoop.
Raccoustrer, to mende, to trim again. Raccoustrement, a mending, a trimming.
Raccoustumer, ou Ramener quelque coustume, to bring a custom again, to bring
in ure again. Un Race, a race, an offspring, a kindred. Rachasser, to drive
away again Racheter au poix de l'or, to redeem with the weight of gold.
Rachet, ou payeme^t de rancon a redeeming or paying of ransom. Racine, a
root. Racinette, a little root. Racler, to rake, to scrape, too grate. Racle,
scraped, grated. Un Racloir, a grater, a scraper. Raclure, grating. Raconter,
to tell, to declare. Raconteurs de nouuelles, tellers of news. Racourir, to
run again. Radoter, to deceive or set one in dotage. Radotement, doting.
Radouber, to patch, to piece. Radoubement, a mending. Radoubeur, a botcher, a
mender Radresser ou Redresser, too amend, to correct. Radressement, a mending.
Radresseur. a correctour. Se Raduiser, to take better aduisement, to change
advise. La Raffle d'vne grappe de Rasin, the stalk of a bunche of grapes.
Rafreschir, to refresh, to cheer up. Rafrechisement, refreshing, chearing. Se
Regaillardir, to wax merry. Regats d'eaue, floods of water. Rage, rage, fury.
Rager and folatrer, too play the wanton, to ticke and toye. Ragement,
wantonness, or toying. Raggrandir, to enlarge, to make great. Raieunir, to
wax young again. Railler and se gaudir d'aucun, to jest or to floute. En
Raillant, iestingly. Raillerie, jest, sport, flouting. Un Railleur ou Raillard,
A Jester. Vne Rain, a Frog. Rainseaux ou Rameaux d'arbres, bows of trees.
Raire, to shave. Ray ou raze, shaven. Raiz, seek Rets. Vne grappe de Raisin, a
bunche of grapes. Raison, reason. Raiso^ pourquoy? a reason why? A quelle
Raison? by what reason? C'est la Raison, it is reason. Ce qui est Raisonnable,
that which is reasonable. ce n'est pas faict Raisonnablement a toy, it is not
reasonably done of thee. Raisonner, to reason or argue. Railliement, an
atonement, a reconciliation. Ramage, Les petits oiseaux oublient leur Ramage,
The branche song of byrds. Ramas and meslange, A gathering together, a medley.
Ramasser, to gather together. Ramasse, gathered together, assembled. Rame de
papier, a reme of paper Rameau, a branche of a tree, a bow. Ramee and fueille,
a shadow. Ramenteuoir, to remember, to put in remembrance. Vne Rame ou auiron,
an oar. Ramer, tirer a l'auiron, Too row. Ramier, ou coulomb Ramier, a stock
dove. Ramon, ou Ballay, a brom, a besome. Ramoitir, to soake, to moysten.
Rampar, seek Rempar. Ramper ou grimper, to rampe, or climb. Rampement and
trainement sur le ventre ou pieds sur terre, a ramping or creeping on the
ground. Ramu, ou branche, full of bows. Ran, ou Belier, a ram. Ranci, relant,
chansi, morsi, rustie, musty, fusty. Rancissure, restinesse, mustines. Rancon,
a hedging bill. Rancon, Ranconner, seek Re^con. Rancune, hatred, malice,
rancour. s'enfuir a grand Randon, to run away in have. Rang, an order, a rank.
Ranger, ou Arranger, to set in order, to range. Vne Rangee de Rames ou
auirons, a row of oars. Raouler, seek Rouler. Un Rape, A Raspe or roughe
Fyle. Rapetacer, and reamender, To patch, to piece. Rapine, rapine, robbery.
Rappeller, to call again. Rappel, a calling again, an appeal. Rapporter, to
bring again. Fair Rapporter vne chose a un autre, too make one thing agree
with an other. Ce champ Rapporte and rend beaucoup, this field yeldeth much
fruit. Se Rapporter a aucun, to report himself to any man. Rapporter tout a
aucun, Mettre tout enter les mains d'aucuns, to report all to one man, to put
al into his hands. Rapport, report, or talk. Grand Rapport de terre, great
yielding ground. Rapporteurs de parolles, reporters of words. Faulx
Rapporteur, a false reporter, a backebyter. Rapprendre, too learn again.
Rapt, ou Rauisseme^t, rauishing or taking away by violence. Vne Raquette, a
racket. Rare, qui ne se trouue, ou ne se void point souuent, ne par tout, rare,
geason, dainty. Raser, ou Raire, to shave. Raze, shaven. Rasement, a shauing.
Rasoir, a raser. Rasure and effaceure de lettres ou mots, rasing out of words.
Rassasier, to satisfy, to content ones appetit. Rassasiement, a satisfying.
Rasse^bler, rabiller, raccoustrer quelque chose bien proprement, to set
together, to mende a thing finely. Rasseoir, to sit down. Qui est pose and
Rassis, a settled man. Vin rassis, settled wine. Un Rasteau, a little rake.
Rasteler le bled en herb, To rake the corn while it is grene Rasure, seek
Raser. Rat, a ratte. La Rate, the spleen. Vne Ratiere, a mouse trap. Ratifier,
and approuuer, to ratify, to approve. Raton, ou petit rat, a young rat.
Ratisser, to rake, to scrape. Vne Ratissoire, a scraper. Ratteindre en
cheminant, To overtake in going. Fair un Rauage, to make a rode on the
enemies. Raualler, rehumer, to swallowe down again. Rauellement and
amoindrissement, a falling in price, as the falling of the market. Rauaudeur
qui refait les vieux habillements, a botcher. Rauauderesse, a woman botcher Vne
Rave, a rape, or turnop. Rauine ou Ragaz d'eaue, great floods of water. Rauir,
to rauishe, to take away by violence, to rob. Raui, ravished. Rauissant, a
rauisher. Rauissement, rauishing, robbing Rauiser, seek Raduiser. Se Rauoir, to
come again to him self. Un Ray ou rayon de soleil, the beam of the Sun. Un
Rayon pour escouler l'eaue d'vne champ, a drane to draw the water out of a
field. Vne Raye, ou ligne, a row, or ligne. Rayer, Effacer, to raze, to
cross out. Ray, crossed out. Reagal, a kind of poison. Reaument and de
faict, verily, in deed. Rebailler form a quelq^ chose to new make a thing.
Rebarbatif, shrewde, sharp, curste. Il a Rebecque contre moy, He stood with
me face to face. Rebeller, to rebel. Rebellion, rebellion. Rebondir, to
rebounde back again. Reboucher ou Emousser un trenchant ou point, to blunte^
the edge or point of a thing. Reboucher un trou, to stop up a hole. Rebouche,
stopped up. Rebouchement, a stopping up, A Rebours, arsward, quite contrary,
backward. Color a rebours, To flow against Reduire a neant, To bring to
naught. Reduire en pouldre, To bring to dust. Refaire les ports qui sont
ro^pues, to mende broken gates, to make new. Refection, food or refection.
Refaucher, to new mow grass. Refermer, to shut again. Reflechir, to bow
again. Reflourir, to flourish again. Refondre, to cast again. Reforger, to
forge again. Reformer, to refourme. Reformation, a reformation. Reformateur, a
reformer. Un Refort ou rave, a rape, a radishe. Refort sauuage, a wild radishe.
Refouler le trenchant de quelque chose, to blunten the edge of a thing.
Refoule, made blunt. Refoulement, an abating of the edge. Refrains des balades,
the burden of a song. Refrapper, to strike again. Refrappe, stricken again.
Refrappement, a stryking again. Se refraindre and moderer, To refrain, to
forbear. Refrener la hardiesse d'aucun, to abate the boldness of one.
Refrigerer. etc. Uses de refroidir, proprement se dit d'vne chose qui par auant
boulloit, to cool. Refroidi, cooled. Refroidissement, cooling. Se Refrongner,
to frown. Refrongnement, a frouning. Refrotter, to rub again. Refuge, refuge,
succor, help. Refuir, to flee again. Refuiant le labeur, fleeing from
labor. Refuser, to refuse, to deny, to gaynsay, to forsake. Estre refuse, to
be refused or forsaken. Refus qu'on fait d'aucun, The refusing of any person.
Regain, foin derriere saison, aftercrop of hay. Regarder, to regard, to mark,
to see, to look, to espy. Regarder dedens, to look into. Se regarder and
glorifier, to set much by himself. Regard, ou regardeure, regard, respect.
Regarduere basse, down look. Regardeur, a looker. Regardement, a looking.
Regent, a regent, a scholemaister, a governor. Regermer, to spring again.
Regimber, To winse, to kick and fling. Regimbeur, a winser. Regimbement, a
wynsing or kicking. Un Regime de viure, an order of diet. Region, a Region, a
realm, a country. Regir and gouerner, to rule and govern. Un registre, a
register. Un Regnard, a fox. D'vn regnard, of a fox. Regner, to reign. Qui
Regne, that reigns. Regorger, to give up again, to parbreake. Regorgement
and trop grande abondance, excess, too great abundance. Regratter quelque
vielle rob, and la fair comme neuue to new dress an old gown Regrateurs,
ou regratier, dressers of old clothes. Regratement de vieilles chooses pour les
mieux vendre apres, the flourishing up of old things to make them better to
sale. Regrediller les cheueux, To frisell the hear. Regret, Sorrow, grief.
Regretter aucun, To bewail one, to be sorry for one. Rehouer, to new dig.
Rehouement, a new digging as they do yearly about the roots of vines.
Rehumer, Too suppe up again. Reiecter, to reject, to despise, to cast of.
Reiecter tout un affair au mois de Mars, To put off all a business till
March. Reiecte, cast off. Reiectement, a casting off. Un reiecton, the young
spring of a vine. Reigle, a rule. Reigler les chooses, To rule things.
Reiglement and ancienne observance, a rule and ancient custom. Reigleement ou
reguliereme^t, orderly. Le Rein, ou roignon, The kidneye. Les Reins, the
reins. La rain d'vne bride, the reyns of a bridle. Reinser, to rynse, to
wash. Reiterer, to begin again. Reiteration, beginning again. Relant, musty
or moldy. Relascher, to release. Relasche, release. Relaschement de labeur,
leaving of work Relater, pour reciter, to show forth, to recite. Releguer,
Bannir, ou confiner, to bannishe. Releuer, to raise up again. Le Relief ou
demourat du souper ou disner, the remnant of a supper, or that which is left.
Relier des livers, to bynd books. Relier un muy ou cuuier, to hoope a tubbe.
Diuerses Religions, diverse religions. La Reliqua qu'on doibt d'aucun, the rest
of any sum. Relire, to read again. Relics, relikes. Reluire, to shine, to
have a gloss, to glister. Reluisant, shining, glistering. Remanent, the
remnant which is left. Remanier, to take in hand again. Remascher, to chawe
again. Remaschement, a chawing of the cudde. Rembarrer aucun, to confute one.
Remboister un os, to set a bone that is out of joint. Rembourser les deniers
despe^duz en la guerre, to purse the money again that we spent in the war.
Relais, seats or banks to sit on. R'embrousser chemin, to take the next way.
Remede, a remedy, a medicine. Remedier, to heal, to help. Remediement, a
healing. Remembrance, a remembrance, a similitude. Remener, ou Ramener, to
bring again. Remenement, a bringing again. Remercier, to thank. Remerciement,
a thanking. Remesurer, too measure again. Remettre, to place aright, to
restore to the first estate. Remettre la peine, to forgive the pain. Remission
and pardon, pardon, remission. Remettre a aucun sa fault, and l'en reprendre
aigrement, to reprove one for his fault, to check. Remordre, to byte again.
Remouuoir, to remove. Rempar, a rampart, a forte. Remplir, to fill, to stuff.
Rempli, stuffed, filled. Remplissement, a filling. Remplage, ou Remplissage and
fourniture, furniture. Remporter, to bring again. Remuer, to remove, to
stir. Remuement, a remouyng. Remunerer, to reward, to recompense. Renard, a
fox. De Regnard, of a fox. Renaistre, to be borne again. Renauiger, to sail
again. Reng, Rengee, seek Rang. Rencherir, to wax dear again. Rencheoir en
malady, To fall sick again. Rancon quasi redemption, ra^some. Ranconner and
pillar aucun, to ransom or poll one. Rencontrer, to meet with. Rencontre, a
meeting. Rencontreur, qui se mocque d'autruy, mocqueur, a scoffer. Rencuser, to
bewray. Se Rendormir, to fall a sleep again. Rendormissement, a falling
again on sleep. Render, to yield, to restore. Se Render a aucun en sa
sauegarde and puissance, to yield to the sauegard and power of an other.
Rendement, a restoring. Renforcir, to wax strong, to take a good courage.
Renforci, strengthened. Enuoyer du renfort, to send aid Se renfrongner, To
frown, to skoule. Rengendrer, to engender again. Rengreger un mal, to make a
thing worse than it is. Renier auec serment, to deny with oath. Reniement de
la chose deue, to deny a due. Renfler, to puff up again. Renom, Renommee,
renoume, good name. Renoncer aucun a gendre, to forsake one for his kin.
Renoncer a l'amitie d'aucun, to forsake friendship with one. Renouer les chooses
delaissees and rompues, to knit up things that are a sunder. Renouueler, to
renew. Renouuele, racoustre, and regratte, renewed, new trimmed. Renouuellement,
a renewing. Rent, rent, custom, tax. Rentraire, to lay in a seam with a
nail. Rentrer, to go in again. Renuerser, to overthrow. Coup done a la
Renuerse, a crosseblow. Renuerseme^t, an overthrowing Renuersure, overthrowing.
Renuoyer, to send again. Renuoy, a sending again. Repair and logis, a place
to repair to, a loding. Repaistre and bailler a manger, to feed. Reparer, to
repair, to mende. Reparation, reparation. Reparement, a repayring. Repargner,
seek Respargner. Repas, a meal, repast. Prendre son repas, To take repaste.
Repasser la mer, par ou on estoit venu, to pass again over sea. Repeigner, to
comb again. Penser and repenser en son esprit, to think and think again.
Repensement, a chewing of the cudde. Soy repentir d'auoir fait quelque chose,
to repent of doing a thing. Repentance, repentance. Repeter and redire un mesme
chose, to repete or say often one thing. Repetition de quelque chose, the
repetition of any thing. Replanter, to plant or set up again. Replier, to bend
again, to fold again. Replis, bent again. Replicquer, to reply or answer.
Replicque, a reply. Repliques, answers. Repoindre and repiquer, Too prick
again. Repolir, to polish again. Reporter, to carry again. Reportee, carried
again. Repos, rest, quietness. Repos d'esprit, quiet mind, peace of
conscience. Reposer and dormir, to rest and sleep. Se Reposer, to rest, to
take ease. Repoulser, to repulse, to withstand. Repoulse, repulsed,
withstande^. Repoulsement, a repulsing. Repoulsoir, that which repulseth.
Reprendre, to receive again, to take again. Fair repre^dre les chooses
rompues, To make broken things hold together again. Reprendre aucun de
quelque fault, to reprove one of some fault committed. Reprins, taken again.
Reprins and repetitio^, a repetitio^ Repreneur, a reprouer, a carper
Reprehe^sio^, reprehensio^, reprofe Representer, To represente, to keep the
place. Representatio^, a representatio^. Ie vous pry, and reprie, J pray and
pray you again. Reprimer, to repress and subdue Reprocher, to reproach.
Reproach, reproach, vpbraiding. Reprouuer, to reprove, to check. Republique, the
public weal. Repudier sa femme, to forsake his wife. Repue, seek Repas.
Apres la Repue, after meal. Repugner, contredire, aller ale^contre, to
repugne, to gaynsay. Repugnance and contrariete, repugnance and contrariety.
Reputer aucun pour tell, ou tell, to repute or esteem one for such. Bonne
Reputation, good reputation and estimation. Mauuaise Reputation, ill reputation
or name. Requerir, to require instantly, to desire. Racine fort Requise pour
fair onguent, an excellent root to make oyntement. Request, a request.
Requests scriptes, requests or supplications. Fair Request a aucu^, to make
request to one. Requoy, seek Recoy. Resaillir, to start back. Rasaluer, to
salute again. Resarcler, to sow again. Reschaper d'vne malady, to escape or
recover a sickness. Reschauffer, to warm again. Reschauffoir ou Reschault, A
chasing dish. Rescinder un contract, to break a bargayne. Se Recourre du
danger ou on estoit d'estre mis en oubly, to seek to forget danger. Rescreer,
seek Recreer. Rescrire, to write again. Le Rescript and lettres d'vn Prince,
the answer of a Prince by letter. Resembler, to resemble, to be like. Ne
Resemblant rien a un autre, nothing resembling an other. Resemblance faicte sur
le vif, a counterfeate made after the life. Resemblement, resembling. Resemer,
to sow again. Resequer and oster du tout, to cut it wholly off. Reserrer, to
shut up, to close. Reserre, shut up, closed up. Reseruer, to reserve.
Reseruoir, a closet too keep things in. Resider, estre long temps assis, to
be resident, or to sit long. Residence, residence. Le Residu, the residue.
Resigner, renoncer and quicter son office, to resign, too renounce, to give
over. Resignation, resignation. Resine, vne humeur coulante, principalement du
pin, and ^^autres herbs, rosin. Resiouir, to rejoice, to make one merry, to
be merry. Se Resiouir, to be glad, to be joyful, to be merry. Tu m'as tout
Resiouy, thou have lightened my heart. Fort Resiouissant, very merry.
Resiouissance, mirth, pleasure. Resister, to resist, to withstand, to repugne.
Resistance, resistance. Ie suis Resolu a cela, J am resolved thereto. C'est ma
Resolution, Voylace qu'il m'ensemble, this is my resolution or advise.
Resonner, to resound, to ring. Resonnant, ringing, sounding. Resortir en la
cour, to demand right in Court. Resort and jurisdiction, jurisdiction
Resouldre, to resolve, to break or undo. Fair Resouldre les humeurs du
corpse, to resolve the humors in man's body. Respandre ca and la, Too spread
abroad. Respandre le vin, Too shed wine. Respandeme^t, shedding, sprinckling
abroad. Respargner, to spare. Respargnant, a sparing man. Respargne,
sparignesse, hardness. Les parties ont Respectiuement appelle, the parties have
on both sides appealed. Respi, Delay, respit, delay. Respirer, to gasp or
fetch ones breath. Respirement, Respiration, A breathing. Resplendir, to shine,
to glister, to glimse. Resplendissant, shining, glisteri^g Resplendeur,
Resplendisseur, brightness. Respondre, to answer. Respondre de quelque
argent, ou aultre chose, to be suertie for money or other things. Un
Respondant ou pleige, A suertie. Respondement, ou correspondance, an
aunswering. Response, an answer. Responses, herb, a little root that is
eaten in sallades. Restaurer, to restore, to repair, to renew. Rester, to
remain, or to reast behind. Restituer, to restore, to yield again.
Restraindre, to restrain. Restrainct and serre, ou arreste, restrained and
closed up. Resueiller, to waken or to stir up. Resuer, to rave, to rail.
Resuerie, railing. Resueur, a rayler. Resumer, to take again. Resusciter, to
raise from death to life. Retarder, ou Retarger, Too drive off, to slacken, to
defer, to hinder. Estre Retarge, to be hindered. Retargement, hindrance.
Retenir, to retain, to withhold. Retenu, retained, witholden. Retentio^,
Retenue, withholdi^g. Retentir, to sound again, too give an echo.
Retentisseme^t, ringing or sounding again. Best Retiue and qui rue, a resty
horse. Retirer en arriere, Too draw backward. Retirer ce qu'on done, too
receive in that which is given. Retirer a quelqu'vn, and luy resembler, to be
like one in condition. Retirer a soy and derobber, Too scratch to himself, to
steal. Se Retirer a part, to withdraw aside. Retirement, ou Retraction, A
recanting or calling back of words spoken, a retractation. Retistre ce qui
est detissu, Too weaue again that which was vnwouen. Retondir de toutes parts,
Too sound or ring on all sides. Retordre, to wring, to wreth, to wrest, to
twyne. Fill Retort, twyne thread. Un Retoube, vne terre qu'on seem tous les ans,
a field that is sown every year. Retour, retourning again. Retourner, to
return, to come back again. Retracter and reuoir, to correct a thing and
ouersee a thing. Un prive and Retraict, a privy or house of office. Un
Retraict public, a common privy. Retraicte and retour, returning again.
Sonner a la Retraicte, to sound the retire. Retraire, to pluck out again.
Retraire en seruage, to bring to bondage. Retrecir, Too pull or draw back.
Retrancher, to cut off. Retrencher les gages, to cut off wages. Vne Rets, a
net. Reu, ou Ru, a brook. Reualloir, to recompense, too be as much worth to
him as that comes too. Soy Reuancher, Too wreake himself. Bailler la Reuanche,
to be even with one. Reueler, to reveal, to disclose, to bewraye. Revelation,
revelation. Reue^dre vne chose auec celuy qui l'auoit vendue, too sell a thing
again to him that sold it. Un Reuendeur and regrateur, A retayler, or
huckster. Reuenir en quelque lieu, Too come again into any place. Qui Reuient
bien aux gents, and n'est point enuieux, a fellow-like man. Revenue, rent,
reuenew. Le Reuenu d'aucun, any man's rent or reuenew. Reuoir and retracter vne
chose, to correct and ouersee a thing. Reuerbere, ou frappe, reflex or
reuerberation. La Reuerberation du soleil, the reflex of the sun. Reuerdir, Too
wax green again. Reverend, reverend, worshipful. Reverence qu'on port a au
cun, the reverence that is borne to one. Auoir en Reverence, too have in
reverence. Reuereement, reverently. Reuesche, wild, untamed. Reuisiter, to
reuisit, to ouersee. Reuisitement, an ouerseeing. Reuiure, to live again.
Reunir, Reunion, seek Vnir. Reuoler, to fly again. Se Reuolter and render du
party des enemis, to reuolte, to take the enemies part. L'an Reuolu, the year
being gone about. Reuoquer en doubt, to call in question or doubt. Le Rez de
chaussee, Le sol and fondement de toutes chooses, The foundation of any thing.
Rhetorique, l'Art and science de bien and sagement dire and parler, Rhetorique.
Rhetoriquement, Rhetorically. Conterfaire le Rheteur, Too counterfeat the
rhetorician. Ribault, a ribald, an adulterer. Ribler, to keep ill rule. Couper
tout Ric a Rye, to cut quite in sunder. Ricaner, to play the wanton. Rich,
rich, wealthy. Richesse, richesse, goods, wealth. Richement, richly,
abundantly. Le Rideau des ioueurs de farces, the players courtin. Les Rides
qui viennent au visage, wrincles in the face. Se Rider and refrongner, Too
frown or lowre. Rien, nothing, naught. Rigueur, rigor, sternenesse,
sharpness. Rigoureux, rigourous, roughe, sharp, cruel. Rigoureusement,
sharply, cruelly. Rhyme, ryme or meeter. Rinser, seek Reinser. Rioiter, to
riot, to play the spendthrifte. Rioiteux, riotouse, excessive, lauishe. Rire,
to laughe, to smyle. Ris, laughter. Risee, laughing. Du Riz, ryce, whereof ryce
pottage is made. Riuage, the shore or coast. Vne Riuiere, a river Du Ris, Ryce,
a kind of grain. Rob, an upper garment, a gown, a robe. La Rob d'vne
femme, a woman's gown. Vne longue Rob, A long gown. Robre, ou Roure, vne
espece de chesne tres-dure, a hard kind of Oak. Robuste, strong, mighty.
Robustement, strongly, mightily, roughly. Roc, ou Roche, ou Rocher, A rock or
stone. Roder le pays, to make a rode on the Country. Un Rodeur ou coureur, a
roder or wighrider. Rogue; a presumptuous fellow, arrogant. Estre Roide de
froid, to be stiff with cold. Roidi, contented. Roideur, roughness,
sternenesse. Roidement, roughly, strongly. Le Roignon, the kidney. Un Roitelet,
sort d'oiseau, A bird called a wren. Roll, Rollet, seek Rouler. Rosmarin, a
branch called Rosemary. Rompierre, Persepierre, herb Empetron, an herb
called Empetron. Rompre, to break, to burste in sunder, to pash in pieces.
Rompu, broken. Rompure, a bracke. Rompeme^t, breaking, bursting. Vne Ronce, a
bramble. Rond, round. Rondace, ou Ro^delle, a target. Rondement, roundly. Un
Rondeau de patissier, A cooks peele. Rondeur, roundnesse. Vne petite Rondelle
de guerre, a small target or buckler. Ronfler, to snort, to snore, to rowte.
Ronger, to knawe, to knabble. Ronge tout a l'entour, knabled about. Rongement,
a knawing. Rongner, to pare, to clip. Rongne, pared, clipped. Rongnement, a
paring, a clipping. Rongnure, parings, clippings. Rongne, a scab. Rongneux,
scabby. Roquet, habilleme^t de fille ou femme, a woman's wastcote. Roquette,
herb, an herb called rocket. Rose, a rose. Un Rosier, a rose arbor. Roseau,
a reed. Rosee, the dew. De la Rosette, a color called rosset. Un Rossignol, a
nightingale. Rostir ou cuire a la braise, To roast. Rosti, rostmeat. Vne Rostie,
a toast. Rostisserie, cooks row. Un Rotisseur, a cook. Retourier, a carter
or villain. Vne Roue, a wheel. Rouete, a little wheel. Rouelle d'oignon, a
shiue of an oignion. Rouge, red color. Rougeur, redness. Rougeastre, reddish
or clarret color. Rougir de honte, to blushe for shame. Rouget, poisson, a
fish called a rotchet. Rougeole, ou verole, the small pocks. Rouille, ou
Rouillure, rustines. Rouler, to roll or tumble. Roulant, rolling. En Roulant,
in rolling. Roulement, a rolling. Roll, ou Roole, a skroll, a catalogue. Le
Rouleau and racloir des mesureurs, a weauers shittle. Un Rouillier, ou
voicturier, A Carriar. Roupie, an issicle, the nose dropping. Vne Roussette, a
fish called a Barbell. Roussir, to wax red. Rousselet, reddy. Vne Route, a
belche. Router, to belche or break wind La Route du lieure, the hare furme.
Vne grande Route de gens, ou de cerfs, a route or multitude of people. Un vieux
Routier ou Roturier, qui de long temps est vsite a sinesses, an old deceyuer.
Roux, reddish color. Roy, a King. Royne, a Queen. Royal, Royal, Kingly.
Royalement, royally, princely. Royaulme, a kingdom. Roye, on Royon, seek Ray.
Roytelet, A bird called a wren. Un Ru, ou Reu, a brook. Ruben de test, a
headband or fyllet. Rubis, pierre precieuse, A rubie. Vne Ruche a miel, a Be
hyue. Rude, rude, rustical, lobbishe, blockish. Rude and aspre a manier, rude
and hard to be broken. Rudement, rudely, rustically. Rudesse, rudeness,
blockishnesse. Rues d'vne ville, the streates of a town. Par Rues, by
streates. Vne Ruelle ou petite Rue, A Lane. De la Rue, an herb called Rue, or
herb grace. Ruer, to throw. Ruer du hault en bas, to throw down hedlong.
Ruer par terre, to throw down to the ground. Ruer des pieds, to strike with
the heels, to kick. Rueur, a kicker. Rufien, a he baud. Rufienner, to play
the baude. Le Lion Rugit, ou Ruit, The Lion rores. Rugissant, roaring.
Rugissement, a roaring. Ruin, ruin or overthrow. Ruiner and destruire, To
overthrow to destroy. Ruineux, ruynous, in decay. Ruir, Ruissement, seek
Rugit. Ruisseau, a cannel, a brocke or running water. Ruisselet, a gutter.
Rume, the room. Ruminer, come quand les bestes remaschent ce qu'elles ont ja
mange: propre aux bestes a pied sourche, Too chewe the kud. Ruminement, a
chewing. Rupture, a breaking. Rupture, quand l'intestin descend, bursting of
the coddes. Rural, rude, countreylike. Ruse, suttletie, craft, deceit. Ruse,
subtle, crafty. Rustault, ou Rustique, a country man. Rusticite, rudeness.
S ante A.
SAble, ou sablon, Gravel. Sablon and menu grauois and grieve, sand. Vne
Sablonniere, A grauelly place. Un Sabot a se iouer, a top. Sabots and
souliers de bois, pattens, wodden shoes. Saburre and gross arene dequoy on
charge les nauires, a fin d'estre plus fermes, shingle, or pebble stones. Un
Sac, a sack. Sachet, a bag, a pocket. S'accouster a l'oreille, too whisper in
ones ear. Sacre, oyseau de proye, a kind of hawk. Sacre a Dieu, consecrated
too God. Sacrements, qui sont tenus secrets au peuple, Sacraments. Sacrifier,
to sacrifice. Sacrifice, a sacrifice. Sacrificateur, a sacrificer. Sacrilege,
Larron des chooses sacrees, sacrilege, theft of holy things. Sadayer vne femme,
Too flatter a woman, or speak her fair. Sade, ou Sadinet, preatty, fair.
Safran, saffron. Safrane, saffroned. Safre, wanton. Sage, wise. Sagement,
wisely, advisedly, discretly. Sagesse and cognoissance, wisdom, knowledge,
understanding Sagitaire, ou archer, an archer, a shooter. Saigner and iecter
sang, too let blood. Saigner aucun, to let one blood. Saigne, a letting of
blood. Saigneux, bloody, or full of blood. Saillir, to leap, to skip, to
hoppe, to dance. Saillie, ou Sault, a leap. Saillie auec impetuosite, come
de gensdarmes sur les ennemis, an issuing out, as footmen do on their enemies.
La Saillie and cabochon d'vne pierre pretieuse taillee en bosse, the chase
wherein a precious stone is enclosed. Sain, health. Sain and entier, whole and
perfect. Sain and sauue, safe and sound. Sain doulx, seem or fresh grease.
Saint and sans aucune tache de de vice, holly, unspotted. Sainctete,
hollynesse. Saisir les meubles d'aucu^ pour quelque contumace, to seize or
attach the goods of any man Saisine, possession. Saisissement, a seazing or
attaching. Saison and temps propre a fair quelque chose, season, or fit time
to do any thing. Vne Salade ou heaulme, a sallet, or helmet. Salades d'arbres
ou autre chooses, all kind of salades. Salaire, reward, recompense. Saler, to
salt, to season, to powder. Vne saliere, a poudring house. La saline, a salt
house, where salt is made. Saligots ou truffes, Salure, poudring or salting.
Salir quelque chose, to beray a thing, to soil. Ord and sale, filthy, lothsom.
Saliue, spettle. Vne salle, a hall. Salamandre, a Salamandre. Salpestre,
Saltpeter. Saluer aucun, to salute one, to greet. Salut, health. Donner salut,
saluer, To give health. Salutation, salutation, greeting. Salutaire, helthfull,
wholesome. Samedy, saturday. Sandal, bois qu'on apporte d'Inde, a precious wood
that is brought out of Jnde. Sang, blood. Sanglant, bloody, full of blood.
Sanguin, of sanguine complexio^. Un sangle, a sengle or girth. Sangler un
cheual, To girth a horse. Porc sanglier, a wild bore. Des sanues blanches, an
herb called wild cole. Sans, without, besides. Sans toy, without thee. Sans
cause, without cause. Sans fin, without end. Un sansue, a horsleach, a kind
of worm. Sante, health, welfare. Saouler, to suffice, to satisfy, to fulfill.
Saoule, full. Saoulete, fullness. Sapin, a tree called a fur tree Saphir,
pierre precieuse, a precious stone called a Sapphire. Sarcler, to rake.
Sarclement, a raking. Un sarclet, a rake. Sarcleur, ou bineur, a weeder. Un
sarcueil, ou biere, a biere or coffin. Sardelle, ou sardine, sort de poisson,
a kind of fish called a sardin. Sarfouir, souir par dessoubs, to vnderdig or
undermine. Serment, a vine branch. Sarpe, ou sarpette, seek serpe. Sarrer
seek serrer. Sarriette, an herb called Sauerye. Un sas, a sieue. Sasser, to
sifte. Satisfaire and payer, to satisfy, to pay. Vne sauatte, an old shoe.
Sauetier, a cobbler. Saueur, savor or taste. Sauourer, to taste. Chose
sauoureux, of good taste. Sauf, safe. Sauf vostre honneur, saving your
reverence. Saufconduict, a safe conduct. Sauinier, herb, a tree called Sauin.
De la saulge, an herb called sage Saulmon, a Salmon. Saulmure, a cake of salt.
Saulnier, a salter. Saupicquet, any kind of sauce. Saulpoudrer la chair, to
corn flesh with salt. Vne saulsaye, a place where willowes grow. Saulse,
sauce. Saulser, to sauce. Saulsisse, a sausige. Un sault, a leap. Saulter, to
leap. Saulteler, to hoppe. Saultement de l'vn a l'autre, to leap from one to
an other. Saulteur ou danseur, a leaper or daunser. Saultereau, petite best, a
grasshopper. Saulteresse, ou danseresse, a woman daunser. Un saulx, a willow or
withy. Du sauon, soap. Sauuage, wild, untamed. Sauuageaux and plants, young
plants. Sauuagete, wyldenesse. Sauuagine, venson. Sauuegarde, safegarde,
surety. Se mettre en la sauuegarde d'aucun, to commit himself to the
safegarde of one. Sauuer, to save. Sauue and eschappe, saved and escaped.
Salutation, salutation or greetyng. Sauuete, safety, assurance. Un say, ou
sayon, a coat, a iacket. Scabelle, scabeau, petit banc, a stool, a form.
Scabreux, rough, knaggie. Scandale, offense. Scariole, an herb called Sikory
Scauoir, to know, to kenne, to wot. Scauoir bon gre, to conne one thank.
C'est a scauoir, That is to wete. Ascauoir mon, whether or no. Qui scait, he
that knows. Scauant, skillful, learned, cunning. Scauamment, skilfully,
lernedly, cunningly. Scauoir and experience, knowledge, experience. Scammonie,
herb, a dangerous herb so called. Scedule and obligation, an obligation, a
bill. Sceptreroyal, a kingly scepter. Science, science, knowledge, skill.
Schism ou division, schism or division. Sciatique, the sciatica, the gout of
the hyp. Scintelle ou estincelle, a spark. Scinteler, to sparkle. Scipioule ou
oignon marin, a sea oignion. Scorpion, a scorpion. Scrupule de conscience,
fear of conscience. Mettre quelqu'vn en scrupule and crainte de conscience, to
bring one into trouble of conscience. Mettre horse de scrupule, to bring out of
fear or doubt. Scrupuleux, scrupulous, religious Seant, sitting, seemly,
decente, comely. Seance, comlynesse, seemelynesse. Seamment, comely, decently.
vne seau ou seille a porter eaue a water payle. Vne seau ou seel dequoy on
scelle, a seal or signet. Sec, seek seicher. Second, second. Un second
moymesme, an other my self, my fellow. Secondement, secondly. Seconder autruy,
to practice, to do as well as an other. Secouer, to shake off. Secousse, shaken
off. Secouement, a shaking. Secourir and aider aucun, to succor or help one.
Secours, help, succor, aid. Amy secourable, a comfortable or helpful friend.
Un secret, a secret, a hidden thing. Lieu secret, a secret or close place.
Estre secret, to be secret, to be close, to keep counsel. Secretement,,
secretly, closely. Secretain, the keeper of writings Un secretaire, a Secretary
or writer of letters. Vne sect and opinion fuyuie par beaucoup de gens, a
sect or opinion. Vne sect and band, a sect or company. Seculier ou lay, no^
dedie a dieu seculer or lay. Seder, and appaiser, to pacify, to assuage.
Sedition, sedition. Seditieux, seditious. Seduire, to seduce, to deceive, to
misleade, Sedulite and diligence, diligence. Scel, ou seau a seeller, a seal
to seal with. Seeler, toutes chooses qui ce soit to seal all things. Seelle,
sealed. Segue, hemlockes. Seiche, un sort de poisson, A fish called a cuttle.
Seicher, to dry. Seichement, drying. Sec, dry. Secheresse, drought. Du seigle,
rye. Seigneur ou maistre, lord, master, owner. Seigneurie and maistrise,
lordeship, maistry. Seigneurier, to rule. Vne seille ou un seau, a payle or
kit. Seillon, terre esleuee en un champ enter les rayons, the ridge between the
furrows of corn. Seillonner un terre, to rydge a ground. Vne serine, grand
file a pescher poisson, a great net too take fish. Le sein, the bosom.
Seiourner en quelque lieu, to soiourne in a place, or remain for a time.
Seiour, remainyng, soiorning. Sell, salt. Sans sell, unsavory, without taste,
foolish. Vne selle, ou banc, a seat or a form. Selle ou autre couuerture de
cheual, a saddle. Seller les cheuaux, to saddle horses, Vne selle percee pour
aller a la selle, a stool of easement. Aller a la selle, to go to the stool
of easment. Selon ce que ie pe^se, according to that J think. Selon ce que ie
peux voir, As far as J can see. Il me semble que i'ay ouy sa voix maintenant
deuant la maison, me seems I herd his voice at the door. Il me semble que
i'ay memoire qu'il a este faict, me thinks J remember since it was done. Il
te semble ainsi, thou think so. Il semble a voir que tu dis la veritee, it
seems at the first show that thou say truth. Ainsi qui bon te semblera,
as thou shall think good. Semblant couuert, Beau semblant, a cloked
countenance, a fair show. Faulx semblant, a false countenance. Semblable and
pareil, like. Semblablement, likewise, also. Semblance, show, likeness.
Semblance d'aucun, the likeness of one. Semelle de soulier, the soale of a
shoe. Semeler, to sole shoes. Semer, to sow seeds. Semer quelque chose parmy
le people, to sow or spread among the people. Semer guerre, to stir wars.
Seem, ou plant, sown or begotten. Semence, seed. Semaille, ou semoison,
seed corn. Semeur, a sower. Semondre quelqu'vn a souper, to bid one to
supper. Semondre aux nopces, to bid one to wedding. Semonneur, a somner.
Se^piternel, qui dure tousiours, ayduring, everlasting, sempiternall. Le senate,
la compaignie des senateurs and Conseilliers, the Senate, or company,
counselors or aldermen. Senateur, a Senator. Du senecon, an herb called
groundswell. Du senegre, an herb called Fenegreke. Seneschaux, Bailifs,
Preuosts Gouuerneurs, and autres iuges de Provinces, seneschals, bailiffes, and
other officers. Seneschaussee, seneshalship. La main senestre, the left hand.
Seneue, mustard seed. Sengle, Qui n'est point double, single. Rob sengle, a
single gown. Le senglout, ou hocquet, the hickop. Sengloter ou s'e^glouter, to
hickop. Sens and entendement, wit and understanding. Que s'ensuit il? Qu'en
est il? what folowes thereof? what matter makes it? Vne sent ou sentier, a
path. Sentence and opinion d'aucun, the sentence or opinion of one. Sentencier,
to give sentence. Sentir and render odeur, to smell sweetly. Sentir and flairer
premier, Too smell first. Sentant, sweet smelling. Senteur, sweet sent.
Sentement, a perfuming. Sensible, sensible, easy to be understood. Se seoir,
to sit. Un sep de vigne, the branche of a vine. Separer, to separate, to
sunder, to s^uer, to untwine. Separe, separated, sundred. Separation, a
separation. Separeement, separately, or asunder. Sept, seven. Sept fois, seven
times. Septieme, the seventh. Septante, ou soixant and dix, seventy, or
threscore and ten. L'an septantieme, the seuentith year. Septembre, September.
Septentrion, the north. Lieu septentrionel, the north parts. Un Septier, seek
sextier. Sepulcher, a grave, a sepulcher, a tomb. Sepulture, a burial.
Sequestre, one in whose hands money is left till the parties be agreed. Sera,
seek Estre. Qui sera, which shall be. Serain, beau temps, fair, mild, and
sweet weather. Serancer du lin, Too hetchell flax. Un serf, a servant.
Servitude, ou subjection de ceux qui sont Serfs a quelque seigneur, servitude,
bondage, subjection. Sergeant, a sergeant. Serie, the even. Le serinent and
iurement qu'on fait, an oath. Sermon, a sermon. Seroit, seek Estre. Seroit ce
raison que etc. were it reason? Seroit il possible? were it possible? Serpe a
esmondre les arbres, a hedging bill. Un serpent, a serpente, an adder.
Serpentine, herb, an herb called Dragons. Serpeilliere, ou serpillere, A
serpcloth. Un serpette, a sicle. Du serpolet, an herb like sauorie, and
smells like time. Serrer, to lock, to shut up, to put to, to close. Serre,
shut up, thrust together. Serrement, a thrustyng together. Serreement and a
l'estroict, narrowly, or straightely, in little room. Serrure, a lock.
Serruriere, a lockesmith. Vne seruiette, a napkin. Seruir, to serve, to obey.
Aider and seruir a aucun, to stand one in steed, to help. Se seruir de quelque
chose, to take the use of a thing. Cecy sert a cela, this serves to that use.
Il sert beaucoup de. etc. It is very good to know. Tu ne sers icy de rie^,
thou do no good or service here. Seruiable, seruisable, diligent. ready.
Seruiteur, a servant, a prentise. Seruante, a maid servant. Service, service.
les arbres sont en seue, the trees cast their leaves. La seue d'vn vin, the
bleding of the vine. Un homme severe, a cruel man. Seuerite, cruelty,
ouerstraightnesse. La seuero^de du toict d'vn edifice, the eaues of a house.
Seul, only, singular. Seulet, solitary, all alone. Seulement, only. Ma seur,
my sister. Qui est seur, suresby, he that is faithful. En lieu Seur, to be in
a sure place. Estre a Seurte, to be safe, or in surety. Seurete and gage,
surtie or pledge Seurer, to weane from suck. Qui est Seure, that is weaned.
Sex, a sex or kind. Sextier de bled, a measure of corn. Si son pere estoit
return, Jf his father were come home again. Si tu le fais, if thou do it.
Si comme, so as. Si fort, so strongly. Siche, seek Chicher. Un sie, a saw.
Sier, to saw. Sie, sawed. Sioment de ble, a cutting down of wheat. De la
sieure, saw dust. Il luy sied bien a parler, it becomes him well to speak.
C'est habit te Sied bien, This garment becomes thee well. Le siege de
l'homme, that part that a man sits on. Siege, ou chair, a seat or chair Le
siege and parquet des grands iuges, the seat of the Judge. Le siege royal, the
kings throne Le siege and assault qu'on baille a vne ville, the siege of a
town. Lever le siege, to raise the siege. Sien, his. Garder le Sien, Too keep
his own. Des siens, of his. Siffler, to whistle or hiss. Sifflement, a
whistling. Le sifflet du poulmon, the whesing of the lungs. Signamment, namely.
La signature d'vn notaire, the signature or mark of a Notarie. Un sign au
ciel, a sign in heaven. Sign manuel, a manuel sign. Un sign qui denote
quelque chose, a sign that signifies something. Signs d'amours, signs of
love. Signer to sign. Signer de sa main, to sign with his hand. Un signet, a
signet. Signifier, to signify, to give notice, to show. Signifiance,
signifying. Silence, silence. Similitude, similitude, likeness. Simple,
simple. Simplement, simply. Simplesse, ou simplicite, simplicity. Simulation,
simulation, hypocrisy. Simulateur, a dissembler. Un sing manuel, a
handwriting. Un singe, an ape. Singler sur mer, to sail, to cut the seas.
Singulier, singular, alone. Per grand singularite, with great singularity.
Singulierement, singularly. Sinon, except. Sinople, vne sort de couleur, a
kind of read color. Un sion and iecton d'arbre long d'vn pied, qu'on plant
en terre, a scion or plat of a tree. Vne siringue, a squirt. Du sisame ou
iugeoline, a kind of white grain so called. Silver, to place, to set, to
situate. Si^^e, placed, situate. La situation de quelque chose, the situation
of a place. Du sieve, seame, or swines grease. Six, six. Six foix, six times.
Six ans, six year. Le Sixieme aage, the sixth age. Sobre, sober, continent.
Sobrement, soberly. Sobriety, sobriety. Le soc d'vne charrue, the coulter of a
plowe. Societe, society, fellowship. Soef, ou souef, sweet. Soefuete,
sweetness. Soefuement, sweetly. Soeur, seek seur. Soif, thirst. Auoir soif,
to be on thirst. Solure and escorcheure faicte en la peau, a scratch in the
skin. Soimesme ou soymesme, himself Soin, care, diligence. Auoir soing de
quelque chose, to care for some thing, to set the mind. Soigner, to care.
Soigneux and dilligent a fair q^lque chose, careful, diligent. Soigneux en ses
affairs, dilligent in his business. Soigneusme^t, diligently, carefully Le
soir, the evening. ois, soit, Il vient de estre, be thou, be it. Ne sois plus
courrouce contre luy, be no more angry with him Soit ainsi, be it so. Soixante,
sixty, or three score. Le Sol and fondement de toutes chooses, the foundation
of any thing. Vne Sole, poisson, a fish called a Sole. Soleil, the Sun. Soleil
leuant, the Sun rising. Soleil couchant, the Sun setting. Solenniser, to
solemnize, to celebrate. Solennization, and feste, solemnization. Solennite,
sound, tune. Solennel qui se fait tous les ans, solemnities that are used every
year. Solennellement, solemnly. Solerre, vent, the east wynd. Soliciter
aucu^, and le presser fort de fair quelque chose, to solicit one, to entreat
one instantly to do a thing. Soliciter un homme, a fair quelque chose, and
l'en requerir, to solicit or require one to do a thing. Soliciter un process,
to follow a suit. Un Soliciteur de process, an attorney. Solicitude,
carfulness. Solicitation, soliciting. Solid, fast, massy. Un Solier, ou
grenier, a soller or garret. Solitaire, solitary. Solitude, solitariness. Vne
Soliue, ou cheuro^, the rafter of a house, a beam. Solsie, seek Soulsie.
Estre Soluable, pouuoir payer ses debtes, to be able to pay his debtes.
Solution ou payement, payement. Un Sols, ou Sold, a shilling. Vingt Sols,
twenty shillings, a pound. Temps Sombre, drousie wether Sommaire, the sum.
Sommairement, summarily. Sum d'argent, a sum of money. Summer, to cast
account, too sum. Sum, sleep. Sommeil, slumbring. Sommeiller, to slumber.
Sum ou charge, a burden. Un Sommelier, a bottle bearer. La Sommelerie, the
wine seller. Le So^met, ou coupet de quelque chose, the top or height of any
thing. Un Sommier, cheual portebahuz, a sompter horse. Un Sommier en
charpenterie, a piece of timber called a summer. Somptueux banquet, a sumptuous
banquet. Somptueusement, sumptuously. Son, sound, tune. Sonner, to sound, to
ring. Arains sonnans, ringing plates. Sonnette, a little bell. Du son, bran.
Vne sonde a marinier, a sounding plumbet. Sonder la riuiere, to sound the
depth of the river. Songer, to dream. Song, dreamed. Songeart, a dreamer.
Songemalice, an imaginer of mischief. Sorcier, a sorcerer. Sorciere, a
sorceresse. Vne sornette, a tale, a jest. Sort and maniere, sort and manner.
De ceste sort, on this manner. Sortable, sortable. Sortir and saillir horse, to
go forth, to issue out. Fair sortir a force de coups, to beat him out.
Sortie, issuing out, going out. Sorty and garny, sorted and furnished. Un sot,
a fool, an idiot. Sot and legier, a rash fellow. Chose sotte and contraire a
soymesme, a fond thing and contrary to it self. Sottement, foolishly, fondly.
Sottie, ou sottise, fondness, foolishness, dotage. Sotbriquet, a nycke name,
a taunt. Un soubassement de colomne and autre chose, the foot or bases of a
column. Soubchantre, subchanter. Soubdain, sudden. Soudain, ou soubdainement,
suddenly, immediately, swiftly. soubdainete, sodaynnesse, swiftness.
Soubdepensier, a butler. Soubhaster, seek subhaster. Soubhastation, selling of
forfet goods by port sale. Soubiect, ou subject, a subject. Soubleuer, to heave
up, to stay. Soubmettre, To underprop, too submit. Soubmission, submission.
Soubpendues, ou souspendues de maisons, The pentises of houses. Soubpeser, to
weighe, to ponder. Faiseur de soubresaults, A fetcher of gambolds, a tumbler.
Se soubrire, to smyle. Soubris, smyling. Soubs, under. Soubscrire, to
vnderwrite, or subscribe. Soubsigner, to vndersigne. Soubtenir, ou soubstenir,
Too sustain, to bear. La souche d'vn arbre, the body of a tree. Du souchet, a
kind of galingale. Soustenance ou soustenement, maintenance. Soustraire, to
draw away. Soustraire and retirer, To withdraw. Souffler, to blow, to
brethe. Souffler le feu, to blow the fire. Souffleurs de charbons, blowers of
coals. Un soufflet a souffler le feu, A pair of bellows. Un soufflet sus le
jove, a box on the ear. Souffleter, ou bailler des soufflets, to box, to clap
on the ear Souffre, seek soulfre. Souffrir, to bear, to suffer. Souffrance,
suffrance forbeara^ce Souffrette, need, penury. Souffreteux, a needy person.
Souhait, wish. Souhaiter, to wish or desire. Souiller, to foil, to defyle, to
beraye. Souille, soyled, rayed. Soillure, soil, filth. Un souillon, a slouen.
Soulas, solace, ease, joy. Soulager, to cheer up. Soulagement, easy. Soulcy
and esmoy, care and sorrow Mettre en soulcy, to put in sorrow. Se soulcier, to
care. Soulder, to sauldre. Souldure, sauldre. Souldoyer and payer la soulde au
gents de guerre, To pay soldiers their wages. La soulde and gages qu'on
baille aux gents de guerre tous les mois, the soldiers monthly wages. Un
Souldart, a soldier. Souldre vne question, to resolve a question. Soulfre,
brimstone. Un soulier, a shoe. Souloir, to be wont. Un soubls, ou sols, ou
sold, A shilling. Soulsie, ou soulsi, herb, marigolds. Vne soupe, a soppe.
Souper, to suppe. Soupple and aise a plier, soupple, and easy to be bent.
Iouer des soupplesses, to play with puppets. Source, the spring, the
begi^ning. Le sourcil, the eye browe. Sourd, deaffe. Sourdesse ou Sourdete,
deafnes. Sourdre, se lever, se dresser, se monstrer, to rise out, to boil out,
to spring out. Sourdant, springing out. Sourgeon and reiecton des arbres, a
branch or twig of a tree. Vne Souri, ou Sori, a mouse. Vne Souciere, a mouse
trap. Les Souris du corpse qu'on appelle musches, Les parties charnues du corpse,
the muscles of the body or the mouse piece. Souspecon, suspicion, deeming
Souspeconner, to suspect. Souspeconne, suspected. Estre Souspeconne, too be
suspected. Souspeconneux, suspicious. Souspir, a sighe. Souspirer, to sighe. Un
Souspiral de cave, a seller window. Se Souuenir, to remember, to call to
memory. Il me Souuient, J remember. Fair Souuenir, to put in remembrance.
Souuenance, remembrance. Souuent, ou Souuentesfois, often, many times.
Souuerain remede, and excellent co^tre la morsure des serpens, a sovereign and
excellent remedy against the biting of serpents. Soy, he. Soye, come de
porceau, hogs bristles. Soye a fair habillement, silk. Soymesme, ou Soimesme,
himself. Spasme and retirement de nerfs, shrinking of the senewes. Spatieux
and fort large, large, wide. Vne Spatule, ou Espatule, A slyse. Special,
special, peculiar. Specialement, especially. Specifier, to specify. Spectacle
public, a common spectacle. Spectateur, lookers on. Speculer, to vewe.
Spirituel, ghostly, spiritual. Splendeur, brightness. Un Squadron des
gensdarmes, a square battle of soldiers. Squinance, a disease called the
squinsey. Stable, stable, firm, constant. Statuer, To appointe, To ordain.
Statue ou peincture faicte sus le vif, an Jmage. Stature and grandeur du corpse,
stature or greatness of body. Sterile, frutelesse, barren. Sterilite,
barrenesse. Stipuler pour aucun, to demand as attorney from an other.
Stipulation, demanding performance of covenants. Stipulateur, an attorney.
Stocfiz, ou Merlu, poisson, stockefish. Stradiot, mot grec, and en adioustant
vne e, Estradiot, a soldier. Studieux, qui a vne volo^te bien ardente,
studious. Studieux de lettres, studious for learning. Sudieux de sapience,
studious for wisdom. Style and maniere d'escrire, style and manner of writing.
Styptique, ou astringent, binding or shutting up. Un suaire and linge a
s'essuyer, a handkerchef. Suaue, ou souef, sweet. Suauite, sweetness.
Suauement, sweetly. Suader, Tascher d'induire aucun a fair quelque chose, to
persuade. Suasion and induction, persuasio^ Iuges Subalternes, secondaries, or
vice Judges. Subhaster, vendre les biens d'aucun au plus offrant and dernier
encherisseur, par l'ordo^nance de justice, to put goods to port sale.
Subhastation, port sale. Subject, a subject. Subit and soudain, sudden, swift
Subit, and subitement, and soubdainement, suddenly, swiftly. Subiuger and
vaincre, to subdue, to overcome. Suborner un accusateur ou tesmoing, to brybe
an accuser or witness. Suborneur de filles, An entiser of young wenches to
folly. Subroguer, mettre en la place d'vn autre, to appoint one in an others
place. Subside, ou secours, subsidy, help. Substance, substance. Substituer,
ou mettre aucun en la place d'vn autre, to substitute one in an others place.
Substitution, substitution. Subtle, subtle, crafty, slye. Subtilement,
suttelty, craftily, slyly. Subtilite, suttlety, craft. Sans Subtilite, without
suttletie. Subuenir, seek suruenir. Subuertir, to subvert. Suc, juice. Sucer,
to suck. Sucement, a sucking. Succeder a aucun and estre mis en sa place, too
succeed in the place of another. Nos successeurs, our successors. La succession
d'vn trespass, the succession of one dead. Succinctement and en peu de pa
rolls, briefly and in few words Succomber, cheoir, Too fall down. Sucre,
sugar. Le Seuil d'vn huis, the threshold Suer, to sweat. La sueur, sweat. Sueur
qui sue, a sweater. Suant, sweating. Suffire, to suffice. Suffisamment,
sufficiently. Temps a Suffisance, sufficient time. Suffoquer and estouffer, to
stra^gle, to smother. Suffocation, smothering. Suggerer, bailler and fournir,
To give or furnish. Suif, tallowe. Suiure, Suite, seek Suyure. Suin, Lain
auec le Suin, The oil that is in woll. Tout le superflu qu'on iecte de quelque
chose que ce soit, the superfluity or off all of any thing. superflu and ne
servant de rien, superfluous, serving to no use. Superfluite, superfluity.
Auoir la superintendance des affairs de la ville, To have the charge and
oversight of the City. Superscription, Tiltre and escripteau qu'on fait sus
quelque chose pour la cognoistre, superscription or note. Superstition,
superstition. Superstitieux, qui fait scrupule and danger ou il ne fault pas,
superstitious, that makes scrupule of that he needs not. Supplier and amender
la fault de quelque chose par un autre, to make amends by an other. Supplement
and remplissement, a filling, a performing. Supplier aucun, to beseech one.
Suppliant, a suppliant. Supplication, a supplication. Supporter, endurer, to
support to bear, to suffer. Supporter aucun, to maintain one. Supporte moy,
bear with me. Support faict a aucun, favor showed to one. Supposer and
mettre desloubs, to put under. Suppose, under propt, under put. Supposer faux
testamens, Too counterfeat false wills. Vne Suppositoire, a suppositorie.
Supprimer, cacher and receler quelque chose, too suppress, or conceal a
thing. Supprime, suppressed. Supputation, reckening, counting. Sur, ou tirant
sus l'aigre, sower, or sharp. Sur, ou Sus quelque chose, upon. Sur tout que,
etc, before all. Sur le vespre, on the even. Surabonder, to ouerflowe, to
exceed. Suracheter, to ouerbye. Suranne, the great year. Surcharger, to
ouerlade. Surelle, ou Ozeille, sorrel. Surcroist, qui est baille oultre la
mesure, overplus, that which is more than measure. Surcroistre, to ouergrowe.
Surfaire vne merchandise, To hold ware at too great a price. Surgeon, seek
Sourgeon. Surmonter and vaincre, to overcome. Surmonte, overcome. Surmontement,
An ouercomming. Surnaistre, to ouergrowe. Surnom and Sobriquet, surname or
nickname. Surnommer, to surname one. Surpendant, ouerhanging. Le Surplus and ce
qui est rest, the overplus, that which remains. Au Surplus, further, that
that more is. Surprendre, to take one at a sudden. Estre Surprins, to be
taken unawares. Surprinse, sudden taking. Surroguer, seek Subroguer. En
Sursault, unawares, suddenly. Surseoir, to surceasse, to pause. Surceance,
dilating, or deferring. Suruendre, to ouersell. Suruenir, to come on a sudden,
to come by chance. Suruenant, come by chance. Suruenue ou Suruenement, A
sudden chauncing upon a company. Suruestir, to clothe upon, or put aloft.
Suruiure, To ouerliue, To outliue. Suruiuant, the outliuer. Suruider, To empty
out of one vessel into another. Sus, ou Sur, upon. Sus deuant, on before.
Susciter and mettre en aua^t quelque chose, to raise up, or bring a thing to
light. Susciter a quelqu'vn un accusateur, to raise up an accuser against one.
Un Suseau, ou Sureau, an elder tree. Suspect, suspected. Suspendre aucun de son
office, to suspend one from his office. Estre Suspens and en doubt, too be in
suspense or doubt. Sustenter, to maintain. Suye, the soute of a chymney.
Suyure, to follow. Suyure autruy a mal fair, Too follow other in il doing.
Suyuant, following. Le iour Suyuant, The day following. Suyte, following,
suite. suyte and accompaignement, the train or company of men that noble men
have. Tout de suyte, one following an other. Vne Syllabe, a syllabe. Symmetrie
ou proportion, proportion. Syndic and procureur d'vne communaute, an attorney
for the whole communaltie. Syringue, a squyrte.
T ante A.
TAbellion, A public Notarie. Tabernacle and pauillon, a Tabernacle, a
Pauillion. Vne Table de cuiure, d'arain, d'estain, ou plomb, assez espesse, a
plate of any metal. La Table ou comptoir de cha^geurs, banquiers ou
Argentiers, the merchants counting table. Table d'vn liver, mo^strant some
mairement le contenu en iceluy, the table of a book showing briefly the
contents of the whole. Les Tables pour iouer aux dames, a pair of playing
tables Tablette, a little table. Tablette ciree en laquelle les anciens
escriuoyent, waxed tables in which the auncientes wrote. Tablettes bordereaux,
ou memoires, writing tables. Tableau de peincture, a table of painters work.
Tablier a iouer, a chesse board. Tablier ou Deua^tier, an aprone Un Tabouret, ou
Esplingnier, a pinner. Tabourin, a drum, a tymbrell, a tabber. Tabourineur, a
drumsleyer. Tabourineresse, a woman that plays on a tymbrell. Tabuter vne
person, to pushe to iolt, to butte. Vne Tache, a spot, a tatch. Tachette, a
little stayne. Tacher, to spot, to stayne. Tacheter and marqueter, to spot, to
mark. Tachete, spotted. Taffetas, taffeta. Un Tahon, qui tormente les cheuaux
ou vaches en Este, a hornet. Taille and coupure, ou crenure, a cutting a
notche. Vne Taille de bois, a tale of wood. Taille ordinaire, ordinary custom
or tax. Vne Taille qu'o^ leave sus le peuple, a tax levied on the people
Taillable, qui pay tribute and taille, that which pays tribute or tax.
Tallier, to cut, to hew. Tailler and engrauer, to grave. Taille, cut. Tailler
la vigne, to cut vines. Le Taillement d'vn ferrement, the edge of a tool.
Tailleur de pierres, a cutter of stones. Tailleur ou graueur, a cutter, a
grauer. Taillure ou coupure, cutting. Un Tailloir, a trencher. Un boiz Tailliz,
under woods. Se Taire, to be still, to hold his peace. Tais toy, hold thy
peace. Qui se taict, that holds his peace. Tais, seek Tests. Taisson, ou
blaireau, a badger, a brocke, a gray, a bauson. Un Talent qui valoit six cents
escus, a talent in money. Le Talon, the heel. Talonner, to kick, to spur.
Tamaris, nom d'arbre, the name of a tree. Tamis, a boulter. Tamiser, to boult.
Tandis, the whilst, in the mean while. Tanesie, herb, an herb called tansey.
Taniere, and autres lieux ou les bestes se retirent, a beasts cave or hole.
Couleur tannee, tawny color. Tanne obscur, dark tawny. Tanser aucun, to
chide, to check. Tanse and reprins aigrement, chidden, checked. Tant and si
fort, until. Tant seulement, only. Tant qui i'ay peu, as much as J could.
Tant s'en fault que. etc. so much wantes it. Tant soit peu, how little soever
it be. La Tante, the aunt. Un Tantinet, a little aunt. Tantost, even anon,
immediately. En Tapinois, slily, lurkingly. Tapi and cache, hidden or lurking.
Tapis, ou tapisserie, tapistry. Un Taquin and trop tenant, a niggard, a
pinchpeny. Qui est Tard, late. Trop Tard, too late. Tarder, to hinder, to
slacken. Tardant on demourant, tarying long. Homme tardif, a slow man.
Tardement, slowly, slackly. Tardiuete, slacknesse, slownesse. Tare, dross or
wast in any metal. La Tare and dechet pour le change de quelque piece d'or ou
d'argent, the loss in change of money. Vne petite Targe and bouclier dequoy
vsoyent les Espagnols, and ceux d'Afrique, a little target or buckler. Targer,
to tarry, to abide, to remain. Targement, a tarying. Targue and pauois en
facon de croissant, a shield. Vne Tariere ou Tarault, an auger or wimble.
Tarir, to dry. Vne Tarte, a tarte. Un Tarte de figues, a Tarte of figs. Un
Tas de quelque chose que ce soit, a sort or company of any thing. Par Tas, by
companies. La Tasche ordinaire que par chasque iour on doibt fair, a daily
task. Fair ou acheuer sa tasche, to make an end of his task. Tascher de
prendre auec les mains, too go about to take with his hands. Tascher and
s'efforcer de fair quelque chose, to go about or enforce himself to do any
thing, to endeavor. Taschement and effort de fair quelque chose, endeavoring
to do a thing. Vne Tasse a boire, a cup to drink out of. Taster, Testonner,
to stroke. Taster and gouter deuant, to taste before. Tastonner les cheuaux de
la main tout doulcement pour les amignoter, Too stroke horses. Un Tandis, a
snayle. Tauele, Uses de formules de Marqueter and Moucheter. spotted or marked.
Tavern, a tavern. Tauernier vne chose, to tauern a thing. Tauernier, a
tauerner. Vne Taulpe, a Moll. Un Taureau, ou Toreau, a bull. Taux, ou Tax, a
sessing. Taxer aucun and reprendre, too reprove or check one. Taxer le
payement aux bataillans, to cease the payement to those that fought. Vne Taye
and Tache blanch en l'oeil, a perle in the eye. Tayes de l'oeil, spots in
the eyes. Vne taye d'oreillier, a pyllowe beer. Le Tect d'vne maison, the
covering of a house. Teigne, the scurfe of a scall. Teigneux, skalde. Teindre
d'autre couleur que la couleur naiue, to dye into any color. Teinct, dyed.
Teincture, dying. La Teincturiere, a dyehouse. Teincturier, a dyer. Tell, such.
Tellement, so, in such wise. Temeraire, sot and ledger, rash, hardy.
Temerairement, rashly. Temerite, rashness. Tempere and modere, temperate,
moderate. Temperance, temperance. Tempereement, temperatly. Temperature,
temperatenesse. Tempeste, tempest, storm. Tempester, to storm at a thing.
Tempester, and tormenter, Too torment. Homme Teepestatif, a wrangling man. Un
Temple and esglise, a church, a temple. Les Temples, ou mieux Temps de l'homme,
the Temples of a man. le Temps, time. Bon Temps, good time, prosperity. Beau
Temps, fair weather. Le Temps passez, old time. Passer le Temps, To pass the
time, to play. Il est maintenant temps, It is now time. Le Temps pass, time
past. Il a este un temps que. etc, there was a time when. Long te^ps, long
time. Long temps deuant, long time before. Un peu de Temps, a little time. Un
autre temps, an other time. Du Temps de nos peers, The time of our fathers. En
peu de Temps, in small time, shortly. Temporiser, s'accommoder au temps, To
agree with the time. Tenaille, a pair of pinsers. Tender ou estendre, to
stretche out, to spread abroad. Le tout tend a cela, The whole tends
thereunto. Cela tend en mont, that gives upward. Ou Tendez vous, whyther walk
ye? Tendon and vuile de la vigne, the tendrell of a vine. Tender aux oyseaux,
to lay for birds. Tendu, stretched out. Tendu and roidi, stretched out and
stiff. Tenture, a stretching forth. Vne Tente and pauillon, a tent or
pauillion. Qui est tender, which is tender Tendret, tender, soft, nesh.
Tendrement, tenderly, softly. Tendrete, tenderness. Tendron, comme celuy de
l'oreille, ou du nez, the gristle of the ear or the nose. Le tendron de bout
des arbres ou arbreaux, the tender branches of a tree. Tenebres, darkness.
Tenebreux, dark. Tenir, to hold. Tien, pren, hold, take, have. Tien,
regard, hold, look. Tenir compte au chapistre des receptes, to hold account
of such things as have been received. Ne Tenir compte de soy, not to care for
himself. Tenir order, to keep order. Tenir sa promise, to keep promise. Tenir
propos auec quelqu'vn, to hold talk with one. Tenir court, to hold short. Se
Tenir nettement, to keep him self cleanly. Se Tenir debout, to stand upright,
to stand. Ie ne me puis tenir que. etc. J can not forbear. Tenir a quelque
chose, ou contre quelque chose, to hold or cleave to a thing. Estre tenu a
aucun, to be beholden to one. Tenir contre aucun, to stand against one. Tiens
pour certain que. etc. hold it for certain. Tenant and taquin, a niggarde, a
snudge. Le Tenans and aboutissans, The limittes or bounds. Tout d'vn tenant, al
of one hold Teneur, suite, ou continuation, the tenor or continuation. le
Tenon se met en vne mortaise, a staple. Tente, ou pauillon, seek Tender Vne
Tente qu'on met en vne play, a tent to put in a wou^d. Tenter and essayer a
fair quelque chose, to attempt or assay to do a thing. Tentation and preuuer,
temptation or proof. Tenue ou Tenure, thin. Tenuete, thinness,
sleightnesse. Tenuement, ou Tenurement, thinly, weakly. Tercer, Terceer,
labourer pour la troisieme fois la terre, To till the ground the third time.
Terelle, ou Tarelle, a perser. Term, term. Long Term, long term. Estre mis
en terms, to be put to terms. En mesmes Terms, in the same terms or words.
Terminer, to end, to finishe. Se Ternir, to wax pale or wan. Qui est de
couleur Terne, pale. Terre, land, ground, earth. Le territoire d'vne ville,
the territories belonging to a town. Grand Terrien, a man of great lands.
Terreur, terror, fear. Terrible and donnant effroy, terrible, fearful. Vne
Terrine, an earthen pot. Un Tertre, an hillocke. Un Tesme, ou thesme, La chose
qu'on a proposee pour en parler and disputer, a theme. Tesmoing, a witness.
Prendre a Tesmoing, to take to witness. Tesmoigner, to witness. Tesmoigne and
conferme, witnessed and confirmed. Tesmoignant, witnessing. Tesmoignage and
deposition, witness and deposition. Testament; a Testamente, a will.
Testateur qui a laissee un laiz, a testatoure that leaves a legacy. La Test,
the head. Testu, a headestrong fellow, a wyldebrayne. Un Testiere ou salade, a
skull, or sallet. Testelette, a little head. Un testicule, a man's stones.
Testifier and dire appertement, to testify and speak plainly. Testonner, to
curle or frisle ones head. Testonne, curled or frisled. Un teston, poisson, a
gudgeon. Le Tests de la test, the scalpe or skull of the head. Tette,
Mammelle, a dugge, a teate, a breast. Tetter, to suck. Text, the text.
Thalent and ardente volonte, fervent desire. Theater, Edifice public ou le
peuple s'asse^bloit pour voir iouer les ieux, a theater or common place of
show. Un thresor, a treasure. Un thresorier de guerres, a tresorer in wars.
Tresorier de l'espargne, The high treasorer. Du Triacle, triacle. Thun poisson,
a kind of fish called Tunny. Du thym, an herb called Time. Tiede, ne chauld
ne froid, luke warm. Se Tiedir, to wax warm. Tiedeur, warmth. Tien, thine.
Cela est Tien, that is thine. Il est le Tiers, he is the third. Tiercement,
thirdly. La Tige de quelque herb que ce soit, the stalk of any herb. Tigne,
Tigneux, seek Teigne. Un Tigre, a tygre. Le Tillac d'vne nauire, the decking
of a ship. Tillet, ou Tilleul, arbre, a Birch tree. Un Tiltre ou escripteau,
qu'on fait sus quelque chose pour cognostre que c'est, a title written upon a
thing to know it. Timide and craintif, fearful. Timon d'vn chariot, the
axeltre of a cart. Vne Tinette ou cuue a se baigner, a bathing tub. Tinter and
sonner clerement, comme fait un verre, or, ou argent, to ring as silver does.
Tintant and resonnant, ringing. Tintement, a ringing. Tont d'vne tire and
continuement, all in one length. Tirer and trainer, to draw or trayle. Tirer
par force, to draw by force Tirer ou mettre dehors, to draw out. Tirer a la fin
and se mourir, to draw on, or lie in dying. Tirer a l'auiron, to draw at an
oar. Se Tirer pres, to draw nigh. Tirer les verse du nez, to creep into a man
to know his mind. Tire, drawn. Tireurs a l'auiron, Rowers. Tirement, a
drawing. De la Tisane, a kind of drink called Tisant. Tisanne de ris, Tisan
made of Rise. Un Tison allume, a fire brande. Tison de feu esteinct, a quenched
brande. Tistre, fair de la toil, to weue. Qui est Tissu, which is wouen.
Tissure, weauing. Tissier on Tisserand, a weauer. Tisserand de toil, a linen
weauer. Tisserande, a woman weauer. Vne togue on rob longue, a long gown. Le
Toict and couuerture d'vne maiso^, the covering of a house. Estre cache and
soubs le toict, to be hidden and under covert. Toil, Linen cloth. Toise, a
measure of six foot long. Toiser, to measure with such a measure. Toison, a
fleese of wool. Tolerer, endurer, and souffrir, to tolerate, to suffer, to
bear with. Tomb, ou Tombeau, a grave or tomb. To^ber, to fall down, seek
Cheoir To^ber en un danger, to fall into danger. Tomb, fallen. Tombement du
hault en bas, a falling down hedlong. Un Tombereau, a tumbrell. Tondre, to
shave or clip. Tondu, shaven, clipped. Tonneau, a tun or fat. Tonnelier, a
Couper. Tonner, to make a noise. Le Tonnere ou Tonnoire, the thunder. Torche,
qu'vn allume, a torch. Porter la torche, to bear a torch Torcher, nettoyer, to
wipe, to make clean. Torche and poli, wiped and polished. Un Torchon, a
Torcher les souliers, ou vaisselles, a shoe clout. Tordre, to wring, to wreath.
Toreau, ou Taureau, a Bull. Tors, ou destors, wreathed. Torsement, a wreathing.
Torture ou gehe^ne, a rack or pin bank. Torment, torment, extreme pain.
Tormente and Te^peste de vents, storm or torment of wind. Tormenter, to
torment, to vex, to grieve. Tormentant, tormenting. Estre Tormente, to be
tormented Torpille, poisson, a fish that when it is taken, beno^meth the hands
of the taker for a while. Torrent, vne abo^dance d'eaue qui par grande roideur
chet des montaignes, a great flood of water. Tort and dommage, iniurye, wrong,
hurt. A Tort and sans cause, wrongfully, without cause. A Tort ou a droict, by
right or by wrong, by one means or other. Torteau, a cake. Tortuer, to wrest,
to deprave. Tortu, crooked. Tortuement and pliement de quelque chose, a
crooking or bending of any thing. Tortuement, en Tournoyant, wrily, crookedly.
Tortuosite, crookedness. Vne Tortue, a beast called a Tortoise. Torture, seek
Tordre, Tossed, quickly, suddenly, swiftly. Vne Tostee, a toste of bread.
Totalement, wholly, effectually. Touaile a mains, a towell. Vne piere dicte
Touch, sus laquelle on esproue l'or, a touchstone. La Touch dequoy on escript
sus les tablettes, a pen to write on tables. Toucher, to touch. Toucher
deuant soy, and mener son bestail, to drive our beasts before him. Cela me
touch, that touches me. Touchement, a touching. Touch a^t cela, c'est sa
fault, as for that it is his fault. Touchant le pere, about his father.
Touchant ce que tu m'escris par tes lettres. etc. concerning that which thou
writest to me in thy letters. Vne Touffe de cheueux retors les vns enter les
autres, a we^lock or lock of hear. Touiller and mesler, to mingle, to meddle.
Toupil on Toupie, a top. Vne tour, a toure. Touruette, Tourelle, ou Tournelle,
a turret. Un Tour and finesse, a fear or pranke. Le Tour du soleil, the
compass of the sun. Le Tour d'vne ville, the compass of the town. Le Tour
and rond des roues, the circle of the wheel. Un Tour ou tournoir, a turnepike.
Tourbe, press, and foulle de ge^s a prease and thrust of people. Tourbillon de
vent, a whirle wind. Un Touret a cauer, a wimble or perser. Tourner, to turn.
Tourner son esprit a fair quelque chose, to turn his mind to do some thing.
Tourner d'vn language en un autre, to turn out of one spech into an other. Il
turn and panche verse le midy, it turns and hangs toward the south.
Turn, turned, converted. Par Tournees, Chascun a son tour, Tour a tour, by
turns, or every one in his turn. Tournement, a turning. Tournoyer, to compass
or go about. Tournoyant, rollyng. Tournoyement, a rolling. Un tournoy, ou
ioustes, a tourney or iustling. Un Tournois, ou denier, a penie french. Un
Tourte, ou Tourterelle, A turtle dove. Tous, all persons. Tonser est autant que
Tondre. Tousiours, always, ever, perpetually. Tousir, seek Tous. Tout, all.
Tout aulta^t, even as much. Tout au plus, at the most. Tout par tout, every
where. Tout ce que voudras, plutost q^. etc. what thou will rather. Tout un,
all one. Toute, bonne sort d'herbe autrement dicte Oruale, an herb like to
horehound. Toutesfois, nevertheless, as often. La Toux, the coughe. Toussir,
to coughe. En Toussant, in coughing. Toy, thou. Toymesme, thou, thy self.
Trac, Nier tout a Trac, to deny it flatly. Tracasseur, a busy body, a toyler to
little purpose. La Trace, soyt d'homme ou best, the trace of man or beast.
Tracer, to trace. Tracement, a tracing, a seeking for. Traduire, Tra^slater, ou
tourner d'vne langue en autre, Too translate out of one speech into an other.
Trafique, to trafike, to occupy. Trahir aucun, to betraye one. Trahi,
betrayed. Trahison, treason. Traistre and desloyal, a traitor or an
unfaithful person. Un Traict ou ligne, a draught or line. Les Traicts des
lettres, The draught of letters. Le Traict and facon de quelque chose, the
draught or figure of any thing. Un Traict on dard, an arrow or dart. Un Traict
d'are, a bow shot. Un Traict d'eaue, a draught of water. Traicter and manier,
to treat or to handle. Traicter aucun soit en bien ou en mal, to use or
entreat one either well or ill. Traicter de quelque affair, to entreat of
certain things. Mal Traicte, ill entreated. Traicte, used or entreated. Un
Traicte and liuret, a treatise or small book. Un Traicte and accord, a treaty
and agreement. Traictement, a treating, an using. Traictable, tractable.
Tranne, ou Trame, Trame oil. Le Train d'aucun Prince, The train of a Prince.
Tout d'vn train, all in one way. Veu le Train ou la disposition en quoy est ton
pere, seeing the trade that thy Father is in. Se Trainer, to creep. Vne
Train, a sledde. Un Trameau, vne sort de rets, a tramell net. Traire vne
vache, brebis, and autres bestes qui ont du laict, to milk a cow or sheep.
La Traicte du laict d'vne best, ones meals milk. Traistre, seek Trahison.
Tranchet, Trancheplume, seek Trencher. Tranquille and paysible, quiet, still,
peasible. Tranquillite, quietness. Tranquillite d'esprit, quietness of
conscience. Tranquillement, quietly, peacible. Transcrire and copier, To write
out, to copy. Transfigurer, cha^ger d'vne form en autre, to change from one
form to an other. Transformer, to transform. Estre en Transe, Too be in a
trance. Transgresser and outrepasser, too transgress, to ouerpasse. Transi,
in a swoune or trance. Estre Transi de froid, to be almost dead for cold.
Tra^siger and appointer, to agree, to fall to a point. Vne Transaction, un
accord, an agreement, an atonement. Transitoire, transitory. Translater, ou
tourner en autre language, to translate. Translate, translated. Translation, a
translation. Translateur, a translatour. Transmettre, to send one forth.
Transmuer, to change. Transporter, to carry over, too transport. Transport d'vn
lieu en aultre, the transporting from one place to another. Transportement, a
transporting. Transposer d'vn lieu en autre, to transporte from one place to
another. Transpose, ou reiecte, tra^sported or rejected. Un Tracquenart, An
ambling gelding. Trauail, Travail, labor, toil. La peine and T rauail qu'o^
prend a fair quelq^ chose, the travel and labor that we take to do a thing.
Le Trauail d'vne femme pour enfanter, the travel of a woman in childbyrth. Le
Trauail ou les marichaux mette^t les cheuaux pour ferrer, ou autrement, that
wherein the ferrer settels unruly horses to shoe them. Trauailler, to travel,
to labor, to toil. Trauailler and ennuyer aucun, to grieve or annoye one.
Trauaille, trauayled, wearied. Trauaillement, travailing. Iecter au trauers,
and fair passer de nauire en autre, to stryke overthwart. De Trauers,
overthwart, cross. Regarder de Trauers, to look a skewe, to leere. Trauerser
and percer tout oultre to pierce through. Trauerse, perced through. Trauersin de
lict, a bolster. Trebucher, to fall down, to offend. Trebuchant, offending.
Trebuchement and heurt, an offense. Un Trebuchet a prendre oyseaux, a pitfall,
to catch birds in. Un Trebuchet a peser or ou argent, gold weights. Un Tref,
ou poultre, the beam of a house. Treffle, herb, an herb called three leaued
grass. Tne Treille, an arbor. Treillis, lattises, grates. Tremble, arbre,
white poplar. Trembler, to tremble, to shake, to quake. Fair Tembler, to make
one quake. Trembler de froid, to quake for cold. Trembler de peur, to quake
for fear. Tremblant, quaking. Tremblement, a quaking. La Treme, ou Traime d'vn
tisserand, a weauers wooffe. La Tremie d'vn moulin, The myll hopper. Tremeur,
fear. Tremper, to wet, to moist. Trempement, a moysting. Trencher, to cut, to
thwite. Fort Trenchant, sharp, well cutting. Le Trenchant ou taillant d'vn
ferrement, the edge of a tool. Le Trencher d'vn courdouannier, a shoemakers
knife. Un Trencheoir, a trencher. Un Trencheoir rond, A round trencher. Un
Trencheplume a penknife. Les Trenchees, maladies de ve^tre, a disease in the
belly, the gnawing of the guts. Trente, thirty. Trentefois, thirty times.
Trentieme, the thirtith. Un Trepied, a treuet. Trepiner and danser, to trample,
to daunse. Qui est Tresbeau, very fair. Tresbien, very well. Tresbon, very
good. Trescher, very dear. Mon Trescher ami, My very dear friend. Tresdigne,
very worthy. Tresdoulx, very sweet. Tresexcellent, very excellent. Tresfort,
very strong. Trefort, Grandement, most greatest. Tresfroid, very cold.
Tresgrandement, very greatly. Treshardy, very hardy. Treshastiuement, very
quickly. Tresheureux, very happy. Tresloing, very far. Treslong, very long.
Tresmal, very evil. Tresmauuais, worst of all. Tresmauuaisement, most
mischeuously. Tresmeschant, very mischeuous Tresmeur, very ripe. Tresord, very
filthy. Trespass and la mort d'aucun, the death of one. Trespasser, seek
Mourir. Trespasser le commandment de Dieu, to trespass the commandment of
God. Trespass, dead. Trespetit, very little. Tresrenomme, very renoumed.
Tressaillir, to leap for joy. Trescauant, very learned. Tresuolontiers, very
willingly. Tresutile, very profitable. Treues and cessation de guerre iusques a
quelque te^ps dict, truce or ceassing from war for a time. Fair Treues, to
take truce. Treize, thirteen. Triacle, seek Thriacle. Un Treangle, a
triangle, that is three cornered. Vne Tribu, c'estoit anciennement la
tre^tecinquieme party du peuple de Rome. Et la douzieme party du peuple
d'Israel, a tribe. Les Tribuns qui furent creez a Rome pour empescher que les
grans magistrates ne foulaslent le peuple, the Tribunes of the people of Rome.
Tribulation, Tribulation, trouble. Tribut, tribute. Tributaire, tributarie.
Tricher and tromper, Too deceive. Trier and eslire, ou separer l'vn d'auec
l'autre, to choose. Vne Tringle, a fastening of two pieces of wood together
which the Carpenters call a douetayle. Triomphe, entree solennelle and
magnifique qu'on faisoit a un Captain, a triumph. Triompher, to triumph.
Triomphant, triumphant. Triomphamment, triumphantly. Triomphement, a
triumphing. Triper and fouler aux pieds, Too tread under foot. Des Tripes,
trypes. Tripiere, a trype wife. Triple victoire, triple or three fold victory.
Tripler, to three double. Tripot, ieu de paulme, a tennis court. Tripotage,
mingling. Triquehouse, a start up. Triste, sorrowful, heavy. Tristesse, sorrow,
heaviness. Tristesse and douleur de cueur, sorrow, or hartgriefe. De Tristesse
and douleur, of sorrow and grief. Tristement, heavily, sorrowfully. Des
Troschique, espece de medicine, pills. Troesue, arbre aya^t les fueilles plus
larges que l'Oliuer, A tree so called. Trois, three. Trois cens, three
hundredth. Troisieme, the third. Trompe and museau d'Elephant, the snout of an
Elephant. Trompe, ou sabot dequoy se iouent les enfants, a top. Trompe ou
Tro^pette, a trompet. Un Trompetteur, a trompeter. Tromper, to begile, to
deceive. Trompe and deceu, begiled and deceived. Tromperie, deceit, craft,
suttletie. Tro^peur, a deceyuer, a begiler. Le Tronc d'vn arbre, the body of a
tree. Un Tronchet, a troncheon. Trongne, a face or countenance Tronson,
Diminutif de Tronc, a troncheon. Tronsonner, to loppetrees. Trop, to much.
Troquer, to barter, to change. Trotter, to trotte. Trot de cheual, the trotte
of a horse. Trotteur, un villotier, a trotter, a trampler. Cheual Trotier, a
trotting horse Vne Trotiere ou coureuse, A gadder about streates, a fisegig. Un
Trou and pertuis, a hole. Trouer, to find. Un Trouble, bruict and esmeute, a
trouble. Vne chose Trouble, a thick or unsettled thing. Troubler, to trouble.
Trouble, troubled. Troublement, a troubling. Vne Trouppe and multitude de
gents, a troop or multitude of people. Troupeau de bestes menues ou grosses, a
flock of any kind of beasts, a heard. Troupeau de bestial, a flock of
cattle. Par Troupeaux and bands, By heaps and bands. Vne Troussoire, a
girdle, a belt. Vne Trousse, ou Carquois, A quyuer. Trousser sa rob, too
tucke or trusse up his gown. Trouuer, to find. Trouuer a la Trace, ou aupres
auoir bien cerche, to find by the trace. Trouuer en chemin, to find by the
way. Trouue, found. Trouue sur le faict, taken with the deed doing. Trouueur,
a finder. Un Trucheman, an interpreter Vne Truelle, a trowell. Truffer, seek
Mocquer. Truffes ou saligots and chastaignes de riuiere, a kind of tree Vne
Truite, poisson, a fish called a trout. Vne Truye a sow. Petite Truye,
Truyette, a little sow. Les Tuberositez des os, The rou^dnesse within the
knitting of the bones. Tuer aucun, to kill, to slaye, too murder. Tuer
cruellement, to kill cruelly, to murder. Qui est Tue, which is killed. Tueur
de gens, a man queller, a murderer. Tuerie, slaughter. Tuement, a sleyng.
Tuile, a tyle. Vne Tuilerie, a tyle kill. Tumbe, Tumber, seek Tomb, Tomber.
Tumbereau, seek Tombereau. Tumulte, a tumulte, an vproare Tuph, ou Tuf sort
de pierre, a kind of stone. Turbentine, turpentine. Turbit, herb, an herb
called Turbit. Turquoyse, pierre pretieuse, a precious stone called a Turkis.
Tuteur, a tutour, an ouerseer. Tutelle, safeguard. Tuyau, A pype, a reed, a
Canell. Tympan, a tympan. Tyran, un mauuais and cruel roy ou seigneur, a
tyrant, a cruel King. Tyranny, tyranny, cruelty. Tyranniquement,
tyrannously. Tyrannizer, to play the tyrant
V ante A.
VA par cy, go this way. Va deuant, go before. Va t'en, go thy ways. Va,
va, get thee hence. La chose va bien, this gear goes well. Vacation, ou
estat, vacation or estate. Vne Vache, a cow. Vne Vache pleine, a cow with
calfe. Du Vaciet, a kind of purple flower. Vaciller, to waver, to stagger.
Vagabond, a vagabound. Vne Vague, a wave of the sea. Vaguer and aller ca and
la, de cost and d'aultre, to waver, too remove from one place too another.
Vaillant, vaillamment, seek valoir. Vain, vain, unprofitable. Vainement,
vaynely. Vainete, vanity. Vaincre, to win, to overcome, to surmount. Vaincu
and surmonte, overcome and surmounted. Vainqueur, a conqueror. Vaisseau, a
vessel. Vaisseau a vin, ou laict, a wine vessel. Vaisselle, vessel.
Vaisselle d'argent, vessel of silver. Valeur, seek valoir. Val, and vallee, a
valley. Vallet ou Varlet, a Page, a servant. Vallet de chamber, a grome of the
chamber. Vallet de cuisine, grome of the kitchen. Vallet d'huis, c'est un engine
qui ferme l'huis, a devise too shut a door after one. Valoir, to be worth, to
be of value or worth. cela vault and sert auta^t que loy, that is as good as a
law. Il Vault mieux que, etc. It is better that. Il Vault mieux d'aller a luy,
It is better to go to him. Estre plus Valable, to be more worth, of greater
price. Vaillant, valiant, hardy, courageous. Vaillamment, courageously,
valiantly. Vaillantise, valiantise. Valeur, value or worth. Un Van, a fan.
Vanner, to fan, to winnow. Vanneur, a fanner. Vanger, seek Venger. Vanite,
vanity. Se Vanter, to vaunt or boast. Vanterie, bragging, vaunting, boasting.
Un Va^teur and glorieux, a bragger, a boaster. Vapeur and exhalation, vapor,
brethe. Vaquer and entendre a quelque chose, that can intend to do a thing.
Vacation d'office, the vacation of an office. Varier and desguiser, fair
autre, to alter or change a thing. Varier, dire puis d'vn puis d'autre, to
vary, to hold on both sides. Variable, chaungeable, unconstant. Variete and
diversity, variety, change, diversity. Varlet, seek Vallet. Vne Vase, ou
Vaisseau, a Vessel. Vassal, qui tient quelque chose d'aucun a foy and hommage,
a Vassal, who owes ho^mage by tenor. Vancrer sur la mer, too row on the
sea. Vault, seek Valoir. Vaultneant, an unthrift, one that is nothing worth.
Un vaultour, espece d'oiseau de proye, a grype. Un Veau, a calfe. Se Veauter en
la boue, to wallow in the mire. Veautrement, wallowing. Veeller, est, quand la
vache fait son petit veau, to calue. Vefue, a widow. Vefuage, widowhode.
Vehement, vehement. Vehementement, vehemently. Vehemence, vehemence. Veiller,
to watch. Veillant, watching. Vne Veille, an holly even. Veillement, watching.
De la veillere, ou Liset, herb, an herb called byndweed. Vein, a vain.
Vela, seek Voicy, voyla. Rob de Velours, A velvet gown. Velu, roughe.
Venaison, seek Vener. Vendange ou Vendenge, wineharuest, vintage. Vendanger,
to work in vintage. Ve^dangeur, A wyneharuest man. Vendoise, poisson, a kind
of fish Vendre, to sell. Vendeur, a seller, a merchant. Vendible, vendible.
Vendition, a selling. Vente, sale. Mettre en Vente quelque chose, to put a
thing to sale. Expose en Vente, put out too sale. Lots and Ventes, cessing by
lands Vendredi ou venredi, friday. Vener, to hunt. Veneur, a hunter. Venaison,
venson. Venerable, digne qu'on luy face reverence, and qu'on l'honore,
worshipful. Venger, to revenge, to wreake, to avenge. Vengeur, a revenger.
Vengeance, vengeance. Venim, venom, poison. Venimeux, venomous, full of poison.
Venir, to come. Venir and approcher, to come, to approach nigh. Venir and
arriuer, to come and arrive. Venir a rien, to come to naught. Venir deuant, to
come before, to prevent. Venir au deuant, to come and meet one. Venir en bruit
and auoir nom, to come to a name. Venir tout a poinct, to come in season, to
come in the nicke. Venant, coming, approaching. Venu, come. Vent, wind, vent.
Il vente, it venteth, it blows. Vente and ventes, seek Vendre. Flux de
Ventre, the flixe, the laxe. Ventru, a gorebelly. Ventree, ce que la mere port
en son ventre, the burden of a woman's womb. Vne ventose, a vent in a cave. Le
Ventre, the belly, the womb. Venus, ou paillardise, whoredom. Veoir, to see,
to look, to spy. On le voit, it is seen. Qui a este veu, which has been
seen. La veue, the sight, the vewe. Un ver, a worm. Vereux, full of worms.
Un ver de Poet, a Poets verse. Du veratre, herb, an herb called Helleborus.
Verd, green. Verdir, to wax green. Verdeur, ou verdure, greenenesse.
Verdier, un sort de crapault ou grenouille de hayrs, aucuns l'appellent
Graisset, a kind of hedge frog or tode. Verdier, ou forestier, a foster, or
woodman. Verdillon, green grapes. Verdoyer, to wax green, to flourish.
Verdoyant, flourishing. Verdon, petit oiseau qui nourit les petits d'vne aultre
pensant qu'ils soyent siens, a hedge sparrow. Un Verdun, a wine trought. Verge,
a wande or rod. Vergette, a small wande. Poignee de Verges, a handful of
rods. Verger, a garden. Verglas, frost upon rain. Vergongne, shamefastness.
Vergo^gneux and ho^teux, shamefast, bashful. Verifier and ratifier, Too
verify and ratify. Verisimilitude, likelyhode of truth. Verite, truth.
Veritable, a true man, an upright man. Veritablement, truly, certainly. Verius,
vergise. Vermeil, reddish, claret coullor. Du Vermillon, vermillio^, a kind of
red color made of quicke-siluer. Vermin, toute sort de petites bestes qui
s'engendrent de pourriture, vermin, all sort of small beasts that are
engendered of filth. se Vermoulir, to mould or wax rotten. Du Vernis, varnish.
Verole, ou rougeole de petits enfants, the small pockes. La gross Verole, The
French pockes. Un Verrat, a boar. Un Verre, verrier, seek Voarre. Un
Verrouil, a bolt of a door. Verrouiller l'huis, Too bolt the door. Vne Verrue
and petit morceau de chair esleuee sus le corpse, a warte. Verse, toward. Verse
luy, toward him. Verse la fin, toward the end. Regard Verse moy, look
toward me. Verser horse, to power out. Verser ou conuerser auec aucu^, to be
conversant with one. Verse, powered out. Versement, a pouring out. Vertau,
Tampon, ou Bondon, a stopple, a bung. La Vertebre and os de l'eschino du dos,
the chyne bone. Vertus, virtue. Virtue and force, strength and might. Auoir
force and Virtue, too have strength and power. Vertueux, full of virtue.
Verueine, an herb called Veruen. Verueu a prendre poisson, A dragge. De la
Vesce, fitches, a kind of pulse. Vescu, seek Viure. Le Vespre, the even. La
Vespree, the evening tide. Vne Vesse, a fyste. Vessir, to fyste. La Vessie, the
bladder. Vestir, to clothe, to put on. Vestu de rob de soye, clothed with a
silk garment. Vestement, a garment. Vesture, a clothing, a putting on. Un Veu,
seek Vouer. Veu, ou A ce que tu me racomptes, seeing either to that that thou
tellest me. Veu l'heure du iour, seeing the hour of the day. Veu l'occasion,
seeing the occasion. Ie Veulx, seek Vouloir. Vexer and tormenter, to vex, to
tormente. Estre Vex and torme^te de gens de sa maison mesme, Too be vexed and
tormented with his own household. Viagier, Rent viaigiere, During ones life, a
rent during ones life. Viaire, a visar, a face. Viande, meat, food.
Vibrequin, ou Villebrequin, a percer. Vicaire, a Vicar. Vice, vice. Vicieux,
vicious, given to noughtinesse. Victoire, victory, triumph. Rapporter la
Victoire, to carry away the victory. Victorieux, victorious. Estre Victorieux,
to be victorious. Victuailles pour vne armee, vittayles for an army. Vie,
life. Vieil, old, ancient. Vieillot, a little old man. Vieillotte, a little
old woman. Viellard, an old man. Viellesse, old age. Viellement, aunciently.
Vierge, a maid, a virgin. Virginal, of a virgin. Virginite, Virginity,
maydenhode. Vif, quick. Viuement, lively. Viuacite, quickness, lyuelynesse.
Vigilant, seek Vieiller. Vigne, a vine. Vigneron, a vine worker. Vignoble, a
vyneyard. Vignottes, and fleurs en Livers imprimes ou enlumines, la taille,
drapperie, ou feillages qu'on faict en menuizerie, ou pierres, certain flowers
or deckings printed in books, also branches in any other kind of work.
Vigueur, vigor, strength. Vigoureux, strong, well brawned. Dire Vigoureusement,
too declare strongly. Vendre a vil pris, to sell for low price. Vilete, ou
Vieut^, bon and grande march de toutes chooses, good cheap of any thing.
Vilain, a villain. Vilainement, vilelye, villanously. Vilener and enlaidir, to
raye or defile. Vilenie, villainy, filthiness. Village, a village. Petit
village, a little village. Un villageois, a man of the country. Ville, ou
cite, a town or city. Villette, a little town. Villoter, to run from one
town to another. Un Villotier, a land loper, a runagate. Les villes, fleaux,
ou tendons de la vigne, the young branches of the vine. Vin, wine. Vin de
pressourage, the after pressed wine. Le vin des vallets, servant wine. Vinot,
Vinet, petit Vin, small wine. Un Vinotier, Tauernier, a vintener, a tauerner.
Vinaigre, vinegar. Vinagrette, sallades. Vindicatif, wreakefull, seeking
revenge. Vinette, ou ozeille sauuage, wild s^rrell. Vingt, twenty. Violent,
violent. Violence, violence, force. Violemment, violentlye, forciblye. Violer
vne fille, to rauishe a maid, to defloure. Violation, rauishing, Violateur, a
rauisher. Violet, violet color. Violette, a violet. Violier, a violer or
player on the violl. Vipere, vne sort de serpent, a kind of serpent called a
Viper. Vne vire, ou traict d'arbaleste a quarrel for a Crossebowe. Virer and
tourner, to turn. Virement, vireuoustes, turning, friskes or gamboles. Viril
and verteux, manly, courageous. Virilement, courageously, Vis de pressoir, ou
maison a monter par degrez, the vice of a press, or turning of a pair of
stairs. Vis a vis, face to face, over against. Le visage, the face. Viser bien
droict, ou frapper dedens le blanc, to l^uell right, to hit the white. Visce,
leuelling. Qui ne vise point a l'aduenir, that regards not the time to come.
Visible, visible, that may be seen Vision, a vision, a fantasy. Visiter, to
visit, to ouersee. Visitation, a visitation. Viste and soubdain, swift,
sudden, quick. Vistement, quickly, swiftly. Vistesse, swiftness. Vital, qui a
vie, vital, that has life. Vitre, Vitrier, seek Voarriere. Vitriol, ou
couperose, coprose. Vituperer and blasmer, to revile, or blame one. Viuacite,
seek Vif. Un Viuandier, a vittayler. Un Viuier ou estang, a ponde. Viure, to
live. S'il eust Vescu, if he had lived. Homme viuant, a living man. Viuoter,
to live poorly. Le Viure, meat. Vlcere, a sore, a bile. Vmbre, Vmbrager,
seek Ombre. Un, one. Un ou deux, one or two. Ce m'est tout Un, it is all one
to me. Unguent, seek Oindre. Vnir, to unite, to set at one. Plain and vni,
plain and smooth. Vniement and applanissement, making plain and smooth.
Vniement faict, equally done. Uniform, uniform, of one fashion. Union, union.
Union and accointement, union and acquaintance. Unite, unity. Vniuersel and
general, universal and general. Voarre, ou Verre, a glass. Voarrier,
Verrier, ou Vitrier, a glasier. Voguer, to flote, to sail. Voguement, sailing.
La Voile d'vne nauire, the sail of a ship. Voiler, couurir and cacher, Too
veil, to cover, to hyde. Voir, to see. Voire and desea, but now. Voire dea:
Ouy dea, mot dict par mocquerie, yea wisse. Voiries d'vne ville, the lay stall
of a town. Voisin, a neighbor. Voisinaige, ou Voisigne, neighbourhode.
Voiture, ou Voicture, carriage, fraught. La voix, the voice. Voix caslee, hoarse
voice. La voix des eslisants en la creation de quelque office, The voice of the
choosers. Voler, to fly. Voler aucun, to rob one. Volerie, robbery. Qui
Vole, that flies. Le Vol des oyseaus, the flying of birds. Fair quelque chose
a la Volee, to do a thing at all adventures. Parler a la Volee, to speak at
randon. Volage, a shittle hedded fellow, an inconstant man. Volement, flying.
Voleter, to flitter. Voliere, a bird cage, or where birds be brought up.
Voltiger un cheual, too manage a horse. Un Volume and party d'vn Liver, A
volume or part of a book. Volunte, Volunteers, Volo^taire Volontaireme^t,
seek vouloir. Volupte, fleshly pleasure. Voluptueux, given too fleshly
pleasure. Vomir, to parbreake, to vomit, to spue. Vomissement, vomiting.
Vostre, yours. Vouer, to vow. Voue, vowed. Veu, ou Voeu, a vow. Le Veu que
les anciens faisoyent an Diable, the vow that men of old time made too the
Devil. Vouloir, to will. Vouge, a hunting staff, a boar spear. Le Vouloir
and intention, the will and intent. Bien Voulant, a well willer. Volonte, will.
La Volonte ou vouloir d'aucu^, the will of one. Volontiers, willingly, gladly.
Volontaire, that is of our own free will. Volontairement, freely, willingly.
Vne Voulte, a vaute. Vaulter, to vaute. Voulte, vaulted, sometime crooked
backed. Vous, you. Voutrer, seek Veautrer. Voy-cy, Voy-la, come qui diroit
Voy-le cy, Voy-le la, here, there, see here, see there. La Voye, the way. vne
Voye ou Voicture de quelque chose, The weight of a thing. Suiuir la Voye and
l'exemple, To follow the way or example of other. Voyage, a viage, a journey.
Voyager, to journey. Voyageur, a wayfaring man. Voyagement, a iorneying. Le
Voyer, the bounds of lands. Vray, true. C'est un Vray calomniateur, it is a
very wrangler. Vray semblance, likely too be true. Scauoir au vray, to know
certainly. Vrayement, truly, certainly. Vrbanite, Ciuilite, good manner,
vrbanitie, courtesy. Vrge^t, Pressant, urgent, pressing nighe. Urine, urine,
chamber lie, piss. Vriner, to make water, to piss. Un Vrinal, a chamber pot,
an vrinal. Vne Vrne, ancien vaisseau de terre ayant le col estroict, servant a
porter and garder l'eaue come vne cruche: Servant aussi anciennement au
Preteur a mettre le nom des Iuges and des parties quand il failloit vuider
quelque chose par sort: Et a mettre and garder les cendres des trespassez, an
earthen vessel with a narrow neck that served to keep water in as in a pot,
it served the magistats also to put in the names when they should decide any
thing by lot, and also to preserve the ashes of the dead. Use, worn. Vser, to
wear. Vsiter and exerciter sa memoire, to use or exercise the memory. Bien
Vsite aux livers, well exercised at his book. Vsance, ou Usage, vsance, usury,
wearing or use. Vsufruict, droict d'vsage and iouissance sus les chooses, don't
la propriete appertient a aultruy, an usurping of an other man's ground and
reaping the fruits thereof. Usure de souliers, wearing out of shoes. Usure,
usury. Vsurier, an usurer. Usurper, to usurp. Vtensile, toute chose necessaire
a nostre usage, any kind of tool that a man does occupy. Vtile and
proufitable, profitable, commodious. Vtilement, profitably, commodiously.
Vtilite, profit, commodity. Vuider, to empty, to void. Fay Vuyder ceste
tourbe, cause this people to avoid. Vuide, void, empty. Vuide, voyded,
emptied. Vuidement, a voyding. Vuidance, voyding, emptiness. Vulgaire and
commun, vulgar and common. Le Vulgaire, Tbe common people. Vulgairement,
commonly. Droict and Vz de franchise, the right and custom of a freedom. Aux
us and coustume, To the use and customs.
Y
YA il chose quoy ie vous puisse seruir? Js there any thing wherein J may do
you service. Yeux, eyes. Yeux verds, gray eyes. Yeux estincelants and
esueilles, twinkling eyes. Yeux qui se mouuent ca and la, rolling eyes. Arbre
nomme If, an ewe tree. Yuer, ou Hyuer, winter. Le course de l'Yuer, the course
of winter. Iour d'Yuer, a winters day. Yuerner, to winter. Yuoire ou Iuoire,
dent d'Elephant, Yuory, Elephants, tooth. Qui est d'Yuoire, That is of Yuorie.
Yure, drunk. Yurongne, a dronkard. Yurongner, to drink drunk. Yurongnerie,
drunkenness. Yuroye, herb, darnell.
Z ante E.
ZEle, comme Qui ont Zele, zeal, that be zealous. Zelateur, a Zealous man.
Zephyre, vent d'Occident, qui co^mence a souffler au printemps, lequel faict
germer toute plant, the West wind. Le Zodiaque, Cercle au ciel ou sont les
douze signs, The zodiake or the circle in which the twelve signs be placed.
Zizanie, Toute semence bastar de, qui croist parmy le bon ble, autrement
appellee Yuroye, coccle.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, For Lucas Harrison. An. 1570.


