A RIGHT noble and pleasant History of the Successors of Alexander surnamed
the Great, taken out of Diodorus Siculus: and some of their lives written by
the wise Plutarch.

Translated out of French into Englysh. by Thomas Stocker.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knightrider streat at the
sign of the Mermayd, for Humfrie Toy.

ANNO DOMINI. 1569.

TO THE RIGHT honorable, his very good Lord, Lord Ambrose Dudley, Earl of
Warwyck, Baron Lisle, of the right honorable order of the garter, Knight: and
M. of the ordinance to the Queens most excellent Majesty.
AS of late came unto my hands (right honorable and my very good Lord) this
Book, entitled, the History of the successors of Alexander, surnamed the
great, written in the Greek tongue by Diodore the Sicilian, and translated into
French by M. Claude of Seissell, sometime M. of the Requests, to the most
Christian King Lewis the. xij. of that name, and to him addressed: I was (when
I had over read and well considered the same) maruellously ravished, and
earnestly wished, it had been published in our vulgar tongue, that many others
might understand it. Because (as me thinks) it is both noble and pleasant,
as well for the novelty of the History, as also for the variety and style,
which is right propre, and such one as apperteyneth, and chiefly belongs to a
very good Historian: wherein is showed the uncertainty of fortune, which
maruellously may serve and help to read, and consider the worldly happes
heretofore, to great Kings, Princes, and Nobles chanced, who sometime were in
great dignity and had high authority, and wonderful prosperity. Whereby in
seeing (after great felicity and marvelous prosperity) the strange
adversity and misery which happened them, and the continual change of their
estates and adventures: may more and more be understood the instabilitie and
imperfection of wordly matters. And chiefly in those great and honorable
personages, the successors of Alexander the great, by whom is most declared
the inconstancy of all things subject to alteration and change: and where
Fortune (to speak after the vulgar opinion) has best showed the power, and
authority. Which Book when I had finished, I advised me to what honorable
and Martial personage I might fitliest address it. And as I aboade in this
imagination, I at last called to remembrance your late noble progenitor, who in
facts of war and Martial policies, surmounted in these our days the more
part of this noble Realm of England. And forthwith considering, that your
honor is he, who in those noble virtues, rightly represents the very lively
Image of your most noble progenitor, and also understanding your affability
and natural inclination to all such as have delight therein: I am therefore
(all these things considered) the rather enboldened, to take on hand to
dedicate this the first fruit of my travel unto your honor: Most humbly
beseching the same that it would vouchsafe to take in worth, this small
present and gift, and to consider rather the heart and good will of the giver
(who desires nothing more than to do you service agreeable) than the value or
quality of the present, very small, and in a rude style, to dedicate unto so
Noble a personage. And because the said Claude of Seissell would not that this
said History should remain imperfect, to leave the Reader in doubt of the
end and issue of the wars begone by Antigone the great and Demetre his
son, against all the rest of the Kings and Princes successors of Alexander in
those days, somewhat touched in the beginning of the third Book by the said
Diodore, he has therefore taken out of the wise Plutarche, the remnaunte, in
the life of Demetre unto his death, in whose time were almost all the great
and notable factes of war (worthy memory) exployted and done. Wherefore in
reuoluing the said History with judgment, and to the end it is translated,
there may (in my opinion) some commodity and profit be received. For as
touching the course of worldly things, may be seen the Stratagemes and
policies in the facts of war, together many sundry and diverse battailles,
sieges and enterprises, very pleasant to read and hear: wherein may also be
learned many things apperteyning to that art. And farther as concerning the
moral direction of man's life, there may besides be found both by learning
and examples many goodly documentes. And chiefly, that which is most meet
and becoming a noble personage, whereof he is called Magnanimus, that he
should not for any prosperity which happens him, be over high minded nor
yet for any adversity he has or might chance him, lose his heart, courage or
hope, which things wholly serving to the perfection of man in this present
life, and consists in the habitude and operation of Moral virtues: and also
to the perfection of the soul, ordering and appointing the latter end and
intention to the everlasting bliss: which god of his infinite goodness and
grace grant your honor, and us al, after the course of this present life.

Your honors most humble at commandment. Tho. Stocker.

The first Book of the successors of Alexander surnamed the great, written by
Diodore the Sicilian, in the Greek tongue, and after Translated into the
French by Claude of Seisel, sometime a Counsailour, and master of the Requests
to JEWS the twelfth of that name, then the FRENCH King. And now Englished from
the FRENCH, By THOMAS STOCKER.
The Prologe.
PYTHAGORAS the Samian, and diverse other grave and wise Philosophers, have
taught and left in writing, that the souls of men are immortal: and the more
strongly to approve and verify their opion and judgment therein, they affirm
that when the souls depart the bodies, that they have the prescience and
foreknowledge of things to come. Thereunto also accords the famous Poet
Homer, as appears by his introducing of Hector, who a little before he died,
prognosticated the death of Achilles, which shortly after ensued. The like also
of later days has been well noted and known in many that died, who at the
hour of their deaths, prophesied what should happen: and chiefly confirmed in
Alexander surnamed the great^ his death, King of Macedone. For he lying at
Babylon upon his death bed, being by his friends asked in the very extreme and
last article of death, to whom he would leave his Realm and royal dignities?
answered, to the most worthy the government thereof. For I (quod he) foresee,
that in stead of my sepulture and funeral, my friends are determined to move
open hostility and wars: which in deed soon after came to pass. For the
greatest and most honorable his friends, striving for the principality and
government, were the causes of many and great conflicts. Al which matters,
together with the deeds and gestes of his said successors, shall be contained
in this present Book, and be made manifest and plain to al studious and
learned, which will read and desire to understand the same. For the book
precedent, treats of the Noble and worthy deeds of Alexander, unto the time
of his death. But this which now I am in hand with, comprehends and sets
forth the renoumed acts of Alexander his successors, being an History of.vij.
whole years continuance.

After the death of Alexander the great, Aride his brother is established king,
and Perdicas appointed to be his gouernoure.

The first Chapter.
THE same year that the Athenians ordained and chose Celphisodore to be their
Provost and governor, and the Romans created Lucie Fury, and Dece Iuny their
Consuls: King Alexander deceasing without issue, chanced between the reign
and state, to arise great dissension and sedition amo^gs the Princes, for the
principality and government. For the regiment of his foot men were wholly
determined to advance Aride to the kingdom: who although son to king
Phillip, and brother to Alexander, yet notwithstanding he was attainted with
the incurable disease of the mind. By reason whereof, the rest of the Princes
and Nobles in aucthority, which guarded Alexander his body, having with them the
horse men called the Soldiers, condescended and agreed by one whole and
common consent, to rear wars against the footmen, rather than they would
suffer and abide their insolent boldness. But before they enterprised the
matter, they thought best to send certain of the chiefest and most honorable
personages in their company, with an ambassade to the footmen: Amongs whom
Meleager was appointed chief and principal Ambassador, to dissuade them to
desist and leave of their attempt, alleging that it stood most with reason,
that they should obey the Princes. But so soon as Meleager was come amongst
them, he never made mention of the Ambassade and charge committed unto him, but
contrariwise approving and alowing their attempt and enterprise, did all that in
him lay, to support and maintain them against the Princes and their
confederates: so that the footmen having great good liking both of his
counsel and courage, ordained him forthwith their Coronel, and thereupon armed
them to give battle to the adversary. In so much that the Princes and Nobles
in their company, issued out of the town in arms, and put them selves in
order of battle. How be it certain of the wisest and most circumspect,
deeply waying and considering the case, concluded a final peace. Wherein was
agreed that Aride should be established king. And Perdicas chief of the
Macedonian princes, to whom Alexander at the hour of his death gave his ring,
deputed his governor. And to the rest of the Princes, and chief of the army,
were divided and given the administrations and gouernmentes of the Provinces
late under the subjection of Alexander. Which administratio^s or presidentships
the Greeks called Satrapies, and the governors of the same Provinces Satrapes,
conditionally that every of the said Princes at all times should be subject and
obedient unto the King and Perdicas his governor.

Perdicas taking upon him the government of the realm, deuideth the Satrapies
amongs the Princes.

The second Chapter.
SHortly after that Perdicas had taken upon him the rule over the rest, he
forthwith assembled all the princes and captains, and assigned to every of them
certain Provinces to govern. And first he bestowed the government of Egypt, on
Ptolome the son of Lage: on Laomedon of Mytthilene, Syrie: on Philote,
Cilice: on Phiton, Mede: on Eumenes Paphlagone and Cappadoce, together the
regions to them adjoining, in which Alexander, by reason of the continual
wars betwixt him and King Darye, never came: on Antigone, Pamphilie, and
Licie, together Phrigie the great: on Cassander, Carry: on Meleager, Lydie: and
on Leonate, the lesser Phrigie: which bordereth above Hellespont. In this sort
were divided the Provinces of Asia. In Europe was appointed to Lysimache, the
Country of Thrace, with the Countries and people thereunto adjoining, lying
upon the Sea coast of Euxine: to Antipater, Macidone, with all the rest of the
Countries bordering thereon. And for the residue of the Countries and Satrapies
of Asie, over and beside those already named, he thought good to leave to the
rule and government of those, whom Alexander had deputed in his life time. And
the rest next to them, he left to Taxille and the other Kings and Princes,
which before enjoyed them. Taxille.
And the Countries lying beyond Caucase the Mount, which is Paropanisade, he
left to Osarte, King of the Bactrians, whose daughter Alexander had espoused,
Osarte.
named Roxanne. He bestowed also on Sebirte, Aracose and Gedrose: on Stasanor
the Solian, Arrye and Draucine: on Phillip, Bactriane and Sogdiane: on
Frataferne, Parthe and Hircane: on Lucete, Perside: on Tlepoleme Carmanie: on
Atrapes, Mede: on Archon, Babylon: on Achesilaye, Mesopotame. Besides all this,
be constituted and ordained Seleuck, captain general of the horse men, called
the Soldiers, being the chiefest Office of charge, and most honorable within
the army, Epheston.
which charge Ephestion first had, and after him Perdicas. Moreover, the
Realms and dominions which Alexander gave to Taxille and Pore, Pore.
they held and enjoyed them according as Alexander had left them. And as
touching the transporting of Alexander his body to the Temple of Jupiter
Hammone, the setting up of his Toomb, the apparelling thereof, with the
furniture and solempnization of the funeralles, the whole charge was committed
to Aride. While Alexander lived he appointed Cratere one of his chief
Captains, with^^ M. old soldiers to go into Cilice, to whom he gave certain
ordinances and Commissions to execute and perform. But as soon as Alexander
was dead, the Princes his successors would in no wise agree that the said
ordinances should be performed. For after Perdicas had seen and red the
letters and registers of the said Alexander, Marvelous enterprises, and
ordinances of Alexander.
whereby he appointed a great deal of treasure to be levied for ye burial of
Epheston, and that he had farther assigned many other things of great cost and
charge to be done, he was of the opinion that all the said ordinances of
Alexander should be revoked and adni^ hilate. But to the end it should not be
thought that he went about to derogate the aucthority and honor of Alexander,
he comprimitted the matter to the deliberation of the Macedonians, and amongs
diverse and sundry things they found great and waightye matters (worthy
remembrance) appointed by Alexander. For first he ordained that a thousand
tall Galleys should be built longer and bigger than were in Phenice, Sirye,
Cilice, or Cypres, to war against the Carthagians and certain other
Countries, lying and bordering upon the Lybian and Spanishe seas, and the
regions to them adjoining even unto Sicile: to the end he would be Lord and
governor of all the Libian seas hard to the pillars of Hercules. He also
ordained that there should be erected.v. royal and honorable Temples to the
value of five hundred talents every of them, and that there should be cut out a
number of large and great harborowes, in places meet for the purpose, to ride
at harborow the said navy of galleys. That done, he willed and commanded
diverse mighty and great Cities to be built, and those to be peopled as follows.

First, that the inhabitaunts of Asie should be brought into Europe, and the
inhabitants of Europe into Asia, to the end that they being conjoined in
marriage and affinity with the other, they should always live and continue in
amity, friendship and concord. And for the places where the Temples should be
erected, he appointed that one should be at Delos in the honor of Jupiter
Dodone, one in Macedone, to Jupiter Nidie: one in Amphipolis to ye goddess
Diane of Scithie: the other two in ye honor of the goddess Pallas, the one in
Cyrne, the other in Illye. Which temple in Illye, he would should be so
excellent and sumptuous, that the like might not any where be found. Over and
bisides all this, he appointed a tomb to be built in manner of a Pyramide or
broche, in the honor of his father Phillip, far exceeding them in Egypt,
which are thought the most excellent things in the world, that ever were seen
or heard of.

When the ordinances and escriptes of Alexander were red and heard, although
the Macedonians loved Alexander maruellously, yet after they see that his
enterprises were such and of so great charge, and very difficult to bring to
pass, they all agreed that nothing should be done. And shortly after Perdicas
caused thirty of the principal soldiers to be slain which were against him,
and namely Meleager, whom, bisides that when he was sent Ambassador to the
footmen, he did traitorously, and quite contrary to his charge, he accused
also to have been the chief conspirater, and purposer of his death.

Perdicas sends Python against the Greeks, rebelling in the hye Countries,
whom he overthrows. And incidently is described the site and compass of all
Asie.

The third Chapter.
AFter Perdicas was advertised that the Greeks which were divided by Colonies
into the higher provinces rebelled, and had assembled great puissance of men,
he sent against them, one of the Princes, named Python. But before any mention
be made of the wars, we think it first meet to make report in this History
of the occasions of the said rebellion, together the description of the site
and greatness of the Country of Asie: and the natures and properties of the
Provinces of the same. In doing whereof, they which shall read the History,
having before their eyes the distaunces of the places, may with greater ease,
conceive and understand it.

First, the Mount Thaure adjoining to the Country of Cilice, extends and
reaches all along Asie, even to the East Occean. But because there are in
the same, many bows and crookes, they have therefore diverse and sundry names,
so that Asie is divided by the said Mount into two parts, the one of which
abutteth and lies toward the North, and the other toward the Southe. Some
of the springs also which descend from the said Mountain on the North side of
the hill, run into the Caspian sea, some into the river Euxine, and another part
into the North Occean. And the rest which descend from ye South side, some fall
into the Indian Sea, some into the Occean, adioining to that part of Inde, and
some into the red sea. In this manner abut the provinces of Asie, some against
the North, and other some against ye south. And for the North part thereof, the
first provinces which bou^dre upon the river Thanais, are Sogdiane and
Bectriane, and adjoining to them, Arrie and Parthe, enuironing the Hircane-sea,
divided from the rest. Bisides all these are the Province of Mede, the greatest
and largest of all the rest, having many and sundry countries belonging there
to, called by their several names. After these are Armenie, Licaonie, and
Cappadoce, very cold Countries. Beyond this straight forward, is Phrygie ye
great, which joins upon Hellespont, and of either side it are Lydie and
Carry. And on the right sidelieth Piside a great country.

Behind that lies Licie in the firm land, and all along the Sea coasts
are the Cities which the Greeks sometime builded and inhabited, whose names
shall not be needful to be mentioned in this present history. And in this sort
do lie and abut the provinces of Asie toward ye North. But to return to the
provinces toward the South, the first that lies about the Mount Cauc^ se, is
Inde, a very great realm, and wonderfully peopled with diverse nations: amongs
which the greater nation are the Ga^ garides, against whom Alexander could
never bring his army, by reason of their Elephants: which country extends so
the river Ganges. In the same river boundreth the realm of Inde, being in that
quarter.xxx. furlo^gs broad, or there about.

Next unto the Country of the Gangarides, joins the rest of the realm of
Inde, which Alexander conquered, full of goodly wholesome rivers, and of great
wealth. In the same, besides many other countries, are also the realm of Pore
and Taxille, amidst which runs the river Inde^ whereof all the country first
took the name of Inde, About which, Mesopotame to say lying between two rivers,
which are Euphrates and Tigris.
lie the Provinces of Aracose, Gedrofe, and Carmanie, and right over against
the^ Perse wherein are enclosed Fusiane, and Sita^ ine, together the Country of
Babylon, which reaches to the deserts of Arabie. And on ye other side leding
hyer up, lies Mesopotamie, enclosed with tw^ rivers, and thereby so called. And
on the other side joins all this region of Babylon, the higher Sirie, and nere
to them al along the Sea coast are Pamphile, and the other part of Sirie,
called Celosyrie, in which is enclosed Phenice. To that and the deserts
joining thereto, by which the flood Nile runs down, and deuideth Sirie,
there is on the other side of the river, the Country of Egypt, which was
always reputed and taken the richest, and of greatest revenues of all the
rest. And al these Provinces are in a hot Region, for so much as they lie
toward the south, even as the others which be toward the North, are very
cold. All which were divided amongs the principal chiefetaines and Captains
of war, which served Alexander as has been aforesaid. But to return to the
History of the Greeks, (I mean those which Alexander had sent by Colonies, to
enhabit the hier provinces, there to dwell) they were much agreued, for that
they were driven to forsake their manner of life, the wholesome air and fertile
soil of the good country of Grece^ and as it were become abiects in the
farthe s^ wartes and co^fines of the country. Notwithstanding so long as
Alexander lived they endured the case for fear of him. But so sone as they had
news of his death, they ge^ to rebel and assemble in arms to the number of
twenty thousand footeme^ or more and three thousand horsemen all trained
soldiers, amongs whom Philo Enian^ was general. Philo.
When Perdicas understood the rebellion of the said Grekes^ he sent against
them Phiton one of Alexanders guard or Pencioners, a man of great magnanimity
and courage, and for his prowes and martial policy; worthy the charge. He
delivered to him three thousand footmen, and eight hundred of the choi^ est
horses within the army, and farther directed his letters unto the Satrapes in
these quarters, commanding the^ to ^^ euie for him ten thousand footmen and
eight thousand horse.

When Phiton had taken upon him this charge and addict to atchieue hie and
weighty enterprises, he hoped under that color through his courteous and
gentle entreating, to win the love of the Greeks, and so thereby to increase
his power and get great signories and dominions. But Perdicas knowing the
haultinesse of his mind and courage, had already conceived that which he
pryuily imagined, and therefore willed and commanded him, that so sone as he
had vanquished and overcome the Greeks his enemies, he should forthwith do
execution on them al, and give the spoil to his men of war.

After Pithon had received of him those soldiers, and that the Satrapes had
delivered him the rest, he merched against the rebels with his whole power,
and by the mean of Eniane a Greek, he by corruption wanne Lipodore one of the
captains of horsemen to the rebels, and thereby easily ouerthrewe the enemy.
For although they were the greater number, and of more force, (yet the victory
being uncertain) the traitor Lipodore retired with his troop of three
thousand horse toward an hill hard by, whom when the rest of the soldiers
perceived, they stood in such amaze, thinking him to fly, that they all fled
at ones. By reason whereof Pithon obtained victory, and forth with caused to
sound the trumpet, and made proclamation that so many as were escaped should
cast of their armoure, and peaceably depart home to their own houses, with the
one half of their goods: which incontinent was done. But the Macedonians
calling to remembrance the commandment of Perdicas, they without regard of
the peace, granted to them by Phiton, which they also had confirmed with their
oaths, by and by with shot overthrew and kild^ all the Captives and forth with
butyned their goods. When Pithon see that he was put beside his enterprise, he
immediately returned with the Macedonians toward Perdicas. And in this case
stood the state of Asie.

Of the wars which the Athenians make against Antipater, called the Lamian
war.

The fourth Chapter.
AFter that the Rhodians expulsed the Macedonians garrison amongs them, and the
Athenians made preparation to war against Antipater, called the Lamian war,
because of the siege of Lamie. But first before I proceed any further, I
think it very necessary to make report of the occasions of the said wars,
to the end that the deeds and factes of wars exployted in the same, may
with more ease be understood of the Reader, which were these.

Not long before Alexander died, he purposed to call home again all the exiles
and bannished men of the Cities of Greece, and restore them to their mansion
places and dwelling houses, thinking that that would greatly redound to his
honor and fame: and thereby he might have a number of men in every city to be
his Pertisannes or guard, if the rest at any time took in hand or enterprised
any mutany or would revolt. Wherefore he seeing the time of the Olimpiad at hand,
he sent thither Nicanor the Stagerite with letters, containing the edict of the
said restitution straightly charging and commanding him in the end of ye
assemble, to make proclamation by the sound of the Trumpets victors of the
said letters: which thing he speedily did. The tenor of which letters hereafter
ensue.

Alexander the great king of Macedone, The tenor of King Alexanders letters.
to the bannished and exiles of Greece greetyng. We have not ben the cause of
this your exile and bannishement, but rather are a mean that ye may return
home, except such as have offended against the sacred law. Wherefore we have
addressed our letters to Antipater concerning the same, strayghtly charging and
commaundyng him, if any the cities refuse to do this our commandment, that he
forth with enforce and compel them.

When these letters had been proclaimed and red, the people thereof were
marvelous glad. And because the thing pleased the multitude, they made such a
noise and showte, that it was heard unto ye heavens, for as much as there were
above twenty thousand exiles, who all auerred and said, that the same
restitution was for the common wealth of the whole state and country of Greece.
But the Etholians and Athenians were therewith evil apayd, and greatly
displeased, because ye Etholians feared to be plagued for the oultrage they had
committed against Eniade, who^ they chased and expulsed their land, knowing for
certain ye the king had sworn that not only his neuewes and others descending
from his line, but also the exiles and bannished them selves would be revenged
for the injury done to him. Again the Athenians in no wise determined to
render the Isle of Damie, which they had divided amongst them selves, to
those whom before they had expulsed. But because it lay not in them to resist
the power of Alexander, they endured the case, always awayting opportunity,
which in the end at unawares happened them. For after they had heard news that
Alexander was dead without heirs, they then boldly enterprised not only to set
them selves at liberty, but also took upon the^ the government of all Greece,
having great affiaunce that they were able to maintain wars against all the
world, by reason of the marvelous amasse of money, which they not long before
had gotten by the death of Harpale, recited by us in the book precedent, with
which they waged the mercenaries whom the Satrapes had left in Asie, to the
number of eight thousand or more lying then at Teuare, in the country of
Peloponnese. Wherefore they gave secret commandment to Leosthenes the
Athenian, Leosthenes.
to take upon him as it were at his own costs and charges to wage them,
making them believe he would without knowledge of the City, enterprise some
notable exploit, to the end that Antipater who made no great estimate of him
or his doyngs, should have little regard to make against him, whereby they
might have leisure and time to prepare for all such necessary hablements and
engines of war as were meet for the purpose: which thing in deed was done.
For Leosthenes at his pleasure, assembled the said men of war, so that he
had gotten a band of valiaunte and lusty Soldiers and of great experience,
because they had served in many sundry and notable wars in Asia. All this was
done, before there came any sure knowledge of the death of Alexander.

But after certain which came from Babylon, had given it out that they see him
dead, the Athenians arrered open wars, and sent immediately to Leosthenes some
part of Harpale his money, together with great stoare of Armoure and weapon,
willing him no longer to dissemble the matter, but openly to begin to war,
as to him should seem for the best.

When Leosthenes had received the money, he then according to his promise,
paid al his soldiers their wages, as well the unarmed as the armed, and so
marched on into the country of the Etholians, to the intent they might join
with him, whom they right thanfully received, and with great courage accorded
his request, and there upon delivered him seven thousand Soldiers. From
thence he sent to the Locriens, Phocians, and the other cities therabout,
soliciting them to take their part for the restoration of the whole country
of Greece into her pristinate estate and liberty, from the servitude and
bondage of the Macedonia^s:

But in the city of Athens, the richest and welthiest citezins, prayed and
exhorted the co^moners of the same to peace and quietness. Nevertheless there
were other who diverse times, and many ways had gratified and done much for the
said co^moners, that continually moved and stirred the multitude to wars,
because their chief living was by their salarie and wages in the time of
wars. Wherefore king Phillip oftentimes accustomed to say, that peace was
their wars, and wars their peace. Therefore an edict of the wars was
drawn and published by them which were deputed by the communalty, as follows.

First that the people of Athens ought to take upon them the quarrel, to
reduce into her populer governance the whole country of Greece.

Also that there should be no garrisons maynteyned or kept within any the said
cities.

Moreover, that there should a navy be sent to sea. To say forty excellent
tall, long and fleet galleys of three tier of ores on a side, and lxx. of
four.

Also that all the Athenians of the age of forty years and upward, should be
in a readiness to war.

Moreover, that of the ten tribunes of their people, three should remain at
home for to defend the country, and the other seven to be in a readiness for
the wars, to send whether it should be thought most convenient.

Far^ her, that Ambassadors should be sent through out all Greece, pronouncing
and signifiing to all the Cities of the same: that even as in times past the
people of Athens did repute and take the whole country of Greece to be one
common and free country and domi^ ill of Greciaens, and had assailed, chased
and put to flight by sea ye Barbarians who meant to have subdued and conquered
them, in like case also they now thought it best forthwith (for the common
liberty of Greece) to move war, and to be contributors in the same, both with
their ships and money, for the sa^ etie of the said Grecians, before any
other people of the world.

Which decree and edict being approved and allowed, was forthwith put in
execution. Whereupon many both grave and wise Grecians seeing the imminent
dangers that would ensue said, that the Athenians had well considered of all
things concerning honor, but for any gain or commodity that thereby should
ensue, they greatly er^ ed and were deceived, alleging, that before they
needed, they had taken upon them to arrere wars against great and invincible
armies, exhorting and praying all sage and wise men to be otherwise minded, and
to take example of the late destruction of Thebes. Notwithstanding this, the
Ambassadors of Athens never desisted, but trauailled through all the cities of
Greece, persuading the^ by eloque^t orations and fine persuasions to wars, so yt
in the end the greater number of the cities agreed to aid them, some with all
their power and force, and other some with certain numbers of men. And the rest
which refused to join with them, some took part with the Macedonians, and the
other rather chose to be neuters. Howbeit the first yt joined with the Athenians
were ye Etholians, as we have before declared. After them all the Thessalians,
except the Pellenians. All the Oetians also, except the Heraclians. All the
Achees, the Phitiothes reserved: and all the Eliens, except the Milesians. And
beside al these, ye Dorians, Locrians, Phocias, Aenians, Elisians, Dolopenians,
Athamantians and Leucadians, and al ye Molossians under the government of
Aripthy. For he had showed him self to be their friend, although after he
betraide the Greeks and took part with the Macedonians. And as for the
Illirians and Thracians, few of them would take part with the Athenians, by
reason of the old enimitie they bare them: But notwithstanding the Euboians
declared them selves to be their ayders in those wars, and all those which
dwell in the uttermost co^fines of Peloponese. To say the Argiues, Sicionians,
Elians, Messenians, and those which enhabite the quarter of Acten. These were
in effect all the people of Greece, which conspired with the Athenians in those
wars.

After which conspiracy, the Athenians sent to Leosthenes a new supply of five
thousand footeme^ all Citizins, five hundred horse, and two thousand
strangers: Who trauailling the country of Boetia, found all the people in
those quarters against them, because that when Alexander had assaulted and
won the City of Thebes, he gave away al their lands and possessions to the
Boetians, enhabiting there round about: which people had made particion of all
the said lands and possessions, whose revenues yearly amounted to a great
value. Wherefore fearing that if the Athenians prevailed, they would render unto
the Thebanes their City and territories, they determined the rather to take
part with the Macedonians. After Leosthenes had encamped before Platea, he
returned with certain of his Soldiers into Boece, and there joined with the
army of the Athenians, where they encountered and fought with the Boetians and
overthrew them. And immediately after the battle, he caused a Trophe to be
set up in token of victory. Which done he returned to the passage of the
piles, and there continued certain time, always awayting the puyssaunce of the
Macedonians. But when Antipater understood of the death of Alexandre, and the
division of the Provinces which had been made in Babylon, he sent his messengers
toward Cratere who was in Cilice, who had been sent thither before, to conduct
into Macedonie five thousand old Macedonian soldiers. He sent likewise to
Philote, Governor of the country of Phrigie, adjoining to Hollespont, praying
him to come to his aid and succor, and by ye mean he offered him one of his
daughters in marriage: he understanding the concourse of the Grecians against
him, being Governor of Macedone, he left in the Country for Lieutenaunt Sisbe
Sisbe.
and a certain of such Soldiers with him as he thought best, commanding him
to levy so many men in the said country, as he could. And him self
with.xiij. thousand footmen and six hundred horse, (for more he could not
well have, because the great number of his Soldiers were gone into Asia, to
guard that country and confynes of the same) departed out of Macedone and came
into Thessalie, where he see before his face upon the sea coast of Macedone,
the whole Navy which Alexandre had sent for the wasting of a great sum of
money and a great deal of other treasure, being in all an hundred and ten tall
Galleys of war. The Thessalians allied them with Antipater, and for that cause
they had sent him for the maintenance of his wars, a great number of able
horse me^ well appointed. Howbeit, after the Athenia^s were come amongs them,
and that they had with pleasant and delicate words so won their favor to
fight for the common liberty of Greece, they wholly yielded to Leosthenes,
through which practice the Grecians army then was of greater force than the
Macedonian. By reason whereof happened, that when Antipater came to joining of
battle, he was incontinent overthrown and vanquished. And after that, he
never durst come in the face of the enemy, neither yet was he able safely to
return into Macedone: wherefore he was forced to retier into the City of
Lauige with the rest of his army, which City he there fortified and furnished
it with men, armor, weapon and shot to avoid the siege, every day looking and
attending for aid out of Asie. Whereupon Leosthenes forthwith removed his
Camp, and with his whole power besteged the Town. And after, he had encamped
and entrenched him self about, he approached the walls offering battaill. But
when he see the Macedonian^ after many days offers durst not sallie out he
assaulted the Town. Notwithstanding, the Towns men so valauntlie defended it,
that they repulsed the ennimy, and slew a great number of the rash assailants:
by reason the town was well manned, thoroughly provided wtih all kinds of
hablements of war, and the curten of such height and thicknes that the
besieg^ed with great ease became victors. When Leosthenes see that he could not
by force win the Town, straightwaies cut of their victuals, trusting by
famine to win it, wherefore he stops all the passages with large and deep
ditches and trenches. In this mean while had Leosthenes for a time given leave
to the Etholians to go into their country, about such necessary affairs as
they had to do, and thereupon they all returned into Ethole. And as Antipater
was thus distressed and in great danger, loking for none other, but that he
must needs for wan: of victuals, yield him self and al his power to the enemy:
suddenly happened them great good luck. For as the assaillaunts were
undermining the walls, Antipater with fierce courage falied out upon them, and
Leosthenes coming to the rescue of his soldiers, had by hap such a blow on
the head with a stone, which was thrown from the curten in time of the
skyrmish, yt it felled him to the ground, and being by his Soldiers, taken up
more than half dead and carried to his Tente, within three days after died
thereof: who for his noble and cheualrous acts in feats of war, was honorably
buried, where at the commandment of the people of Athens, Hiperides then the
most excellent Orator in all the Town, made an Oration in his praise at the
funeral. For Demosthenes the Orator was in exile by reason of the money which
he had gotten of Harpale. After the death of Leosthenes the people chose
Antiphile for their Captain in his rowme, a right and valiant man, and in
Martial Policies very expert.

Certain of the Princes upon whom Perdicas bestowed the government of the
Provinces, go about to seigniorize them.

The fifth Chapter.
WHile these broiles were in Greece, the Princes and Governors of Asie among
whom the Provinces were divided, emo^gs Ptolome who was one, eftsoon without
resistaunce or contradictio^, seized on Egypt^ behauing him self to the whole
country, wisely, liberally and gently: And during the time of his government
there, had gathered together about viij. thousand talents, by mean whereof he
had levied a great number of Mercenaries. There also repaired to him many af
his kinsfolks and friends, as well for the bounty of his nature, as also for
his liberality and fra^knesse. Again he sent Ambassadors to Antipater, to
participats with him al his affairs and business, knowing for certain, yt if
Perdicas could, he would expulse him the province of Egypt. But now to return
to Lisimache, so soon as he was arrived in ye province of Thrace, he found
King Southe with xx. thousand footeme^^ and two thousand horse there encamped,
yet feared he not to join battle with him. But because on the one side was
the greater number, and on the other side prowess and virtue, the fight
endured long and cruel, wherein many Grecians were slain, but a far greater
number of Barbarians, so that either of them retiered into his camp, not
knowing who had the better, and there continued a season both minded to
assemble greater power.

Leonate coming to the rescous of Antipater, is by the Athenians overthrown
and slain; but after the said Athenians are at Sea by Cly^ e chased and
ouerhrowen.

The sixth Chapter.
DUring the time that Antipater was besieged in Lamie, he had secretly sent
his Ambassador Ecathe toward Leonate desiring his aid: who promised to
come. And thereupon he immediately put all things in a readiness and passed
Europe, until he came into Macedone, where repaired to him many Soldiers,
Macedonians, so that he had assembled twenty thousand footmen and five
thousand horse: with which army he intented to war upon the Greeks through
the Country of Thessaly. Who understanding of his coming, raised their siege,
and sent all their baggage and artillarie; together the Paysaunts and Sclaues
which followed the army into the city of Melite^ The City of Milet.
because they might more speedily march on with the soldiers, aswel^ footmen
as horsemen, against Leonate, meaning to give him battaill before he joined
with Antipater. Now had the Greeks not passing xxij. thousand footeme^, (for
that the Etholians and certain other regiments were licensed to go into their
Countries and mansion places) and three thousand horse, of which two thousand
were Thessalians, valiant and trained Soldiers, in whose magnanimite
co^sisted ye whole hope of victory. At last they joined battaill with Leonate,
which continue long and doubtful, but in the end, the Thessalians through
their hie and manly courages obtained victory, and Leonate manfully and
stoutelie fighting, in the retire fell into a ditche, and there miserably was
slain. Nevertheless his Soldiers recovered the body and carried it to his
Tent. When the Macedonian Phalange see that Memnon General of the Thessalian
men at arms had won the victory, and fearing they would charge them,
sodenlie retired from the plain where the battaill was fought, unto the
straightest passages they could find near hand, for their guard and
strength, through which policy the Thessalian men at arms charging them,
profited nothing. The next day in the morning, Antipater coming with the rest
of his power to aid them, joined all the Macedonians in one camp under the
government and conduct of Antipater, who fearing the Grecian horsemen, never
durst (...) battaill (and again, doubting his inabilite to pass through them,
was enforced by the straight ways and passages in those quarters, fair and
easelie to retire. Antiphile.
But Antiphile general of the Grecian army, having honorably overthrown the
Macedonians in battaill, remained still in Thessalie, always attending and
looking what the ennimie mente or durst to do. Thus had the Grecians in all
their affairs by land prosperos success. But after the Athenians understood
that the Macedonians were of great power by sea, they caused many new ships of
war to be buylt, so that they had in all C^ xx sail. Clite.
But Clite Admiral of the Macedonian Navy having alwais about CCxl. sail,
twice chased and vanquished Ethion Admiral to the Athenians, Ethion.
and slew many of his people about the Isles Ethimades.

Perdicas overcomes Ariarathe, and restores to Eumenes the Country of
Cappadoce.

The seventh Chapter.
IN this mean, time Perdicas (having with him King Phillip and his army
royal) purposed to war upon Ariarathe of Cappadoce: Who never (during the
life of Alexander) would at any time be subject to the Macedonians. And the
cause why Alexander suffered him peaceably to enjoy the same, was, that he had
such notable wars with King Darie, that he never forced of Ariarathe, so
that he peaceably held and enjoyed that country of Cappadoce many years. By
reason whereof he became so rich and of such great wealth, that he had waged a
great number, as well Cappadocians, as strangers, with whom he thought to
defend him self and his Realm against Perdicas, if at any time he attempted
to pierce and invade his country. He had about xxx. thousand footmen, and x.
thousand horse. Notwithstanding, when they came to battaill, he and all his
army was quite discomfited and overthrown: whereof about iiij. thousand
slain, and above v. thousand prisoners taken, of which number him self was
one, who with all his kinsfolks and allies were hanged. This done, Perdicas
proclaimed peace to the whole Country, and restored to the Government thereof
Eumenes Cardian, who was before assigned unto it at the first particion of the
Provinces.

Antipater in fight vanquisheth the Grecian armie^ puts in subjection the
greater number of the Cities of Greece and Athenes, and in the end restores
them to liberty.

The eight Chapter.
IN this mean season was Cratere come out of Cilice into Macedone, accompained
with vj. thousand footmen of ye most expert soldiers that served Alexandre
when he first invaded Asie. And upon the way he took up iiij. thousand Persian
Archers, a thousand Slings or Shot, and a thousand horse to aid Antipater, and
to revenge the oultrage committed by the Greeks against the Macedonians. But so
sone as he was come into Thessalie, he voluntarily gave the principal charge
and conduct to Antipater, praying him to take upon him the office of L.
General of the army. So they encamped together about the River Pene, The river
Pene.
and one day mustering the army (accompting those which came with Leonate) they
had xl. thousand footmen well armed, iij. thousand archers and slings, and
about v. thousand horse. Notwithstanding the Greeks feared nothing, but
encamped right over against them, albeit they were the weaker and febler
company, by reason that a great number of them (for their many victories
before obtained) were so hault and proud, that without weting or knowledge of
their Captains, they were gone home, so that (the Captains being not obeyed,
nor the Soldiers at commandment) there remained not behind above xxv.
thousand footmen, and iij. thousand v. hundred horse, in which nmubre of horse
lay and consisted the only hope of victory, both for their valiant courages,
and also because the country was plain and champion. Antipater daily offered
battaill, but the Greeks remained quiet and kept their camp, loking still for
aid from the cities of Greece. But they were by the enemy so long oppressed and
grieved, that of force they must in the end abide, and put all to the hazard of
battaill. And because they desired that the horsemen should first charge, they
placed them as it were for their voward before the Phalange of footeme^. And
when Antipater see that the Thessalians at the first encountre and charge had
gotten the better, he commanded his Phala^ge to march against the maine
battaill of the Greeks, whom they so fiercely grieved and pressed, that in
less than an hour they had almost slain the whole Grecian Phalange. And at
last the Grecians seeing them selves no longer able to abide the brunt, nor
maintain the fight, retired in good order to battaill to the straight passages
toward a mountain, where by reason of the aduau^tage of the place, they with
greater ease defended them selves from the power and force of the Macedonians.
And albeit the Grecian horse were to hard and bettered the Macedonians, yet
they seeing their footmen so retired, yielded them selves to the enemy: so by
that mean the Macedonians wanne the honor of the battaill, in which were
slain about v. hundred Greeks, and Cxxx. Macedonians.

The next day in the morning Memnon and Antiphile chief leaders of the Grecian
army, assembled their Captains and called a counsayll, wherein was proposed
two questions. First whether it were good to abide and tarry for the aid and
help of the cities of Greece, and continue the war until they were of as
great power as the enemy: or whether it were better (considering the time) to
send unto them to treat a peace: so they agreed upon the last. Whereupon they
sent Ambassadoures to Antipater: who answered, he would not at one instant
condescende and agree to conclude a peace with all the whole cities of Greece:
but if they would every of them perticulerly send their Ambassadoures to him,
that then he was content to hear them, and otherwise not: whereunto the Greeks
in no wise would agree.

While the wars still continued, Antipater and Cratere besieged the city of
Thessalie, to the end whereof the Greeks were not able to come: wherefore the
Citizens being sore distressed and in great danger, rendered the town to
Antipater, whom he received into favor, and showed him self so gently and
courteous toward them, ye shortly after all the rest of the cities of Greece
every of them particulerly yielded to Antipater, with whom he accorded peace.
And farther, they clearly forsook both the Athenians and Etholians utter
ennemies to the Macedonians: who seeing them selves so rejected, took
counsayll of their captains for the mayntenaunce of the wars. When Antipater
had by such Stratageme separated and dispersed the Greeks, he then with all
his power made preparation against the Athenians, who seeing them selves
unprovided of aid and succoure of their friends and allies, were greatly
astonished: Demades.
wherefore they al agreed, ye Demades the famous Orator should be sent to
Antipater to treat a peace, which he refused to do. And although they had
called him to counsel, he would not come thither, because he had been before
thrice condemned of the privy Counsel or Senate, as an insringer of the
Laws, forbidden to ask for him self the aid or benefit of the Laws, and
to declare his opinion in the Counsel. Nevertheless for the cause aforesaid,
the communaltie incontinent forgave him, and sent him to Antipater, accompanied
with Phocion, Phocino.
and certain other Citizens: whom Antipater after their Ambassade published,
answered that he would conclude no peace with the Athenians, vnelesse they
would wholly submit them to his discretion and government: alleging that what
time they besieged him within the City of Lamie, they would make none other
answer to his Ambassadoures. When ye Athenians see none other boot, and that
they were no longer able to resist, they remitted the whole government of the
City to his pleasure. Who being of such moderation of mind, redeliuered to
them their City and lands with all their goods and cattels. Howbeit, he
altered and changed the government of the City. Declaring, that where before
the rule and estate of the City was common, he therefore now decreed and
ordained, that none should be admitted to any office or dignity within the
City, except such as were of good revenue and living, and that might at least
dispend two thousand Drachmes by year, and they to have all the authority,
government and ordering of the same. And that the rest whose lands did not
amount to the clear yearly value aforesaid (as persons seditious and desirous
of tumultes and wars) were clearly excluded from authorite and government.
Nevertheless, they that were contented to dwell elsewhere, he gave them the
conntrey of Thrace for their habitation and relief: of which sort were above
xx. thousand which went to dwell al in Thrace. And there remained in the City
of ancient and landed Burgesses about ix. thousand or near thereabout: who
governed the same and territories thereof, after the Laws of Solon, without
taking away from Perseus any of the goods which he possessed. And for their
better quietness and refuge, Antipater least behind under the the charge of
Menille, Menille.
a garrison of men of war for the repressing of such as would go about to
commence or revive any innouatio^ or mutation. And for as Samy, he least it to
the wills and discretions of the Kings. Thus the Athenians being gently
handled and well entreated (far beyond their expectation) minded upon that
conclusion to live in rest and peace, and to use their trauaill without fear:
by mean whereof in short time they grew to great wealth.

After Antipater had achieved and obtained these victories, he returned with
Cratere into Macedone, whom he perfectly loved and greatly honored, bestowing
on him large and honorable gifts, giving him also in marriage his eldest
daughter Phile, a young a Damsel of excellent favor and beauty, making
farther great preparation for his return into Asie.

Moreover, he used such great humanite and courtesy toward all the Cities of
Greece, and reduced them to ciuility and politic government, that he acquired
great praise and renown. Perdicas likewise rendered to the Samians their City
and Country, and called home all the citisens which had been in exile xl.
years and more.

Of the explotys done by Thimbron and Ptolome in the wars of Cyrene.

The ninth Chapter.
Now since we have spoken of all the factes of wars done in the Lamian
war, it behooves us out of hand to make mention of the wars which the
Macedonians had against Cyrene, and to give it this mean space, to the end we
defer not those gests so long from the time in which they were done, but to
make the matter more clear and manifest, we must begin somewhat farther of.

What time Harpale fled out of Asie into Crete with a certain number of
soldiers (as in the book before we have mentioned) Thimbron who by outward
apparaunce seemed his friend, traitorously slew him, and seizing on all his
money, men and ships, sailed with all the said soldiers and riches into the
country of Cyrene, and by the mean of the aid and conduct of the exiles of
the same City, he gave battaill to the Citisens governors, and vanquished
them, whereof he slew many and took a number of prisoners, and so wanne the
Port or haven, whereupon he put the Citisens in such terror and fear, that he
drove them to come to a composition, wherein they agreed, that he should have
v. hundred Talents of silver, and the one half of his Charriots and Charrets
that he would occupy in his wars. This agreement concluded on, he
immediately sent his Ambassadors to the rest of the cities near hand,
demanding their aid for the subduing of the Region of Lybye, thereto
adjoining. He farther willed his Soldiers to spoil and but in all the goods
which they found in the ships within the said Port, the rather to enbolden
them to enduer the wars. And albeit fortune highly favored the said
Thymbron, that he became rich and proud, yet not long after she brought him
again into as great misery by this occasion, for one of his Captains, named
Mnasicles, Mnasicles.
borne in Crete, a man expert in martial factes, challenged him, and said he had
done ill, because he made no egall division of the but in: And being a valiant
and stout man, and of nature mutinous, revolted and took part with the
Cyrenians, greatly blaming and discommending the cruelty and disloyatie of
Thymbron: dissuading them to break promise with him, and to set the^ selves
at their own choice and liberty. But when Thymbron see that they had not as
yet paid but lx. Talents, and that from day to day they delayed the payment of
the rest, he held the agreement and composition on their part infringed and
broken: wherefore he took so many Citisens as were within the Port prisoners,
to the nu^bre of four score. That done, with all his force he besieged the
City, and preuayling nothing, retired into the haven. In this while the
Barcians and Hesperits took part with Thymbron, wherefore the Cyrenians
purposing some fact, least one part of the Soldiers within the Town: and
with the other part salied out and ran upon the Barcian and Hesperite camp,
who were forced to send to Thymbron for aid: whether he came with all his
power: which when Mnassicles see, and perceiving he had leaft the Haven
unfurnished, persuaded the Cirenians in the Town to assaye to win the haven,
whereupon they immediately issued out, and with great ease wanne it, because
there were few or none leaft to defend the same: all which was exploited and
done by the mean and conduct of Mnasicles, who straightwayes redeliuered to
the merchaunts of the town so much of their goods as might be found: and
after furnished the Port with a garrison of valiant men of war.

When Thymbron understood that the Port (so meet a place for the anoying of ye
enemy) was lost, and all the bagage of his me^ of war, he was thereat greatly
abashed. Howbeit, he took to him a martial courage and went to the siege of
an other City called Thacire, Thacyre.
which he wanne, wherefore he waxed right glad and bold. Nevertheless, not
long after happened him other great misaduentures. For first, his Soldiers
which were a board, having lost the Haven (thereby cut of from victuals at land)
were constrained to make out certain bands to fourage the fields and Country
for provision of victuals: whom the Libians one day among the rest finding
abroad disordered, discomfited and overthrew: of which, some were slain, other
were taken prisoners, and the rest recovered thire ships and went to sea,
meaning to arrive at some Port where they might find friendship. But suddenly
arose so grievous and vehement a tempest, yt it perished and drowned many of
their ships: and such as escaped, were driven with wind and weather into
Cypers, and upon the coast of Egypt. Yet for all this ill fortune, he never
desisted his purpose and attempt, but without stop sent certain of his chief
and assured friends into Peloponese to mustre and take up Soldiers, willing
them also to entertain the two thousand men of war strangers, lying and
abiding in the Country of Tenare, Tenare.
and to bring them also into Libie

All this time the Cirenians (by reason of the late overthrows by them given)
trusting in their own courages, and hoping well of better success, boldly
attempted Thymbron with battaill, wherein they vanquished and killed a great
number of his people, which conflict made him almost despair of the conquering
and subduing the Cyrenians. But suddenly came in his aid the Soldiers of
Tenare, wherewith he took such heart, that he a fresh assembled an other great
number to commence and begin his wars. But when the Cyrenians see that,
they by and by sent to the Libians and Chartagians their neighbors, requiring
aid, so that with them and of their own City, they had gotten together about
xxx. thousand men, with whom they arrered an other great army, wherein on
either side co^sisted and depended the whole and total victory. And although
the fight endured long, yet in the end Thymbron obtained victory, whereof he
was right joyous, hoping then in short time to conquer and subdue all the
Cities thereabout. In which conflict the Cirenians lost al their Captains:
wherefore they chose for their Chieftayne and General Mnasicles and other under
him, to defend the haven and City, which Thimbron had before besieged and yet
still daily approached. But in the end, the siege so long continued, that
victuals within the Town were very scarce, which caused great muteny:
wherefore the Cirenians expulsed the most worshipful and rich Citisens:
whereof some took part with Thimbron, and the rest went for rescous into
Egypt, and desired aid of Ptolome, for their return home, whereunto he
granted. So they departed thense toward Sirene, with a puissaunt army, both
by sea and land, under the conduct of Orphellon. Orphellon.


When the exiles with Thimbron understood of their coming, they determined by
night to steal upon them, and so to rob and spoil them: but their enterprise
being revealed and discovered, they were all slain. Then the Co^moners which
kept the Town, perceiving the exiles at hand, truced with Thimbron, and joined
together to fight against Orphellon, who encountered them in battaill and
overthrew them and took Thimbron prisoner. When al these conflictes had thus
taken end, he took the City of Cirene, and the rest of the Cities near about
(which before lived at liberty) to the behoof of Ptolome his Lord and
Sovereign.

Perdicas entering Piside, takes the Lauradians prisoners, and by siege so
distresseth the Isaurians that they kill them selves. And at the entreatie of
Antigone, Antipater and Cratere, which warred upon the Etholians, conclude a
peace with them, because they would go against Perdicas.

The x. Chapter.
BUt now to return to Perdicas and King Phillip, after they had overthrown
and discomfited Ariarathe, and bestowed the government of Cappadoce on
Eumenes, they took their journey into Pisided, etermining to sack and raze
the Cities of Laurade and Isaure: because that they in the life of King
Alexander had slain Balacre the Son of Nicanor, whom Alexander had deputed
their Patron and Governor. And first by force they took the City of
Laurade, and killed all the men and made portsale of their infaunts and young
children. But because the City of the Isaurians was strong and thoroughly
manned to hold out the enemy: after they had two days besieged it, wherein many
of their Soldiers were lost they (seeing the Citisens well furnished of all
things for the defense thereof, and fully determined to maintain it to death)
retired: howbeit, after three days past, they again approached the walls and
gave a fresh assault, which the Citisens to their great loss, manfully
defended: wherefore being the^ disfurnished of able men for the manning of their
walls, rampires and Bulwarks, they purposed an honorable fact and worthy memory.

First, foreseeing their iminent destruction inevitable, by reason they were no
longer able to resist, and knowing for certain that they should shamefully and
villaniously be entreated, they therefore determined rather than to yield to
the enemy, to die an honest and honorable death. For first they shut up in
their houses the old men, women and children, and to the end there to bury
them, they set all the houses on fire, which being on a light and the flame
issuing out on every side, they cast in all their mouable goods, and all other
things which any way might be profitable or gaynefull to the enemy: whereat
Perdicas greatly amassed, commanded his Soldiers to enuiron the Town, and
give the attempt to the walls, but the Townsmen so valiaunly defended the
curten, that they ones again repulsed the assaylaunts. Then Perdicas much more
astonished, enquired the cause why they so courageously stood to the defense of
the City, considering they had burnt both their houses and goods. But after
Perdicas had retiered his Soldiers from the assault, the Isaurians threw them
selves into the fire, and so were buried in their houses with their friends and
familiers.

The next day in the morning Perdicas licenced his soldiers to sack and spoil
the City, who after the fire was thoroughly put out, found infinite treasure of
gold and silver: forasmuch as the said City had long continued without wars,
and through traffic and great trade of merchaundise grew to great wealth, and
became very rich. When Perdicas had won these two towns, he purposed the^
to marry being in choice of two Gentlewomen, to say, of Nice the daughter of
Antipater, Nice.
whom he had already fianced, and of Cleopatre sister to Alexander the great,
Cleopatre.
and daughter to king Phillip, son to Amint. But first he determined to allie
himself with Antipater, because his puissaunce and aucthority was not yet
thoroughly confirmed and established: and therefore fianced he his daughter. But
after he had once obtained an army royal, and princily estate, he altered his
purpose, meaning for his greater aduau^cement to espouse Cleopatre, wherein he
affected the kingdom of Macedone: to ye end the Macedonians might accept and
take him for their Lord and Sovereign. Nevertheless, because he would not
that this his practice should come to light, he in the mean while married
Nice, fearing that if he did not, Antipater would be come his utter enemy. But
after he perceived that Antigone Antigone.
friend to Antipater had smelt out and understood his determination and
practice, and being he emongs the rest of the Princes, who was both wise and
martial to enterprise any hie and notable matters, he thought therefore to
dispatch him clean out of the way. Whereupon he began to reprove him of many
false and slanderous imputacions, whereby might easily be perceived, that he
went about to bring him to his final end and destruction. But Antigone like a
wise and stout Champion dissimuled the matter, openly pronouncing that he would
answer and defend all such false and surmised accusations, wherewith he
should be charged. But contrariwise making secret preparation to fly with
Demetrie his Son, Demetrie.
his friends and household folks, enbarqued in certain ships of Athens, and
with prosperous winds sailed into Europe to join with Antipater. The same time
lay Antipater and Cratere in Camp against the Etholians with xxx. thousand
footmen, and two thousand v. hundred horse. For of all the regiments of
Soldiers which conspired against the Macedonians in the Lemian wars,
remained no more unsubdued but the said Etholians (who although they see so
huge a power invade their country) would not be daunted, but assembled about
ten thousand lusty young men, and taking with them their wives, children, and
all their goods and cattels up into the mountains and strong places,
abandoned and forsook their towns and villages indefensable, and thrust into
the rest garrisons, who right stoutly defended them against the power of the
enemy. But after Antipater and Cratere were entr^ d the Country, and found
their Cities unpeopled, they turned all their force against those which were
run up into the mountains: where the Macedonians thinking at their first
arrival to win by force and virtue, those strong and invincible places
(being well and manfully defended) were greatly discomfited and many slain.
For the Etholians being over them in the straight passages and places of
advantage, repulsed and hurt so many as came against them. Which thing
Antipater and Cratere seeing, besieged the mountains, pitched their camp, set
up Tents and Hales of wood, and there encamped all Winter. By mean whereof the
Etholians enclosed in the mountains full of snow, were through cold and want
of victuals brought into so great necessity and extremity, that either they
must descend the mountains and come to battaill against the enemy, which were
many, and especially against two valiant Chieftaynes of war, or else to dye
of cold and hunger. And being thus distressed, and thereby almost desperate,
suddenly happened them for their deliverance strange aid and succors as if
the Gods had sent it from heaven, taking pity of them and respecting their
magnanimity and noble courages. For Antigone coming out of Asie (as
aforesaid) arrived at that present before Antipater and Cratere, declaring the
enterprise of Perdicas: farther, asserteyning them, that incontinent after the
marriage of Cleopatre (which should be shortly) he would with his whole army come
down into Macedone as King, and there enjoy the Empire and dominion of the
whole country. With which news they being both astonished, assembled their
Captains to consulte and devise what were best to do: and by their advise
they concluded to take the honestest peace with the Etholians they might, and
then speedely to pass with all their army into Asie, and that Cratere should
govern and enjoy the Empire of Asie, and Antipater Europe. After to send
toward Ptolome into Egypt, desiring his help and aid, knowing him to be
their chief friend, and utter enemy to Perdicas, who with as much expedition
would practice the discomfiture of him by espiall or other martial policies,
as they the^ selves by any possible mean could or might: wherefore incontinent
they coucluded a peace with the Etholians, thinking nothing less but at last
to discomfite and transfer them with their wives and children into some
desert in Asie far enough of.

After they had put in writing and sealed the treaty and conclusion, they made
preparation about their enterprise. Again, Perdicas assembling his friends and
Captains, consulted whether it were best first to go into Macedone with his
army, or into Egypt, but they all agreed, that he should first war upon
Ptolome and discomfite him, alleging, that there was then no let or stay to
go into Macedone: whereupon he following their counsel and advise, first sent
Eumenes with a great band into Hellespont to guard the passages there: who
departed out of Piside, and went straight into Egypt. Al these matters were
exployted the year that Philocles was Provost of Athenes, and Caie Sulpete and
Gne Eley were created Consulles at Rome.

Of the transporting Alexandre his body out of Babylon into Alexandrie. The
form and fashion of the Chariot, with the Pomp and solemnity thereof.

The.xj. Chapter.
IN this mean while Aride, to whom the charge for transporting Alexandre his
body was committed, so soon as he had finished the Chariot whereon it should
be carried, and made ready all the rest of the furniture there to belonging, he
immediately took his journey. But because the excellency of the workmanship
was sumptuous and singular ageeing with the state of so honorable a personage
as Alexander, both for the infinite charge and dispense of many Talents, as
also for the singularity and excellency thereof: me think it not much from
the purpose to stay a while in describing and setting forth the manner and
order of the same.

First, a Coffin was forged and beaten out of fine gold, portured and made
according to the stature and bigness of the body, very full of sweet spices
and many other droogs aromatike, as well for sweetness as also for preserving
the body from corruption. The cover wherewith it was covered, well proporcioned
and made, fitted to the same, was a fingers thickness of gold, curiously and
artificially wrought. Over that was cast a purple cloth, curiously enbroidered,
and wrought with gold with most excellent devises, standing upright like a
brouche, whereon was hanged the armoure of the dead, to the end, that all the
whole work standing together, should represent the figure of his noble acts
and invincible courage. After that was brought out the Chariot whereon the
Coffin should be carried, covered with a tabernacle of gold, rered and set up
in manner of a vault, garnished and set within with many precious stones and
Jewels, eight cubits broad, and twelve cubits long, under the same rouffe
besides the workmanshippe thereof was a place of a state or Throne Imperial
four square, by which stood a certain kind of beasts, ye one half of them
like hearts, and the other part like goats, thrusting out their forepartes,
excellently engraven and wrought in gold, with great collers of gold about
their necks, whereat hong the scutchins of the arms of Alexander such as
customably are borne at hie solemn feasts, pictured and colored with most
rich and orient colors. In the tops of every the corners of the place of a
state was a valence finely wrought like a net, whereat hong great belles, the
noise of which were heard far of. And at every corner of the Tabernacle stood a
statue or Image of a Goddess victor, all of gold, bearing a Trophe in her
hand in token of victory. The same vaulted Tabernacle also was supported with
small pillars of gold, whose tops were enbost and enameled like the curious
Pillars of Iony. Betwixt the Pillars was a square netting of gold, whereat
hong four Tables all of a bigness, at every corner one, of egall distaunce
one from an other, wherein were graven and artificially wrought diverse
pictures.

In the first was depainted a Chariot upon which sat Alexander, holding a
Scepter in his hand, royally apparelled, guarded with a band of Macedonians all
in arms, and an other of Persians called Portpomes likewise armed, before whom
went the Esquiers for the body.

In the second table were graven the Elephants which came after the armed men,
appointed as if they should have been led to the wars with their Captains and
Governors on their backs: to say, on the side before Indians, and on the side
behind Macedonians, all apparelled and appointed as they were wont to be in the
wars.

In the third were pictured and graven the battails and troops of horsemen as
if they had been ready to fight.

In the fourth were set forth the whole Navy of ships, all apparelled and
furnished ready to give battaill. At the enter of the Tabernacle were two Lions
of gold, sitting as if they marked those which entered. Atwixt the Pillars were
certain leaves of gold, subtily wrought, which mounted by little and little up
to the tops. Above all this was cast a purple cloth like a Tent, which
covered all over the Tabernacle without, and in the top a great crown of gold
like an Olife leaf, that when the Sun cast forth his beams and shone on it,
forthwith appeared such a glistering and burning light, that so many as see it
far of thought it to be a hot burning furnace.

The place of estate or throne, which was under the tabernacle, stood upon
two Axeltrees turned with four persian wheales, having no kind of iron work
about them, but the only shoing: and for the rest, as spokes and naues, all
were of gold, wrought and made like Lions heads, biting a Dart of gold, which
served in stead of lyntpinnes to keep on the wheles. In the midst, betwixt
the two Axeltrees was a round pole fastened in the midst of the Tabernacle,
by such artificial mean, that neither it, nor the place of estate or throne
which stood upon the Chariot, being driven over Hills and Dales, ever weaued or
reled either one way or other, but continually drove upright and steadie. To
the Chariot belo^ged four draught trees, and every of them had four yokes,
and to every yoke were four great mulets yoked to draw it, so yt there were in
all lxiiij. fair and strong choice mulets, and every of them had a Crown of
gold on his head, and at either side of the chekes hong bells of gold, and
about their necks collers or wreathes of gold set with many and rich precious
stones.

In this sort was the Chariot apparelled: and because it was so sumptuous and
costly to behold, and not almost possible to be described: there came (for the
bruyt and renown thereof) men out of all Countries to see it. And when it was
brought into any City, the Citizens would be right angry if they stayed not
until they had their full sight of it. And when it went away, they would
accompany it, so that for the beauty, richness and excellency thereof, they
were never weried with the sight. For the conduct were a great number of
Pyoners appointed to plain the ways, that it might the better pass. And to
attend on it, were a great number of Soldiers richlye apparelled and armed,
appointed to follow the body.

In this pomp and glory did Aride transport Alexander his body into Egypt,
being above two years making preparation, for the appareling of the same. To
the receiving of which came Ptolome with all his Soldiers, even unto the enter
of Sirie, and did all that in him lay to honor it. But he thought it not best
that it should be carried to the Temple of Hammon, according to his own
ordinance and appointment: but rather to remain and continue in the City of
Alexandrie, whereof Alexander was founder, and one of the fairest and
renowmedst Cities in the world. And to the end his body should the more
honorably reast, Ptolome him self caused a Temple to be erected, meet for the
worthynesse of so honorable a Potentate as Alexander. Which thing done, he
there honored him with honorable and noble sacrifices as was the manner in those
days, apperteyning to so noble a Prince. By reason of which gratitude not men
alone, but the Gods also esteemed and rewarded Ptolome therefore. For men
understanding the magnanimity and bountifulness used toward his Prince and
Sovereign, came from all parts to dwell in Alexandrie, offering their service
in his wars, although they knew that the army royal which Perdicas arered,
was to fight against him, and so that both he and his estate stood thereby in
great hazard and danger. The Gods likewise seeing his bounty, his liberality
and courtesy toward his friends, delivered him from many great and dangerous
perilles, as shall be well understood by that which we will hereafter treat of.

Eumenes is in battaill overthrown and Cratere slain.

The.xij. Chapter.
WHen Perdicas see the power of Ptolome daily increase, he imagined and devised
all the mischief he could against him: wherefore he determined to bring the
greater part of the army, with all the Kings of Egypt to war upon him.
Again, he sent Eumenes into Hellespont, for to stop the passages against
Antipater and Cratere, delivering him such number of men of war, as he
thought would serve his turn, and such Captains and Leaders, as he best
liked: ^ mong whom was Alcete, Alcete.
brother to Perdicas, and Neoptolome, Neoptolome.
commanding them to obey Eumenes as well for his great conduct in martial
facts, as also for the singular trust he reposed in him. After Eumenes had
taken his charge, and passing toward Hellespont with his army, he took up
upon the way in the country of Capadoce, whereof he was Governor, a certain
number of men at arms, and thereby strengthened his power, which before
wanted. In this mean time were Antipater and Cratere come into Asie. Which
Neoptolome understanding, always hartburning Eumenes, and disdayning to serve
under him, secretly practiced to join with Antipater and bring a band of lusty
Soldiers Macedonians under his charge: practizing also and devising secret
mischief against Eumenes. But the conspiracy being manifested before execution,
he was constrained to fight against Eumenes, whereby he was in extreme danger:
for the one part of his Soldiers were slain, and the rest reconciled them to
Eumenes. Nevertheless him self with four hundred horse escaped and fled
toward Antipater and Cratere, where after long consultation they concluded
that Antipater should go against Perdicas through the country of Cilicie, and
Cratere against Eumenes. For they thought if Eumenes could be vanquished, and
that they might a new join together with Ptolome and his power whom they
looked for, they then should be well able to encountre the army royal, and
discomfite and overthrow them.

When Eumenes understood his enemies to be at hand, he mustered his men, and
arranged them in order of battaill, but chiefly his horsemen, in whom lay all
his hope of victory, because he knew right well his footmen were never able
to abide the Macedonian Phalange.

When the armies were in view one of an other, Cratere like a stout and
valiant Champion exhorted his soldiers in hearty and courageous manner, gyuing
them (if the victory lighted on their sides) the butin and spoil of the
enemies Camp, thinking thereby the more to enbolden and encourage them. After
which exhortation he also arranged his battle, placing him self in the right
wing or voward, and Neoptolome in the left wing or rereward. He had in all xx.
thousand footmen the greater number Macedonians (in whom he much trusted,
because they were all men renowned and experimented in many battails and
wars) and about two thousand horsemen. And Eumenes had of sundry Nations xx.
thousand footmen, and about v. thousand horse, with which he thought to give
the first charge: whereupon he divided his horse into two wings, and caused
them to troup before the Phalang. Cratere likewise with his horse first
encountered Eumenes, and fighting there valiauntly, was in the prease
overthrown and smothered. But after the horsemen which charged with him in the
right wing or voward, understood of his death, and seeing the enemy going about
to enclose them (notwithstanding their valiant fight) retired to their
battaill of footmen as vanquished. But Neoptolome who led ye rereward of
Cratere his army, and Eumenes which had the voward of his own, so violently
charged one an other, that the fight on either side was cruel. Then the two
Captains, which both by their horses and other signs and tokens knew one
another, encountered body to body, and with great courage, fell and angry mood,
valiauntly fought: which fight was cause of victory, for after they had a while
buskled and fought together with their swords, they forsook hold of their
bridles, and wrestled on horseback, meaning by plain force to ouerthowe one
another. But as they were thus wrestling, their horses drew back, and they
both fell to the ground, which fall was such, that neither of them (by reason of
the heaviness of their armor) could well recover their selves. Howbeit,
Eumenes first recovered his feet, and coming with his sword in his hand
toward Neoptolome, gave him such a blow, that he cut his hamme strings
clean asunder, whereby he could not arise. But his heart which supported the
imbecility of his body was such, that he recovered his knees and defending him
self manfully, wounded his enemy on the hand and on both his thighs:
notwithstanding, him self continually bled, and because the wounds he gave
Eumenes were neither deep nor deadly, Eumenes at the next encou^tre so
violently struck him on the head, that he yielded the ghost. During this affray,
the Soldiers valiauntly fought: and albeit on either side was great slaughter,
yet would they not give over until Neoptolome his death was known, and then
the horsemen gave over and retired toward their Phalange as to their guard and
place of suerty.

When Eumenes had considered that he had won honor enough in obtaining
victory, and especially that he had gotten the bodies of two his chiefest
enemies, he caused to sound the retraict. And after he had set up and garnished
his Trophe, and buried the dead, he sent certain messangers toward the
Macedonian Phalange, to exhort them to take his part, offering to as many as
were disposed, leave to depart. Who taking the appointment and league
confirmed by their oaths, prayed they might go to the next villages to provide
them of victuals: whereunto be agreed. But after they had made their provision
(falsifying their oath and promise) they in ye night stole their ways,
meaning to join with Antipater, whereof Eumenes advertised and thinking of the
perjured traitors to be revenged, incontinent pursued them. But seeing (what
for their manly and noble courages, and also for the dolor and anguishe which
he felt of his wounds) that he nothing prevailed, he immediately retired. And
thus through this great victory, but chiefly by the killing of two his
principal enemies, being both noble personages and well esteemed, he acquired
great renown and fame. From thence he marched toward Perdicas, through the
Country of Cilice, hoping in good time to come to his succoure and help.

After Perdicas has brought his Soldiers into Egypt, they slay him. And
Phiton and Aride are chosen Governors over the Kings.

The.xiij. Chapter.
WHen Perdicas was entered Egypt, something near the River of Nyle, Nyle.
he encamped before the City of Peluse, Peluse.
and there taking upon him to scour and make clean an old ditch through which
ran an arm of the River Nyle, he impaired and lost all which before he had
done, for the river ran then with so fierce and vehement a course, that it
carried away and ouerflowed all: wherefore many of his Soldiers rendered to
Ptolome: for Perdicas in the end became so detestable in pride, and beastly
cruelty, yt he put his Captains from all government and would by force and
viole^ ne over rule al. But Ptolome did otherwise, for he was courteous and
liberal to his Captains, and would gladly hear them whenever they spoke:
and besides, he provided for the meet and necessary places of Egypt, and
furnished them with men, armoure, weapon, and all other things needful for
the defense of the Country. Wherefore, whatsoever adventures he took in hand,
either in battaill or else, he commonly had the better, because his Soldiers
loved him so dearly, that they would hasard them selves in any danger to do
him pleasure and service. When Perdicas see this eminent mischief, meaning to
get again the good wills of his Captains clearly lost, and to put things in
better order, that were disordered: he by the sound of the Trumpet assembled
his Captains and Soldiers, making a long protestation, wherein (with courteous
and gentle words) he exhorted them, and when he had by gifts won some, and
other with large promises, thinking that he had then brought them again to a
good conformity to serve him, and to attempt any danger he would lead them to
for his cause: he commanded them that they should by the first watch be in a
readiness to march forward, not declaring to any whether he would: and
continuing their journey all night with great speed, about the day break,
they enca^ped by Nyle, near a town and Castle called the Wall of the Camels,
The Wall of the Camelles.
and besieged it. But after a days continuance there, he began to set over
his army. And first, he put over his Elephantes, next to them, his footmen
which carried the terges and scaling ladders, and all the rest which were
appointed for the assault of the town. After them he placed his best men at
arms which should encountre Ptolome if at any time he issued out into the
fields. And as they were passing and about the midst of the river, they
escried on the other side the enemy, whom Ptolome with great speed ^ hrust
into the town for the defense thereof. And although they were first entered the
town, which they well understood both by their noise, and sound of Tru^ppets,
it nothing daunted the courages of Perdicas Soldiers, but that they stoutely
approached the walls, and addressed them to the scaling thereof, and they which
led the Elephaunts threw down the trenches and battred and spoiled the
batlements of the Curtennes: which thing Ptolome seeing, and minding to
encourage his Captains and Soldiers (whereof were many both famous and
valiant) encountered them even upon the uttermost rampare at the push of the
Pyke, and fighting in a place of advantage, put out the eyes of the foremost
Elephant, and sore wounded his ruler an Indian. This done, he with great
despite and mighty blows, charged the scalants, and tu^bled them from the
ladders into ye river which ran alongest the side of the Town. Then his
friends and compaignions in arms purposing some notable exploit, with shot so
charged the other Elephant which followed the first, that they slew his
governor, whereby he could do nothing. Notwithstanding all this, Perdicas
Soldiers continued the assault and forced to enter: when Ptolome see yt he then
bare him self twice so bold and stout, and to give good example of well doings
to all his friends, he in his own person exploited notable deeds of arms:
whereby many worthy me^ (through ye noble courages of their Captains) with
aduenturing lost both life and limme. And because Ptolome had the place of
aduau^tage, and the enemy the greater nu^bre, the assault on either side
continued long and dangerous, until at last Perdicas seeing he could by no
mean win it, and that night drew on, he retired into his Camp, and
immediately without noise, privily removed and came to a place right over
against the City of Memphis, where the River Nyle makes a particion like unto
an Isle, and an excellent good and meet place to encamp a great and mighty
army. Into this put he over his army, being hard for the Soldiers to pass,
because they waded up to their chinnes, and through the violence and swiftness
thereof so staggered, that with great pain they hardly passed. When Perdicas
had seen the dangerous and difficult passage, he sent his Elephantes on the
left side up into the River to break the violence of the stream, and beneath
on the right hand, placed his horsemen to take up them whom the violence of
the water did carry away, and so bring them to land. In this passage chanced a
singular thing, and greatly to be marvelled at. A thing to be marvelled at.
For after the first company had safely passed over, the rest which followed,
were in wonderful danger, because the River suddenly swelled and became so
deep, that none could perceive by any apparaunt reason whereof it should come,
for it ran above the Soldiers heads. And being enquired and reasoned of what
might be the cause, answer was made, that there was some low or hollow
place about the arm of the River stopped up, by mean whereof the waters
goulfed, and thereupon proceeded the swelling and waxing: some said it had
rayned about the head or spring of the River, and that that might be the cause.
But after, it was found to be neither the one nor the other, for they which
went over first, so raised and removed the sand and gravel which lay in the
bottom of the water, that the violence and swiftenesse thereof carried it away:
and so by that mean became deeper, and chiefly in the channel. When Perdicas
see that his soldiers already over, were not able to resist Ptolome, nor him
self able to make any shift to set over ye rest, he was in such a perplexity,
that he commanded them that were over to return. So the mighty and strong men
and such as could swim, came hardly back again, leaving behind them
(notwithstanding) their armor, other which had no skill in swimming, were with
the water swallowed up, and a great many violently carried down with the
stream, were eaten and devoured of the Crocodiles: the rest which durst not
give the adventure, yielded to the enemy, who spoiled and robbed them of all
they had. When Perdicas in this sort had lost better than two thousand of his
men, amongs whom were a great many good Captains, the biggest nu^bre of the
army found them sore agreeued with him. Contrariwise, when Ptolome had burnt
the dead carcases which were cast on land on his side, he sent their bones to
their kinsfolks and friends. When the Macedonians with Perdicas understood
that, they were then more offended with Perdicas^ than before, and inclined to
the good nature and conditions of Ptolome. But at night, all the whole Camp was
filled with sorrows, complaints, lamentations, and weepings: because they had
lost through evil conduct and want of good guyding (without fight) such a
number of their friends: of which the better part of a thousand were eaten and
devoured with Crocodils: whereupon diverse of the Captains (for ye causes
above rehearsed) assembled, openly blaming Perdicas. Again, ye battle of
footeme^ with threatening words showed their malice and grudge against him. For
that very cause also the principal Captains assembled, amongs whom Pithon
was chief, the same Pithon who at the commandment of Perdicas, had in the
hier Asie discomfited the Grecian rebels, and for his nobleness and virtue
nothing inferior to any of Alexanders friends and familiars. Whereupon they all
with one accord, having at their commandment certain of the men at arms,
forcibly and violently rushed upon the pauillon of Perdicas, and there
incontinent slew him.

The next day following Ptolome came toward the Macedonians, and after he had
saluted them and excused him of all such matters as Perdicas would have
charged him withal, he caused to be brought such abundaunce of bread, wine and
diverse other necessary things, as furnished and fillede their Camp: whereby
he acquired so great favor and good will of the whole army, that they would
needs in Perdicas stead, make him governor and regent of the Kings: which
charge he clearly refused, but made means, that that government with the
whole power and aucthority thereof (by the advice and deliberation of the whole
counsel) might be bestowed upon Pithon and Aride, the same Aride who
transported the body of Alexander in to the City of Alexandrie. Thus and in
this manner did Perdicas (after he he had ruled and governed the principality
the space of.iij. years) lose both Empire and li^ e.

After Perdicas his death, the Macedonians slay all his kynne and friends in
the army, and adiudge Attale and Alcete, with their Abettors and friends,
enemies and rebels. Of Attale his retire into the City of Tyre^ and
consequently how he afresh assembleth all Perdicas escaped friends.

The.xiiij. Chapter.
INcontinent after the death of Perdicas, news were brought that Eumenes had
overthrown and slain Cratere and Neoptolome in Cappodoce: which news if they
had come and ben known before Perdicas death, there was not one amongs them
(understanding the prosperous success of victory done in his favor and
behalf) that once durst have laid hands on him. But after he was dead, the
Macedonians (for the deeds aforesaid) adjudged Eumenes an enemy and condemned
man, and L. great personages with him, amongs whom was Alcete Perdicas his
brother. They slew also all Perdicas chief and principal friends, and his
own sister Athalante, Attale his wife, then Admiral, and abiding at Peluse.
But after he understood of Perdicas death and his wife, he immediately loused
thence, and with all the furniture of his Navy, sailed unto the City of Tire,
whom Archelay the Macedonian, Captain of the Castle there, gently received
and entreated, and rendered to him the town and all the treasure which Perdicas
had delivered him to keep, amounting to the sum of viij. C. Talents. Then
Attale abiding still at Tire, assembled and brought together all Perdicas
friends, which diverse ways had escaped from the discomfiture and overthrow
given before the City of Memphis.

The Etholians to put Antipater from his enterprise, enter Thessalie, who are
constrained by the Acarnanians to return into their country: and in what
sort Polisperco^ conquereth the country of Thessalie.

The.xv. Chapter.
WHat time Antipater was come into Asie, the Etholians who had leagued with
Perdicas warred on Thessaly, to the end to put Antipater from his enterprise:
and thereupon they mustered and got together.xij. thousand footmen and.iiij.
thousand horse, and appointed Alexander the Etholian their General. But as
they marched on the way, they besieged the Locrians, and spoiled and fouraged
their territories, and took certain of their smallest towns. They discomfited
also in battaill Policles one of Antipaters Captains, and slew a number of
their soldiers, and of those prisoners which they took, they ransomed some,
and sold the rest. But after they were entered Thessaly, they persuaded many of
the people of the country to join with the^ against Antipater in ye war, so
that in short time they had levied about.xxv. thousand footmen and viij.
thousand horse. When the Acarnanians (enemies to the Etholians) apperceyued
that the other Cities joined and took part with them, they entered their
Country, wasted and spoiled their fields, and besieged certain of their
towns, whereof the Etholians advertised, appointed and ordained Memnon of
Pharsale their Captain and general in Thessaly, Memnon.
and they them selves speedily returned home, at whose coming the Acarnanians
trembled and feared, and by that mean their country was delivered from
danger and spoil. While these matters were in deciding, Polyspercon Governor
of the realm of Macedone, entered Thessaly with an army royal well appointed,
and overthrew his enemies in battaill, and slew Memnon their chieftayne with
many other, and thereby recovered the whole Country of Thessaly.

Antipater being constituted Governor of the Kings, a new deuideth the
Satrapies.

The.xvj. Chapter.
THen departed Python and Aride, protectours of the Kings, with their army from
the River of Nile, and went to Triparadice in the hier Siry. Triparadis.
And after they were thither come and apperceyued that Queen Euridice had
taken upon her greater care and charge about the affairs of the realm, than
was meet or requisite that she should, and that she was clearly against all
things that the Governors meant to do, and that they had no obedience of the
army, they assembled all the Macedonians: And after they had declared unto them
their minds and purposes, they discharged them selves of their government and
aucthority. Then the Macedonians fully and wholly, those Antipater governor of
the kings. Howbeit Antipater was no sooner come to Triparadice, but yt he found
Queen Euridice, practizing and suborning the me^ of war against him.
Nevertheless, although they were as then very mutinous, yet assembled he them,
and with fair and gracious words so wanne their good wills, that be appaysed
that mutiny, and put Euridice in such fear, that she desisted from all
mutinies and practizes, and became most quiet. This done, he a new divided the
Satrapies, and gouernements of the Provinces.

And first he leaft to Ptolome the regio^ of Egypt, which he already possessed,
and the reason was, because he knew not well how to put him besides it,
forsomuche as Ptolome thought that that which he had, he had gotten and held it
by his own strength. To Laomedon of Mythilene, he gave the country of Syrie:
To Philoxene, Cilice: And for the other Sapatries in the hie countries, he
bestowed on Amphimacke, Mesopotamie and Arbelite: To Seleucke, he gave Babylon:
To Antigone, Fusiane: because he was the first that assailed Perdicas: To
Pencete, Perside: To Neoptolome, Carnanie: To Phillip, Parthe: To Scasandre,
Cyprian, Arie and Draucine: To Stasanor, Soliene, Bactriane and Sogdiane: To
Oxiarte, the father of Roxa^ne, wife to Alexander, he gave the Paropanisades.
And that part of Inde which joined on the Paropanisades, he gave to Python the
son of Agenor. And the realms thereto adjoining he gave to the Kings which
before enjoyed them, to say, those next the river Inde, to Pore: and those
about the river Hidaspe to Taxille: because he was not able to expulse them
without sending an army royal and the most of his chief and noble Captains.
But touching the Provinces toward the North: To Nicanor he gave Capadoce: To
Antigone, Licie which he before occupied: To Cassander, Carry: To Clyte, Helie:
To Aride, the part of Phryge joining upon Hellespont. He farther constituted
Antigone Marshall or chief ruler of the army, commanding him to war upon
Eumenes and Alcete. Nevertheless he joined with him as a compaignion in the
said charge, Cassander his own son, Captain of a cohort of a thousand men,
to the end Antigone should enterprise nothing to his own particularity, but
that Antipater would be advertised thereof. These things finished, he departed
with the army royal to conduct the Kings into Macedone, their chief seat and
habitation.

Antigone vanquisheth Eumenes and besieges the City of Nore.

The.xvij. Chapter.
WHen Antigone (as aforesaid) was nominated and appointed general to go into
Asie against Eumenes, and had gotten together his men of war which lay in
garrison, to winter, and made ready al things necessary for war, he took
his journey against Eumenes abiding in Cappadoce. It fortuned that season that
Perdicas, one of Eumenes Captains, rebelled and led away.iij. thousand
footmen and.v. hundred horse, with whom he had encamped and enpalled in a
strong place three days iourneis from him. Wherefore Eumenes sent against him
an other of his Captains named Tenede a Phenician, to whom he delivered four
thousand footmen of the best and most trained Soldiers he had, and two
thousand horse: who with such diligence sped him, that suddenly about midnight,
when they were all at rest and a sleep, he stole upon the said rebels, and
took Perdicas and brought him back to Eumenes, together the men of war with
him, who according to the quality of the offense, punished the chief and
principal procurers of that conspiracy, and divided the rest by their bands,
reconciling them with gifts and fair promises.

In this mean time had Antigone secretly sent to Apollonide general of
Eumenes, horse to betraie him, whom at last through large promises he
corrupted, promising yt whenever they came to battaill, he would retier to
Antigone and revolt from Eumenes. It happened that Eumenes encamped in the
midst of a large and great plain of Cappadoce, because he would be the
better aided and succored with his horse. And Antigone encamped at the foot
of the hill joining upon the said plain. Now had Antigone in his host,
about ten thousand footeme^ the better half Macedonians, notable and valiant
Soldiers, and in martial factes greatly experimented, two thousand horse, and
thirty Elephauntes. But Eumenes had not many less than twenty thousand
footmen, and as many horsemen. Anon, they joined battaill, and whiles they
were in the chief fight, Apollonide with his horse revolted and turned to
Antigone, who then wanne the victory, so that there were slain on Eumenes
part, about eight thousand Soldiers, besides the rifling and spoiling of the
Camp, which was very rich. Whereupon Eumenes his Soldiers that did escape,
seeing (besides the loss of the field, their friends and compaignions) that
they had also lost their goods, they became very desperate and out of heart.

When Eumenes see his Soldiers in this disorder, he determined to fly toward
Armenie, trusting to get certain Soldiers there which would take his part and
help him. Again, seeing the enemy sore distress him, and the greater number
of his Soldiers yield to Antigone, he retired into a little strong Town called
Nore, Nore.
situate on a rock, and not above two furlongs compass. But by reason of the
strength of the seat, and the fortification and strong buylding thereof, it was
of marvelous strength and force, and had been of long furnished with all things
necessary to abide a siege.

Into the same Town retired Eumenes with five hundred Soldiers, which dearly
loved him, all determined to spill their bloods in his service. When Antigone
see his power wax strong, by reason of Eumenes Soldiers, which daily
repaired to him, and that he had won his Countries, and exacted on them great
stoare of money, he reuolued in his mind many notable and worthy enterprises,
seeing right well that none of the Satrapies nor Captains of Asie, were able
to contend against him for the Principality. Notwithstanding, he all that while
dissimuled the matter until he had well assured all his affairs with
Antipater whom he served and obeyed: but his meaning was, that after he had
taken order and gone through with that business according to his promise and
allegiance, then neither to be subject to him or the Kings. But first he
besieged Eumenes and his people within the town of Nore, and environed it with
a double wall, great ditches and deep trenches. After that he parled with
Eumenes, to whom he began to recompt the old acquaintance and great amity
between them of long had: persuading him to join with him in all his affairs
and business. But Eumenes (allthough he see the sudden changing and
alteration of his fortune) demanded greater and larger requests than the
danger or necessity of the place required or deserved. For first he asked
pardon of all he had perpetrated and done: again he would that those Satrapies
which he before held and enjoyed, should be restored unto him. Whom Antigone
answered, that he would advertise Antipater of those his demaundes. But after
he see he could not win him to be of his faction, he left behind him at the
siege such a number of Soldiers as he thought would suffice, and him self went
against Alcete and Attale. During which time Eumenes sent his Ambassadoures to
Antipater, among whom Jerome (who writ ye histories of the successors of
Alexander) was chiefest. Jerome the Historian.
And although Eumenes see him self in this misery and so distressed: yet
would not his heart yield, for he had experime^ted so many chaunges of fortune,
that still he hoped out of hand to see an other change to his great
advancement and honor. For he considered that ye Kings had no more but the
title and name only, and ye many noble and mighty Princes which there governed,
always considered and regarded their private and singular honor and estate
royal, for the usurpation of the whole regiment and principality. Wherefore
he thought (and he was therein not deceived) that many of those Princes should
have great need of him, because he was not only a man of great wisdom and
virtue, and notably experimented in martial policies, but also faithful and
constant. And as he thus lay attending the occasion and opportunity of time,
and seeing he could not exercise his horses by reason of ye straightness of
the place, he bethought him of a new kind and fashion of exercise, to the end
they should not be vnbreathed with still lying. First, he caused their
forepartes to be tied up with iron chains so hye, that the horses (do what
they could) were not able to touch the planks with the tippe of their houes
before, whereupon they striving to set their fore feet on the planchers,
as well as their hindre feet, labored so sore, that they were dryue^ into a
watery sweat, by which devise they were always in breath, able to trauail, and
yet never come out of the stable. He also made such division of his victuals
amongs the Soldiers, that every man had as great portion as him self, or
rather a greater, so that he still wanne their good wills and favor. In this
estate were Eumenes and his men.

Of the conquest which Ptolome makes on the countries of Phenice and Celosirie.

The.xviij. Chapter.
BUt to return to Ptolome, after he had dispatched him of Perdicas, and driven
out of Egypt the army royal, he held and enjoyed that country as his own,
and as if he had won and got yt by conquest. And considering that the
Province of Phenice, and that part of Sirie called Celosirie were hard
adjoining to Egypt, he took upon him to conquer them: whereupon he sent out
one of his chief friends and Captains named Nicanor, Nicanor.
with a sufficient army into Sirie, who took in battaill Laomedon, Laomedon.
Governor thereof, and brought under Ptolome his subjection all Siry. From
thence marched be into Phenice, and did the like, and furnished the Cities with
garrisons and soon after returned into Egypt, when he had in short time
performed his enterprise and voyage.

Antigone enterpriseth wars against Alcete and Attale, and discomfiteth them.

The.xix. Chapter.
THe same year that Apollodore governed Athenes, and Quinte Pompile and Quinte
Publie were created Consulles at Rome, soon after ^ hat Antigone had
vanquished Eumenes, he began to war upon Alcete and Attale, whom Perdicas
(in his life) amongs all the Chieftaynes and Captains in his army most
honored and esteemed: each of them having an army Ryall, able so make war
and fight for the principality and government. And first he marched with his
army into Piside, where Alcete, Attale, and their Soldiers were res^ a^ nt:
and contending to come thither with speed, he with his army in seven days
had traveled two thousand five hundred Furlongs, and gotten to the City of
Crete, where (through his expedition) he took and furnished certain straight
passages and mountains near adjoining, before Alcete knew it. But as soon as
Alcete and Attale knew and understood thereof, they arranged their battaill of
footmen, and with their horse charged those which had won the hye passages,
thinking to repulse them. Whereupon the skirmish waxing very boat and cruel,
with marvelous great slaughter on either side, Antigone with six thousand
horse, violently and with great force, spedde him against the Phalange of the ^
nimy, thinking to enterclude Alcete from his footmen. Which done, they in the
mountains (by reason of their great number and difficulty of the places)
clearly repulsed Alcete. But in the retier, when Alcete see they were cut of
from their footmen, and encompassed with the multitude of enemies, he then
looked for none other but present death. And although the matter stood upon
this tickle and dangerous point, yet at last with the loss of many Soldiers,
he got and recovered to the battaill of footmen. Howbeit Antigone with his
mighty Elephauntes and army marching against them in order of battaill, greatly
amazed them, being far the weaker. For Alcete had not in all the world
above.xvj. thousand footmen and nine hundred horsemen, and Antigone over and
besides his Elephants, had above forty thousand footmen and eight thousand
horsemen. Wherefore when the Phalange of Alcete see the Elephants march
toward them in the front or voward, and the horse by reason of the great
number enuiron them, and that the footmen in a maine battaill marched also
against them, being the greater number and valiaunter Soldiers, they were
therewith greatly astonned, and the rather because of the place of advantage
which the enemy had won, and the thing done upon such a sudden, that their
Captains and Leaders had no leisure to arrange their battaill. Wherefore they
fled, in which flight were taken Attale, Docine, Poley, and many other noble
and valiant Captains. But Alcete with his Esquiers and familiars together the
Pisides which he waged, fled into a City of Piside named Thormese. Thormese.
When Antigone had won this victory, he pardoned and forgave all Alcete his
men of war which were left, and divided them amongs his bands.

But the Pisides which escaped with Alcete to the number of six thousand,
prayed him not to be discouraged nor dismayed, promising him that they would
live and dye with him. For they all which were with him, singularly well loved
him, because that he after Perdicas his death, having no trusty Companions or
allies in all the Country of Asie, determined by gifts and courtesy to draw
the Pisides to his friendship, thinking thereby to get a warlike nation to be
at his commandment, and a country very strong and hard to be entered, being
full of many invincible castles and fortes. For this cause in all his wars
honored he them more than the rest: and of every spoil and butin which he got
of any enemies, the moetie he gave to them. He was very familiar amongs them,
daily inuiting of the chief and principal to dynner or supper, sometime one,
other while an other: rewarding them also particularly with diverse and many
gifts, as those in whose friendship and alliance he reposed his final trust
and confidence: wherein he was nothing at all deceived, as then appeared. For
as Antigone with his whole power encamped before the town, and demanded
nothing else but Alcete, notwithstanding that the ancient Burgesses of the
City were of one determinate mind to deliver him, yet the lusty young
gallaunts and Soldiers, against the wills and minds of their own fathers,
concluded and agreed rather than to render so noble and worthy a man of war,
to abide and sustain all mischiefs and dangers whatsoever. But when the
ancient Burgesses see that neither counsel, or reason, could persuade to the
contrary, they practiced an other devise. Wherefore they secretly in the night
advertised Antigone by their intelligencers, that they would deliver Alcete
alive or dead. For accomplishing whereof they willed him after a while to
approach the town and make some skirmishes and false Alarmes, and suddenly to
retier as though they fled, which would be a mean to cause all the lusty
young Gallaunts and Soldiers to sally out upon them, so yt they being in the
skirmishe busied, the rest within would assault Alcete, being disfurnished of
his said companions, and with ease take him. Which thing according to their
demand and request, Antigone performed. For while the young and lusty Soldiers
were salied out of the town to skyrmish and chase the enemy: the old men with
their sclaues and other lusty fellows (no me^ of war) assailed Alcete in
his lodging: but alive they could not get him. For he seeing the present
danger wherein he was, killed him self, rather than he would be rendered alive to
the enemy. Notwithstanding, they laid him dead on a bear covered over with a
most vile robe, and so carried him through the gates of the town to Antigone,
before the young bloods in the skirmish knew of it. By this mean ye ancient
Citizens saved their City from desolation and spoil. But after the Soldiers
understood thereof, they (for the great love they bare him) were so agreeued
and angry, that they kept one part of the town and held a counsel, wherein
they first concluded and agreed to set fire on the town, and after to get
them out in arms to pille and destroy Antigone his countries hard adjoining
to the foot of the Mountains. Howbeit, after they took better advise than to
burn the town, but got them out in arms wasting and spoiling the greatest
part of the plain country of the enemy. After Antigone had gotten Alcete his
body, he did him all the opprobries he knew or could devise, and in the end
of three days after, it began to corrupt, he threw it into the fields without
burial, and so departed from Piside. Howbeit, the lusty young Gallaunts of
Thormese took him up and honorably enterred the dead. Whereby may be
apperceyued that the courtesy and pleasure which men do one to an other,
engenders in them which receive it, an indissoluble bond of love and amity.

After the death of Antipater, Polispercon is ordained governor of the Kings,
and Cassander enterpriseth to expulse him the government.

The.xx. Chapter.
WHat time Antigone departed from Piside, he with his army trauailled into
Phrigie. And as he lay to repose him in the City of Crete, there came to him
Aristodeme the Milesian, Aristodeme.
aduertising him of the death of Antipater, and farther declaring that the
Empire and government of the Kings was given to Polispercon the Macedonian. Of
which news Antigone was right joyous, determining now to establishe him self
Lord and Seigniour of al Asie. But for a while we will omit speaking of him,
and make report of al things which were done in Asie.

It happened at that season, that Antipater fell into a grievous disease, and
in deed waxed so sick, that (by reason of his great age) all men thought it
impossible for him to escape the danger: wherefore the Athenians thinking
Demades Demades.
the notable Orator a meet and necessary man for such a charge, sent him in an
Ambassade to Antipater, to require him that he (according to his former
promise) should call home his garrisons from the town of Munichie. Munychie.
And although Antipater had before time very well loved Demades,
notwithstanding after ye death of Perdicas, such letters were found in Demades
his chest, written with his own hand to the Kings, in which he exhorted
Perdicas to pass into Europe against Antipater, that Antipater was maruelously
despited therewith. Nevertheless, he dissimuled his grudge and anger. But
Demades with arrogant language and threatening words so still pursued and delared
his Ambassade, that Antipater without answer caused him and his son joint
Ambassadors in the same Ambassade to be apprehended, and forthwith committed
them to the rulers and governors, who immediately sent them to prison, and
after put them to death. Not long after when Antipater perceived he could not
escape death, he nominated and appointed Polispercon governor of the Kings,
Polispercon.
and chief of all the whole power, because he was ye auncientest Chie ^ ayne
that had served with Alexander, and of all the Macedonians had in great honor.
He ordained also Cassander his son Chiliarque or Captayn of a thousand men,
and next in authority. Cassander.
The same order of Chiliarque was first erected by the Kings of Persie, and
after continued and maintained by Alexander, and therefore did Antipater long
before he dyed, give the said office to Cassander his son when he was yet
very young. Nevertheless, after the death of his father, he liked not his
constitution and ordinance, but thought he had done him great injury and
wrong to prefer Polispercon to the Empire before him self being his child,
and not of so near alliance as he, knowing also that he was both able and
sufficient to govern the Realm: as by experience enough both of his
valiantness and wisdom he had before seen and well appeared. Wherefore
ryding abroad in the country with certain his friends, he devised with them at
his leisure touching the Empire and government, and seducing every of them,
moved them to take his part and aid him with their power, for the attayning
of the principality, promising them in their so doing, large and honorable
reward. He sent also his Ambassadoures to Ptolome, to renew and confirm the
old amity and friendship lately had between him and his father Antipater,
praying his aid also in the same war, and to send him out of hand his Navy
from Phenice into Hellespont. He likewise sent messangers to other nobles,
Captains, and cities, to be confederate with him in the same matter. And
during the time of this practice, to put him self out of suspicion of this
conspiracy and treason, he made semblaunt as though he cared for none other
thing but hunting, and such like disports. In this mean while Polispercon
Governor of the Kings, by the advice and cousaill of his friends, sent to
Olympias Alexander his mother, praying her to repair into Macedone, and to
take upon her the government of young Alexander her sons son. For Olympias by
reason of ye discord and enmity between her and Antipater, had long before
gotten into Epire, and there continued. In this state stood ye affairs of
Macedon.

Antigone understanding of Antipater his death, takes upon him the government
of the Empire of Asie, and sends to Eumenes desiering his return.

The.xxj. Chapter.
AFter it was diuulged in Asie that Antipater was dead, the people began to
study and muse of strange and new devises, and chiefly such as governed
under him were in doubt what to do. But amongs others^ when Antigone was
nominated and proclaimed Emperor of Asie, and had greatly increased the oath
delivered him by Antipater, through the subduing of Eumenes, Alcete and Attale,
he became after so many victories so proud and arrogant, that he persuaded him
self with ease to enjoy the government over all the rest, and not to be
subject to the Governors. He again thought (considering his power which was
at least.lx. thousand footmen, ten thousand horse, and thirty Elephaunts)
he might rear of all the treasure in Asie, for that there was none able to
resist him, and hoped for his money to levy in Asie a number of hiered soldiers
to augment his army. And dwelling in these ymaginations and devises, he sent
for Jerome the Historian, a friend and familiar of Eumenes Cardian, who lay
besieged in ye town of Nore aforesaid, whom he with large promises sent
toward Eumenes to persuade him to forget the battaill and conflict betwixt
them in Cappadoce, and to join with him as his allie and companion, which if
he would do, he promised honorably to reward him, and to bestow on him
greater Satrapies and dominions than ever before he had, and to hold him as his
most dear friend, and never to enterprise or do any thing, but that he should
be privy of. After Antigone had thus done he assembled his friends, declaring
to them his meaning and purpose, and entered them in a book, in which he made
to some a division of certain Satrapies, and gave to other the charge and
leading of Soldiers, so that in deed they all greatly hoped to be both
honorable and rich, and were thereby in all his attemptes and services the
rather encouraged to serve him. For he determined wholly to subdue and conquer
Asie, and to expulse all the Satrapies, and in their steades to place his
familier and trusty friends.

Aride is repulsed from the siege of the City of Cizice.

The.xxij. Chapter.
AS Antigone was thus occupied, Aride governor of Phrigie about Hellespont
(doubting the enterprise of Antigone) determined to fortify and furnish his
principal Cities and towns. And because the City of Cizice was very strong
and meet for the wars, he incontinent went thither, accompanied with.x.
thousand Mercenaries, a thousand Macedonians, five hundred Persian shot, and
viij. hundred horse. He was farther well provided and furnished of all manner of
weapon both great and small, engines also to shoot great stoanes, and pieces
of wood, and all other things meet and necessary to maintain a siege. So he
suddenly came upon them, and on the way he took up a great number of the
Citizens which were dispersed abroad in the country: and after besieged the
town, and would needs enforce the silly besiegeaunts to receive and take in
his garrisons. And although they were unprovided of men and all other things
necessary to hold out the enemy, yet determined they to defend their
liberty. Notwithstanding they sent first their Ambassadoures to Aride, praying
him to raise his siege, saying they were all at his commandment to do
whatsoever he would, except the receiving of men into garrison. But in the
mean time they secretly armed all their young and lusty fellows to man the
wall and curten. And when they see Aride still urge them to receive his
garrisons: they answered, they would comprimit the matter to the deliberation
of the co^munaltie, and for dispatch thereof demanded truce for the next day
and night following, which was granted: and in the mean while made they
greater preparation for their defense. When Aride see he was thus deceived and
mocked, he lost both opportunity and hope for winning the City, because it was
very strong, both toward the Sea and land, standing almost like an Island
within the Sea, and but one way to enter by land, and that part toward the
Sea very strong, because Aride had there no ships. They sent also by Sea to the
Bizancians for men, armoure, and all other things necessary to hold out the
siege, which they incontinent sent, whereupon they were greatly assured, and
took marvelous courage to defend their City. Farther, they sent out their
galleys alongest the shore to gather together their people which were
dispersed in the country, and in the end they had assembled so great a number
of men of war, that they sallied out upon the enemy, slew many, and repulsed
the rest from the siege. Wherefore Aride (deceived by policy) returned into
his Satrapie without any exploite.

Antigone commenceth war against Aride, governor of Phrigie, and against
Clyte, Lord of Lydie. And in the end openly proclaymeth him self enemy to
the Kings, and enjoys one part of Asie.

The.xxiij. Chapter.
^^ lene.
AS Antigone abode in the City of Celene, he was advertised of the siege of
Cizice, wherefore he thought (if he sent toward them speedy aid and succoure
in their distress) that it would be a good occasion for him, to win the
said City to be his friend and confederat. For which cause he chose out of the
whole army.xx. thousand of his most warlike Soldiers, and.iij. thousand
horse, and in his own person speedely marched to aid the Cizicians: And
although the siege was raised before his coming, yet ever after they became
and remained his most bounden friends. Notwithstanding, he sent his
Ambassadors toward Aride, declaring to him that he had done very ill to
besiege a free City of Greece, and friend to the Macedonians: considering the
people thereof had in nothing abused him, and that he had showed enough to make
him self of a Deputy and Governor a Potentate and commander, commanding
him therefore to give over his said Satrapie, and for his habitation to betake
him to one only City. When Aride understood the charge of the Ambassadors,
he greatly detesting the arrogancy of Antigone, answered, that he was not as
yet determined to leave his Satrapie, but to keep and defend it: and if
Antigone would come to expulse him, he should then see whether of them had the
better right. After the Ambassadors had received this answer and were
departed, he soon after fortified and furnished his Cities and towns. He also
sent to Nore a band of Soldiers, to Eumenes under the leading of one of his
own Captains, thinking thereby to win his favor and be his confederate.
When Antigone had received answer from Aride, he sent one half of his army
against him, and him self with the rest, travailed into Lydie to chase out
Clyte Governor thereof. But so soon as Clyte understood the cause, he
garrisoned his Cities, and made as good provision against him as he could. That
done, he immediately went to Sea, and transfreted into Macedone, signifying to
the Kings, the boldness of Antigone, and said that he went about to advance
him self to some high and honorable estate, and to rebel against them:
praying therefore aid for the repressing of him.

In the mean time Antigone by the intelligence of certain citisens, took at
his first coming the City of Ephese. But after he understood that Eschil the
Rhodian was there arrived, Eschilus.
and would for the behoue of the Kings carry out of Cilice into Macedon, in
four ships, six hundred Talents: he intercepted them and took it away,
saying that he had great need thereof for the wageing of his mercenaries: which
deed imported that he meant to establishe him self some great Prince and to
war upon the kings. When he had this done, he went against the other Cities
of Asie, and by violence and practice brought many under his subjection.

Of diverse adventures which happened Eumenes, and of his deliverance from the
siege of Nore.

The.xxiiij. Chapter.
WE will here leave a while to speak of Antigone, and return to Eumenes, who
(besides many and diverse mishaps) had also ben in sundry adventures, both
good and bad: for after the death of Alexander, he still took part with
Perdicas, who gave him the Satrapie of Cappadoce and the countries thereto
adjoining, in which he had assembled and got together numbres of men of war
and great sums of money, getting thereby great renoume, always living in
prosperity and felicity. He in battle vanquished and killed Cratere and
Neoptolome: two of the most renowned Captains amongst all the Macedonians, and
all the Soldiers which served under them, which had been continual victors
where ever they became. But when he thought him self most puyssaunt, and none
able to resist him, he was by Antigone in battaill suddenly vanquished and
constrained to fly and retier with a few of his friends into a little town
and castle: where being besieged and enclosed with a double trenche, could not
in one whole year be aided to raise the siege. Howbeit, about the years end,
when he was almost out of hope and in despair, suddenly came unto him present
remedy: For Antigone (who still held him besieged, having altered his
determination and purpose, sent to him, requiring his friendship and company:
and after he had taken his oath and faith, he delivered him of the siege. Who
departing thence, travailed into Cappadoce: and being there but a short time,
assembled the Soldiers lately under his charge dispersed through the said
country: and by reason of the earnest zeal and love they had to him, he had
gotten together in a little while, a great number at his commandment. For
over and besides the six hundred which were with him during the siege, he had
gotten above two thousand other soldiers, and in the end came to great
authority: for he was made General of the army Royal, to war upon those
which rebelled against the Kings, as hereafter shall be declared. But at this
present we mean to leave speaking of the matter in Asie, and make mention of
those which happened in Europe.

Cassander shows him self enemy to Polispercon, and gets to his
alliance many of the Satrapes. Polispercon by an edict royal restores the
Cities of Greece into their ancient liberty.

The.xxv. Chapter.
When Cassander (of whom we have before spoken) of him self put from the
Empire and government of Macedone, kept not his desire longer undiscovered,
but purposed by violence to obtain and recover ye said government: thinking
it a great dishonor to suffer any other than him self, to have the rule and
authority which his father held and enjoyed. But apperceyuing yt the
Macedonians in general were prompt and ready at Polispercon his commandment,
and took his part, he secretly began to discover his intention to his
trusty friends, and under a color made them go toward Hellespont occupying
him self many days in the country in chasing and hunting, to the end his
people should believe and think that he forced not of any hie enterprises or
princely government. But after he had dispatched and put al things in a
readiness, he secretly departed and went toward Hellespont, sending forthwith
to Antigone, praying his aid, and aduertising him yt Ptolome had promised the
like. Whereunto Antigone accorded, and promised to send out of hand both
Soldiers and ships. This friendship fained he to do, for the great love he
had always borne to Antipater his father, but truth is, he meant none other
thing but to trouble Polispercon in his wars and affairs: to the end that
while those matters were in deciding, he might seize on the whole country of
Asie: and after attain to the Empire of Macedone.

When Polispercon had seen the sudden departure of Cassander, he knew he
meant to work him great trouble and mischief: wherefore he did nothing without
great advise of his friends and the chief of Macedone, declaring unto them,
that he clearly see ye Antigone would aid Cassander, and by that mean should
win the Cities of Greece, because that diverse of them were guarded by the
seruitours of his father, and the rest governed by some of the Citizens whom
his said father had deputed governors, and had always supported them. He see
also that Ptolome governor of Egypt, and Antigone, who apparauntly had
already withdrawn him from the obeysaunce of the Kings, would aid him,
either of them having an huge and mighty host, great stoare of treasure, and
held under their obeisance great countries and provinces. When they had at
large consulted on these matters, and that every man had said his opinion, he
was finally resolved to restore the Cities of Greece into their popular
governance and liberty, thereby to depose the Tyraunts and Governors
assigned by Antipater. For ye Macedonians thought by that mean to diminishe
and abate the power of Cassander, and that the Kings and Polispercon should
win great honor and renown, together the friendship of all the Cities who
greatly might help them with their service. Whereupon they sent out
commandments to all the cities, that they should send their Ambassadoures
to the Kings: which they did. And when they were al assembled, it was by the
kings declared and signified to them, that they should be of good courage, and
have an assured hope and confidence that they would restore them to their
ancient liberty and popular government: delivering forthwith in writing the
decree of the said deliberation to be carried and published without delay
unto the Cities: to the end they should know the liberality and franknesse of
the said Kings and Macedonians toward them. The contents and effect of which
decree was written in Greek as follows.

Forasmuch as our noble Progenitors have in times past greatly pleasured and
gratified the Grecians: The substance of the Decree.
We therefore pursuing and following their institution and ordinance therein,
do declare and pronounce to all people the love and good will we bear toward
the Greeks. Wherefore, since the death of Alexander^ and that the realms came
to our possession and governance, thinking that they are all determined to
peace and quietness, and also contented to stand to the institutions and
ordinances concerning the weal public established by Phillip our noble
parent, we have herein addressed our letters to all the said Cities. But
because of our absence in far countries some of the said Greeks, not rightly
understanding our meaning and intencion, making war upon the Macedonians:
certain of them chaunted to be vanquished by our Captains and Chieftaynes of
war, whereby many inconveniences ensued to some of their Cities: which
troubles and misfortunes ought to be imputed to the fault and negligence of our
said Captains. Wherefore we, for our parts considering the ancient amity
and benevolence of our Ancestors toward you and yours, are desirous and by
virtue of this decree do grant you peace, and farther do remit and restore
you into that liberty and Civil government which you heretofore have had
under Philip and Alexander: and that all you and every of you, do govern
according to the ordinances first by them to you granted: we will also, that
all those which were banished and expulsed the Cities by our Lieutenaunts and
Chieftaynes of war, since Alexander passed into Asie, be called home, and being
so called and come again, will by these presents, that they recover and enjoy
all their goods, and ever hereafter to live peaceably without sedition in their
country, forgetting all injuries and wrongs done and pass, and be partakers
of the honors and ciuilities of their Cities, as well as any other. And that all
decrees and sentences made to the contrary, shall be revoked and made void
(except and always reserved all such as are banished for murder, or any other
like villainous act, except also and reserved all those which were bannished
Megapolite, for the treason conspired with Polyenote, except also the
Amphisencians, Tricians, Pharcondonians and Heraclians.) And for the rest we
well they be called back, and received home on this side the thirty day of
April. And if Philip our Father and Alexander our brother, have ordained and
made any ordinances or laws particular contrary to this, let them which find
them selves agreeued come to us, and we will take such order, as shall be both
honest and reasonable for either part. And for the Athenians, we will that
they continue and remain as they did in the time of Philip and Alexander, and
to enjoy the city of Orope, and country thereof as they did at that present:
together the City of Samye, as Phillip our progenitour and noble parent
delivered it them. In this doing we forbid the Greeks that they enterprise
nothing, neither serve or aid any whom soever against us, upon pain of
banishement both they and their posterity, with confiscation of their lands
and goods, which attempt or do the contrary. Of all which things we have
given notice and power to Polispercon and Deicete to execute, willing therefore
and commanding you wholly to obey him accordingly, as we have heretofore
written unto you. For if any take in hand to do contrary to our ordinance
aforesaid, we will by no means suffer and abide it.

When Polispercon had published this edict, he commanded the Argiues and other
Cities to expulse the Governors whom Antipater had authorized, and to
condemn and put certain of them to death, and confiske their goods that
Cassander might not be helped thereby. He write also to Olympias to return
into Macedon, and take upon her the government of Alexander, until he came to
age. He write likewise letters in the names of the kings to Eumenes, not to
reconcile him to Antigone, but to take part with the kings, and return into
Macedone, where he should be received as a compainon with the said Polispercon
to the government of the said kings: or else if he would farrie in Asie, there
should be sent unto him both men and money to war upon Antigone, an utter
enemy and rebel against the kings: and that he would also render the
Satrapies which Antigone had expulsed him: together, all the rest which he
before held and enjoyed in Asie. Saying farther, that it was he above all
other, which of right ought to be most zealous and vigilant about the affairs
and authorite of the ligne Royal, by which he was altogether preferred and
honored: following his accustomed care and diligence which he before at all
times had showed to the same. And if he needed greater force, the said
Polispercon would with the kings and their power come into Asie. These matters
were done the year that Archippe governed Athens, and Quinte Elye and Lucy
Papyre were created Consulles at Rome.

Eumenes taking part with the kings, goes into Cilice: and of his practices
to get men of war.

The.xxvj. Chapter.
Soon after that Eumenes was departed the City of Nore, he received letters
from Polispercon, wherein were contained over and besides the things abouesaid,
how that the kings (somewhat to countreuayle his great loss) had freely given
him five hundredth Talents, and that they had written to the Pretors and
receyuers of the country of Cilice, to deliver him other five hundred Talents,
and so much money besides as was sufficient to pay his Soldiers wages, and
for the buying of all other his provision for the wars, and that the
Captains of the Argiraspides who had about six thousand men, should serve
under the said Eumenes as Lieutenaunt to the kings, and Lord and Governor of
all A^ ie. Anon were brought letters from Olympias to him, praying and
requiring his aid in the behalf of the kings, and her: For that he alone had
been always just and faithful to the kings and was presently able to deliver
them from the troubles which grew daily upon them. And farther, she desired his
counsel, whether it were her best to remain in Epyre, and not to give credit
to them which seemed but protectors and governors, and in deed affected the
only kingdom, or to return into Macedone. Whom Eumenes again answered by
letters, yt he thought it the surest way for her to remain still in Epire,
until she see some end of the wars. But Eumenes evermore trusty and
faithful to the kings, purposed not to take part with Antigone, affecting the
kingdom, but rather to serve the Son of Alexander, yet a boy (who through
the wickedness of his Captains and seruitours wanted aid) and to adventure
him self for his cause in all dangers. Wherefore he departed incontinent out
of Cappadoce with eight hundred horse, and two thousand footmen, having no
time to tarry and abide, for all those which promised to join with him,
because Antigone (understanding that he was his enemy) had in all haste sent
Menander with a mighty army to expulse him Cappadoce. Menander.
When Menander came thither, and found Eumenes gone three days before, he
determined to pursue him, but seeing he could not over reach him, he retired
into Cappadoce. Shortly after, Eumenes (through his great speed, passing the
mount Thaure) got to Cilice. As soon as Antigene and Teutame (Captains of the
Argiraspides, who served the kings) understood of his coming, Antigene.
Teutame.
they met him on the way with a number of their friends: who after they had
rejoiced together with him, in that he had escaped from so many dangers, they
freely and redilie offered him their service. In like case also did the
Argiraspides Macedonians, greatly wondering at the variety of his fortune,
considering that not long before he was adjudged a rebel to the kings, he and
all his friends condemned to death, and now reuersing their judgment, they had
not only pardoned him, but also had given him the government of their whole
Empire. The variety and instabilitie of worldly things.
Notwithstanding, such as considered Eumenes strange Fortune, little or
nothing marvelled thereat. For what is he, which marketh and notes the
instabilitie of our life, that knows not the change and mutabilitie of
fortune? Or who is he, which overmuch trusts to the honor and prosperity,
which in this world happens him that is not subject to fleshly britlenesse?
For the common and ordinary life of men governed and ruled by some secret
ordinance of God, is without any stabilitie, continually turned to good and
evil. Wherefore let no man meruaill if any thing chance to him sodenlie, but
rather if whatsoever comes, comes not unlooked for. And therefore by good
reason ought all men to commend histories. The commendation of Histories.
For the variety and instabilite which men in worldly matters find by
experience, abateth the pride and ambicion of those which have in them any
felicity, and enboldeneth and gives hope to such as are in adversity, as to
Eumenes chanced, who knowing the slippernesse of worldly Fortune, constantly
endured his infelicitie, hoping and looking for better: And then seeing him
self preferred and advanced to great authority, and foreseeing the
inconstancy of Fortune, very wisely and circumspectly ordered his affairs
and business. For first he considered, that he being a stranger, the
government of a realm and so princely an astate was unmeet and not
apperteyning unto him: and that those whom he should govern were Macedonians,
and had condemned him to death: and that all the Captains and Governors of
the Provinces were honorable personages, and of hie courages, and pretended
great and weighty enterprises. Wherefore he suspected, that if he should take
upon him so great a charge, they would contemn him being a stranger, and
thereby he should get great enimitie, and always stand in danger of losing
his life. For he knew well, that the Macedonians would in no wise be at his
commandment, because they reputed him a mean man, and much inferior to them,
and therefore rather thought that he should be subject to them, than they to
him. Wherefore all these things considered, he declared to the Captains and
Soldiers, that first, where it had pleased the Kings by their letters to
grant him for his relief.v. hundred Talents, he highly thanked the^, but
utterly refused the receipt thereof: saying, he needed not so great a reward
and gift, since he affected neither Empire or dominion: nor to have any such
charge was his desire, but that by the letters of the kings he was commanded
to do it: neither was he able any longer to abide the labors and trauails of
war, because he was now sore broosed and lame: doing them farther to wete,
that he looked not thereby to attain to any principality, considering he was a
stranger and not a Macedonian. He also affirmed, that in his sleep he see
such a vision, that him thought necessary to be manifested to them, forasmuch
as in his judgment it might be an help to unity and concord, and also very
profitable to the common wealth. He thought in his sleep, that Alexander
appeared to him as if he had been alive: and in the same robes which he
commanded all his princes and Captains, and ministered the Laws apperteyning
to the Empire. Wherefore quod he) I think it good that of the kings treasure a
Throne imperial be forged and made of gold, and thereupon to be placed and
set the statue or image of Alexander crouned, holding a Scepter as he did in
his life time. And that all the Princes and Captains shall every morning
assemble there, and after the sacrifice finished, to sit in counsel of the
affairs of the wars: and whatsoever is concluded on, to take it as from the
mouth of ye said Alexander: which thing was thought good by all the
assistauntes, and they all out of hand caused the said deliberacion to be
executed, and forged a statue or image: because in the treasury of the kings
was great stoare of gold and silver: Whereupon within few days after, an
image was enstalled in a Throne Imperial with a Diadem, Scepter and other
kingly robes. About the same was an Altar rered up, and fire laid thereon,
of which all the Captains took coals, and put them in Censures of gold,
wherewith they encensed the Statue with sweet and precious smelles, making
sacrifice thereto as unto God. After the sacrifice was done, stools and forms
were brought, whereon sat all the noble Princes and valiant Captains,
consulting of the incident affairs. In doing whereof Eumenes took upon him no
authority or title of Governor, but showed him in all points egall to them,
and through curteons and gentle language, was void of all grudge and hatred,
and got the good wills of all the Captains. Moreover, because of the
superstition they used toward the statue of Alexander, they hoped to prosper
as if some God had governed and guyded them. And using the same humanity
toward the Argiraspides Macedonians, they highly esteemed him and accomted him
worthy the charge and government of the affairs of the kings. This done, he
sent his principal and wisest friends to assemble and wage other Mercenarie
Soldiers, appointing large sallarie and entretainement. Of which
Commisioners some departed into Piside, Lycie, and other Regions neereby:
other into Celosirie and Phenice: the rest into Cypres: so that amongst them
they levied a great number of men. But after it was noysed that they took up
Soldiers, and gave good entretainement, a number of good fellows of the
Cities of Greece, offered their service and were enrolled, so that in short time
(as besides the Argiraspides and other whom Eumenes brought with him) they had
gotten together, above ten thousand footmen and two thousand horse.

Ptolome goes about to cause the Argiraspides to kill Eumenes, whom he by his
wisdom appaised, and after sends an army by Sea into Phenice.

The.xxvij. Chapter.
WHen Eumenes in short time was suddenly became puyssant, Ptolome arriving with
his Navy at the City of Zephire, Zephire.
in the country of Cilice, sent letters to the Argiraspides, signifying to
them, that they ought not of right to obey Eumenes, considering he had been by
the Macedonians already condemned to dye. He sent also straight admonition to
all the towns in Cilice, not to deliver him any money: promising to save the^
harmless against him. Howbeit, there were none that made any account of his
letters, because the kings, Polispercon their governor, and Olympias,
Alexander his mother, had written to the contrary, that they should obey
Eumenes, and to whom they should give whatsoever he demanded, as to the
Lieutenaunt general of the kings, having full power and authority. Now waxed
Antigone marvelous angry, by reason of Eumenes his authority. For he knew it
was Polispercon who had so advanced and set him in such rowme to plague the
rebels against the kings. Wherefore he determined either by treason, or some
other villainous mean, to bring him to his end. And therefore sent he Philote
one of his chief friends with letters to the Argiraspides and the rest of the
Macedonians. Philote.
Whereupon he incontinent appointed thirty Macedonians, both wise and well
spoken, to accompany him: commanding them to prease and talk with the
Captains of the Argiraspides, to say Antigone and Teutane, and to promise,
(that if they would kill Eumenes) to reward them largely, and besides bestow
on them greater Dominions than before they enjoyed: and make the like promises
to all the Argiraspides with whom they had any acquaintance or familiarity.
Howbeit, they found few or none agreeing thereto, but Teutane only, who in
all he might labored to win Antigone his companion. But he as one that
esteemed his faith and honor, did not only gainesay so wicked and villainous an
act, but in the end, converted his corrupted friend, saying, that it were much
better for them that Eumenes did live and bear rule, than Antigone. For yt if
Antigone attained the greatest dignity and authority, he would expulse them
their Satrapies and give them to his friends: where Eumenes being a stranger
durst not affect the principality, but continuing Chieftayne and Lieutenaunt,
would always gently and favorably entreat them as his special friends and
companions: and in taking his part, would suffer them to enjoy and possess
their Satrapies, and paraduenture bestow some better upon them. By this mean
and persuasion they which came to betraye Eumenes, were frustrate of their
enterprise. Notwithstanding Philote assembled the Argiraspides, and the other
Macedonians, to whom they presented their letters written by Antigone, wherein
he greatly accused and charged Eumenes, commanding them incontinent upon the
sight of the letters, to apprehend and put him to death: And in case they would
not, he threatened and meant with his whole power to come against them, for their
disobedience sharply to punish the^. When the letters were seen and read, both
Captains and Soldiers stood in great perplexity and doubt^ for they see that
they by no mean could escape the danger, because (if they took part with
the kings) Antigone would overthrow them: and if they obeyed Antigone, the
kings then would plague them. And as they were in this trouble of mind, Eumenes
boldly entered the assembly: and after he had read the letters, he pronounced
unto them, that of duty and allegiaunce, they ought to obey the kings, and not
to give ear to such as rebelled against them, so that through his words and
persuasions, he in such sort confirmed them, that he both assured his own
estate, and likewise still wan their favors and good wills. And where he was
before in marvelous danger, he now again suddenly became to be advanced to
high authority. Incontinent after, he marched forward with his army toward
Phenice, purposing to assemble all the ships of the Cities, and to send a
mighty Navy to Sea, to the end, that Polispercon should be Lord of the
Seas to pass into Asie, to war upon Antigone.

Nycanor keeping and occupying the Port of Pyre against the Athenians, is
besieged by Alexander Polispercon his son, and of the mutenie in the City of
Athenes.

The.xxviij. Chapter.
AT the same time that the things abouesaid were exploited in Phenice, Nycanor
Captain of the City of Munichie, understanding that Cassander was departed
Macedone, and gone to Antigone, and that Polispercon would come with his army
Royal shortly into the country of Athenes, he persuaded the Athenians to
keep their friendship and amity with Cassander. And when he see they stayed
not at his words, but instantly required him to take away his garrisons which
kept the city, he meant to entertayne and delay them: desiring them to pawse a
while, and after that, would take such order, that they should have cause to be
well contented and satisfied. Now in this mean time that the Athenians were
quieted with these words, he privily thrust in the night by little and little
all the Soldiers of Athens into the Castle of Munychie, so that he was then
able with those Soldiers to keep and maintain the same place, and defend him
self against the assailauntes, which crafty dealing the Athenians seeing,
sent their Ambassadoures toward the kings and Polispercon, to demand aid,
according to the edict published for the liberty of the cities of Greece. They
also called many cou^sails to see by what mean they might expulse Nycanor. But
while they thus co^sulted, Nycanor found the mean to wage a certain number of
Mercenaries, with whom in a night he sallied out of Munychie, and seized on
the entry or mouth of the Port of Pyre. Pyre.
When ye Athenians see that in stead of recovering Munychie they had lost Pire,
they were sore agreeued. Wherefore they chose certain Ambassadoures of the
worshipfullest of the City, Nycanors very friends, and sent to him: to say,
Phocion the son of Phoce, Thymon the son of Thymothe, and Clearcke the
son of Nansicles, commanding them to challenge and blame him for that fact,
and to require that they might be restored to their Civil government,
according to the Decree of the kings before by them published. Nycanor
answered, that they must send to Cassander by whom he was deputed Gardein of
the same: because without him, he had no authority to dispose or take away
any thing. In the mean time letters came to Nycanor from Queen Olympias,
commanding him to render to the Athenians, Munichie and Pire. Then Nycanor
seeing that the kings and Polispercon would have Olympias come into Macedone,
and restore her to the government of the infant, and give her as great
authority as she had in the life of Alexander, fearing therefore to disobey
her, promised the Athenians to make restitution to them according to the form
and tenor of her letters. Notwithstanding, he delayed them from day to day,
making many excuses. During this season, the Athenians considering that in
times past they had maruelously endeavored them selves to honor Olympias the
Queen, and that the honor which they had done to her, was well employed and
bestowed: and that therefore they might by her means recover their liberty
without danger, they became marvelous glad, and fed them selves with vain
hope. But before Nycanor had accomplished his promise, Alexander Polispercon
his Son arrived in their Country with a great army. Then the Athenians
thinking that he was come to restore them the Cities of Munychie and Pyre,
were in marvelous joy. But it chanced contrary to their expectation: for he
came to seize to his own use on the said Fortresses, and to furnishe them
with garrisons for his own aid in the wars. At his coming, certain
conspiratours, Antipater his friends and Phocion him self fearing punishment
for their disobedience and rebellion against the ordinances of the Kings,
met with Alexander, and cou^sailed him according to the necessity of the
case, and what was best for his commodity and profit, but chiefly that he
should furnishe the fortress with his own Soldiers, and not render them
unto the Athenians, before Cassander were discomfited. When Alexander was come
before Pyre, he forthwith pitched his camp and besieged the Town, and fell to
a parle with Nycanor touching the same, without calling any of the Athenians to
counsel, or once making them privy: so that it manifestly appeared then,
nothing to be done for the profit and common utility of the City. By reason
whereof, the people assembled and deposed the officers then in authority, and
assigned and deputed new: and such as they thought more affectioned to the
popular faction. And certain which had the government of any particular office:
some they condemned to death, and other to perpetual exile, with confiscation
of their goods: amongs whom was Phocion, who in Antipater his time had the
greatest rowme and authority within the City. And after, he with the rest
which were deposed, repaired all to Alexander Polispercon his son, trusting
by him to be restored, whom he right gently received, gyuing them his letters
addressed to Polispercon his father, praying him not to permit and suffer
Phocion and his adherents to be destroyed, who had taken part with him, and
had always ben ready to do what pleasure and service him liked. The people of
Athenes also sent their Ambassadoures to the said Polispercon, to accuse
Phocion, and to demand that the City of Munychie might be rendered to them,
and them selves restored to their liberty and popular governance. When
Polispercon understood the whole matter, he greatly desired to keep the Port
of Pyre, being a meet and necessary place for the affairs of war.
Nevertheless, fearing to be reputed a dissembler and double man if he went
against that which he before had commanded by a common and public Decree,
and that he would not be accounted and taken deceytfull and disloyal, chiefly
to do wrong to that which was the principal City of Greece, altered his
determination and courteously answered the Ambassadors of the people:
whereupon Phocion and his adherents were apprehended and sent bound to Athens,
co^primitting ye whole matter to the will and choice of ye Athenians, whether
they would condemn and put them to death, or remitte and forgive the
effendours. Wherefore when the people were assembled to sit in judgment of
Phocion and his accomplices: the most of the banished in the time of Antipater
which took part against him, grievously accused and adjudged them worthy the
death, the sum of which accusation was this: that they after the Lamian war
were the principal and chief causers that their City and Country were
brought in thraldom and bondage, the government and authority of the people
wholly extinguished, and the laws and ordinances of the same Country clearly
violated and infringed. When the day assigned was come, Phocion very sagely
and wisely began to plead and defend his cause: but so soon as the
multitude and great number of the people heard him begin to speak, The fury
of the people.
they made such a noise and uproar, that he could not be heard. When the noise
was ceased, and that he began again to speak, they likewise interrupted and
stopped him that he could have no audience: for the multitude of the baser
sort, which had been degraded and put from the public government, being
suddenly newly authorized, were very insolent against those which had deprived
them their liberty. Howbeit Phocion in danger to lose his life, boldly and
stoutely stood to the defense of his justification, so that these about him
heard what he said. But they which were any thing farther of, could hear
nothing for the noise and uproar of the people: but they might all see, that he
spoke and made many gestures with his body, as a man in great danger and
fear. But in the end when he see no boot, he with a loud voice cried and
said, that he was contented to dye, but prayde that they might be forgiven
whom he had inuegled and attracted to his will and pleasure, some forcibly,
and some by gentle admonitions and persuasions. When certain of Phocions
friends see that the violence and rage of the people ceased not, they preased
in to speak for him, whom the multitude incontinent hearkened unto, before
any man knew what they would say: But after it was perceived they spoke in
the favor of the accused, they were in like sort rejected by the clamors of
the people, so that in the end by the common voice and exclamation of the
multitude, they were condemned to death, and that done carried to prison. Then
many of their friends seeing their misery, were very pensife and sorrowful.
For when they see that such personages being the chief and principal of the
City, as well for their nobility as their authority and renoume, and had done
many good and gracious deeds to the City, were in such sort condemned without
order of justice, they greatly feared to come in the like danger. But forasmuch
as fortune is common and mutable, many of the people dispiteously agreued with
the said Phocion, spoke all the oultrages and viltanies against him they could,
reproching him of many wicked acts and deeds, as people commonly do which
dissimule their anger against them in authority: But when they see fortune
turn her sail, and that it otherwise happens, then will they without reason or
measure, in all despiteful cruelty utter and show forth their privy grief
and pestiferous malice. Not long after, the condemned, acording to the custom
of the country, drank poison, and their carkaises were thrown without the
limits and precinctes of Athens unburied, and this was their end.

Polyspercon besieges Cassandre in Pyrey, and perceiving that he could not
win it, departs thence and besieges the city of Megalopolis, where by the
wisdom and policy of Demades, he is at an assault repulsed.

The.xxix. Chapter.
DUring the time that these matters were done in Asia, Antigone had sent
Cassander with.xxxv. tall warlike galleys, and four thousand soldiers to
sail into Pire: whom Nichanor captain of the Castle, received and rendered to
him the port and castle. But as for Munichie Nicanor guarded and held that with
his own garrison. When Polispercon who abode and continued in Phocide,
understood that Cassander had taken and enjoyed Pire, he came into the
Country of Athens, and encamped before Pire, with twenty thousand
Macedonians, and four thousand strangers and confederates, and three score
and five Elephantes, and besieged the same. But seeing the scarcity and want
of victuals, and the siege like long to continue, he left behind at the siege
such number of Soldiers as the Country might well vittell, deputing for his
lieuetenant Alexander his son, and him self with the rest, being the greater
number, entered Peloponess, to the end to force the Megalopolitanes to come
under the obeisaunce of the Kings, being greatly inclined to Cassander, and the
continuation of their Oligarchie: to say, the government of certain
particular offices and dignities which Antipater had appointed them. While
Polispercon was about this enterprise, Cassander with his Navy having
alliance with the Eginets, went and besieged the City of Salamine his enemy:
And every day with shot, whereof he had foyson, assaulteth the town, bringing
them in great hazard and fear. And being almost in despair, aid came from
Polispercon both by sea and land. Whereupon Cassander was so daunted, that he
raised his siege and returned to Pire. After that Polispercon meaning to set
and order and stay about the affairs of Peloponese, assembled before him the
Deputies of all the Cities: whom with gentle and gracious words he allured to
join with him, and afterward sent his Ambassadoures to all the Cities,
commanding them that they should suddenly kill all the governors appointed by
Ptolome, and restore the government to the people. Which commandment the
people incontinently obeyed, so that there were great slaughters and
banishmentes throughout the Cities of the friends of Antipater. Then the
commonaltie being restored to liberty and authority, joined with Polispercon.
And because the Megalopolitames would not obey, but still stick to Cassander,
Polispercon fully determined to besiege them. When they understood his meaning
and purpose, they incontinently caused all their goods in the Country to be
brought into their town, and after mustered and took view of their people,
which were of Citizens and forainers, about fiftene thousand besides their
slaves, all able men, and divided them into two bands: whereof some made
rampires and other works, some manned the walls, so that at one instant they
were all busied and occupied: One company ditched about the Town, an other
company carried wood and earth out of the fields to make the Rampires, other
repaired and mended the walls where they were any thing at all decayed, some
forged harnaies and engines of Artillarie, and on this sort was all the whole
City occupied, because that every one was minded, and disposed thereto, for so
much as the power which came against them, were men of invincible courages,
and the Elephantes of great violence and might. Not long after that they had
brought all things into a readiness and perfection, Polispercon with his whole
army arrived before the same, and on both sides besieged it. On the one side
encamped Macedonians, and on the other side his allies and strangers. He
builded also many Towers of wood, higher than the curten and wall, and planted
them in places convenient, and thrust into them Souldioures, with very great
plenty of shot or slings, who stoutly fought with them which manned the
walls, toures and bulwarks. He undermined likewise three of their toures, and
one part of the curte^, and after gave fire to the mines, and overthrew them:
When the Macedonians see the overthrow of them, they made a great outcrie,
whereat the townsmen were maruellously dismayed, to see their curten laid on
ground: Nevertheless when they see the Macedonian^ force to enter the breach
of the toures and walls, they divided themselves into two bands, whereof one
band stood to the defense, and through the aduaunting, and difficulty of the
passages where the enemy would have entered, they valia^tly repulsed them. The
other band made new rampires and bulwarks more within the town: so that
bisides the wall or curten which was ouerthrown, they did make an other curten
and trenche a good distaunce from the first, workyng day and night until they
had ended and finished it, furnishing the same with shot and engines of
artillery, wherewith they sore hurt and galled the enemy upon the toures of
wood, so that on each side were many hurt and slain until night approached,
and then Polyspercon cau^ ed to sound the retraite, and retired into his camp.

The next day in the morning he gave a fresh assault and wanne the breache^
commaundyng his Pyoners to cast abroad the rubbishe and great stones which
lay on heaps, into the dytches and trenches, for smoothing and playnyng the
ground, that his Elephauntes might come near, because then they would
greatly help to win and take the town. But the Megalopolitains through the
wisdom and conducte of Damides, who had long served with Alexander in Asie,
Damides.
and knew the nature of Elephantes, found an excellent remedy against them,
and through his policy and trauail, made those monstrous and terrible beasts
unprofitable, and able to do nothing in manner as follows.

First, he caused many doors and gates to be made, and thrust them full of
great pinnes, and laid them within the little shallowe ditches, with the
points of the pynnes upward, and covered them with mouldes of earth, and
such light stuff, that they might not be seen: and when the enemy came to
assail, to place on every side a strong company of shot of all sorts, and
none before, so ye Polyspercon seeing none to resist at the front of the
entry, brought on his Elephantes through the breach into the town. But as
soon as they came to the place where the ditches were, they by reason of their
heaviness, so hurt their feet, that they could neither go forward, nor
backwarde, chiefly because of the violence of the shot, which came so thick
against them on the side, that the greater part of the Ind^ ans, their
leaders, were sore hurt or slain, not able to govern them, and the beasts f^
lyng them selves hurt, returned in great disorder against their own people,
and maruellously hurt them: and in the end, the mightiest and fiercest fell
down dead, and the rest able to do no good, ouerthrewe their own company.
When the Megalopolitanes see that they had thus repulsed the enemy, they
were delivered from al fear, and waxed very proud.

After Clyte has overthrown at sea Cassander, he is through the wisdom of
Antigone, soon after discomfited, and finally slain in his flight.

The.xxx. Chapter.
AFter this repulse, Polyspercon repented him, that he had besieged the City
before it was needful: And because he would lose no time, he left one part of
his army at the siege, and with the rest, he intended some greater and more
necessary exploites: Wherefore he sent Clyte Admiral with his whole Army
into Hellespont to stop his enemies for passing out of Asie into Europe,
commanding him to call upon Aride, to accompany him, abiding with his army
in the City of Cyane, Cyan^.
for fear of Antigone his enemy. When Clyte had sailed and was come to the
passage of Hellespont, and had taken in Aride and his men of war, and won
to be his confederates, the Cities of Proponetie, Nicanor captain of Munychie
was sent by Cassander, with all the ships there, with a certain company of
other Soldiers, which Antigone had also sent, to the number of one hundredth,
and encountered Clyte about Bizance. Bizance.
So he gave him battle, but Clyte won the victory, in which he
soonke.xvij. sail of Nicanors, and prized forty, and the men within them. The
rest packt on sails, and fled into the port of Calcedone. After which
overthrow, Clyte thought that his ennimies durst no more encounter him at sea,
by reason of their great loss. Notwithstanding Antigone aduertized of the
said conflict, shortly after thorough his wisdom and diligence amended and
requited the same. For be found a mean to get from the Bizances a certain
number of small ships which he furnyshed and charged with stoare of shot, A
Stratageme.
and nimble and quick footmen, and sent them into Enrope, who being landed
before the daunyng of the day, gave the alarm to Clyte and his Soldiers,
encamped on the land, whom they so disordered, that they retired to their
ships out of array, leauyng the greater part of their baggage behind them,
and many that did tarry for the saving thereof, were slain or taken
prisoners. In the mean while Antigone furnished his greatest ships with his
best and most trained Soldiers, and also a great number of Maryners,
declaryng unto them, that if they would lustyly assail and boorde the ennimie,
he would warrante them both great honor and also victory. In pursuing which
commandment, Nicanor departed that night, and sped him with such diligence,
that about the day break, he with such deuoire assailed and boorded the
enemy, that findyng them at his arrival out of order, he put them to flight.
In which flight some of the ennimies ships were sore shaken and broosed, and
the rest wholly rendered, and became subject to Nicanor, except the Admiral,
in which Clyte escaped. Nevertheless after he was set on land, and hoped
safely to pass thorough the country of Thrace into Macedone, he was by
certain of Lysimache his Soldiers encountered on the way and slain.

Eumenes understanding that Antigone is coming against him, departs out of
the country of Cilice. And when he has by his wisdom and industry escaped
in the way the hands and ambushes of Seleuke, he comes into Perse.

The.xxxj. Chapter.
FOr this noble and honorable victory Antigone was greatly esteemed, and wan
thereby much glory and reputation, and therefore fully minded to be lord of the
seas and emperor of Asie, wherefore he chose out of his whole army.2000.
footmen, and.4000. horse, with who^ he speedily marched into Cilice against
Eumenes, thinking to overthrow him before such time as he might assemble a
greter army. But Eumenes being advertised of his coming, albeit he was willing
to recover in the name of the Kings, the Country of Phenicie, which Ptolome
unjustly enjoyed, seeing that the time then served not, and especially because
he still looked for the coming of Antigone, went from Phenicie with his whole
army, and with great speed came through the country of Celosirie, for that
he meant to get upon the hie Country of Syrie. And when he was near the river
Tygris, the people of the Country, by night assailed him and slew some of his
soldiers. From thence marched he into the country of Babylon, where Seleucke
also assailed him about the river Eufrates, being in danger of loosing al his
whole army: because an arm of the River which woonted to run through an old
ditche, was broken up by Seleucke his souldioures, so that all Eumenes camp
was ouerflowed. But through his wisdom and industry, he retired unto an hill,
and caused the entry and mouth of the said ditch to be stopped up, and turned
the intercourse of the water, so by that means he readily saved both his
person and army from the hands of Seleucke, and with the loss of fiftene
thousand foot men, and three thousand horse, marched on into the Country of
Perse. And after he had there a while soiourned, his soldiers yet through their
long travail sore wearied, he sent toward the Satrapes and governors of the
higher Provinces, commanding them to send him men and money. And these were
the things done that year in Asie.

The Athenians make a perfect amity and inviolable peace with Cassander and
allie with him. After he kills Nicanor, and brings the greater number of
the Cities of Greece to his alliance.

The.xxxij. Chapter.
AFter Polispercon had shamefully been repulsed from the siege of Megalopolis
in Europe, his credit began maruellously to empaire and abate, so that many
of the cities of Greece revolted from the kings to Cassander. And when the
Athenians saw that neither through the help of Polispercon or Olympias, they
could expulse the garrison from Pire, some of the worshipfullest of the City,
presumed and took upon them to propose before the assemble of the people, that
it should be very meet and expedient, to make alliance with Cassander. But
because many were of the contrary opinion, there arose great contention amongs
them. Nevertheless after they had considered their commodity and profit,
they all thought it the surest way to send their Ambassadors to Cassander to
agree with him in the best manner they might: Who after many days of parle and
treaty, compounded with him as follows.

First, that the Athenians taking part with Cassander, should hold, occupy,
and enjoy in quiet and peaceable possession, their city and territory with
the revenues: together their ships, and all other their appurtenances.

Item that the town of Munychie should continue and remain in the possession
of Cassander, until he had finished the wars against the Kings.

Also that the governance thereof, should be in the richest and welthiest men,
and such as might at least dispend.x. Minas of revenue by year. X. Minae, is
of our money.xx. pounds.


Moreover, that the governor thereof should be a Citizen, and such one as
Cassandre would nominate and appoint.

These articles agreed upon, Cassander deputed Demetre Phalare ruler of ye
City, Demetre Phalare.
who peaceably and gently governed it. After Nicanor was arrived at Pirey, with
his victorious army, Cassa^der received him honorably. But when he see him
shortly after to be over glorious and insole^t, and that Munychie was
garrisoned by his soldiers, he therefore fearing some secret mischief,
traitorously put him to death. This done, he made a voyage into Macedone, with
whom he joined a number of the borderers there. Many Cities of Greece likewise
as it were with a violent desire, drew to his alliance, because they thought
ye Polispercon unwisely and cowardly ruled and governed the affairs of ye kings
and his allies, and that Cassander was toward all men courteous, gentle and
painful in all his affairs and business: and many there were yt took his
part.

The end of the first Book.
The second Book.
Of certain matters both by the Romans and the Crotonians exploited in
Italy.

The.j. Chapter.
THe same year that Demogene was Prince of Athens, and Luce Phoce, and Manius
Faluy were Consuls at Rome, the ninth year of the wars between the Romans
and the Samnites, the Romans warred not so openly, as they had upon them the
years before used: but by farrages and pillages, wasted and spoiled the
Country of ye Samnites, without any other deed worthy the talk. And after
the same manner, they spoiled and wasted the country of Damie in the Region of
Pouylle, and there by composition took the City of Canouse, Canouse.
enforcing the Cities to render them hostages and pledges: bringing likewise
under their obeisance the Cities of Phalerne and Ophartine. At that time had
the Crotonians made an appointment with the Brutians, that they might the
better continue and maintain the wars against the exiles of their city, who
were reconciled to Heraclides and Sosistrate, as we have declared in the book
precedent. And because the same wars had already continued two years, they
chose for their Captayns and Chieftaynes of war that year, Paron and
Menedeme, men greatly renowned for their experience in martial factes and
warlike policies. Notwithstanding, the exiles of Thury by night came with three
hundred marcenaries, and thought by stealth to take the City of Crotone:
Howbeit, they were repulsed. Wherefore they retired into the territory of the
Brutians, and shortly after were discomfited and overthrown there, by the said
Crotonians, who charged them with mighty power. And for this time we will
leave speaking of the things done in Italy, and make mention of those
exploited in the other parts of Europe.

Olympias Alexander his mother, by mean of Polispercon obtayneth the
government of the Realm of Macedone, causes King Philip and Euridice his
wife to be executed, and besides uses many other cruelties.

The.ij. Chapter.
IN that season Queen Euridice (who had the ordering and disposing of the
affairs of Macedone, Euridice.
) understanding that Olympias made preparation to come into the said Realm,
sent a messanger of hirs to Cassander in Peloponese, praying him that he would
out of hand come to help and aid her: And through great gifts and large
promises, she wan the Princes and Barons of Macedone. Notwithstanding
Polispercon assembled a mighty army, and with the King of Epyre accompanied
and conducted the said Olympias, together the son of Alexander, into the
realm of Macedone. And when Olympias had intelligence that Euridice was with
her army encamped in a country of the Realm called Ema, she with an army
made all possible speed against her, determining to hazard all in one
battle. But so soon as the two armies were aranged in order to fight, the
Macedonians with Euridice seeing the person of Olympias, so reverenced her for
the remembrance of her son Alexander, and the good turns that he had done
them, that they rendered to the said Olympias. And by that mean was king
Philip with his family and guard taken, and Euridice with Policles one of her
counsaylours, retired into the City of Amphipolis, Amphipolis.
where not long after she also was taken. Thus when Olympias had taken Philip
and Euridice prisoners, she shortly after without danger seized on the realm:
howbeit she very ungently entreated them.

For first she caused Euridice and her husband to be detruded into so straight
a prison, that they could scarce turn them within, and had their meat given
them in at a little hole. And after they had been a great while thus miserably
dealt withal, Olympias perceiving that the Macedonians for very compassion that
they had of the said captives maliced her, caused king Phillip by certain
souldioures of Thrace to be slain, after he had reigned and continued king six
years and four months. And because that Euridice somewhat insolentlye
spoke, and said that she had better right and title to the realm than
Olympias, she therefore without regard either of the late dignity royal that
the said Euridice had been in, or yet the common variety of fortune, sent her
three instruments to end her life withal: to wete, a sword, a halter, and
poison, willing her to choose which kind of death of the three she best liked.
Whereupon as matters after fell out, Olympias in ye same sort miserably ended her
life. For when the three kinds of death were presented Euridice, she prayed the
gods yt such presents might light upon Olympias. And after she had adorned the
body of her husband Phillip slain in her presence, and stopped up the
wounds, to cover the deformity of them in the best manner she could, with her
own girdle strangled her self, never sighing nor weeping, either yet showing
any countenance of desire to live: such was the greatness and courage of her
heart there showed in the end of her days.

After Olympias had thus shamefully put the^ to death, she made Nicanor
Cassanders brother to be slain, and defaced the Tomb and monument of Iolas
his other brother, to revenge the death of Alexander her son, as she said,
because that it was suspected that he had poisoned him, in gyuing him drynk.
Over and besides this, she picked and weeded out an hundred noble men of
Macedon Cassanders friends, and caused their throtes to be cut. Wherefore the
people of the country seeing her cruel dealing, reduced and called to memory
often times the words of Antipater on his death bed, The prophecy of a sage man
which dyed.
prophesying of things to come, who exhorted them to beware how they gave the
regiment of a realm unto a woman. In this sort was then governed the realm
of Macedon, which evidently proves, that there was very often great alteration
and change.

Eumenes passes the river of Tygre, and maugre Seleuke and Python, marches
into Susiane, and after commands the Satrapes of the higher Asie, with their
whole power to mete him.

The.iij. Chapter.
AFter al these matters, it is meet we somewhat speak of the things that time
done in Asie. Eumenes who had then in his company the Macedonians Argiraspides
and Antigene their captain, wintred in the Province of Babylon, in the chief
towns of the marches, and from thence sent his ambassadors toward Seleuke
and Python, praying and exhorting them, that they with him would aid the Kings
against the rebel Antigone, because that in the second distribution of the
provinces made at Triparadis, was given to the said Seleuke the Satrapie of
Babylon, and to Python, Mede. Whom they then answered, that to serve the Kings
they were at commandment, but to obey Eumenes, by the Macedonians adjudged an
enemy and condemned man, that would they never do. And after they had with
the said Ambassadors at large debated the matter, they sent a counter
ambassade to Eumenes and the Argiraspide^, to persuade them that of right they
ought to depose Eumenes from his authority: which thing they denied: wherefore
he gave them hearty thanks, and great commendations. From thence departed he
with his army, and encamped on the river Tygre, being three hundred furlongs
from the City of Babylon, to the intent to come to Susie, and get the favors
of the Satrapes of the hyer countries, and help him self with the treasure of
the Kings as he thought needful. Notwithstanding in the end he must needs
pass the river, because on that side where he remained, were no victuals left,
and on the other side store. And as he had gotten a number of ships, to put
over himself and his army, Seleuke and Python thereof advertised, rowed down
the river in two galeys of three tire of oars, and many brigantines and other
pinnaces, which had been there builte and left in the country, and remained
from the time of Alexander his being in that quarter of Babylon. And as soon
as they were come thither, they now a fresh practiced and suborned the
Argiraspides, willing them to expulse Eumenes his authority, saying he was a
stranger, and had caused many Macedonians to be slain. But when they see that
they could not compass them to execute the same, the Seleucians rowed down
the river unto an old ditche, and opened the mouth thereof, which of long time
had been stopped up: whereupon the water in short space had so broken and
run out, that it covered and ouerflowed the camp of the Macedonians, and all
the country round about, who being therewith in great danger, and not
knowing all the day how to remedy it, armed them with patience until the next
day in the morning that they had gotten together their pinnaces and barks, to
the number of.CCC. or therabouts, in the which without stop they put over
the greater part of the army, because Seleuke had on the other side none but
horse, and fewer in number than the Macedonians. But when Eumenes see night
draw on, and the great difficulty and hardenesse to put over the baggage,
he caused those that were already passed, to return. And by the advice and
counsel of certain peasantes, he hollowed and cleansed a place of the river,
through which the water might run and void, to overthrow the country next
adioynyng. Which thing the Seleucians seeing, and desirous to discharge them
their countreye, incontinent sent messangers toward them, by whom they agreed
to grant passage and truce for certain days. They sent also ambassadors with
all diligence toward Antigone in Mesopotamie, requiring him to come in all
speed with his whole power, before the other Satrapes of the hier Regions came
down to join with Eumenes and the Argiraspides. After Eumenes had passed the
River, and come into the country of Susiane, he divided his army into three
parts, because victuals there were very dear. For they neither had wheat or
barley, but of other grain, as rice, and the fruict of palms growyng in that
country great abundance, which he by measure divided amongs his soldiers. And
although he had by his first Ambassadors sent to the governors of the higher
countries, the letters patents of the Kings, by virtue of which all the
gouernoures and Captains were commanded to obey him, yet sent he after his
posts, requiring them with all their power and force to mete him in Susiane, at
which time the rulers had levied an army royal, for the exploiting of other
great affairs, which shall out of hand be declared.

The Satrapes of the hie country of Asie, to resist Python, join together:
and of the power they assembled.

The.iiij. Chapter.
WHen Python gouerner of Mede, and chief ruler of all the higher Satrapies,
was with great power come into Parthie, and had killed Philote deputy thereof,
Philote.
and in his stead placed Eudame his brother, Eudame.
all the other Satrapies understanding the case, and fearing his like dealing
with them, assembled against him, and vanquished him in battle, so that he
was with the loss of a great number of Soldiers forced to aba^don the country
of Parthe. Whereupon he first retired into Mede, and from thence toward
Seleuke in Babylon, to crave his aid and succor, offering to make partition of
the countries he had conquered. By reason whereof, the Satrapes which understood
it, assembled their power, and by that mean Eumenes his messangers found them
in arms, under the conduct of Penceste, Penceste.
whom they had appointed their general, a man highly renoumed amongst the
rest, and of the chieftayns best esteemed, whom Alexander also in his life time
by reason of his strength and mightiness of body, had appointed to be of his
guard, and after gave him the Satrapie of Perside, which he many years during
Alexanders life enjoyed, and so well governed the same, that all the people of
the country, greatly loved and honored him. Wherefore Alexander minding to
gratify them, suffered him only, and none other of the Macedonians, to be
apparelled like a Persian, thinking they would thereby be more addict and
obedient to his governance. He had.x. thousand Persian shot, and.iij. thousand
other armed after the manner of the Macedonians: Greeks and Thracians vj. C.
horse, and of Persians, above.iiij. hundred. Over and besides these, Polemon.
Polemo^ the Macedonian gouerner of Carmanie, had a thousand five hundred
footmen. and.vij. hundred horse, Sybirte bailiffe of Aracosie, Sybirte.
a thousand footmen and.vj. C. horse. Androbase.
Androbase gouerner of part of Paropamsade was sent with.xij. C. footmen,
and.iiij. hundred horse. Stasander of Arie and Draugine, Stasander.
with a band of Bactrians, had a thousand and five hundred footmen, and
one thousand horse. Out of the country of Inde came Eudame with v. hundred
horse, and.iij. thousand footmen, and.xxx. Elephants: which Elephantes he got
after the death of Alexander from king Pore, whom by treason he had slain. And
thus the power of all the said Satrapes together, were.xxj. thousand and two
hundred footmen, and.iiij. thousand and two hundred horse.

Eumenes through his wisdom appeaseth the dissension of the Satrapes striving
for the principality, and pays his men of war. And of the preparation which
Antigone for his part makes.

The.v. Chapter.
AFter they were all come into the country of Susiane, and had joined with
Eumenes, great contention arose, who should be general of the army. For
Penceste said that he ought to be perferred unto it, both for the greatness of
his number, and also for his estimation and prerogative during Alexander his
life. Again, Antigene Captain of the Argiraspides said, that the chosing of
the general, appertayned to him and the Argiraspides, because it were they
which in Alexander his company had conquered the country of Asie, and through
their virtue and prowes stood always inuinci^ le. When ^ umenes see and
perceived their controversy, and fearing that by their intestine dissension
Antigone might easily overthrow them, he was of the advice not to appoint one
sole General or chief, but look which of the Satrapies and Captains soever
that the multitude thought most worthy and renowned, should daily assemble in
the Kings pauylio^, which he had made ready to be pitched, wheresoever they
were, in the midst whereof should si^ te the statue or image of Alexander in
a Throne Imperial, vn^ er a sumptuous tabernacle or clothe of estate: and
after service done, to devise and talk of the urgent and public affairs.
Which opinion was amongs them all thought good and reasonable. And after they
had agreed upon this, they assembled and met togethers as they commonly do
in Cities governed by the best and worshipfullest Citizens, after the manner
Democraticke. And immediately upon their coming to the City of Suse, Eumenes
commanded the kings Treasurers to deliver him such sums of money as he
thought necessary to be employed and defraide about the affairs of the
wars. For the kings had commanded them to give him what he would ask. After
which receipt, he paid the Macedonians for six months, and gave to Eudame
the Indian, who brought the Elephants, two hundred Talents as it were for the
hier of his beasts, but to say truth, it was to make him his friend. For he
thought who so ever of the Satrapes would stand against him, if he joined with
him, he should (through the use of the said beasts being in wars very
terrible) be greatly strengthened. And for the rest of the Soldiers which were
not Macedonians, every of the Satrapes maintained his with the revenue of his
Satrapie. While Eumenes lay thus at Suse, he greatly increased and stre^gthned
his army. And as for Antigone, he determined after winter once past over in
Mesopotame, to assail him before the other Satrapes should join with him.
But when he understood they were already joined, he altered his mind, and
assembled a new army to strengthen that he had, knowing right well, that the
wars by him entreprised, required great power.

How eight prisoners, Alcete his soldiers, through their great prowes escape,
and take the town wherein they are emprisoned, and in the end again taken.

The.vj. Chapter.
WHile these things were in doing, Attale, Poleme, Docine, Antipater and
Philote, Alcete his Captains, and taken with him at the overthrow, and ever
after in a very strong Castle emprisoned, understanding that Antigone was gone
into the hier Satrapies, thinking it then good time to escape, practiced and
wanne some of their keepers to be loosed, whereby they seyzed on the other
Soldiers armor which guarded them, and about midnight being but eight,
violently ran upon their keepers which were above.iiij. hundred:
nevertheless they were of greter courage than their garders, and sometime
Alexander his Soldiers. And first, they threw down from the height of the
walls into the ditch. Xenopithe Captain of the Castle, being above a furlong of
height: and for the rest, some they slew, cast some out of the Castle, and
after set fire on certain houses without, and took into them fi^ tie of their
houlshold servant, who always had attended abroad, looking when the
enterprise would take place. By which mean they seized on a very strong
Castle, and furnished with all things necessary: nevertheless, they were in
great deceptation and doubt, whether to tarry there and attend the coming of
Eumenes, since they were strongly placed and well victualed, or whether to
adventure through the country whatsoever betid them. Docine was of the opinion
to go out, and Attale contrary, saying, that through their long detention in
prison, which had much feebled their persons, they were not able to endure any
warlike labors. And while they thus contended (certain soldiers of the next
villages to the number of.v. thousand footme^ and four thousand horse,
assembled with above four thousand paysantes which they had gotten together
suddenly, under such a Captain as they had chosen) prevented and besieged
them.

When Docine see and apperceyued that they were again enclosed, he had espied a
certain secret way of the Town unguarded, by which he let down a messanger
of his, Stratonice.
and sent him toward Stratonice Antigone his wife abiding thereby, praying
her to take pity and compassion on him. And not tarrying for answer, but t^
inking to escape, tumbled him self twofold down the wall, where he was without
suertie taken and cast in prison. But the other which came out before him, the
enemy racked, to make him confess and show the passage which he and the said
Docine came out at: which he did, so that by his mean and conduct, they wanne
and took one of the rocks the castle stood on, although almost impregnable
and inaccessible. Nevertheless, the Captains within, albeit few in number,
through their great virtue and prowes so valianntly them defended, that they
resisted and kept them out a year and four months before they could be
vanquished, fighting almost every day, and in the end, were taken by force
And now for whi^ e we will leave of this matter and re^ orne to Antigone,
making mention of that he did.

Antigone being come into Babylon, and joining with Seleuk^ and Pithon, is by
Eumenes repulsed the passage of Tygre, to the great loss and slaughter of his
people.

The.vij. Chapter.
THe same year that Democlade was Praetor of Athens, and Caye June and Quinte
Emilye were Consulles at Rome, and that Denomene of Laoco^ ia won the prise at
the running in the Olympiade the Cxvj. Antigone departed out of Mesopotamie,
and with his power came into Babylon where he found Seleuke and Python, who
there joined with him. Shortly after, they made a bridge with their ships over
the River of Tygre, upon which they set over their armies, and after marched
against the enemy. Which thing when Eumenes and the other Satrapes and
Captains with him understood, gave first in commandment to Xenophile
Captain of the Castle of Suse, Xenophile.
not to deliver to Antigone any of the money in his custody, nor yet once to
communicate and talk with him. That done, they departed the City, and came
all together to the River of Tygre, from the said City about a days journey,
adjoining the mountain in that Region, wherein inhabit and dwell certain
people called the Vsians, living at liberty. The breadth of which in many
places thereabout, is commonly three and four furlongs over, and the midst of
the stream as deep as the height of an Elephant, running through the country
from the mountains above.vij. hundred furlongs, and falls into the red Sea.
It is also full of Sea fish and monsters which show them selves after the
first entering of the Canicular days. When Eumenes and his companions were
there arrived, they encamped about the banks of the river next to the Sea side,
attending the enemy. And because they wanted men for the garding of the said
river, Eumenes and Antigene required Penceste to send for, out of Perse, ten
thousand Archers and other shot, who sligthly gave them the hearing, because he
was not chosen general of the army. But after he had considered that if
Antigone won the victory, he should lose his Satrapes, and stand in danger
of his life, and that having a greater number he might the easlier obtain
victory, accorded their requests, and sent for ten thousand Persians shot
more. And although some of the said Persians were thirty days journey from
the place where the camp lay, yet in one day they had news and were by a
marvelous industry advertised of the message. Marvelous industry.
And because it is a thing at the first sight, hard to be believed, I therefore
mean to tell in what order and manner it was done. And first, thou must
presupose that the Country of Perse is all hilly and full of little
mountains: wherefore they had appointed certain people of the Country, and
especially such as had the loudest and shrillest voices, to stand in the
hiest places of the mountains to keep watch so near one another, that they
which made a loud noise, might both be hard and understood, and by that mean
they declared from one to another, that which was commanded by the sound of
the first watch, even to the end and farthest parts of the Country. Then
Eumenes and Penceste, having regard with their host to that before said:
Antigone with his whole army entered the City of Suse, and there proclaimed
Seleuke governor of that Province. And because Xenophile Captain of the
Castle and keeper of the treasure, refused to obey him, he appointed a number
of his men of war to tarry and besiege him, and him self with the rest
set forth against the enemy, through a hoate country, very dangerous and
painful to a people of another Nation: wherefore he was forced to travel by
night, and at the Sun rising to soiorne about the River: so that he could no
way escape without loss of many men, by reason of the fervent heat, and
chiefly being about the canicular days. And incontinent after he was come to
the place he would be at, he made ready all things meet and necessary for
his passage. Now was he in the same corner or boought, that the River of Tygre
descending from the Mountains enters Pasitigre, Pasitigre.
distaunt from the Camp of Eumenes four score furlongs, and commonly above
four oxgangs broad: and besides that, the River was so violent and swift,
that it was impossible to pass over without a bridge or ships. Wherefore
taking some cocks and long boats, he put over a certain number of his men,
commanding them, that as soon as they were on the other side, to entrenche
and strengthen them with ditches and trenches, keeping good watch until the
rest were come over. Whereupon Eumenes by his intelligencers advertised, passed
and came over the bridge which he had made over the river Tygre, with four
thousand footmen, and a thousand and three hundred horse, to charge Antigone
his Soldiers already passed, being near about three thousand footmen, and
four hundred horse, and of forragers, victuallers and such like which went
before to make provision of victuals, above six thousand. And first, he charged
the disordered and straglers, so that at his first arrival he put some to
flight, and in the end caused all the Macedonians which stood to their
defense, he run into the River, because he had the greater number, and
therefore he charged them lustely. And for that every man was glad to save
him self, they made such speed to their ships to have repassed, that with
an ouercharge, the greater number sonke, and the rest which thought to be
saved, assayed to swim, but few or none escaped drowning, by reason of the
violence and swiftness of the River. And they which thought better to render
to the mercy of the enemy, than to be drenched in the water, were taken
prisoners, being above four thousand. And although Antigone see before his
eyes so great an overthrow of his Soldiers, yet could he by no mean remedy
it, The City of Bedace.
by reason of the want of ships. Wherefore considering it was impossible to
pass, he returned and went to the City of Bedace, standing upon the River
Eule. The river of Eule.
But because it was in the midst of Summer, and the Country marvelous
hoate, he lost in traueling, many of his Soldiers: wherefore the rest of the
Soldiers were almost in despair, but after that they had reposed them selves
and soiourned in the same City a certain time, they were well refreshed, and
took then better heart.

Of Antigone his coming with his army into the country of Mede, and the
dangers and hard passage he has upon the way.

The.ix. Chapter.
WHen Antigone had certain days in the City of Bedace, well refreshed his
army, he determined to march therewith into the Region of Ecbathane in the
country of Mede, hoping thereby to conquer the hie Countries. And although
there were two ways to pass into Mede, yet was it a hard matter for him,
without interruption and let to get through any of both. For the way by the
mannured land, was fair and excellent, but very hot and little less
than.xl. days journey. But the other, leading through the Country of the
Eosians, was very short and close, howbeit, cold, sharp, straight, hilly and
barren, and the enemies country: so that it had been very difficult without the
good wills of the paysaunts to pass an army, being a people which time out of
mind had always lived at liberty, dwelling in ca^ es, and living with
acornes, mushrubbes and the flesh of savage and wild beasts poudered.
Nevertheless, Antigone having so mighty an army, thought it over great a
shame to pray and require such paysauntlie slaves of passage and recourse.
Wherefore determining to take that way, he chose out of the whole army the
targe carriers, archers, and all other shot and light armed men, which were the
lustiest fellows and most aduenterours, and divided them into two bands,
whereof the charge of the one he gave Nearche, Nearche.
commanding him to march before, and to win the most meet and convenient
passages. And the other band he divided, and set al alongs the way in diverse
places, as occasion served. Then him self marched on with the phalange or
battle of footmen, and committed the rereward to Python. But the first which
were sent out, after they had won certain trifling passages to no purpose, and
not the passages most necessary, the paysaunts at hand, so stoutly charged
them, that they slew a great number, and the rest very hardly escaped. And
Antigone coming on with his battle of footmen, thinking to win the
straightes, was in great danger, which by no means could be remedyed. For the
paysants knowing the ways and straightes of the passages, had prevented them,
and from the tops of the rocks, cast and tumbled down against the soldiers as
they marched, huge and mighty stones. They had also great strength of bows,
wherewith they hurt and galled the enemy, because they could neither defend
nor yet eschew the dinte of the shot, by reason of the hardness of the way,
which was stiepe and almost inaccessible: so that the Elephants, horsemen, and
the armed footmen, could no way succoure them, for that that they were in as
great danger, or more than the rest. Then acknowleged he his fault, and
repented him that he had not believed and followed the advice and counsel of
Python and other his friends, for buying of the passage. Notwithstanding in
the end he so valiantly and wisely bare him self, that he had within nine
days, with great loss, marvelous danger and sore travail of his soldiers,
gotten the country habitable of Mede. Wherefore they were so mutinous, that
every man complained, cried out, and spoke very evil words of him. And to say
the truth, for the space of.xliij. days, they had abidden many marvelous
adventures, and suffered intolerable mischeues. Howbeit he with sweet words
and stoare of victuals appeased their mutiny, and well refreshed them, and
after commanded Python to travail through the whole country of Mede, there
to levy so many horsemen and horses as he could get. Which commandment he
diligently executed, and in short time, because the region was well furnished
with horse and other bestiall: he brought.ij. thousand lusty horsemen, and
very near a thousand spare horse, well appointed for the wars: And of al
other kind of cattle, as Mares, and such like bearing beasts, so many as
suffised the whole army: and bisides brought.v. hundred talents of the
tresure royal on the empty horses. Then remounted Antigone all those which
had lost their horses: and amongs the rest divided the other bestiall. Which
liberal dealing, brought him again in favor with his men of war.

Eumenes to please his Satrapes, with the whole army marches into the
country of Perse, and by his wisdom and policy puts Penceste, who
affected the government and army, in great fear: and after reconcileth the
said Penceste, and assures him self of all the other Satrapes and Captains.

The.ix. Chapter.
AFter Eumenes and the Satrapes with him, understood of Antigone his coming
into Alcide, they called many counsels, and were of diverse opinions. For
Eumenes and Antigene captain of the Argiraspides, and all the rest which came
out of the low country, did think it meetest and most for their safety to
go toward the sea from whence they came. But the Satrapes of the hye
countries, having special regard to their own particular case, said, that the
best were to march into the higher regions. When the dissension thus increased
and waxed hoter, Eumenes foreseeing, that if the army should be divided and
dispersed, either part then should be to weak to encounter the enemy,
condescended to the Satrapes of the high countries. Whereupon they removed their
Camp from the River of Pasitigre, and marched on to Persepolis, The City of
Persepolis.
the honourablest city of Perse, being about.xxviij. days journey, a country
very hilly, the one way lying beneath the mountains very hot and barrein of
all kinds of victuals, and the other a hie country, very wholesome, and a good
air, full of al kinds of pleasant fruits. It was also full of valeys, close
and shodowy, and gardens abou^ding with all sorts of trees, and fruits, great
store of fountains likewise running with clear waters, making the country
marvelous pleasant and delectable, which caused the passengers to desire to
rest and soiorne there. Moreover there were many fair chases, and great
plenty of wild beasts, whereof the peasantes brought to Penceste great
abundance, which he gave and bestowed upon the men of war, to get and win
their love and good wills. There are also in that region for archers and other
shot, the best Soldiers within the whole countreye of Perse. When they were
at last arrived in the City royal of Persepolis, Penceste gouerner of the
same country, made a solemn sacrifice to Philip and Alexander, as to their
Gods, and after the sacrifice, a great and sumptuous banquet to the whole
camp, aboundyng in all sorts of meats, brought from all the parts of the
country. And for the assemble of the men of war, he made ready a place
abroad in the fields, with.iiij. round circles like unto a cloister, one with
in an other egally distant, the second bigger than the first, and all the
rest in mete proportion, so yt the vttermoste which enclosed the other three,
was.x. furlongs about, in which sat the mercenarie soldiers and strangers.
In the second sat the Argiraspides Macedonians, and the Soldiers which served
with Alexander in his wars.viij. furlongs in compass. In the third were the
extraordinary captains horsemen, and all other the special friends of the
Satrapes, and other chieftaines, being four furlongs about. In the last which
was two furlongs round, sat the Dukes, and chief rulers of the army, the
captains of the horsemen, and the princes of Perse there. In the midst of the
last circle stood the altars of the Gods, the tabernacle of Alexander and
Philip, whose seats were made of leaves and trees bearing fruit, and the
residue covered with fair and rich tapistrie, whereof the country of Perse
abounds, being full of delices and things of pleasure. The distances of the
circles were in that sort drawn out, to the end that they which sat in the
one, should be no let or stop to those in the other: and every circle had his
officers and ministers, kitchins, and all other houses of office, in such order
and so many, that the great diligence and providence of Penceste, might therein
be well understood and known. By mean whereof he greatly wanne the favor
and good wills of all the company. Which thing Eumenes perceiving, and
knowing he went about to win the soldiers favors to be made general, and to
obtain the principality, counterfaited and forged certain false and surmised
letters, by which he animated the Soldiers to war, wherewith he soon
abated Penceste his audacitie and ambition, and brought him self into greater
authority and reputation, in whom also the men of war had great hope and
confidence. The contents of the letters were these: How that Olympias had
brought the young son of Alexander into Macedone, had slain Caslander, and
peaceably enjoyed the realm. And that Polispercon, with the greatest part of
the army royal and all the Elephantes, was gone into Asie, to war on
Antigone, and was already in Cappadoce. Which letters. were written in the
Syrian tongue, subscribed in the name of Oronte Satrapa of Armenie, Penceste
his great friend, and therefore bare the more credit. Then Eumenes caused them
to be carried to all the Satrapes and captains to be seen, and after published
them to the whole army. By reason of which letters, all the host then thought
that Eumenes might advance to the kings whom he would, and punish those he
hated. And the more to put and keep in terror and fear such as were
disobedient and desirous of authority, he called to judgment Sybirte, Satrapa
of Aracose, and great friend to Pencest, whom he accused, saying that he had
sent some of his horse against the Aracothes, without knowledge of the assemble
and counsel, and therefore required that he might be discharged, and all his
treasure and goods confiscate. Whereupon he put him in such peril and danger,
that if he had not secretly fled, he had been slain by the multitude of the
Soldiers. Notwithstanding, after he had by that mean put the other in fear,
and recovered his authority, he returned to his accustomed humanity and
courtesy, and through fair words and large promises he reconciled Penceste,
and made him ready and tractable to employ his service in the affairs of the
Kings. And to assure him self of the other Satrapies, chieftains and captains,
and to have some manner guage of them, to serve in stead of hostages, he fained
the want of money, praying every of them to lend him as much as they could
spare, for the affairs of the kings. Which they did, so that he borrowed of
those whom he chiefly suspected, the just sum of.CCCC. talents. By which mean
he thought him so sure of the^, that they would not work him any falshode or
treason, nor yet once step aside from him, whom he after kept and reserved
for the guard and defense of his person and his fautours, in all his affairs
whatsoever.

Of the battle between Antigone and Eumenes, and of their powers: and of
their retire to winter without victory on either side.

The.x. Chapter.
WHen Eumenes had thus provided for all things that might happen as aforesaid,
news were brought out of Mede, how Antigone with his whole power was coming
into Perse, which Eumenes understanding, immediately took his journey with his
whole army, determining to be there before him, to ye end to give battle.
Whereupon he sacrificed to the Gods, and that done, royally banketted the
Princes captains and men of war, because he would give them greater occasion
of affection and love toward him. And for that they should think he would at
full please them, he pledged so many as drunk unto him, by reason whereof he
fell into a grievous malady, and therefore was forced to repose there certain
days. For whose cause, all the whole army (desirous of battle) were very
sorry. Nevertheless, after some amendment and recovery, he no longer stayed
his journey, but being carried in a horselitter, hasted on the array, the
conduct whereof he gave to Pencest and Antigene. And after he had gotten within
a days journey of the enemy, the vauntcurrers of each side gave intelligence of
the approach of one an other, wherefore they determined on both sides the next
day following to give battle. Howbeit by reason of a valley and River betwixt
them, besides the straightness of the ground, they were frustrate of their
purposes and determinations. Notwithstanding they aranged on either side their
battles, and encamped not above.iij. furlongs one from an other: and
for.iiij. days together, they only skirmished with shot: during which time
both the armies had wasted and consumed all the victuals in the country near
unto them, so that they began to want.

The fifte day following Antigone sent his ambassadors toward the Satrapes and
Macedonians, to persuade them to aba^don and forsake Eumenes, and join with
him, promising to leave the Satrapes their Satrapies. And the rest which
would not follow the camp, he promised to some great lands and possessions,
and to send the rest honorably with large gifts home into their countries:
and so many as minded to serve, he was content to retain, every one according
to his astate. To which offers and gentle words the Macedonians gave no ear,
but threatened to kill the messangers, if they departed not, and that quickly.
Which thing Eumenes understanding, came toward them, highly allowing and
commending their doings, and gyuing them besides hearty thanks, began to
recite this Fable ensuyng, which although right old, yet very meet and served
for his purpose.

There was sometime (quod he) a fierce Lion, amorous of a certain fair young
Damosel, A moral fable.
which prayed of her Father this maid in marriage. Whereunto the Father
answered, that he was well pleased to bestow her on him, always provided, that
he should pull of his claws, and pluck out his teeth, fearyng that if upon
any occasion he waxed angry with his daughter, having his teethe and claws, he
would incontinently tear her in pieces: To which demand the Lion agreed. But
when the father of ye maiden see that the Lion had neither claws nor teeth for
his defense, he with a leauer easily slew him. Even so (quod he) noble
soldiers and Companions in arms, would Antigone do with you, promising all
your desire until he have you under his power, but after he will punyshe you
at his pleasure. When he had thus spoken, the soldiers believed he said
truth, and thereupon the assemble brake up. When night came, certain which
fled from Antigone his camp, arrived, declaryng that he was trussyng up his
baggage, and that at the second watch of the night he meant to depart. When
Eumenes understood thereof, he imagened that he would into the country of
Gabene, Gabene.
being but three days journey off, because it stood whole, and furnyshed with
all kinds of victuals to victual a camp for a long time, and besprinkled
with ryuers and strong valeys very hard to pass. For which cause, Eumenes
determined to preuente and occupy the same country before him, and thereupon
marched forth on the way. A cautell.
But to keep the enemy in the mean while occupied, he sent certain of his
mercenarie Soldiers whom he had corrupt, to Antigone his camp, who
should make semblaunt as though they came to yield: affirming that the enemy
was in readiness to come and assail them that night in their camp, and in the
mean time, commanded his soldiers soon after they had supped, to take their
journey: which they did. When Antigone understood that the enemy would come
and assail him in his camp, he stayed his army, and put them in order of
battle: and while he was so occupied Eumenes with his army had travailed a
great way beyond them before it was perceived and known. Nevertheless after
he was by his scoute advertised of the truth, and understood the crafty
dealyng, he altered not his purpose, but commanded his men with all speed to
pursue the enemy as though they fled. A Stratageme.
But after a whiles trauail, seeing the enemy six hours before him, and he by
no mean able to overtake them, bethoughte him of this policy. First he left
the conduct of his footmen to Python, to bring them on with reasonable
journeys, and he upon the spur with his horses pursued the enemy, and by the
day break had overtaken the tail as they were descending into a valey. So he
tarried and rested him upon the top of a mountain, and there mustred his men,
making in the face of the enemy, the greatest show he could: Who thinking it
to be ye whole army of Antigone, stayed and put themselves in order of
battle, determining out of hand to fight. In this sort, the generals of
either army by subtle and marciall policies, deceived one an other, as if
they had striued which of them had been wisest, and skilfullest and to show
that the victory greatly consisted in their two persons. And by this devise
has Antigone stayed the enemy, having good leisure to attend for his
footmen: and after they were come, they aranged their batailes, and then
descended the side of the hill, The number of the men on either side, and their
order.
in such order as was terrible to behold. He had in the whole with the
soldiers of S^ leuke^ and Python, above.xxviij. thousand footmen.viij.
thousand horse, and.lxv. Elephantes. The two Chieftaynes used their sundry
policies in ordering their battails, as who would say that the one had as
great knowledge and experience as the other.

First, Eumenes gave the leading of the vowarde of his army to Eudame, who
brought the Elephantes out of Inde, besides a band of.v. hundred horse about
him. Before the^ placed he two ba^des of lances, fifty horse in each, one at
the tail of an other, at the foot of the mountain in places most meet.
After was placed Stasander, with his thousand horse. After him, Antimacke,
Antimacke.
gouerner of Mesopotamie, with.vj. hundred horse, besides.vj. hundred
Arocothes, who before had been under the conduct of Hybirte and after he fled,
given to Cephele. After were.vj. hundred horse of the Paropamsades placed,
Cephele.
and with them.vj. hundred Thracians. And before all the bands aforesaid, he
placed.xxv. Elephants, aranged in manner of a saint Andrews cross, and the
spaces between the Elephants and the horse, he supplied with shot. The vowarde
being in this sort placed, the battle of footmen marched next, in the
foreparte whereof were appointed the mercenaries, being above six thousand,
behind them, five thousand of diverse nations, which came thither to serve,
all armed after the manner of the Macedonians. After them were placed the
Argiraspides, to the number of three thousand or more, keeping their array:
which band because it was never vanquished nor overthrown, greatly feared
the ennimie, and behind them, all the soldiers which Alexander waged, being
about the like number of the Argiraspides, and served under their captains:
and before the Phalang or battle of footmen he arranged forty Elephantes,
and the void spaces betwixt them he likewise supplied with footmen lightly
armed. On the left wyng or rerewarde on the other side of the phalang, were
first placed three hundred Carmanians, under the charge of Clepoleme,
Clepoleme.
after them nine hundred, called the companions or adventurers, with the bands
of Penceste and Antigene, to the number of three hundred horse, all under one
guydon: and at the end of them, ^ e appointed his own band of horse of the
like number. And for their guard, he placed two wings of his household servants,
fifty horse in each, aranged on the side, and not a front like the rest. And
without them in the right point he likewise placed in an other wing four
bands, wherein were two hundredth choice and picked horse. Besides them, he
chose out of the lightest and brauest of all nations he had.CCC. whom he
placed in the front of the battle where he himself was, and before them he
aranged the rest of his Elephantes. The whole army of Eumenes was about.xxxv.
thousand footmen.vj. hundred horse, and.Cxl. Elephantes. Antigone being in
the top of the mountain, had seen the order which Eumenes kept, he arranged
his battails as he thought for the best. For seeing the right wyng or voward of
the ennimie chiefly fortified with Elephantes and his best horse, he placed
right over against them the chiefest light horse he had, the more part shot,
meaning that they should not choke the enimie^ but wheel about to and fro,
thinkyng thereby to keep them occupied in that wing or vowarde, whereon they
most trusted, so that they should do nothing. And right over against the
battle of footmen of the enemy, he placed Arbalisters on horsback and
lances, about a thousand Medians and Palatians, all trained soldiers,
according to the necessity of the time and place. After them placed he.xij.
hundred Tarentines, all choice men, and very subtle to lie in ambush, in whom
he greatly trusted, whereof a thousand were Phrygians and Lydians. After he
placed Pythons horse, being a thousand and and.iiij. hundred lances, whom
Lysanias conducted: behind them placed he the vauntcurrers or forrayers,
Lysanias.
and viij. hundred other of the hie countries. With this number and in this
order was furnyshed and placed the left wing or rerewarde under the conducte
of Python. After them marched the phalang or battle of footmen, in which were
the mercenaries to the number of nine thousand: behind them were the Lydians
and Pamphilians, and after the^ were.viij. M. of diverse nations armed after ye
manner of ye Macedoninas. And behind the^ were ye Macedonians, about ye like
number, whom Antipater, when he was created gouerner of the kings, had given to
Antigone^ And in the right wing on the other side of the phalang, trouped the
mercenarie horsemen of diverse nations, being about five hundred: after them a
thousand Thracians, and.v. hundred other soldiers, which came thither to
serve: behind them a thousand, called the compaignions or adventurers whom
Demetre the son of Antigone had charge of, which was the first time that ever
he came into the field with his father in battle. Demetre.
And in the vttermoste part of the right wyng or voward was Antigone with his
band of of four hundred horse, divided into three cohorts or troops all of
his own house, and to them adjoined a hundred Tarentines. On the front before
the said right wing or vowarde were placed.xxx. Elephants, which embraced the
whole right wing or vowarde in form of a cross, and the spaces between them,
and the men of war, he furnished with light armed footmen. And for the rest
of the Elephantes, he placed the greater part before the phalang, and the rest
before the left wing or rereward.

When Antigone had in this order aranged his battails, he caused the^ to march
down from the mountain in order, and not afront. For the right wing or vowarde
wherein lay all his hope, he caused to march against the ennimie, meaning they
should charge all alongest the flank of the enemy. But the left wing or
rerewarde which he had appointed to amuse the right wing or voward of the
enemy he caused to march straight and close together. Howbeit, after they
approached, and the trumphets sounded to battle, the horsemen with Python, seeing
no greter power against them, and they more in number and far better mounted
than the enemy, kept not the order of amusing them, according as they were
appointed, but stoutely showed their corages. And because that in the front of
that wing or voward were the elephantes, which they thought not good to
assail, they wheled about. And after they had passed the Elephantes, they
charged them on the flank, in which they slew and hurt with their shot and
lances a great number, and the enemy no way could hurt them, by reason they
were so heauyly armed, that they were never able to pursue them, nor yet save
them selves when they were charged. When Eumenes see that, he called out the
lightest horses in Eudame his band, which were in the right wing or vowarde,
and a certain number of footmen lightly armed, and charged the said Python,
and by little and little brought on the Elephantes in the same wing or vowarde,
and by that mean incontinente he put the enemy to flight, and chased them
hard to the foot of the mountain, during which fight, the two battles of
footmen fought long together, where many men were wounded and killed, but in
the end Eumenes phalang wanne the victory, through the virtue and prowes of
the Argiraspides Macedonians, all old trained Soldiers, who had oftentimes
been in many adventures and dangers, and thereby became so valiant and
hardy, that few or none were able to abide their force, as clearly by them
then appeared: For being not passing.iij. thousand men, their band was the
bulwark and strength of the whole army, and therefore placed in the front of
the battle, as their chief strength. When Antigone see his left wing or
rereward put to flight, and his whole phalang turn the back, and heard his
friends counsel him to make to the mountain, to put in order his men which
were fled, yet would he not: but with the band of horse about him, he so
profited him self, and used the opportunity of the mountain, that he both
saved his fled men, and also wanne the honor of the field. For after he see
that the Argiraspides and the rest of Eumenes footmen, had subsecuted and
chased his Soldiers unto the foot of the hill, and had thereby broken their
array, and were divided, he straightways charged the flank of Eumenes right
wing or vowarde, which Eudame led, and put them al to flight, because that
where as they thought before the victory had been theirs, and then being so
suddenly charged, they became so amazed, that many of them were slain. Then
Antigone forthwith sent out certain of his light horse to stay the fled
footmen and retire them to the foot of the Mountain, which was speedely
done, and there he put them again in order of battle. When Eumenes
understood that his right wing or vowarde under the conduct of Eudame was put
to flight, he caused to sound the retraict, and sent out aid to retire the
rest which had the enemy in chase. When both the Chieftaynes by this mean had
retired their fled Soldiers, they somewhat before night got them together,
and again put them in order of battle: both generals, Captains and
Soldiers, on either side were so obstinate and fierce. And although it drew
to night immediately after, yet it was so very fair and clear, that they might
see (by reason the Moon was at the full) one another. And besides, the armies
were so near the one the other, that they might on both sides hear the
neighing of horses, and clattering of armours, that every man would have
thought they had been together by the ears. But being passed above thirty
furlonges beyond the place where the battaill was fought, and that the dead
lay: about midnight the Soldiers on either side all weried and tyered, what
with their trauaill sustained in the battaill, as also oppressed with hunger
and thirst, desired they might pitch their camp without any more blows. And
although Eumenes did all that in him was, to persuade them to return to the
place where the dead lay, to the end to bury them, which was the whole honor
of the field, yet could he not bring them unto it, but all with one voice
cried, to return to their Camp and cariages: Wherefore he was forced to agree
thereto, because he was not of that power and authority there to chastise and
rebuke them: for that many of the Chieftaynes there thought them his egal: and
therefore was no time convenient to use correction and punishment. But Antigone
being chief of his army, after the retire of the enemy into their camp,
enforced his Soldiers to remove their camp and pitch it where the battaill
was fought. And by that mean being Lord of the field, to bury the dead, he
wan the honor of the field, although in the rest he had no whit the better:
for there were on his part slain above.iij. thousand.vj. hundred footmen, The
number of the dead and hurt.
liiij. horse, and above.iiij. thousand hurt. And of Eumenes side.v.
hundred.xl. footmen, few or no horse, and about.ix. hundred hurt. After
Antigone was returned from the battaill, and perceived his Soldiers greatly
discouraged, he determined to retire from the enemy: and to the end he might
the speedylier march with them, he sent all his hurt men and baggage into a
City near hand. And after he had about the dawning of the day buried the
dead on his part, he detayned the Herault which was come to enterre the bodies
of the enemy, and commanded his Soldiers presently to suppe. When the day
was past and night come, he delivered the Herault, gyuyng leave the next day
in the morning to bury the dead. That night removed he his camp, and with his
army so hasted, that by morning he had gotten far enough of the enemy, and
lodged him in Gamarge in the region of Mede by Pyton governed, a country well
victualed, and very singular for an army.

Eumenes burieth the dead: and of a marvelous case which happened between two
women of Inde.

The.xij. Chapter.
AS soon as Eumenes was by his scoulte advertised of the enemies departure, he
by reason of his men's weariness sustained in that battle, minded in no wise
to pursue them, but to bury the dead. Which was very honorably done. In doing
whereof happened a marvelous sudden thing, and to the Greeks very strange.
For after that Cete Captain of the Indians had in that battle ben slain,
two of his wives which he brought out with him in the same wars, being there,
the one newly married, the other many years before, showed the great and
excessive love they bare him. But first you must understand, that the law
sometime amongs the Indians was, that all or at the least the most contracts
and marriages were by the wills and agreements of the married made, without
asking the consents either of fathers or mothers, whereby oftentimes happened,
that many yo^g people being neither like nor matches, for a little light
fantastical love, married togethers, and so soon after repented. Through
which sufferaunce, many incontinent and light Dames, made love and became
familiar with others, and because that with their honesties they could not
forsake their first husbands, they would poison them: for in the same Country
are great stoare of all kinds of poison which speedely will do it: and
especially there are such vehement poisons, that if they but come near the
meat which is to be eaten, or the dishes wherein it lies, the meat straight
becomes mortal. And because this was a common practice and chanced often,
and that many husbands by this mean died, to the end that the wives being in
such cases attainted might be punished, they made a general law, that when
the husband died, if the wife were not with child or had borne him one, she
should be burned with him. And they that refused to be burnt, were reputed and
taken for whoores and vile women, and never after to be married, nor yet
received with the honest and virtuous Dames and Matrones to thy administration
of their sacrifices or other public matters. By reason of which law, the
wicked deed before so common amongs the naughty wives in poisoning their
husbands, was now converted all to the contrary. For they considering the
necessity and straightness of the law, and the shame and dishonor to such
as refused the accomplishing thereof, were not only careful for the lives of
their husbands whereon theirs depended, but also when it happened any their
husbands to die, the wives would be at co^trouersy (if he had many) which of
them should have that glory and honor, as then chanced, for the law would
that one should be burnte, and because there were two, either of them pleaded
her cause before the Chieftaynes and Captains of the army to have the glory.
The younger woman said, that the other was with child, wherefore by the law
it was not laufull she should be burnt: the elder said, that since she was the
auncienter, she most deserved the honor. In the end the Commissioners
appointed for the hearing and determining of ye controversy, informed by the
report of the Matrones, that the elder was with child, judged the younger to be
perferred: Wherewith the other sore agreeued, with great lame^tation and
tears, despoiled her of her clothes, and tare her hair, as if she had had
marvelous evil tydinges brought her. On the other side, the younger who had
the honor, accompanied with her waiting maids casting chappellets of flowers
upon her head as if she had been newly married, joyfully went to the fire.
Her kinsfolks also went with her, singing hympnes and songs agreeable to her
virtue. And as she came near ye stake, she began to put of her garments
whereof she had stoare, besides rings, bags of gold and all kinds of
precious stones and jewels both on her fingers, head, neck and arms, which
she gave and bestowed upon her friends and servant as tokens of remembrance.
And after she was vnrayed, her own brother led her to the fire: where in the
view and sight of all the whole army there assembled in great admiration to
see the sight, she honorably ended her life. But before the fire was put to
her, all the army thrice marched about the stake in arms: which done, she
embraced the body of her husband hard by her, and so without either sighe or
groan was burnt. Whereupon some of the lookers on moved with pity, condemned
the law of the Indians, as strict and cruel, and other some highly commended
the same. After Eumenes had celebrated the exequies of the dead, he departed
from Paretace, and trauailled into the country and Province of Gabene, Gabene.
wherein his men of war had never ben, very full of victuals, and all other
things necessary for the army: distaunt from the place where Antigone lay by
the maineured land, xxv. journeys, but through the deserts where is neither
victuals nor water.ix. or thereabouts. In this sort lodged Eumenes and
Antigone their armies to winter, exercisyng and refreshyng their Soldiers one
far enough from an other.

Cassander understanding of that Queen Olympias had done, with his army
comes into Macedone, and besieges the said Olimpias within the city of
Pidue, where the Queen in short time is clean void of hope of all succors
she looks for.

The.xiij. Chapter.
IN the mean time that Antigone and Eumenes warred in Asie as aforesaid, The
city of Tege.
Cassander who besieged the City of Tege in the Country of Peloponese in
Europe, understanding of Olympias coming into Macedone, and the death of
Euridice and Phillip her husband, and of the defacing the tomb of Iolas his
brother, concluded with the Tegeans a peace, and with his army marched
toward Macedone, whereby he leaft his friends and allies in great
perplexity. For Alexander Polispercon his son having a great army, always
had an eye to the Cities of Peloponese. And the Etholians minding to gratify
Queen Olympias and Polispercon, took and furnished the passage of the piles,
by which Cassander should pass: wherefore he was forced to leave that
passage, and to get together a number of Passengers out of the country of Eube
and Locres, in which he put over his army into Thessalie, The City of
Perrhebie.
where he was advertised that Polispercon besieged the City of Perrhebie. So
he sent Calas one of his Captains with part of his army to maintain the
wars against Polispercon, and Dynias an other of his Captains to win the
passages of Macedon: Dynias.
which he diligently exploited and wanne, before the Soldiers of Olympias
(whom she had for that purpose thither sent) were come. But after she
understood that Cassander with a power royal was approached Macedone, she
constituted Aristone General, Aristone.
to fight against him, and her self accompanied with the young son of
Alexander and Roxanne his mother, Thessalonique the daughter of Philip, and
sister to the said Alexander, Deidamie the daughter of Eacle King of Epire
sister to Pyrrhe, who after warred on the Romans, the daughters of Attale,
and many other of the principal Ladies of the country, with a great number of
their kinsfolks and friends, retired into the City of Pidue: The City of
Pidue.
the more part of which people were unmeet for the wars, and the town
unprovided of victuals to maintain the siege long. And notwithstanding that
she see she was in some danger, yet determined she to tarry there, trusting
that the greater part of the Greeks and Macedonians would come aid her. She
had about her a certain number of footmen and horse, which accustomably were
restau^t in the court, besides a few Elephants which Polispercon had least in
the Country. For Cassander at his first entry into the country, had taken the
greater number, and after he had passed the straights of Perrheby, he came and
besieged the City of Pidue, and with a trench enclosed it from the one side of
the sea to the other. For it stood in a gulf of the Sea, on each side
environed with water, except the entry, wherein he made a cross trench, and
sent to them which would be his friends and allies, for ships, artillary, and
all other hablements of war, to besiege the same by sea and land. And when he
understood that Eacke King of Epyre was with a great army coming to aid
Olympias his sister, Attarie.
he sent Attarye with one part of his army out against him: who made such
speed, that he wan and kept the straight passages between the country of
Epyre and Macedone: so that he put Eacle from his enterprise: by which mean,
and also for that the greater part of his subjects which with evil will came
against the Macedonians, made in his camp such a muteny, that he was feign
(notwithstanding his meaning to succoure his sister) to send back all those
whom he see evil willing, and with the rest which determined the adventure
with him, continued his journey: howbeit, he was very weakly accompanied: and
which was worse, they that forsook him, after their return home, brought all
the rest of the people of the country into such a mutenie, that by a common
and public decree, they bannished their King Eacke, and allied with
Cassander: which thing in the country of Epyre was never seen since
Neoptoleme the son of Achilles first governed there. For that Realm always
went by disce^t from the father to son, and the Kings until that day died
within the Country. After that rebellion, Lyciseus.
when Cassander had sent into Epyre Lisiske to be governor and ruler of the
same: they which stood in doubt whether to take Olympias part or no, seeing
all things out of hope, turned to Cassander: whereby remained no more for
Olympias but one expectation and hope of aid, to wete, of Polispercon, who not
withstanding soon failed her. Callas.
For Callas whom Cassander had sent to war upon Polispercon, being very
near encamped the said Polispercon, as he besieged the City of Perrheby,
found the mean so to suborne his men of war, that the more part forsook
him and rendered to Callas. Thus and by these means in short time lost Olympias
all her hope of aid.

Antigone thinking to surprise and discomfit Eumenes and his army, the said
Eumenes (through his wisdom and diligence) frustrateth his enterprise: and
by that mean saves both his Elephants and baggage.

The.xiiij. Chapter.
WHile Antigone aboade in the Country of Gamarge, in the Region of Mede as we
have before declared, and had considered yt he was much weaker than the enemy:
he imagined and enterprised at unawares to assail them, and by skill and policy
martial to conquer them, and the rather forasmuch as they were so dispersed
in diverse villages to winter, that some of them were six days iorneis one
from another. Notwithstanding his enterprise was very difficulte and hard to
bring to good purpose, because to pass through the maneured country was a
very long journey, and never able to do it without knowledge of the enemy, and
he could not well pass his army the shorter way without great trauaill and
want of all things, in so much as it was through the deserts, and the country
very dry. Nevertheless, because it was the nearest way and meetest to bring
his purpose to pass, he fully resolved to take it, whereby he thought he might
best so surprise the enemy, being all dispersed, divided, and idle. Whereupon
he commanded his Soldiers to be in readiness to depart, and to make
provision of victuals ready to eat for.x. days, causing it to be noysed, that
he would into Armenie. But suddenly beyond all men's expectation, he took his
journey through the deserts in the winter when the days are at the shortest.
And as he passed, he gave commandment to his soldiers on the day to make so
great fires as they would, but in the night none, to the end the p^ isaunts
might not by the sight thereof have any notice to advertise the enemy,
considering that the deserte being plain and champion, and with hye mountains
environed, ye light of the fire might easelie be seen very far of. In this
sort trauailled they without fire in the night.v. days together. The.v. day
at night, the Soldiers almost frosen to death and far spente for want of
victuals and other things necessary, made fires to warm and refresh them.
Which the inhabitaunts of the deserts seeing, and suspecting what that was,
with all possible post sent certain of their men upon Dromadaries, a very
swift beast in iourneying, toward Eumenes and Penceste: which beasts in one
day without bait, had posted a thousand five hundred furlongs, to aduerti^ e
them of the coming of Antigone. When Penceste his Soldiers understood that
the enemy was already half way, they determined to go into the farthest
parts where the rest of the Soldiers lay, and so join with them, rather
than there still to tarry and be surprised of the enemy, before any aid
could come unto them. When Eumenes see them thus feared and dismayed, he to
give them courage, and to persuade them that they needed not to remove from the
places they were in, which was the entry of the desert, declared that he had
found out an excellent devise and remedy to stay the coming of the enemy
for.iij or iiij. days: during which time the rest of the army might easily be
gotten thither, and so by that mean without any great difficulty they should
win of the enemy victory, who with hunger and thirst were al benoumed and
weried, and likewise unprovided of all other things necessary. At whose
words all the Soldiers marvelled, and would needs know what devise that was
or might be, which was able to keep back the enemy iij. or.iiij. days. Then
commanded he, and enjoined al his Captains there, to follow him with those
men they had, and to carry all the vessels they could get, wherein any fire
might be made. Which done, he hasted to get the hiest mountains about the
uttermost limits of the desert, in the sight of the enemy, and on the^ placed
men dispersed in diverse places, being about.lxx. furlongs in length,
commanding every of them (during that time) to make great fires in the places
where they stood all alongest about.xx. cubits one from an other, and at the
first watch of the night to make notable great fires, as though they watched
and were at supper, at the second watch less, and at the third watch least of
all: to the end, that they which see them far of, might think it a great
camp. Which commandment by the Soldiers diligently executed, many
paysaunts dwelling on the mountains in the oppisite, and Pithons friends
Satrapa of Mede, with great speed descended into the plain, signifying to
Antigone and Python, all they had seen: who were greatly abashed at those
news, which they never doubted of. Wherefore they sobdainlie stayed where they
were, and asked counsel of the said Paysants what was best to do. For they
thought it very dangerous, for their men being trauailled, weried, and
unprovided of all things, to join battaill with the enemy well provided of
all things, and together assembled, thinking also, that some of their own men
had betrayed them, and had advertised the enemy of their coming. Wherefore at
last they leaft the plain way and took that on the right hand, by the
mountains, a while to repose and refreshe their people. In this sort abused
Eumenes the enemy, having time enough to assemble al his power which was
dispersed in diverse places and lodgings, to entrenche and fortify his camp,
and to provide and furnishe it with all things necessary.

After Antigone had passed all the deserts, word was brought him, that all
Eumenes his Captains and men of war were gone to the camp, and that their
Elephaunts were coming behind on the way almost at hand, without company or
conduct of any men of war. Wherefore he chose out.ij. thousand^ lau^^ es.ij.
hundred Tarentines, and all the light armed footmen to go and assail the
enemies Elephants, thinking that if he could overthrow them, the enemy thereby
should greatly be weakened. But Eumenes doubting thereof, sent to conduct the
said Elephaunts, a thousand of the best horse he had, and about.iij. thousand
light armed footmen. When Antigone his Soldiers had showed them selves to the
conductours of the Elephaunts, they arranged their beasts in a square
battaill. And after they set in order the. CCCC. horse that they had for
their aid, and in the midst put all their baggage. Howbeit Antigone his
band of horse, because of their great number so violently charged the horse
of the enemy, that they were forthwith overthrown and put to flight. That
done, the Antigonians charged the Elephaunts and their conductours, who a
pretty while defended them, albeit they were by the enemy very sore hurt, and
they harmed them no whit at all. Wherefore in the end they began to recule
and had out of hand fled, if present aid which was unlooked for, had not
come and delivered them of that peril and danger.

Antigone in battaill overthrows Eumenes, puts him to death, and after
seizes on all his army.

The.xv. Chapter.
Shortly after, as they lay in camp about.xl. furlongs one from an other:
they embattailled them selves to assaye and prove fortune, and to hazard their
estates in hope of victory. And first Antigone began to place his horse and
divided them into two wings or battailles, of which the charge of the left he
gave to Python, and him self with his son Demetre led the right, and
aranged the armed footmen in the midst, and appointed the Elephaunts in the
front of the battaill in good order. And in the void space betwixt both, he
placed the light armed footmen: so accompting those he brought out of Mede, he
had in the whole.xxij. thousand footmen.viij. thousand horse, and lxv.
Elepha^ts. The number of the men on either side, and order of their battles.
When Eumenes understood that Antigone led the right wing or voward of his
battle with his best horse, he placed him self right over against, in his
left wing or rerewarde with his best and choice horse, because he had in that
battaill appointed the greater number of the most expert and best trained
horse of the Satrapes, and in the same Mithridate Ariobarzane his son, which
Ariaobarzane was descended from the princes of Perse, whom the Tyraunts
sometime flew, a valiant and hardy Champion, and had all his youth ben brought
up and trained in the wars, and before ye wing or rerewarde he arranged in
form of a cross, lx. of the most puissaunt and best Elephaunts: and in the
void places appointed the light armed footmen. Next after, he placed his
armed footmen in a maine battle, in the foreparte whereof, he first placed
the ^ erge bearers, behind them the Argiraspides, and after them the
Mercenaries and other strangers, armed after the manner of the Macedonians,
and before them al, his Elephants, and between the^ the light armed footmen,
as him thought best. In the right wing or vowarde which Phillip led, he placed
the other horse, and arranged before them the least and weakest Elephantes,
whom he commanded by no mean to charge, but to forbear fighting and to have
an eye and regard to the leaft wing or rerewarde. So there where in Eumenes
army.xxx. thousand footmen.vj. thousand and vij. hundred horse, and.Cxl.
Elephantes. A little before they joined battle, Antigene gave commandment to
one of his horsemen to ride straight against the Phalange of the enemy: and
when he was near over against the place where the Macedonians stood, so that
they might well hear him cry out with a loud voice unto them, saying these
words following. Ah cursed and wicked people, how dare you presume to come
against your fathers, who always have served with Philip and Alexander, and
obtained in their companies many victories. Certes anon ye shall see them
exploit as condign and worthy factes for the kings whom they have served and
do, as their noble and honorable deeds heretofore executed and done. For
there was not one the same time among the Argiraspides Macedonians under three
score or three score and ten years of age or more, and by reason of their long
continuance and exercise abidden in the wars, all passing valiant and
hardy. After this horsseman had done his message, they on the other side
answered aloude, and said they they were very sorry it was their chance to
fight against their kinsfolks, coosins, and so ancient men of war. But the
soldiers with Eumenes desirous of battle, exhorted him to march with speed
against the enemy. Then Eumenes seeing their forwardness, made sign to the
trumpets, who forthwith founded to battle, whereat both the armies made a
great outecrie. The first which encountered were the Elephantes, and next the
horse: whereupon because the field was large, dry and barren, there arose
through the moving and stirring of the horse, such a dust, that although they
were hard together, yet could they scarsly discern one an other did. Which
thing when Antigone see, he commanded the Median horse, and certain
Tarentines, to ride out and spoil the camp and baggage of the enemy, which
he thought by reason of the dust, might without the sight of the Eumenians be
easily done, and so winning the camp and baggage, would with little effusion
of blood be the cause of victory on their side, as it after happened. For the
fayd Medians and Tarentines passing: the corner of the enemies battle, and
riding forth on, ran upon the baggage, which was five furlo^gs from the
battaill, before they were perceived, and from thence to the camp, wherein were
few soldiers but many straglers, who for a while resisted, but soon after
they put them to flight, and by that mean wanne they the camp and carriages,
and without any great resistance took all the straglers. In the mean while
began Antigone to join battle, and so charged the left wyng or rerewarde
which came against him, and through the great number of his horse, gave so
violent a charge, that he daunted their courages, through which Penceste
Satrapa of Perse, being in that wyng, retired out of the duste with his own
horses, and after him followed a thousand more, and by that mean was Eumenes
left disfurnished and weakly accompanied in the vttermoste part of that wing
or rereward. Notwithstanding he thought it a great shame and dishonor to
fly, and therefore determined he rather to tarry, and valiantly defend the
quarrel of the Kings, than to recule. Whereupon he with might and maine charged
Antigone: so yt the fight betwixt the horsemen was sharp and cruel, and many
slain. It chanced the same very time as the Elephants were fighting, that the
foremost on Eumenes side, was by the chief and principal of Antigone discomfited
and overthrown. When Eumenes see his men disordered, and in all places have the
worst, he retired the rest of his horse yet unbroken from the battle, and
trouped to the wing or voward which Philip had the leading of, whom he had
commanded to stay and delay from fight, and took his soldiers. In ye mean
time, the Argiraspides so lustily and courageously charged the maine battle of
the enemy, that with very hand strokes they slew many, and put a number more
to flight. And their force was so intolerable, that they repulsed and
discomfited the whole phala^ge, being the far greater number, whereof.v.
thousand were slain, and the rest fled. When Eumenes understood that the
ennimie had won his camp, and that Penceste was at hand yet whole in troop,
he forced to join with him, and to charge Antigone again with his horse. For
he thought if he could get the victory, he should not only recover his own
cariages and his men's, but also the enemies. Howbeit Pencest and his horsemen
would not thereto agree, but rode further of from the battle: and when night
came, they retired one from an other into diverse places. Antigone likewise
divided his horse into two handes^ the one of which himself kept, attending the
doings of Eumenes and his soldiers, and the charge of the other he gave to
Python, commaundyng him with all speed, to charge the Argiraspides, who were
dissefurnished of their horse: which commandment with great diligence he
executed: but the Argiraspides seeing their inability to resist, retired
together in a square battle, hard to the river side, without hurt, greatly
blaming Penceste: and his company, as the only causers of the overthrow of
the horssemen. And being in such order retired, Eumenes with his horse came
and joined with them. But at their accustomed hours to make fires, they went
to consulte and advisedly debate of their great business and weighty
enterprises. The Satrapes were of the opinion that they all should forthwith
retire into the high country which they governed. And Eumenes contrary
affirming that it were best for them to charge afresh, saying that the Phalange
of the enemy was discomfited, and that yet they were as many horse.
Notwithstanding the Macedonians Argiraspides said, they would neither follow
the one opinion nor the other, because al their goods, baggages, together with
their wives, children and family, were under subjection of the enemy, so that
the counsel and assembly without any conclusion brake up. They sent also
secret messangers toward Antigone, practizing with him to yield Eumenes at his
pleasure, condicionally that he should restore their wives, children, and
goods. The Satrapes likewise and the more part of the other Captains concluded
a league and amity, and abandoned their chieftaine. Through which mean,
Eumenes was betrayed and rendered to Antigone. Who seeing that by greater hap
and much better good luck, than he looked for, he had gotten under his
subjection the Argiraspides and the rest of the soldiers which held against
him, took Antigene coronell of the Argiraspides and buried him quick. He also
slew Eudame captain of the Indian Elephantes, and diverse other captains his
utter enemies. And for Eumenes, he committed the garding of him to certain of
his men, until he had determined what to do with him. For gladly he would have
retained him, if either by good or gentle entreatie he thought he might win
him: because he knew him to be a noble warrior and stout man. Notwithstanding
he had no great confidence in his premis, by reason of the marvelous love and
singular affection that he did bear Olympias and the Kings, which he before
had well declared. For although he was by his mean from the siege of Nore
delivered, yet after in the quarrel of the Kings he warred upon him with his
whole power. Moreover seeing the mortal hate of the Macedonians against him, he
determined to put him to death. Howebeit for the love and favor he before
bare him, he caused him to be burnt, and in a fair vessel sent his bones to
his kinsfolks and friends. He found likewise among the hurt men, Jerome
Cardian, a wise and politic man, whom Eumenes greatly honored and familiarly
used: Jerome.
and therefore Antigone in like sort, after Eumenes his death, honored and
well entreated him.

Antigone retireth to winter in the country of Mede, and of the deluge or
flood which that time chances in the country of Rhodes.

The.xvj. Chapter.
AFter Antigone had brought back al his army into the country of Mede, he
wintred in a village of the Ecbathanes hard by, wherein is the Kings Palace of
that quarter, and divided his men of war through the whole country of Mede,
and chiefly in the waste country, so called because of diverse mysfortunes which
there sometime happened. For in old time about those quarters had been the
richest and gretest number of towns within all that Province, and by reason of
so many terrible and continual earthquakes, The wast Country.
all the said towns together with their inhabitants perished and were
utterly lost, whereby the whole region was maruellously altered and changed:
for there were such new rivers and lakes seen, as had not customably been. The
same time that Antigone lay in Mede, the city of Rhodes was the third time by
deluge or floude overcome, by reason whereof a great many Citizens a new were at
that present drowned, more tha^ at the other two times. For the first, because
the town was newly buylt and little enhabited, did no great hurt. The second
was much greater, and did more damage, for that there were more enhabitaunts.
But the third came about the spring, and began through great raines and showers
which fell suddenly with mighty and marvelous hayle stones: for they fell hole
and big and weighty as a mine, but some much bigger and heavier: so that
they beat down the tops of many weak built houses, and killed a great number
of people: and because the City was round, stepest and hiest in the midst in
manner of a Theater, the waters on every side so abundantly flowed, that the
lower parts were incontinent filled up, and could no way pass nor fall,
because the Citizens (seeing winter paste) took no great h^ de to the clensing
of their sinks under the earth. And the more part of the sinks and channels
about the walls were so choked, that the water in short time grew so ^ ie and
strong, that it flowed up to the market place called Digma, Digma.
and the temple of Dionisie, and in the end grew and arose up like a lake, even
to the temple of Esculape. Whereupon the Citizens seeing so great and sudden
a deluge, sought every man to save him self. Some ran to the ships, some
to the theater: and they which were most oppressed, s^ aled the tops of the
churches, and clymbed the pillars on which the statues and images stood. And
as the Citizens were in this terror and perplexity, chanced them a sudden
remedy. For one of the panes of the wall (through the violence of the water)
fell down: and so by that means it voided and ran into the sea. It was also
a happy turn that the deluge chanced on the day, because that when the
Citizens see the imminent danger, they had leisure to get out of their houses,
and withdraw them to the hiest places of the town. It was good hap likewise
that the walls of their houses were strongly buylt of stoane, and not of
brick: and therefore they which got up to the tops were safe. Howbeit, there
died above.v. hundred, and many houses overthrown and wholly beaten down,
besides diverse that were sore shaken and quashed. In this danger and
inconvenience was the City of Rhodes.

Antigone by craft puts to death Pithon, who begins to rebel: and gives
the Satrapie of Mede to Orondonate: and likewise vanquisheth certain other
Median rebels.

The.xvij. Chapter.
AS Antigone wintered in the country of Mede, he was advertised that Python
practiced with the soldiers in garrison, about some enterprise. Notwithstanding
he made semblant that he believed not the report, reproving the reporters
before the people, saying, that to set controversy between him and Python,
they had fained and devised it in their own heads. He caused it also to be
openly diuulged, that he would leave the said Python Satrapa and governor of
all the Provinces and Satrapes of the hye country, together one part of his
army, so that he might rule the better, and hold and keep him self in
sauetie. He writ also unto him gentle and gracious letters, praying him to
repair over so soon as was possible to communicate and devise of the affairs
in those quarters, to the end Antigone might with more speed return to Sea.
This did he with a crafty and painted contenaunce, clearly to put him out of
suspicio^, thinking he would, in hope of obtaining that Seignorie, come to him.
For well he knew, it was not hi^ ^ ase forcibly to take him, because he was a
valiant and courageous man, and such one, that Alexander when he lived, by
reason of his virtue, had given him the government of the same country of
Mede, which to that day he held and enjoyed. And to be short, he through
corruption and other ways, greatly got the good wills of the men of war,
that the more number promised to forsake Antigone and follow him.
Notwithstanding, although he for this cause somewhat mistrusted his crafty
cloyning, yet through the hope which certain of his familiars and friends with
Antigone put him in, he came at his commandment. And so soon as he was come,
Antigone caused him to be apprehended, and the chief and principal Captains
of the army being there in manner of a Senate assembled, accused him. Before
whom he was lightly convict, and incontinent condemned to death, and with
greater speed executed. Which done, he assembled the whole army, and in their
presence proclaimed Orondonate the Median, Orondonate.
Satrapa of the said Country of Mede, having for his assistaunce and aid
Captain Hypostrate with four thousand Mercenarie footmen, Hyopstrate.
and.v. hundred horse. And him self with the rest of the army went to the
City of Ecbathane, The City of Ecbathane.
where he took.v. hundred Talents of vncoined silver. From thence trauailled
he toward the City of Persepolis, in the country of Perse, The City of
Persepolis.
distaunt thence.xx. days journey of. But as he passed on his journey, certain
of Python his friends and coniuratours, of which Meleager and Menete were
chief, Meleager.
Menete.
had assembled, and got together of Pythons familiars about.viij. hundred
horse, and made many incursions and roades upon the people of the Country
which would not obey them. But when they were advertised of the encamping of
Hypostrate and Orondonate, they suddenly by night assailed them, and had
almost won their camp. And although they were through the nu^bre of the
ennimie repulsed, yet suborned they some of their Soldiers, who went away
with them. And because they were all horse and had no carriages, they feared
all the whole country, and set them in a marvelous uproar. But in the end
being sore pressed and charged, they were forced to retire into a valley
environed with steep rocks, and almost inaccessible, and at last there taken
and slain. But Meleager and Occrane both valiant Captains, and diverse other
of the principal stoutely standing to their defenses, were amongst the rest
also slain. And this was the end of the rebels in Mede.

Antigone coming into Perse, and there received as Lord and Seigniour of all
Asie, divided the Satrapies thereof: and after goes to the City of Suse, and
takes all the treasure he there finds.

The.xviij. Chapter.
WHen Antigone was come into the country of Perse, he was without
contradiction by ye people of the country as Lord and Seignior of all Asie
honorably received. And after that he assembled his friends, and with them
consulted and devised concerning the division of the Satrapes. Pampolemon.
First he left to Pampolemo^ Carmanie, and to Stasanor Bactriane: because he
could not with his letters easily expulse them, who were of the inhabitants in
the said provinces well beloved, and had also amongs the men of war great
friends and mighty armies. Into Arie he sent Erite, Erite.
and after his death, he deputed Euagoras, Euagoras.
a man of marvelous great courage, and wise. Oxiarthe.
He permitted likewise Oxiarthe the father of Roxanne Alexanders wife, to keep
and enjoy the Satrapes of Paropanisade, as he before held it: because he could
not expulse him without great power, and long continuance. He also called home
out of Aracothe Sybirte, whom he dearly loved: and on him bestowed that
Satrape, gyuing him the charge of the mutinous Argiraspides, under a color to
lead them into the wars, but the truth is, it was to destroy them. For he
told him in cou^sail, that he would send and put them to such uses as they
should loose their lives. Amongs which were those ye betrayed Eumenes, Even so
comes to all Traitors.
and for their treason suffered that way condign punishment. And as
oftentimes it happens, that treasons to Princes are profitable to win
victory: even so to such as commit them, they have always ben the cause
efficient of many and great mischiefs.

After Antigone see that Penceste in the Country of Perse was greatly
honored, he expulsed him the Satrapie, whereupon many of the country being
therewith agreeued, at last one of the chief and principal of them named
Thespius, Thespius.
stepped out and frankly told him, that they would obey none other: whom he
caused for his so saying, incontinent to be slain, and gave the Satrapie to
Ascleptodore: Ascleptodore.
together a sufficient and able number of men of war, to guard and defend it.
Notwithstanding he with gentle words and large promysses courteously
entertained Penceste, until he had gotten him out of the country. These things
done, Antigone took his journey toward Suse: and as he approached near the
city, Xenophile Captain of the the Castle of Suse, Xenophilus.
and Treasurer of all the treasure Royal within the same, by Seleuke sent to
offer his service, and to be at his commandment, met him about the river
Pasitigre, whom Antigone gently and courteously received, making him believe
that he would honorably entreat him, least if he otherwise did, Xenophile might
alter his determination and purpose, and so should be despoyled and robbed of
him. By which mean, after they were entered the City, Xenophile rendered him
the Castle, wherein he found a tree and many other things, all of massife
gold, amounting to the value of.xv. thousand Talents: he found also there
great sums of money, besides many crowns with other great gifts and spoils,
to the value of.v. thousand Talents. So by that mean and with that he brought
out of the country of Mede, he had in gold and silver the sum of.xxv.
thousand Talents. And for this time we will leave speaking of Antigone and the
things by him done in Asie, and return to that the same time exploited in
Europe.

Cassander takes by composition Olympias, and after puts her to death.

The.xix. Chapter.
Now says the history, that Cassander who besieged Olympias within the City
of Pidue, in the country of Macedone, could not well win it, by reason of
the winter season, but only with ditches and trenches, held it enclosed and
guarded the Port with ships: to the end no aid or succoure should be thither
brought. By mean whereof, the towns men were so distressed and in such need,
that they allowed monthly to every soldiour, but five Choenices of corn:
Choenice was a measure amongs the Greeks about the bigness of our quart, or
somewhat more.
Neither did the Elephantes eat any thing else than the poudre of dry wood,
and the horsemen were forced to eat their horses. Notwithstanding the Queen
still hoping of succoure, so long aboade the siege, that the Elephantes dyed of
hunger: and almost all the extraordinary horssemen, besides the greater part
of the footmen, died for want of victuals. And certain Barbarians which there
served, by necessity constrained (against nature) eat the flesh of the dead
carcases. And the rest which were uneaten, one part by the Commisioners,
deputed by the Queen, was buried, and the other thrown over the walls into the
ditches, very horrible to see: so that not the women alone, who always had been
fynely and delicately brought up, but the Soldiers also, which had abyden
almost as many miseries as might be, endured there a most intolerable stench.
But at last, the famine daily increased, that many of the Soldiers came to
the Queen and desired leave to depart, who seeing the great want of victuals,
and other inabilitie to deliver them of the siege, gave license: whereupon they
departed and rendered to Cassander, whom he right gently received, and sent
them home to their own houses, trusting that the Macedonians thereof
advertised, and seeing no hope to be looked for at the Queens hands, would not
long trauail in her aid: wherein they had good reason. For all the Macedonians
which determined to succoure her, understanding the danger, she was in,
altered their opinions, and took part with Cassander: Aristone.
Aristone and Momme except, which Aristone kept the City of Amphipolis,
Amphipolis.
and Monime the City of Polle When Olympias see, Monime. Polle.
that one part of the Macedonians had quite forsaken her, and that ye rest
were unable to mainteyn and help her, she went about to save her self and her
friends in a Gally by sea, which she caused to be sent for and brought to the
Port. But Cassander being thereof advertised by one that fled out of the town
took the said Gallie. Whereupon the Queen despayring in her affairs and
business, sent Ambassadors to Cassa^der, to treat a peace. But he seeing the
necessity wherein she stood, and therefore meaning that she should yield her
self to his courtesy, he hardly granted her safe conduct for her own person.
When Cassander had the city rendered to him, he incontinent sent certain of his
men of war to take Amphipolis and Polle. Whereupon Monime Captain of Polle
understanding the state of Olympias, yielded without resistaunce. But Aristone
who was extreme proud both of his great hand of men of war, as also for
that he had a little before vanquished and overcome Cratebas, one of Cassanders
Captains, in battaill slain a great part of his army, Cratebas.
subsecuted and chased him through the country of Busalcie, hard to the City
of Bedine, Bedine.
and it besieged and took by composition, whom he after with.ij. thousand of
his men besides, sent away with white rods in their hands, supposing that
Eumenes had not ben yet dead, and hoping that Polisperco^ and Alexander his
son would come to aid him, utterly refused the yelding up of the City of
Amphipolis. But after Olympias had written to him to render the Town,
summoning him of his faith and allegiaunce, he thought it best so to do, and
taking suertie for his person, gave up the same. Notwithstanding Cassander
considering the great authority of Aristone, by reason of Alexanders
aduauncing him in his life, and meaning to make quick dispatch of so many as
would or might any way let or hinder his affairs and doings, caused Cratebas
own kinsfolks to kill him. He persuaded likewise all their friends which
Olympias had put to death, to accuse her in the place of judgment before the
assembly of the Macedonians, which thing they did: where the Macedonians in
her absence without patron or Advocate there to defend her cause, condemned
her to death: whereupon after sentence and judgment given, Cassander sent to
her certain of his friends, persuading her to fly, promising to enbarque her in
a Gallie, which should bring her to the city of Athens. And this did he, not
for any good will to save her, but to the end she might by that mean
voluntarily run in exile, and be drenched in the Sea: so yt it might after
have been said, how by fortune of the sea, and judgment of the Gods, she was
for her cruel, mischeuous and wicked deeds, justly punished. Nevertheless,
she answered yt messangers, that fly she would not, nor yet refuse the
judgment of the Macedonians. Which thing Cassander perceiving, he for fear
that the people and assembly of the men of war would alter their
determinations and minds, when they understood she was well able to purge her
of every offense wherewith they would charge her, and should likewise reduce
and call to memory the great good turns and honour^ by them long before at the
hands of Phillip and Alexander received, sent.CC. of his trustiest soldiers
about him to kill her. Who with great violence entering the Palaice where she
was, were at the first sight so abashed with the Majesty of her face, that
they returned without doing her any hurt. But their kinsfolks whom she caused
to be slain, thinking to revenge their deaths, and also to gratify Cassander,
out of hand slew her, who never made words or showed any countenance of a
woman dismayed, or yet fainte hearted. In this sort Olympias, which in her
time had been the most honorable Dame of the world, Neoptoleme his daughter
King of Epire, Alexander his sister King of Epire, who warred in Italy, King
Phillip his wife of Macedone the most puissaunt of all other which before him
in Europe reigned, and Alexander his mother, surnamed the great, which had
exployted the most notable and honorable wars that ever were worthy the
writing and talk, miserably ended her life.

After the death of Olympias, Cassander espouseth Thessalonice Alexander the
great his sister, and foundeth the City of Cassander. And after he has put in
safe keeping Roxanne and Alexander his son, he goes into the country of
Beote, and reedifieth the City of Thebes.

The.xx. Chapter.
WHen Cassander thus gloriously and prosperously reigned, he affected the
realm of Macedon, and the better to bring his purpose to pass, espoused
Thessalonice, Thessalonice.
Phillip his daughter and Alexander his sister both by father and mother, being
always desirous to insinuate him self with the ligne royal. He likewise in
the country of Palene, within the Region of Macedone, found and built a city
named Cassandria, The City of Cassandria.
and peopled it with inhabitaunts of the Cities of Cheronese and Potede, and
diverse other villages about the same City, and the remnaunt of the
Olinthians. By which mean and also because of the great and fertile
territory, he laid and gave thereto and by other ways he took, wherewith on
hand to enlarge and make it great. The City in short time became so mighty
and rich, that it was named to be the greatest and worshipfullest amongs all
the Cities of Macedone. Now had Cassander purposed to put to death Alexander
his son, and Roxanne his mother: to the end, there should no more of
Alexanders ligne remain on live. But before he would execute this execrable
murder, he stayed, first to understand what the Macedonians thought of the
death of Olympias, and what talk was emongs them: together what Antigone did
in Asie. Wherefore he all that while caused Roxanne and her son to be brought
into the Castle of Amphipolis, and charged Glaucias Captain thereof and one
whom he greatly trusted with the keeping of them, commanding him to use and
treat them no other ways but as common persons, laying al princilie honors
and dignities toward them aparte, and to put away all the children which had been brought up with the said Son of Alexander, as his play fellows. After
that, he took upon him the authority and government as King, and caused
solemn exequies for Euridice and Phillip, whom Olympias had made be murdered,
to be celebrated, and with great pomp and solemnity entombed them in a tomb
royal with ye Kings their predecessors, making sports and pastimes, at those
days accustomed. That done, he levied a great number of men of war in the
country of Macedone, to go into Peloponese. While Cassander was thus occupied,
and that Polispercon who lay besieged in the City of Naxe, in the Region of
Perrheby, understood of Olympias death, apperceyuing no longer hope for him to
take in hand to rule the affairs of Macedone. privily by night stoale out of
the City with a few of his people, and passing through Thessaly, took the
Soldiers with Eucide, and traveled into Ethole (where he was very well
beloved) to see what retinue or train would there govern the affairs of
Macedone, hoping to find some mutacion or change. After Cassander had
assembled a mighty army, he sped him into Peleponnese to chase Alexander the
Son of Polispercon, because there was not one of his enemies which had an
whole army but he, who also had fortified and furnished all the Towns and
Castles of the same Country, by him thought most meet and defensible. Thus
without empechement or stop, passed Cassander through the country of
Thessaly. But after he was come to the entry of the Piles the Etholian. kept
him such play, and so stoutly resisted him, that with great and difficult
pain, he perforce wanne the passage: but after he was passed and had entered
the country of Beote, he sped him to bring back and again to assemble all
the Thebanes, and to restore and reedifie the City of Thebes, thinking be
should thereby get both great praise and immortal fame: as well for the high and
incomparable facts of the same City, as also for the marvelous reports which
came thereon. And because it had been greatly altered and changed, and
oftentimes made desolate, I think good to make some notable declaration of the
fortunes and chances that thereto happened.

Of the foundation and fortunes of the City of Thebes in Beota.

The.xxj. Chapter.
AFter the deluge and flood of Deucation, the City of Thebes in Beote was by
Cadme first founded and built, Cadme.
and by his name called Cadme, by the Spartes inhabited, to say, a people
dispersed, because the recourse there was of al sorts. It was by some also
named Thebicene to wete dwelling at Thebes, for that by reason of the deluge,
the people departed thence and scattered abroad in diverse countries, and after
returned thither. It fortuned after, that the Eucheleians (by force) chased and
expulsed the said inhabitants about the same season that Cadme with his people
was put to flight, and fled into the country of Illyrie. After that, Amphion
and Zethe who had the government thereof, Amphion.
Zethe.
enlarged the same as witnesses Homere, Home^ e.
saying: Who first with walls enuirond Thebane Town: And with seven gates,
to win fame and renown. Yet after that, the inhabitaunts whom Amphion and
Zethe had thither brought, were by Polidore the son of Cadme the second time
expulsed, Polydore.
by reason of a sudden mortality which happened Amphion his children. And in
process of time, the same being by the successors of the said Polydor
governed, all the country bare the name of Beote, so called of Beote, Beote.
the son of Neptune and Menelippe which sometime ruled there. Neptune.
The Argiues likewise ye third time expulsed the Thebanes, Menalippe.
and took the City. But after the Argiues were gone again into their
country, the Thebanes which retired into Alcomene, in the mountain of
Thilphosine, returned home. Yet after that certain of the said Thebanes were
gone to the siege of Troy, the Pelasgians drove so many as remained at home,
both out of the City and Country, who continued in exile in diverse miseries
until the fourth generation, as by an Augurie of certain Crows was presaged.
But in the end, the succession of the exiles, in the fourth generation
returned, and there enhabited the space of eight hundred years. Who were the
first that governed that Region, and after contended and fought for the Empire
of Greece until the time that Alexander the son of Phillip (by force) took
the city, and after razed it. But about.xx. years after, Cassander (desirous
of glory as aforesaid) through his earnest request and marvelous persuasions,
by the assent and consent of the whole country, reedified it, and repeopled it
with those which lived, and of the ligne of the exiles which were dead, as well
for the pity he had of the miserable people, as also for the glory and
renoume of the city. The Athenians also at their own costs and charges,
built and set up one part of the wall. Many other cities, likewise and
several people of Greece, Sicill and Italy, h^ lp them with money. After this
manner recovered the Thebanes their City and Country.

After Cassander has taken and subdued certain Cities of Peloponnese, and
understands of the coming of Alexander, Polispercon his son, against him,
he returns into M^ c^ done.

The.xxij. Chapter.
WHen Cassa^der was with his whole army come to the entry of Peloponnese,
called Isthmus, and found the same by Alexander the son of Polispercon taken
and guarded, Isthmus.
he passed beyond him, and went to Megare, Megare.
and there got together a number of ships, barges and fery boats, wherein he
put over into Epidaure his army and Elephants, Epidaure.
and so came against the city of Argos, Argos.
which he constrained to reuolte from Alexander, and to take his part. He
reduced likewise after, all the towns and cities of the Messenians to him,
except I^ home, Ithome.
and by composition took the City of Hermonide. Hermonide.
And apperceyuing that Alexander came against him to fight, Gerannie.
left in the City of Gerannie about I^ thmus. Moliecke.
Moliecke one of his Captayns with.ij. thousand trained soldiers, and him self
returned into Macedone.

Upon Antigone his arrival in Babylon, Seleuke perceiving that he seeks
occasions to expulse or kill him, flies into Egypt.

The.xxiij. Chapter.
THe year ensuing wherein Praxibule was created Governor of Athens, and
Nance, Spure and Marcke Popill were chosen Consulles at Rome, after Antigone
had given to Aspise one of the Satrapes of the country, the Satrapie of
Susiane, Aspise.
he got together a number of charriotes and Camelles to carry all his gold
and silver to sea, and with them and his army took his journey to Babylon.
And when he had in.xx. days iourneis reached Babylon, Seleuke Governor of
that Province, honorably received him, on whom he bestowed great gifts, and
roially banquetted his soldiers. Notwithstanding Antigone called him to an
account, for the revenue of the said Province. And because he held and
mainteyned that he was not accomptable for it, considering that the said
Province was by the Macedonians in the life of Alexander, for his merits and
good service bestowed on him, they were at some controversy. Nevertheless
after Seleuke had remembered his dealing toward Python, he much doubted that
Antigone under like color, would make quick dispatch of him, for so much as
it was well known, that he endeavored him to discomfite all the noble
personages and men in authority, which were appointed for the ruling and
government of any good and honest business. Wherefore because of the notable
fame and renoume which was blown abroad of Ptolome, his great honor and
honesty, and also his gently and friendly entreaty of al such as came unto
him for help, he with.L. horse departed thence, and fled into Egypt unto him.
Which news wonderfully ioyed and gladded Antigone, because he thought ye
would be such a color for him, that no man should be able to reproach him and
say he had laid hands on Seleuke his great friend, who had with his power
always aided him: but that of his own mind he voluntarily fled, and by that
mean left him without question or difficulty, the said Satrapie. But after
he was by the Chaldees aduertized and admonished, that if Seleuke escaped his
hands, he should be Lord and King of the whole Empire of Asie, and s^ ea him
in battaill: he the^ marvelous sorry repented him of his escape. Wherefore he
sent out in all possible post, certain horse after him, who in long pursuit
and doing less good, returned. And although Antigone gave no great faith or
credit to such diuinations, yet by reason of the authority of the said
Chaldees, and their great and long knowledge and experience in the course and
influe^ce of the stars, he was meruellouslie troubled. For the people of that
country and sect, had alone a thousand years wholly applied them selves to
that kind of study and knowledge. Which thing by their great experiences, well
appeared, and chiefly by Alexander his death, of whom they presaged that if
he entered Babylon, he should there lose his life. And as that prediction
proved true in Alexander, even so according to their divination of Antigone
happened him, as hereafter when we come to the time wherein it chanced, shall
at large be declared. But for this time let us out of hand treat of the army
of Seleuke in Egypt.

Of Seleuke his practice and devise, touching the alliance and confederacy
betwixt Ptolome, Cassander and Lysimache, against Antigone^ of their defiau^ce
they send him, and of his preparation against them. Also of his siege aginst
the City of Tire in Phenice.

The.xxiiij. Chapter.
WHen Seleuke was come into Egypt, Ptolome right honorably and courteously
received him. To whom he recompted the ungentle and disloyal dealing of
Antigone against him: declaring farther, that Antigone his meaning was to
expulse and vanquish all the Satrapes which had any rule or dominion, and
especially all those which had been in household with Alexander. And the more to
asserten him of the truth that it was so, he recompted how he had put to death
Python, expulsed Penceste Perse, and all he had done to him self: where
neither he nor they had once offended him, but had employed and bestowed all
their trauaill and service, as his dear friends and accomplices. He farther
showed him the mighty power he had of men, and his innumerable treasure:
together the great victories and prosperity he had in short time achieved:
whereby he began to wax so proud and arrogaunt, that he affected the whole
Empire of Macedone. By these tales and reports had he persuaded Ptolome to
prepare and resist him. And again sent certain of his friends into Europe
toward Cassander and Lysimache, to perusade them to do the like: who
diligently performed their charge. By reason whereof they forged many
practizes, which were the original and beginning of great dissension and
wars. For Antigone who doubted (and not without good cause) the evil will of
Seleuke against him, and the practizes he would devise, sent his Ambassadors
toward Ptolome, Cassander, and Lysimache, to exhort and desire them to
continue and remain his old and ancient friends. Nevertheless after he had
created Python who descended from the Indians, Pithon.
Governor of Babylon, and left him there, he took his journey with the whole
army, and marched toward Cilicie: And after he was come to Maley, Maley.
he divided his army into diverse places to winter. The City of Quint.
He took also all the money he could get in the City of Quint, amounting
to.x. thousand Talents: and with the rest he brought with him, he was
marvelously provided of gold and silver, besides his clear yearly revenue
of.xj. thousand Talents. Antigone his yearly revenue.
By reason whereof, as also for his mighty puissaunce of Soldiers and men of
war, he was much to be feared. When winter was past, as Antigone with his
whole power had taken his journey to come into the hier Syrie, the Ambassadors
of Ptolome, Cassander, and Lysimache came unto him: who having open audience to
tell their Ambassade, demanded of him to restore to Cassander the countries of
Cappadoce and Lycie, to render Lysimache Phrygie and Hellespont, to yield up to
Ptolome all Sirie, and to deliver to Seleuke Babylon. And that he would also
make an egall division with them of all the treasure he had gotten and taken
since the wars commenced against Eumenes: because they had been pertakers with
him, and companions in the said wars. And in case he refused this to do, they
denounced to him in the names of them all, that they would allie and join
together, to arrere mortal hostility against him. When Antigone had heard
this their Ambassade, he with arrogaunt and insolent words answered, and
amongs other things willed and charged them to tell Ptolome that he made good
and strong preparation to stand to his defense. When the Ambassadoures were
returned and had made report of their answer, the said Ptolome, Cassander
and Lysimache, reallied together, and made the greatest preparation of men,
armoure, and all other things necessary for the wars, they possibly could.
When Antigone understood thereof, and considered the nobleness, puissaunce and
authority of those against whom he took on hand wars: he drew to his
amity and alliance all the Princes, Nations and Cities he could get. For
accomplishing whereof, he sent Ageselaye toward the Kings of Cypres, and to
the Rhodians, Idonome and Moschion. He sent also into Cappadoce an army with
his Nephew Ptolome, to raise the siege before the city of Amiss, and to
expulse all Cassanders Soldiers that country: gyuing him farther in charge
to have a vigilaunt eye and take good heed, ye Cassander passed not into Asie,
through Hellespont. Moreover, Aristodeme.
he sent Aristodeme the Milesian with a thousand Talents to Pelopo^nese to make
alliance with Polispercon and Alexander his son, and to get together there, so
many men as they could, and forthwith war upon Cassander. That done, he sent
to make ready his posts and Beacons, throughout all the country of Asie under
his obeissance: by which he might in all his affairs have speedy
advertisement. These things set in order, he sped him toward the country of
Phenice, meaning there to prepare and make ready a Navy to send to Sea:
because the enemy was yet strongest at Sea: by reason of their great Navy,
and himself altogyther disfurnished. And when he was come into Phenice, he
encamped before the City of Tire, meaning to besiege it. Nevertheless, he
sent toward the Kings of the Country, and Governors of Syrie, exhorting and
requiring their aid and help for the addressing his Navy to sea: because all
the ships which had been before in the country, Ptolome had sent into Egypt. He
commanded also the Lieutenaunts of Syrie to furnish him with so much wheat,
as should suffice the maintenance of his army for one whole year, and him
self got together all the Carpenters, Sawyers and shipwrights he could find,
and caused them to fell an innumerable number of trees in the mount Libane, The
mount Libane.
which were carried to the Sea side, for he had.viij. thousand men to fell,
saw and build ships, besides a thousand waines for carriage. It is to be
understood, that the Mountain is of a great length, for it runs alongest
from the Cities of Tripolis and Byblie, even to Sydone, full of an innumerable
number of marvelous high and mighty Cedres and Cypres trees. He likewise
caused.iij. mighty Docks to be cut out to build the said ships in, one at
Trypoly, another at Byblie, and the third at Sidone, all three in Phenice.
There was also an other in Cilice, whether was brought all the timbre feld and
cut down in the mount Thaure: and another at Rhodes, by the consent of the
citizens, likewise to build ships in. As Antigone was thus occupied in
building of ships, and encamped about the sea side, Seleuke comes out of
the Country of Egypt with a Navy of an hundredth tall ships of war under
all their sails, richly apparelled, passing alongest the Sea coast in the
view of the camp, as who would say, in despite and maugre Antigone and his
people. At which sight the Citizens of the next Cities and other his allies
with him, were in great terror and fear, being then apparaunt that the enemy
was Lord and King at sea. Wherefore they thought, they went to forraie and
rob their Cities and territories. When Antigone see them thus daunted, he
comforted them in the best manner he could, saying, that him self without
stop, would that summer be upon the seas with.v. hundred tall and warlike
ships or more. And as he was thus occupied about the things aforesaid,
Ageselay who^ he had sent into Cypres, came toward him and reported unto him,
that Nicocrey and diverse other mighty and puissaunt Kings were already
allied with Ptolome. But that Citicke, Nicocre. Citike. Lapite. Marye. Cerenite.
Lapite, Marie, and Cerenite, had allied with him. Which news understood, he
left Andronicke with.iiij. thousand men behind at the siege of Tire, and
himself with the rest went against the cities of Hyoppe and Gaze, Andronice.
his adversaries, and won them together all the Soldiers of Ptolome within
the towns, Hyoppe.
and retained them in wages, Gaza.
and thrust into them garrisonnes, and into the rest of the Cities in that
quarter. That done, he retired toward his other camp lying before Tire,
making provision for all things necessary to take the City.

Of the wisdom and virtue of Phile, Antipater his daughter.

The.xxv. Chapter.
AT that same very time Aristo to whom Eumenes had given Cratere his bones to
bury, delivered the^ to Phile, Phile.
first married to Cratere, and then wife to Demetre, Antigone his son, who
was reputed a right sage and virtuous Lady, in so much that her wisdom and
courtesy toward the Soldiers being such, that she oftentimes appaised the
controversies and mutenies arising in ye camp, they loved and honored her. She
would also at her own costs and dispense marry the poor men of wars
sisters and daughters: and besides acquit and discharge diverse of the
soldiers when they had at any time been accused and wrongfully sclaundred.
And it was said, that when Antipater her father (who^ al men thought to be the
wisest and sagest Prince in his time that ever bear rule) had any great and
mighty affairs in hand, yt he would use the advice and counsel of Phile his
daughter. And although she was in manners gracious and excellent, yet did she
far pass in speech and vtteraunce, and all her doings were thereto
correspondent and agreeable. And as for her wit and prudence, that well
appeared upon the judgment which she gave of Demetre his principality, as we
will hereafter set forth in their places.

Antigone wins to his alliance Polispercon and Alexander his son, and by
a decree by the Macedonians made, denounces Cassander an ennimie, and after
takes the City of Tire.

The.xxvj. Chapter.
BUt now we will return to the Chieftaynes and Ambassadoures whom Antigone
had sent into diverse places to make new alliaunces. And first, Aristodeme
who was sent toward the Spartians, Aristodeme.
had by their permission and sufferaunce, assembled in the country of
Peloponnese.viij. thousand footmen, with whom he went to seek out Alexander
Polispercon his Son, and in Antigone his name allied with him and his father:
through which alliance he left the government of the country of Peloponnese
to Polispercon, and persuaded Alexander to go into Asie toward Antigone,
which he performed. And the other Chieftaynes, to wete, Ptolome his Nephew
whom he had sent into Cappadoce with a great army, delivered the city of
Amise from the siege, which Asclepiodore one of Cassander his Captains lay
before, Amise.
and upon composition dismissed him with all his Soldiers, Asclepiodore.
and so recovered the Satrape. From thence he went into Bythanie, and finding
Zibith King of the said country besieging the Cities of Calcedone and
Astacone, forced him to raise it, and after allied with him, and the said
cities, and took of them ostages. From thence he trauailled into Ionye and
Lydie: because Antigone had written to him to make so great speed as might be
to the Regions lying and bordering upon the sea, because he understood ye
Seleuke was sailing toward those quarters. And at last Seleuke arrived in the
Countries, and besieged the city of Erythe. But after he was advertised of
Ptolome his coming, he retired without doing of any thing. When Alexander was
come to Antigone, he confirmed and swear the alliance for him and Polispercon
his Father.

Then assembled he all his men of war, and in presence of them, charged and
greatly accused Cassander, but chiefly for the death of Olympias, and the
detayning of Roxanne and her son in prison: alleging moreover that he
forciblie had espoused Thessalonicke, and in deed meant thereby openly to
usurp the Realm of Macedone. And farther objected, that he had suffered the
City of Olynthe chief enemy to the Macedonians, to be reenhabited, and also
reedified the city of Thebes, which Alexander, surnamed the great, had
destroyed and razed. When he see, that by the means of those accusations and
tales the men of war and Soldiers there assembled, were with Cassander
greatly despited: he incontinent caused a decree to be written and proclaimed:
wherein Cassander was pronounced an enemy, except he would raze the said two
cities, set at liberty the said King and Roxanne his mother into the hands and
guard of the Macedonians, and also wholly obey Antigone, named and chosen
Emperor of the army, protector and regent of the Kings, and of the realm of
Macedone. He would also it should be denounced, that all the Greeks were
discharged of al garrisonnes and other impositions, to live at liberty
according to their ancient and accustomed woonte.

When this Decree had been thus by the common assent and consent of the whole
army ratified and approved. Antigone by and by sent it throughout all quarters
to be published, trusting that the Greeks in hope to come at liberty, would
allie and join with him. He likewise thought that when the Satrapes and
Governors of the Satrapies of the hier countries of Asie (which still
ymagined that Antigone would clerelie extinquish ye Kings, and all the ligne
Royal of Alexander) apperceyued that he now enterprised and publikelie took
in hand, the wars for the defense of the Kings, they would alter and change
their determination and purpose, and gladly become obedient and subject to
him. That done, he gave to Alexander.v. hundred Talents, and sent him into
Peloponnese laden and fraught with fair promises, and in hope to be preferred
to some great authority and honor. He sent also for his ships to Rhodes, the
greater number of which he made ready and furnished, and after embarked and
sailed to Tire, Tire.
and both by sea and land besieged the city the space of.xv. months, so that
nothing could be brought into it. Whereupon in the end they were enforced to
render upon this composition and agreement, that all Ptolome his Soldiers
within the same, should with bag and baggage safely depart, and Antigone at
his pleasure to thrust in his gerrisones.

Of the practizes, devises and provision by Ptolome and Seleuke on the one
part, and Antigone on the other part, made by Sea in the country of Asie.

The.xxvij. Chapter.
AMongs these entrefaicts, when Ptolome understood the edict and decree which
Antigone and the Macedonians had made for the liberty of Greece, because he
would it should to the Greeks be known, that he had so good an heart and will
to restore them to liberty, as the said Antigone, he caused the like
proclamation to be made, and before them to be notified and published. For
either of them made great account, and thought it a very good way to win the
Greeks to stand their friends, and therefore they contended how and by what
mean they might best gratify them. He wanne also to his alliance Cassander,
governor of Carry, a mighty Prince, and one who had at his commandment
many Cities. He sent likewise over and besides the.iiij. thousand men sent
before by him to the Kings of Cypres his confederats, a mighty army to
enforce to their obeissau^ce their enemies, to wete, Mirmidon.
Mirmidon the Athenian with.x. thousand Soldiers, Polyclete.
Polyclete with a Navy of an hundredth sail, and appointed for general
Menelaus his brother. Menelaus.
And as they arrived in Cypres, they heard of Seleuke his being there:
whereupon they held a counsel, wherein was concluded that Polyclete should
with. L. shipe sail into Peloponnese, to war upon Aristodeme, Polispercon
and Alexander: That Myrmidon with the Mercenaries should into Carry to aid and
comfort Cassander and other their allies, whom Ptolome Antigone his brother
warred on: and that Menelaus and Seleuke should remain in Cypres with
Nycocreon and other their allies, to mainteyne the wars there. When Seleuke
and his company had thus divided their power, they took the cities of Cerine
and Lapythe, Stasicetus.
and there wanne to their al-aliaunce Stasicetus King of the Manians, Amathusius
and forced Amathusius an other prince of the country to deliver the^ ostages.
Cithia.
They besieged also with great force the City of Cythie, because they would
not at their first coming allie with them. At that same very season sailed
from Hellespont and the Rhodes, to Antigone.xl. sail under the conduct of
Themyson their Admiral. Themison.
Dioscorides likewise brought from Hellespont and the Rhodes four score,
Dioscorides.
besides the ships first built in Phenice, being in all, accompting those left
at Tire.Cxx. whereof.iiij. score and.x. rowed with four tier of ores in a side:
ten with five tier: ten with nine, and ten with ten tier, and.xxx. barques, the
rest less, so that he had in the whole.CCxl. Galleys appointed for the wars.
Which Navy he divided, whereof.L. he sent into Peloponnese, and appointed
Dioscorides his brothers son, Admiral over the rest, and gave him in charge
to go to the aid of his Allies, and purchase the good wills of the Isles not
yet confederate. Now for this time, we will leave speaking of the things done
in Asie, and return to the matters exploited in Europe.

Of certain exploictes of war, by Cassander and his Soldiers in Peloponnese
and other parts of Greece done. And how Alexander Polispercon his Son
reuolteth. After of a great victory which Ptolome his Navy has against
Antigone his Navy in Cilice. And after, Ptolome and Antigone come to a parle,
and of certain exploits of war between the Romans and Samnites.

The.xxviij. Chapter.
THe while that Antigone made preparation for the wars in the country of
Asie, as we have heretofore declared. Apollonide whom Cassander had left
Captain of Argos, Apollonide.
secretly departed into Arcadie, and in the night by stealth took the City
of Stymphale. Stymphale.
In this mean time the Argiues not content with Cassander, sent to Alexander
Polispercon his son, and promised to yield him the Town, but he so detracted
his coming, that Cassander was thither first come, and when he had entered the
city, the Traitors co^spiratours took ye Palaice for their defense, which he
besieged and clearly burnt to the ground. And of the rest be put some to
death, and sent a great number in exile. The same time Cassander advertised of
the sailing of Aristodeme into Peloponnese, and concourse of the Mercenaries
thither: first assaied, if he could withdraw and remove Polispercon and
Alexander his son from the amity of Antigone. And seeing it would not frame,
he passed through the country of Thessalie into Beote, and strengthening the
Thebanes with aid for restauracion of their City, entered Peloponnese, and
took by force the city of Cencre, The City of Cencre.
and made incursions on the territories of Corinthe, and there winning two
castles by force: licenced Alexanders Soldiers to depart without dommage or
hurt. After that, he was by a band which loved not Alexander, received into
the City of Orcomenie, Orcomenie.
and licenced the citizens to pluck out by the ears certain of Alexanders
friends, gotten into the Temple of Diane, and to do with them what they listed,
whom they incontinent contrary to the law and common custom of Greece, put
to the sword. After that, Cassander came against the City of Messenie,
Messenie.
and seeing it to difficile to win, passed on and entered Arcadie, in which
country he left Damides Governor, Damides.
and him self returned to Argos, where he caused many tou^ noys to be done,
and after returned to Macedone. Whereof Alexander advertised, took with him
Aristodeme, and warred upon all the Cities which Cassander had won and
furnished with garrisonnes, thinking to bring under his subjection the said
Cities, promising to restore them to liberty. Which Cassander understanding,
sent toward him Propelle, Propelle.
by whom he offered, if he would yield and revolt from Antigone, to give him the
government of Peloponnese, and the authority over all the army: and
farther, to use him as his companion, and advance him to great honor and
dignity. When Alexander had considered that the same offer whereunto Cassander
granted, was the only occasion of the wars between them, he allied with
him, and so became and remained Governor of Peloponnese. In this mean while,
Policlete sent by Seleuke out of Cypres touched at Cencre, Polyclete.
and understanding of Alexander his reuolte, and seeing there no army of
adversaries, sailed into Pamphilie, Aphrodise.
and from thence to the city of Aphrodise in Cilice, Theodote.
where he understood, that Theodote Admiral for Antigone, was loused from
Patare in the region of Lycie, Patare.
in the ships which came from Rhodes, ma^ned with Mariners of Carry:
Perilaye.
and that Perilaye for the more safety of the said Navy, went by land with a
terrible army. Wherefore he by ambushes deceived both the said armies: for he
closely laid a number of men against the enemy which came by land, where they
must needs pass: and him self with the Navy lay behind a promontorie,
attending the enemy to battaill. It happened that the army by land first
lighted upon the Ambushe, where being surprised and sodenlie come upon, they
were almost all slain and taken prisoners: amongs whom was Perilaus, all in
the sight of the Rhodian Navy: who with great speed making toward the land
to their aid, were by Policlete which there road in order of battle, so
lustily bourded, that they discomfited all the whole Navy, and prized their
ships, and the greater number of their men: amongs whom was Theodotus, who
soon after, of the wounds he had received in fight, died.

When Polyclete had thus without danger won these victories, he sailed into
Cypres, and from thence to Peluse, whom Ptolome honorably received, and with
great rewards and gifts rewarded, and to him gave a far greater charge, as
to the Aucthor of that notable and honorable victory. He delivered also
Perilaus and many other prisoners, for delivery of which Antigone had sent an
honorable Ambassade, and to treat a peace. Which treaty was granted to be had
at the place called the Eruption where they met together, and commoned of the
matter, but departed without conclusion, because Antigone would not agree to
Ptolome his demaundes. The same season the Romans inuading the Samnites,
took by force from them the City of Ferent in Ponille. But the Citizens of
Nucere called Alphaterne, by the persuasion of some revolted from the Romans,
and confederated with the Samnites.

Of diverse exploites which Aristodeme, one of Antigone his Captains, does
against Alexander Polispercon his son in Peloponnese, and Alexander being
slain, his wife through her prowes, takes upon her the government.

The.xxix. Chapter.
THe self same year that Nicodore governed Athens, and Luce Papyre the fourth
time, and Quinte Publie the second time were at Rome created Consuls:
Aristodeme Antigone his Lieutenaunt, understanding the reuolte of Alexander
Polispercon his Son, Aristodeme.
accused him in the presence of all the assembly of the Etholians, and
persuaded them to join with Antigone. Which done, he departed with his
Mercenaries out of the country, and came into Peloponnese, where he found
Alexander and the Etholians, besieging the City of Cilene, Cilene.
sore distressed, and by his coming in good time to the aid thereof, raised
the siege. And after he had thrust in as he ^^ ought a sufficient number to
guard and defend it, he went to Acaie, and there likewise delivered the City
of Pataras, by Cassanders soldiers besieged. He took also by violence the
city of Ege, Pataras.
and used the garrison thereof at his pleasure, Ege.
and according to the general Edict, determined to restore the City to
liberty. Howbeit, he could not, because the men of war who by assaut had
taken it, were wholly bent to the spoil, slew many of the Citizens, and
razed, and sacked a number of their houses. After that, during the time he was
in Etholie, the Citizens of Dyme keeping a garrison of Cassa^ders in their
City, Dyme.
suddenly had buylt and set up a wall between the town and castle, to separate
them, exhorting one another to reduce their city to her pristinate liberty,
and entrenching the Castle, gave many proud assautes. Which doings Alexander
understanding, with his whole power returned, and after he had entered the town,
he put to death the principal mutiners, imprisoned some, and bannished a
number. By mean whereof, the remnaunt never durst a long time after make or
revive any commocion or rebellion, reducing to memory the misery and
punishment of the late rebels. But not long after, they got in their aid the
soldiers of Aristodeme in Ege, by whose help they again attempted the
Castle, and by great industry won it, and flewe the greater part of the
garrisonne, together all the citizens which took part with Alexander: who
departing at the same time from Sycione was under the color of friendship by
Alexion, Sycione.
Alexion.
and certain his accomplices, shamefully slain. Notwithstanding after his death,
Cratesipolis his wife took upon her the domination and rule of the city and
army, Cratesipolis.
whom the Soldiers dearly loved, by reason of the great pleasures she had
oftentimes done them, and always helping their present miseries. She was a wise
Lady, and in matters of great importance had a meruellous forefight, and an
heart and courage more valiant than to a woman was pertinent, which she amongs
the Sicionians thoroughly showed. For when the Sycionians, after the death of
her husband, without making any account of her, had gotten in arms, in hope to
have restored their liberty, she in battaill vanquished and ouerthrewe them.
In which conflict were many slain, and.xxx. of the rest after taken and
hanged. When she had appaised thus this mutenie, she peaceably governed the
town, and had at commandment a great number of Soldiers which were all
determined to abide in her service any adventures whatsoever. These things were
done in Peloponnese.

Cassander making amity with the Acarnanians and Illyrians, and reducing to
his alliance certain other Cities, returns into Macedone, and the Etholians
taking the City of Arginye in Acarnanye, slay and kill the inhabitaunts thereof.

The.xxx. Chapter.
WHen Cassander had considered, that the Etholians (which favored Antigone)
warred against the Acarnanians their neighbors, he thought he should do very
well to allie with the Acarnanians in that war, and so abase and repress the
Etholians. Whereupon he travailed with a mighty power out of Macedone into
the country of Etholie, and encamped about the river Cambile, and there called
together the Acarnanians to speak with them, The river of Cambile.
to whom he declared, the importance of the wars which they so long had had
so near hand, and yet still continued. And the better to encounter them, said,
that it was very needful, that they did forsake the indefensible small towns
and villages, and get them into two or three of the chief and principal. For
while they were so separated and divided, they could neither easelie nor yet
readily assemble, when occasion of business served, and thereby might
lightly be surprised and discomfited. In following which counsel, the
greater part retired into the City of Strate, Strate.
very great and strong. The Cynades and their neighbors into the City of
Saurie. Saurie.
The Dorians and certain other into the city of Arginie. Arginie.
That done, Cassander for their guarde and defense left a band of Soldiers
under the charge of Lyascke, Lyascke.
and him self with the remnaunt went against the city of Leucade, Leucade.
and by an Ambassade got the favor of the city. From thence he went into
Adrye, and by assault wanne the City of Apollonie. Apollonie.
After that, he entered the country of Illyrie, and passing the river Hebre,
Hebrus.
vanquished in battaill King Glaucye of Illyrie, Glaucie.
and after made amity and alliance with him, which Glaucie amongs other
things promised never to war against Alexander or any his Allies. After
that, he subdued the city of Epidaure, and there left a garrisonne, Epidaure.
and so returned into Macedone. But during the time of this voyage, when the
Etholians perceived that he was a great way of them, they assembled and got
together the number of.iij. thousand, and came to besiege the city of
Arginie: which they round about entrenched, and made other fortifications to
assaut it. When the towns men see that, they came to a parle and treaty,
wherein was accorded and agreed, that the besieged should render the Town and
safely depart with bag and baggage: who trusting upon the conclusion,
daparted. But the Etholians contrary to their oaths, pursued the citizens
which went out, and flew them almost every one. And now we think it meet a
little to touch the matters of Asie.

Two bands of Cassanders which he sends to Lemne and Carry, are by the
Soldiers af Antigone overthrown.

The.xxxj. Chapter.
WHen Cassander had returned into Macedone, he was advertised that the cities
of Lemne and Carry ( Seleuke and Ptolome their confederates) were by Antigone
his Soldiers sore warred on and oppressed. Wherefore he sent part of his
army for their succoures, to deteyn^ Antigone in Asie, to the end he should
have no leisure to pass into Europe. He writ also to Demetre Phalerey and to
Dionise Captain of Munichie, Demetre.
to send.xx. sail into the Isle of Lemne, Dionise.
which with all speed was done. And for transfreting of them, Captayn
Aristotre had charge: Aristotre.
who after his arrival in the Isle, sent word to Seleuke to repair thither
with all his ships. And after he was come, they assaied and forced to win
to them the Lemnians, but apperceyuing they would not thereto consent, they
fouraged all their land: and after besieged the city, and entrenched it
round: which done, Dioscorides.
Seleuke departed to Coo. Then Dioscoride ( Antigone his Admiral) advertised
of his departure, came to the aid of the Lemnians: and chased Aristotre, and
took the greater number of his ships, and the Soldiers within them. But
when Cassander and Propelaus (deputed chief rulers of the army which
Cassander Cassander.
had sent into Carye) understood that Ptolome ( Antigone his Lieutenaunt) had
divided his Soldiers in garrisone to winter, Propelaus.
and was also occupied about the funeralles of his father deseased, they sent
Eupoleme with.viij. thousand two hundred footmen, Eupolome.
to watch and surprise the enemy lying about the Region of Caprine, in the
Country of Carye. Whereof Ptolome (by some which came to render to him)
advertised, assembled of his garrisons near there abouts.viij. thousand.CC.
hundred footeme^, and.vj. hundred horse, and by night went and assailed the
camp of the enemy, and them lightly (who doubted nothing less) overthrew, by
reason they were at rest and a sleep, and without scoult or watch: so that
they took Eupoleme prisoner, and made the men of war render and yield. Such
was the adventure of Cassander his Captains by him sent into Asie.

Antigone gyuing order about the affairs in Syrie, goes into Phrygie, and of
a notable victory which one of his Captayns wins at sea on the enemy.

The.xxxij. Chapter.
WHen Antigone perceived Cassander his doings, and considered, that he affected
the Empire of Asie, he left his son Demetre with.x. thousand Mercenarie
footmen.v. hundred Lycians and Pamphilians.CCC. hundred Archers and other
shot.iij. thousand horse and.xiiij. Elephants to guard and defend ye Country:
because he feared that Ptolome would with his army come thither. And because
his son Demetre was young, not above.xxij. years old, he left behind: for
his Governors and Counsailours, Nearche.
four noble personages, to wete, Nearche of Crete, Pithon the Son of Agenor,
Python.
(who a little before came out of Babylon) Andronicke of Olynthe, Andronicke.
and Phillip, Phillip.
all four ancient and not able soldiers, and had served with Alexander the
great in all his wars. And him self with the remnaunt of the army prepared
to pass the Mount Thaure: But by reason of the great abundance of snow, he
was forced with no small loss of his men to retire into Cilice, until the time
and season were more fair and pleasant, and the passage much easier: and then
passed he with all his army. And being come to Cilene in the Region of
Phrygie, Cilene.
he sent his army by garrisons to winter. After that, he commanded that his
ships should be brought out of the country of Mede, Captain of which was
one Mede a Median. Medius.
And as the said Mede came sailing alongest, he encountered.xxxvj. sail of the
Pidues, and them prized, together the soldiers within them. These matters were
exploited in Greece and Asie.

The Romans losing a great battaill against the Samnites, people the City of
Locres with their men.

The.xxxiij. Chapter.
About this season, in Italy, the Samnites who with the Romans had many
years continued war to get the Empire and dominion one of an other, took by
force the town of Plastic, Plastic.
by the Romans garrisoned, and in such sort practiced with them of Sore,
Sore.
that they slew all the Romans in the city guarding ye same: and after the
Soreans took part with the Samnites. And not long after, as the Romans lay
before Straticole, Straticole.
the Samnites with all their force came thither to raise the siege, where both
the armies joined and fought together. In which battaill were many slain, but
the Romans had still the better, took the City, and after subdued all the
whole country. When the Samnites see that their only strife was for the
country and cities of Pouil, they prepared an oste and sent out their general
letters and commandments, by which all the Citizens and subjects able to
bear armoure, were commanded to come, and then encamped hard by the Romans,
being all determined to fight for the total of their estate. The Romans
likewise knowing the importance of that battaill, sent great strength and
supplices of men: and appointed besides Quint Fabie the most renoumed Captain
they then had, Quint Fabie.
General of their army, Quint Elye.
and Quint Elye Marshall, La^ scalle.
and about Lanscalle joined battaill with ye enemy, in which on either side
were many me^ slain. But in the end, the Romans were discomfited and put to
flight. Which Elye seeing, because he would avoid the shame to be said he
fled, tarried alone in the battaill, and there valiantly and manfully fought
against the enemy: not for any hope he had of victory, but to show such
magnanimity to be in him, as an apparaunt matter of the invincible courages of
the Romans, who much more loved honorably to die in fight, than to live and
remain Captain of those which fled. After this discomfiture and overthrow,
the Romans fearing to lose al Pouille, sent one Colonie of their people to
Locres, the principal city of that country: from whence they transferred the
wars against the Samnites. And that Colonie and City served them not for
that war only, but continually ever after: and at this present does, as an
explorator and receptacle to hold and keep their neighbors in subjection.

Lisimache subdueth the cities of Pont and Thaure, which rebel: and after
vanquisheth the Scythes, and supplies by Antigone sent into the same country.

The.xxxiiij. Chapter.
THe year ensuing, which was the same time that Theophraste governed Athens,
and Marcke Publy and Caye Sulpitie were at Rome created Consuls, the
Caulandians enhabiting the left parts of Pont, expulsed Lysimache his
garrisone there, and set them selves at liberty. The like also did the
Histrianois, and the other cities near thereabouts. Whereupon they altogyther
joined to resist Lysimache, and made also alliance with the Tracians and
Scythians near them, so that (being altogyther joined) they were able to
encountre and resist a mighty army. Whereof Lysimache advertised, departed
with an huge army, and came through the country of Thrace, and passing the
mount Emus, The mount Emus.
sodenlie encamped before the city of Odesse, and after besieged Obseste, both
which he at his first arrival surprised and put in such fear, The Cities of
Odes^ a and Obsesta.
that they rendered upon composition: and going thence, he took after the same
manner the Histrianois. From thence he went to besiege the Calandians, but when
he understood that the Scythes were come in the country with a mighty army
to help their Allies and friends, he marched against them, and as soon as he
was near them, so fierslie charged the whole camp, and put the Thracians which
were with the^ in such fear, that they revolted and came to him: and after
joined battaill with the Scythes, in which he overthrew and killed a great number,
the rest he chased and expulsed the country. After that, he besieged the city
of the Calandians, fully determined to be revenged for their rebellion.
Calantia.
But as he was thus purposed, news came that Antigone had sent two armies for
the relief of the Calandians: to say, Lycon.
Lycon by the sea of Pont, and Pausanie by land: Pausane.
who already was encamped at a place called Sacre. With which news Lysimache
very sore troubled, left so many of his army as he thought would suffice for
the siege, and him self with the greater part marched on to encounter the
enemy which came by land. But when he was come to the foot of the Mount Emus,
and thought to pass, he was advertised that Seuthes the King of Thrace was
revolted from him, Seuthes.
and joined with Antigone, and guarded and kept the passage with a great number
of men. Wherefore he was enforced to give him battaill, in which many of his
people were lost. But in ye end, after great slaughter he drove the enemy from
the passage. And al sodenlie he so lustily charged Pausanie his band which
was fled to the straights of the mountain on the other side, that he slew the
greater part, amongs whom was Pausanie^ and some of the prisoners he ransomed
and sent away, and retained the rest, and divided them amongs his bands.

Thelesphore one of Antigone his captains restores the greater number of the
cities of Peloponnese to liberty. And Phillip a Captain of Cassanders,
vanquisheth the Etholians and the King of Epire which came to their aid.

The.xxxv. Chapter.
AS Lysimache his affairs stood in this astate, Antigone apperceyuing him
self frustrate of his purpose, sent.L. sail manned with such number of men
as he thought good into Peloponnese, under Thelesphore, and gave him in charge
to restore the cities of the same country to liberty: thinking to get such
credit thereby amongs the Grecians, that they would firmly believe, how he
unfeignedly desired nothing more, than the restoring of them to their liberty
and popular government. He sent also his intelligencers to learn what
Cassander did. And shortly after that Thelesphore arrived in Peloponnese, he
delivered all the citizens from the garrisons of Alexander, except Sycione and
Corinth, which Polispercon with a great army held and kept, whom he could
not expulse, considering the great strength of the places. The same season,
Phillip.
Phillip whom Alexander had sent as Lieutenaunt General against the
Etholians, after his coming into Carnanie, began to make incursions and
robberies in the country of Etholie. But soon after, he was advertised that
Eacide, who had been expulsed the realm of Epyre, was thither returned, and had
assembled a great army. Wherefore he departed thence and marched forth,
meaning to encountre him before he joined with the army of the Etholians. But
he found at his first coming the Epirotes all pressed and ready to battle,
who^ he so forcibly assailed, y^ he them discomfited, slew many, and took a
great nu^bre prisoners, and amongst ye rest.L. of those which had been the
causers of Eacide his return into Epire, Eacide.
which.L. he sent bound to Cassander. But they escaped with Eacide, and joined
again with the Etholians, to fight a fresh, whom Phillip likewise
discomfited, and slew the greater part, together with King Eacide him self. Thus
Philip by reason of his two great victories in so short time, put the Etholians
in such terror and fear of him, that they abandoned the plain country and
vndefensable places, and with their wives and children got up to the straights
in the mountains. And so much as touching the affairs of Greece.

Antigone apperceyuing that he is by Cassander deceived, takes certain cities
in Carry, and after comes to a parle with Cassander. And upon little or no
agreement, they begin the war in Greece.

The.xxxvj. Chapter.
DUring the time that these things were exploited in Greece, Cassander
(Lieutenaunt to Ptolome) and other his Allies in Asie, by Antigone oppressed,
came to an agreement with him. Wherein these articles were concluded upon. First,
that he should put away and deliver his army to Antigone. Item, that he should
set the Cities Grecians in Asie at liberty. Item, that he should retain and
hold the Satrapies he had first given him. And lastly, that he should become
and remain Antigones entier and dear friend. For suertie and performaunce of
which things he gave him in ostage his brother Agathon. Agathon.
Notwithstanding before many days past, he repented him of that alliance, and
found the means by stealth to get away his brother. And incontinent after he
sent toward Ptolome Seleuke, and Cassander, to send aid for his defense and
suertie. Whereof Antigone advertised, in great despite, sent both by sea and
land, a mighty army to set the Grecians Cities at liberty: to say, Medius.
Mede his Admiral by sea, and Decime by land. And when they arrived before the
city of Mylese, Decimus.
they denounced to the Citizens, Mylese.
that they were come to restore them to their ancient liberty, and to expulse
the garrison in the Castle. In this mean while, Antigone took be force the
city of Tralles Tralles.
From thence he marched by land and came before the city of Caune, Caune.
whether he made his ships also to come by Sea, and it besieged, and won
(except the castle) he could not presently take. Howbeit, he entrenched it on
that side it was siegeable, and gave many assauts. And as he lay thus before
the castle, he sent in the mean time Ptolome with one part of his army to the
city of Iase, Iase.
and drove them to a composition, whom he enforced to take part with
Antigone, and so the cities of the country of Carry became subject to
Antigone. Few days after, the Etholians and Beotians sent an Ambassade
toward him, to treat an alliance, which was concluded upon. That done, he
came to a communication with Cassander about Hellespont, thinking to have
agreed upon some conclusion of peace: but they departed doing nothing. By
reason whereof Cassander void of all hope of peace, determined again to win
the Grecian cities. Wherefore he departed with.xxx. sail to besiege the City
of Orey, and so stoutly charged it with siege and assauts, that it was in
great danger of taking or rendering. But all at one instaunt Thelesphore came
out of Peloponnese with.xx. sail, and Medie out of Asie with an hundred, who
seeing Cassanders ships keep the Port, threw in amongs the^ wild fire and
burnt four, and failed very little that the rest had not ben so served. And
as Cassander was the^ the weaker (behold) so sodeyn aid came to him from the
Rhodes, where with his Soldiers took such courage, that they assailed the
enemy, nothing fearing or doubting any such thing, either yet accompting of
their force, until they had sonke one of their ships, and took other three
and the men within them. These matters were done in Greece and Pont.

The Romans win a victory on the Samnites. And the rebellious Champanois
by an agreement put them selves to their obeisaunce.

The.xxxvij. Chapter.
IN Italy the Samnites pursued their victory, winning and destroying the
towns and cities, which had taken part with the Romans in Pouille. Again,
the Roman Co^suls marched on with their army to the aid of their friends
and allies: and perceiving that the Samnites lay before the city of Cynue,
they came and encamped hard at their noses, and forced them to raise the siege.
But few days after they joined battaill, wherein many on both sides were
slain: but in the end the Romans wanne the victory, and in fight so
lustily pursued the enemy, that they slew above.x. thousand. During which
time, and before the victory known abroad, the Champanois contrary to their
alliance with the Romans, came toward the aid of the Samnites: which thing
the Romans understanding, fully aucthorized Caie Manly, C. Manlye.
and sodenlie sent him against them, and according to their custom joined with
him Manly Fuluie. M. Fuluye.
And as they were encamped about Capue, the Champanoys put them selves in arms
to give battaill: but so soon as they understood of the overthrow of ye
Samnites, and fearing that the Romans had sent against them all their
puissaunce, they made an appointment, by which were rendered the aucthours of
the reuolte. Who by reason of judgment prolonged, and sentence not pronounced,
they in the mean time slew them selves. And the cities of Champanois being
pardoned, continued with the Romans their pristinate alliance and amity.

Ptolome and Antigone to despite one the other, restore diverse cities of Greece
to liberty. And the same Antigone fails of his entry into Macedone. After
are entreated the matters by Ptolome done in Cypres and Cilice in the hier
Syrie.

The.xxxviij. Chapter.
THe year following that Ptolome governed Athens, and that at Rome Lucie
Papirie the.v. time, and Caye Iunie were created Co^suls. And the.Cxvij. year
of the Olympiade, when Parmenon of Mythilene won the prise at the running:
Antigone sent his Captain Ptolome into Greece to restore the Greeks to
liberty, gyuing him.Cl. Galleys under Mede the Admiral.v. thousand footmen,
and.v. hundred horse. And besides allied with the Rhodians to fight for the
liberty of Greece, who sent him.xx. sail armed and furnished. Ptolome likewise
with his power at Sea arrived at a Port of the Beotians (called the deep
Port) and there mustered and took up.ij. thousand two hundred Beotian
footmen, and three hundred horse. He called back also his Navy from Orey^
and after he had with a wall entrenched Salmone, Salmone.
he brought thither his whole power. For he verily trusted to take the
Calcedonians, being only defended from the enemy but by a garrison of
Eubeans. But Cassander myndfull of Calcide, and fearing the lost thereof
raised his siege from before Crea, and came to the laid Calcide, and commanded
his army to march thither. When Antigone understood that the two armies were
assembled there together, watching one another, and every of them attending
the opportunity and aduauntge, he commanded Mede with all speed to return
into Asie. And at his coming back, he again enbarqued his army and hastily
sailed into Hellespont, thinking through Cas^ ander his absence, to find the
country of Macedone unprovided of men, and so win the same before he could
return from Calcide, or if he came back for the defense of the realm of
Macedone, he should lose that he held in Greece. When Cassander understood
thereof, he left for the defense of Calcide his Lieutenau^t Plistarche,
Plistarche.
with a number of his men, and him self with the remnaunte went to the city
of Orope in B^ ote, and by force took it, and trucyng with the other Cities of
the Country of Beoce, left for his Lieutenaunt in Greece Eupoleme, Eupoleme.
and returned into Macedone, chiefly to stop the enemy for passing into
Europe. When Antigone was come to the passage of Propontide, he sent his
Ambassadoures toward the Bizancians, requiring their aid in those wars:
who there found for the same matter the Ambassadoures of Lysimache, requiring
that they would not go against him nor Cassander. By reason whereof the
Bizancians fully determined to take neither part. When Antigone see he failed
of his purpose, and that ye winter drew near, he divided his Soldiers into
garrisons, and sent them abroad into the Country to winter. In this mean time
the Corcirians with the aid of the Apollonians and Epidaurans, expulsed
Cassanders garrisons their cities, and set at liberty the city of Apollonie,
and restored Epydaure to the King of Illirie. Ptolome also (one of Antigone his
Captains) after Cassander was departed into Macedone, took the city of
Calcide, and after he had expulsed the garrison of the enemy, he restored them
to their pristinate estate: to the end al men might think ye Antigone sans
fail would restore the cities of Greece to liberty. For if he had meant to
keep and retain ye same city, it had been a meet defense for such as would
continue any wars to have recourse unto. Ptolome likewise took the City of
Orope, and restored it to the Beotians, and had Cassander Soldiers in his
power. After he made alliance with the Eretrians and Caristians, and removed
his camp to the city of Athenes, ( Demetre Phalerey being then governor
thereof). But the Citizens understanding of his coming, first secretly sent
Ambassadors toward Antigone, praying his aid for the defense of their
city. When Ptolome was approached the City, they constrained Demetre to make a
truce, and after to send to Antigone to treat an alliance. After the truce
made and taken, he departed and came into Beote and there took the city of
Cadmea, Cadmea.
thrust out the garrison of the enemy, and delivered the Thebanes. From
thence went he into the country of Phocide, and there expulsed Cassanders
garrisons the cities, and after besieged the city of Locres, Cassanders
confederate. The same season the Cyrenians rebelled against Ptolome, and
besieged the castle which his Soldiers kept, thinking out of hand to have
taken it. It chanced the same time certain Ambassadors to come out of
Alexa^drie in the name of the city, to pray and exhort them to surcease and
give over their enterprise and rebellion: which Ambassadors they killed, and
then made greater preparation to take the castle. Wherewith Ptolome sore moved
and agreeued, sent by land Agis a Captain, we a mighty army, and by sea
Epinete for his greater succoure. Epinete.
Which Agis forcibly took the city, Agis.
and sent the principal aucthours of the rebellion into Alexandrie, and from
the rest took their armor and weapon, and taking order about the affairs of
the city, returned into Egypt. When Ptolome had thus reduced the City of
Cirene to his mind, he departed from Egypt, and went into Cypres, to subdue
the kings which would not obey him. Amongs which he slew Pigmalion, because he
had sent an Ambassade toward Antigone to take Praxippes King of Lapithe,
Pigmalion.
and the tyrant and Prince of Cyrene, Praxippe.
for that he mistrusted them, with Stasice Malie his son. Which City he
destroyed, and transferred the inhabitaunts thereof into the city of Paphe.
These things performed, he left Nicocreon his Lieutenaunt in the Isle of
Cipres, Nicocreon.
and gave to him the cities and revenue of the Kings, whom he had deposed, and
after sailed into the hier Syrie, and there took the cities of Neptunie and
Carry. From thence we al speed, he departed into Cilice, where likewise he
took and forraged the city of Male, and sold the Citizens he took
prisoners: he wasted and spoiled also the next region. And after he had
enriched and furnished the whole army with spoil, returned into Cypres, for
he so loved his Soldiers, that he thought all he could do for them was to
little, to the end they should the willinglier serve him in all such high and
great affairs as he had to do.

Amongs these entrefacts, so soon as Demetre Antigone his son lying in
Celosirie, and nothing mynding the wars exploited in Egypt, understood the
great spoil and damage which Ptolome had done in Cilice, and the hier Sirie,
he left the charge of his armed men, his Elephantes and baggage to Python, and
him self with the horse and shot, departed with all speed to the aid of his
friends in Cilice. But when he came thither, he found the enemy quite
dispatched and gone. Wherefore by reason of his great haste he returned with
the loss of many horse, for he had rydde from Maley thither in two days,
which was.xxiiij. reasonable days iourneys for men of war to trauaill, in
so much that neither Muleter nor horse sclaue might follow him.

Ptolome and Seleuke come into Syrie against Demetre, and in battaill vanquish
him. And after Ptolome conquereth the country of Phenice.

The.xxxix. Chapter.
WHen Ptolome had according to his hearts desire woonne in short time so many
victories, and performed such notable exploictes, he sailed into Egypt.
Howbeit, not long after at the instigation of Seleuke, and the rather because
he maliced Antigone, he determined a fresh to invade Celosyrie, and fight with
Demetre. Wherefore he assembled his army and losed from Alexander to Peluse
with.xviij. thousand footmen, and.iiij. thousand horse, the one half
Macedonians, the other Mercenaries. He had besides of the Country of Egypt, a
great number of men, as victuallers and such like, and some armed men meet
for the wars. From Peluse daily traveled he through the deserts until he
came about the old city of Gaze in Syrie, The City of Gaze.
and there enca^ped near the enemy.

When Demetre understood of his coming, he likewise assembled and mustered his
garrisons and brought them into the said old Gaze, attending the violence of
the enemy. And although his Governors and friends cou^sailed him not to
hazard battaill against so valiant a chieftayne and mighty an army, yet
would not he by their counsayls be stayed, but made him ready to fight, hoping
(notwithstanding his young years and absence of his father) to win honor and
victory. And after he had assembled his army and by his oration very
stoutly exhorted them to war, perseuering and still abiding in the assemble
pensive and in great trouble of mind, the multitude with one voice showted and
cried unto him to hope well and fear nothing. And such was their honor and
reverence toward him, yt before he could command them to silence, they held
their peace, upon this only occasion, for that he neither in factes martial
or cyuill had offended them, in so much as he was but newly made chieftayne,
and the first time that the charge of an army had been committed unto him: but
it commonly chances otherwise to them which long have had such rule and
leading, The variable nature and conditions of soldiers.
because they sundry ways and by diverse means grieve their me^ of war and
Soldiers. And therefore when they once get occasion to trippe and take
their Captains in any one fault, they forthwith seek revenge of ye rest of
the injuries against them committed: for the multitude love not long to
persevere and continue in one estate, but always desire and are glad of change,
so it exceed not. The men of war besides seeing his father well stryken in
years, and the likelihood of the succession of the Realm lyneallie to descend
and come to him, the rather wholly addicted them to his service.

He was a man of wonderful beauty and fair complexion, of body tall, mighty
and strong therewith, and when he was like a king richly apparelled and
armed, there appeared in him a goodly majesty and reputation, in whom the
multitude greatly hoped: his modesty, courtesy, bounty and liberality also
allured the people to love, honor and obey him, as to a new and noble King
appertayned, so that both the ordinary and extraordinary Soldiers would
run to hear his proposition and sentence, and were very careful of his
youth and victory: because he minded so valiantly to adventure his person
against such a number of enemies, and especially against two such Chieftaynes
(to say Ptolome and Seleuke) both in policies martial renoumed and greatly
experime^ted, and had had often conduct and charge as well in the company of
Alexander as else where, being never vanquished nor overcome.

When Demetre had with an hearty oration exhorted his men of war, promising
them gifts and butinie according to their demerites, he arraunged them in
order of battaill.

And first in the left battaill (where he him self meant to fight) he placed
two hundred of the choysest horse within the camp, which always attended
about him: amongs whom were his chief and principal seruitours and friends,
and the same Python also who had served amongs Alexander his men at arms, and
therefore had Antigone given him the principal charge and conduct of the army
with Demetre. In the front of that he placed three bands of horse like unto a
bulwark, and on each side as many: and without from the battaill to the wings
he placed three other bands of Tarentines, so that about and near his person
he had.v. hundred lances and an hundred Tarentines. After the^ he placed about
eight hundred horse called the Companions or Adventurers. And next to them
about a thousand horse of diverse Nations: and before the whole front of that
battaill he placed.xxx. Elephantes, and the spaces betwixt them he furnished
with.xj. hundred shot: with this leaft battaill thus ordered as aforesaid, he
determined to begin the fight, the Phalange or main battle of footmen
being to the number of.xj. thousand or therabouts, whereof a thousand were
Macedonians, and as many Lycians and Pamphilians, the rest all Mercenarie
soldiers.

In the right side adjoining to the Phalange he placed the rest of the horse
to the number of a thousand and.v. hundred under the leading of Andronike, whom
he commanded that when he should come to fight, to slip by and not to come
on yt front, but to stay and delay the battaill, attending and diligently
marking what the other poincte would do. He placed moreover the.xiij.
Elephantes which remained, before the Phalange or maine battaill, and between
them an other company of light armed footeme^. In this order arra^ged Demetre
his battailles. But before Ptolome and Seleuke knew Demetre his order, they had
strongly appointed and well furnished their left corner. But after they were
by their espials advertised of the order of the enemy, they altered and
changed theirs, and ordered their battails as follows.

First they placed in their right corner all their principal force to
encountre the battaill wherein Demetre was. On the other side in the left
corner were.iij. thousand horse, and the two Chieftayns. Before them went a
great number of men which carried great store of iron poles, tied to iron
chains, prepared like an haie against the violence of the enemies Elephantes,
which was an excellent devise easelie to stay and repulse the Elephants. And
by them they placed a great number of shot to hurt and galle the said beasts
and their Governors. The rest of their me^ they arraunged as to them best
seemed, in the midst of the right poinct and at the wings, and in this order
with great shoutes and cries began to march one against an other. And first
the horssemen which were in the uttermost places of the poinctes began to
charge, so that on each side was a stout fight. Howbeit from the beginning the
Demetrians did valiauntest and had the better: but shortly after they which
were in the opposite began so lustely to charge and enuironne the old battaill
wherein Demetre was, that the fight on each side (by reason of the readiness
and valiantness of the Soldiers) waxed hot and terrible, in so much that
at the first encountrie they brake well near all their lances, in which were
many hurt and overthrown. Then drew they their swords and fought so
cruelly, that the slaughter was far greater than before: because the
Chieftaynes them selves preased forth so valiantly, and adventured so many
perilous and dangerous attemptes, that by mean and through their
exhortacions they encouraged the Soldiers violently to fight. And all the
horssemen who for their virtue and prowes were all choice men, manfully and
stoutly fought together in the view and sight of their Chieftaynes, because
they might bear witness of their noble hearts and invincible courages. But
after the horssemen had fought long, and that no man could judge which part
had the better, ye Indians Demetre his Elephanters with great violence marched
against the enemy, who somewhat at the first feared, because they thought them
nothing able to resist their power. But so soon as they came against the iron
rampire, they stayed, and the shot which flanked the ra^pier, shot so thick,
that the greater part of the beasts were sore wounded and their ryders, who
feeling their grievous wounds, urged the beasts with great strokes, so that
some of them fell on the rampire, and being sore hurt with the pricking of the
poles and shot, ran quite out of order. And here is to be noted, yt those
kind of beasts so long as the way is plain and short, are marvelous strong,
either to charge or encountre. But when they shall charge in hard places they
ca^ do nothing, by reason of ye softness of their feet. Which thing they with
Ptolome right well knew, and therefore prepared this manner of stop. At last,
after ye greater part of the Indians Elephanters were either slain or sore
hurt, the Elepantes were by the enemy all taken. Which thing Demetre his
horsseme^ were so a fraide of, that the greater number of them ^ led. And
although Demetre by entreatie and persuasions did what in him lay to keep
still the small number which tarried about him, yet was there no remedy but
that they would needs fly to Gaze: and when he see he could not stay them,
yet enforced not he him self to flee with them: but so handled the matter,
that a great number of his horssemen joined together, and in such order
retired, that the enemy which pursued in heaps and disordered were never able
to hurt them: by reason the way was so champion and large, that they easily
retiered in a great troop togythers. Some footmen likewise disorderly
followed, and because they would run the lighter, they cast of their harne^
s. In this sort they came near Gaze, almost at the sun set. But after they
were about the city, certain of his horssemen forsook him and entered the
Town, to carry out their baggage: by reason whereof the throng and prease
was so great of mares and other bestiall at the gates, for that every man
thrust to be foremost, that Ptolome his Soldiers which chased the^ thither,
because they could not shut the gates, entered the town, and so seized on it to
Ptolome his use. When Demetre had thus lost the battaill, he fled all that
night without stay until he came to the City of Azote, Azote.
distaunt from them two hundred.lxx. furlongs. The next day in the morning he
sent his Ambassadors toward the enemy, of whom he prayed leave to bury the
dead, meaning in that case to do them all the honor he could. There were in
that conflict slain the greater part of his friends. Amongs whom Python was
principal, who with him had equal charge of the army, and Berte which was
with him brought up of a child, and knew all his mind and secrets. In that
battaill also were slain of noble personages above.v. hundred, the more part
horssemen, and above.viij. thousand prisoners taken. When Ptolome and Seleuke
had given leave to bury the dead, they sent back to Demetre all his mouable
goods and treasure which they had taken, and so many prisoners as were his
household meiny without ransom, saying, that the wars which they arrered
against Antigone, was not for his goods and treasure, but because when they
were in consort and warred together, first against Perdicas and after against
Eumenes, he would not make egall distribution with his friends and companions
of the realms and dominions achieved in those wars: and also for that
against the tenor of his alliance, contrary to all equity and conscience, he
had expulsed Seleuke Babylon. The rest of the prisoners Ptolome sent into
Egypt for Gallie slaves.

When Ptolome had magnificiallie and honorably buried all the dead on his
part, he with his army invaded the cities of Phenice, some of which he
besieged, and upon composition reconciled others. When Demetre see his power
and army decrease and insufficient, he sent letters toward his father,
praying his aid and speedy help. And in the mean time while he tarried for
answer, he went to the city of Tripoly in Phenice: Tripoly.
and from thence sent into Cilice for Soldiers, and to all the Captains
farther of, which either in city or castle had any garrison. When Ptolome had
won this victory, and that there was no army to resist him, he subdued the
city of Sidonne, and from thence departed and encamped before the city of
Tire, and practiced with Andronicke Antigone his Lieutenaunt, to render it unto
him, promising great gifts and hie promotions: who not only answered that he
would by no mean falsify his faith to Antigone and Demetre, but also used
chorlish language to Ptolome. Notwithstanding he was shortly after through the
mutenie and sedition of the Soldiers expulsed, and the town rendered to
Ptolome: so that Andronicke then became his prisoner, who both for his vile and
naughty language, also because he would not yield the town, looked to be evil
entreted. Nevertheless Ptolome forgot the injury, and gave him great gifts,
and retained him as one of his chief friends, and after preferred him to an
honorable charge. He was a Prince full of marvelous equity and justice,
courteous, pitiful, full of lenity, and therewith liberal, which greatly
profited him, and was the chief cause that great and honorable personages
desired his amity and friendship. And amongs other, he right gently retained
Seleuke, who praying his aid for the recovering of Babylon, willingly granted
his request, and farther promised to lend him what thing soever was his,
until such time as he had recovered his Satrapie which he first enjoyed. In
this estate were the matters of Asie.

Thelesphore reuolteth from Antigone: and Alcete by the Epirots chosen King,
making alliance with Cassander, after many battailles is by his subjects
slain. And Cassander loses a battaill before the City of Apollonie in the
Country of Adrie.

The.xl. Chapter.
AS the matters of Asie stood in the estate aforesaid: Thelesphore Antigone his
Admiral lying about Corinth, apperceyuing that Ptolome ( Antigones Lieutenaunt)
was better perferred and advanced than he, and all the estate and affairs of
Greece committed to his charge, complained thereof to Antigone, and after sold
all his ships, and bestowed the money amongs the me^ of war which would
follow and go with him. And going to the city of Elyn, Elyn.
was there received as Antigone his friend. But when he had once furnished the
Castle, he brought the city in servitude. He robbed also the temple in Olympe,
and took away above.L. Talents, wherewith he waged a great number of hired
soldiers strangers. In this sort Thelesphore (for the envy and malice of
Ptolome his preferment and authority) revolted from Antigone. Which things
Ptolome ( Antigone his Lieutenaunt in Greece) understanding, with his army
entered Peloponnese, and marched to the City of Elyn, took the Castle and
razed it, restored the City to liberty, and rendered to the God the silver
violently taken away from him. After, upon treaty and composition he
compassed Thelesphore to render the city of Cylene which he enjoyed and kept,
Cylene.
and it restored to the Citizens of Elyn.

Amongs these exploites, the Epyrotes after the death of Eacide (their King)
bestowed the Realm on Alcete, whom Aryuille his father, Ariuille.
and enemy to Cassander, had bannished. Lyciske.
Wherefore Lyciske ( Cassander his deputy of Acarnanie) marched with his army
into Epyre, thinking easily to deprive and put down Alcete from his princely
seat and realm, before he were thoroughly confirmed and established in the
same. And as he encamped before the city of Casopey, Casopey.
Alcete sent his two sons, Alexander and Theucer, Alexander.
commanding them to assemble so many Soldiers as they could. Theucer.
And him self with the Soldiers he had, drew near the enemy, attending the
coming of his sons. Whereupon Lyciske seeing the Epyrotes approach (although
the greater number) so lustely charged them, that they reculed, and finally
fled: but Alcete escaped unto the city of Eurymen, Eurimen.
whom Lyciske there besieged. And as he lay before the Town, Alexander
Alcete his son came with all his power to the aid of his father and fought
with Lyciske. In which conflict he had the better and slew a great number of
Lyciske his Soldiers, and two valiant Captains, to say Mychite and
Lysander of Athens, to whom Cassa^der had left the government of Leucade.
After that conflicte and overthrow, Dyme came in Lyciske his aid, Dyme.
and in few days after gave battaill to Alcete his Sons, and vanquished
them: whereupon the young men and their father retired into a strong place and
forsook the City of Eurimene, which city Lyciske shortly after took, sacked
and razed. When Cassander was aduertized of the discomfiture of his people,
before he had heard of the victory before by them achieved, he levied a great
number of men, and hasted into Epyre to the aid of Lyciske. But after he
understood that his Soldiers had had the better, he concluded a peace and
contracted amity with Alcete. From thence departed he with a great number of
men into the quarters of Adrie to besiege the Apollonians: because they had
expulsed his garrisons and joined with the Illirians. Howbeit, the Citizens
nothing afeard of his coming, having a great army with the aid of their
Allies, marched out of the Town to fight against the enemy. And after a long
and cruel battaill, the Apollonians being the greater number, at last
discomfited Cassander. Whereupon he with great loss and slaughter of his men
(then to weak, and seeing winter approach) returned into Macedon. After whose
departure the Leucadians with the help of the Corcyrians expulsed Cassanders
garrisons there left. The Epyrotes also a while perseuered under the
subjection of Alcete their King. But after he began to wax over rigorous and
cruel against them, they slew him, and Esione and Nise two of his youngest
sons.

Seleuke through his wisdom and prowes, with a small number of men which
Ptolome had given him, conquereth the country of Babylon, together Susiane,
and the rest, nere adjoining, which hold with Antigone.

The.xlj. Chapter.
BUt to return to the doings in Asie. After Ptolome and Seleuke won upon
Demetre the victory about the city of Gaze in the country of Sirie, Seleuke
with viij. hundred footmen and about two hundred horse, (which Ptolome
delivered him) trauailled into Babylon. For so great was his hope, that
although he had no men of war, yet doubted he not, but with his servants
and familiar friends only to go thither, because he surely trusted that the
Babylonians for his gentle entreatie toward them heretofore showed, so
hartelie loved him that they would with right good will receive him: and
especially for that Antigon^ was far off that country. And as he in this hope
and confidence went, his friends which see his small number, and the great
force and power of the enemy, both of men, money, friendship, victuals, and
all other things necessary, were not a little astonished. When Seleuke see them
in this terror and fear, he with these persuasions comforted them. Had it
been requisite (quod he) think you, that they which served Alexander the king
in his wars (to whom for their prowes he had preferred and given charge to
enterprise and take on hand matters of great weight) should have trusted in
the force and strength of men and money, more than in their own prudence,
experience and industry? No: for through that chiefly achieved Alexander so
many honorable and notable victories, which at this day are in admiration of
all the world. It is also meet and convenient to give faith and credit to the
oracles and mouths of the gods, who have presaged, that the beginning and
sequel of this voyage shall have good and prosperous success. For as I went
to the oracle of Branchide to know my fortune, the God saluted and greeted me
as a King: moreover I had a vision in my sleep which seemed that Alexander
was with me in my journey for mine aid and succoure, letting me clearly
understand, that in time I should attain to great Empire and dominion. Again,
no great and weighty matter ca^ be brought to pass without some labor and
trauaill, besides great hazard and danger. And after all these persuasions, he
used him self as a companion amongs the Soldiers, which increased such love
and reverence in their hearts toward him, that they were emboldened to do him
double service. In this sort came he with his small company into the country
of M^ sopotamie, and there what with fair and foul means, he drew to him
many of the Macedonians enhabiting Caris, and with them marched into the
country of Babylon. And after he was entered, all the whole Country met him
and offered their entier service and obedience: because that during the space
of.iij. or.iiij. years while he governed that Province, he showed him self a
just man and good Officer: by mean whereof, he wonderfully got the love of all
the people. He likewise grew in the amity of diverse and sundry persons, which
would do him service at a pinche: Poliarche.
and Poliarche besides Antigone his Lieutenaunt of a certain country, revolted
and joined with him, with above a thousand men of war. When they in League
with Antigone see the unbridled affection of the multitude, they retired into
a strong castle (where of the Captain was one Deiphile) which Seleuke shortly
after besieged and wanne, Deiphile.
and therein found many of his friends and familiars, whom Antigone after his
departure out of Babylon had committed to ward. That done, Seleuke got
together so many men as he could, and bought a number of horses which he
bestowed on such as came in his aid. He likewise showed him self to al men so
courteous and gentle, that they determined to endure al adventures and dangers
in his service whatsoever. But after he was advertised that Nycanor governor
of Mede had assembled of the same country and Perse and of other countries
thereabouts, an army of.x. thousand footmen, and.vij. thousand horse, he
with great diligence departed with those Soldiers he had, to the number
of.iij. thousand footmen and.v. hundred horse to meet him. And when he had
passed the river Tygre, and was advertised that the enemy was not above two or
three days iourneys of, he retired and hid his men in certain mershes
thereabouts, amongs the reeds and bulrushes, to the intent by ambush to
surprise Nycanor, who being come to the bank of the said river, and hearing no
news of ye enemy, lodged in a Manor roial hard by: thinking ye enemy
understood of his coming, and had gone into some place farther of. And for
that self same cause was he not very careful to set his watch, neither yet
put him self in any readiness whatsoever might chance. By reason whereof
Seleuke that night with great noise and affraie assaulted his lodging.
Nevertheless the enemy in that disorder stood to the defense as well as they
could: and as it happened, the Persians first encountered and fought, whereupon
their Satrapa Euager and diverse other of their captains were slain. Euager.
Wherefore the more part of the rest of the Soldiers, what for fear of
danger, and for that they liked not Antigone his dealing, rendered to Seleuke.
Which thing Nycanor seeing and fearing to be by the Soldiers betrayed and
delivered prisoner to Seleuke, fled through ye deserts with a few of his
friends. When Seleuke had strenghtned him self with these me^ at arms, and
using his acustomed courtesy and humanity toward all men, he easily wanne
again to his obeissaunce the countries of Susiane and Mede, and diverse other
regions near about. Of which doings Ptolome and his other friends were
advertised, having already such increase of power and authority as might
beseem a right mighty King with glory and fame worthy a great Empire.

Demetre in battaill vanquisheth Cylles Ptolome his Lieutenaunt, and after
Antigone his Father comes and joins with him, and then Ptolome forsakes
the countries of Syrie and Phenice, and leaves them to the said Antigone.

The.xlij. Chapter.
DUring the time that Seleuke was occupied as is aforesaid, Ptolome who had in
battle vanquished Demetre in Celosirie (as above) and there still remained,
understanding that Demetre was again come into the hier Syrie, and there
encamped, sent one of his captains named Cylles a Macedonian, Cylles.
with such number of men as he thought good, either to expulse him the
country of Syrie, or else to keep him so occupied, that he should do no kind
of exploite. But as he was upon the way, Demetre being by his scoulte
advertised of his coming, and their disorder: because he neither feared or
esteemed the enemy, in the night departed from his camp (lying nere Myunte) with
his horse and light armed footeme^, Myunte.
leaving in his camp the rest with the baggage: and so hasted, that about the
day break he assailed Cilles camp, which he found so disordered, that they
without resistaunce yielded, together Cylles himself. Whereupon when Demetre had
thus sodenlie done so great an exploite, he thought he had well revenged the
shame and damage by him (at the battle before lost) received. Notwithstanding,
doubting that if Ptolome heard of those news, he would with his power come
against him, he pitched his camp in a very strong place, having at his back
a great Marris, and then so much as in him lay, sent to advertise his father
of that he had done, praying him with all diligence to send a strong supply,
or else with all his power to come him self and enter Syrie, to recover it. Of
these news Antigone (then lying in Cylene in the country of Phrigie) was
right glad that his son, Cylene.
a young man, had won so great and honorable a victory, whereby he deserved
to be a King. And incontinent he with his whole army departed Phrigie: and
after he had passed the mount Thaure, he made such speed, that within few days
he was come to his son. When Ptolome understood of his coming, he advised
with his counsel what should be best to do, whether to attend the enemy in
Syrie and there to fight, or to return into Egypt, and from thence make war
as he had before done against Perdicas. Whereupon they all agreed that he
should not hazard his case against the force of the enemy joined together: and
chiefly, because they had a great number of Elephants, and Antigone him
self also in person, who never yet was vanquished. Wherefore it seemed to
them that the best and surest way was, that Ptolome should return into Egypt,
where were victuals great store: and might there keep him self in strong and
aduauntageous places. In following which counsel he delibered to go into
Egypt: but before his departure he beat down and razed certain fair and
beutiful cities: to wete Hace in Phenice, Hace.
Yoppe in Samarie, Yoppe.
and Gaze in Sirie. Gaze.
That done he with his army and all the mouable goods which might be carried,
went into Egypt. By this mean Antigone without difficulty or resistaunce
recovered all the countries of Sirie and Phenice.

Antigone enterpriseth wars against the Nabathians inhabiting the deserts of
Arabia: and Athaney his Captain is by them discomfited. Also after Demetre his
coming thither, he concludes a league and amity with them.

The.xliij. Chapter.
AFter Antigone had thus recovered and won the countries of Syrie and
Phenice: he indicted wars to the Arabians called Nabathians, who^ he thought
his enemies. Wherefore he chose out one of his Captains named Atheney, and
delivered to him.iij. thousand shot, and.vj. hundred of his lightest horse,
commanding them to enter the said country, and to make so many incursions as
they might. But because the manner of life and order of the said Arabians is
far different and disagreeing from all other, I think it meet and expedient
here to make some mention and declaration thereof. First they dwell wildlie
abroad without either towns or houses: wherefore they say their land is
uninhabitable, because there are neither ryuers or fou^tayns wherewith to
maintain an army. The Arabians manner of life in the deserts.
They have also a law which prohibiteth them on pain of death not to sow any
corn, neither to set or graf trees bearing fruit, nor to drink wine or build
houses. This they hold and mayntayn, because they think that those which have
houses, and maneured lands and fruitful, are always subject to conquerours.
But there are amongs them many whereof some have great flocks of sheep and
other great herds of Camels going abroad in the deserts, never tarrying long
in one place. And although there are diverse kinds of Arabians which inhabit
the deserts, yet are the Nabathians the richest and wealthiest, and are about
the number of.x. thousand: whereof some are accustomed to trade by Sea with
incense, myrrh and other drugs aromatique, growing in the fertile Country of
Arabie. They are also meruelouslie determined to keep and mainteyne their
liberty. And when any enemy inuadeth, they draw to the desert and places
solitary which serve in stead of castles and forts, where no stranger can
live. Notwithstanding they have certain receptacles within the Caves which they
dig in the same earth being of plaster and soft stones, whereby they may
the better dig the Caves, the entry of which are little, but within large and
deep, so that they are more than an Arpent square: and in those they set
earthen vessels filled with great store of rain water, and then they in such
sort cover the entry of the Cave above, that they which pass by can not
perceive it, but them selves know it again by a sign which they leave
behind, and every third day they water their cattle with that water, to the
end, if they were put to flight, they should not want drink: and their chief
food is flesh, milk, and other things which the land brings forth, very
good and wholesome to eat. In this land also grows Peper and wild honey,
which they drink with water. There are besides beyond these, other Arabians,
dwelling in the maneured land, and are tributaries as the Syrians, and live in
such order as they do, save that they dwell in no houses. And this is ye manner
and life of the Arabians. Now is there a place in the same Country very
strong, without walls or any such like defense (distaunt from the land
habitable two days journey) where at one time of the year which was even
very then, they repair and come from all quarters of the country to buy and
sell. And as the merchaunts were there assembled and had left at home their
goods, wives, children, and old men and women in a certain strong rock,
Atheney (who had well espied out his time) with his deliuerest and lightest
Soldiers, departed the country of Ydumey, and in two days and three nights
had trauailled three thousand and two hundred furlongs, and were gotten to the
said rock and assaulted them within, whereof some they slew, ^ ooke some
prisoners, and left the rest hurt: from whence they carried great store of
incense and myrrh, besides.v. hundred talents of silver. Which done, Atheney
fearing that the Arabians which were assembled at the place abouesaid, when
they heard thereof, would pursue them, he after.iij. or iiij. days with speed
returned and without stay iourneyed above two hundred furlongs. Wherefore being
through their great speed sore trauailled, and thinking that the Arabians
could not in two or three days ouerget them, without making any great watch,
pitched their camp. But the Arabians in that assemble advertised by such as
see it, of the damage the Greeks had done them, broke up their assemble, and
with all diligence came to the place where the discomfiture was, and there
being better informed of the truth of their loss, and told of the way which
the Greeks went, in such haste pursued the^, that they had the same night
overtaken them, and encamped hard by. And having intelligence of some of their
people which were escaped, by mean of the negligence of the watch, all weried
and a sleep, about three hours before day assailed them, and slew all the
footmen a sleep in their beds, to the number of.viij. thousand, and there
escaped not above.L. of their horse, the greater part of which were also sore
hurt. In this sort the Soldiers under the charge of Atheney, after good
exploite of their matters in the beginning, were in the end through folly and
negligence overthrown. As commonly happens, that with felicity and good
Fortune follows negligence and contempt of the enemy, by reason whereof many
sage and wise men have said (and not without good ground) that it is more easy
patiently to sustain and abide infelicitie and adversity, than in
prosperity, sagely and wisely to govern. For the infelicitie and misery once
passed, causes them which have tasted thereof (for fear to run hedlong into
the same again) to be in their affairs very circumspect and diligent: where
contrariwise prosperity and felicity makes men negligent and ^^ relesse, and
in all things causes great contempt and rechelousnesse. When the Nabathians
had revenged the outrage and damage done to them in such sort as aforesaid,
they writ their letters in Greek to Antigone, wherein they complained them of
Atheney his assailing, and excused the deed by them committed. To whose
letters Antigone answered, that whatsoever Atheney had done against them, was
without his consent and knowledge, and that he was well pleased with the revenge
thereof. All this said he to assure and deceive them: to the end they should
have no regard or care of him, whereby he might suddenly surprise the^. For it
was a hard matter without some cautel and wyle to surprise such a people always
living like sheepheardes, and having for their retraict places inaccessible and
impregnable. And although the said Arabians were right joyous to be by that
mean delivered of so great terror and fear where they were, yet gave they no
such credit to the letters of Antigone, but that they placed their espialles
and watches upon the mountains and places eminent, where they might see all the entries of that country: and beside disposed and ordered their business,
to their best advantage according to the necessity of the same, attending
that which might happen. When Antigone thought he had by his letters
sufficiently abused, deceived and assured them, he chose out.iiij. thousand of
his lightest men, and as many horse, and commanded them to make provision of
victualles to carry for certain days, and be obedient to follow his son
Demetre to whatsoever he commanded. Willing him by all means possible he
could, to chase and expulse the said Arabians. Which commandment he obeyed and
followed, and so took his journey and trauailled through the deserts the
space of three days (thinking the Arabians had thereof known nothing) but
they forthwith by their espials and watches were advertised by signs and
tokens which they made on the hie mountains with fires and other ways as they
had amongs them devised. Wherefore they carried into their strong rocks, al
their baggage, wives, children and old people, and left with them a number of
their lusty young fellows to defend the same, very easy to guard and keep,
because it was of a mighty height, and but one entry and way to come in at.
The rest divided them into bands, and drove their bestiall through diverse
places amidst the wilderness.

When Demetre was come to the rock, and all their cattaile driven away, he
gave many assautes to take it, but the Arabians right valiantly defended it,
and by reason of the advantage of the place, easily repulsed the Greeks, so
that the assaut through many attemptes continued all day. But about the sun
going down, Demetre caused to sound the retraict. The next day in the
morning, as they thought to give a fresh assault, one of Arabians standing in
the top of the rock, cried out with a loud voice, addressing to Demetre
these words ensuing: Sir King Demetre, what wickedness has moved thee to
war upon us pore wretched men that inhabit the deserts, where is neither
corn, water, wine, nor any other thing necessary and meet for thy use. For we
to defend our liberty have chosen this place improuided of all things meet and
necessary for the life and maintenance of any other nation, but live here like
savage and wild beasts, doing neither hurt or displeasure to any. Wherefore we
pray and earnestly desire thee and thy father to take such gifts as we are
able to yield you, and withdraw and call back your army, and hereafter to
hold and retain the Nabathians for your friends. For if thou tarry and
continue here any while, thou shall want water, and other things necessary for
the nourishing and relieuing of thy people. And admit thou conquer us, thou
can never force us to alter and change our manner of life, so that those which
thou shall keep prisoners, can not nor will not endure or abide in servitude and
bondage. Through these words Demetre his heart waxed so cold, that he drew
back his men, and caused it to be declared to the Arabians, that they should
send to him their Ambassadors to treat a league and amity: whereupon they
sent the most ancient amongs them, who in like manner persuaded as the first
man did. Whereby was accorded, that they should give him a certain number of
ostages with many other rich and precious gifts, and that then he would
return with his army. Which conclusion performed, he forthwith departed. And
after he had traveled about three hundred furlongs, he arrived at the Lake
called Asphalte. The Lake Asphalte.
The nature of which because it is marvelous and singular, I think it meet to
entrelace in this present history.

Of the Lake Asphalte, and the marvelous nature thereof: also the discomfiture
of Antigone his people there, by the Arabians.

The.xliiij. Chapter.
THis Lake surnamed Asphalte, is as it were in the midst of the Satrapie of
Arabie, about.v. hundred furlongs long and.lx. brood: the water thereof is
marvelous foul and stinking, so that no fish can live therein, nor any other
thing accustomed to live in the water. And albeit there enters and runs
into it many great ryuers of fresh and sweet waters, nevertheless they are
through the great and marvelous stenche of the water of the Lake incontinent
infected, which of it self yearly casts a great quantity of plastry all
hoale as big and great oftentimes as three Arpentes: and many times not
passing as great as one Arpent. And when there is great store and abundaunce,
the inhabitaunts call it the Bull, and when less, the Bulchin. This amasse and
heap of plaistry in such sort rises and swimmeth above the water, that they
which see it far of, think it to be some Island. And when it begins to
arise as we have before said, they may perceive it xx. days before: because
there issues out of the Lake such a vapoure smelling like plaistre, many
furlonges round about: and of such efficacy and strength, that all the gold,
silver, and all other metal within the limits and compass thereof, lose
their color. But after the plaistre is once risen above the water, it gets
it again. Which vapoure scaldeth all the Regions thereabouts, and dries them
as if they were half burnt, and makes the people very pale and wanne and also
sickly, so that they are not long lived. Notwithstanding the land round about
is fruitful for Date trees, whereas is any river or fountain to moist them.
And in a place lying in a valley near thereto, grows the sweet and
odoriferous Baulme which is of great price: because there is none in the whole
world but there, The sweet Baulme.
which the Phisicions use in their receytes as an excellent and singular
thing. And as touching the plaistre rising out of the Lake, the people of the
Country run thither to spoil and gather it as it were the butine of the
enemy. The boats which they row in are made of great reeds, and in every boat
but three men, whereof two row, the third has bow and arrows to defend
them against those which would let them from gathering. And when they are come
to that amasse or heap, with their axes and hatchets they cut thereof as a man
should do on a Tuph or soft stone, and therewith fraught their boats, and
then return. And if it happen at any time that the boats break that they fall
into the water, yet though they cannot swymme, they sink not to the ground
as in other waters, but remain above as if they swam. For the nature of the
water is to bear and hold up the bodies of any thing which has humiditie and
breath. And such things as are whole and massife, as gold, silver, lead and
such other metals sink not so soon to the ground as they do in other waters.
With the same plaistre the Paisaunts gather and get great store of silver, for
they carry it into Egypt, where they sell it very dear, because it is very
excellent and sovereign to preserve dead bodies from steach and putriture: and
if the other dredges be not mingled with that, they can not long preserve and
keep them.

When Demetre was returned to his Father in Sirie, he recompted all he had done
against the Arabians, and also the nature of the Lake whereof we have spoken.
Howbeit his father was no deal contented with the league and amity made with
the Arabians: saying they would hereafter become more cruel and fierce, seeing
they had not now been chastised and brought under: and farther, they would
think that the same conclusion of peace was made not for any pity or
compassion he took of them, but because he was not able to correct and punish
them. Notwithstanding he much commended him for fynding out the Lake by which
he trusted the better to increase his revenue and possessions. Wherefore he
charged Jerome the Historian to assemble and get together a number of ships
and to fraught them all with the plaistre he could there find, and to carry
it into some place to be safely kept. But the matter happened all other ways.
For the Arabians who were thereof advertised, had assembled to the number of vj.
thousand or thereabouts, and with their boats with shot of arrows so charged
Antigone his people upon the said Lake in their ships, that they had almost
slain them all. Whereof Antigone advertised, loss all his hope of gayning by
the said Lake: and chieftie because news were brought him out of Mede, of
greater and weightier affairs, which answered him as hereafter shall be
declared.

Demetre Antigone his son, at his fathers commandment goes to Babylon, to
make thereof a conquest, and after returns to his Father.

The.xlv. Chapter.
AS Antigone lay in Syrie, and thought a fresh to commence wars against the
Arabians, sodenlie came a messanger to him with letters from Nycanor Governor
of Mede and the other Satrapes near thereabouts, by which he was advertised of
Seleuke his arrival in Babylon, and of the things he had already done,
together of Nycanor his discomfiture, with which news he was greatly astonished.
Wherefore he incontinent dispatched Demetre his son with.v. thousand
Macedonian footmen.x. thousand Mercenaries, and iiij. thousand horse:
commanding him with all celeritie to go and recover the Satrapie of Babylon,
and after to return to Sea toward him. For execution of which commandment
Demetre departed from the City of Damas in Syrie, The City of Damas.
and sped him to Babylon. When Patrocles Seleuke his Lieutenaunt there
understood that Demetre was already entered Mesopotamia, Patrocles.
and seeing his small number not able to resist, kept with him self one part,
and commanded an other company to depart the city, and pass the river
Euphrate, to save the^ selves through the deserts: and appointed the rest to
pass the River Tigre, and to go into Susiane, into the city of Eutele, Eutela.
over against the red Sea. And him self (with the soldiers he deteyned)
remained in the Country of Babylon, having an eye to the passages and fourdes
of the Ryuers and other difficile places, that he might know when and what way
the enemy came. He also gave notice with all speed to Seleuke abiding in the
country of Mede, of their coming: and from day to day signified unto him what
was done, exhorting him to bring with all diligence, aid and succoure. When
Demetre was come to Babylon, and found the City left alone, he minded to take
the castles. The one of which he forcibly took, and gave the spoil to his men
of war. And seeing it impossible for him out of hand to take the other, and
that the term appointed to meet his Father approached, he left behind at the
siege thereof one of his friends hight Archelaye, Archelaye.
with.v. thousand footmen and a thousand horse to continue the siege, and
him self with the rest returned to Sea.

The Romans under the conduct of Quinte Fabie their Dictator, win and take
two Cities from the Samnites.

The.xlvj. Chapter.
DUring the time that these things aforesaid were done in Asie, the wars
between the Romans and Samnites in Italy waxed and continued more fierce,
never ceasing besieging of Towns, making incursions and robberies one into
another country and running all over with rolling camps. For these two
Nations, notable Soldiers and warlike people, left nothing vnhazarded for the
winning of Empire and Dominion one of another. It happened also that ye Roman
Consuls with one part of their army were come and encamped more near the
camp of the enemy, to epsy the time, and aduauntages for them to fight, and
also to stay the enemy: that they might thereby hold and keep the Cities
allied and confederate with them, in suertie. The other part of the army
led Quinte Fabie, Quinte Fabye.
General of the whole army, The City of Fretonia, or Ferent.
and sovereign Dictator, who won and forcibly to^ ke the City of Ferent,
and sent two hundred of the principal Citizens to Rome prisoners, whom for
their common rebellion against the Romans, they according to the Law and
manner of the Roman custom, were whipped about the City, and after beheaded in
the great market place. Shortly after he entered the territory of the
Nolaines, took the city, and by the sound of the drum, sold the butine
thereof, and divided one part of their land amongs the men of war.
Wherefore the Romans seeing their affairs prosper and go forward, The Isle of
Potide.
sent a Colonie of Citizens into the Isle of Potide.

After the alliance made and confirmed between Cassander, Ptolome, Lysimache
and Antigone: Cassander puts to death the young Alexander and Roxanne his
mother.

The.xlvij. Chapter.
THe year ensuing in which Thesimonide had the government of Athens, and
that Man ke Valerie and Publy Dece were at Rome created Consuls, Cassander,
Ptolome and Lysimache treated a league and amiti^ which was put in writing. By
which Cassander was declared and named Governor and Emperor of Europe:
Lysimache of Thrace: Ptolome of Egypt, and the Cities near there about, as well
in Lybie as Arabie: And Antigone of all Asie, until that Alexander, Roxanne her
son came to his full age. It was also concluded and agreed upon, that the
Greeks should remain and be at liberty after their accustomed laws.
Nevertheless the said Princes continued nor remained not in that accord and
appointement, for every of them by exquisite means went about to enlarge and
increase his Dominion and authority. But Cassander seeing that Alexander ye
son of Roxanne waxed and grew in years and bigness, and that in Macedon
the voices went and men talked that it was needful and requisite to take
Alexander out of prison and to restore him to the authority and government
of his fathers Realms: and fearing if that should so come to pass, it would
go awry with him, commanded Glaucye (who had charge and keeping of the infant)
secretly to put him and his mother to death: Glaucie.
which thing was speedily done. Through which fact, both Cassander, Ptolome,
Lysimache and Antigone, so soon as they had thereof intelligence, were clearly
delivered of the fear they had of the young King Alexander. For after him
remained no succe^^ our of Alexander the great, but every of the Governors of
the Countries and Provinces, aspired the Kingdoms and principalities, and
after held and kept them as their own inheritance, acquired and gotten by the
right and conquest of war. And the same time in Italy the Romans with a
great number of footmen and horse, went to besiege the city of Spolite, in
the country of Maruce: and sent into that country a Colonie of their Citizens
whom they called Interanneis.

The end of the.xix. Book of Diodorus Siculus, the second part of this
present volume: and here begins the.xx. of this volume, the third part.
A little short Prologue, wherein the Author declares in what sort it is
commendable and well beseeming a good and perfect Historia^ to use Rhetoric,
Orations, Declarations and such other like.
NOt without just cause ought they which understand and know the art of
Rhetoric, to reprove their order, which in Histories do admixt either too long
or many orations, because they by such impertinent and superfluous words, do
not only interrupt and break the order of their narration, but also do hinder
the desire of the Readers for understanding of the things passed. And if such
Orators and Rhetoritians will by such orations show their skill and learning,
and the elegancie of their speech and language, they may particularly by them
selves couch the orations and Ambassades apperteyning to Ambassadors, the
praises and disprayses able and meet, and other such like: and so using their
art and elegancie in such tales, and busying them in this and that matter
particularly, shall be commended therein. Howbeit, at this day some writers with
using the art Oratory, reduce the greater part of Histories into Orations and
tales: which to the Readers are very tedious and yrkesome, not only for that
they have naughtely written and made them, but also because they no whit
regarded the order and nature of the History. By reason whereof such as do
read them, very often pass over unread the said orations and declarations,
which by great art and cunning had been composed and made: or else for the
length and impertinencie are so weried, that they leave all unread. And not
without good reason: for the nature of an History is to be plain and
continued without interruption: like as when the body of a man is dismembered,
it loses his kindly virtue, but when it is whole joined together, it has
then the full grace and perfect strength. And so in like case, the narration
and setting forth of an History gives to the Reader thereof a manifest and
delectable pleasure, if it be plain and continued. Notwithstanding, I will not
altogyther reject and forbid the use of Rhetoric in an History, for that
to make it pleasant, it ought with some variety and copy to be garnished, and
is therefore very requisite that in some corner and place thereof be orations
and declarations. Neither will I my self be altogyther void of that faculty
and art, when I shall come to the talk of any Ambassadoure, Counsailour or
other such grave personage, but I will recite what he has said. And they
which have not the knowledge to do that, might find many excuses and say they
had forgotten to put it in, which had been expedient and necessary in the same
place to have been interlaced. Therefore where things be worthy memory and
profitable, whereby the History should be garnished: they ought not
negligentlie to be passed over (as it were under color that they nothing
served to ye purpose) and not properly couched and placed. But where the
matter and effect of the History is evident and of importance, it is not
convenient that the declaration thereof be inferior to the deeds. It is also
sometimes meet and necessary to use the art Oratorie, to say, when any
thing happens otherwise than is looked for. For it is expedient by copye of
words to make the orations artificially as it falls out. And now, since we
have sufficiently answered this matter, it is meet we return to the
narration of our History, and divide the things whereof we have spoken,
according to the times they were done in.

The third Book.
Of certain aid which Cassander sends to the King of Peons: of certain
enterprises by Ptolome against Antigone, done in Phenice. How Polispercon
takes on hand to restore Hercules the son of Alexander to the realm of
Macedon. And finally of the pitiful and lamentable death of Nycocles and his
whole family.

The first Chapter.
THe year that Hieronemon governed Athens, and Quinte Iulie and Quinte Emelie
were Consuls at Rome, Antholion.
as Antholeon King of Peons lay in Macedon, the Antariates warred upon him: to
whom Cassander sent aid and succoure, so that where before he was in case like
to have lost his estate, he is now clearly delivered of that danger, and
enforced the Antaryates with their wives and children to go inhabit the mount
Odorbel. In this same very season Ptolome Antigone his Lieutenaunt of his
army in Peloponnese, under color that he was not so well entreated and
honored as he had merited and deserved, revolted from him and took part with
Cassander, and left Captain Satrapeas the Phenician (whom he best trusted) in
Hellespont, Satrapeas.
and sent to him certain men, with commandment not to take part with
Antigone, but to keep and guard the places and Towns he held for him, in his
own propre name. Again, because in the league and peace concluded between the
Princes as aforesaid, amongs other things was pronounced and declared, that
the Cities of Greece should remain and continue at their liberty and popular
governance, Ptolome Prince of Egypt, for that Antigone kept his garrisons in
some of them, determined to arrere open hostility and war against him.
Whereupon he sent one of his Captains named Leonide, into the hier Cilice, to
take the Cities of the same country, subject to Antigone, and sent likewise to
Cassander and Lysimache, praying them to join with him, that they three
together might war upon Antigone, and no longer permit his power to wax and
increase either greater or mightier. For resisting of which enterprise,
Antigone sent his youngest son Philip into Hellespont to war upon the
Phenician and other rebels. And sent his son Demetre into Cilice against
Leonide, who chased and expulsed Ptolome his Soldiers, and recovered the
Towns which they had taken. Amongs these enterfactes Polispercon abiding in
Peloponnese, finding him self agreeued with Cassander, did all yt in him lay,
to recover the government of Macedon. Wherefore he sent for Hercules Alexander
the great his bastard Son (by Barsine) to Pargame, Hercules Alexander his
bastard son.
where he was brought up, and then about.xvij. years old, and writ to all
his friends, and to so many as he thought hated Cassander, for help in
Alexander his aid for recovery of his fathers realm. And further writ to
the Etholians in general to join with him in that enterprise: promysing that
if the said Hercules could by their mean and aid recover his Fathers realm,
to give them great things. To which persuasions the Etholians and many other
agreed, and put them selves in arms, to the number of.xx. thousand footeme^,
and a thousand horse. And Polispercon who about this enterprise was most
careful, levied money on all sides, and sent secret Messangers to the
Macedonians, to exhort them to take part with the young King, thinking that to
be their best and most agreeable to reason. Again, when Ptolome Lord of the
Isle of Cypres, understood that Nycocles King of Paphe had secretly allied with
Antigone, Nycocles.
he sent two of his principal and chief friends, Argey.
to wete Argey and Calicrate into Cypres, charging them to kill the said
Nycocles, Calicrate.
fearing, that if he left him unpunished, the rest would not styck to do the
like. When they were arrived in Cypres, and had taken with them Ptolome his
soldiers under Menelaye his charge, and encompassed Nycocles house, they
signified to him their charge from Ptolome, and exhorted him to kill him self,
who from the beginning used many words in excusing the fact and deed. But
when he see there was no account made of his talk, he at last slew him self.
And after that Axithea his wife understood of his death, A pitiful History.
the first slew two young maids her daughters, whom she had by him, to the end
they should not come in the hands of her husbands enemies: and after exhorted
Nycocles brothers wives willingly to die with her, which they did, albeit
Ptolome had commanded that no hurt should be done to the women, but let them
alone. In this sort was the Palaice Royal of Paphe full of murdres and
wilful slaughters, and after in manner of a Tragedy, burnt. For immediately
after Nycocles brethrens wives were dead, they shut up the doors of the houses
and set them on fire, and forthwith killed them selves.

Of the wars between Parisade his three children, King of Bosphore, after his
death, for the succession of the Realm, together their deeds and gestes, and
also their ends.

The.ij. Chapter.
IN this season while these matters were done in Cypres, great controversy
arose in the country of Pont, Parisade.
after the death of Parisade, sometime King of Bosphore Cymerique: Satyr. Eu^
ele. Pritame.
between Satyr, Eumele and Pritame, Parisade his sons, for the succession of
the said Realm. Because that the said Satire in the life of his father had by
him ben named and declared heir apparaunt, and successor, and had also
governed and ruled the estate the space of.xviij. years: Eumele who there with
was much moved and offended, assembled a great number of men, of the countries
thereto adjoining, to war upon his brother. And he understanding his fetch
and enterprise, with a mighty power came against him. And when he had passed
the River Thatis, The River of Thatis.
which ran between the two armies, he enpaled his Camp with his carriages,
whereof he badde store, and arranged his Soldiers in order of battaill, and
placed him self in the midst of the Phalange according to the custom of the
Scythes. He had in his company and army about two thousand Mercenarie
Greeks, and so many Thracians.xx. thousand Scythian footmen, and above.x.
thousand horse. And on Eumele his side came Arypharne King of Thrace with xx.
thousand horse, and.xxij. thousand footmen. And at last they courageouslie
joined battaill. Satire then having about him his choice and picked horssemen,
so lustely charged Arypharne in the midst of his battaill, that there was a
sharp and cruel conflicte betwixt the horssemen, and many on both sides
slain: but in the end Aripharne was put to flight, whom Satire a while
chased, and overthrew and killed a great number of his people. But when he
understood that his brother Eumele which lead the other wing over against the
Mercenarie Greeks, had the better of them, he desisted chasing of Aripharne
and came to the rescous of his own men. At whose coming the enemy was
repulsed, and in the end put to flight. And in this manner Satyr him self was
cause of victory in both the wings. By which well appeared yt the realm,
as well for his Seignoritie as also for his virtue and prowes, to him only
apperteyned.

The victory thus won, Aripharne and Eumele retired into a Castle standing
on a very steep rock, situate in the midst of the River of Thatis. By
reason whereof, and also because the walls were strong and hie, well manned
and also furnished with all kinds of shot and weapon, it was not easy to be
taken, but very difficile and hard to besiege, having but two ways to enter,
both of them artificially made and wrought: the one went directly to the
castle, environed and defended with flankers and bulwarks: the other to certain
marshes lying round about the castle, fortified with ra^piers of wood, in the
midst of which marshes were fair houses buylt upon great pillars standing
upon the river. When Satyr had considered the strong situation and great
danger in the siege thereof, he first made incursions and robberies upon all
the country round about, and took a great number of the paysauntes prisoners,
with great plenty of cattle, and burnt and fouraged all the villages. And
after he had thus done, he determined forcibly to assail the place which lead
to the Castle, but he was repulsed with loss of many men. Notwithstanding he
desisted not, but so lustely and courageously assaulted the other way, that he
wanne the rampers and houses standing on the marshes, and spoiled them, and
after passed the river, where he began to cut and hew down the piles and houses
of wood through which he must needs pass if he determined to come to the
Palaice. Which thing when Arypharne see, and fearing the taking of the Palaice,
his whole trust and chief refuge, defended the same by all the possible means
he could. Now had he a great number of shot, which he divided on both sides the
way, who hurt a great number of the wood fellers, because they could not
avoid the shot, nor yet endomage them which did the hurt. Nevertheless they
courageously endured the danger, and for three days together never ceased
cutting down of wood, so that they had made a plain beaten way through the
marshes, and the fourth day were gotten hard to the curten. For Menisce
Captain of the Mercenaries, Menisce.
a valiant and wise man, came bravely and courageouslie with his Soldiers
through the same way to give the assault. But after he had long sustained the
violence of the shot within, and the greater number of his men hurt, he then of
force retired. And in the retire they of the Castle in such number sallied out
upon him, that what through the narrownes of the way, and disaduauntage of the
place, he surely had been slain, had it not ben that Satyr seeing them so
distressed, incontinent came to their rescous. Who nobly fighting and abiding the
force of the enemy, was with the blow of a lance in one of his arms so sore
hurt, that he was feign to be taken and carried back into his camp, and the
night ensuing died on the same stroke, when he had reigned but.ix. months,
after the death of his Father. When Menisce see that, he raised the siege and
retired the army to the city of Galgaze, Galgaze.
and from thence sent his brothers body down elongest the River unto his
brother Prytame, in the city of Panticape: who caused it very sumptuously and
honorably to be enterred, amongs the sepulchers and tombs of the Kings. And
that done, he incontinent went into the city of Galgaze, and there seized on
the army and Realm. To whom Eumele his brother sent Messangers to demand
particion of ye said Realm, who harkened not to any such demand: but after
he had placed his garrisons in Galgaze, forthwith returned to Pa^ticape,
Panticape.
to establish and set an order about the affairs and estate of the realm. The
same time Eumele with the aid of a number Barbarians, took the city of
Galgaze, and many other Towns and Uillages thereabout. Whereof Pritame
advertised, levied a great army and came against him, where he in battaill was
vanquished, and enforced to fly into a place in the straight near the marshe
Meothide: and being there by Eumele enclosed, was driven of necessity to come
to a composition, wherein he gave over and restored to him his army, and also
forsook his right and title of the realm. But after he was returned to
Panticape the Palaice Royal of the King of Bosphore, he again forcibly took
upon him the government and estate of the Realm, but he was a fresh by
Eumele overthrown, and fleing through certain orchyardes, there slain. After
whose death, Eumele meaning to assure himself of the realm, caused all the
friends, wives and children of Pritame and Satyr his brethren, to be put to
death, except and reserved Parisade, Satyr his son, a very young stryppling,
who on horse back got out of the town and fled to Agare King of the Scythes.
Agare.
But when Eumele see the Citizens for the slaughter of their friends and
familiars wax mutinous, he assembled them and declared the causes which moved
him to do the same, saying farther, that he would restore them into their
ancient estate, immunitie and franchize, sometime had under his predecessors,
and that they should be exempte of all trybutes and impostes: by which mean he
appaised them, and wanne again their good wills and favors, and after,
sagely and courteously governed and behaved him self in his reign, to the
great admiration of all his neighbors. For through his munificencie and
courtesy, he made all his friends to love him: as the Byzancians, Synopians,
and the rest of the Greeks inhabiting the country of Pont. And when Lysimache
besieged the Calantians, who for want of victuals, were brought into great
danger and necessity, he received a thousand of them which came out by reason
of the famine: and not only licenced and assured them to remain in his
Country, but also gave them one of his own cities, named Yse, and amongs them
divided the territory thereof. Yse.
He moreover warred upon the Heniques, Thaures, and Achees, Barbarians, and
Sea rouers, to make the Sea Pontique nauigable to them of the country. By
which his doings he both got great praise and renown of the country men
there, and also of the whole world: because of the report the people of that
country made to all which sailed and came thither, so that he had won a
great part of the region of Barbary joining upon his realm, and became so
puissaunt and renoumed, that he enterprised to subdue and conquer the whole
country of Pont, which he had without pe^ adventure compassed, if death by a
marvelous mishappe had not shortened his days, after he had reigned.v. years
and.v. months. For as he was ryding in a coche running on four wheles, by
four horses drawn toward a sacrifice or pilgrimage, the horses sturtling
at some thing they see, ran quite out of the way, coursing overthwart all
the fields. But when the King see that the waggoner could not stay the^,
fearing the overthrow of yt coche or chariot, made haste to get out, and
thinking to leap to ye ground, his sword caught between the spokes of one of
the wheles, wherewith he was immediately drawn under the wheles, and there
frushed and bruised to death. And it is said, that ye death of him and his
brother, were by certain plain and simple Oracles pronosticated of, which in
deed the men of the country greatly credited. For one day Satire demanding
what death he should die, The superstition of the Paynims.
answer was by the Oracle made, that he should take heed and beware he were
not by a mouse suddenly slain. By reason whereof he would neither suffer free
or bond bearing that name, to tarry within his country: and so feared the myse
in field and town, that he commanded all should be slain: and farther made
all the holes in the ground to be stopped up, which they might come out at.
Howbeit, that served to no purpose, nor was the cause of his end, but died of
a wound on the muscle of the arm by us called the brawne. It is to be
understood, that a mouse in Latin is called Mus, and a little Mouse, Musculus:
and thereby was signified, that he should take heed, he died not by a mouse,
and after his death, some enterpreted that it was of the muscle, which in Latin
may be said a little mouse, and also the brawne. And it was of Eumele presaged,
to beware of the fall of a house, and therefore he never entered any house, but
that he would first circumspectly advise, and look upon the fundation, to see
if it were stable and sure. But after he was dead in manner as aforesaid, some
thought the Oracle was accomplished, and that the Chariot was understood the
fall of an house. But for this time we will give over mencioning of the things
done in the East part of Pont, and speak of those the same season done in
Italy.

Of two victories which the Romans won against the Samnites, whereby they
took many of their Cities.

The.iij. Chapter.
IN this season the Roman Consuls being come with their army into the
country of Puille, wanne a battaill against the Samnites, about a place
called Talie: Talie.
who retired into a mountain there by, called by the inhabitaunts, the holy
hill: so that the Romans could not pursue them that day because night drew
on, and therefore returned to their camp. But the next day in the morning they
joined battaill, where a number of Samnites were slain, and above two
thousand taken prisoners. Through which victory the Consuls kept the fields
and took the Cities and Towns against them. Amongs which by force were taken
Cataraste, and Carauille, and certain other by treaty and practice. Cataraste.
And thus much touching the matters of Italy. Carauille.


Ptolome Prince of Egypt wins from Antigone certain Cities, practizeth and
gets to him Ptolome Nephew to Antigone, and after puts him to death.
Polispercon also through the persuasion of Cassander, puts to death Hercules
the son of Alexander. And finally of Cleomenes death King of Lacedemon.

The.iiij. Chapter.
THe same year that Demetrie Phalerie governed Athens, and Quinte Fabie the
second time, and Caie Martie were created Consuls at Rome, Ptolome advertised
that his Captains in Cilice had lost all the Cities they had won and taken,
betook him to sea with his whole army, and arrived at Phaselid, Phaselid.
which City he took by siege, and from thence sailed into the Country of
Lycie, and there took the city Xanthe, Xanthe.
guarded by Antigone his Soldiers: after that he came before the city of
Caune, Caune.
which he by Sea attempted and wanne: he likewise took by force the Castle of
Heracle, and the Castle Persike yielded upon compositon. From thence departed
he, and came before the city of Coo, at this day named Laugo: and there
practiced with Ptolome, Antigone his brothers son, and Lieutenaunt of certain
men of his fathers, whom he drew to his alliance, and made him reuolte from
Antigone his uncle. And going from Calcide where his army lay, to meet with
Ptolome at Coo, he received and welcomed him right honorably. But after he see
his prodigality and ambition, to win and get away Ptolome his Captains,
fearing he went about to betray him, he prevented the matter, and caused him to
be apprehended and poisoned: and attracting his Soldiers to his favor,
divided them amongs his bands. In this mean while, after Polispercon had
assembled a great army, he took his journey to bring Hercules the son of
Alexander by Barsine, to the realm of Macedon. And when he was with his army
come to the place Stymphale, Cassander also came thither with a puissaunt
army, and encamped very near him. But when he perceived that the Macedonians
which came with him, were satisfied and content that Hercules should be
restored to his fathers realm, and fearing if they see him, they would quickly
take his part, sent secret Messangers to Polispercon, declaring that so soon
as he had restored Hercules to his realm, he should then become his subject
and thrall: but if he would kill him, and make alliance with the said
Cassander, he would first render and restore to him, all that he before held and
enjoyed in Macedone, give him a sufficient army, nominate and proclaim him
Prince and Governor of Peloponnese, make him partaker and consorte of all he
had under his dominion, and besides have him in greater honor and reverence,
than any other of the Satrapes. Through these persuasions and fair promises,
he induced Polispercon to consent unto this mischeuous and wicked practice: and
after they had plighted their faythes one to an other, he caused the young
Hercules trayterouslie to be slain: and that done, openly then showed him
self friend to Cassander, who for accomplishing his promysse, rendered first
to him all that he had held and enjoyed in Macedon, and after delivered
him.iiij. thousand Macedonian footmen, and.v. hundred Thessalian horse: and
so many as voluntarily came to serve him, he received and gave them good
enterteynement, with which army he invaded and entered Peloponnese, through the
country of Beoce: but being by the Beotians and Peloponnesians repulsed, he
returned with his army and wintred in Locres. The self same year founded
Lysimache a city in Theronese, called after his own name Lysimache. And when
Cleomenes King of Lacedemon had reigned.Lx. years and.x. months, he died:
after whose death his Son Arete succeeded, and reigned.xliiij. years.

Of certain victories which the Romans have upon the Tyrrhenians and
Samnites. And of certain Innouations, by Appie Claudie the Roman Censor made,
in contempt and defacing of the Senate and nobles, in favor of the
communaltie.

The.v. Chapter.
ABout the same time, the Tyrrhenians besieging the City of Souttre, Souttre.
a colonie of the Romans, were in vattaill by the Roman Consuls vanquished
and chased home into their camp: which Romans came thither with great
power, of purpose to raise their siege. On the other side, the Samnites seeing
the Roman armies far from their country, burnt, wasted, and pilled the
lands and country of the Iapides, confederats with the Romans. By reason
whereof the Consuls were enforced to divide their army, leaving Fabie in
Toscane, Fabie.
and sent Martie against the Samnites, Martie.
who took by force the city of Aliphe, and delivered the Allies of the
Roman people, from the necessity and danger they were in. Again, Fabie
seeing that a great number of the Tyrrhenians were assembled to besiege the
City of Souttre, secretly departed from that quarter, and passing through the
territory of their neighbors, before they were espied, entered the hie
country, which of long had been vnpilled and vnrobbed of any enemy, and
spoiled and fouraged it all over, and slew numbres of the paysaunts that
resisted him, and took many prisoners. Which done, he went against Perouse:
and finding the Tyrrhenians there assembled in battaill, Perouse.
discomfited them, and slew a great number, wherewith they were maruelously
amazed: for the Romans had never ben so beforehand as Fabie was the^. Who
after that victory, trused with the Aretians, Crotonians and Perousians: and
shortly after took by force the city of the Tyrrhenians named Castolle,
Castolle.
by mean whereof they were enforced to raise their siege from before the city
of Souttre.

In this season Appie Claudie and Lucie Claudie were by the Romans elect and
named Censores. Ap. Claudius. I. Claudius.
And the said Appie being through flattery of his companion, in all doings
followed, changed and altered many of the ancient customs of the city, for
he (to please the communaltie) had no regard to content the Senate. And first,
he caused a pipe of lead to be brought into the City by conductes four score
furlongs long, to the great cost and charge of the common treasure, without
making the Senate any thing privy thereto, and called it after his own name
Appie. He likewise caused the ways and straights, from Rome to Capue, being a
thousand furlongs distaunt between, to be paued, and called them Appie, he
playned and leuelled also all the rocks and mountains, and filled up all the
ditches and valleys with earth and rubushe, so that he had about those works
employed and bestowed almost the whole revenue of ye City, to have his name
ymmortall, for his liberality and munificence toward the weal public,
besides great novelties and chaunges in the Senate by him made. For where in
times past were none but of the noblest houses and greatest wealth admitted to
the dignity of a Senator, he put in many sclaues borne, wherewith the nobles
and gentlemen were greatly offended. He likewise granted to every of the
Citizens, to enrolle and writ him self in what tribe he would, and in the
same pay his rent. Moreover, when he perceived the nobles wholly moved and
bent against him, he would do nothing, that in any wise should seem to please
or content them, nor do any thing according to their intention and desire, that
by any mean might displease the mean sort of the communaltie: making in this
sort his part good against the nobles, through the good wills of the
commons. So that, when it came to the musters of the horssemen, he would not
once reject any horse of theirs, and in vewing the Senate, would not put back
one of the infamed according to the ancient custom therein always before
observed and kept. By reason whereof, the Senates to despite him, when they
assembled the Senate, would not once call to counsel the Senators by him
appointed, but only those which before had been by the others Censors
nominated and chosen. Howbeit, the communaltie thinking to please Appie, and to
uphold and mainteyne that which he had done, and also desiring that the
promotion of their kinsfolks and friends by him pronounced Senators might take
effect, chose to the chief and principal office of Edilite Gne Flauie, Gne
Flauie.
son to a bondsman: which thing in Rome was never before seen. When all
these things were finished and done, and that the end and term of Appie was
consumed and determined, to avoid the malice and displeasure of the nobles
conceived against him, he feigned and countrefaited blindness, and never after
removed out of his own house.

After Ptolome Prince of Egypt has restored one part of the Cities of Greece
to liberty, he for despite and in recompense of their breach of promise with
him, concludes a peace with Cassander. And Cleopatre sister to Alexander the
great, coming on her way toward him, is by the commandment of Antigone,
miserably slain.

The.vj. Chapter.
THe year that Carine held the principality of Athens, and at Rome were
created Co^suls, Publie Decie and Quite Fabie^ and in the Olympiade the.Cxxvij.
Ptolome Prince of Egypt went to Sea with a great army from Mind: and sailing
alongest the Isles of Greece, delivered first Andrie from the subjection of
Antigone^ and expulsed his garrisons. From thence he sailed to the straight of
Peloponnese, called Isthmus, and there took the cities of Sycione, Corynth,
and Cratesipole, and restored them to liberty, fully de^ ermined to do the
like to the rest of the cities in Greece, thinking thereby to get great good
will and favor, and so to fortify and make strong his estate. But after he
see that the Peloponnesians would not with victuals and money aid him
according to their promise, he for despite and anger, allied and concluded a
peace with Cassander, wherein was declared, and agreed on, that every of them
should govern the Cities and Provinces already in their possessions. And
upon that conclusion, after he had garrisonned Sycione and Corinth, he
returned into Egypt. In the mean while Cleopatre seeing the enimitie daily
between her and Antigone increase, determined to join with Ptolome, and so
departed from the City of Sardis, meaning to seek him out. It is to be
understood, that Cleopatre was sister to Alexander the great, and sometime wife
to Alexander late King of Epyre deceased, which warred in Italy: whom for
the nobleness of her ligne and stem, Cassander, Lysimache, Antigone,
Ptolome, and in effect all the puissaunt and renowned Princes and Chieftaynes
which remained after Alexander the great, greatly desired to wife, thinking
that the Macedonians would soon obey and follow him, who should marry her, by
reason of the affinity he should have in the blood Royal, and be held for
chief and sovereign over the rest. But the deputy of the City of Sardes for
Antigone, having from him express charge and commandment to take diligent
heed she departed not, incontinent stayed her going. And after, by the
commandment of Antigone, through certain women whom he had for that purpose
corrupted, put her to death. And because Antigone would not seem to be the
Author of so execrable a murder, he by justice put to death certain of the said
women, as if they had perpetrated and committed some heinous fact: and very
honorably buried the body of the Lady, as apperteyned to so noble a Dame. In
this sort Cleopatre for marriage of whom all the noble and renowned Princes
were at debate and controversy, before the time of marriage ended her life.

After the taking and razing of Munichie, Demetre, Antigone his son, by his
Fathers commandment restores Athens, Megare, and many other Cities of Greece
to liberty: and of their liberality toward him, and the honors they judged
him worthy for that his benefit and good turn.

The.vj. Chapter.
THe same year in which Anaxicrate held ye government of Athens, and that
Appie Claudie and Lucie Volamine were at Rome created Consuls, when Demetre
Antigone his son (to execute his Fathers commandment for restoration of
the Cities of Greece to liberty) had gotten together a great number of
footmen, ships, plenty of armoure, and all other munition meet and
necessary for a siege, he loused from Ephesus, and sailed directly to the
City of Athens, by Cassander garrisoned. And after he had before the Port of
Pyrea pitched his camp, he caused by an edict, his fathers commandment to be
published for the restoration of the cities of Greece to liberty. But Dionise
Captain of Munychie, and Demetre Phalerey deputy of Athens for Cassander,
right over against him had with Soldiers ma^ned their walls and curtens.
Nevertheless some of Antigone his Soldiers had gotten one quarter of the
curten of Pire, standing upon the Sea side named Acten, and there slew and
repulsed the enemy, which was the cause of the taking of Pyre. Howbeit,
Dionise retired into Munichie, and Demetre Phalerey into the City of Athens,
who the next day in the morning was by the commoners sent in an Ambassade
toward Demetre, before whom he propounded as well the deliverance of the
city and Citizens, as also his own. But when he see he could no whit
impetrate or get grant for the said City, but for him self only, he fled
into Egypt to Ptolome, and so abandoned his Country after he had governed the
city.x. years. And after the people had gotten liberty, they adjudged the
authors thereof worthy perpetual honors. In this mean time Demetre having
great provision of shot and engines for to assault, both by Sea and land
besieged Munychie. Howbeit Dionise and his soldiers had great advantage of
the enemy, by reason the town was of great height, and the situation of the
walls agreeing thereto, so that they right valiantly defended it, although
Demetre had marvelous great provision of all things. And lastly, after he had
two days together without stay assaulted the castle, he shreudlie daunted the
courages of ye defendants, because the greater number were sore hurt and gald
with shot, not able to releue the curten with fresh men, and the assailaunts by
reason of their mighty number, continually refreshed and releued their
Soldiers, and thereby at last wanne the castle, and took Dionise Captain
thereof prisoner. After he had in short time achieved this victory, he
razed Munychie, restored the Athenians to their pristinate liberty, and with
them allied and made an inviolable peace. By reason of which benefit,
Stratocle.
they by the commandment of Stratocle ordained that the statues or Images of
Antigone and Demetre should be set up in gold hard by Armodie and Aristogiton,
and farther, sent to each of them a crown of gold worth two hundred Talents.
They likewise rered an Altar called the Altar of their deliuerers, and added
and annexed to their.x. Tribes two more: whereof the one called Antigonide, and
the other Demetriade. They farther ordained every year (in their honor)
games and sacrifices to be made as unto Gods, and that their Statues and
Images should be wound and covered over with a couerchief of the Gods
Pallas. And thus the Government and liberty populer which the Athenians had
in the Lamian war lost under Antipater, was restored to them unlooked for.xv.
years after. The like did Demetre to the city of Megare, by Cassander
garrisoned, whom they also honored as they did the first. After all these
matters, when the Ambassadors of Athens came to Antigone to present the Decree
made by the city in the honor of him and his Son, and to desire him of
timber and other stuff for the buylding of certain ships and corn to
victual them, he gave.Cl. thousand Medymnes of wheat, and so much timber and
other stuff as would build a hundred tall ships, and rendered to the^ the
city of Imbre which he kept, The City of Imbre.
and farther writ to Demetre his son to depute and appointe all the
Conseruators of ye free cities of Greece, to have charge and authority to
consulte and puruey for all things apperteyning to the conservation of their
liberty: and ye done, incontinent to take shipping and sail into Cypres, to
fight with the Lieutenaunts of Ptolome.

Demetre, Antigone his son, vanquisheth in a battaill at Sea Ptolome, before
the City of Salamine in Cypres, and by that mean wins the whole Isle from
him. And after the said Antigone, Demetre and Ptolome take upon them the
Tytles and Dyademes of Kings.

The.viij. Chapter.
WHen Demetre had executed and performed his Fathers commandment, concerning
the restoration of the Cities of Greece, he sailed into Carry, and from thence
sent his Ambassadoures to the Rhodians, to persuade them to allie and join
with him in the war against Ptolome, whereunto they would not agree, but
concluded to be in amity and friendship with them both, and not to make or
meddle with any of their doings, which was the first occasion and chief cause
that plucked away the hearts of the Rhodians from Antigone. From thence loused
Demetre, and passing elongest the Isle of Sicile, levied ships and Soldiers
and sailed into Cypres, having with him.xv. thousand footmen.iiij. hundred
horse, and of Pumasses and excellent fine Galleys.Cx. besides.Liij. other of
greater burden, meet for the wars, and a number of Barques laden with
victuals and other necessary hablements for the army. And first he landed on
the coast of Carpasie, Carpasie.
and there encamped hard by the shore, which he entrenched with deep ditches
and trenches. From thence he went to the siege of Vranie, Vranie.
making incursions on the Country in the way, and took them. That done,
leaving a sufficient number for the guard of his ships, he marched on to
Salamine, Salamine.
whereof Menelaye was deputy for Ptolome, Menelaye.
who had levied a number of me^ in the Isle, and retired into Salamine, and
having intelligence that Demetre was approached within.xl. furlongs of the
city, he marched out against him with.xij. thousand footmen and.viij.
hundred horse, and encountered him in battaill, but after the horssemen had a
while lustely charged one another, the Menelaians retired and fled, and the
Demetrians seeing the victory theirs, subsecuted and chased them hard to the
walls of the city, so that they slew about a thousand, and took above
three thousand prisoners. Whom Demetre retained in wages, and divided amongs
his bands. But when he see they daily fled from him to Menelaye, because their
goods and baggage, were left in Egypt with Ptolome: and that he could not
reduce the^ to his amity and service, he enbarqued ye rest, and sent them to
his father lying in the hier Syrie, where he buylt about the river Oronte a
very sumptuous City, called after his own name Antigone, being four score
furlongs about. Now was this a meet and necessary place to get and hold the
imperial dominion of Babylon and all the hier and lower Satrapies in
subjection, notwithstanding, it stood not or continued long: for Seleuke
shortly after destroyed it and transported the inhabitaunts into an other city
of his foundation and building called after his name Seleuke. After Demetre
had been victor in the battaill aforesaid, Menelaye and the rest of his
Soldiers which escaped and had gotten the City of Salamine, made great
preparation of shot and engines for their defense and surety, dividing the
quarters of their walls with the towers and flankers between them, because
they see that Demetre determined with all his power and force, to attempt and
assault the city. They also sent into Egypt to Ptolome, signifying to him of
their estate and danger, soliciting him to send his aid and help. When
Demetre see that the City was mighty and strong, and thoroughly ma^ned, he
determined to make huge and mighty engines wherewith they commonly used to
besiege and overthrow Towns and Cities, which shot stones and other kind of
shot of all sorts against the walls, and the residue of his provision
marvelous terrible to batter and overthrow the same. For exploiting whereof he
sent for a wonderful number of workmen and artificers, and plenty of iron and
such other stuff out of Syrie, so that in short time he had prepared and made
ready all things to batter and overthrow the walls. But amongs other his
devises he caused an engine to be made called Helepolis, Helepolis.
to say, an ouerthrower of cities.xl. cubits each way square, and four score
and ten cubits hie, in which were.ix. stories or sellers divided one from
another with planchers of wood, all running upon four great wheles.viij.
cubits hie. He had also many other engines called Rams, very large and great
to batter any wall, and two great and puissaunt Tortoises to help them. In the
lowermost sellers of the Helepolis he planted store of engines and ordinance
which threw and shot stones, the greater sort waying three Talents. In the
middle stories he planted engines made like boltes shooting long and sharp
shot, and in the hier stages were other which shot less and lighter. He
placed also in the said rooms or stories two hundred expert Soldiers to
shoot off and handle the said ordinance and engines. After he had placed
his engines of battery against the wall, he in short time beat down the tops
and batlements of the curten, and after sore battered and shaked the walls:
Howbeit the besieged so valiauntly defended their City with such weapon and
engines as they had prepared against the assaults, that for certain days no
man could judge of the winning of the city, such were the noble hearts and
courages invincible of the honorable Captains and lusty Soldiers on either
side. But to be short, the wall was so sore battered and shaken, and a long
breach made, that the city was disfurnished of defense and no remedy but to
yield or be taken the next day following, if there were not found some new
manner of defense that night, before the assault ceased. Wherefore the
Menelayans having great store and plenty of dry wood and such like stuff
which soon would take fire, about midnight so near approached ye engines of
the enemy, that with long poles and other which they had lighted, they cast in
fire: so that in less tha^ an hour, the fire grew so quick and terrible,
that they had burnt the greater part of the engines and the soldiers within
them: which thing the Demetrians could not help, and avoid by reason of the
sodainenesse thereof. And although Demetre for that time was frustrate of his
determination and purpose, yet had he good hope and still urged to take the
city, continuing the siege both by Sea and land, not doubting but in the end
to win it. In this mean while Ptolome having intelligence of the affairs
and slaughter of his people, departed out of Egypt, and took sea with a great
power sailing toward Salamine, and being driven into the Port of Paphe in
the Isle of Cypres, he there landed and got together all the ships of the
cities thereabout, and from them made his course to Syrie, distaunt from
Salamine two hundred furlongs. He had in his Navy an.Cl. Galleys, whereof the
greater were of.v. tier of ores on a side, and the lesser of four: he had also
above two hundred Barques, wherein were enbarqued above ten thousand
soldiers, and the rest laden with baggage and other provision. He sent by
land likewise certain Messangers to Menelaye, commanding him if it were
possible to send the.lx. Galleys lying in the haue^ of Salamine, which joined
with his, and he thought to be much stronger at sea then Demetre, having two
hundred Galleys or better. When Demetre understood of Ptolome his coming, he
left the siege furnished before the city, and enbarqued the rest of his
Soldiers with great store of shot and engines which shot far off, planting
them in the noses of his Galleys, and when he had arranged them all in order of
battaill, he environed the Town, and in the mouth of the haven cast ancre, and
road there all that night without the danger of the shot, both for stopping
of the Galleys which lay in the Port, that they should not get out to join
with Ptolome, and also to see what course Ptolome kept, to the end that which
way soever he came, he would be arranged and ready in order of battaill to
fight. But after the day once appeared, he might descry a mighty and terrible
Navy of Ptolomes, sailing toward the city, whereat he was astonished:
Anthiston.
wherefore he left his Admiral Anthiston with ten Galleys of five tier of ores,
in the place where he lay, to guard and take heed that the Galleys of the
Town made not out, and commanded his horsemen to ride all alongest the
shore, to the end, that if any mischief happened him, they might save them
which were overthrown into the sea and swamme to land: and him self in order
of battaill, sailed against the enemy with a Navy of a.Cviij. sail with
those he received of the cities he wanne, whereof the greater were of vij.
tier, and the rest of.v. tier. And first in the left wing or rereward he
placed.vij. Phenician Galleys of.vij. tier, and of the Athenians.xxx. of four
tier, appointing Mede, Mede.
the leading of that battaill: behind them he placed ten of six tier, and ten
of five tier, meaning to fortify and strengthen that well, wherein him self
paraduenture would fight. In the middle wing or maine battaill he placed the
lesser Galleys, the charge of which he committed to Themise the Samian, and
Martian the Historian who writ the deeds and gestes of the Macedonians. The
right wing or vowarde lead Egesippe the Alicarnasian, and Plescias of Coho,
Admiral of the whole Navy. Now had Ptolome in the night loosed, and with all
possible speed sailed toward Salamine, thinking to prevent the enemy, if he
could get into the Port of Salamine. But when it waxed near day, he might
discry not far of the Navy of the enemy in order of battaill. Wherefore he
got together his Galleys and arranged them as follows: First he commanded
that the barques should come a good way behind, and arranged the rest in good
and compotent order, placing him self in the left wing or rereward, wherein was
the greatest power and strength. When he had ordered and placed his battaill,
the Soldiers on either side made the prayers and supplications to the Gods
in loud manner according to their custom. And ye Chieftayns considering that
ye hazard of their lives and whole estate stood thereon, were very careful and
sore troubled in mind about the same. But so soon as they were approached
within three furlongs one of an other, Demetre first gave the sign and token
of battaill to his Soldiers, halsing a terge of gold in the poupe of his
Gallie in the view of the whole Navy: and shortly after, Ptolome did the like.

Then sounded ye trumpets to battaill, and forthwith began a fierce and
violent fight with shot and darts, being a pretty distaunce asundre, wherein
on each side were many sore hurt: but after they drew nearer, there was
flinging of great mighty stones, and the Marryners for their lives rowed as
hard and forcibly as they could, so that at the bording was a terrible affray,
for they violently rushing one by another, brake and carried away one another
ores, to the end there should be no flight nor yet any great forcible
assayling. Some encountered one an other before, and there fought hand to hand,
some borded on the broad side ye eas^ ier to get into the enemy, because it is
difficile and hard to lay abord about the beak or forebough of a Gallie,
other some thinking to enter, fell into the Sea and were slain with the short
pikes of the enemy, some entered and slew many en^^ ies, and made the rest
leap into the Sea, so that in the end happened diverse adventures and
victories unlooked for. For often times the lesser Galleys borded and took the
greater, because they were so heavy that they could not so readily remove and
turn to and fro. And although in fight on land the virtue and prowes of the
Greeks wins them victory which by no fortune or chance can any way be let
or stopped: yet in conflictes at Sea, diverse and sundry ways it chances
that the greater power and most lykely, The valiantness of Demetre.
contrary to man's reason, is soonest vanquished and overthrown. But in this
battaill Demetre amongs the rest most valiantly bare him self, for he
getting up to the poupe of a Gaily of.vij. tier of ores which he had wo^ne, so
stoutely fought against the Soldiers within, that what with darts and
Iauelings he slew of the^ a great number, and some with plain hand stroks.
And although great store of shot came against him, yet put he by and eschewed
some, and received the rest on his armoure. And for the three men which
continually were about him, the one was with the pushe of a pyke slain, and
the other two with shot sore hurt. But to be short, he so cheualrouslie
exployted his matters, that he put to flight ye right wing or voward of ye
enemy, and as many as were next them. And Ptolome with his greatest and most
warlike Galleys put to flight the leaft wing or rerewarde of the enemy,
sinking some and pryzing the rest with so many as were within them. And
returning as victor to the aid of his right wing or vowarde, which was
discomfited and put to flight, he seeing the Demetrians pursuing and chasing
them, and after making toward him, was so afraid, that he fled into the City
of Citin.

When Demetre had at Sea achieved and gotten this victory, he divided his
Navy and gave the charge to Neon and Burick two of his Captains, Neon.
Buricke.
commanding them to pursue and chase the enemy, and take in as many of his
soldiers as they found swimming, and him self with the rest of his Navy
and his prizes carried ensigns and tokens of victory into his camp, lying
about the Port of Salamine. In the mean while that these two Provinces were
in fight, Menelaye deputy of the City of Salamine had enbarqued a number of
men of war in the.lx. Galleys, ryding in the haven of Salamine, to send in
Ptolome his aid, appointing for Admiral Menete, Menete.
who with such violence rowed out upon the.x. Galleys which guarded the entry of
the haven, that he put them all to flight, and made them haste toward the
shore where Demetre his horssemen were. But the Menetians prevented of the
enemy, came a day after the fair, and were feign to return to their city.
In this fight were above a hundred Barques taken with.viij. thousand
Soldiers.xl. Galleys and the Soldiers within them, and four score sore
frushed and shaken, which Demetre his Soldiers brought away laden to the
siege lying before the entry of the Port of Salamine. There were not of
Demetre his Galleys above.xx. lost. After this victory Ptolome despayring in
the defense and keeping of the Isle of Cypres, returned into Egypt: and
incontinent after his departure, Demetre got in subjection all the Towns and
Cities of the country, together all the garrisons within them, to the number
of.xvj. thousand footmen, and.vj. hundred horse, which he divided amongs his
army. When he had finished and accomplished all these things, he embarked
certain of his most warlikest Galleys he had, and sent them to his Father,
signifying to him of his notable and triumpha^t victory: who was so glorious
and proud thereof, that he took upon him the name of a King and Diadem
Royal, and after bare him as a King, willing Demetre his Son to do the same.
Ptolome likewise (notwithstanding his great overthrow and loss in Cypres) to
show he had lost neither heart or courage, took upon him the name of a King,
and in all his letters and proclamations to all me^ so entitled and named him
self. By whose example the other Princes which before were but as Uicegerents
and Governors, entitled them selves then by the names of Kings, to say,
Seleuke of the Satrapies and hier Provinces by him newly conquered, Lysimache
and Cassander, of those which at the first were given them and still retained.

Antigone and Demetre his son, with a mighty power invade Egypt both by Sea
and land. And after finding the entry and border of the country well provided
and furnished, they return without any exploite.

The.ix. Chapter.
THe year that Corile governed Athens, and at Rome Quinte Martie and Publie
Cornelie were created Consuls, after King Antigone had sumptuously celebrated
the funeralles of Phoenix his younger Son deceased, Phoenix
he sent to his Son Demetre in Cypres, to make haste and come to him, and in
the mean time him self made great preparation to arrere wars against
Ptolome in Egypt. Which done he took his journey through the country of
Celosirie, with an army of four score thousand footmen, about.viij. thousand
horse and four score and three Elephantes, and sent his son Demetre by Sea
with.L. Galleys and above an hundred Carraques and Barques, which carried his
people and their baggage, commanding him to sail alo^gest that shore side
which the army marched on by land. And although the Mariners counseled him
to stay.xv. days longer, until such time as the dangerous season of winter
were passed over, yet would he not be ruled, but very angerly gave them
despitefull and reprochefull words, calling them cowards and dastards: and
encamping at the city of Gaze, Gaze
determining to prevent Ptolome his army, commanded his Soldiers to make
provision of victualles for ten days, and laded the Camels which ye Arabians
brought with.Cxxx. thousand Medynnes of wheat, and hay for their horses
great store: and his shot, armor, weapon, and other necessaries were carried
by carte through the deserts, a laborsome and painful journey, because the
ways were myery, deep and full of marshes, but especially as he drew near the
country of Baratre. Baratre.
And Demetre who the same day about midnight loused from Gaze, had for certain
days a fair and caulme ceason. During which time he haled and drew with his
Galleys the Carraques and Barks fraught with Soldiers and sarriages. And as he
thus for a few days rowed, suddenly arose so great a flaw of wynd out of the
North, that it put the Galleys in great hazard, in so much that some of them
were carried with the surgies and bellow into the dangerous mouth of the port
of Raphie, Raphie.
because it was almost choked up with a shelf of dyrte and ouze. And some of
the Barques which carried the shot, armoure, and other carriages, perished by
tempeste, and other were driven back again into Gaze. But the rest of the
Navy wherein were the strongest Galleys and lustiest Soldiers, so labored
against the wether, that they arrived about Cassile, Cassile.
a city situate upon the river Nile, having no Port but only a rode, which in
the time of any unseasonable wether or tempest is very dangerous, by reason
whereof, the Marryners were forced to cast Anchor two furlongs from the shore
riding in much danger, for ye Bellow went so hie that it was great marvel the
ships and men had not out of hand ben overthrown and drowned. And to land
could they not get either with boat or man, which land also belonged to the
enemy: and that which was worse, their fresh water failed, and they driven to
such need, that if the tempest had continued but one day longer, they had all
died of thirst. While they were in this despair looking for present death,
suddenly the wind calmed and ano^ they descried Antigone his army encamped not
far from the Navy: wherefore they came on land, and there refreshed them
certain days, attending some good news of the rest of their ships. In this
tempest perished.iij. Galleys, but by good hap many of the Soldiers were
saved and came on land. From thence departed Antigone, and encamped within two
furlongs of Nyle. But Ptolome already advertised of the enemies coming, had
thoroughly furnished all the fortes and blockhouses which fronted on the enemy,
with strong and mighty garrisons^ and sent certain in small pynnaces, with
commandment that they should row near and make proclamation that so many as
would come and serve him, he would give liberal wages and gentle reteynoure,
to say to every common Soldier two mines a day, A Mine was a coin amongst
the Greeks of two sorts, the one called Mina Attica Solonis, in value of our
money xlvij. s. xj. d. the other named Mina vetus worth.xxxv. s. and.xj. d.
farthing.
and to every Captain or any other which had charge, a Talent a day. By reason
of which proclamation most of Antigone his Mercenarie soldiers minded to
serve Ptolome: and amongs them many Captains also for diverse occasions
desired to serve him, so that Antigone seeing his Soldiers daily steal from
his camp, was enforced to set strong guard and watch all alongest the river
side, with great store of shot and engines to stop the enemy for coming on
land, and greeuouslie punished certain of those which were taken going to the
enemy, to the end to put the rest in terror and fear. Demetre also with
those few ships he had, A Talent: of Talen^ es were diverse sorts, one worth
five hundred pound, one of.cc^ li. but the common ^ alent of.xl. li.
entered an arm of the river Nyle, which ran into the Sea, called the false
Port, thinking there to land a number of his Soldiers. But when he found
it guarded with a lusty garrison, and that he was with shot and all other kind
of engines repulsed, and the night drawing on, retired, and commanded all the
Captains of the ships to follow the Admiral by the light in the main top
sailing directly to the other entry of Nyle, called Phenitique. When day was
come, because many of his ships had missed their course, he was driven to stay
for them, and sent out his Brigantines to seek and haste them forward.
Wherefore with spending much time in getting them together, Ptolome who was
advertised of the certeyntie thereof, made speed to guard the said passage, so
that he had a great number of able fighting men, ready arranged in battle
upon the shore. When Demetre see them thus furnished, and that the Country
next to the said entry was almost all marish ground, he sailed back into the
deep, where immediately arose such a great wind which so violently drove
them toward the shore that.vj. Galleys and as many Barques, which carried men
of war, with the vehemency of the wether were run on land under Ptolomees
power, and the rest with strength of ores rowed against the wind to the place
where Antigone encamped. When Ptolome had thus furnished all the passages of
the Sea with strong garrisons, and the entry of Nile with ships, shot and men,
Antigone was in great fear. For once Demetre his Navy at Sea served to no
purpose to enter the mouth of Peluse, being so well guarded and kept: again the
army by land could no way pass, by reason of the swelling and rising of the
river: and that which was worse, they had so long trauailled, that they
wanted victuals both for men and horses. When the soldiers for the causes
above said, began to murmur and grudge, Antigone assembled his army and took
counsel and advise of his Captains, whether it were more expedient to tarry
and continue his enterprise, or presently to return into Syrie, and come
again at some other more convenient time, when he were better appointed and
the river Nile fallen lower. But when he see them all of mind and accord, he
brake up ye camp and speedily returned into Syrie by land, having his Navy
sailing by him all alongest the coast. As soon as Ptolome had intelligence
of their departure, he was right glad, making to the Gods great sacrifices,
and to his friends honorable feasts and banquettes, signifying also Seleuke,
Lysimache and Cassander by his letters, of his adventure and good luck, and
the reuolte of Antigone his Soldiers to him. This done, thinking that he had
now the second time by arms recovered and gotten the Country of Egypt: and
last of all, that he might by just title and conquest of war hold and keep
it, returned to Alexandrie.

Of certain exploites of war between the Romans and Samnites.

The.x. Chapter.
Dionise.
THe same season after Dionise Tyrant of the city of Heracle in the country
of Pont, had reigned xxxij. years, he died: Zatras.
and his two children Zatras and Clearche succeeded, Clearche.
who reigned after him.xvij. years. And the self same year the Samnites
won of the Romans the cities of Sore and Acye, and them sacked and spoiled:
Ageine the Roman Consuls entered the City of Lapige, and after besieged the
city of Silue, which the Samnites had long kept and garrisoned, but in the
end the Romans took it by assault, butined all their goods, and ransomed
above.v. thousand prisoners. Which done, they spoiled the Region of the
Samnites, cut down the wood, and burnt the Towns and Uillages. For the
Romans thought, because the same Nation had already many years contended
with them for the Empire and rule, that if they destroyed their land, they
should of force give place and yield unto them. For which cause they for.v.
whole months together, burnt and spoiled in their Country all that they
could not carry away, in so much that they left not standing in all the
Country either house, cottage, tree or bushe that might be destroyed, but made
the land utterly void and desolate. And this year also they warred on the
Egmettes, and by composition took the city of Erusin, and sold the whole
territory.

Demetre by the commandment of his Eather, both by Sea and land besieged the
City of Rhodes. Of the great and lusty assaults they gave, and the marvelous
and honorable defense that the Townsmen made.

The.xj. Chapter.
THe year following that Xenippe governed Athens, and Lucie Posthume and
Tyberie Mynute were at Rome created Consuls, wars for these occasions were
between Antigone and the Rhodians co^menced. For the city of Rhodes was then
by sea very puissaunt and strong, and was most wisely governed, and in greater
reputation than all the other Cities of Greece. By reason whereof, all the Kings
and Princes in those days had an eye thereunto, and endeavored them to
obtain and get their favor and alliance on their side. But the Rhodians who
foresaw and considered their common emolument and commodity, gently
enterteyned all the said Princes, and had with every of the^ a particular league
and amity, without entremedling at any hand with any of them in their
wars. Whereupon happened, that all the said Princes honored and cherished
them diversely, and with great gifts remunerated and gratified them: by which
mean they long lived in tranquillity and wealth. Through which occasion,
their power so greatly increased, that they at their own costs and charges
enterprised war for the whole state of Greece, against all Pirates, and
clearly purged the Seas of all thieves and rouers. But their chiefest and
greatest estimation was, that Alexander surnamed the great, most renowned of
all Princes of the world of whom remains any mention, made so much more
account thereof, than of all the other Cities of Greece: so that he gave them
the Testament of his whole estate and Empire, to keep, and in all things he
might, honored and greatly advanced the same. And although the Rhodians had
in such sort (with all the most puissaunt Princes and Potentates) lived, that
none of them could reasonably complain on them or be agreeued: yet had they
nevertheless far greater amity and familiarity with Ptolome than with all
the rest, because their Merchants had greater traffic and commodity from
the country of Egypt than else where, and the greater part of the city lived
and was mainteyned by the marchaundise of the said country. Which thing
Antigone understanding, did all that in him lay to turn the trade and
intercourse of Merchandise thence,

Wherefore after his son had warred upon Ptolome in Cypres, he sent his
Ambassadors toward them, praying their aid and to send their ships to
Demetre his son. But when he see they would not hear him, he sent one of
his Sea Captains with certain number of ships in that quarter, commanding
him to stay and take so many sail of Rhodians as he found sailing into
Egypt, and to spoil and rob them of their merchandise. But the Rhodians
thereof aduertized, drove him quickly back, and chased him quite from those
Seas. Whereupon Antigone took his occasion to say that they were the authors
of the war. So he with many minatorie terms menaced them, and vau^ted and
bragged that he would with his so mighty a power come against them, and that
he would besiege their city. Whereof the Rhodians advertised, decreed to do him
great honors in their city, sent great Ambassades to him, praying him not to
enforce them to make war against Ptolome, nor yet to break their promise
and alliance which they had with him. Antigone gave a fierce and stern
answer, and therewith sent Demetre his Son with a great army, store of
engines and artillery to besiege and beat down the city. Whereupon they were
astonished, so fearing the great power of the King, yt they sent to Demetre,
declaring that they were ready and content to go with Antigone to war upon
Ptolome. Who nevertheless was scarcely content therewith, but demanded an
hundred ostages of the chief and principal of the city to be delivered him,
and also to have his Navy received into their Ports. Which demand made them
greatly suspect, that he went about to make himself Lord of the Town, and
therefore made all ye preparation they could for their defense. When Demetre had
assembled his army at the Port of Elorym, he trymmed his Navy to sail to
the siege of Rhodes, in which were two hundred Galleys of sundry mouldes, and
of other ships to carry men and victualles.Clxx. and in them above.xl. M.
soldiers, besides an innumerable number of armoures, shot of all sorts, and
all other engines of battery. There were besides above a thousand Foistes and
Barques of Marchaunts and diverse other sundry kind of people, who followed
the Camp to traffic. For knowing that the Rhodians had been long without
wars, they thought there would be such store of wealth in the Country, whereby
the Marchaunts should be great gayners. When Demetre had set all things in
readiness, he went to Sea, and so ordered his ships as though he would
fight. And first he placed his Galleys in the first front and in their noses he
couched great engines, which shot great sharp arowes of wood.iij. spa^nes
about: next them came the ships which carried the horses which were haled
out by the Galleys and other small pynnaces rowed with ores. In the latter
flote came the Pirates and Marchaunts aforesaid, so that all the Sea between
the city and the firm land was covered with ships: which sight sore
dismayed and troubled the citizens. Nevertheless they with their Soldiers
and so many as were able to bear arms, manned their walls and bulwarks,
awayting the approach of the enemy, and the old people and children were set
in the garrets and hiest places of the houses to behold them, for the city
stood so upon the Sea, like unto a Theater, that they might clearly see the
hugeness of the ships, and the brave glistering armoures and helmes, which
was a terrible thing to see, and that made them careful of their estate and
City. Shortly after, Demetre landed and encamped before the city without
danger of the shot, and incontinent after he had pitched his camp, sent out
his Pirates and a another company thoroughout the Isle, to spoil and rob it
both by sea and land: And further himself caused to fell the trees and pull
down the houses in the fields to make and buyld up the lodgings and
fortifications in his Camp, which he with a treble of wood and earth
fortified, yt it might be the stronger against the force and power of the
enemy. He likewise filled the void ground and places betwixt the City, and
the Port: and left at the Sea side only a space for the Navy to ride in. In
the mean while the Rhodians sent many and sundry times Ambassadoures to pray
him not to do them any hurt. But when they perceived he would give them no
reasonable answer, they sent to Ptolome, Caslander, and Lysimache, requiring
them to come to the aid and succor of the city, which for their quarrel was
besieged and oppressed. During this time, it was put to choice of the
inhabitaunts within the city able to bear armoure, as well Citizens as
Forainers, whether they would tarry and abide the danger of the siege, or else
depart the town: and so many as would not tarry, as also those which were
unmeet for the defense thereof, they excluded the city, f^ reseeing yt their
victualles thereby should last longer, and that no man should say he was
there against his will besieged, and so not content therewith, might devise and
ymagine some treason or villainy against the City. This done, they mustered
the remnaunt, which were about six thousand Citizens, and above a thousand
strangers. They moreover made and published a Decree, wherein was agreeed,
that all the sclaues which valiauntly served in the same siege, should with
the common treasure be bought and set at liberty: and that their bodies slain
in those wars, should be enterred, their Fathers, mothers, wives and children
at the despence and cost of the City mainteyned, their daughters with the
money of the common treasure endowed, and the men children when they were out
of their minority, crowned and armed in the theater with all such
solempnities as sometime were done to Dionise, to the end their Citizens
should with greater courage defend and mainteyne the city. When they had thus
by an whole and common consent accorded, the rich men disburst money, the
artisans and workmen labored to make armoures, engines and other things
necessary for their defense, so that in effect every man according to his
calling, in that he was most skilful and excellent, did his best: some made
Crosbowes and engines, other repared and strengthened the walls, and the
greater sort carried stones and earth to the curten. They sent also out of the
Port three of the lightest ships and best sailers, to give an alarm to the
enemy, and especially unto the victuallers, who much more exploited than they
thought them able: for they soonke many Marchaunts ships which followed the
camp to traffic spoil, and buy the pillage, and brought a great number into
the Port, which they after burnt, and took many prisoners, of whom, they
according to the appointement and conclusion in that behalf, between Demetre
and them accorded and agreed upon, took a great sum of money, which was
this, that the prisoners taken on either side should be ransomed as followed.
A Drachme is about the value of our Grote.
First that a free man should pay a thousand Dragmes, and a bond man.v.
hundred.

When Demetre had prepared and gotten abundaunce of al things, he buylt two
great tortoises made of bords and covered with leather that would not burn,
the one to defend his Soldiers from the stones, the other to defend them
from quarrelles and such like shot, which two engines were set upon two
ships of burden joined and grappeled together an egall distaunce the one from
the other. He caused also to be set upon two other ships, two towers of wood,
every of them having.iiij. stages or stories much hier than the towers within
the Port to assail and batter them with great artillery and other shot. He
made also a notable ra^pier of great timber hollowed-nayled and pinned
together, which swa^me four feet above the water, as a defense before the
ships which carried the towers and engines and great artillery: because the
ships of the Town (which were great and mighty) should not board them
with their beakes, and so quash and break them, or else utterly repulse them.
In the mean time while these things were brought to an end, he picked out
his strongest Barques and furnished them with thick plan^ hers made out with
great wyndowes, which served in stead of Port holes to open and shut, at which
he placed great mighty crosbowes and other artillary which shot great arrows
and far of, and men also cunning in the handling of them, besides a great
number of other archers and Arbalisters of the country of Crete. All which
preparations thus made as aforesaid: after the said ships and engines were
approached the wall within danger of the shot, he sore hurt and gald the
Towns men which manned and defended the towers and Bulwarks in the Port.
When the Rhodians see that all the force and power of the enemy was bent
against the Port, they with all their study devised how to defend it.
Whereupon they planted two engines of Artillary upon a Bulwark adjoining to
the Port, and other three engines upon three ear^^ cques near the entry of
the little haven, wherein were men, crosbowes, shot, stones and other things
necessary, of great force to withstand and repulse the enemy, were it either
to set men on land to win the said bulwark, or else to approach their
engines of Artillary. They also built and set up upon the other carracques
which lay in the great Port, certain receptacles of weapons to shoot, meet
for the engines, called boltes. And as either part had made ready all things
for the fight, and that Demetre purposed forthwith to approach and bring near
his engines of battery of the entryes of both Ports, suddenly arose a great
tempest at Sea, which lasted and continued until night. But when night came and
the wynd calmed, he secretly sailed about the haven until he came to the great
Bulwark above in the great Port, and won that, being from the walls of the
city about.v. acres, and fortified it with strong rampires and deep trenches
of stone and wood, and thrust into it four hundred soldiers well purueyed of
all kind of shot. But so soon as day appeared, he with great noise of men
and Trumpettes brought near his engines to the Port, and with his crosbowes
and other small artillary, hurt and slew the garders of the rampires of the
Port. And with his greater engines he so battered the Wall, that there he
brake some and there ouerthrewe some, because it was neither very strong, nor
yet hie. Nevertheless the Citizens all the whole day right valiauntly
repulsed the^, where was on either side great slaughter and mischief given and
taken. And after it began to draw toward night, Demetre retired and haled
back his ships with his engines of battery, out, and from the danger of the
shot. Then the Townsmen fraughte their cocks with dry wood and such like
stuff, and pursued the said engines, and so soon as they were come near,
they cast fire into the ships. Notwithstanding they were enforced to retire,
both because of the rampire before me^cioned, which swa^me above the water, and
also by reason of the shot wherewith they were by the enemy galde. But when
they see they could do no good, some quenched the fire of the boats wherein
they were, and then returned into the Port, and the rest which could not, let
all burn and leapt into the Sea, and by swimming saved them selves. The next
day in the morning Demetre by Sea a fresh assaulted the Port, and at one
instant with as great noise of men and Trumpettes as was possible, attempted
the walls of the town round about, thinking thereby so to affray the
townsmen (being on every side assaulted) that they would leave defending of
the curten and come to some treaty, who for their parts meant nothing less,
but valiauntly sustained all the atteintes and assaults that were given, during
viij. days. When Demetre see he could not daunte the courages of the
defendaunts, he caused to be planted upon the top of their Bulwark which he
had won about the great Port, his greatest artillarie, which shot stones as
weighty as three Talents, wherewith he flanked and battred the curten between
the Towers, and the Towers also. During this broyle certain of Demetre his
Soldiers had won the top of the Wall right over the Port: but the
Rhodians in such number came thither, that they slew very many of them, and
stoutely repulsed the rest. For they were but a few men, and the place for
the Rhodians of such advantage, because it was steep and hard to mount unto,
that they so oppressed the Demetrians with stones, which were cast down upon
them, and so gald them with shot out of the houses standing near the Wall,
that the Marryners (who brought the assaillaunts) were enforced to run on
ground their ships, and retire to the Soldiers on land, whereupon
incontinent the townsmen sallied out, took and carried away al such ornaments
as they found in the poupes of the ships, and after set them all on fire.
Amongs this entrefactes Demetre his Soldiers sailed about the town and set
up ladders all alongest the sea side, and violently assailed them, and the
Soldiers on land did the like, so that there were many which without fear
adventured marvelous dangers and sealed the very tops of the walls. Again,
the defendaunts so maruelously advanced the^ selves, and so stoutly defended,
that they slew many which were gotten up, and hurt a great number, whom they
took prisoners, amongs which were certain of the principallest Captains and
honorablest personages of the Camp. After this assault and slaughter, Demetre
ritired his own ships into the road where the rest lay, and his engines of
battery, which at the two assaults were sore broused and torn and new
trymmed and amended them. When the Rhodians had thus repulsed the enemy,
they enterred the bodies of their people and sacrifised to the Gods the
armours and beakes of the enemies ships, and for the space of.vij. days in all corners repaired their Walls sore battered and broken down. During which
time Demetre new built and again trimmed his engines. When Demetre had the
vij. day set in good order all his whole business a fresh to assault it, he
came directly with his ships well furnished against the haven, for to win
it was his only study, because he would cut them from victualles. And when he
was with in an arrow shot approached the Port, he began violently to set upon
the Rhodian ships with fire brandes and other fire works, whereof he had
plenty, and with long bows and crosbowes slew many which manned and defended
the curten, and with his great artillary sore battered and shaked the Walls.
Nevertheless, the Rhodians in this fight took such pains to defend their
ships, that they clearly extinguished the fire. And the Captains and Chief
of the town fearing the winning of the Port and City, exhorted all the
lustiest Soldiers, at that pinche stoutly to stand to it or else never, which
thing they speedely did. And amongs other things they enbarqued in three of
their tallest ships the most hardy and valiant me^ they had, commanding
them with all their force to board with their beakes or Gallie noses on the
enemy which bare the engines of battery, and drown them, who (notwithstanding
all the shot which came against them) so violently ran upon the enemy, that
they first brake the rampire which swamme upon the water before the ships,
and after so lustely borded them which carried the engines, that the water
broke in on every side and drowned two of the greatest engines. Nevertheless
the third was by the Galleys haled out and carried back. When the Rhodians see
al things prosper thus well, they waxed so proud and bold, that needs they
would pursue the third engine amiddest the enemy: wherefore they were so
surprised, assailed and overthrown, by reason of the number of the enemies
ships: that Exaceste Chieftayne of the band, Exaceste.
and Captayn of one of the Galleys, was very sore hurt, and in the end taken
and a great number of the rest leapt into the Sea and so were saved: and of
three Galleys the one taken, and the other two escaped. After this assault
Demetre made an other engine of battery thrice so great as the first: but as
he was sailing toward the Port, there arose such a wind, that the ships and
engine were all drowned. When the Rhodians see such opportunity, they salied
out of the Town and assailed the Bulwark about the Port, which a while was
manfully defended. But when they see their aid taken and cut of from them by
reason of the tempest, and the Rhodians continually relieved with fresh men, so
oppress them, yt they were forced to yield, being within above four hundred
Soldiers. After this victory, great aid arrived at the city, to say, from
Gnose Cl. men, and out of Egypt from Ptolome more than v. hundred: amongs whom
were some Rhodians which served and had entertaynement of Ptolome. In this sort
was the siege of Rhodes.

Of two victories by the Romans had upon the Samnites.

The.xij. Chapter.
IN this season the Romans wanne victory against the Palinians and expulsed
them their land, Palinians.
and bestowed the City on such as favored them and took their part. But
after the Consuls understood that the Samnites kept the territory and country
of Phaleritide, Phaleritide.
and it wasted and spoiled, they made out and vanquished them in battaill, in
which they wanne above.xx. ensigns and took above two thousand prisoners.
After the Consuls had taken by assault the City of Vole, Gellie Gaye
Chieftayn of the Samnites came against them with six thousand Soldiers,
whom the Consuls likewise vanquished and took him prisoner, slew the one
half of his men, and took the rest prisoners. Sore.
By mean of which victories the Co^suls recovered their towns and cities
confederates, Arpine.
to say Sore, Arpine, and Saronie. Saronie.


Demetre at many assaults by the Rhodians repulsed, concluded a peace. And
departing thence, restores to liberty many Cities of Greece. Of the death of
King Eumele of Bosphore, and the reign of Spartace his son.

The.xiij. Chapter.
THe year ensuing that Pherocles was Prince of Athens, and Publie Sempronie,
and Publie Sulpitie were at Rome created Consuls: And that Andromenes wanne the
prize in the course at Eley, the.Cxix. of the Olympiade. Demetre besieging the
Rhodes both by sea and land, and seeing al he did at sea auailed him nothing,
determined with all his power wholly to besiege it by land. Whereupon amongs
other artillarie for battery, he buylt the engine Helepolis before mentioned,
and of such hugeness, that the like before had never ben seen. The
foundation thereof was four square, each way.L. cubits long, made of great
square pieces of timber, armed and bound with iron, in the midst were great
beams laid over, a cubit between each, to set in men which should thrust and
run the engine against a wall. It ran upon.viij. great and massiue wheles,
whose axeltrees were two cubits about, armed with mighty iron cloutes: and to
turn it about, were fine and subtle engines made to remove it whether they
would or listed. At the four corners were four great pillars of wood, armed
and bound with iron, each of them an hundred cubits hie, so leaning and bending
one to an other, that the whole building, having in it.ix. stories or sellers,
the lowermost had.lx. beds, and the uppermost but.ix. And for defense of the
engine against fire and other shot, it was before and on both the sides armed
with thick iron plates nailed to with great iron nails. In the front of the
stories were windows, out of which they might lay out and shot any kind of
artillary y^ was within. To every window was a cover which opened and shut by
cunning and art as occasion served, for suertie of the enginers, made of cow
hides farsed with wolle to break the blow and dint of shot. In every story
also were two broad ladders: the one to go up on for carrying of such things as
were needeful, and the other to come down on, to the end one should not
hinder and let another. When the engine was thoroughly finished, they chose out
three thousand and four hundred of the mightiest and strongest me^ in the
army, to move and drive it: whereof some were thrust in, and the rest stood
without at the breeche with cables and other things made for the purpose meet
to run it forward. He also built Tortoises and couers to defend the other
engines of artillary as rams and such like. He forced and cast a trenche also
covered over, wherein men might go and come in safety from the place where the
engines stood, to the place they should be brought. He made his Marryners and
Gallie sclaues likewise to smoothe and plain the ground where the engines
should be drawn and brought on, being about four furlongs broad, which is
half a mile English: over against which place of ground in the wall of the
Town stood.vij. great towers or Bulwarks, and six little Turrets, against
which he planted his engines. And although the workmanship was marvelous, and
such that in long time it was thought impossible to finish and end, yet had he
quickly achieved and brought it to pass, by reason of the great store of
workmen he had of all sorts, being.xxx. thousand or more: all which things in
the sight of the Citizens were very terrible. For besides ye great multitude of
engines and number of men which they see, they considered the diligence and
violence of Demetre, and his industry in the making of engines of battery,
being of him self able to devise more than the Masters of the mystery and
occupacion had either wit or skill to find out. The description and
commendation of Demetre.
By reason whereof they named him Poliorcete, which is in the Greek tongue, a
besieger and ouerthrower of cities. He was amongs all in that reputation, and
thought to be such a one, that there was not so strong a wall in the world able
to stand against him and his engines. He was of personage and stature tall, and
thereto well proporcioned and made, so that he seemed a stout and noble
Champion: he had besides so good a grace, so gentle and courteous
enterteynement, that all strangers which came where he was, seeing his
comeliness of body, his grace, majesty and royal attire, did thereat much
marvel, and would follow him for the pleasure they had to behold him. Besides
his comely stature, gesture and beauty, he was of that magnanimity and
haultie courage, that as he made little estimate of the meaner sort of people,
even so also made he small account of the Princes of war and Potentates. In
time of peace his property was to be very familiar with his Soldiers, to
banquet them often, and many times play with them, which bred him great favor
and love. To be short he forced to follow in all points the manners and
conditions of Dionise, accordingly as is of him written, and in the wars he
was so ware and painful, yt there was not one within his camp who less rested
in body or spirit, so that under his conduct were made the greatest engines of
artillary and greatest shot that ever were seen or heard. He had also at
Sea the most huge and mighty ships after that siege and after his Fathers
death, that ever were built or seen.

When the Rhodians see the great furniture and preparation that he made to come
against them, they buylt and set up within the uttermost wall for their
defense, a countermure of stone, least ye first Wall should be sore battered
and shaken. For performaunce whereof, to have store of stone, they pulled down
the wall which enco^passed the Theater, and many houses joining thereto:
besides certain temples, vowing (to the Gods in whose honor they were built and
consecrated) that they would build and set up much beautifuller Temples, if
they escaped that siege. They armed moreover.ix. tall ships, and sent them
out of the Port, either to sink or bring in so many of the enemies as they
encountered, that they might be Masters of the Sea, which ships were into
three parts divided: whereof the three called the Scoult, Demophile.
Demophile had charge and sailed directly to the Isle Carpathe, Carpathe.
where they found a great many sails of the enemy, some of which after long
fight they sonke, and brought away the rest to the Port of Rhodes, and after
set them on fire. But a great number of the chief and principal Soldiers and
Marryners which were in them that went to rob and spoil the fruictes and
commodities of the Isle, they kept still in prison. Menedore Captain of other
three, Menedore.
sailed toward the Country of Lycie, Patare.
and finding in the Port of Patare a great ship vnmanned, laden with
victualles, for that the Mariners were gone on land, he burnt it in their
sight, and took besides many other small Barques laden with victualles, which
he sent to the Rhodes: he took a Gallie also coming out of Cilice, in which
amongs other things was found much royal, rich and precious attire, that
Phile, Demetre his wife, had sent to her husband, which apparel he sent into
Egypt to King Ptolome, Phile.
and brought the Gallie into the Port of the Rhodes, and ransomed all the men
both in that and in the rest. The third Captain named Amynthe, Aminthe.
who had charge of the rest, through long sailing, fortuned to descrye a
number of Barques laden with wood and such like stuff to make engines,
keeping their course toward the camp, whom he had in chase, some of which he
sonke and brought the rest home to Rhodes, having a great number of prisoners,
amongs whom were.xj. of Demetre his most excellent enginers. Between these
doings ye governors of the Town began to animate the commoners to throw
down the Images of Antigone and Demetre, which they had set up before the
wars in their honor, saying it were no reason that they which held them
besieged as enemies, should stand amongs their friends and benefactours.
Notwithstanding the people would not consent thereto, but sharply rebuked
those which urged and put forward the matter. And surely the people as well for
the honor of the city, as for the profit and commodity thereof, had therein
great reason. Which constancy of the Rhodians got not only great commendacio^
and honor amongs al their neighbors and friends, but also amongs all forreners
and strangers which knew it. Again, the assaylaunts seeing their ^ ranchise
and bounty, repented that ever they came against them: considering they had
restored to liberty all the other Cities of Greece, who never had showed any
sign or token of benevolence or gratitude toward them. And that City which
by experience had manifested so great acknowledging of good will and bounty,
they went about utterly to subuerte and bring to ruin. Which thing if it had been well and justly considered, was a good occasion for them to have delivered
the Rhodians from the great danger they were in. And besides, if peradventure
the city had been taken, they might well have answered no breach of peace in
them, because they had always desired to have continued amity and friendship
with Demetre his father, which of the Rhodians was very wisely and
circumspectly considered. But when they were aduertized by one who fled from
the camp, that Demetre had with his Myoners undermined one corner of the wall,
they dug a very deep trenche and countermyned the enemy, so that they
could no farther pass, but every of them at the entry and mouths of the mines
kept diligent watch. And as Demetre was thus undermining to overthrow the
curte^, certain of the Demetrians had practiced to corrupt Anathagore of Mylete,
sent thither by Ptolome, with the charge of ships as general to the
Mylesians, that he would suffer Demetre to enter the City by the mines,
whereunto Anathagore accorded. Anathagore.
So there was a day taken between them, when Demetre should send one of his
chief Captains, whom he promised to thrust into the town by the mines, that
he might see how to bring in the rest of the Soldiers without. But after
they were agreed upon the practice wherein Demetre had great hope, the Mylesian
reveled the matter to the Senate. Notwithstanding at the day prefixed and
assigned, Demetre sent one of the friends and domesticals of the King of
Macedone, named Alexander, to the said mine, whom the towns men incontinent
took prisoner, and after crowned Anathagore with a Crown of gold, and
rewarded him with five hundred Talents of silver, to the end to give greater
encouragement to the other Mercenaries and strangers within the Town, justly
and truly to serve in the said siege. When Demetre see he could thereby nothing
prevail, and having finished and made ready all his engines, and playned the
way wherein they should be drawn, he planted in the midst the great
Helepolis, and the.viij. Tortoises without rams, he planted on each side the
Helepolis four, well covered and porched, and the ways covered from one to
another like porches, so that men without danger might pass to and fro. Over
and besides these engines he had two other rams of wood, of a marvelous
greatness, which were brought thither, each of them six score feet long, and
the beaks or points armed with iron like unto the Gallie nose, so that there
could not be fewer than a thousand men to drive and run them against a wall,
albeit to conducte and bring them fewer would serve, because they went upon
wheles. When he had brought his engines near the Wall, and had appointed in
every story of the Helepolis, such number of shot of all sorts as him thought
good. He sent to the port and to his men about the Sea and all other quarters
of the town, commanding them to approach and seal the wall: And forthwith
marched on with the footmen to give the attempt and assault, so that in one
moment the town in every corner was assailed, and the walls with great
engines of artillary battered, and they which manned the curtens were with
quarrelles and stones sore hurt: But to see how the Rhodians defended was
wonder. While these matters were at this point, and that the assault had long
time continued, the Ambassadors of the Guidians came to entreat Demetre for
their City to leave of and raise his siege, promising to persuade the Rhodians
to perform his demaundes which with reason might be granted, whereunto he
gladly agreed. But after the assault ceased, and that the Ambassadors had long
gone about all parts of the curten, debating with them to and fro to yield and
to consider the danger they were in, the King seeing yt impossible to persuade
them, gave a fresh assault more fierce and terrible than the first, and with
his Artillary so beat them, that he battered and ouerthrewe a great square
Tower of stone and the wall it stood on all to powder, so that the Soldiers
of the town could not that way pass to go to their other towers and
defenses. Notwithstanding the Attemptaunts (through the wonderful and
valiant defense of the Citizens) could not all that day enter the Town. In
this mean while arrived at the Haven a great number of barques laden with
corn and great plenty of other victuals, by King Ptolome sent out of Egypt,
who with a prosperous wind, sailed a maine under all sails, and entered the
Haven maugre all Demetre his Navy, who did all that in them lay to bar them
the Port. And as it were al at one time, certain other ships laden with
victualles sent from Cassander and Lysimache, arrived. Whereupon the Citizens
which before were in great fear and necessity, took now such courage, that
they wholly determined to sallie out on the enemy and set on fire their
engines. And thereuppon they made great provision of dry wood and such other
stuff for fire works: and when they had appointed all their shot to that side
on the wall where the engines were planted, they which were put out of the Town
began about midnight al at one throw to cast fire in diverse sort against the
engines and their garders; and the Soldiers from the curten so lustely
applied them with shot, which came to the rescous, that the whole army was
in marvelous terror, as of a thing not precogitated or thought on. But the
Demetrians fearing the burning and spoil of all their Engines, fiersly ran
to their rescue, and by reason of the darkness of the night, the fire carriers
being always in sight, were very sore hurt and stryken down, because they
could not in the dark avoid the shot which came on them. Nevertheless, after
the Rhodians had once perceived that the plates of iron wherewith the great
Helepolis was armed were fallen of, they then in all they might, cast fire
about the bare and naked places. But they within diligently quenched the fire
with water which they had for the purpose made ready. Howebeit when Demetre
see the fire still increase, and fearing ye consummation of all his engines, he
caused them at the sound of the Trumpette to be drawn away by those who had
the charge. The next day in the morning he commanded his Soldiers to
gather together all the shot which came out of the Town, to the end he would
have a guess what furniture they had within, which thing was speedely done:
and by the report that was made, they coniectured to be within, engines of
artillary, for fire works, above.viij. hundred of diverse bigness: and of
other artillary as crosbowes and such like, above a thousand. Wherefore when he
had seen such plenty of shot in so short time, in one night, he greatly
wondered at the marvelous wealth and dispense of the City, and yet he more
wondered at their furniture. Nevertheless, after he had taken order for the
burying of the dead and healing of the hurt me^, he then repaired and amended
his engines of artillary.

During which time the Citizens being at reaste and without danger of battery,
made a cross wall within the Town, enuironning all that part of the wall which
was in danger, and besides cast a deep trenche at the corner of the Wall
which was beaten down, to stay the King, that he should not by any great or
impetuous force enter the City by assault. They sent out also secretly
Amynthe with a number of their fittest sailors, who before any thing was
perceived, had gotten ye coast of Asie, right over against the Isle where
Demetre had three tall and mighty ships, which the Pirates had brought in
the aid of the King, whom he there borded, and after a whiles fight, took
them and all that were a board, amongs whom he had Thimocles Prince of the
Pirates. He took besides these, many other small Barques laden with
victualles, coming toward the camp, all which he brought by night into the
Rhodes without knowledge of the enemy. Soon after that Demetre had repared
and amended his engines of battery, he again brought them as near the wall as
was possible, and with great force of shot, repul^ ed all that stood to the
defense and towers of the curten, and with his rams and other engines of
battery, so sharply battered them, that he threw down two Turrets. Howbeit,
the Soldiers of the Tower or Bulwark that stood between the two Turrets,
defended it so valiantly, that it was nothing shaken: nevertheless many of
the Soldiers were slain and Ananie Captain thereof. Ananie.
Amongs these enterfacts Ptolome had again sent another fleet laden with as much
corn and other necessary things as before, with a thousand Soldiers under the
conducte of Antigone the Macedonian. Antigone.
In this mean while arrived before Demetre above.L. Ambassadors sent by the
Athenians and other cities of Greece, desiring him to conclude an inviolable
peace with the Rhodians and raise his siege, whereunto he agreed, and for
certain days the Ambassadors and diverse other messengers were sent on all
hands to treat a peace, but in the end they agreed not, so that the
Ambassadoures returned without conclusion. After their departure he by treason
determined to win the City, and by night to thrust in his Soldiers at the
great breach. And thereuppon he chose out a thousand of his valiauntest and
best trained Soldiers, commanding them about midnight, fair and easily
without noise, to approach the Wall on that side: and the rest he arranged in
order of battle, and at that very instant with so great noise as might be,
gave an assault round about the town, both by sea and land. And incontinent
they which were charged to enter the breach, violently rushed in, and slew
the watch which guarded the trenche, so that they entered the town, and meant
to win the Bulwarks and Bastils standing about the Theater. When the
governors of the Rhodians understood the case, and seeing all the City in
great terror and marvelous fear, they commanded them which manned the Port
and Walls, not once to remove from their charge, but valiauntly stand to the
defense thereof, and they with a number of pycked men and trained Soldiers,
and those newly come out of Egypt, went against the enemy that had entered the
breach: but during the night, no great exploite was done. About the dawning
Demetre gave a sign as well to those Soldiers which assailed the Port, as
to all the rest, at one present to make a great showte and noise, to encourage
the^ which were entered and had won the Bulwarks and Bastils about the
Theater. When the shoute and noise was heard, women, children, and all the
weak company began to cry, howl and weep, as if the city presently had been taken. But the lusty and courageous Soldiers, valiantly assailed the
enemy entered, who very long right stoutly defended, so that on each side
were a great number slain. But in the end, ye Townsmen still releued as well
with fresh men as also men of valiant and lusty courages: for that it then
stood upon the hazard of the loss of them and their City, and contrariwise ye
force of the enemy decreasing, they so stoutly after charged the Demetrians,
that they slew in honorable fight Alcime and Mancie the two Captains of those
bands, Alcime. Mancie.
and the greater number of their Soldiers, the rest they took prisoners,
except a few which fled that way they entered, and returned to Demetre.
Notwithstanding a great number of the Citizens were slain, amongs whom was
Prytame of Demotele, Pritame.
a man greatly renowned for his valiaunce and martial policies. After this
assault, Demetre yet had a greater affiaunce and hope to take it than before.
Wherefore he again furnished him to give a fresh assault. But in the mean
while he received letters from his father, which willed him to conclude with
the Rhodians so honorable a peace as he could. Wherefore he attended and espied
some occasion to come to an honest composition and agreement with them. Again
Ptolome had addressed his letters to the Citizens, letting them to wete, yt he
would send a new supply of three thousand men, notwithstanding counsayling
them that if they might come to any gracious and favorable composition, not
to refuse it. Which letters seen and read, they all were inclined to peace. It
happened the self same time that the Etholians had sent their Ambassadoures to
Demetre, to entreat a peace: who after many entercourses between one an other,
a final peace was there concluded as follows.

The conclusion of the peace.
First, that the Rhodians should be at liberty, and live after their old
accustomed manner, and not to be enforced to take in or keep any garrison.

Also that they should continue and remain friends and Allies with Antigone,
with all, and against all, except Ptolome.

Item, for assurance and confirmation thereof, they should deliver an hundred
ostages, such as Demetre would chose out, except and always reserved the
officers.

In this sort the Rhodians after they had sustained and abidden one whole
years siege, were delivered. And so many as bare them in that siege valiauntly
and manfully, were continually ever after highly honored and largely
remunerated with many great gifts. And all the sclaues who had well served,
were bought of their Lords, set at liberty, enfranchised and made Citizens.
They caused also in their Theater the Images of Cassander and Lysimache, to be
enstalled, and diverse other of less honor and dignity, who had them in that
siege aided. And because they would honor Ptolome more than all the rest,
they sent into Lybie to the God Hammon, to enquire if it were lauful for them
to honor the said Ptolome as a God. And when they had answer from the Oracle,
that they might not, they buylt and set up a Temple in his honor within the
City, four square like a Cloistre, a furlong each way, which they called the
Temple of Ptolome. They likewise repared their Theater and all the places of
the Walls beaten down, much fairer and stronger than before. And after the
conclusion of the peace, Demetre with his whole army took shipping, and
following his Fathers commandment, sailed alongest the Isles, and arrived at
the Port of Aulide, Aulide.
in the Country of Beoce: being commanded to deliver the Cities of Greece:
many of which during the siege, were by Cassander and Polispercon robbed and
spoiled. And at his first arrival, he delivered the City of Calcide, Calcide.
by the Beotians garrisoned, and constrained the said Beotians to forsake the
amity of Cassander, and after alliaunced with the Etholians, against
Polispercon and Cassander, and upon them arrered wars. In this season died
Eumele King of Bosphore, Eumele.
after he had reigned six years, Spartacke.
and after him succeeded Spartace his Son, who reigned.xx. years.

The conclusion of a peace betwixt the Romans and Samnites, and certain other
their neighbors, and of their subduing the Asculaines.

The.xiiij. Chapter.
IN the same year was treated and concluded a peace between the Romans and
Samnites, after the wars had between them, continued.xxij. years and six
months. That done, Sempronie one of the Consuls took from the Asculains
in.L. days.L. Cities, and enforced them to submit to the Seigniorie and
obeisau^ce of the Romayne Empire, and after returned to Rome, where he was with
great triumph received. And soon after, the Romayne people made peace and
alliance with the Marians, Palians and Marucians.

Demetre by force and treaty takes many Cities of Greece, and diverse other
render to him: all which he restores to their ancient accustomed liberty.

The.xv. Chapter.
THe year ensuing when Leostrate governed Athens, and ye Serie Cornele and
Lucie Genuce at Rome were created Consuls, Demetre arrered wars against
Cassander, to restore the Cities of Greece to liberty: and before all other
things to set a stay about the affairs of the same Country, as well for that
it seemed to him good in doing the same, to get great glory and renown, as
also for that he determined to discomfit Cassanders army in Prepelaye,
Prepelay^.
and after to go with his whole power against the said Cassander. And first
he came before the city of Sicione, Sicione.
the deputy whereof was a noble and cheualrous Captain of Ptolomes, named
Phillip, who being by night suddenly surprised, was repulsed and enforced with
all his Soldiers to retire into a very great and strong Citadell. When
Demetre had thus taken the town, he encamped between the town and Citadell,
and planted his engines of battery against the same. Wherefore the defendaunts
seeing them without aid and succoure, yielded, upon such composition as they
might, and so from thence went to sea and sailed into Egypt. When Demetre had
won the Citadell, he transferred the Citizens thither, and razed the one
part of the city joining to the Port, because it was to strong: so he help
the Citizens with his money to build and repair the Citadell, and therewith
restored them to liberty. By which occasion they adjudged him yearly go^ ly
honors, to wete, sacrifices, assembles, solemn processions and combats, and
named the city Demetriade, and did him many other honors as if he had founded
the city. But the variety of time, the mutations and alterations that after
happen, make all things uncertain and void. For the Citizens seeing that the
situation of the Citadell (whereunto they were removed) was much more
commodious and pleasant to enhabite than the ancient city, kept it always
ever after, even to these days. For the place was great and roumie, and above
plain and smoothe, but round about so knaggy and hanging, that the ways were
inaccessible, and subject on no side to battery. Therein were also great store
of springs and fountains, wherewith they watered their gardens. In this sort
then (through the Kings providence) they were in great suertie and in a very
pleasant place. When Demetre had set in good stay the affairs of of the
Sycionians, he marched with his whole army against the City of Corinthe,
whereof Prepelaye a Captain of Cassanders was deputy. And at his firsts
coming, by mean of the intelligence which he had by certain of the Citizens,
he entered the Town in the night through a posterne. But the Soldiers within,
saved them selves in two fortes standing at the ends of the Town: the one of
which was named Sysiphe, and the other Acrocorinthe. Notwithstanding he
through great pain and ^ rauell, wanne by force Sysiphe, and by composition
took the other: because the attemptes and assaults, by reason o^ the great
industry of his Engines of Artillary, and his marvelous care and diligence
therein used, where intolerable. Which done, and that he had set the city at
liberty, the Citizens were well contented he should put in a garrison into the
Bastill of Acrocorinthe, for defense of their City, and there to keep them
until such time as he had descomfited and overthrown Cassander. And after
Prepelaye had shamefully ben expulsed Corinthe, he took his way to Cassander.
When Demetre had thus wrought against Corinthe, he departed thence, pursuing
his victory by the other Cities of Peloponnese, where by force he took Bute,
and restored the citizens to their ancient liberty, Bute.
and from thence went to Scyre, Scyre.
and there did the like, and expulsed Cassanders Soldiers. Then went he
against the City of Orcomenye in the region of Arcadie, Orcomenie.
and there talked with Strombicke deputy for Polispercon, Strombicke.
to render it. But when he see it would not be, and that he used stout and
arrogaunt words, he planted his engines, and battred and overthrew the walls
of the City, and took it by force, and caused the said Stro^bicke and.viij.
hundred of his soldiers to be carried out of the city as utter enemies, and
there to be hanged: and waged and divided amongs his bands, the Mercenarie
Soldiers, being about two thousand. After he had thus done, the rest which
held the cities and towns near hand, having no news or hope to be succored
by Cassander, Prepelaye, nor Polispercon: and considering that the King was so
stoared with engines of artillary and men, that they were not able to withstand
his so mighty power, yielded their cities.

The Tarentines desire Cleonyme the Lacedemonian to aid them against the
Lucaines: of the villainies and lecheries he commits, and after two
mischiefs which in one time betyde him, he retireth into Corcyre.

The.xvj. Chapter.
WHile the Tarentines warred all this time upon the Lucaines and Romans in
Italy, they sent their Ambassadoures to the Lacedaemonians, into the city of
Sparte, praying them, that they would send them Cleonime to be their Leader and
General, Cleonyme.
with a certain number of men: which thing the Lacedaemonians readely granted
them. And shortly after Cleonyme levied in the country of Laconie, about.v.
thousand men, with whom he took shipping and sailed to Tarent, and arryuing
there, he levied an other number of men in that country, so that he had well
near about.xx. thousand footmen, and two thousand horse, amongs which were
many Greeks, lying then in Italy. Of this so great assemble, the Lucaines were
in such terror, that they grew to an agreement with the Tarentines. Howbeit,
the Metapontines forced not their power, for which cause Clonime by the consent
of the Tarentines, suddenly assailed them. Wherewith he put them in such fear,
that they suffered him under the color of friendship, to enter the city, but
after he was entered, he exacted of them above six hundred Talents, and took
two hundred of the beautifullest maids within the Town, under the Title and
name of ostages: but truth was, it was to saciate his lecherous desire and
beastly lust, so as in that and also in diverse other things he evidently
declared his monstrous and abominable villainies. For besides that, he lest
wearing of his Grecian apparel, and apparelled him after the manner of the most
lascivious and effeminate country. Again, so many as rendered upon his faith
and promise, to be assured, he made bond. And in deed when he had so goodly
and mighty an army, he did nothing worthy and beseaming a citizen of Sparte.
He also took on hand to indict wars to Agatocles in Sic^^ e, to enlarge his
tiranny^ and to restore the Sicilians to their ancient liberty, but he to
much delayed and deserred his said enterprise, and before he went thither,
took his journey to Corcyre, and brought the city under his obeisaunce, of
which he levied a great sum of gold and silver and garrisoned it, meaning to
keep that as a receptacle or refuge, whereby he might always be at hand, to
mark and ^ spy out the affairs and doings of the Grecians. And during the
time of his abode there, the Ambassadoures of Demetre, and after the
Ambassadors of Cassander came to him, each of them praying his alliance.
Howbeit, he would not grant either to one or an other, but being advertised
that the Tarentines and their neighbors rebelled, left sufficient number in
Corcyre, and with the rest took shipping and sailed with all speed into
Italy, to the end to be revenged of the rebels. So he arrived at a city
named Tyrice, by the Barbarians kept, and by force took it, sacked it, and
forraged the territory thereof: the like did he to an other City named
Tripole, where he took above three thousand prisoners. After this, the
Barbarians in that quarter assembled and by night assailed him in his camp,
and there slew above two hundred Soldiers, and took above a thousand
prisoners. Not long after chanced him an other loss at Sea, for (through a
tempest that suddenly arose) he lost.xx. sail, of those which rydde nearest his
camp, at which mishaps he was so greatly astonished, that he retired with the
rest of his army and Navy into Corcyre.

Cassander and Lysimache attending aid from Ptolome and Seleuke, begin to
war upon Antigone, the one in Thessalie, the other in Asie, and do take from
him certain Towns, Cities and Castles.

The.xvij. Chapter.
THe year following that Nycocles governed Athens, and Mark Liuie and Mark
Elye were at Rome created Consuls, Cassander King of Macedone, seeing ye
country of Greece wax strong, and doubting that all the war in the end would
be transferred against the country of Macedone, he was thereof so careful,
that he sent his Ambassadors to Antigone in Asie, to treat a peace with him,
who answered, that there was but one way for him to avoid the wars, which
was to submit his person and whole estate to him: with which answer he was
sore abashed. Wherefore he sent into Thrace to Lysimache, praying him to come
over, that they might together consult of his estate. For in all his affairs
and weighty business, he always accustomed to se^d for him to communicate
with him of them, and also to desire his aid, as well for that he was a noble
and valiant man, as also because he was near neighbor to the country of
Macedon. After Cassander and Lysimache had long co^sulted and debated together
of their business, they determined to send their Ambassadoures to King Ptolome
in Egypt, and to Seleuke, governor and ruler of the hier regions, to declare
to them of Antigone his proud and arrogant words: and how that the hazard of
that victory was common to them all. For if he were seized on the realm of
Macedon, such was his desire of Dominion and rule, thinking him to have no
pere, that he would drive them every man out of their Countries, as they had
by experience seen and proved. Wherefore it was meet and necessary, to join
all together, and with one common accord war upon him. To which admonitions,
Ptolome and Seleuke soon agreed, and promised each of them to send a mighty
power of men to resist the said Antigone, if at any time he came to pierce and
invade their countries. Howbeit, they determined not to look for him before he
came to seek them at home in t^ eir own country: and then to prevent him and
do some exploite of great weight, they divided them into two bands, the one of
which Cassander gave to Lysimache, and with the other him self went into
Thessaly, against Demetre and the Greeks. As for Lysimache he passed into Asie,
and at his first coming received and got to his amity the Lampsacians and
Paryanians, whom he set at liberty, because they yielded to him of their own
accord. But he forcibly took the Sigeans, who stood to their defense, and
thrust a garrison into their city. This done, he delivered to Prepelaye, one
of his principal Captains.vij. thousand footmen, and a thousand horse to
go reduce into his obeisaunce the Cities of Eolide and Ionye, and him self
went and besieged Abide. But as he was making preparation with his Engines to
assail the town, understanding that Demetre had by Sea sent thither aid
sufficient to defend it, he changed his determination and purpose, and departed
thence and came into the country of Phryge by Hellespont, and there besieged
the city of Synade, wherein stood a strong Castle, Synade.
in which Antigone laid up and kept one part of his treasure and richesse. But
in the end he so practiced with Docime deputy for Antigone, that he delivered
the Town and Castle and joined with him against Antigone, and was the cause
that certain other forts and Castles rendered, within which likewise Antigone
had an other part of his treasure. And Prepelaye who was sent into Eolide
and Ionye, took as he passed, the City of Adramit, Adramit.
and after encamped before Ephese, where he put the Townsmen in such terror,
that they rendered to him upon composition, and found in it a hundred Rhodians,
which he sent away vnransomed and without endomaging the Townsmen any whit at
all. Howbeit, he burnt all the ships within the Haven, because the enemy was
at Sea stronger than he, and the success of that war is yet uncertain and
undetermined. After that, he incontinent drew to his alliance the Theians and
Colophonians. But the Erythreans and Clazomenians he could not win, because
they were speedly aided by Sea: notwithstanding be made incursions, and robbed
all their land. After that, he went against the city of Sarde, Sarde.
which he by composition took on Phonicke and Docime, Antigone his deputies,
and wanne them to his alliance. Howbeit, he could not get the castle, because
Philip Captain thereof, one of Antigone his chief friends, would not by any
practice or devise be won, but honestly kept it for his said Master, who put
him in that trust. In this estate where the affairs of Lysimache.

Antigone comes against Lysimache, and after he has him twice besieged, and
can not get him out to battaill, they are both feign to send their Soldiers
in garrisons to winter.

The.xviij. Chapter
THe same season had Antigone made great preparation for the sportes, tournais,
and diverse other pastimes in the city of Antigone. Antigone.
For performaunce whereof, he caused a great number of all sorts of people
thither to repair, as sword players, wrastlers, and all the most excellent
artificers. But after he understood of Lysimache his passing by, and the
reuolting of his captains, he left of all his sportes and pastimes.
Nevertheless, to content the^ that were come thither, he gave above two
hundred Talents, to be distributed amongs them, and after departed with his
army out of the country of Syrie, making haste to come before the face of the
enemy. And after he had gotten to the city of Tarse, Tarse.
in the Region of Cilice, he paid all his Soldiers for.iij. Months. And
besides carried in silver with him, three thousand Talents: because he would
want no money to atchieue his enterprises, what so ever should happen. From
thence passed he the Mount Thaure, and entered the country of Cappadoce: and
from thence into the hier Phrygie, bringing under his subjection the Towns and
cities of the said countries, which were revolted. Whereof Lysimache
advertised, assembled his captayns, and consulted what was best to be done. And
in the end considering the great puissance of the enemy, they were all of the
opinion, not to join battaill, until such time as the aid and succors which
Seleuke should send out of the hier Satrapies were come: but still to keep in
the strongest places and most of advantage, to fortify their camp strongly,
to keep good watch. And to be short, whatsoever seemed for their most
advantage, they right wisely performed. For although Antigone approached them
and presented battaill, yet made they no semblaunt once to sallie out of their
camp. Which thing Antigone apperceyuing, took and kept certain passages to
cut them from their victualles. Whereupon Lysimache fearing famine, and by that
mean to be forced to render to the enemy, stoale away by night, and without
stay trauailled four hundred furlongs, until he came to Dorythe, and there
pitched his camp: Dorythe.
because the place was well purueied of victualles and all other things
necessary, having a River running hard by it, which was a great sauegard and
comfort for the army, and entrenched his camp with a broad and deep ditche,
and three trenches.

In the mean season, Antigone advertised of Lysimache his departure, with all
diligence pursued him, but before he could overtake him, he might perceive,
that he had already fortified his camp. Notwithstanding he a fresh presented
him battaill, but seeing him that way nothing apt and disposed, commanded
his Soldiers to enuiron the camp of the enemy with trenches, and planted
all his Engines against the same, determining there to besiege them. And
although the enemy, sore gald, and oftentimes repulsed them with shot, yet
had Antigone his Soldiers ever the better: and in short time had almost
won their rampire, which Lysimache seeing, and still fearing enclosing and
famine, in a foul and raynie night raised his Camp and stoale away, without
knowledge of the enemy, passing through the places of advantage, alongest
the Mountain, by which mean he lost not one man of his army: but dispersed
it, and sent them by garrisons to winter. When it was day, Antigone
understanding the departure of the enemy, likewise departed and pursued them
certain days alongest the plain, costing daily the mountayn, but there fell
such store of rain, and the ground waxed so miery and deep, that he lost
many of his beasts and mares which drew his carriages, and also many men: and
the rest were very sore traveled and weried. Wherefore the King meaning to
rest his weried Soldiers, and seeing winter approach, left pursuing the
enemy, and divided his army, sending them into places couenable to winter. But
when he understood, that Seleuke was with great puisau^ce come out of ye hier
Satrapes against him, he sent a friend of his to Demetre his son lying in
Greece, commanding him to make speedy return with his whole power, because he
greatly feared, that all the rest of the Kings and Satrapes would suddenly come
upon him, and give him battaill, before his army were come out of Greece.
Lysimache also had divided his men to winter in a champion Country, called
Salmone, Salmone.
and had great plenty of victualles out of the City of Heracley, Heracle.
because of the alliance between him and the Governors of the city by
marriage: for he had espoused a Lady named Amistre, Amistre.
daughter to Oxiarthe, Niece to the King of Aure, Oxiarthe.
whom Alexander had before given to Cratere for wife.

Demetre comes into Greece against Cassander, and after certain small exploites
on either side done, they grow to a composition. That ended, Demetre goes into
Hellespont, to join with his Father: and of many and diverse other things.

The.xix. Chapter.
THe same season, wherein the matters before spoken of were exploited in Asie,
Demetre after purposed to celebrate in Eleusine the accustomed annual pastimes
and sacrifices of the country, to the end he would there be enstalled and
consecrated. And because it was long to the ordinary day, he sore lay upon
the Athenians, and required them, that they would for his love, and in part
of recompense of the good turns he had done them, set forward the day: which
at his request they did: whereupon he all unarmed, presented him self to the
Priests, and being before the usual day enstalled and consecrated, after the
manner and custom of the country, departed from Athens, and came to the city
of Calchide, Calchide.
in ye Isle of Euboye, where he first assembled his ships and footmen.
Euboye.
And being there, he understood that Cassanders soldiers kept the passages of
the country thereby: wherefore he thought it not good to travel into Thessaly
by land, but enbarqued his army, and sailed thence, and arrived at the Port of
Larisse, where he came on land, Larisse.
and first wanne the city, and after the castle, and committed the garrison
men to prison, and set the Citizens at liberty. After that, he wan Pronas and
Pteley, Pronas. Pteley.
and stayed the Citizens of Dium and Orcomenie, Dium.
whom Cassander would have transferred into the city of Thebes, Orcomenie.
least they should go thither. When Cassander see that Demetre his doings still
prospered, he thrust greater garrisons into the cities of Phere and Thebes: and
with the remnaunt of his men marched toward him, and encamped as near as was
possible. He had in his army.xxix. thousand footmen, The great power on
either side.
and two thousand horse. And Demetre had above.xv. hundred horse.viij.
thousand Macedonian footmen.xv. thousand Mercenaries.xxv. thousand Greeks, and
above eight thousand Pirates and other light armed men, who came more for
spoil than to fight: so that in all he had lvj. thousand footmen. When the
two armies were in view one of another (although the Soldiers on each side
desired battaill) yet came they not to joining, because the Chieftaynes
attended and looked for news of the success of the wars in Asie. For upon
that hoong the loss and victory to tall. In the mean time the Phereans had
brought secretly into their city Demetre with a certain number of his
Soldiers, who took and held the Castle: and upon his honor sent away
Cassanders Soldiers, with bag and baggage, and after restored the Phereans
to liberty. The affairs of Thessaly being in this estate, Demetre received
letters from his father, wherein he commanded him forthwith to come to him
with his army into Asie: which letters received, and obeing his fathers
commandment, he concluded a peace with Cassander, always reserving his
Fathers pleasure for confirmation thereof, because he was assured his father
would never agree thereto: but would by arms and dint of sword determine and
finishe the wars, and not by composition and agreement. Howebeit, Demetre
concluded the league and peace, to the end he would have an honest occasion to
depart Greece, to go into Asie, so that it should not be said, he fled, but yt
he honestly departed, chiefly considering, that in one of the articles of the
conclusion was agreed, that all the cities of Greece, as well in Asie as in
Europe, should be restored to liberty. After the same conclusion, Demetre made
great provision of Carracques, wherein he enbarqued all his whole army, and
fraught al his carriages: and sailing thence alongest the Isles, he arrived at
the Port of Ephese, and there landing his army, encamped hard before the
town, and enforced the garrison to restore to her pristinate estate and
liberty the City, and licenced them and their Captayn Prepelay one of
Cassanders Chieftaynes, safely to depart with bag and baggage: and garrisoned
the Castle with his own Souldioures, and the^ entered Hellespont: where he
wanne to his obeysaunce the Lampsaks, Parians, and certain other Cities, who
were subtract from his amity. After he sailed to the entry of Pont, and
encamped about the temple of the Calcedonians, for guard whereof he left three
thousand footmen, and.xxx. Galleys, the rest of his Soldiers, he divided
amongs the cities to winter. The same time Mytridate Governor of the countries
of Mysie and Carry, who took part with Antigone, Mythridate.
being suspected, that he had conference with Cassander, was put to death, when
he had governed.xxxv. years, after whom his son Mithridate succeeded, who
after enlarged and increased his fathers Empire, and besides, for the space
of.xxxvj. years, governed the countries of Cappadoce and Paphlagone. The same
season also, Cassander (after the departure of Demetre) recovered the cities he
had lost in Thessalie, and sent in Lysimache his aid, Plisterche one of his
captains into Asie, with the greater part of his army, being about xxij. M.
footmen, and.v. C. horse. But after Plistarche was come to the straight of
Hellespont, and see it guarded by Demetre his Soldiers, he returned.

The end of the third Book.
The fourth Book is taken out the wise Plutarque, in the life of Demetre.
Antigone coming to battle against the enemy, is through the default of his
son Demetre slain.

The first Chapter.
About the spring, the two armies (to say, Antigone and Demetre on the one
part, and the Kings confederate on ye other) with great power came into ye
fields one against an other. For Antigone had about.Lxx. thousand
footeme^.iiij. thousand horse, and.Lxxv. Elephantes. And on the enemies side
were about.Lxiiij. thousand footmen.xv. thousand horse, four score
Elephantes, and.Cxx. armed charriots. When the two armies were in view one of
an other, Antigone was maruelously troubled and very pensife. For there ran
in his fantasy many things, and especially the great danger and hazard of
that battaill, whereof he no less doubted the loss, than he had good hope of
victory. And although one way (by reason of his continual victories) he well
hoped: but chiefly for the fame and reputation, by him newly gotten for his
last victory in Cypres, yet he again as a wise man, and one experimented in
martial policies, considered the variety of Fortune, who is never firm or
stable, but still delights in mutation and change. All which things
thoroughly wayed, he became so sore troubled and grieved, that where he before
in other wars and battailles was accustomed to speak loud and fiercely, in
reproach and despite of the enemy, and set forth his stoutness and
magnanimity: he then without words was altogyther heavy and pensive, which
imported a marvelous thought and care in him, as if he had had some present
infelicitie in his head, which suddenly happened him. He did also at that time
(as they said) many things which he never woonted to do. For he there openly
in presence of al, declared and named his son Demetre successor of his
realm, as though he should presently have died: and after took him into his
Pauilion a great while, and conferred with him alone, whereat the whole army
was maruellously abashed, because he never before used a part to talk, nor
yet communicate with him in secret of his affairs, but trusting to his own
wit, determined all matters after his own fantasy, and without demanding
advise or counsel of any, would command that to him seemed best. In so much
that at one time, (they said) when Demetre his son, being but a young
Soldier, demanded when he should return to him with the army, with a
troubled and disdainful countenance, answered: Art thou so very a boy and
cowarde that thou can not without me hear the sound of the Trumpets? Ageyn,
besides these his fantasies and imaginations, many things then happened which
might be judged pronostications of evil luck and misfortune toward him. For
Demetre one night see in his dream, Alexander the great al armed in white, who
asking him what sign and token he should give to his Soldiers in that
battaill: answered that Jupiter gave victory, and by and by him thought that
Alexander said, and I also will take part with your enemies. It was likewise
reported, that after Antigone had aranged his Phalang or battaille of footmen,
and coming out of his Tente, that he stoond one of his feet, and therewith
suddenly fell flat to the ground. And after he was lift up, holding up his
hands to heaven, made his humble prayers to the Gods, that they would either
give him victory, or at the least, that he might be slain, rather than with
shame to be enforced to fly: and all at once wholly went to the battaill, which
on either side began very hoate and cruel. It happened soon after ye
Demetre, with a lusty band of horssemen under his charge, so violently charged
Antioche the Son of Seleuke, that he put him and all his company to flight,
and by reason of the excessive joy of victory, had them so long in chase,
that with his too great desire, he lost altogyther. For during the time he had
them in chase, the Seleukeans seeing the footmen left naked without horse
(which should have been their guard and succoure) so encompassed them, as
though they would on every side have charged. Whereupon some seeing all their
horssmen gone, forthewith rendered, and the rest which stood to the defense,
after they see their inabilitie to withstand, fled, so that when Demetre was
returned from the chase, he could no way bring them again into order. And
immediately after this company was discomfited, a great band of the enemy,
charged the battaill wherein Antigone was, every of them meaning to get his
person. Which thing one of his Soldiers apperceyuing, said to him: Save thy
self Sir King, for every of these men seek and desire none but thee, whom he
again thus answered: In vain they seek and desire me, for Demetre will
soon be here to aid me. Howbeit, the charge was so sudden and impetuous,
that before his Son could come to help him, many times calling for him to
his aid, and looking round about if he came, was by the enemy environed, and
after he was dead sore wounded. And then all his enemies about him fled, except
Thorax of Larisse, Thorax.
who alone tarried with the body.

After this discomfiture, the Athenians would not suffer Demetre to enter
their City: and how he again gathers together his army. After, Demetre
his daughter is married to Seleuke, who treats a marriage between Demetre and
Ptolomais, daughter to King Ptolome: and of the denial he has of two little
Cities.

The.ij. Chapter.
AFter the Kings confederate had won this victory, they divided amongs them
(as a great pray and but in) all Antigone and Demetre their lands and
Seigniories. And after Demetre see the battaill lost, he in all haste, with.v.
thousand footmen, and four thousand horse fled to Ephese. Whereupon the
Citizens considering his loss, and the necessity he was in, greatly feared
that he would rob and spoil the rich Temple of Diana Howbeit, he took not
a Talent, but doubting that his Soldiers (because they were not well pleased
with him) would do some wicked deed, The industry of Demetre.
he therefore determined to depart the City. And after he see the wind began
to blow up, he enbarqued all his soldiers, and sailed directly into the
Country of Greece, meaning to get into the city of Athens, which he had
kept for his only and singular refuge, and therefore had there his ships,
treasure, and Deidamie his wife, Deidamie.
being fully persuaded that that City would never fail, whatsoever chance
and adversity might happen. Howbeit, he was therein greatly deceived, for so
soon as he was thither come, arriving about the Cyclades, there came
messangers to them from the Athenians, which brought him such news, as he
never thought on or looked for, signifying to him, that the Athenians had
concluded and determined not to receive any King into their City, praying him
therefore to refrain and stay his coming thither. Nevertheless, that they
would send him his wife, in such honorable estate as became them to do, and as
to the wife of so honorable and Noble a Prince apperteyned. What faith and
confidence a Prince ought to have in his subjects.
With which Ambassade Demetre was so angry and agreeued, that a little thing
would have made him lost all the hope of his estate, and almost desperate. For
although what with the loss of his Father, army, and realm, he see him
reduced and brought from so great felicity almost to extreme misery and
beggerie, yet considering the power and nature of Fortune, (to whom al men are
subject) he patiently endured and abyd all his misfortunes and infelicities.
But seeing him so frustrate of his hope, deceived and mocked of the Athenians,
he was thereat so agreeued and despited, that he could by no mean bear it.
Whereupon by example may be learned, and by experience known, that the high
and mighty Princes which think because of the great honor and service that
the people do them, that therefore they singularly love them, and that that is
a great establisheme^t and suertie of their estate, are therein maruelously
deceived: And although of their own accord, and for some good will they bear
to Princes, they oftentimes do them these honors: yet many times it is for
fear, for we daily see that they will do as great honor, and make as humble
reverence to them whom they hate, as to those they honor and love. Wherefore
all sage Princes and Governors of commonweals, do not care or force to be so
much honored of the common people by Decrees, by setting up their statues or
images, by orations, and other like means, as to do such things as are worthy
and deserve such honors. Notwithstanding his anger and despite against the
Athenians, seeing yet no way of revenge, he dissimuled the matter, hoping one
day to have a more convenient time and season. Neither gave he the
Ambassadoures any evil or discurteous language, nor yet made semblant, as
though he were discontented, but required them one thing, to send him his
ships lying in the Port of Pyrey: amongs which was one of.xiij. tier of ores
on a side, which they speedely did. And so soon as he had them, he sailed in
all haste to the straight of Peloponnese, called Isthmus: being there arrived,
news were brought him out of al quarters, that his case daily empaired, and
that his garrisons every where were expulsed, and his towns without
resistaunce rendered to the enemy. Where upon he was in marvelous doubt what to
do. Notwithstanding, considering that he left Pyrrhe in Greece, he went with his
whole army into Cheronesse, to invade Lysimache his country, and in short
time his strength and power so increased, that he had an able army, whereat
the other Kings were nothing agreeued, because they all maliced Lysimache his
pride, and envied his puissaunce. But shortly after happened Demetre a better
adventure: For Seleuke seeing that Lysimache had had in marriage two of Ptolome
his daughters, one for him self, an other for Agathocles his son, he
likewise determined by alliance with the other Kings to establishe and
fortify his realm as much as he could. Whereupon he sent to Demetre,
demanding in marriage his daughter Stratonice: Stratonice.
which sudden adventure Demetre right well knew how to accept, and thereuppon
incontinent, with his whole Navy sailed into Syrie, and brought his daughter
to Seleuke. But coasting alongest the shore, straight upon the Country of
Cilice, his Soldiers went on land, and robbed and spoiled the country.
Whereupon Pisistrate, Pisistrate.
brother to Cassander, which Cassander had had the same Country, by particion
made at the spoil of Antigone, was very sore displeased. Wherefore he
incontinent went toward Seleuke, and made to him his complainte: and farther
declared, that he did evil to separate him self from the other Kings, who had
altogyther made alliance with him against the said Antigone. But when Demetre
understood that Pisistrate was gone, he set on land the greater number of his
Soldiers in the said Country, and again robbed and spoiled the same, and in
the end made the paysaunts compound with him for.xij. hundred Talents: which
they paid on the nail, and thereupon he ageyue enbarqued his Soldiers, and
kept his course directly toward Syrie. And one evening going on land with his
wife Phile, he found Seleuke come thither before, where at their first
meeting, without countenance of mistrust the one of the other, was made great
cheer. But first, Seleuke feasted Demetre in his Pauilion on land, and after
Demetre feasted him in a Gallie of.xiij. tier of ores, and all that day, they
had great talk, and long conference together without armor or watch one to
another, but altogyther good cheer and confidence amongs them and their
Soldiers. Finally, when Seleuke had espoused Stratonice, he brought her
away, and with his whole furniture departed thence toward his Son Antioche.
Demetre likewise returned into Cilice, and after his arrival, he incontinent
sent Phile his wife toward Cassander her brother, Phile.
to excuse him of the incursions and robberies, by him in the said Country
committed and done. In the mean season arrived out of Greece Deidame, before
Demetre, who within few days after, fell into a disease, whereof she died.
Shortly after whose death, Demetre seeking new alliance, a marriage by Seleuke
his mean, was concluded between Demetre and Ptolomaide, daughter to King
Ptolome, wherein Seleuke dealt very gently and courteously toward Demetre. But
not long after, he played him as ungentle a part and ill agreeing to the
affinity with him newly contracted. For notwithstanding Demetre his large and
great offer of money to Seleuke, he not only refused to render the country of
Cilice, but also denied him two Cities Tire and Sydone: which in Seleuke was a
great discurtesie, and therefore reputed of great pusillanimitie, that he being
Lord and King of all the land and countries between the Indian Sea unto the
Syrian shore, did more esteem two trifling cities of no ^ alue, than the
amity and parentage of one so noble and valiant a King. And although he had
married his daughter, seeing him by Fortune persecuted even to the hard hedge,
did not only refuse to aid him, but in refusing to give him the domicile of
two small Cities, secretly expulsed him all his lands and dominions. And
truly this pusillanimitie does the sayings of Plato well prove in this I
counsel him that would be rich (says Plato) not to study and devise to
gather together great store of treasure, A goodly example of Plato against
auari^ ious men.
but that he refrain his covetous desire. For he shall always be poor, who
without setting measure to his covetousness, has an ardent desire to get.
Nevertheless, although Demetre was thus of his intention and purpose by his
son in law frustrate, yet lost he no whit his courage, but as a man of an
invincible heart, and one that oftentimes had assayed the deceytes of Fortune,
said to his friends: Although I should a thousand times have been vanquished and
overcome, yet would I not be so fainte hearted and effeminate, for so small a
trifle to lose the love and favor of my son in law.

Demetre at his pleasure, takes by siege the City of Athens: of his bounty
and humanity toward them. And after besieges the City of Sparte in the
country of Laconie.

The.iij. Chapter.
WHile these matters were doing, Demetre was by letters from his friends out
of Greece advertised, how Lamacare, through a popular sedition which had been at
Athens, Lamacare.
usurped the Dominion thereof. Wherefore they willed him not to lose any such
occasion for recovery of so noble a city. Whereupon he incontinent went to
Sea with his whole army: and sailed directly into Greece. But as he drew near
the regio^ of Athens, suddenly arose a sore tempest, wherein many of his ships
and men perished, whereby he was enforced, for his better sauetie, to come on
land, and for that time to leave of his enterprise of Athens, until some other
more convenient season. Wherefore he gave in charge to certain of his me^, that
they should new calke and amend his shaken and bruised ships: and him self
with the rest sailed into Peloponnese, and besieged the City of Messene,
Messene.
at which siege, as he one day went about the wall to view the Town, there
came a shot out of it, which gave him such a blow on the chappes, that he had
almost yielded the ghost: nevertheless, being soon after healed, he took the
said city, and by composition many other. This done, he ageyn enterprised his
voyage of Athens, and after his entry into the country, he took the cities
Eleusine and Rammise: Eleusine. Rammise.
and farther commanded his men to make incursions, and to spoil and rob all
the country about the city of Athens. When the Athenians were by Demetre his
Soldiers thus we^ ied and endomaged, A mine here was a weight amongs the
Greks of three sorts: the one named Mina Attica, waying xij ounces and a
half. Mina Medica xij. o^c. And Mina Alexandrina. xx. ounces.
happened them an other sudden inconvenience, which sore troubled them. For as
a Carracque of theirs was coming to the City laden with corn, Demetre took
it, and immediately hung the Patron thereof: the taking of which drove them to
so great a necessity, that a Mine of salt was sold for.xl. Drachmes: and a
Bushel of corn for three hundred. Whereupon they were so troubled and in such
despair, that they began to treat and render. But as they were in that mind,
news came to them from all coasts, how King Ptolome would send an Cl. sail
to their aid, already seen at Eugine, whereupon they were not a little
encouraged, and hoped to save all. When Demetre understood of the coming of
the said Navy, he got together in the country of Peloponnese and Cypres, two
hundred ships, so that when Ptolome his Captains see that they were not able
to resist so mighty a Navy, they durst not abide, but incontinent retired.
After Lamacre had heard of that, he secretly stoale out of the City and fled.
And although the Athenians had decreed and published a new and common Decree,
that who so ever did talk, or once make motion with Demetre of peace, or
conclusion in peace, he should lose his head: yet being with famine sore
oppressed and grieved, they were enforced to agree, upon such composition as
him best liked, and set open the gate next to his camp, and sent their
Ambassadoures to render the City and Citizens at his pleasure, with petition,
that he would not forget his old accustomed benignity and clemency, neither
to be revenged of the injuries and offenses against his Majesty committed. And
this did not the Athenians for any favor or grace yt they hoped for at
Demetre his hands, considering his mortal grudge toward them: but by famine
enforced, thought it much better to submit them to his highness discretion
and mercy, than to die of hunger: which (as they said) was then so great, that
a rat falling from the top of a house down unto the flower, Great famine.
the father and his Sons straue maruelously, which of them should have it to
eat. And the Philosopher Epicure fed his household with beans, Epicure.
which he gave them out by tale. When Demetre with his whole army was entered
the city, he commanded that all the people should at the Theater assemble, in
the midst whereof on a great scaffolde pitched he his Pauilion, and appointed
his Soldiers to stand about the same with their weapons in their hands. And
soon after the people were come together, he descended from his Pauilio^ unto
a Tribunal, much lower, whereat al ye people that see him, were in marvelous
terror and fear. But after they heard him utter no sharp or rigorous words,
they were well recomforted. And when he had in the beginning of his Oration
checked and reproved their stubbornness and obstinacy, he gently in all
humanity and benignity proceeded on with the rest. And in token and sign of
reconciliation, he gave them two thousand Medymnes of wheat, and appointed them
such Officers, as were meetest to Govern the City, according to their
ancient accustomed liberty. Whereat yt people were so exceeding glad and
rejoiced, that they never ceased highly to praise and commend Demetre, and to
blason his name throughoute all quarters: the Orators also of the city were
well furnished to make and set forth Orations in his commendation and praise.
And because Democlide, Democlide.
after he had made his Oration, would seem to do something more than the
rest, he propounded a Decree, whereby was ordained, that the people of Athens
should freely give to Demetre the Towns of Pyre and Munychie, to use at his
pleasure: which Decree being by the people allowed, Demetre calling to
remembrance their former rebellion, received their gentle offer: and
immediately fortified the Town of Munychie, to the end if they at any time
else rebelled, he had now gotten a reyne to restrain them. After Demetre had
thus recovered the city and Country of Athens, he rested not, but still
continued from one war to another, and with his army went against the city
of Lacedemonie, and when he was come about the Town of Mantine, Mantine.
he encountered Archidame King of the Lacedaemonians, Archidame.
who with great power was come thither to stop his passage, whom at the
first joining he put to flight, and incontinent without farther resistaunce,
entered the country of Laconie, robbing and spoiling until he came before the
city of Sparte, Sparte.
which he besieged. And as he lay before the city, the Citizens sallied out
upon him, but they so valiauntly repulsed them, that there were two hundred
slain, and.v. hundred taken, and it went very narrowly that his Soldiers had
not entered the city pale mele, which then was rich and opulent, and until
that time reputed and taken to be very strong and inexpugnable.

Alexander King of Macedone, praying Demetre his aid, goes about to betraye
him, but in the end him self according to his demerite, is by Demetre with
such like practice slain, whom the Macedonians after receive and honor as
their King.

The.iiij. Chapter.
The great var^^^ ie of Fortu^ e.
WHen I have thoroughly considered the great mutations and chaunges of fortune
which happened Demetre, he of all the rest of the Kings in my judgment, was
by fortunes inconstancy, most vexed and tossed, both in peace and war. For
oftentimes she advanced him to great glory and prosperity, gyuing him
mighty armies, notable victories, and a large realm and Dominion. And at an
other time, from great prosperity and power, soon after, by the loss of one
battle, she again brought him almost into extreme calamity and misery. Who
being in this estate, and considering the variety of instable Fortune, recited
(they say) these Uerses of Eschine following: Eschine.
Fortune, once thou did me set in hye estate,
And in short time, as low did me mate.
As to him then happened. For having prosperous success in the country of
Peloponnese, news were brought him, that his cities confederate in Asie, could
no longer hold out Lysimache his puisaunce, who persecuted them. And that if he
the sooner came not to the aid of the Isle of Cypres, King Ptolome would
subdue and take it. Moreover, that his wife and children were in the City of
Salamine besieged in great danger of taking. By reason of which news, he was
forced to raise his siege from Sparte, and provide for the foresaid mischiefs.
But as the woman according to Archilocke the Poet carries in one hand water,
Archilocke his similitude of a woman.
and in the other fire: even so plays Fortune with Demetre. For so soon as
he was departed from the country of Laconie, as aforesaid, suddenly other news
came, which put him again in good hope to exployte many notable things. And
first it is to be understood, that Cassander not long before was departed
this world, Cassander.
by reason whereof, Phillip.
the realm stood in controversy between the other two brethren: the elder of
which hight Alexander, Alexander.
and the other Antipater. Which Antipater, after he had killed their mother
Thessalonicke, Antipater.
persecuted Alexander, Thessalonike.
thinking to have chased and expulsed him the realm, who finding him self of
no force in the country, sent out for aid to King Pyrrhe in Cypres, Pyrrhe
the King.
and to Demetre in Peloponnese. Howbeit, Demetre was so occupied about the
estate and affairs of Peloponnese, when the Ambassadoures of Alexander came,
that he could by no mean help him. In the mean time Pyrrhe with a mighty
power came thither: in recompense of his aid and charge, took possession of
so large a piece of yt country of Macedone, joining to his realm of Epyre,
that Alexander greatly dreaded him. And while he aboade in this fear, he was
advertised that Demetre (whose help he had before required) was with his whole
army coming thither to aid him: whereupon he considering his authority and
great renown, and the worthiness of his deeds and acts, for which he was
honored and had in great admiration of the whole world, did now more than
before fear his estate, if he entered his realm. Wherefore he went to meet
him, whom at their first meeting, he right courteously and honorably
entreated, greatly thanking him of his courtesy and travel, in that he would
leave his own affairs of great importance, and with so mighty an army to
come and aid him. He farther told him, that he had already well quieted and
established his affairs and estate, so that he should not need any farther to
trauaill. Nevertheless, he thought him so much bound, as if he had come at his
first sending for, or that al things by his mean had been appeased and
quieted. To these words Demetre courteously answered, that he was of his
quietness right glad, and that he had now no need of his help, besides many
other loving and gentle words, which greeting ended, either of them for that
night returned into his Pauilion. During this time arose such matters between
them, that the one greatly suspected the other: For as Demetre was by Alexander
bidden to supper, he was willed to take good heed to him, because that
Alexander had practiced by treason to slay him. Notwithstanding he by no mean
showed any contenaunce of mistrust, but meant to go to the banquet, to whose
lodging Alexander was coming, to bring him on his way, but he diversely
detracted the time, and went a soft and treatable pace, to the end his
soldiers might have leisure to arm the^, and commanded his guard being a
greater number than Alexanders, to enter with him, and also to wait near his
person. When Alexanders Soldiers see them the weaker company, they durst not
once attempt it. And after they had supped, because Demetre would have some
honest occasion to depart, he feigned him to be something ill disposed in his
body, and therefore forth we took leave of Alexander, and went thence. The
next day in the morning Demetre fayning that he had received certain news,
sent word unto him that he was advertised of matters of great importance, that
he must of necessity with his army return into Peloponnese, praying
Alexander to have him excused. Nevertheless, he offered him his aid and help,
whenever he needed, and desired him to use him as one in whom he might repose
and put his whole trust. With which message the young Alexander, who greatly
doubted him before he came, and much more after his coming, was now
marvelous glad that of his own accord he returned out of his Realm and
Dominions. And because he would better let him understand some sign of the
acknowledging of his good will and love, he accompanied him into Thessaly. But
after they were arrived in the city of Larisse, Larisse.
they a fresh began to practice new treasons one against an other. And first,
Alexander to put Demetre quite out of suspicion, without armoure or guard
visited him, hoping to make him do the like, but he was in his so thinking
greatly deceived. And as Alexander one night, according to his accustomed
woonte, came to supper to Demetre without company, and that they were in the
chief of their supper, Demetre suddenly arose from the table, whereat Alexander
was so sore abashed, that he arose and followed him to the Haldore. But so
soon as Demetre was without, he gave sign and token to his Soldiers, who
incontinent fell upon Alexander and slew him and certain of his men which
would have defended him, among whom one as he was killed, said, Demetre has
prevented us but a day only. With this slaughter were the Macedonians all
that night and the next day in the morning maruelously astonished, and in great
fear. For seeing to oultrage was to no purpose, and that Demetre after
Alexander his death was very strong to bring his purpose to pass: before they
understood what he would do, they durst not trust him, nor yield, until such
time as Demetre sent to them certain of his men, which in his behalf said,
that they needed not to fear him, for it was not his will to do them any
hurt, but prayed them to come to him, and then he would show them a good
reason why he had done that he did. Whereupon the Macedonians ioyed that they
were delivered of that fear and danger. Wherefore they went all together unto
him, and without gyuing ear or attending his oration, salued him as their
King, and needs would bring him into Macedon. Of this change was all the
country marvelous glad: for they so mortally hated Cassander, for the cruel
facts and great villainies, by him (against the great King Alexander and his
ligne after his death) committed, and also for the great oultrage and impious
murder which Antipater, Cassander his son had used toward his mother
Thessalonicke, that they desired nothing so much, as a new King. By reason
whereof, Demetre was of all the Macedonians generally well liked. Again, his
wife Phile and the children he had by her, so much renewed and lively reuyued
the Image and likeness of the good old Antipater her father, that they
reputed Demetre the very true, and undoubted successor and heir to the said
Realm.

Seleuke through a fatherly love, remitteth to Antioche his son, his own
wife Stratonice, daughter to Demetre, and gives to them in title and name of
the realm, all the hier Provinces.

The.v. Chapter.
THe same season that these things were exployted in Madecone, Demetre had
news that his wife and children, besieged at Salamine, were by Ptolome
delivered and with great honors and presents sent away. And soon after, it
was throughout all the coasts of Asie bruted, that Stratonice Demetre his
daughter, Stratonice.
whom Seleuke had married, was divorced, and espoused to Antioche his son:
and therefore by the people of the heir Provinces, received and named Queen, as
follows. While Antioche lay and aboade in the house, and company of Seleuke
his father, he so much haunted and frequented the company of Stratonice his
mother in law, being then young, marvelous fair and beautiful: and had had
also a child by the said Seleuke: in process of time became so enamoured and
ravished, that day and night his mind wholly ran on her: whereby he was so
troubled and fell into such weakness, y^ to every man's sight he dried and
consumed away: and so much the more grieved it him, because what for shame,
as also for the reverence and natural love he bare his Father, he durst never
discover it to any in the world. Wherefore seeing his malady daily vex and
trouble him, and no hope of remedy, he to be delivered of that so grievous a
martyrdom, took upon him a quick dispatche, more necessary than wholesome.
He determined to feine him sick, and under that color, to absteyne from
meat, whereby to being him self so feeble and weak, that as then death must
follow. But after Erasistrate, Erasistrate.
at those days a great Doctor in Physic whom Seleuke before all other had
sent for to cure his son, by his statue and other ways well considered what
disease this young Prince might have, he at last apperceiued it only to proceed
of love, but for whom he knew not. Wherefore he diligently and circumspectly
marked and noted all the parts of his body, which are wont to move when a man
in amors, sees that he loves: And with great care, watched when he see any
of the young and fair Ladies and Damsels of the house come to visit him. But
he could by no means perceive, that for any of them who often had recourse
unto him (as it had been most reason) that either he moved or changed his
countenance, but only when Stratonice entered with Seleuke. And the^ he was so
suddenly taken, that he (as it were) lost his speech, waxed very red, his
pulse vehemently beat, a fine and subtle sweat running throughout all his
body, and in effect appeared in him all the accidents that men gather to be in
them, which are in love: and after by little and little lost his senses, waxing
very pale and wanne over all the body. By these signs knew Erasistrate
clearly, that it was Stratonice whom the young Prince loved, and none other.
Notwithstanding, fearing the anger and displeasure of^ his father, and the
danger he might incur, if he discovered the case: determined rather to leave
the son in that danger, whatsoever should come on him, than to open the
secret to the Father, and put his person and life in hazard. Howbeit, after
certain days, when he see the great love that Seleuke bare his son, and the
malancolie he was in day and night for his sickness, he determined to board
and tell him, and by some subtle mean and sweet vain, to feed his humor,
concerning his son. Wherefore one day he came unto him, and spoke in this
sort: Know Sir King, that the mortal disease which infesteth thy son, is
no disease in the body, whatsoever they say, but only an ardent desire in
love. And paraduenture it were better for me to hold my peace, A sage and wise
medicine.
and keep it close, than to reveal and tell it thee, considering there is for
him no remedy. Whereat King Seleuke all astonished and abashed of the matter,
said unto him. Now I pray thee (my friend) tell me ^ ow the case stands. And
if my son have none other disease but amoures, is it not possible to find
remedy? Are we so unprovided of wit and wealth, that we can no way remedy
it? Finally after long talk between them, Erasistrate feining him to be sore
troubled, said: Know Sir King, that it is my wife, on whom he is enamoured.
Which words Seleuke hearing, with warm tears trickling down his cheeks,
embraced and instauntly desired him to help that poor young man and not suffer
him wilfully to perish, considering it was he in whom consisted all his joy
and hope, to whom the whole realm should lineally descend, and in whom all
the people and nations under his subjection, had their expectation and hope.
And that after his death there remained for him none other comfort, but
likewise present death, without redemption. Certes Sir King (quod Erasistrate)
you speak this all on pleasure, but admit he were as amorous of Stratonice, as
he is of my wife, peradventure you would then be of an other opinion. Now I
would it pleased the Gods (quod Seleuke) it were so, and that I could alter
and change that love of thy wife to mine. For I take all the Gods to
witness, that if all the things which I hold most dear in this world were
together, I would give them al for the sauegard of my sons life. Then
Erasistrate seeing his marvelous affection and weeping so tenderly, took him
by the hand and began thus to say: Now haste thou Sir King no more need of
my aid, for being a King, married, and a Father as thou art, thou may be
the right medecin and cure of thy family, because that for truth, The
marvelous love of a Father.
it is not my wife whom thy son loves, but thine own: with these words
was Seleuke much abashed, as of a very new and strange thing. And thereupon
prayed Erasistrate to declare unto him the whole estate and circumstaunce of
the matter, and how ^ e knew it. And after he understood that for childishe
reverence Antioche chose rather to die than discover his fond love, he was
moved with so great pity, that he determined all he might to save him.
Whereupon immediately he assembled al his people, and after he had with many
fair and gracious words persuaded them, he declared that it was his will and
ordinance, that Antioche his son should espouse Stratonice his wife, and
that they should have in the title and name of the Realm, all the hier
Provinces: thinking it unreasonable to gainesaye his son in that, who never
to him in any thing had been disobedient. And so by adventure Stratonice his
wife made thereof some difficulty, and thought it very strange: wherefore he
prayed all her friends and familiars, to persuade her, to obey his will and
pleasure, and farther, to say that all things which he had ordained were good,
just, and reasonable. In this sort was the marriage made, and soon after,
with all the greatest joy and pomp of the world, celebrated.

Demetre thrice conquereth the Country of Beoce, and city of Thebes, and
chaseth King Pyrrhe out of the country of Thrace.

The.vj. Chapter.
WHen Demetre in this season had obtained all Macedone and Thessalie, and
many cities in Peloponnese, Isthmus, Athens, and Megare, he was not yet
satisfied and content, but determined to war upon the Beotians. Howbeit, that
was no enterprise, either long and difficile. For after the Beotians were
aduertized of his coming, they came and desired him of peace, and concluded
upon such conditions as him liked, albeit against their wills. Cleonyme.
Whereupon Cleonyme King of Sparte, came soon after from Thebes with great
power, and had gotten to his alliance Piside the Thespian, Piside.
a man greatly renowned, and done many notable exploites, whereupon the
Beotians waxed so proud, that they rebelled against Demetre, who being thereof
advertised, determined suddenly to come upon them and so to chastise their
infidelity and inconstancy. Wherefore he incontinent departed with those armed
men he had, and besieged the city of Thebes. Thebes.
And suddenly planted his engines of battery against the weakest places of the
wall: whereat the Towns men were greatly astonished, in so much that Cleonyme of
Sparte stoale away and fled: whereupon the Thebanes were in such fear, that
they sent their Ambassadoures toward Demetre, remitting the city and Citizens
at his commandment, praying him to remember his benignity and clemency,
wherein he surmounted all other Princes. In this sort rendered they, whom he no
whit hurt, but exacted on them great sums of money, thruste garrisons into
their Towns, and left Jerome the Historian his Lieutenau^t, Jerome the
Historian.
in that Country. And thus showed he (according to his old accustomed manner)
his debonaire and courtesy toward the rebels. Great bounty of a King.
But especially toward Pyside the Thespian, who being his prisoner gently
entreated him, and after with great and large gifts rewarded him, and gave him
charge of his Soldiers in the quarter of Thespie, of which country he was.
Shortly after that these things were done in Beoce, news came to Demetre,
Dromichete.
how that Lysimache was by Dromichete taken prisoner, whereupon he thinking
that to be an excellent occasion, and good opportunity for him to exploite
great and weighty matters, went in all speed with such power as he could
readily leave into the Country of Thrace. And at his first coming, he
besieged a forte and very rich Town of the same Country: which Forte and
Town at the first, practiced and devised to render unto him, but when news on
every side came to him, that the Beotians again rebelled, and that Dromichete
had delivered and released Lysimache, he was thereat abashed and sore
despited with the commotion of the Beotians. Wherefore he incontinent departed
thence, and in so short time as was possible, returned into Greece, to chastise
them: but before he could get thither, he was advertised, Antigone.
that his son Antigone had in battaill vanquished them all: and that they
greatly repented and bewailed their rebellion. Of which news he was marvelous
glad, and chiefly that his son had won the victory. And to execute and
consu^mate his enterprise, he continued his journey to besiege the city of
Thebes. But in the mean time, he was advertised that Phyrrhe King of Epyre was
in arms entered Thessaly, and had robbed and spoiled the Country unto the
city of Thermopile. Wherefore he left his son at the siege of Thebes with
one part of his Soldiers: and him self with the rest, made great speed
into Thessaly, and at his first coming, made Pyrrhe soon retier to the strong
passages and forsake the plain country. Which done, he left in that country
for the guard thereof a thousand horse, and.x. thousand footmen, and with the
remnaunt returned to the siege of Thebes, where he caused to be brought and
planted that marvelous engine aforesaid, named the beater down of Cities,
albeit it seemed he could not in long time do it, because the engine was of
such poise and weight, that it could scarsely be drawn in two months the
space of two furlongs. When the Thebanes had considered their fault and
oultrage committed against Demetre, they determined to stand to their defense
even to the last man, because they hoped or looked for no mercy at his hands.
And he ageyn was fully persuaded, to spare for no cost, but that he would
win it, more for to be of them revenged, than for any gain or profit he
looked for, for the loss was much greater than the gain or commodity,
because the more part of the lustiest and most valiant soldiers, with
overmuch adue^turing to assault the stro^gest and most disaduantagious places
of the city, were many times slain. Wherefore Antigone, seeing the loss of
so many brave and courageous Soldiers, came to his Father, and with great
meekness and humbleness of mind, in this manner said unto him: To what
purpose (good father) are at these lusty and valiant Soldiers daily forced
to hazard them selves to such slaughter for a thing whereof will arise no
gain or emolument? Whom Demetre all in a rage answered: Why art thou (quod
he) so careful of thy self, seeing there are such a number of men between
thee and thy danger? And because his Soldiers should well know that he
would not have them hazard farther than he him self would endaunger him: He
one day amongst the thickest, and with the foremost came to the assault, where
he nobly and valyauntly bare him, but in the end to openly approaching the
wall, he was by the Townsmen with the blow of a stone hurt, and although he
felt with the blow, great anguishe and pain, yet never ceased he from the
assault, but with much greater courage than before, exhorted his Soldiers
valiantly to stand to it, whereupon they waxed so hardy and bold, seeing
their King there in person to lead them the way, that through their great
virtue and prowess, they by force entered the City, and so took it: whereat
the Citizens were in marvelous fear, looking for none other mercy, but that
he would make great slaughter of the^, and after spoil and burn the^, and
never leave doing of any mischief which might be devised. The great humanity
and mercifulness of a King.
But he contrary to the judgment and expectation of all the world, caused
but.xij. to be executed, sent a number in exile, and left the rest entier and
whole. Thus was the city of Thebes in ten years by Demetre twice taken and
subdued.

Demetre robbing and ouerrunning the Country of the Etholians, enterpriseth
war against Pyrrhe King of Epyre, and after missing of their encountre and
meeting, either of them do all the mischief they can one to another Country:
and of the renown and fame that Pyrrhe gets in that war against the
Macedonians.

The.vij. Chapter.
THe same very season, should the solemn feasts of the God Apollo Pythie
have been celebrated in the Temple of Delphos, but because the Etholians
stopped the passage where they should pass, Demetre against the old ancient
custom, caused all the said pastimes with the pompes and ceremonies to be
done within the city of Athens, which was the most principal and chief place
of Greece, to honor their Gods in. And after his return into Macedone,
considering that the aid of the Macedonians would more prevail him in war
than in peace, following his own nature and inclination, which was never to be
at rest and in quiet, incontinent arrered new wars against the Etholians, with
great power went thither, where he robbed, burnt, and wasted the greater part
of their country, and that done, left Panthauke, one of his Captains with a
brave band of soldiers to guard and kept it: and he with the rest in all
possible speed marched against King Pyrrhe, with whom he had many quarrels.
Who being thereof advertised, came with so great will to fight against him, as
the other to assail him. Howbeit, by Fortune it happened that they took
several ways, so that they meet not: Nevertheless, after Demetre was entered
the country of Epyre, he over ran and spoiled the greater part. But Pyrrhe
had a better adventure, for as he had gotten to the place where Panthauke was,
Panthauke.
he fought with him, and through his great virtue and prowes, wanne the
victory. And as the two armies joined, Panthauke calling out and urging
Pyrrhe to fight with him body to body, he willingly accepted the offer: and in
view and sight of both the armies, very bravely encountered: and after he had
received one wound, he gave Panthauke two, finally vanquished him, and
therewith put his army to flight. Whereupon Pyrrhe got him not so much hatred
and evil will of the Macedonians, whom he had vanquished, as he for this
victory wanne honor and admiration, because all men wondered and were abashed
at his virtue and valiantness. Wherefore they said it was he amongs all the
rest of the Kings, which should renew the virtue and courage invincible of
Alexander the great. And that the rest all inflamed with honor and
prodigality, and enuironned with Soldiers, always went accompanied with
whores, and minstrels, as common daunsers. And amongs them was none other
controversy, but who should surmounte other in pomp, deceit, and vain
glory. And that was spoken by Demetre, who (as they said) did not only wear
a Crown royal, and robes of crymosin tynsell, but also shoes of gold. It was
also said that he caused a robe to be made like unto heaven, with stars in
it, a very curious and sumptuous work, which fashion he there long time ware,
but the alteration and change thereof remained imperfect. And never before or
since was any King of Macedone, were he never so proud and pompous, that once
durst enterprise or take on hand to cause such a garment to be made to wear.
These things abouesayd greatly troubled the Macedonians, yet were there other
fashio^s that Demetre used, which more misliked the^, both for his
strangeness in gyuing audience, as also for his hie and stout annsweres,
besides the ceremony and gravity intolerable. But one thing amongs other
which is talked and noted of him, was that he held and kept the Ambassadoures
of Athens two whole years, being more his friends than any of the rest of
Greece, and made them follow him which way so ever he went, without any
dispatche: and in the end departed from him in as great hatred as they came.
Another time was an Orator sent to him from the Lacedaemonians, whereat he
maruelously grudged, thinking they esteemed him not, for sending of so simple
an Ambassadoure. Wherefore he wonderfully reviled and with minatory words
menaced them, and after turning his talk to the Orator said: And art thou he
whom the Lacedaemonians have sent hither alone? Whom the Orator very gently
answered: yea for so the Sir King to thee alone. Another time also, when he
had caused it to be published, that he would give attentive audience to all
suitors: a number of people at the day appointed came with many supplications,
and delivered them to him in writing, which he very courteously received, and
put them in the skirte of his gown, but at his departing thence, going over
the bridge of the River Axie, in the sight of all those which had put up and
given him their supplications, The river Axie.
and followed for answer, he cast them all in the river, whereat the
Macedonians were greatly offended and discontent. For they thought it not the
office and honor of a King of hie and noble courage, nor yet a good officer,
but rather of a iester and deceyuer of the people, and of one who made no
account of justice. And a great deal the more thought the Macedonians it
strange, for that they had understood of their auncesters, the great
courtesy and facility that King Phillip, father to Alexander the great, used
in gyuing audience to his subjects. It happened one day about the same
season, that a poor woman coming to Demetre, and desiring him to hear her,
he aunswering that he was not at leisure, A good and wholesome docume^t for a
King.
she again with loud voice replied and said: Then ought thou not to
reign. Which words well considered and reuolued in his mind, at last
constreyned him to give good and gracious audience to his people. And truly
there is no one thing in the world that so well apperteyneth and is so propre
to a King, as to be at leisure and attent to justice. For as the Philosopher
Timothey says: Tymothey.
Mars is a Tyrant: and according to the judgment of the Poet Pyndare: ^^
ndare.
The Law is king over al. Homere also says: ^ omere.
that Kings and Princes reciued not of God engines and such other warlike
instruments, to batter and overthrow walls and Bulwarks of Cities, but
justice: and to exercise and use that for the preservation of their people and
subjects. Therefore the said Poet calls not that King a good disciple of God
which is cruel and fierce, but commends him which is gentle and just. And
for truth, Demetre delited in a name and Title more agreeable to the great God
Iuppiter, than meet or apperteyning to him. For he would be called the Garden
and conseruator of Cities, and also the ouerthrower and destroyer of them.
Wherefore it is oftentimes seen, that villainy and wickedness, entering the
house of honor and honesty, and favored of the vulger opinion and ignorance
of the people, usurps the name and title of dignity and renoume.

King Pyrrhe entering the country of Macedone, is by Demetre expulsed. And
after, Demetre raises a mighty power to recover his Fathers realm, and the
other Kings link together against him. And going again to encountre Pyrrhe,
who was entered Macedone, is through the mutiny of the Macedonians enforced to
fly, and after of the division of the realm between Pyrrhe and Lysimache.

The.viij. Chapter.
SHortly after these matters aforesaid, when it was blown abroad and come to
Pyrrhe his ear, that Demetre was sore sick in the city of Pelle, Pelle.
he thought he had then good occasion to occupy and enjoy the realm of
Macedone. Wherefore he suddenly assembled the greatest number of Soldiers he
could get, and with great hostility entered the said country, robbing and
wasting all he encountered, even to the city of Edisse, Edisse.
because none came against him. Now was the estate of Demetre in great
danger, after he was cured of that malady. Notwithstanding he caused his
captains to assemble his whole army, to encountre King Pyrrhe, who
understanding of their coming, retired in great have out of the country of
Macedone. And shortly after Demetre concluded a peace with him, fearing, that
being his near neighbor, a valiant and Martial man, he might for the
execution of his other enterprises of greater importance, much hinder him. For
he thought the time was come, that he might to his great honor and glory,
recover the Realm which his Father not long before had lost, which was the
greatest thing of the whole world that he considered and thought on. Wherefore,
minding nothing else but the execution thereof, because he knew it very hard,
levied in short time above a hundred thousand footmen, and.x. thousand
horse, besides a Navy of.v. hundred sail, A terrible power.
which with marvelous speed had come out of diverse places. First, he caused
some of the keeles and bottomes to be built, in Pyre, Calchide and Pelle: and
after went him self to those places, to give order for the finishing of them:
so that by his wisdom and industry they were in few days made an end of,
armed, apparelled, and furnished ready to sea. Whereat all the world wondered,
and not at the ships alone, but at the strangeness of the workmanship and
buylding. For he had there which exceeded in bigness al those that ever were
seen, even those of.xv. and.xvj. tier of ores on a side, then thought very
strange. But after, Ptolome King of Egypt, Ptolome.
surnamed Philopater^ made one of.xl. tier on a side, Philopater.
which in greatness exceeded all those that ever were seen. For it was by
the keele two hundred and four score cubits, and from the keele to the
netting.xlviij. For navigations whereof were appointed.iiij. thousand men to
row, An horrible great Gallie.
and for sailing, three hundred marryners. There were also laid in, about
four thousand armoures, to arm them above. The Uessell was so ponderous, that
they had much ado to stir it, built more for the show, and to be marvelled
at, than for any service. But to return to Demetre his Navy, they were not
only marvelous great and full of good workmanship, but also the use of them
where for the wars meet and necessary. At this great preparation, whereof
the like was not seen since the time of Alexander, were Ptolome, Seleuke and
Lysimache, greatly astonished, and therefore they lincked together to resist him.
They also sent by a common accord toward King Pyrrhe, persuading him to
war in Macedone, declaring that the peace which Demetre had made with him,
was to none other end, but to amase him, that he in the mean time might
vanquishe the other Kings, and so consequently destroy all at his pleasure.
And in effect, that was a fire to burn all the whole world in order, if it
were not in good season extinquished: and therefore that they all with one
consent, should join and link together to resist him, their common enemy,
who in mind had conceived to subdue all Asie and Europe. Through these
persuasions Pyrrhe moved to his alliance, and to the otheir kings being joined
together (to take their whole force against Demetre) marvelous wars on al
parts were arrered against him, before he was fully furnished and ready. For
all at one instaunt, to wete, Ptolome with a great Navy and army went to sea,
to invade and perce Greece, and Pyrrhe and Lysimache Macedone, to say Lysimache
on the coast of Thrase, and the other on his own coast in the country of
Epyre joining upon Macedone. When Demetre had notice of these things, he sent
his son into Greece with one part of his army to guard it, and he with the
rest went into Macedone. And first he marched into that quarter, where
Lysimache was entered. But before he came there, he had news how Pyrrhe by
force had taken the city of Bery, and burnt and wasted all the country
round about: with which news the Macedonia^s were sore vexed and troubled, yt
there arose great tumulte and mutenie, with weeping, wayling, maledictions, and
cursing against Demetre, throughoute the whole army. Whereupon many under
color, for the defense of their houses, children and parents, came to him and
prayed leave to depart, but their meaning was to yield to Lysimache: which
thing Demetre well apperceyued, and therefore determined he not to come near
Lysimache, whom he knew the Macedonians both for his nobleness and
familiarity used to a number of them in the time of Alexander would accept.
Wherefore he marched against Pyrrhe, a stranger and of another Nation, but as
after it appeared, he was much deceived. For so soon as he was come near the
place where Pyrrhe was, many Citizens of Bery came to the camp, who above the
heavens praised and commended Pyrrhe, saying he was valiant, in Martial
factes invincible, liberal toward his Soldiers, and toward them whom he
vanquished, courteous and gentle. And farther put them in remembrance, that
their au^cestors always reputed those true and undoubted Kings, who knew to
use arms in time of war, and govern their subjects by gentleness and
courtesy in time of peace. In all which things they preferred and commended
King Pyrrhe. And to be brief, they said the time was come, yt they might be
delivered from the grievous dominion of Demetre, and submit them to a
valiant and gentle King, who heartily loved and esteemed his Soldiers and men
of war. Through this and such like talk were the Macedonians Soldiers so
moved and affectioned, that some first began secretly to mutine: and shortly
after arose so great mutenie throughout the whole host, that no man could make
the^ keep order, either in the camp or without, nor yet obey any. And the
matter at last grew to his end, that some of them were so bold to come to
Demetre and say, it was necessary if he meant to save him self to fly: for
the Macedonians were so aggreeued, to fight any longer for his pleasure, that
they would no more abide his Dominion and government: which words to Demetre
seemed very loving and honest, considering the common voice and rumor
throughout the army. Wherefore he thought it not good to tarry for any more
motions, but with that, retired at once into his tent: and after despoyled him
of his hablementes royal, ^ nd put on a minstrels garment, and with a small
company fled. After it was noysed he was gone, the greater number of his
Soldiers ran to his tente, and there straue for the butine, but Pyrrhe
understanding thereof, suddenly came upon them and made them all retire. And
incontinent as the Soldiers see him, they al with one voice received and
saluted him as their King, and he thereby seized of the army and spoil of
Demetre. But shortly after, thither came Lysimache, and there divided they
between them the realm of Macedone, which Demetre had about.vij. years held
and enjoyed.

After Demetre his flight out of Macedone, he besieges the City of Athens
which rebelled, from whence he departed without taking it, and goes into Asie
to war on Seleuke. After he has taken many Cities, he is so sore pressed on,
that he sends toward Seleuke, to conclude a peace, and upon the refusal,
he again commenceth the wars, and wins on him certain victories.

The.ix. Chapter.
WHen Demetre was fled out of Macedone, as has been said, and gotten with all
diligence to the city of Cassander, Phile his wife being there, after she had
intelligence in what sort he was come, was therewith so displeased and
desperate, that she could not be persuaded to see him, so fled, and in such
adversity, considering that fortune was more constaunt in her adversities,
than permanent in her prosperities. Wherefore, eue^ werie of her life, she
took poison and so died. Notwithstanding, Demetre departed thence, and with
all speed went into Greece, and there assembled as many ships as he found
whole and sound, and the residue of his army, determining once again to put
them in a redynesse, and so pursue his enterprise, lamenting nevertheless his
Fortune and adversity, as King Menelaye, according to Sophocles in these
words lamented his: Menelaus.
Alas, my Fortune and chance incessauntly tourneth as does the wheel of a
Myl, Sophocles.
and as the Moon, which never in one form and estate continues two whole
nights together, A man greatly subict to Fortune.
but at the beginning alters her figure, as if she came out of a dark place,
by little and little showing her self until she come to the full, and after
by the same degrees decreaseth, until she has lost her whole light. Even so
may truly be spoken of Demetre his Fortune, who after the loss of Macedone,
going into a private habit through the Towns of Greece, without any princely
tokens and signs: one which see him in the City of Thebes in this estate said
of him the verses of Euripide, making much to this purpose and in this effect:
Euripide.
Who sometime was most like the form divine,
And now to form human convert again:
Is come to Cyrces fountaynes clear and fine.
And Ismenius River: there to live does daine.
Nevertheless, Fortune shortly after somewhat returning in his favor,
restoring his power, which in his first estate seemed to be clearly or very
near extinguished, purposed by a singular benefit worthy memory, in
restoring it to his first and ancient liberty, to win the benevolence and
love of the city of Thebes.

In the same season, news were brought him, how that Deiphile governor of the
city of Athens was dead, Deiphil.
and another (according to their customs and orders) placed in his room, and
that they were revolted and rebelled against Demetre. And when they understood
his power to be greater than they supposed, they sent into Macedon, to King
Pyrrhe, to desire his aid, whereat Demetre was so angry, to see that City so
often times rebel, which he so many times had conquered: and to be so lightly
from him revolted, which he always had so gently and courteously entreated,
that he incontinent with his whole power departed thence to sea, and went so
besiege it. But after he had been there certain days, Crathe the Philosopher,
Crathes.
a man then in great authority and renoumed in the city, came with the
Citizens Ambassadoures toward him, and by diverse reasons persuaded him to
raise his siege and depart, and take some other enterprise in hand which
might be more profitable. At whose persuasions Demetre having another
enterprise in his head, quieted him self, and went his way. And incontinent
assembled his ships and all his men of war, to the number of.xj. thousand
able men or more, and with them speedely sailed into Asie, to the intent to
win from Lysimache the Countries of Lydie and Carry. But as he drew near the
city of Mylette, Milet.
he met Euridice, Euridice.
sister to Phile, his late wife, bringing Ptolomaide, whom Ptolome by Seleuke
his mean had granted him for his wife, and there forthwith by the consent of
Euridice espoused her. After the celebratio^ of the marriage, he went about his
enterprises, and at his arrival took by assault many cities, the rest without
resistance rendered: amongs which the city of Sardes, Sardes.
garrisoned by Lysimache his Soldiers was one, which with the army and
treasure they had of his in keeping, came and yielded to Demetre. But after he
understood that Agathocles, Agathocles,
Lysimache his son, came with a mighty power that way against him, he
departed thence into Phrygie, thinking that if he could get and enjoy the
country of Armenie, he might after easily trouble the Region of Mede, and
thereby bring the hier Provinces under his subjection. And during the time that
he marched through the plain country, Agathocles daily pursued him so near,
that they had many skirmishes together, wherein Demetre had always the better.
Nevertheless, he see many discommodities which hindered him from the attayning
the chief and principal matter of his enterprise. The one was the great lack
and want of victuals, both for men and horse. Wherefore the Soldiers seeing
them in that necessity, doubted he would lead the^ into Armenie, but there
chanced him an other mishap. For as he passed over the river of Lis, The River
Lis.
a great number of his men which knew not well the depth, swamme over: whereat
the rest were so angry, that they would neither obey any within or without
the camp, and that which was worse, they with evil and oultragious words,
reproched Demetre. And there was found set upon his Pauillion written in a
table these words: O thou son of good father Antigone, into what region will thou now carry us? Finally when he see the famine more and more daily increase
and augmente, he thought it most expedient and necessary, considering the
necessity of the time, to depart, that with the loss of eight thousand
Soldiers, he retired into the city of Therse. Therse.
And because that Country was subject to Seleuke, he was careful to look
about him, that his men should not spoil the Country, whereby he might
provoke Seleuke his indignation against him, whose puissaunce was very strong,
but especially at that time, because he had such great affairs in hand,
which was impossible for him to compass, considering the necessity and
poverty of his people. And Agathocles so guarded the passages of the river
Tygre, that he was every way enclosed. Whereupon considering the danger he
was in, he determined to sly toward Seleuke, but before he would so do, he
wrote unto him his pitiful letters, containing all his misfortunes and
adversities, grievously complaining his miserable estate, praying him to have
pity and compassion of so wretched a man, his familiar, and near allie, who
already had had so many adversities, that his very mortal enemies thereof
ought to have compassion and pity. These letters received, Seleuke having
pity and compassion of one so noble a personage, by fortune come into such
calamity and misery, writ to his Officers and Lieutenaunts in those
quarters, that they should use and entreat him, as apperteyned unto so noble a
Prince: and farther, to call back the men of war which pursued him. But after
that Procley, a sage and wise man, and one of Seleuke his counsel, had told
him that it was not expedient he should nourishe and mainteyne Demetre his men
of war, nor yet to guie occasion to a Prince and Chieftayne of war, and so
Noble a warrior, to tarry long within his countries, he grew marvelous
suspicious, and by and by altered his opinion. For men (quod he) ought not to
make light account of so quarrelous a man, which has always invented and
devised strange and hie enterprises, and chiefly of one in so great
adversity, which were enough to move a man of small courage, to enterprise and
execute a very great oultrage, to his best and dearest friend. These
persuasions so moved Seleuke, that he levied a sufficient army, and with great
diligence entered the country of Cilice. When Demetre heard thereof, he was
wonderfully abashed and astonished to see so sodayn a mutation and change, and
so speedy a return. Wherefore he with his army, retired into the strongest
places of the mount Thaure, and sent toward Seleuke his Ambassadoures,
praying of him aid and help, for the obtaining and getting some principality
and Seigniorie in some of the provinces near hand, which had no King, wherein
he might stay him self, end his banishement, and there lead the rest of his
life, and mainteyne his army: and further, furnishe him and his people with
victuals, for want whereof sore distressed and in great need: and not to suffer
that one of his familiars and poor and miserable allie to live (to his great
dishonor) under the power and subjection of his enemies. Whereupon Seleuke
greatly suspecting, answered him: That he was content, Demetre and his army
should remain two months in the country of Laconie: always provided, that
he send certain his principal friends for hostages. When Demetre understood
this answer, he then wholly dispaired, seeing him self on every side
enclosed and environed with Seleuke his garrisons, and out of hope, by prayers
or entreatie to urge him. Wherefore he turned al his despair into a rage, and
determined to war and fight with him: and thereupon descended into the playnes,
where he made great incursions and robberies, wasting the plain and champion
Country: and after came and encamped so near Seleuke, that they daily
escarmoushed together, in which Demetre had always the better. And at last, as
they were one day arranged in order of battle ready to fight: after Demetre
had repulsed and discomfited certain armed charriots, he bravely put all the
rest of Seleuke his army to flight. And all at once with all possible speed
marched against Seleuke Soldiers, keeping the passages of Syrie, whom he
likewise without great resistaunce incontinent chased and erpulsed.

After the victory by Demetre won on Seleuke, certain of his Soldiers (by
reason of a disease which happened him) forsake him: but he with the rest still
warring upon Seleuke, is at last vanquished, and enforced to render, and in
the end kept as a prisoner.

The.x. Chapter.
OF this victory were Demetre and his Soldiers so proud and cruel, that
they daily presented battaill to Seleuke. But he, who feared Demetre his hazard
and fortune, then very miserable, yet because she again somewhat favored
him, and advanced him to an hier degree of prosperity, turned back Lysimache
his soldiers by him sent in his aid, for that he had no great trust or
confidence in them. And with the rest of his own, kept him in the places of
most advantage, not meaning to fight. In this sort began Demetre to get
again courage and strength. But as he stood upon the point to exploite some
notable matter, he was suddenly with a grievous malady (which troubled and
hindered al his enterprises) taken. For his Soldiers who through victory
had gotten courage, and in good hope to work wounders, seeing their
chieftayne so sore sick, faynted again, so that some fled from the army:
some rendered to the enemy: and other thinking by strange and uncouth ways to
retire home, villanously died. Notwithstanding when Demetre with much a do,
had in.xl. days recovered his health, he with the men which remained, forcibly
entered the country of Cilice, ouerrunning and spoiling every where: and in the
end encamped in so hie a place, that the enemy being a great way of, might
easily see them. When night came, he without noise departed with his army, and
passed the mount Aman, and after descended to the foot of the mountain, The
Mount Aman.
into the plain, and there spoiled and wasted all, hard to the city of
Cyriste. Cyriste.
But shortly after, Seleuke, who fair and easily pursued him, encamped near
him. Whereupon Demetre was right glad, thinking that that happened well for
his purpose, to surprise him in such sort as he had determined to do: and in
the night at such time as he thought Seleuke and his men were at rest and a
sleep, and doubted nothing, he put all his host in arms, and came straight
upon the Camp of the enemy to assail them are they were provided.
Nevertheless, he was not so soon approached the said ca^pe, but that certain of
the scoultes were come in extreme haste, to advertise Seleuke of his coming,
who at the news all dismayed, suddenly arose and took his gown and slippers,
and ran out of his Tent, crying alarm, alarm, making the Trumpettes sound
to arms, exhorting and praying the Captains, lustely to resist such an
enraged beast. But when Demetre knew by the noise in the enemies camp, that
his enterprise was discovered, he would not attempt Fortune but retired. Soon
after, Seleuke with ensigns displayed, assailed his camp: and because Demetre
would show that he was no whit abashed or afeard, he sent out a band of his
Soldiers against the enemy, which so lustily charged a corner of Seleuke his
battle, that they stood at a stay whyther to tarry or fly. Which thing
Seleuke seeing, and knowing the danger of the case and his estate, threw of
his headpece, and fiercely on horsbacke galloped hard to the forefronte,
showing him self barefaced to them all, praying them to return to the
battle, saying he had long absented him from them, not for want of good will,
or fear of Demetre, but to obey those who were his good and loyal friends.
Then his Soldiers through these exhortations were so encouraged and
emboldened, and chiefly because they see and beheld the face and Majesty of
their King, that they incontinent returned bravely to the battle, and so
impetuously recharged the enemy, that Demetre being well mounted, and seeing
him not able to abide the violence of his power, got out of the camp, and
upon the spur fled hard to the Amanipiles: and immediately from thence with
a few of his own folks got into a forest hard by, and there tarried till
night: to the end to get to the Port of Caune, The port Caune.
where his Navy rode, trusting to find it and his friends who had charge
thereof there, and from thence to go hier: but considering his want of money to
pay for victualles by the way, he was enforced to take another deliberation.
And being in this imagination and thought, one of his household servants, named
Sosignes, came to him and said, Sosignes.
that he had yet.iij. hundred pieces of gold sowed within his girdle, which he
trusted would bear his charge to the sea side. And as they were by night
coming out of ye forest, they had espied a far the fires in the enemies
camp, so that they were constrained to alter their determination and purpose,
and return from whence they came, being thereby disseuered, but not all: For
certain left him, and they which tarried, had much a do to follow: amongs whom
was one, who was so bold to say unto him, that he must now of necessity,
yield to Seleuke, whereat he was so sorrowful and troubled, that he drew out his
sword to have killed himself, and without stay had done it, if his trusty and
loving friends had not let him, and forthwith bereft him his sword,
praying him so to advise and counsel with them, that they might save them
selves together, and not wilfully to kill and destroy him self: with which
words he was well quieted. And after they had long debated their matters, he
in the end by persuasion of his friends was content to send toward Seleuke
some of them, signifying that he was willing, frankly to yield his life and all
that Fortune had left him, to his pleasure. Of which Ambassade was Seleuke
right joyous, and by report, said these words: Certes, Fortune does not so
much for Demetre in saving of him, as for me. For over and besides many great
good turns and honors by her to me done, she has now given power and
liberty to show my liberality and courtesy toward my familiar and allie,
who is a man of so great virtue, prowess and renown, that I repute and take
it for the chiefest felicity that ever happened me. He after caused a Pauilion
and Lent, and all other furniture apperteyning to a mighty Prince, to be
prepared and made ready in the most honorable and pompous wise he could
devise. Now had he in his house a servant named Apollonides, who long had used
Demetre his companis, whom he sent unto him, charging him to say, that he
might without fear freely come to his friend and allie. After Seleuke had
given him this in charge, a few of his men, at the beginning, and after a great
number made them ready to ride, and meet with Demetre, every man studying and
devising to do him the greatest honor he could: thinking that he being so
great and renoumed a personage and allie to Seleuke, should incontinent have
all the whole authority about him. But it happened quite contrary, for that
pity and compassion turned into enimitie. Because certain villains who ruled
and had authority about Seleuke, fearing that Demetre his coming would
thrust them by, with many surmised tales put sundry suspicions into his head,
saying, that it was not meet to suffer so valiant and renowned a Prince, a
conductor and leader in wars to come in the view of his army, because it was
to be feared that his presence might be an occasion to make some commotion and
mutenie in his Camp. In the mean while was Apollonides and the rest which
accompanied him, come to Demetre, and had made report of Seleuke his courteous
and gracious purpose for him, who thereof right joyous, gave them marvelous
good and gentle enterteynement, and there reioysed and chered together. And
above the rest Demetre who before reputed his fortune miserable so shamefully
to yield him self, understanding by the report of his very familiars, the
good and gentle words of Seleuke, merely and joyfully went toward him as to
his ancient friend and Allie. But in these enterfactes Pausanias sent by
Seleuke with a thousand horse met with him, Pausanias.
and so soon as he approached, encompassed him and put back all the rest,
which were with him: and after, as from the mouth of Seleuke, said that as
then he might not come to him, but that he had charge to bring him to an other
place. So he brought him into a castle of Syrie, named Cheronnese: Cheronness.
and leaving there with him a great guard, returned toward Seleuke.

Antigone for delivery of his Father Demetre, makes great speed, but in the
end, Demetre dies in prison, and of the honors done to him after his death.

The.xj. Chapter.
AS Demetre lay prisoner in the castle of Cheronnese, very straightly kept
and strongly guarded, yet Seleuke caused him to be very well entreated, and
gave him also so much liberty to sport him as might be. For the lodging was
honorable and royal, and therein great orchyardes and gardens full of
marvelous fair and pleasant trees and other delices, in which he might at
his pleasure, solace him: and left with him his own servant and familiar
friends which served and accompanied him at his commandment. And they
oftentimes repayring to Seleuke, and eftsoons returning toward Demetre,
reported unto him all the good and courteous language and communication by
Seleuke said and talked in his behalf, exhorting and praying him to make good
chere, and to hope well of his deliverance: and not to mistrust the bounty
and liberality of Seleuke. They farther declared unto him for certain, that
Seleuke looked for the coming of Antioche his son, and Stratonice his wife,
daughter to the said Demetre, whom he had sent for, to the end they should
have the honor and thank for his deliverance, and that after their coming
he should be set at liberty to go whyther it pleased him. Notwithstanding
Demetre seeing him self in this captivity, and void of all hope of
deliverance, sent certain messangers to the Governors of Athens and Corinth,
his subjects, to signify unto them, that they never after that time should
give any credit to his seal or letters, but hold and take him for dead. He
moreover willed them as they had always loved him and kept their faith to
him, that they would in the best sort they might, conserve the Realm and
estate to Antigone his son. Which Antigone after he had heard the pitiful
news of his fathers captivity in the city of Patras, became thereof so
sorrowful, Patras.
as he could not be more. And incontinent when he had made him his mourning
gown to mourn, he sent letters and Ambassadors into every country, toward
the other Kings, praying and requiring them to make intercession to Seleuke,
for delivery of his Father. He sent also Ambassadoures to Seleuke, praying him
to take all such goods as Fortune had left him for the ransom of his father,
and besides offered, if it so liked him, to come him self to be an hostage or
pledge for his said father. He farther desired him presently to show and
declare his humanity and courtesy, wherein he had ever surmounted all the rest
of the Kings. The like request made all the other Kings, except Lysimache, who
was so cruel, The cruelty of Lysimache.
that where the rest entreated for his deliverance, he not only refused to
make that request, but contrariwise offered Seleuke a great sum of money to
put him to death. Whereunto Seleuke gave no ear, but blaming and detesting his
cruelty and inhumanitie, refused his request and money. Nevertheless he still
looked for the coming of Antioche his son, and Stratonice, because he would
at their requests and pleasure deliver him: to the end, they should for that
deliverance receive all the thank, favor, and good will at his hands.
Howbeit, the matter (under color of long looking for them) was so
procrastinate, that Demetre in the end had no need of their help. For although
he see yt misery inevitable which happened him, yet determined he patiently to
endure and abide it, and after her coming, he made semblaunce that he meekely
bare it. And although from the first hour he was brought in to that place, he
in hunting, running, and exercising his person, as well on foot as on
horsbacke passed the time, yet nevertheless after a while he held and kept
an other kind of life. For, where before he took pleasure in travel, he now
gave him self wholly to rest, and desired nothing but banquets, feasts and
other such like pleasures, done without travel of the body: were it by that
mean to pass away his melancholy humor, or else because it seemed he had
found out the right order of life, which he always desired: detesting and
abhorring his labors and travels heretofore taken, and the dangers and
miseries which he through ambition and vain glory had oftentimes adventured.
For to that only end had he beaten and traveled the Seas and all Countries,
hoping ever after to take his rest and ease: whereby he might use the remnaunt
of his life in pleasures and delights, which ease and rest he there found,
unlooked for. And surely, these are the ends and issues of the wars which
vicious and covetous Princes so excessiuely desire, Against ambitious Princes.
and with great labor and travel follow, placing their whole pleasure and
felicity in them: wherein after my judgment they not only greatly err, in
reputing vices for virtues: but also in desiring to live an idle and voluptuous
life, seek after, and follow those things which are quite contrary to
pleasure. But after Demetre had about three years been at Cheronnese: what
with banquets, rest and ease, pleasures, and idleness, he fell into so grievous
a malady, that in the end he died thereof: when he had lived. lxiiij.
years. Whereupon the news soon after were throughout the whole world
diuulged and spread abroad, and so many as understood it, greatly blamed
Seleuke, for being so ungentle toward his Allie. Him self also was very
pensive and heavy in that he had greater suspicion of his friend and Allie
than needed, and showed him self more wretched and fearful than Dronichete
the Thracian, a barbarous and uncivil man, who after he had taken Lysimache,
frankly and freely set him again at liberty. Howbeit, he commanded, that
for his sepulture and burial all the honors, ceremonies and solemnities that
were possible should be made, which would be to tedious to recite, and seem
rather a Tragedy than an History. In so much that when his son Antigone was
advertised of his death, he with his whole Navy went to Sea and sailed into
Syrie, to get together his Fathers Ashes. But being about the Isles, he met
certain messangers which brought them, of who^ he received them and enclosed it
in a box of massiue gold, and set it in the Poupe of his ship Royal, making
his course directly to sail to Corinthe. And as he sailed alongest the Cities
of the country of Cheronnese, the Citizens with solemn processions came
out, some bearing Crowns of gold, other brought Mourners to accompany the
dead body. In this sort was borne and accompanied Demetre his body in the very
top of the poupe of the ship which was covered with purple, and crowned with
gold, having also about it a great number of lusty young Soldiers, all armed
in white, which renewed the remembrance of the dead. He had also an excellent
Musician, named Xenophante, who in all sweetness and hermonie, soong the
Psalms and songs accustomed in such a case, and the Gallie sclaues, with so
great consonance haled their ores, that they answered Xenophante his song:
Xenophante.
and al with one voice, made dolorons and lamentable noise, very pitiful to
hear. Finally, when he was arrived at the Port of Corinth, the towns men
came out to mete it, and seeing the young Antigone in mourning apparel, al
sad, and besprent with tears, were so moved with pity, that they all at one
present gave a marvelous lamentable dolorous shoute and cry. From thence was
the body carried into the City of Demetriade, which he him self founded, and
called after his own name, and it peopled with the places near about, as if
it had been in his own propre domicile. Of the said King Demetre descended a
right noble and honorable ligne or steme. For he left behind him by his wife
Phile, Antigone and Stratonice: and by Deidame, Alexander, who lived in Egypt.
Over and besides these, he left two other young me^, both named Demetre, whereof
the one named Demetre the long, he had by his wife Illiriade: and the other he
got of Ptolomayde, who after reigned Lord and King of Cyrene. There are some
also which say, that Barrabe begotten of Euridice, was likewise his son.
Thus after his death the succession and posterity of the said Demetre
obtained and enjoyed the realm of Macedone, until the reign of King Perse,
whom the Romans after vanquished and expulsed.

Thus ends the History of the Successors of Alexander, extracte out of
Diodore the Sicilian, and some part out of the wise Plutarque, which conteyneth
their acts and iestes from the death of Alexander the great, until the death
of Demetre son to the great Antigone. And whosoever lysteth to read and know
the end of the other, may read the History of Troge Pompey, abridged by
Iustine.
FINIS.
The Table of the Chapters contained in this present volume.
The first Book.
AFter the death of Alexander the great, Aride his brother is established King,
and Perdicas appointed his Governor. Chapter.1. fol. 1 Perdicas taking upon
him the government of the Realm, deuideth the Satrapies amongs the Princes.
Chapter.2. fol. 2 Perdicas sends Python against ye Greeks rebelling in the
hye countries, whom he overthrows. And incidentlie the description of the
site and compass of all Asie. Chap. 3. fol. 4 Of the wars that the
Athenia^s made against Antipater, called the Lamian war. Cap. 4. fol. 6
Certain of the Princes upon whom Perdicas had bestowed the government of the
Provinces, go about to Seiniorize them. Cap. 5. fol. 9 Leonathe coming to the
rescous of Antipater, is by the Athenians overthrown and slain. But after the
said. Athenians are by Clythe chased and overthrown at Sea. Cap. 6. fol. 10
Perdicas overcomes Ariarathes, and restores to Eumenes the country of
Cappadoce. Cap. 7. fol. 11 Antipater in fight vanquisheth the Grecian army,
puts in subjection the greater number of the cities of Greece and Athens, and
in the end restores them to liberty. Cap. 8. fol. 11 Of the exploits which
Thymbron and Ptolome did in the wars of Cyrene. Cap. 9. fol. 13 Perdicas
entering Piside, takes the Lamadians prisoners, and by siege so distresseth the
Isaurians that they kill them selves. And at the entreatie of Antigone,
Antipater and Cratere which warred upon the Etholians, concludes a peace
with them, because they would go against Perdicas. Cap. 10. fol. 15 Of ye
transporting the body of Alexander into Egypt, out of Babylon. The form and
fashion of the chariot with the Pomp and solempnitie thereof. Cap. 11. fol. 17
Eumenes is in battaill overthrown, and Cratere slain. Cap. 12. fol. 19 How
the soldiers of Perdicas after he had brought them into Egypt, slew him. And
how Python and Aride were chosen Governors of the Kings. Cap. 13. fol. 21
After the death of Perdicas, the Macedonians flea all his kynne and friends in
the army, and adiudge Attale and Alcete with their abettours and friends,
enemies and rebels. Of the retire of Attale into the city of Tire, and
consequently, how he a fresh assembleth all Perdicas friends which are
escaped. Cap. 14. fol. 23 The Etholians to put Antipater from his enterprise,
enter Thessalie, who by the Acarnanians are constrained to return into their
country. And in what sort Polispercon conquereth the country of Thessaly.
Cap. 15. fo. 24 Antipater being constituted Governor and Protector of the
Kings, a new deuideth the Satrapies. Cap. 16. fol. eodem Antigone vanquisheth
Eumenes, and besieges the City of Nore. Cap. 17. fol. 25 Of the co^quests
which Ptolome made on the countries of Phenice and Celosirie. Cap. 18. fol. 27
Antigone enterpriseth wars against Alcete and Attale, and discomfiteth them.
Cap. 19. fol. 27 After the death of Antipater, Polispercon is ordained
Governor of the Kings, and Cassander enterpriseth to expulse him the
Government. Cap. 20. fol. 29 Antigone understanding of Antipater his death,
takes upon him the government of the Empire of Asie, and sends to Eumenes
desiring his return. Ca. 2^. fo. 30 Aride is repulsed from the siege of the
City of Cizice. Cap. 22. fol. 31 Antigone commenceth war against Aride,
governor of Phrigie, and against Clite, Lord of Lydie. And in the end openly
proclaymeth him self enemy to the Kings, and enjoys one part of Asie. Cap.
23. fo. 31 Of diverse adventures which happened Eumenes, and of his
deliverance from the siege of Nore. ca. 24. fo. 32 Cassander shows him self
enemy to Polispercon, and gets to his alliance many of the Satrapes.
Polispercon by an edict Royal, restores the Cities of Greece into their
ancient liberty. Cap. 25. fol. 33 Eumenes taking part with the Kings, goes
into Cilice: and of his practices to get men of war. Cap. 26. fol. 35
Ptolome goes about to cause the Argiraspides to kill Eumenes, whom he by his
wisdom appeased, and after sends an army by sea into Phenice. Ca. 27. fo.
37 Nycanor keeping and occupying the Port of Pyre against the Athenians, is
besieged by Alexander, Polispercon his son, and of the mutenie in the city
of Athens. Cap. 28. fol. 38 Polispercon besieges Cassander in Pyrey, and
perceiving that he could not win it, departs thence and besieges the
city of Megalopolis, where by the wisdom and policy of Demades, he is at an
assault repulsed. Cap. 29. fol. 41 After Clyte has overthrown at Sea
Cassander, he is through the wisdom of Antigone, soon after discomfited, and
finally slain in his flight. Cap. 30. fol. 43 Eumenes understanding that
Antigone is coming against him, departs out of the country of Cilice. And
when he has by his wisdom and industry escaped in the way the hands and
ambushes of Seleuke, he comes into Perse. Cap. 31. fol. 44 The Athenians make
a perfect amity and inviolable peace with Cassander and allie with him.
After, he kills Nycanor, and brings the greater number of the cities of
Greece to his alliance. Cap. 32. fol. 44
Of the second book.
OF certain matters both by the Romans and the Crotonians exploited in
Italy. Cap. 1. fol. 45 Olympias, Alexander his mother, by mean of Polispercon
obtayneth the government of the Realm of Macedone, causes King Phillip and
Euridice his wife to be executed, and besides uses many other cruelties. Cap.
2. fol. 46 Eumenes passes the River of Tygre, and maugre Seleuke and Pytho^,
marches into Susiane, and after commands the Satrapes of the higher Asie,
with their whole power to mete him. Cap. 3. fol. 47 The Satrapes of the hier
country of Asie, to resist Python join together: and of the power they
assembled. Capt. 4. fol. 48 Eumenes through his wisdom appeaseth the
dissension of the Satrapes stryuing for the principality, and pays his men
of war. And of the preparation which Antigone for his part makes. Cap. 5.
fol. 49 How eight prisoners, Alcete his soldiers, through their great prowes
escape, and take the Town wherein they are emprisoned, and in the end again
taken. Cap. 6. fol. 49 Antigone being come into Babylon, and joining we Seleuke
and Python, is by Eumenes repulsed the passage of Tygre, to the great loss and
slaughter of his people. Cap. 7. fol. 50 Of Antigone his coming with his army
into the Country of Mede, and the dangers and hard passage he has upon the
way. Cap. 9. fol. 52 Eumenes to please his Satrapes, with the whole army
marches into the country of Perse, and by his wisdom and policy puts
Penceste, who affected the government and army, in great fear: and after
reconcileth the said Penceste, and assures him self of all the other Satrapes
and Captains. Cap. 10. fol. 53 Of the battle between Antigone and Eumenes,
and of their powers: and of their retire to winter without victory on either
side. Cap. 10. fol. 55 Eumenes burieth the dead: and of a marvelous case which
happened between two women of Inde. Cap. 12. fol. 59 Cassander understanding of
that Queen Olympias had done, with his army comes into Macedone, and
besieges the said Olympias within the City of Pidue, where the Queen in
short time is clean void of hope of all succors she looks for. Cap. 13.
fol. 57 Antigone thinking to surprise and discomfite Eumenes and his army, the
said Eumenes (through his wisdom and diligence) frustrateth his enterprise:
and by that mean saves both his Elephants and baggage. Cap. 14. fol. 58
Antigone in battaill overthrows Eumenes, puts him to death, and after
seizes on all his army. Cap. 15. fol. 60 Antigone retireth to winter in the
Country of Mede, and of the deluge or flood which that time chances in the
City of Rhodes. Cap. 16. fol. 67 Antigone by craft puts to death Python,
who begins to rebel: and gives the Satrapie of Mede to Orondonate: and
likewise vanquisheth certain other Median rebels. Cap. 17. fol. 68 Antigone
coming into Perse, and there received as Lord and Seigniour of all Asie,
deuideth the Satrapies thereof: and after goes to the city of Suse, and
takes all the treasure he there finds. Cap. 18. fol. 69 Cassander takes by
composition Olympias, and after puts her to death. Cap. 19. fol. 70 After
the death of Olympias, Cassander espouseth Thessalonice, Alexander the great
his sister, and foundeth the city of Cassander. And after he has put in safe
keeping Roxanne and Alexander his son, he goes into the country of Beote,
and reedifieth the city of Thebes. Cap. 20. 71 Of the foundation and fortunes
of the city of Thebes in Beote. Cap. 21. 72 After Cassander has taken and
subdued certain cities of Peloponnese, and understands of the coming of
Alexander, Polispercon his son, against him, he returns into Macedone. Cap.
22. 73 Upon Antigone his arrival in Babylon, Seleuke perceiving that he
seeks occasions to expulse or kill him, flies into Egypt. Cap. 23. 74 Of
Seleuke his practice and devise, touching the alliance and confederacy betwixt
Ptolome, Cassander, and Lysimache, against Antigone. Of their defiaunce they
send him, and of his preparation against them. Also of his siege against the
city of Tire in Phenice. Cap. 24. 74 Of the wisdom and virtue of Phile,
Antipater his daughter. Cap. 25. 77 Antigone wins to his alliance
Polispercon and Alexander his son, and by a decree by the Macedonians made,
denounces Cassander an enemy, and after takes the city of Tire. Cap. 26. 77
Of the practizes, devises and provision by Ptolome and Seleuke on the one
part, and Antigone on the other part, made by Sea in the country of Asie.
Cap. 27. 78 Of certain exploites of war, by Cassander and his soldiers in
Peloponnese and other parts of Greece done. And how Alexander Polispercon his
son reuolteth. After of a great victory which Ptolome his Navy has against
Antigone his Navy in Cilice. And after, Ptolome and Antigone come to a parle:
and of certain exploites of war between the Romans and Samnites. Cap. 28.
79 Of diverse exploites which Aristodeme one of Antigone his captains, does
against Alexander, Polispercon his son in Peloponnese^ and Alexander being
slain, his wife through her prowes, takes upon her the government. Cap. 29.
80 Cassander making amity with the Acarnanians and Illirians, and reducing to
his alliance certain other Cities, returns into Macedone: and the Etholians
taking the city of Arginye in Acarnanye, slay and kill the inhabitaunts
thereof. Cap. 30. 81 Two bands of Cassanders which he sends to Lemne and
Carry, are by the soldiers of Antigone overthrown. Cap. 31. 82 Antigone
gyuing order about the affairs in Syrie, goes into Phrigie: and of a notable
victory which one of his captains wins at Sea on the enemy. Ca. 32. 83
The Romans losing a great battaill against the Samnites, people the City of
Locres with their men. Cap. 33. 83 Lysimache subdueth the cities of Pont and
Thaure, which rebel: and after vanquisheth the Scythes, and supplies by
Antigone sent into the same Country. Cap. 34. 84 Thelesphore one of Antigone
his Captains restores the greater number of the cities of Peloponnese to
liberty. And Philip a captayn of Cassanders, vanquisheth the Etholians, and
the King of Epyre, which came to their aid. Cap. 35. 83 Antigone apperceyuing
that he is by Cassander deceived, takes certain cities in Carry, and after
comes to a parle with Cassander. And upon little or no agreement, they
begin the war in Greece. Cap. 36. 83 The Romans win a victory on the
Samnites. And the rebellious Champanois by an agreement put them selves to
their obeisaunce. Cap. 37. 84 Ptolome and Antigone to despite one the other,
restore diverse Cities of Greece to liberty. And the same Antigone fails of
his entry into Macedone. After are entreated the matters by Ptolome^ done in
Cypres and Cilice, in the hier Syrie. Cap. 38. 85 Ptolome and Seleuke come into
Sirie against Demetre, and in battaill vanquishe him. And after Ptolome
conquereth the country of Phenice. Cap. 39. 89 Thelesphore reuolteth from
Antigone: and Alcete by the Epirots chosen King, making alliance with
Cassander, after many battailles is by his subjects slain. And Cassander
loses a battaill before the city of Apollonie in the country of Adrie. Cap.
40. 92 Seleuke through his wisdom and prowes, with a small number of men
which Ptolome had given him, conquereth the country of Babylon, together
Susiane and the rest near joining, which hold with Antigone. Cap. 41. 93
Demetre in battaill vanquisheth Cylles Ptolome his Lieutenaunt, and after
Antigone his Father comes and joins with him, and then Ptolome forsakes
the countries of Syrie and Phenice, and leaves them to the said Antigone. Cap.
42. 95 Antigone enterpriseth wars against the Nabathians, inhabiting the
deserts of Arabia: and Athaney his Captain is by them discomfited. Also after
Demetre his coming thither, he concludes a league and amity with them. Cap.
43. 96 Of the Lake Asphalte, and the marvelous nature thereof: also the
discomfiture of Antigone his people there, by the Arabians. Cap. 44. 99 Demetre
Antigone his son, at his Fathers commaudement goes to Babylon, to make
thereof a conquest, and after returns to his father. Cap. 45. 100 The
Romans under the conducte of Quinte Fabie their Dictator, win and take two
cities from the Samnites. Cap. 46. 101 After the alliance made and confirmed
between Cassander, Ptolome, Lysimache, and Antigone: Cassander puts to death
the young Alexander, and Roxanne his mother. Cap. 47. 101
Of the third Book.
OF certain aid which Cassander sends to the king of Peons: of certain
enterprises by Ptolome against Antigone, done in Phenice. How Polispercon
takes on hand to restore Hercules the son of Alexander, to the realm of
Macedone. And finally of the pitiful and lamentable death of Nycocles and his
whole family. Cap. 1. 103 Of the wars between Parisade his three children,
King of Bosphore, after his death, for the succession of the Realm, together
their deeds and gestes, and also their ends. Cap. 2. 104 Of two victories
which the Romans won against the Samnites, whereby they took many of their
Cities. Cap. 3. 107 Ptolome Prince of Egypt, wins from Antigone certain
cities, practizeth and gets to him Ptolome Nephew to Antigone, and after
puts him to death. Polispercon also through the persuasion of Cassander,
puts to death Hercules the son of Alexander. And finally of Cleomenes
death King of Lacedemon. Cap. 4. 108 Of certain victories which the Romans
have upon the Tyrrhenians and Samnites. And of certain innouations by Appie
Claudie the Roman Censor made, in contempt and defacing of the Senate and
nobles, in favor of ye communaltie. Cap. 5. 109 After Ptolome Prince of
Egypt, has restored one part of the cities of Greece to liberty, he for
despite and in recompense of their breach of promise with him, concludes a
peace with Cassander. And Cleopatre sister to Alexander the great, coming on
her way toward him, is by the commandment of Antigone, miserably slain.
Cap. 6. 110 After the taking and razing of Munichie, Demetre Antigone his
son, by his fathers commandment restores Athens, Megare, and many other
Cities of Greece to liberty: and of their liberality toward him, and the
honors they judged him worthy for that his benefit and good turn. Cap. 7.
111 Demetre, Antigone his son, vanquisheth in a battaill at Sea Ptolome,
before the city of Salamine in Cypres, and by that mean wins the whole
Isle from him. And after the said Antigone, Demetre and Ptolome take upon them
the Tytles and Dyademes of Kings. Cap. 8. 112 Antigone and Demetre his son,
with a mighty power invade Egypt both by Sea and land. And after, finding the
entry and border of the country well provided and furnished, they return
without any exploit. Cap. 9 116 Of certain exploites of war between the
Romans and Samnites. Cap. 10. 118 Demetre by the commandment of his Father,
both by Sea and land besieged the city of Rhodes. Of the great and lusty
assaults they gave, and the marvelous and honorable defense yt the Townsmen
made. Cap. 11. 119 Of two victories by the Romans had upon the Samnites.
Cap. 12. 124 Demetre at many assaults by the Rhodians repulsed, concludes a
peace. And departing thence, restores to liberty many cities of Greece. Of the
death of King Eumele of Bosphore, and the reign of Spartace his son. Cap.
13. 124 The conclusion of a peace betwixt the Romans and Samnites, and certain
other their neighbors, and of their subduing the Asculaines. Cap. 14. 130
Demetre by force and treaty takes many Cities of Greece, and diverse other
render to him: all which he restores to their ancient accustomed liberty.
Cap. 15. 130 The Tarentines desire Cleonyme, the Lacedemonian, to aid them
against the Lucaines: of the villainies and lecheries he commits, and after
two mischiefs which in one time betyde him, he retireth into Corcyre. Cap.
16. 132 Cassander and Lysimache attending aid from Ptolome and Seleuke,
begin to war upon Antigone, the one in Thessalie, the other in Asie, and
do take from him certain towns, cities and castles. Cap. 17. 133 Antigone
comes against Lysimache, and after he has him twice be sieged, and can not
get him out to battaill, they are both feign to send their Soldiers in
garrisons to winter. Cap. 18. 134 Demetre comes into Greece against Cassander,
and after certain small exploites on either side done, they grow to a
composition. That ended, Demetre goes into Hellespont, to join with his
father: and of many and diverse other things. Cap. 19. 135
Of the fourth Book.
ANtigone coming to battaill against the enemy, is through the defaulte of
his son Demetre slain. Cap. 1. 137 After this discomfiture, the Athenians
would not suffer Demetre to enter their city: and how he again gathers
together his army. After, Demetre his daughter is married to Seleuke, who
treats a marriage between Demetre and Ptolomais, daughter to King Ptolome:
and of the denial he has of two little Cities. Cap. 2. 138 Demetre at his
pleasure, takes by siege the city of Athens: of his bounty and humanity
toward them. And after besieges the city of Sparte in the country of
Laconie. Cap. 3. 140 Alexander King of Macedone, praying Demetre his aid,
goes about to betraye him, but in the end him self according to his
demerite, is by Demetre with such like practice slain, whom the Macedonians
after received and honor as their King. Cap. 4. 142 Seleuke through a fatherly
love, remitteth to Antioche his fonne, his own wife Stratonice, daughter to
Demetre, and gives to them in title and name of the realm, all the hier
Provinces. Cap. 5. 144 Demetre thrice conquereth the country of Beoce, and
city of Thebes, and chaseth King Pyrrhe out of the country of Trace. Cap. 6.
146 Demetre robbing and ouerrunning the country of the Eholians, enterpriseth
war against Pyrrhe King of Epyre, and after missing of their encountre and
meeting, either of them do all the mischief they can one to another country:
and of the renown and fame that Pyrrhe gets in that war against the
Macedonians. Cap. 7. 148 King Pyrrhe entering the country of Macedone, is by
Demetre expulsed. And after, Demetre raises a mighty power to recover his
fathers Realm, and the other Kings link together against him. And going
again to encountre Pyrrhe, who was entered Macedone, is through the mutiny of
the Macedonians, enforced to fly, and after of the division of the realm
between Pirrhe and Eysimache. Cap. 8. 150 After Demetre his flight out of
Macedone, he besieges the city of Athens, which rebelled, from whence he
departs without taking it, and goes into Asie to war on Seleuke. After he
has taken many Cities, he is so sore pressed on, that he sends toward
Seleuke, to conclude a peace, and upon the refusal, he again commenceth the
wars, and wins on him certain victories. Cap. 9. 152 After the victory by
Demetre won on Seleuke, certain of his Soldiers (by reason of a disease
which happened him) forsake him: but he with the rest still warring upon
Seleuke, is at last vanquished, and enforced to render, and in the end kept
as a prisoner. Capt. 10. 154 Antigone for delivery of his father Demetre,
makes great speed, but in the end, Demetre dies in prison, and of the
honors done to him after his death. Cap. 11. 157
The end of the Table.
Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knightrider streat, at the
sign of the Mermayd, for Humfrie Toy.

ANNO. 1569.


