PSALMS OF CONFESSION, found in the Cabinet of the most excellent King of
Portingal, Don Antonio, first of that name, written with his own hand. Wherein
the Sinner calls upon the mercy of God for his sin. Translated out of the
Latin copy, printed at Paris by Federike Morell.

LONDON, Printed by G. Bishop, R. Nuberie, and R. Barker. Anno Domini. 1596.

PSALMS OF CONFESSION, wherein the Sinner calls upon the mercy of God for
his sin.
PSALM. I.
WHo shall give water unto Esai. 9.
my head, and a fountain of tears for mine eyes, that I may be able to lament
and bewail the losses of my soul with grief agreeable thereunto? for there
is a manifest and great cause of sorrow, when with the sight of my mind I
behold mine ancient days, and my youthful years: in this meditation my
Psalm. 76.
spirit has failed me: for I Psalm. 79.
know what I was, yea rather what I should have been, and understand what I
am, and fear what I shall be: and the less I sorrow, so much the more I
fear. I would to God I sorowed more, that I might fear less. But woe to me,
O Lord, for now a long time thou smitest, and yet I sorrow not: thou call,
and yet I hear not: thou knockest, and yet I open not the bar of my heart.
The sorrows of death Psalm. 114.
compass me round about: and being filled with many sorrows without, I feel
inwardly no sorrow that may work unto salvation. And I feel not only the
sorrows of old age, but I am a man of sorrow from my youth upward, and all my
Psalm. 87.
days are full of travail and griefs: and yet I sorrow, because that always
sorowing, I Psalm. 53.
cannot sorrow. O marvelous Eccles. 2.
and unspeakable wisdom of the heavenly Physician! O wonderful goodness of
the high King! O singular benefit of him that is the giver of all good things!
for thou, O God, give unto me sorrow, least I perish in pleasures, and that I
may learn to rejoice without offense: thou give me sorrow for a time, that I
may not suffer everlasting pains: thou afflictest my body, that thou may
save my soul: thou scourgest, that thou may heal: and killest, that thou
may quicken. But alas, unwillingly do I receive thy salve out of the
secret hand of thy mercy: and being ignorant, do not acknowledge ye
sovereign medicine of healthful sorrows, wherewith thou art mercifully severe
against me, and how do I acknowledge it. If I earnestly desire to be delivered
from sorrows, who without sorrows cannot be healed? for how shall he be healed
without sorrows, who by delights is made sick? Therefore, O Lord, make me to
sorrow, and teach me a saving sorrow, that my grief may be turned into joy,
John 16. Psalm. 12.
and that I may rejoice in thy salvation, saying: Glory be to the Father, and
to the Son, and to the holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, etc.

PSALM. II.
Days pass, and years slide away: but I unhappy man, who after so many
corruptions of my soul, after so many most grievous and long falls, do not
yet repent, nor am afflicted for my sins, neglect the often falling again
into them, care not for rising from them, heaping new unto old, and greater
unto less. What shall I do, O Lord? or whither shall I go, Psalm. 138
when my last time shall come? where shall I be hidden from the countenance of
thy wrath? or whither shall I fly away from thy face, when thou shall call me
unto judgment, and require of me account of the talent given unto me? What
shall I answer unto thee? or how shall I excuse my negligence, when thou
shall sit upon the throne of thy Majesty, and command me to give account of my
stewardship to Matthew. 5. Luke 16.
the uttermost farthing? Surely I will say, Lord, I suffer violence, answer
for me: for who Esai 38.
am I that I should answer unto thee in judgment? But what if thou compel me
to answer? I will say as a man confounded, fearing, and trembling: O Lord, I
have gained Matt. 25.
nothing thereupon. Yea I have Luke 15.
wickedly and vainly consumed thy talent, and by loose living I have spent thy
goods. surely I have spoken foolishly, by saying living: for I should better
have said by dying. But I then thought I lived, and lo I was dead, because I
lived without thee my true life. And if I lived at any time with thee, I scarce
remember it. Yea, if the life of a wicked man, may rather be called death, then
life, I may worthily say, that I sooner began to die, then live. For I did not
perfectly understand what life was, when I had forsaken thee that art the life
of lives, and the fountain of life, and malice did supply mine age in
manifold wickedness. I was scarce come out of my mothers womb, and already
was a sinner. Coming into the world, being yet ignorant of sin, I did
bewail the sin wherein my parents begotte me: neither did I altogether leave
bewailing others sins, when I committed mine own which I know, and did not
be wayle. Being an infant, I followed iniquities, and spent my childehood,
wherein I S. August.
should have been pure, vnpurely: there breathed sinful vapors from the
slimie concupiscence of my flesh, and the spring of my youth, and did shadow my
heart, that it could not discern light from darkness, and the cleerenes of
the mind, from the mist of lust: and traitrous and crafty pleasures did carry
my weak forgetful loose age, into ye headlong rocks of lust, so as I boiled
up in whorings, desiring to be satisfied in hell: from my childehood I grew to
growing years, neither was I sooner growing toward youth, then my wickedness
did grow ripe: and I was bold to grow wild in diverse and shadowie lusts, by
the which being drawn and entised with the gulf of wickedness, I was James
1. 1. Tim. 6.
drowned to death and destruction. The evil and wicked days of my growing
years passed on, and I grew toward youth: but I returned backward so much
filthy in vanities, as I was elder. I was a young man, and came to be a man:
but vice always flourished in me in stead of virtue. I waxed old and gray,
and did not walk in thy ways: but as a child of an hundred years, being now
an old man, I live childishly. Where then have I been at any time innocent
that I would be judged of thee according unto the time of mine innocence,
though thou did appoint it me unto judgment? For Psalm. 118. Psalm. 61. Job.
9.
thou art just, O Lord, and righteous is thy judgment, and thou renderest to
every man according to his works. And I fear all mine, because they are the
works of darkness: and I have been a worker of iniquity from the
beginning, and have always willingly followed the paths of the unrighteous. I
have wallowed in sin as the swine in filthiness, and as he was fed with
coddes: so was I delighted with filthy and vain words, and grieved with
earnest and profitable sayings. I did communicate with those that wrought
iniquity, and did banquet with the chief of them, and did glory in sin,
Psalm. 51.
being mighty in iniquity. I loved to excuse, and could not accuse my self,
and made heavy my heart: and the more incurable is my sin, for that I did
not think my self to be a sinner. Neither did I only not seek a medicine for
my soul, that was sick unto death, but refused it being offered: yea, with an
vnreuerent and untamed mind was wroth against them, that would minister it unto
me. I persecuted them that reproved me, and embraced them that spoke
pleasingly to me, and was delighted in their speeches, that had not their heart
right unto thee. I studied devises and lies, and in all things loved rather
darkness John 3.
then light. Behold, O Lord, I have declared my self unto thee: this is the
course of my life, wherein I have deserved thy wrath. This will I answer unto
thee, when thou shall ask me of me: But do Psalm. 25.
not remember the offenses of my youth, nor my ignorances, O Lord: and enter
not into Psalm. 142
judgment with thy servant, for no living creature shall be justified in thy
sight: but if thou Esai. 61.
wilt enter, because thou art a God that love judgment, do judgment unto
me, but not justice, and judge me according Psalm. 18.
to the judgment of those that love thy name, that I may sing unto thee mercy
Psalm. 106.
and judgment. Remember, O Lord, that though I am wicked, yet am I thy
servant, and the son of thy handmaide, Psalm. 81.
and do not look unto the multitude of my miseries, but unto the greatness of
thy mercies: Abak. 3.
and when thou shall be angry against me for my wickedness: remember thy
mercy, that thou be not angry with me for ever, but have mercy upon thy
afflicted servant, that my soul may praise thee, and confess thy
mercifulness. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, etc.

PSALM. III.
VVOe unto me, O wretched man, because I have made my Redeemer angry against
me, and have rebelliously neglected his Law. I have willingly forsaken the
right way, and as a sheep that Psalm. 62.
refuses his shepherd, I have been carried far and wide round about through
dry vnwatered places, wandering in the wilderness, and not in the way. I have
gone to all rough inaccessable places, and every Sapi. 3.
where was anguish and tribulation. I have been wearied in the way of
iniquity and perdition, and have walked in hard ways, seeking rest, and
finding none, because I did not seek thee, O Lord, but was in a barren land,
in the country of death, where is no rest, but continual labor and
affliction of the spirit dwells there. When I was in honor, I did Psalm. 48.
not understand: but as one of the flock of brute beasts, my dwelling was
among the walks of wild beasts. I dwelt in anguish with pleasures, and among
thorns did I make my bed, and slept in death, and hoped for rest in torments.
Now therefore what shall I do? whither shall I turn my self in these so
great dangers? All the hopes of my youth are fallen down, and I am made like
one that has suffered shipwreck, who having lost his merchandise, swimmeth
away naked, being tossed with wind and sea. I am carried far from the haven,
and do not take hold of the way of salvation, but am carried away on the left
hand. The enemy has placed nets for me which way soever I went, and snares
for my feet: and I despised them, and walked securely in slipperie places, and
flattered my self in sins. I thought youth was not held by the law of
death, and being deceived by this confidence, I followed the filthy desires of
my flesh, and gave the raines beyond all measure to sensuality, following it
whither soever the force thereof did carry me: and said, a fool in my heart,
wherefore Psalm. 5^.
do thou think of the end before the middle? thou have many days yet
remaining, and may be converted when thou listest. So waxed I old in
sins, and a most wicked custom was turned into nature: and now like a
bondslaue unto Barnard.
sin, I serve as it were inchained, and as a mad man haling his own flesh,
seeks to hurt himself, all reason of deliberation being quenched: so I more
grievously and dangerously have hated mine own soul: for the impenitence of
my heart, and obstinate wilfulness, has laid violente and wicked hands upon
me, and has torn in pieces and exulcerated my soul: and so having brought
unto my self the heaps of hell, every day more and more according to my
hardness and impenitent Romans 2.
heart, I do whoord wrath against the day of wrath. I have made trial
sometime to shake off the old yoke, but am not able, because it cleaves to my
bones. O that at length it may fall from my neck, that I may love thee though
late, it shall surely sal away, if thou O Lord command, and send me help from
above. I confess I have not deserved it, but thou, O most gracious giver, who
make the Sun to rise indifferently upon the good and bad, and grauntest
temporal blessings to the unworthy, even when they ask them not: how can
thou deny spiritual things to those that shall require them? Have mercy
therefore upon me, O Lord, and fulfill the desire of a poor man, thou that art
rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.
and art wont cheerfully to Romans 12.
have mercy, and do purge the will from evil custom, and hear the
gronings of Psalm. 101.
those that are bound, and loosest us from the bands which we have made unto
our selves, unless we raise up against thee the horns of false liberty. Give
thy right hand unto the Job 14. Psalm. 36.
work of thine own hands, that when I fall, I may not be bruised, and being
bruised, I may not be drawn into the Esai. 14.
deep lake, wherein is no water. Deliver me from the mouth Psalm. 16.
of the cruel lion, that is ready for the pray, and gapeth after my soul,
that he may devour it: for thou only art my protector and deliverer, and in
thy mercy alone is all my hope. Let thy mercy therefore Psalm. 3^ Psalm. 3^
be done unto me, according as I have trusted in thee. I have trusted, and
shall not be confounded, but obtaining my desire, shall sing unto thee: Glory
be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost. As it was in the
beginning, etc.

PSALM. IIII.
MY nights pass away in griese, and vex me with innumerable terrors: my
conscience shakes me while I am awake, and I am tormented therewith as if I
were wounded with a two edged sword: my sleep is troubled with diverse
illusions, bringing me no rest but travail: I watch all night in my thoughts,
and when as being wearied I endeavor to give some sleep to mine eye lids, by
and by sleep departs from mine eyes, and I sleep always in sorrows, being
wakened with an unquiet wearines from the care of the Job 30.
day, and all my inward parts are inflamed without rest. The Job 33.
meat which before I desired, is made abominable unto my soul, and my drink
is mingled Psalm. 101.
with tears, and confusion is before mine eyes, and rednes in my cheeks, when
I remember how grievously I have offended thee, O my God, and in how many
sorts I have abused my strength and thy gitfes: I have spent my days in
vanities, everlasting cares have consumed me, and being carried hither and
thither with senseles cogitations, I have spent my time. I fained to my self
dreams oftentimes, and rejoiced: and vanished away being deluded in my
vanities and madness: I ascended into Psalm. 106.
heaven, and by and by descended unto the deep: and while Psalm. 41.
one deep calls another, my soul did consume in evil, and I did rot before
the eyes of men. I wished impossible things, and by the fantastical fruition
of them, I was made like unto them that sleep, and rising from their sleep,
have found nothing in their hands. I am a vile worm, and yet, O Lord, I did
never know thee, but with an high forehead have exalted my self alone above
all. I have rashly boasted of my words, and in pride thought them to be
wisdom. I was an enemy unto my companions, and being angry with many did
reproach them without cause. I hated patience and loved wrath, and would be
angry without reason. I cursed my servants and familiars, yea and my self also
when I was angry, and scornefully reproched my friends. I did unwillingly
bear mine adversities, and have put my trust in man, more then in God. I heard
the truth impatiently, and answered the wise in fury. I sought injuries and
reuenges willingly, and never reserved revenge unto God. I waxed cruel against
him that defended his own cause: neither did a soft answer, or a Prou. 6.
gentle man please me. I took pleasure in strife and contention, and as a
wicked man, did often sow discord and hatred among brethren. I received with
mine ears wholesome and good counsels, but did not apprehend discipline. I did
with a mild countenance behold such counsailours as tickled mine ears: but
those that spoke unto me with a free mind, I put far from me. I Tobia.
held not out my hand to the needy, neither did I eat my Tobit.
bread with the hungry: the beggars and lepers did lie in the streets, and I
passed away turning mine eyes from them, least my bowels should be stirred, and
I moved with mercy, should give alms unto them. I paid not my debt to them
that did lend unto me, and did borowe to satisfy my inordinate desire. I
coueted to be rich, that I might do unlawful things, and in all godly duties
showed my self poor: and what I wanted to godliness, did largely abound unto
my lust. I rejoiced beyond measure in all gluttony and bankets, and with
insatiable greediness, offended nature that is contented with little. My belly
was as it were my Philip. 3.
god, and my glory in the shames of those that savor earthly things. I sought
the sweetest and most exquisite meats: and with the pretense of necessity I
did often shadow the desire of pleasure. I put my Psalm. 49.
portion among the adulterers, and my familiar conversation was among
fornicators. I was immoderately conversant in blood: and being like unto brute
beasts, I was so overthrown in this vice, that I shame to speak, what I
shamed not to do. Mine ear and my tongue served vanity, whilst by the one,
the oil of sinners did make my head fat, and with the other I supplied often
that, which others seemed to want concerning my praise: and as opportunity
served, I did set forth to others mine own praise, and did always rejoice to
be set forth both by mine own, and other men's speeches. To conclude, I lived
in all kind of pleasure of this world, being banished far and wide from the
delights of thy house: and if at any time the fear of death, and the last
judgment did quicken my sloth, and for a little time call me from the deep
gulf of pleasure, by and by I returned as a dog to his vomit. Being dead in
them, I yet live, and abiding in death, I hasten to death, and see death also
swift by coming unto me. But let thy mercy, O Lord, Psalm. 78.
quickly prevent me, before that terrible day of misery and calamity do
come, the great Psalm. 25.
and bitter day, that though I Zeph. 1.
die, I may live, and declare thy mercies above all thy works, Look back, O
Lord, and behold how my soul lies in her concupiscences sick of the
palsy, and is evil vexed there with: deliver it from the fast birdlime of
death, that it may cleave unto thee alone, who only art the true life, and
leaving all others follow thee that art above all. Say unto my soul, O Lord
God of my salvation, Psalm. 27. 54. Math. 15
be it unto thee as thou desire: make me to hear this thy voice, a voice of
rejoicing and salvation, that I may run after it, and take hold of thee, and
keep thee fast, and not let thee go, until thou sendest me whole away. For
being sick, to whom shall I go but to thee, that I may be cured: or who can
heal mine infirmity, but he that for man and mankind came down from heaven,
that they might be healed of their griefs? who can 1. Reg^
quicken, but he that does mortify and quicken all things? who can save but
thou, O my God my Savior, in the time of tribulation? save therefore and
quicken me, thou that art the life and everlasting salvation of all that put
their trust in thee. And to thee that art without (...).
beginning, be glory without end: to thee be praise and honor, to thee be
continual worship, thanksgiving, thou that art the everlasting spring of
mercies: for I was gone far from thee, and did run away, and yet thou do
speedily come to him that is sick and run away, when he calls upon thee,
and do grant him health, before thou hear his sighs: for to be willing
to be healed is enough, that thou should heal, and to be willing to live,
that thou should grant life, and in the blessing of thy sweetenes do
thou prevent the desire Psalm. 20.
of a sinner that does know himself. Therefore I will say unto thee, O Lord,
and it shall suffice unto me, I know mine Psalm. 50.
iniquity, and what is it to know? but I will be healed? and how do I know?
because all my bones are vexed within me, and my soul is very much Psalm. 60.
troubled for my sins. Behold now, I lay all mine iniquities before thy
sight, O my God, Psalm. 40.
that thou may cure and heal my soul, because it has sinned against thee.
For as thou Psalm. 5.
art a God, that desire not iniquity: so will thou not the death of a
sinner, but rather Ezec. 18.
that he should be converted, and live. For the dead shall not praise thee, O
Lord, but we Psalm. 105.
that live, do bless the Lord, and confess unto him: for he is good, and his
mercy is everlasting. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, etc.

PSALM. V.
I Have revealed my miseries unto thee, O Lord, not to make known my ways
unto thee, that did know them all from the beginning, and have numbered all
my steps: for Job 31.
thou know the hidden places of darkness, and all things Psalm. 43.
are naked and open to thine eyes, and thou do not only see, but also
discern the lurking Hebr. 4.
places of our thoughts, and the marrowe of our affections: but I uncover that
thou maiestcouer, and protect, I reveal that thou may hide, and know in me
an humble and contrite spirit, and by the Psalm. 50.
offering of this sacrifice, which is most acceptable unto thee: be merciful
unto me, and forgive Luke 18.
my sins: I have spoken many and great things, and yet have said little: for
the worm of my conscience does Barnard.
prick me in more, I would to God it might gnaw away the rottenness, that by
gnawing it might consume it, and withal be it self consumed: and that it
begin not to be cherished in immortality, but let it bite, that it may die,
and by little and little by biting leave biting. But woe unto me, for when I
think I have made an end of telling my evils, then am I constrained to begin
again as it were, and my memory being full of uncleanness, does more
abundantly remember much more filthiness: for I have sinned above the number
of the sands of the sea: and if I had a hundred tongues, and a hundred mouths,
I shall skarse answer one of a thousand thousand: yet that increases my
grief, that I can not remember all my filthiness past, and the fleshly
corruptions of my soul: for while I commit new sins, I forget the old, but
those that I remember, I will not hide, not that I will love them any more, but
that I may love thee most earnestly, O my God: and that I remembering my most
wicked ways in the bitterness of my remembrance, thou may S. Augu.
be sweet unto me, O sweetness that art not deceaueable, O amiable
sweetenes, O happy and secure sweetenes, then envy was familiar unto me, and
charity was estranged from me, I slandered Kings and Princes, and the
Ministers of the Church, and did bite them with a lying murmuring, I did
disgrace the deserts and praises of the just, and allowed the doings of the
wicked: if at any time there were a commendable Fra. Petrarch.
speech concerning good men, I objected false spots, and did discover their
secret infirmities, and for most light things did accuse them to others, as
guilty of a greater crime. Again, if there were any infamy of the wicked, I
did by and by set forward their slender virtues, and preferred them in desert
before their betters, and so was cause of their greater ruin. If I saw a
thief, I did Psalm. 44.
run with him, and to fulfill mine iniquity, I raised offense against my
mothers son, and spared not to slander and deceive my kinsefolke. I wished to
my neighbors sorrow and ill hap, and in his death only did I set my hope. I
did not defend the cause of the innocent, and did vpbraide the guilty as if I
rejoiced at their torments: I rashly judged many guilty of faults, and seeing
a little moate in my brothers eye, I did not feel a great beam Luke 6.
in my owneeie: I loved slothfulness as my mother, and idleness was as my
brother, and I did avoid all honest exercise and labor: I waxed heavy from
day to day, and did not give God thanks for his daily benefits bestowed upon
me: and thou, O Lord know how seldom I did by night meditate upon thy
law, and thy wonderful works: I often spent ye whole night without sleep,
and when my mind did wander from thee hither and thither to many things, thou
did never meet with it. I went to bed without thee, I lay in my bed without
thee, I rose from my bed without thee, without thee the day shined upon me, and
passed wholly away without thee, and therefore was I always without thee,
because I was always with my self, who in my dark affections am far from
thee: yet if at any time thou came into my mind, and that I did begin to
consider thy marvelous works, suddenly the burden of the world (as in
sleep is usual) did sweetly press me down, and my thoughts wherewith I
did meditate on thee, were like the endeavors of those that would wake, and yet
conquered with the depth of sleepiness, are drowned again. I often purposed
to determine of the affairs of my conscience, but the present day does always
delude me with the expectation of that which is to come. I rested unto a
brittle and deceitful foundation, and leaned upon a broken reed, and when as
trusting thereto, I thought I stood sure, I fell into the fire, and when I S.
Augu.
fell, I knew how weakly I had stood. I gaped with an unquenchable thirst
after honor and gain, and in these desires I suffered most cruel
difficulties. Every disordered and undisciplined man was my friend, and I
defiled the vein of friendship with the filth of concupiscence, and obscured
the whiteness thereof with hellish lust. Tragical spectacles full of the
shows of my miseries, and the food of my fire did draw me: and I did not
only not shut the passages against death, but opened also S. Barnar.
the windows unto it, and all my members were several windows through the
which death entered into my soul. And so new filthiness growing on, I have
not purged the old: nay rather from thence did spring in me many sins, for
which I am cast out from before thy face, O my God, and being deprived of the
comfort of thy presence, I fall almost into desperation, knowing not whither I
go: but departing from thee, whither shall I go? and who will look upon my
face, if thou turn thine away from me? and as a reprobate deprive me of thy
sight? I shall undoubtedly become hateful unto all men, and as a wanderer and
runnagate in the land, I shall be made a shame and skorne unto them, when they
shall ask of me, where is thy God? and wherefore Psalm. 73.
has he put thee from him? what shall I do therefore, O wretched man that I
am, when I see my self estranged from thy protection, and forsaken in the
midst of mine enemies that fight mightily against me? I will seek thy face, O
Lord, and with sighs beseech thy countenance not to leave me, nor in anger to
depart from thy servant: for all mine enemies follow me as a fugitive, that
they may take and kill me, and therefore I must seek refuge at thy hands, to
whom I do fly, O my God, my strength, my refuge, and my virtue, in the day of
my tribulation: for as there is no Esai. 45.
God beside thee, so also there is no Savior besides thee. Thou therefore, O
Lord, that know all my miseries, and Psalm. 102
from whom the work of my weakness is not hidden: cast behind thy back all
mine offenses, Psalm. 7^.
and do not remember my old iniquities, but save me Psalm. 50.
according to thy mercy, from all those that persecute me, and deliver me,
because there is none that can redeem nor save, but thou, O Lord, who sauest
all that trust in thee, and Psalm. 71.
deliuerest the poor from the mighty, and from the hands of them that are
stronger then he: hide not therefore thy face from me, O Lord, neither despise
me, my saving God, my strength, and my deliverer: for Psalm. 85. Psalm. 10.
I am poor and very needy, and thine eyes look upon the poor, and if thy
justice seek me, hide me in the bosom of thy mercy, wherein thou have with
long suffering borne me, and invited me to repentance: for thou art long
suffering, patient, Psalm. 102.
and very merciful, and excellent above al wickedness: Joel 2.
yea nothing is more proper unto thee, then to spare and have mercy always:
and therefore thou have mercy on all, because thou can do all, and
dissemblest the sins of men for repentance, and thou Sapi. 11.
sparest all, because they are thine, O Lord, who love souls. Turn
therefore unto me, who am turned unto thee, and deliver mine afflicted soul
from all danger, that my mouth may be filled with thy praise, and say unto
thee: Blessed be Psalm. 123.
the Lord who has not suffered me to be delivered unto the teeth of mine
adversaries: Except the Lord had been my helper, they had perhaps swallowed
me quick: my soul as a sparrowe was delivered from the snare of the fowlers,
the snare is broken, and I am delivered. Glory be to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, etc.

PSALM. VI.
O Wretched man that I am, what shall I do? for the great wild beast has
devoured my soul, and I have been made a pray to the enemy, he has spoiled
me of all those goods wherewith thou, O Lord, had beautified me, and I am
afraid to appear naked before thee: I departed rich and beautiful from thy
Esai. 37. Ierem. 11 Osee. 5.
face, and went wandering after filthiness in a corrupt way, and in the
wickedness of my heart: and my soul is made black upon the coals, and the
excellent color thereof is Thren. 4.
changed, and I that was nourished with spices, have embraced dung, and I have
so impouerished and deformed my self by wearing the vile garments of sinners,
according to the likeness of Adams offense, as thou, O Lord do not now
know me, according to the image wherein thou have created me: and wilt not
suffer me as a scabbed sheep, to dwell among the sheep of thy pasture. How
then shall I presume to return unto the presence of thine infinite Majesty,
(in whose sight Job 15.
the Heavens are not clean) being empty, vile and unclean? or how shall I
presume to communicate with thy chosen people, being made foolish by offending.
I would hauereturned unto thee though ashamed and afraid, trusting to thy
mercy: for thou art a sweet father to thy son that is travailing into a
far country; but much sweeter unto him when he returns from a long
pilgrimage: But, O my God, I lack the power to come unto thee: for I am kept
fast bound by a most cruel robber, not with strong iron, but with the iron of
mine own will, whereof the enemy has made a chain for me, and brings my
heart in hard works and all wicked Exodus 1.
slavery to bitterness. My refuge Psalm. 118
is far from me: for salvation is far from sinners, and I am compelled to
die in most miserable bondage, unless thou, O Lord, looking down from Heaven,
do help me: I stick fast in the slimie claie of the deep, and a tempest
of temptations, even like the waves of the cruel sea, has over whelmed and
crowned me so that I am in despair of avoiding these imminent dangers, unless
thou, O God, shall take me up: for the more I endeavor to arise, the more am I
bruised: I am both within and without troublesome unto my self, and every
where I find domestical enemies, that do beat me down: I look on the
right hand and the left, and I see none to whom I may safely commit my self:
but every where fear does shake me, and to whom so ever I come, I find not a
faithful friend, and how should I find any, that my self do not keep my
faith given to my God? I have sought any to comfort me in my afflictions and
calamities, and there was none of all my dear Thren. 1.
friends that would comfort me: but I met with men that were too full of
words, nay dumb rather, and therefore dumb, because thy word, O my God, did
not sound from their lips, but the offense of Psalm. 58.
their mouth, the words of their own lips, who did condemn my wantes without
compassion, and triumphing over me, did hardly and fiercely provoke strife
against me. I have often consented unto Prou. 18.
foolish deceivers, and swaruing from the right pathe, I ignorantly agreed to
their opinion, and by little and little was by them brought to such toys and
madness, as (though by the help of thy grace, I never departed from the true
religion) yet I did believe many fables: yet am I an inexcusable man, for that
(when I did know thee to be always a God in truth, I did not worship Romans 1.
thee in spirit and truth:) but changed thy truth into lies, and served the
creatures rather then the Creator, and sought my self and my pleasures in
corruptible things: but thou, O Lord, my sweetness, and my trust, proceed
on, and as thou have made me by true faith to acknowledge thee, waken me up
that sleep in Psalm. 12.
sin, and open mine eyes, that I never sleep unto death: Lighten, kindle and
lift them up Psalm. 83.
unto thee, yt in thy light they may behold thee, the everlasting light, the
unquenchable light, that never fails, the Eccle. 24.
sweet and delightful light, that they may see and rejoice Sapi. 4.
and covet thy light, and know Eccle. 11. Psalm. 68.
that nothing is to be loved beside thee, but in and for thee. John 1.
Thou, O Lord, which art the true light, that do illuminate all men coming
into this world: cause this light to rise in my darkness, and make me to desire
thy justification, that my soul being melted away by the force of love, may
faint into thy saving health, Psalm. 188.
and thirste after thy delights: my soul, I say, but let me call it thine,
because thou did make it, and give it unto me, and mine, because I received
it from thee: keep therefore thy creature, which thou have specially framed
according to thine own image, and suffer not thy precious gift to perish,
wherein thou have lifted me up above all the works of thine own hands: upon
my body and members, work whatsoever pleases thee, let my flesh be clothed
with rottenness, Job 33.
and consumed with worms: But I beseech thee, O Lord, only spare my soul,
and stretch not out thy hand against it, bring me back again into thy ways,
before the going down of ye Sun: for it grows toward Evening, and compel
me to come unto thee, if to call be too little, constrain me as it pleases
thee: so I may come and not perish, not for my self, who having so often
abused thy mercy, have made my self unworthy thereof: but for thy holy Name,
take from me a stony heart, and give unto Exec. 36.
me a fleshy heart, and place thy Spirit in the midst of me, that I may
walk in thy precepts, and keep thy judgments: I come too late unto thee, O
Lord, I confess, I would to God I had come sooner: but I know and am
assured, that thou prescribest no time to them that come, so they come, and
receiuest the last as gently as the first: for that although thou hate Sapi.
1.
sin, thou hate not the sinner, neither do thou rejoice in his
destruction: and therefore, though he tarry very long, thou do patiently
look for him: O how sweet and pleasant is that thy saying, O Lord? wherein
thou have given hope unto my Psalm. 118. Hiere. 3.
soul? Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return thou unto me,
and I will receive thee. How delightful and pleasant is that word, wherewith
thou comfortest sinners that are in despair of themselves? If a sinner repent
Ezec. 18.
him from all his sins, he shall live and not die: for is the death of a
sinner according to my will? With great joy I hear thee when thou say, that
the sheep that Luke 15.
had gone astray, shall be brought home with joy upon the shepherds shoulders,
and S. Augu.
that the groate shall be laid up in thy treasures, neighbors rejoicing with
the woman that found it: and the joy of the solemnity of that house does
force tears from me, when I did read of the younger son, that he was dead,
and lived again. Therefore Psalm. 67.
give, O Lord, unto my soul, the voice of thy virtue, and not of thy virtue
alone, which shakes off the slouthe of souls, but also the beam of thy
light, which does both show unto men their sins, and gives light also to
the hidden places of darkness. Cant. 2.
Let thy voice sound in the ears of mine heart, and say unto my sleeping
soul, why art thou so long oppressed with a deadly sleep, and kept captive in
bands? It is now Romans 13. Esai 55. Cant. 6.
time to rise from sleep, and that thou forsake thy way, and return to me
that have redeemed thee: return, O Esai. 44.
thou Sunamite, return that we may behold thee: return, and defer no longer
to come unto me, for I am the Lord thy God that call thee, I am, I am he, that
blot out thine iniquities Esai. 43.
for my self, neither carry in remembrance things past: then will I say boldly
to my soul, turn thee to thy Psalm. 144
rest, for the Lord has done well unto thee: go safely unto him, and though
thou art wearied by thy wicked ways, go the swifter, that thou may the
sooner take rest: be not made afraid for thy sins, for if they be as red as
scarlet, Esai 1. and 44.
they shall be made as white as snow, as a cloud they shall be put away, and
fear not to be accused of boldness, where thou art praised for obedience. Go
and make haste my soul unto him, that came not to call the righteous, but
sinners, and Matthew. 8.
if thou art a sinner, thy God is the God of sinners. Wherefore then do thou
fear to go, thou that art not called by a cruel judge, but by the father of
mercies, that thou may obtain mercy: therefore go now willing being
called to mercy, that thou be not compelled hereafter to go unto judgment.
In thee, O Lord, my noble Father do I trust, and will not be ashamed to
confess unto thee my deformities, S. August
and blasphemies, who was not ashamed to profess them before men, and to bark
against thee. Let the Mark 2.
Pharise murmr and say, who can forgive sins but God alone? for it is God
that speaks unto me, whose word is lively and effectual, he that Psalm. 76.
calls me is mild and pitiful, and is not wonted to contain his mercies in
his wrath: And therefore upon thy words will I assuredly come unto thee, O my
God, my trust, and my portion in the land of the living. I will come and fall
down before thee, and not fear thy Majesty, because thou call me, and
that I offend not thine eyes when I shall appear unclean in thy sight. I
will wash away my filthiness with continual tears, and mine eye lidde shall
not rest from weeping, but my bed shall be privy unto my sorrow, wherein I
please thee, though I displease my self: and being by thee converted unto
thee, I repent me of those things I have committed, that I may praise thee with
a clean Psalm. 88.
heart, saying, O Lord, who is like unto thee? for then is thy Eccl. 15. Psalm.
125.
praise bountiful in the mouth of a sinner, and he that has sowed in tears,
shall reap in gladness. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, etc.

PSALM. VII.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble, and vexed with unspeakable
miseries: for floods of iniquity do vex me, and the waters Psalm. 58.
have entered eue^ into my soul as a river that is overflowed, so my sins
which I have hitherunto dissembled, and neglected to confess, or amend, are
grown so high that they have passed over my head, and Psalm. 37.
bowed my mind and will, to the concupiscence of sensual desires: yea, made
me subject to the slavery of the devil. Woe unto me, for I am altogether
mortally wounded, and there is no health in me from the sole of the foot, to
the crown of my head: for mine enemy has supplanted me, and as a most cruel
tyrant tormenting me, has deprived me of all my senses, leaving only my
understanding, that by joining the knowledge of my hurt and loss, he might
also increase my sorrow. He should little hurt, if he had deprived me altogether
of all use of my senses, and had made me utterly senseless in all my actions,
but he has deprived me thereof for doing that which is good, and has
violently enforced me to evil: and has so infected my mind, which is
altogether bent to outward things, with a certain astonishment of inward
senselessness, that she cannot feel her 1. Tim. 4.
inward hurtes: for when I should have heard, I was deaf, and turned mine ear
from the truth: but when it had been fit for me to stop mine ears, from
hearing unprofitable things, and the toys of many men, I was swift to hear,
and a gentle hearer. Heavenly things I tasted vnsauerly, and my soul lothed
all spiritual meat, but I judged earthly things sweeter then the honey and
the honey comb. Psalm. 100.
I was blind, and an earthly man in beholding those things that were Gods: but
worldly things I looked upon with a proud eye, and desired them with an
insatiable heart: Neither in my senses alone, but in my members also which God
gave to me for the service of my soul, did mine ancient enemy shut up from
me the way of salvation: and prepared such ambushes against me in this cruel
siege, as I was never able to avoid them: but so often as I tried to fly
away, I fell into his hands. For I did offend both by seeing, and refusing to
see, by hearing, and by being deaf, speaking, and holding my peace, standing,
and sitting, sleeping, and waking, walking, and resting: to conclude, I changed
all the peculiar and common use of my senses and members into a filthy abuse,
burning in my unclean desires, so that I have transgressed all the laws, both
of God, man, and nature, and have lived diligent in observing only the law of
sin. I would to God I only had been so, and now were not: but alas,
because I am yet the same that before I was, and nothing changed from that, I
followed the worst: for my sick will does yet bear rule, and my most foul
and stinking soul, that is filled every where with horrible soars, that
proceed only from it self, does still persevere in the old evils. I am often
angry with my self, because I am weary to live, when I am not weary to sin:
I know my folly, and am confounded, and being confounded, reprove my self
saying, O carnal lover, why do thou so long wallowe in the mire of thy
concupisence? why art thou so carefully busy for earthly things? and do so
earnestly desire those goods which shall perish? or with what reason call
thou goods, those things thou gainest with so much labor, and the great hurt
of thy soul, and being gained, possessest in fear, and being possessed,
leesest with grief? O my soul, why do thou forget thine own proper
estate, and nobility, and art not ashamed to endure a miserable and shameful
bondage, under the corruption of thy corporal senses? why art thou deceived
with the unfaithful promises of ye world? and markest not that the chief good
thereof, is a vapor that appears but a little season, and a vanity of
vanities? Blush, and be ashamed, O miserable sinner, how often have thou
departed from thy Creator, and turned to deceitful creatures? and coming
again to thy self, behold with any sight of thy mind, how cruelly in
respect S. Bernar.
of a miserable hu^ting thy soul has bowelled her self, whilst with an
immoderate desire, catching at a vile pray of flies, she has like the spider
made nets for her self of her own bowels. Again and Romans 6.
again I say, Blush at that wherein thou have had no fruit, and lament thy
lost time, that blushing, may bring Prou. 23.
thee fruit: Yield thy heart unto God, and thou shall pay that thou owe.
With these speeches I rage against my self, when being inwardly admonished, I
enter into my self, and consider with my heart what I have lost, and what I
have found: but I do Romans 7.
not that good which I like, but the evil that I will, that I do: for mine
enemy holds my will, and does keep me being fashioned according to the
former desires of mine ignorance captive under the law Romans 8.
of sin: But thou, O Lord God of virtues, the tower of my strength, and the
ruler of my life, do not withdraw thy help from me, look unto my defense,
and protect me Psalm. 25
under the shadow of thy wings, least I fall in the sight of mine adversaries,
and mine enemy rejoicing against me say, I have prevailed against him: Break
the bands of my reproach, under which I have been made crooked, and lose ye
cords of my sins, wherewith I am strongly bound, O most mighty Lord, and
make known thy power unto mine enemies, that I may offer unto thee a sacrifice
of gladness, saying: Who shall Psalm. 105
speak the power of the Lord, or who shall declare all his praises? that
delivered my soul from death, my feet from sliding? who has saved me from
the lions mouth, and my lowliness from the horns of Unicorns. To who^ should
Psalm. 21.
I cry, but to thee, upon whom all our fathers have called, and have been
saved? to thee, I say, who never deceiuest them that hope in thee, set me
therefore near thee, and let any man's hand sight against me: for I will fear
no evil, because thou art with me. All my desires are before thee, blot out
and put away whatsoever is strange from thee: renew, create and confirm
whatsoever thou have given me, that casting away all carnal and unprofitable
desires, the sinner may be praised, in the desire Psalm. 9.
of his heart, and coveting to enjoy thee the only Psalm. 118.
true pleasure, my request may come before thy face, and I may co^fidently say
unto thee: Psalm. 20.
grant unto him, O my God, the desire of my soul: for I know and am assured,
that Job 6.
no man can desire thee but by thy self, nor come unto thee, unless thou draw
him: Draw me therefore, O Lord, and grant unto me, that I may begin in a
good desire, that I may end and perfect it in a good work, before my old
custom oppress my new desire, and my former will strenthened by age, conquer
my new will: least when right things please me, I return to my old wont.
Clothe me with the precious garments of thy salvation and thy beauty, and put
off from me the vile clothes of my widdowhead, wherein Ephesians. 4.
being deprived of thee, I walk according to the ancient conversation of the
old man: and do not any more remember the shame of my widdowhead, that being
newely clothed in Esai. 54.
thee, and become a new man, I may with a new spirit serve thee in newnes of
life, and in the sweet smell of thine ointme^ts running unto thee, I may Abac.
1.
rejoice in Jesus my Savior. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, etc.

The end of the Psalms.
A thanksgiving of a contrite Sinner, obteyning pardon from God of his sins.
I Render unto thee infinite thanks, O most gracious and merciful God, for
that remembering my so many sins, I fear not for them, nor am ashamed to
confess mine iniquities against thee, to thee: that I may confess unto thy
Name, thy mercy toward me. For thou have had mercy upon earth and ashes, and
it has pleased thee to reform in thy sight, all my deformities, and to keep
me from many waters, least the deapth should swallowe me up. I was going the
right way unto hell, carrying all my sins that I had committed with me, unless
thou, O Lord my God, and my guider, did bring me, that was going down
headlong, back unto thee, who art the way, the truth, and the life: and
did inlighten John 14.
my cloudie mind, with the brightness of thy light, that seeing my self in
the land of forgetfulness, and the country of vnlikelinesse, I might call unto
thee out of the deepes of my ignorance, and know that thou art God my Savior
and deliverer, that have drawn me from my most wicked ways, and put goades
unto me, that I might therewith be pulled away. What shall I therefore render
unto thee, my beauty, my sweetness, my part, God for evermore, for the
marvelous ways that thou have used, to correct and direct my ways into the
way of salvation? I was carried away into vanities, forgetting thee, O my God,
and made my ways far from thee, when thou moved with mercy over me, did
call back my filthy life, from the dirt of earthly pleasure, and did
restrain my untamed Psalm. 31.
mind, with the bit and bridle of calamities and labors, that I might come
near unto thee. 2. Cor. 1.
I will therefore willingly glory in mine afflictions and infirmities, that thy
grace may dwell in me, to whom I am a debtor, for that thou have forgiven me so
many evils, and have dissolved my sins like ise. And for my sorrows, as for
thy gifts and benefits (whereby my soul has been saved) yielding thanks
unto thee, I Osee 14. Psalm. 102.
will offer up the calves of my lips, saying: Bless the Lord, O Psalm. 102.
my soul, and do not forget all his benefits, which is merciful unto all
thine iniquities, and heals all thine infirmities, who has redeemed thy life
from death, and crowns thee in pity and mercy, and fills in good things
thy desire. Behold how the comforts of thy mercies, wherein thou have
lightened me, O my God, have taken me, that I might embrace thee, above all
seducements that I followed: therefore I pray thee, my glory, the height of my
humility, and rest of my labor, do not faint in helping me, that I also may
not faint, in confessing unto thee thy mercies. But graciously accept the
sacrifice of my confessions, from the hand of my mouth, and grant unto me the
spirit of fear, that my soul conceauing from thy promises, may henceforth be
cherished with heavenly things, and bring forth the spirit of salvation.
Protect me under ye shadow of thy hands, Esai 49. Prou. 5.
and cherish me in the bosom of thy mercies, least they that pass in the way,
tread upon the unfeathered foul: But S. Augu.
send thine angel, that may put him again into the nest, that he may live
until he may fly, and continually cleave unto thee, with daily prayers knock
unto thee, possess thee in himself, that thou may be unto him all in all.
As the young swallows or doves, mourning Esai. 38.
do call for meat unto their mother: so I, mourning and weeping in this
valley of tears, do cry unto thee, my God, and my helper in time of need,
that thou deliver me from al temptation, even to the end, and nourish me yet
as a sucking child, that having received the strength of thy virtue, as Phil.
3.
long as I shall run in the course of this world, forgetting that which is
behind, and earnestly bending my self to that which is before, with thy
company and protection, I may go on to the appointed place, to the reward of
the heavenly vocation, in Christ Jesus our Lord, who lives and reigns with
thee, in the unity of the holy spirit, God world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
EPITAPHIVM D. ANTONII Lusitaniae Regis Serenissimi.
PAreatibi vita^ rapuit, diadema Philippus,
Et simul Oceasus ac Orientis opes,
Plus tibi restituit pietas tua, reddidit atque
Quicquid habet tellus, sidera quicquid habe^t.
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
EIVSDEM REGIS LVSITAN. PROSOPOPEIA.
PORTVG ALLORVM Regi mihi Gallia portus
Vna fuit, mihi Rex hic Deus, ille lupus.
Me patrio Regni solio fraudarat Iberus:
Electum HENRICUS Rex putate fouet.
Quaqueregit virtute pari Regina Britannos,
Lutore suscepit me ELISABETH A sue.
Grand euum tandem me Rex Coelsque solique,
In sedem mistrans transtulit aetheream.
Faults escaped.
Page 1. line 15. have, read not have.

P. 5. l. 8. know, read knew.

P. 8. l. 24. self, read life.

P. 12. l. 17. in sins, read in my sins.

P. 13. l. 1. a fool, read as a fool.

P. 13. l. 11. haling, read hating. and l.

14. wilfulnes, read wilfulnes to sin.

P. 13. l. 22. brought, read bought.

P. 19. l. 14. girfes, read gifts. and l. 19.

I fained, read unrecoverably I fained.

P. 25. l. 9. read nation, I am thy salvation.

P. 41. l. 12. strong, read strange.

P. 52. l. 12. bountiful, read beautiful.

P. 56. l. 7. lived, read been.


