ARISBAS, Euphues amidst his slumbers: Or Cupids Journey to Hell.

DECYPHERING A MYRROR of Constancy, a Touchstone of tried affection, begun in
chaste desires, ended in choice delights: And emblasoning Beauties glory,
adorned by Natures bounty.

WITH THE TRIVMPH OF TRVE Love, in the foil of false Fortune.

By I. D.

Est aliquid leuibus depingere seria ^^gis. Imprinted at London by Thomas
Creed, for Thomas Woodcocke, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard. 1594.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Master Edward Dyer Esquire, the Maecenas of worth,
and mirror of all admired perfections.
WEll might Telamonian Ajax (Right worshipful) a Peer of the peerlesse
Iliade, and owner of the seuen-fold target, stoutly oppose himself to inuading
Hector, that vaunted his dreaded prowess, backed by succor of the gods, and
strongly repulse the thick-darted Trojan fires from their endaungered navy, the
sole stay of their then-doubted return, having for his vigorous arm so massy
a bulwark, and for his valiant heart so man-like a body. And (si magnis
componere parua licebit) in like sort I, shrouded under the shadow of your
worships wings, have therefore the more boldly adventured to thrust into the
open light, this mine abortiue issue, the fruit of some few idle hours, since
after many thoughts, I could not excogitate any more pleasing recreatio^ whereon
I might bestow times of leisure, hoping that for the common good liking which
all men conceive of you, and for the general good speeches which all men use
of you, they will the better censure of my doing, when they see your
worshippes name to whose worth this worthless Pamphlet is entitled, standing
in the front as a strong fort of defense, to shield me from the descanting
verdites of such unfriendly readers, which conceiting the Authors intent
amiss, may wrest his meaning by wrong co^iectures, and from the sour ce^sures
of the ouer-curious Moralists of our age, which glory to be termed the
new-vprearers of the long ago confuted Stoical Apathy, although these harsh
ensuing lines merit no such high protection, since they are not ouer-curiously
labored: for I deem it mere folly to make a trifle a labor, or my pleasure my
pain: and they may be termed the work of a slumbring, rather then of a
wakefull Muse: yet I have observed that Poetical method in my discourse, which
the best and most approved Authors of the ancientest and most famous languages
have always used and allowed, beginning in Medio, and afterward at occasions,
unfolding former accidents. Howsoever, if these the saplesse fruits of green
youth, and pithlesse blossoms of a simple Authors unripe wit, purchase such
favor and acceptance as I desire, though they deserve not, I shall be
emboldened to raise my Muses note that now yields harsh Music, to an higher
key, a fairer fruit of my better ordered vacant hours, and manifest my duty to
your worship in some matter of greater import, then a superficial toye: for I
judge it the extremity of folly to trouble the world with heaps of trifles.
But fearing to grow offensive through tedious interrupting of your worshippes
serious affairs, and humbly craving pardon of mine audacious enterprise, I
end, wishing to your worship many days of happiness in this life, and
heaven in the other life.

Your Worships most firmly devoted in all duty and service, John Dickenson.

To the Gentlemen-Readers.
LEarned and courteous Gentlemen, Although the whitest Swanne and sweetest of
Apolloes musical birds, has put an endless periode to his everliving
lines, being prevented by untimely death the Herald of ouer-hastie destiny,
though he the honor of Art and hope of Arms, Mineruaes nourse-childe, and
beloved Secretary to the sacred Muses, was in the springtime of his glory,
raised from below to reign above: yet as his heroique spirit disrobed of the
perishing habit of mortality, swiftly passing through the inferior orbs, has
ascended to the Empire heaven, participating eternal joys in the habitation
of the blessed, and does with happier eyes view the glorious light of the
Deity, and resting in that blisfull seat of his repose, wonders at heavens
huge frame, whereto his high thoghts did always honorably aspire: So his Fame
winged with desert, suited in robes of immortality, vanquishing death,
tryumphing over time, and nothing stayed by triuiall stoppes, towers to the
clouds, and not comprehended in small limits, fills the ears of all men with
oft-rebounded echoes of his praise, and ouerspreading Europe, nay the worlds
wide continent, as did the flourishing vine which seemed to dismayed Astyages in
his ill-presaging dream, to cover Asia with a spacious shade.

If you demand whom I mean, even he it is to whom I will ascribe no other
titles, the^ the world has allotted, though I cannot duly afford them as he
deserves them, yet take the^ as I have placed them in this English distich, a
testimony of the reverent affection which I bear to the memory of such a
famous Worthy.

Sweet Astrophil the solace of my pen,
Wonder of worth, and Peer of peerlesse men.
But who can add to that which is infinite? or what pen can sufficiently
express his praise which exceeds the praises of al pens, especially of mine,
whose slender wit treating such an ample subject, feels want in plenty,
raunging in a large field of copious matter, and being engulfed in an Ocean of
conceit, lies there overwhelmed? But some may demand whereto this tendes, to
whom I answer thus briefly, framing mine own Apology* I hope that it shall
not minister just occasion of offense to any, that my blushing Muse reuerencing
the steps wherein he traced, and houering aloof with awe-full dread, does yet
at last warily approach, and carefully observe the directio^s of so worthy a
guide, and in part, glance at the unmatchable height of his heroique humor.

Did not Statius charge his Thebaide to attend with like reverence, on the
lofty foote-steps of the royal Aeneide? But to conclude, I shall be full
heir of mine hope, and shall esteem it no small good hap, if you grace mine
endeavors with favorable doom, and accept my good will in lieu of current
performance. Thus Gentlemen, committing my Pamphlet to your friendly view, and
submitting my self to your courteous censures, I end, wishing to you al,
several good fortunes, and concluding my resolution in this harsh Epigramme,
hatched in codde humor: Quaeris delicias, faeetiasque,
Festiuosque iocos? habes quod optas,
Faecunda Astrophili petens fluenta,
Late mellifluis referta ^iuis.
Quaeris dulce melos, sales; and omnes
Verborum veneres? habes quod optas,
Foecunda Astrophili petens fluenta,
Passim nectareis adaucta lymphis.
Quaeris suauiculi nouos lepores,
Gazas ingeni* tenes quod optas
Faecunda Astrophili petens fluenta,
Lauro and littorea superba myrto.
Illi Pierides fuere curae:
Illum Pieridesque Gratiaeque
Curant. Quin petis illius fluenta,
Queis tot lacteoli canunt olores?
At me saeuior, insidere terrae
Cogit Calliope, negatque vela:
Exemit tamen infimo illa vulgo,
Et sperare dedit placere posse.


I. D.

Arisbas, Euphues amidst his slumbers, or Cupids Journey to Hell.
THe Sun soiourning in his winter mansion, had disrobed Arcadia of all her
pleasures, and disgarnished Vestaes mantle of delights variable choice,
wherewith Flora had in plenty poudred the freshness of her earst-green hue.
Night suited in a duskie robe of pitchie darkness, besieged the globe with
long shadows, while Phoebus wanting wonted vigor, did by darting his scarce
reflected beams afford small comfort to the earths increase. So that Arcadia
erst the sovereign seat of all content, and sole place of worlds
perfections, seemed now a pattern of the ancient Chaos, wherein all things (if
things) were confounded. Feldes flourelesse, trees leauelesse, ground
heatelesse, brooks streamelesse, springs vnhanted, groves unhallowed, augmented
this hue of horror, blemish of Europes Paradise. The maiden huntresse Arcadiaes
patroness, did sildome trace the plains guarded with her troop of
virgin-knights, to fix shafts on the flying beasts, whose wont was in time of
heavens more mild aspect, to grace the fields with her daily presence, and
when her brothers scortching heat tirde her limbs with faintness, to bath her
chaste body in some pleasant brook. Nor did the wanton Satyrs lightly
skipping on the painted meades, painted I mean by Natures workmanship, vaunt
their bodies agilitie to the Fairy wood-Nymphs. Pan Arcadiaes President, pent
up himself in his winter-lodging, and the other rural powers, seeing their
glories date ended for that year, shrouded himself in the place of his wonted
repose. In this season, a season well fitting his melancholy thoghts distracted
with moodie passions, Arisbas the map of Fortunes mutabilitie having lost his
dearest Lady, left his Country, abandoning the state of a Prince, the hope of
a Crown, the succession of a kingdom, wandered in midst of winters rage,
surcharged with sorrow, lamenting his loss, seeking his love, loathing his
life, since lives solace, loves sweetness, had but one and that an hopeless
object, whose want made him an hapless abject: while rough Boreas winters
Hench-man mustering legions of storms, scourged the plains with a troop of
tempests, and aimed his violent blasts at the tallest trees to loppe their
heights pride, and combatting with his companions, filled the air with
dreadful noise of their tumultuous encounter, the unfortunate Prince in whose
mind Love martialled millions of striving passions, wandering alone, (if he be
alone) whom Fancy tosseth in a boundless Ocean of perplexing thoughts, ceased
not his travail till the weathers intemperate fury calmed by heuens milder
influence, took truce with Time, and sealed the attoneme^t with a sudden
change. But when Phoebus renewing his yearly task, and denying longer
residence to stormy winter, had pierced earthes entrails with comfortable
warmth, opening a fruitful passage for the issue of her womb, to cloth
Pomonaes branches with Natures bounty, and diapre her own mantle with Floraes
sense-alluring pomp. Arisbas entered the frontiers of Arcadiaes maine continent,
where seeing the late hue of horror turned to an heaven of eyes happiness, he
redoubled many sighs drawn from the depth of his woeful hearts center: for
remembering that Tellus was erst dismantled, the trees bereaved of their
blossoms beauty, earthes natural defects anatomized by Time, in the place
where frostie Hyems had displaied her ycie trophies, he lamented to think that
these the tokens of worlds mutabilitie, had recovered their former flourish by
ye years timely alteration, but his desperate fortune had no hope of an happy
spring to calm the winter of his woe. Drowned in this deep meditation, he
proceeded pensive, but he had not walked far, when he espied a fair broad
Oak, whose spacious branches enuirond the ground lying underneath with a shady
circle. There he determined to rest awhile his body wearied by long
iourneyes, and somewhat disburthen his soul by displaying his sorrows.
Thither he came, down he sat, and fixing his eyes on the starrie concaue,
began thus to utter passionate complaints, not limiting his laments with
distinct clauses, for his moan admitted no method.

Injurious heavens (quoth he) has your influence effected this misfortune?
Iniust Gods, have you envying earth so rare an ornament, beautified the seat
of your abode with worlds wonder? Ungentle Cupid, have thou deeming my Timoclea
fairer then thy Psyche, renewed thy doting humor? if so, then were thou cruel
in thy change, but more in thy choice, enforcing me to love whom thy self
did like. I have wandered through the earth, augmenting the springs with
streams of my tears, filling the woods with rebounding Echoes of my woes,
tracing the plains with restless steps, yet have I mist Timoclea, and not
finding her, have lost my self. I have blamed heaven, searched earth, accusde
the Gods, and shall Hell exceed the scope of my passions impatience? May I not
surmise that Pluto affecting a second wonder, has performed a second rape? If
so, then most cruel Monarch of the Ghosts, be thy Proserpine as jealous as I
am ioy-lesse. Do thou triumph in the possession of so peerless a pray, and
may not I lament the loss of so matchless a myrror? Should I excuse thy fury,
or accuse thy folly? (if it be folly to be blinded by so fair an object, the
worth of whose perfections words can not utter, and thoughts scarce
comprehend.) O that I might equal Orpheus in art as I exceed him in anguish:
the powerful virtue of his heavenly tunes, amassed furious beasts, stayed
fluent streams, raised stones, assembled trees, moving sense in senseless
things. Descending to the silent vauts of Acheron, he caused ghosts to groan,
shadows to sighe, effecting relenting thoughts in hels remorselesse judges:
but were I his peer in that profession, I would do more, enforcing the tyrant
not touched then with such a sympathy, to leave his lust, and grant me my
love. Tush Arisbas, these are fancies, and therefore follies. Timoclea is yet
lost, and if not found in Arcadia, then for ever lost. But aye me, what comfort
can Arcadia afford, from whose coasts the winds fury did violently drive her?
Has then the Sea greedy of such rare gain swallowed her, not satisfied with
Hell, nor glutted with Hero? No, but Neptune desirous of change, has received
her into his watrie Palace, and crowned her Empress of his liquide Monarchy,
commanding the Sea-Nymphs to attend on her, the Sirens to delight her with the
sweetness of their enchaunting harmony, Dolphins to wafte her Chariot,
Phocae to guard her, and the Tritons to sound her Majesty. Whether do I
wander? Is this to rest? Leave Arisbas, nay, proceed Arisbas, cease to
suppose, begin to sorrow, aye me, wretched me, hapless, hopeless, what means
may I now conceit, what devise may now be plotted? Heereat he stopped, and
opening the floud-gates of his eyes, distilled a shower of tears, supplying
his speeches with deep sighs. But resolving to proceed, he beheld as he
looked aside, one somewhat near him, which was by birth an Arcadian, and by
his habit seemed a Shepherd, who ouerhearing the last words of the Princes
complaints, and aiming (though amiss) at the occasion of his sorrows, thought
that being a stranger he lamented the loss of his way, to which imagination
applying his words, he began thus:

Friend, (for so I may term you without offense) the day is almost spent, and
the night dangerous for such as you are, or at least seem to be, I mean a
stranger, Accept then a simple lodging in my Cottage, with such homely fare, as
Shepherds houses yield, and when to morrowes Sun shall display his fair
(though late forcelesse) beams, you may prosecute your intended journey,
wherein, if my directions may further you, you shall find me ready to afford
them.

Arisbas wondering at such rare humanity harbored in those contemptible
weeds, made a long pause as if he had enioynde his mouth to perpetual
silence, at last shapt this reply.

Friend, (for so your proffered courtesy binds me to term you) muse not
that sobs interrupt my words, or sorrows season my discourse, which only
comfort my fates have assignde me. What I was, I list not now repeat: what I
am, you see, I grieve. A lodging in your Cottage I gladly accept: your country
fare i will thankefully receive. Your directions will be as needful as my
distress is notable. My body wearied much through travail, requires longer
rest then one nights repose. My mind wrapped in a Chaos of confusions,
expects ease by earnest conference. I have a secret to disclose, a sorrow to
disciphre, which while I smother in private passions, I shall in stead of
comfort reap discontent, but by discovering my fortune, I may discharge my
fancy. And if this double favor do proceed from you, then in requital of
your courtesy, first, I beseech Jupiter Xenius, the patron of hospitality,
and protector of strangers, to bless your labors, prosper your attempts, and
enrich your store with heaped plenty. Next, I vow by that bright lamp
heavens ornament, that if fortune (as she is never stable) raise me from so
low an ebb to the wonted height of my good hap, I will remunerate your
kindness with most ample recompense. For know, that I can by birth challenge
what may beseem a Prince to claim. Every Shepherd is not a Swayne, nor all
private that seem poor.

Damon (such was the Shepherds name) seeing majesty in his looks, gravity
seated in disguise, royalty suited in base attire, gathered by these probable
conjectures, that he could be of no mean degree: moved therefore with a
deeper remorse, he courteously entreated him to repair to his simple lodging,
and remain there till fortune should convert her frowns into favors,
protesting, that though he could not entertain him as the quality of his
condition required, yet he would supply in good will the disabling defects of
his low estate. Which words wrought such cheerfulness in the heart of
Arisbas, that he yielded him millions of thanks, and accompanied him to his
house: which, when he entered, he found not gorgeously embost, yet gayly
trimmed, not courtly, yet comely, though homely, yet handsome, and he was
kindly welcomed by Damons wife, who greeted him with a merry countenance,
being by her husband certified of his fortune. Soiourning there some small
time, he sought by sundry means to abolish the impression of his sorrow, but
being unable to find ease in ease, he resolved to depart, and finish his
search by finding his love, or ending his life. Thus ready to effect his
resolution, he determined to inform Damon at full of his estate, knowing that
he being both borne and brought up in Arcadia, could not be ignorant of such
accidents as fortune there had acted. As they walked together on a day through
Damons ground conferring of sundry matters, the heat growing excessive, they
hasted to a cool shade, and there sat down. Arisbas loath to omit so meet
occasion, seeing opportunity friend to his desire, began thus.

Friend Damon, since many respects shorten my intended residence, I have
resolved with speed to leave you, though for ever bound to love you, my
fortune enforces the one, your courtesy causes the other. But before my
departure, I will disclose to you a secret, which may move you to marvel, and
me to melancholy. A secret so rare, so ruthful, that every periode may effect
a passion, each clause a corrosiue, wherein you shall see a world of wonders
plotted by love, and performed by fortune. For know, that you have lodged a
Prince, whose majesty masking in disguise of misery, droupt in a lower ebb
then might seem a decorum in my former dignity. If you muse at this, then
mark the rest, and lend attentive ear to my tale.

Cyprus of all neighbor Isles the noblest, is my fathers Kingdom, the
succession of whose estate, right of birth, and title of inheritance, will by
due claim after his decease, transfer to me. But what auailes it to be
invested with a diadem and want delight? When the date of my nonage was
expired, he desirous to link me in some honorable alliance, determined to
provide a wife with an ample dowry, and large hopes of future good haps. Many
Princes of Ionia, and Peers of Europe, desirous to insert themselves into so
royal a kindred, and to have interest in so noble a Family, offered their
daughters with large portions. But only the Prince of Lemnos sped in his
suite, whose alliance my Father accepted, shadowing his pretense which was
aimed at hoped profit, for the match was concluded with this condition, that if
the Prince dyed without heir Male (as he then had none, nor may by any
likelihoode hope of any) then the enjoying of his estate, and possession of his
Crown, should in right of his daughter descend to me. This compact thus
subtly contrived, was by agreement of both our Parents confirmed, so that
nothing wanted to finish the bargain and strengthen the contract, but my
consent, whereof my Father seeming to conceive no doubt, made me privy to his
proceedings, commanding me to deliver my resolution in brief and plain
terms. I, who misliking his choice, would not conform my thoughts to an
others direction, perceiving the old man's drift, yet dissembling my intent,
answered in effect thus, that my years were few, my experience small, my
affections free, a sole life best fitting my fancy. Yet did I in humility
submit me to his disposing, only craving a little respit to summon my senses,
and conceit a change, desiring him to impute the not liking of so honorable
an estate, to the imperfections of my youth. He suspecting no fraud in these
fair speeches, thought it sufficient that I was so flexible, and referd the
times appointment to mine own choice. But I deeming nothing more dishonorable
then to measure affection by money, or level the eye, fancies herault, at a
gainefull, though inglorious object, pronounced lucre an heresy in love, and
esteeming such mercenary thoughts meeter for a peasant than a Prince, would
rather never marry then so mar. For should I wed mine own woe? Should I
accept her a spouse, whose beauty I beheld not, whose behavior I knew not,
of whose worth I was uncertain, because it was unseen? How could that love be
constant, that affection permanent, which had no deeper root then the parents
naked consent, no surer seal then a bare saluting at the first fight? Yet,
(such was the inclination of my youth) I earnestly desired to fix my fancy on
some fortunate obiecte worthy of a Princes favor. Many both gorgeous and
gallant Dames attended in my Fathers Court, yet none fit, though all fair.
While fancy commenced such tumults in my thoughts, there arrived in Cyprus a
noble Epirote, surnamed Aristophon, a man noble in deed, graced with all
ornaments which nature might afford, or virtue challenge. He was banished from
his native soil by tyrannous doom of his unnatural Sovereign, being falsely
accused to attempt an innovation in the State, and plot some treacherous
practice with the King of Macedon. For it was unjustly surmised by some, and
believed by all, that he had conspired to betray to him the country of
Ambracia, whereof he was President, and had annexed it by force of Arms to the
Crown of Epirus. Although his integrity should have cleared him from such a
crime, yet, (as it commonly happens) innocence oppressed by injury could not
prevail: leaving therefore his unkind country, despairing of return, yet
bearing with manlike patience the burden of his exile, he repaired to my
Fathers Court, who relieved him with princely liberality, allowing him an
honorable pension for maintenance of his estate: for having often employed him in
weighty affairs, and finding him fortunate in atchieuements, he perceived by
these experiments that he was garnished with all glories of nobility, grave in
counsel, valiant arms: of dauntlesse courage, spotless truth. But leaving
this digression, I will return to the proposed intent of my discourse. He
brought with him his daughter and only child named Timoclea, a creature
endued with such ornaments of the body, graced with such qualities of the
mind, that it seemed nature and virtue concurring in one, had conspired to
make her a peerless proofe-peece of their united perfections: and though
fortune fretting at their favors so largely bestowed sought to cross their
courtesies with her cruelties, yet could she not blemish the bright-shining
worth of so famous a wonder. But as a small cloud in a clear day may somewhat
stayne, not wholly stop the Suns light, so fortunes malice did rather darken
then drown her merits, in whose Iuory brows Chastity sat enthronizde as
guardian of her looks, Modesty teinting her cheeks with a vermilian dye of
Virgin-red maiden-blushes, emblasond her a map of mirrors. Majesty which
beauty claymed, birth challenged, love commanded, guided her gestures with
such decent proportion, as Juno wanted in the pride of her glory, or Minerua
in the prime of her pomp. These gifts these glories did so enchaunt, enthrall,
enforce me, that having scarce viewde her, I vowde her mine, or my self not
mine own, such deep impressions were wrought in mine affections. Love having
won and wounded me with mine own weapons, finding an easy entrance into mine
heart through mine eyes, the authors of my disease, and discouerers of my
desire, disgarisond my thoughts of wonted fancies, converting my solace into
sobs, my delights into despair. I unable to sustain so grievous a burden,
perceiving that the more I strove to allay the heat, the more those smothered
cinders reuiude in quenchlesse flames, Flames which Aetna-like boild in my
breast, resembling the horrors of Mount Ghibelloes fiery rage, which vomits
millions of vapors, and darts heaps of sulphur from the glowing center, being
I say torturde with troubles, I resolved to find ease for my love, or end for
my life, suing to her bounty which had undone me by her beauty. I am so
brief in relating my fortunes, as I was then loath to defer the execution of
mine enterprise that so highly concernd the hope of my good hap. Finding her on
a time in company with other, I singled her from the rest, my intent not
suspected by any. When we were alone, I having awhile dallyed with common
devises to enterteine her with variety of talk, in the end though I could not
Orator-like paynt my passions in figurative terms, nor contriue them with
rhetorical conceits, yet did I plainly discover my affection, protesting my
present love, vowing my future loyalty, producing causes, desiring comfort,
alleging her worth, my wants, seasoning my words with many sighs. She in a
cholerike humor (but it was a pretty choler) framde a courteous yet cruel
answer, courteous in her words, enterlaced with reverent speeches, cruel in
that unkind repulse, yet kind rebukes, not omitting to insert the respect of
her own honor, and the regard of her fathers safety: but concluding her
friendly anger in a calmer vein, she proffered in submission all service love
excepted and her honor reserved. Although the last clause afforded sufficient
matter for a fresh reply, yet did her constancy so confound me, that being
unable to utter one word, I brake off our parle abruptly, and summoning my
fancies to a retreat, I resolved to attempt a second onset, wherein being
likewise vanquished by her virtues, yet rather animated then amated (these
kind conflicts kindling not quenching my flaming passions) I attached a third
onset: but having therein received a sharper foil, I proceeded to a fourth, of
all most fatal, for she taunted me with contemptuous terms, and yielding a
full denial, sealed with a storm of frowns, she departed, leaving me amid my
discontent plunged in a sea of dangerous conceits, musing on my mishaps,
meditating on her rigor, desperate of all hope, destitute of all delights: but
my passions were such that I could not conceal them undiscovered: such my
sorrows, that I could not smother them in silence: thus therefore I vtt^red
part of my grief in an extemporall Sonet.

Arisbas his Sonet.
SHould I accuse mine eyes that boldly gazed
On that fair object not to be obtained,
Or blame the worth in Europes wonder blazed,
That them to look and me to love constreyned?
Eyes for excuse alleadgde prevailing reason,
Heart in extremes on fancies wrong exclaymed:
Hopes sunshine clowded like obscurest season,
Yields to despeire at my misfortunes aimed.
Nature too lavish outward graces planted,
Virtue too friendly inward bounties sowed:
Yet those fair eyes of courteous looks are scanted,
And angels hue on tygres thoughts bestowed.
Tush, love which not alike did wound us both,
Is cause, that I my death-like life do loath.
But not satisfied thus to have expressed my sorrow, I did in an odder vein
pen an Elegy without method or good matter, but as it was I will rehearse it.

Arisbas his Elegy.
FAint well I may for I feel enfeebling faintnes about me,
faintnes upon my lims heart to beset to besot.
Love is a God but a cruel God but a boy but a wanton
blind but boldly triumphs, proud to be tearmd a tyran.
What shall I do? shall I sue to the gods that lodge in Olympus?
there love seated aloft vaunts to be Lord over all.
Heaven yields small comfort: him, they do tremble obeying,
and themselves enthralde cannot alas me release.
What shall I do? shall I sue to the power whom Cyprus adoreth,
loves loue-worthy mother though not a friend to Cupid?
Her does he wound and smiles when her hap Cytherea bewaileth,
how then will he for her yield to relieve another?
What shall I then? shall I sue to the boyish God that has hurt me,
hurt and harmd me so, that little is my relief?
Then will he vex me more til heart more heavily languish,
torn as Prometheus fruteful unhappy liver.
What shall I then? i will sue to the saint whose looks me bereaved
of lives bliss through love, love the decayer of hope,
O that beauty so rare (but I blush to blame such a bounty)
should stain fairest hue with such a blot such a blur.
Yet will I try, to the saint will I pray and sue to be succord,
in whose choice it rest me to relieve to release.
If you mislike either of them, or both of them (as well you may) accept this
for a curra^t excuse, that troubled thoughts thwarted with sorrow, can hatch
no pleasant conceits seasoned with sweetness, and where sadness houers, no
Muses harbor, but to our purpose. This melancholy (whereof I spoke before)
procured a grievous malady, which she at the first supposed feigned, knowing
that I would plot all sleights, and leave no subtilties vnassaide to circumuent
her, but when the Physicions report, my Fathers sorrow, the general rumor
bruted through the Court had assured her of mine estate, she thinking it
enough to cause but too much to continue my danger, came with her Father to
visit me. How then I was affected, I refer to their censures whose fortunes
have resembled mine. All the powers of my body being transferd into mine eyes
the contriuers of my then-seeing discontent, were employed in viewing her
outward glories, and valuing her inward graces. When I remembered her last
terms, I trembled at each thought, but weighing that being endued with all
virtues, she could not want that of clemency having the other of courtesy nor
be void of gentleness being garnished with far-deriued gentilitie, I supposed
this the fittest time to speed if now I spoke. When her father took leave, I
craude his daughters longer presence under pretense of passing away the time,
she not unwillingly assented though smelling the drift of my demand, and he
both accepted and ratified my request, commanding her to tarry. When we were
alone, I pleaded in effect thus, though not so boldly as before, First, I
alleged that my present sickness so dangerous, my former vows so serious,
might warrant the truth of mine unfeigned passions. Next, that I meant not to
dishonor her by affecting her, since I craude only to make her my lawful
spouse, which favor if she would vouchsafe to afforde, I vowed to incur all
hazards for the preserving of her honor, protesting to leave Cyprus, to
frustrate the pretended marriage with the Prince of Lemnus his daughter, and
live with her the only blissful heaven of my life, and stay of mine
happiness, as banished in some other country till my Fathers anger were
appeased and his consent obtained, whose royal estate to me as eldest by right
belonging, when I should by succession in that farre-renowned Kingdom fully
enjoy, I promised to inuest her with a Diadem, and Crown her Queen of my
country, as she was already sovereign of my content. I ended my plaints with
an humble petition, desiring her to pity mine estate, accept my service, and
compassionate my sorrows, since in loue-diseases they only can heal which
causde the hurt. She showring a stream of siluer-teares from those crystal
fountains bright lamps of loves light, such as might beseem Venus to shead on
her dear Adonis, Aurora on her Son Memnon, shapt this answer.

Pardon (dearest Lord) the follies of a selly maid, or rather weigh with
indifference the causes of her coyness, for so you term my denial, which if
folly had effected, or disdeigne caused, I had merited more blame then a world
of punishments might expiate. But since the respect of my Fathers safety, and
the regard of mine own honor moved me to be so rigorous in my replies, I hope
to find the more favor in the offer of my satisfaction, which with all
submission I humbly present. As it grieves me to be the author of your present
danger, so it glads me not a little that in me it rests (as you affirm) to
cure your discontent, and be the happy author of your health, wherein if mine
endeavors may further you, I will not fail in diligence, nor be slack in my
deuoire, but with this condition, that you observe your promise of preserving
mine honor from all prejudice: then leaving all, and only loving you, I will
for ever live with you, but if you violate that vowed covenant, then is the
bargain cancelled by so heinous a forfeit.

These words containing such comfort, affoording such content to my
halfe-withered hope, did so relieve my fainting spirits, that they recovered
their wonted vigor, and I my former strength, being within short time restored
to mine health by this good hap. I forthwith conceived means for our escape,
having before decreed to pass into your Arcadia, and to remain there until
my Fathers anger were appeased, knowing that in such affairs delays import
more then ordinary dangers, fearing my Fathers too hasty praceeding in that
ill-pleasing match with the Lemnian Princes daughter. Being loath to defer time,
or dally with fortune, I observed this order in perfourmance of my plotted
enterprise. Disguising my self, I went on an evening t^ ^he Haven (for the
Court was then kept at Famagosta) there I met with a Rhodian, which having
shipped his fraught, was ready to hoise sail, and determined to touch in the
maine of Greece before his arrival at Rhodes. Conferring with him a while of
triuiall matters, in the end I disclosed my purpose, feining my self an
Arcadian, and that my Father enforced to fly his country, had long lived in
Cyprus, spending the remnant of his life in banishment with me and my poor
sister (for so I termed Timoclea) his unhappy children, the hopeless
companions of his exile, that being now dead, he left us seely Orphans, and to
us such small substance as he had, that we bereaved by death of our dearest
comfort, not knowing how to maintain our selves in a strange place with so
small a portion, were desirous to reuiewe our native soil, and return to our
deceassed fathers friends. Proceeding, I told him that I knew none fitter to
transport us then himself, protesting to pay whatsoever he would reasonably
demand, if he would undertake it as well he might, having occasions to touch
in the maine of Greece, since in what part soever of the continent we were set
on land, we might have easy passage thence into Arcadia. He believing my
feined tale, seeming to pity each clause of my discourse, or perhaps tickled
with desire of gain, offered himself most willingly to undertake it, but
requested a round sum, which I granting, gave him part in hand, with
sufficient assurance for the rest. Thus the bargain being solemnly knit
between us, he wild me that I should come with my supposed Sister the next
night very late, being the time prefixed for his departure, and told me
secretly in friendly sort, as one stranger to an other, that he had aboard
certain unlawful and uncustomed wares, the sale whereof would be very
gaynefull to him, but if it were revealed, would work his utter undoing, which
caused him attempt means to launch thence by stealth. Nothing could chance
more ^espondent to my wish, who desired to depart privily. Leaving him
therefore and returning to the Court, I repaired to Timoclea, certified her of
my proceedings in all points, willed her to remember her vowed promise and
plighted faith, enfourmed her of all things needful to be done. She not
failing mine expectation, promised her readiness at the appointed time. I
leaving her, packt such treasure as I could gather in haste, and attended the
assigned hour, which being come, taking her with me, I came to the Haven, and
being speedily conveyed aboard, found all things ready, anchors weighed,
sails spread at our coming: within short space we got out of the Haven, and
before morning were far enough from the coast of Cyprus. Four days we
sailed merrily, having a lusty gale in the poope, which drove us gallantly
forward. On the fifth day toward evening we descryed land, the shores
delightful hue affoording us a pleasant prospect. Our master judging it some
part of Greece, supposing that I which had feinde my self native in the
continent, could not be ignorant of the coast, desired me to go on shore,
search the land, and bring him word whether I knew the country. I of all most
desirous to leave the sea, fearing pursuit of my fathers power, condescended
to his request. Being set on land, pacing up and down a while, I was drowned
in view of those delights which that fertile soil yielded, deeming that it
was Arcadia, or some place bordering on it, participating like pleasures with
it. Then began I to conceit varieties of imagined bliss, judging this a fit
place for me and my Timoclea to rest in a while, till she had recovered her
health, being much impaired by her sea-iourney. Hitherto Fortune seemed
friendly to mine attempts, but now, least she should be unlike her self, she
obscurde the sunshine of my happiness with clouds of her inconstancy, for
the wavering Goddess doomd my solace to be thwarted with eternal sorrows. In
a moment the winds raising the Sea in billows, secluded me from return. He
which attended my coming in the Boat, fearing to be intercepted by the
storm, rowed back in haste, leaving me, yet did he hardly escape drowning. I
though too late weighing the weathers change, hasted back, but missed the
Boat, and him that guided it. Then I beheld the Ship tossed amid those
tempestuous waves, sometimes hoised to heaven, presently plunged in the Oceans
deapth. Accursed eyes the unhappy beholders of my dearest Timocleas troubles
whereof she was unworthy, I too worthy which brought her to this peril, for
whose danger drouping more then dreading mine own, I made signs to them
aboard, which answered me with the like, intimating as I did guess their
desire and readiness to take me in when the storm should cease. I somewhat
comforted with this cold hope, sat down near the shore looking for a calm.
Days light declining, nights darkness shadowed the earth, but in this
obscurity of all things I continued my abode, expecting days return. But
when Phoebus posting from the Antipodes had remounted the Eastern hill, and
burnished heaven with his glittering beams, I hoping to see my wished object,
viewed only the void Sea. What should I then do? exclaim? I did it: accuse?
whom? the Gods? I would not: Fortune? I durst not, for I hoped her favor
might be regayned. But ay me, my hope was forcelesse, because frutelesse. The
winds fury was assuaged, but no Ship seen, no hope of return. I spent the
second night in this bootelesse expectation, which being past, and day
restored, I summond my thoughts to consult, and determind since vain sorrow
without search could not avail, to seek her my lost love, and find her if
the earth affoorded her. Rising in this resolution, and hasting by the coast,
having mine eyes always toward the Sea, I came to a desolate and almost
dispeopled Haven, where finding a Cretan Pinnesse ready rigd, and furnished for
departure, I speedily embarked my self therein, but neither in my passage at
Sea, nor in my search on land after my arrival, could I find any certainty
of my desire. Passing thence by Ship to Rhodes, I had like success, for
expecting there most comfort, I found least content. Though there discouraged,
yet I drouped not, but proceeded: no I Will in the Ionian or Aegaean Seas was by
me unseen or unsearched. Failing in these, I came by Sea to Hellespont, thence
to Epirus, thence to Macedon, then forward into Thessaly, from Thessaly to
Thrace, enquiring diligently in all the Port towns of these Provinces, and not
finding any comfort, not hearing any news of what I most desired, I entered
into Arcadia, and met happily with you amid my laments. Thus have you heard the
sum of my sorrows briefly related, whereto if you can afford such ease as
I expect, you shall not only save the life and salve the honor of a
distressed Prince, but make him of all most fortunate. Here words melted into
tears, tears that made a periode to his plaints. Damon half in a passion
after some pause replied thus.

The strangenes of your discourse has so amazed me, that I scarce know how
to answer. I should derive my beginning from craving pardon for so homely
enterteyning so great a personage: but the ignorance of your estate affoords
sufficient matter of excuse to shield me from reproach. Yet if the sequel of
my report do in any sort satisfye you, I request that the solace which you get
thereby, may in part recompense those former defects.

When our last Autumn the years most desired season, had rendered Earths
tribute with heaped plenty of increase, Aegon and Damaetas, both Arcadians, by
profession Shepherds as I am, walking on the downs not far from the Sea,
while Titan posting to plunge his fiery Chariot in Thetis lap had gladded
Oceanus with his return, walking I say and ouerlooking their Swaynes that
gathered the flocks to pen them in the foldes, they saw a far off one
running toward them, seeming by signs to request their tarriance. At his
approach they beheld him a goodly youth of comely feature, and endued with
such rare beauty, as is seeldome seen in any of our sex. The selly lad
breathless with running, speachlesse, and almost heartlesse through fear,
fell down at their feet. They having granted him some respit to settle and
recover himself, gently took him up and courteously demanded his estate, and
the cause of his ill hap. He which panting for breath stopped often in his tale,
and could not make a long discourse, briefly told them, that having by hard
fortune left his Country, he was taken by Pirates, amongst whom he had long
led a miserable life, being most barbarously handled, they sometimes alluring
him with fair promises, sometimes terrifying him with sharp menaces, but no
way able to win him to their wills, or move him to satisfye their beastly
lust. Often he cursed his worthless beauty, so he termed it, that had caused
that wretched bondage, wherein he had endured so many troubles, continuing
resolutely in his chaste constancy. Thus much he discovered, and desired them
to question no farther of his estate, but earnestly besought one of them, whom
it should so please, to enterteyne him as his servant, and promised to do his
duty with all deuoire of diligence. Aegon the wealthier of the two, a man of
approved honesty enterteined him, took him home, and since that time has
used him not as a servant but a son, for having no child he purposes to
make him his heir. When the fame of this wonder, and the fortune of his
arrival was bruted through the country, Aegons house was frequented with
troops of Arcadians lusty Gallants, and dainty Girls. Ranished with the view
of so rare a creature, they all said that either Hyalus being retransformed,
had returned to grace Arcadia, or Cupid shrouded in disguise of mortal shape,
was come to fire their hearts with new flames. Thus was this wonder admired of
all, loved of Shepherds, and liked of Lasses. Happy seemed the Swayne that
could enjoy his company, proud was the Girl that could for a lovers glaunce
receive a friendly look. Among the rest, Dorylus an Heard-man, doting more
deeply then became a Neateheard, assaying all means possible, yet finding no
means possible to compass his desire, at last resolved to woe him with
offers, try him with presents, and tempt him with gifts: for deeming love a
covetous humor, he thought this the only point for his purpose. Being in so
odd a vein, presuming to foresee his own success, he plotted his supposed
fortune in a Poem, which being common in every Shepherds mouth, I will now
recite, that you may judge how cunningly he could contriue his fancy in a
fiction.

Cupids journey to Hell.
Love leaving heaven began post to Stygian lake,
And being landed on the farther shore,
For Plutoes palace did his journey make,
To view his uncles Court and royal store.
Thus having crept from mothers sight by stealth,
He welcomed is with pomp by bloodlesse ghoasts:
And hels grim tyran greeting him with health,
His royalties to powre-full nephew boasts.
Having viewd each strange hue of monstrous shape,
They feasted with great iollitie in hell:
And sawc'd their meat with store of pressed grape,
Till wine did wit and sense from them expel.
Sleep causde by fumes to their ore-charged brains,
Did seize on both: first Pluto took a nap:
Next, Cupid (thus his quaffing mood constraines)
Lay down to rest him, dreading no mishap.
In have the fondling from his shoulders threw,
His dear bought quiver and his fatal bow:
Fair Proserpine came in and at the view,
Forthwith exclaimde, these, these have wrought my woe.
These, these causde me depriude of wonted joy,
T'inhabit Hell these firde the leachers lust:
But since they are misguided by a boy,
I will commit them to an others trust.
This said, came Plutus headlong tumbling in,
Plutus the god of Coin blind as the other:
Whom with fair words the guilefull queen did win,
T'vsurpe those gifts and seem loves second brother:
At first he fearde, at last he was delighted,
With using them and smiled often to think:
How men's affections by those shafts excited,
Obeide his doom which love with gold did link.
Cupid awaking missed the dreaded signs
Of godheads might: strange passions did him toss:
He wreathes his arms in folds and them vntwines,
Thus childishly he mones his hapless loss.
He wept, he fled, in hell he durst not hide him,
Grieude with the murmr of so many souls,
Near heaven he dares not come least Venus chide him.
What should he do whom Fortune thus controules?
Foul fall the wagge that lost so rare a jewel
Long may he lurk that could no better guard
His fathers toil, his mothers pride, the fuel,
Which for hearts wrack, eyes glaunses have preparde.
Since then the god of gain vsurps loves room,
I will with gifts make suit for gracious doom.
You may perhaps doubt the coherence of this devise, thinking it strange that
Plutus stumbled in headlong at that instant, no former cause of his hasty
coming being pretended: but mark my brief report, which being heard, his
invention may seem plausible.

In this the last and worst time wherein men carry golden thoughts though it be
an iron age, Plutus perceiving the general desire of wealth settled in all
hearts, thought himself so great a god as the best, since his gifts were so
esteemed of the most. Meaning therefore more benignely to express his bounties
royalty, he lent the use of his chief servants to sundry his well-willers,
pretending those the only acceptable sacrifice to obtain his favor, their
names were Covetousness, Deceit, Perjury, and the Seed of all mischief,
that Arch-sinne Usury. Having thus prepared a pathway, he fancying greater
glories due to his devilish deity, discovered himself in the West, supposing
that these Coyne-cormorants, these Money-mongers his godheads chief pillars,
would run in heaps to adore him, and fill the earth with Temples erected in
honor of his name: But his hope wanted success, for these odd companions
hearing that his iollitie had ascended from his infernal lodging to frollike
with them, contrived means to catch him, and having laid hold on him, they
hampred him so, every one catching a piece, that he erst in hell a god, was
now on earth a prisoner, mangled and martired by those his favorites, locked
in great chests strengthened with iron bars, kept so close that the poor god
was almost stifeled, gasping often for breath, but being blind, he felt no want
of light, though closed in darkness where the glory of his former beauty
was blemished by rust. But when Saturnes black son had sent his poursiuant
Death to seize on these hucksters for whom a stately bath was prepared in
euer-burning Phlegeton, the children not liking their fathers close fingring,
restored Plutus to his liberty but with his loss, for they brought him from
prison to torture, setting him on the rack, stretching his joints so, that he
possessed more room then Tityus, whose body covered so many acres, for they
made him reach or rather retch to the benefits of all those whom they glutted
with inordinate gifts, and they had almost dismembered him, for they drew him
so ^rie and sucked ye marrow so near (the quintessence of (...) substance
being bestowed on the basest though best-s^^^ing commodities) that the lean
god had nothing (...) but skin and bone. At last, winding himself from their,
he met in this perplexity with his old friend Fru^^^itie, which being an
expert Chirurgian set him together again: having recovered his legs, away he
trotted amain wingd with fear, dreading ever that some of those mad
companions were at his heels, and never thought himself secure until he came
to hell, but he left his servant Treasure behind him on the earth, with a
thousand curses to them which kept it: Of which one was, that they should never
be quiet in mind: Another, that the brats of Usurers should be always sick
of the loose disease, never able to hold any thing long.

Thus have you heard the cause of his headlong stumbling in, but here I will
presume to comment on the conceit of Dorilus. Plutus did gladly ^^cept this
offer of Proserpina, hoping thereby to recover his servant Treasure, for which
purpose he used to wound lovers after Cupids fashion, with the gold-tipped
shafts, but he pierced the hearts of their beloved objects with leaden headed
arrows, though garnished with a thin couerture of gold, which intimated that
they carried Mercinary affections, not vouchsafing them any favor which
brought them no fee. But belike the god himself meant to share stakes, and by
that kind of tribute which they paid, to recover in part his servant
Treasure, through them to whom he had been the author of so profitable a
profession. Hereat Arisbas smiled, and Damon ending this his first merry
digression, proceeded thus on a second.

This was not his first experience of repulsed affection and unregarded
passions, for before this wonders arrival, he extremely doated on Palma a
fair shepherdess, which was more delighted with observing Dianaes orders,
then accepting his offers. He half in despair, pend a conceit as he thought
persuasiue, thinking that could move her, which did rath^r mad her, and thus it
was.

Dorylus his Ode, in English Sapphiques.
TEll me thou fairest of al earthly creatures
Fair by thy virtue, by thy beauty blessed,
Tell me what moves thee to refuse my service
slightly regarded?
Love of a sole life to be like Diana
May perhaps move you, but I wish ye would not:
Would not or could not, but I hope ye will not,
still be resolude so.
If to the Forests, to the shadie thickets,
Fancy does move thee to repair alone thus,
If to the wide woods, to the craggie mountains,
or to the valleys,
Then will I speed me to the groves vnhanted,
Where Satyrs sport them to the Fairie wood-Nymphs*
Nimbly now skipping, then again reposing,
near to the fountains.
Like not a sole life: Venus is revenging,
Fear ye not frownings of an angry goddess?
Scorn not her hests then: be no foe to Nature,
Love is a pleasure.
Beauty decaieth, yet is no chiefest
Grace of a Virgin, yet it is required:
Life is uncertain. Who can hold a shadow
Lost in a moment?
Such was his conceit wherein he sped not as he expected the issue of his
fortune, yet loath to disgrace himself, to salve that suspicion which might
intimate want of perfections in him, he thus feined the cause of that repulse.

Dorylus his Madrigal.
Love vowde himself my friend and chose his time
To wound fair Palma: Cynthia him espide,
As wantonly the god did climb
To fit his aim, and swear to work his smart,
If he presumed to pierce so chaste an heart:
And therewithal from Maiden side
She drew a shaft: away the god began fly
With wings fast wau'd, nor durst the wanton scant
Or slack his course amid the sky,
Thus he his will and I my wish must want.
But let us return to his last wooing: having thus descanted ^ndeceiuing hope,
he attempted to effect his device, but failing in the execution, being
rejected with severe looks, finding frowns in stead of favors, he felt such
deep impression of sorrow, that since that time of his repulse, he has led a
discontented life, spending his days in pensive meditations. His fortune or
rather misfortune not so rare as by his laments made ruthful, is memorized by
us in a prouerbial byword: for we term il success in love the destiny of
Dorylus. Thus you have heard, what I can discourse concerning this wonder, a
name well fitting his perfections, modesty of behavior, majesty of looks,
comeliness not common, fairness of face, eyes like Stars, brows sometimes
furrowed with pretty frowns, yet always beauties bower: frowns resembling
those silver steps in the milke-white way leading to Jove's palace, cheeks
cherry red, yet was this lovely tincture circled with a maiden white, such
neat proportion of all parts, that I want a world of terms to emblason their
particular praises, and will therefore end with this affertion, which I dare
avouch against all men, that Nature in framing him has wronged her own sex,
bereauing it of so great a glory.

Arisbas galled to the quick with Damons words, houering between hope and
fear, knew not how to surmise, what to suppose, for he felt a world of
melancholy motions mustring tumults in his fancy. Weighing the report of that
wonders beauty, he thought it could be no other then his Timoclea, but when he
remembered the diversity of the sex, he was again discouraged, till hope
rescuing his drouping passions with timely succors of happy comfort, bad him
imagine that as love does often effect rare stratagems, so he might prove his
power miraculous in this one thing, shadowing the sex for his avail. Being in
these dumpes he held a session in his thoughts, whereto he assembled all his
powers, and therein resolved to ryd himself of this doubt by a speedy view of
that far-renowmed wonder. For this purpose he enquired of Damon the name and
distance of the place where he remained, who answered, that he dwelt far of
in the Southern parts of Arcadia, and that it were ^^lly to weary himself
with a needelesse journey, since if he would continue his abode but nine
days, he might with less travail, and in a full assembly view him at ease.
The Prince demanded how, The shepherd after a long pause began thus, gracing
his relation with an unexpected discourse. When our Country was haunted with
the almost-daily presence of heavens high inhabitants, though now bereaved of
so great a good through our own ingratitude. (For Jupiter courted Calisto in
Dianaes shape, robbing her of her dearest Jewel, and Apollo mastered or rather
martyred by Cupid, for his high contempt pursued swift Daphne winged with
chaste desires.)

There lived in Arcadia a most fair Ladde famous as the rest, I may well term
him fair, a term too slender to emblazon his beauties worth. Much I muse
(yet I need not muse, for Jupiter possessed Ganimede already) that he made
not him a pray for his pleasure. But since I cannot fully express his
perfections, I will rehearse to you the description of him couched by an
Arcadian penman, in a brief Ode, a conceit well known to all shepherds, and
by them often recited.

The description of Hyalus in an Ode.
GAnimede th'Idaean boy,
Second glory of the day:
Phrigiaes wonder fathers joy,
Loves content, ^oues wishfull pray,
Blithe Adonis beauties treasure,
Venus darling, Fancies fire,
In whose looks were heavens of pleasure,
Fruit too fair of foul desire:
Both these would, though both were rare,
Both the mirrors of their time:
Blush if they should make compare,
With this wonder of our clime.
In whose eyes love lodgd his darts,
But he did with glaunses aim them,
That he might subdue all hearts,
And his own by conquest claim them.
Such his face such was his stature,
Locks resembling burnisht gold,
That his like, astonished nature,
Framd not since of earthly moulde.
Nature at her self amazed,
O what influence then did guide her,
Since in want such worth was blazed,
Worth which heavens have since denide her?
May not then this lovely boy,
For he was a lovely creature,
Well be tearmd Arcadiaes joy,
Blessed in bearing such a feature?
Well he may and if not he,
Who should then our wonder be*
Such and so many were his perfections, that he could not fully describe them,
much less I discover them. He was affected by many, admirde by all. Shepherds
doted on him, Lasses droupt for him, all liked him, for who could not love him?
It is the custom of Arcadians to rest in some shade when Summers scortching
heat annoyes them. Being shrouded from the Sun, they spend the time in
discoursing on their own or their fellows fortunes, Shepherds I mean, men
of their own profession, whether native in Arcadia or no: as in memorizing the
worth of Astrophell, praising the perfections of Phillis, lamenting the loss,
commending the loyalty of Amyntas, mourning for the death, yet misliking the
disdeine and pride of Amaryllis, pitying the distress of the forlorn
Shepherd, the unhappy admirer, though happy herald o^ her worth. But if
Hyalus by hap came by (as often he did) they would abruptly break off these
discourses, and follow him greedily, gazing on so glorious an object. Nor was
this uniformity of affections only in humane hearts, for the rural powers
were touched with like simpathy: Pan sighed to see him, remembering by him his
Syrinx, though of an other sex. The Hamadryades flocked to view him, wishing
him one of their troop. Faunes, Siluans, Satyrs, seeldome seen before, were
often beheld by men, while they left the hallowed groves to gaze in the open
fields on that eye- Siren, alluring not with the sound, but at the sight.
Amongst other, Pomona, Goddess and patroness of fruit did so deeply affect
him, that Venus could not more dote on her Adonis. She desirous to win him
with ouer-cloying kindness, fed him with Apples, gave him Plums, presented him
Pears. Having made this entrance into her future solace, she would use often his
company, kiss him, coll him, check him, chuck him, walk with him, weep for
him, in the fields, near the fountains, sit with him, sue to him, omitting no
kinds of dalliance to woe him, win him, feyning to droupe, to dye for him.
But he which would not listen to loves lore, nor obey his hests, nor abide his
laws, took no pleasure in her passions, loathed her embraces, liked not these
amorous combats, and often shunning her sight, would repair to the unhappy
Shepherd, disdaind by Amaryllis, and sit with him and sing, tying his angels
voyes to the observations of music, recording the skillful Swains sweet
ditties in heavenly notes: for he loved him for his pleasing grace in
passionate Sonets. While these things chanced, Zephyrus that glads Arcadia
with friendly gales, saw him, and sighed for him: nor did he only see him,
but by often breathing cool gales into him, felt the many sweetes lodged in that
lovely subject. While he thought of no fellow in his affection, his passions
were moderate, but when he knew that Pomona was his rival, he loath to brook
a partner in his pleasure, or a companion in his content, resolved to sequester
his delight from hazard of surpazing, and thus effected his resolution. As on a
day Hyalus parched with summers heat, and tyrde with faintness, reposed his
weary lims on a green bank, Zephyrus not omitting this oppertunitie, gently
heaued him from the ground, and softly conveyed him musing much, into the
worlds Western coasts, wafting this wonder to the fortunate Islands, the
blessed soil not annoyde with rough blasts, nor ouerwhelmd with immoderate
raynes, but sometimes (though seldom) touched with a superficial moisture of
showers. There he laid him down in a medowe on a bed of flowers, gathered
against his coming by his ayrie servants, to whom before he had intimated his
intent. When the boy was laid, being in a pretty chafe, he scolded and
exclaymed, though not knowing whom he might accuse. Zephyrus which felt fresh
coals kindled in his heart by this lovers combat, spoke thus. Scolde not my
wanton with thy friend, whose name if thou desire, know that it is he which for
thy sake has often mantled Arcadia with Floras pride to delight thine eyes, and
comforted thee with a pleasing cool in extreme heat, to relieve thy
faintness, even Zephyrus, Lord of the Western blasts, whom if thou can
affect, thou shall want nothing which the world can affoorde: try me, trust me,
employ me, impute to me thy desires, thy delights. This said, resolving
himself into air, he diued into his dearling, on his eyes, on his lips he
seazd, he surfeited: then raising him thence, he carried him to his Palace, a
most pleasant cool edifice. There Hyalus rested long, not wanting his will in
any wish. He was served by unseen att^ndants that waited with diligence on
their Lords dearling. Variety of daintiest fare, choice of wines, change of
meats, store of delicates, were plentifully brought or rather blown in at
appointed hours, tables covered, all things furnished with more then princely
magnificence, yet no seruitour appearing, divine melody on windy instruments
filled his ears with continual charms of harmonious sounds. Often he walked
abroad to view the perfections planted in that soil, and being weary or
wanton, road back in an ayrie Chariot. But all this could not content him,
who wanting his wonted companions, seemed to lead a life void of comfort. He
did therefore so importune Zephyrus with childish complaints, that he unable to
deny him any thing, granted the boys most earnest desire, and ratified his
grant with speedy performance. Truce was taken, and the composition sealed
with many kisses: the sum of their agreement was, that Hyalus after his
arrival in Arcadia, should shun the sight of Pomona, and leave all other
that pretended love. On these conditions he was conveyed back, and laid in the
place whence he was lifted. The rumor of his return being bruted abroad, the
Arcadians throngd in thicker troops then before to see him, for measuring the
worth of his presence by the grief of his absence, they could not glut
themselves with gazing on him. So soon as Pomona heard these happy tidings,
she erecting tropheys in her fancy, vowde to prevent like future misfortune.
Having gotten a sight of him, she ran, he ran, he fled, she followed, and
followed so fast, that she ouertooke him in his course, and stayed him from
starting: then she began thus. Shun not thy friend fond wagge which has sought
thee, sobd for thee, grieud to loose thee, glad to find thee. At first I
thought that Jupiter misliking Ganimede that now grows stale, had taken thee
to supply his room, or Venus chosen thee her second Adonis: But when I heard
that Zephyrus had done this, I was the less discouraged, knowing my self able
to encounter such an adversary, and beard so bas^ ^ rival in the pride of his
hope. Now I have got thee, and beshrow me wanton if I watch not your wiles, and
keep you not in a surer guard. This said, she took him by the hand, and led
the blushing boy to her mansion, where she locked him up close prisoner,
restraind his former large liberty, allowed him only to walk in her Orchards,
and feed on her fruits. O beauty nourse of bondage, fair ill, sour sweet.
O most preposterous estate of all things, that he should be captive to them
whom his looks had conquered. Ungentle Fortune, what malice did selly Hyalus
merit, that having perfections worth, he should feel pleasures want? was he
therefore fair that he should be unfortunate? this by the way, but i will
proceed. Zephyrus renewing his old wont, romde through Arcadia, and missing
his choice, marueiled at the change. Did he violate his vow? tush, he was a
child that could not value the virtue of an oath. Was he urged by others? why
not? for he was fair. Did he love an other? he might, for he was young. Thus
dreading many doubts, he swallowed his discontent, but when he knew that
Hyalus was Pomonaes prisoner, he was so enraged with furious passions, that he
ruminated on nothing save revenge, and being unable to hurt so power-full a
rival, vowed to inflict vengeance on the whole country of Arcadia. In this
impatient humor, he hasted to the Northren regions, and meeting there with
Boreas, saluted him thus. Father of storms, salve now the sorrows of unhappy
Zephyrus, thy brother in nature, thy equal in substance: help me, and for
ever have me a friend, a favorer. I have in one injury received more wrongs
then I can reckon. Unmindful, unthankful Arcadia not weighing the many
favors by me affoorded, withholds from me my love, my life, my hope, my
heaven: but if thou power thy plagues on that unkind soil, and oppress the
inhabitants with outrageous fury of thy blasts, my rival may repent her
rashness, and I recover my loss: Do it then dear fellow, and for this
courtesy I will for ever rest at thy command, let thy trial of affection
move thee to weigh my affliction. Boreas replide with a rough voice. Brother
Zephyrus, though our blasts do often effect contrarieties in the air, yet are
not we contrary in our thoughts. I have heard thy cause, and will avenge thy
quarrel, scourging the continent with such a storm of whirle-windes embattaild
against themselves, raising in their tragedies the tropheyes of my merciless
fury, that the world hearing report of this ruthful accident, shall repute thy
cause highly revenged. I vow to thee by the Scepter of our King, not to defer
the execution of thy desire. Zephyrus comforted with these words, yielded him
many thanks, and returned to the West. Boreas forthwith issude from his icy
province with a troop of tempests and invaded Arcadia, where he wrought so
many mischieues in a moment, that no eye could view them tearelesse. Groves
were disgarnished of their shrubs, fields disfurnished of their flowers: trees,
some torn, some rent up by the roots, cattaile violently carried from the
places where they fed, and tumbled headlong down the cliffes, men staggering,
could not stay their steps, leaving therefore their wonted walks they housed
themselves. The Arcadians grieved with so many incommodities, imputed these
afflictions to the anger of the Gods, whose wrath they sought to appease by
Sacrifice. Repairing for counsel to the Delphi^n Oracle, they received this
answer, that they should sue to Aeolus, for he only could ease them, whose
altars they loaded with many oblations, omitting no usual solemnities. The God
pitying their distress, checked Boreas for his unruly rage, and limited his
boistrous fury with appointed bounds, commanding him not to touch the pomp
of Flora, or the hope of Syluanus, not to wrong the harmless Husbandmen, or
hurt the selly Shepherds, but afflict only the places of Pomonaes charge,
which thing he did. The amorous Goddess seeing a general tranquillity, and
all other places quiet, save where she was president, was forced to bridle her
affection, and release her prisoner, least for a fickle humor she should loose
her honor. Hyalus set free, raunged in a childish rage, but being weary with
wandering, he rested near a pleasant Spring, and having wept freely, slept
soundly. In this sleep, strange sleep, the late sex was changed, and of a
fair boy a fairer maid fashioned. Awaking and musing much at this
metamorphosis, she was in the midst of her dumps raisde with a strong gale, and
carried to a place near the streights of Thermopyles, where was a Temple
dedicated to Aeolus, wherein the lovely maid was consecrated a Priest to that
God, and continued there the whole term of her life a spotless virgin. Our
ancestors desirous to celebrate the remembrance of this rare accident with
eternal honor, appointed the day of her change to be for ever, memorizd in a
yearly feast called Parthenia, wherein the Priest of Aeolus accompanied with
the fairest of the youth of both sexes, offers a noble Sacrifice, disposing all
things with due Ceremonies. Which done, they compassing the altar in a ring,
sing a solemn Hymn in praise of that God. This did our ancestors institute,
and their progeny has by long success of time observed their devout orders.
This feast must be solemnized nine days hence, whereat doubtless you shall
see this wonder one of that lovely Chorus. Arisbas delighted with this talk,
and cheered with hope-full courage, thanked Damon for his discourse, and
resolved to tarry the neere-approching time, and desirous in the mean while to
rid himself of wonted pensiveness, in a vein half rude half ready, he
fashioned these three fancies, for taking truce with sorrow, yet not wholly
sorrow-lesse, he felt more comfort, though no full content. But take them as he
wrote them, wherein if all be not current, impute it to his thoughts which were
not clearde. If this pass with favor, the other follow with like hope.

The strife of Love and Beauty.
Love was armed with fatal bow,
Shafts which mother did bestow,
Mother gave, but Father framde,
Father, Mother, both were blamde.
Wanton Goddess did beguile
Husband with a feigned smile:
For a kiss she did obtain
(Labor never spent in vain,)
That her Son by Vulcanes trade
Might the chiefest God be made.
Thus she won him to her will,
(Wily work of woman's skill)
But the boy more proud then wise,
Waves his wings and forth he flies.
Soon as he on earth had lighted,
Thus the fondling was despighted.
As he vaunted vncontrolde
Thinking all that glisterd gold,
Terming in a foolish thought
Which his selfe-conceipt had wrought,
Heaven his foote-stoole, Gods his mark,
Men his objects, earth his park,
Gods and men his hunting game,
Beauty natures deareling came:
Beauty clad in native hue,
Whom the Graces did endue
With rich plenty of their gifts,
Beauty cause of witty shifts:
Beauty with whose worth delighted,
Poets have sweet hymns endited:
Fair as is the ruddy morn,
Leaving restfull bower forlorn.
Morn did with Vermilion red,
Rising from old Tithones bed.
Thus this fairest of all fair
Deind to grace the liquide air:
Passing by where love did stand,
Holding powre-full bow in hand*
Not saluting as she went,
Him that raged in discontent.
Boiling wrath must issue find,
Wrath that boilde in troubled mind*
For the ease of whose unrest,
Thus his fury was expressed.
Love said he was Beauties better:
She said Love was Natures debtor.
Love exclaimde on Beauties pride,
Which all duties force denide.
She said Love receiude no wrong,
Where no duty did belong.
None might crave peculiar right,
Since they were of equal might.
He said beauty nere prevailed,
But where Love the heart assailed.
Beauty for it self admired,
His shafts causde to be desired.
For where Love bred no remorse,
There had beauty little force.
Psyche was more fair then any:
Loud of few, though likde of many.
Yet so likde that not affected:
Sisters sped, but she rejected.
Yet, quoth Beauty Psyche gainde
Cupids heart to her enchainde.
Where was then his wonted might?
Vanquishde by a woman's sight?
Thus fell Love into a trip:
Thus she galde him with a quip.
He said it was his own procurement,
She said it was her allurement.
Love said beauty pleased the eye,
But he wrought hearts sympathy.
She said heart when eye had viewde,
Was by beauties force subdude.
He said beauty soon decaide:
She said love no longer staide,
Then while beauty was in prime:
Thus did both give place to time.
Cupid grieude with these replies,
Framde by her in taunting wise:
Swear by dreadful Stygian lake,
(Greatest vow that gods can make)
That he would no more descend,
Till he did this quarrel end:
Vowing by his godheads might,
Beauties darlings to despite.
Thus he says, and up he flies
Swiftly through the Empire skies.
If men might this strife decide,
As by men it should be tried,
Then would all agree in one,
Beauty can prevail alone:
Beauty able to enthrall,
Eyes and heart, and thoughts and all:
Yet three powers in one assenting
Stroke mine heart, heart soon relenting.
Eyes saw beauty and admirde it,
Love saw heart, through eyes he firde it,
But fair looks did first constrain
Cupids shafts to shape my pain.
Fairer Virtue beauties jewel,
Bad me not pronounce Love cruel.
Love that forced me to affect,
Beauties worth by Virtue decked:
Then o three of all the chief,
Ease at last my loathed grief.
His second invention follows thus.

CVPIDS PALACE.
PAphos now a worthless name,
Wants the grace of wonted Fame.
Fishie Cnidus not frequented,
Samos highly discontented,
Discontented with the miss,
Of so great a former bliss,
Where from altars did arise,
Odors sweet, with lovers cries:
Breathing sighs from hearts amain,
Sad reporters of their pain.
Barraine be Idalian hill,
Vnadornd by Natures skill.
Dry be Acidalian spring,
Circled with no evening ring:
Of the Fairy wood-Nymphs tripping,
And on green grass lightly skipping,
Where sweet Amorets were chaunted,
While it was by goddess haunted:
Be they of all bounties reft,
Since they are by Venus left.
Loves coy queen forgetting quight,
Isles could yield her queint delight,
Deeming earthly mansions dross,
Former solace, future loss,
Haunts the palace of her son,
Work of wonder lately done:
Daily guest she there remains,
And of love to Love complains.
Now no more to rule she deignes,
Yoked Swans with silver reins,
As she did from earth ascend,
(Earth which erst she did commend)
And returned through liquide air,
Gliding to Jove's royal chair.
Vulcan staide from framing thunder,
That he might erect this wonder.
Wanton boy would never cease,
Wily mother grant no peace,
Till by this the strife were ended,
Feined strife by them pretended.
Top is close, the form is round,
Seated on an azure ground:
No door seen, yet doors each-where,
Entries close, yet many there.
For one color teinteth all,
Turrets, doors and gyring wall:
Clammy stuff the color bears,
(Half white, half red hue it wears)
Such as in Asphaltis lake,
Did Chaldaean workmen take:
For that high-entitled frame,
Honored with first Empires name:
On the top with triumphs filled,
Stockdoues mothers birds did build.
Right side was with windows dight,
To receive th'infused light:
Light so clear, so bright, so fair,
As in clearest open air.
There the roofes are rich embost,
Walls adornd with equal cost:
Works engraude of queint devise,
And enchasde with gemmes of price.
There his bow of beaten gold,
Worth a world of wealth untold:
And shafts pointed with like mettle,
Wily wag thought meet to settle.
Pleasure guardian of this room,
Author of each happy doom:
Loves Vicegerent on that side,
Vaunts the worth of heavens chief pride.
Fancies on her steps attend,
Such as do her favors send,
Or afford the fruits of pleasure,
When delight by love they measure.
These serve when the god does strike,
Both hearts with one shaft alike.
Not that one should sue in vain,
And the other dart disdain.
But a mutual passion wrought,
In one sympathy of thought:
Or when hope of hap unproven,
Plots the praise of things beloved.
Pyrocles such fancy knew,
Fancy giving Love his due,
Which did on Philoclea look,
Bathing in a Crystal brook.
He disguisde a virgin seemd,
And his name was Zelmane deemd.
O how sweetly did he praise,
In those lines those lovely lays,
All perfections in her planted?
For his pen no praises wanted.
Tresses of her Ambre hair,
Wauing in the wanton air.
Rubie lips and coral chin,
Soft, smooth, Alablaster skin.
Angels ^ookes, hands lily white,
Eyes subduing at the sight.
Left side has no windows made,
Darker then Tartarian shade.
There was bow of fatal yue,
Acting horrors that ensue,
And his arrows with lead tipped,
Which in Stygian poole were dipped.
Sorrow keeps this seat of terror,
Mirthlesse hag the whelpe of error.
Fancies do on her attend,
Fancies which despair do send:
When one shaft poor heart does shiuer,
Drawn from loue-enforcing quiver:
But a second tipped with lead,
Strikes affections vigor dead:
In an other heart not moved,
With remorse of pain unproven.
These do on repulses muse,
And Loves rigor often accuse.
And soft sounds like minutes breath,
Sighs by turns from underneath.
But o God the most divine,
Since Timocleas heart and mine
Were with equal wound oppressed,
And with fairest Fancies blessed:
End these sowres with sweet conclusion,
Least thy godhead seem illusion.
His third invention not treating of love, but shadowing the worth of Poesy in
a fiction, was thus: The worth of Poesy.
IMpute it not profane impiety,
Dread god of Delos, and chaste virgin-troupe:
To him that, in unpitied misery
That does enforce his wearied muse to stoop,
And him all cheerlesse abiect-like to droupe,
Reueales those holy secrets of your hill,
That do concern defense of depest skill.
Under the covert of a Laurel tree,
Upon the mount where learned Muses dwell:
Rare monuments of worth enshrined be,
The works of Laureate pens, works which excel,
Cherished by comfort of Castalian well:
There rest they safe: though safe, yet once assailde
By three mishaped elues, which fled and failde.
There lay enrolde in everlasting lines,
Epique records wrapped in heroique style:
There lay enclosde in those eternal shrines,
Sweet Hymns and Odes that lyriques did compile,
And Elegies, and Epigrams sharp file,
With the other graces of a laureate quill,
Whence honey sweets do copiously distill.
Pale envy Beldame-like with staff upholding
Her cursed limbs, came first and took a sitting,
In loathsome signs her deadly teene unfolding,
Near to that hallowed place how il befitting,
How much annoyd through her contagious spitting,
T'infect the tree that did those branches nourish,
And kill the root whose moisture fed their flourish?
From depth of poisnous mawe the monster fierce
Did belch foul gobbets with an hell of snakes,
Wallowing in loathsome filth, that did empierce
The teinted ground: Forthwith the Laurel shakes,
For whose decaie the hag that vomit makes,
Which sinking down corrupted root and all,
With Crystal drops that from the spring did fall.
Soon as the erst-greene began to perish,
And witherd branches could no longer cover
Those antique rolls, or them with safety cherish,
A second hag still darkness silent lover:
Oblivion hight, slow hag did slily houer,
Suited in duskie robe of pitchie stain,
Like to an hanging cloud that threatens rain.
Well did this name of Lethe her beseem,
Which often forgot her self and her intent:
Eftsoone she staid, as doubting what to deem:
Then forth she stepped: nor long she forward went,
But staid again, as musing what was meant.
But being come, she toward her began rake
Those monuments, that prize her pray to make.
Then Ignorance that does Arts glory blot,
Ran to the tree to get a Laurel wreath,
Before the branches by that fatal spot
Were wasted clean, that rose from underneath:
Nor would she stop, nor did she stand to breath,
Till tree was touched: thus did the sot desire,
The highest praise of laureate Poets hire.
She thought it meet her pupils to inuest
With lasting bay: and in that fairest place
To lodge their lines, where worthier works did rest,
But when they were repulst with deep disgrace,
She hirde those hags both glories to deface.
Those elues of horror which did yield their help,
The one despaires, the other darkness whelpe.
O bane of bliss, against worthiest wits pretended,
O lucklesse lot o injury of time:
Foule-fall the hags that such ill hap intended,
And haggish brood envying honors prime:
When high-plum'd Muse through Empire skies does climb:
And curses all which holy Poemes hold,
Light on the hags that stop those mines of gold.
O who could harbor such inhumane thought,
Though he Hircanian Tygres milk did suck?
Heart more flint-hard then beating waves have wrought
On sea-washt rocks, reward from art would pluck,
And guerdonize desert with direst luck.
Stand they good Gods dull stones ay-vnremoued,
That such despite by censure fell approved.
Fame gliding from on high did there alight,
Viewde their attempts, and rested on the tree:
The earth was circled with a glorious light,
(Such light as mortal eye could never see)
Forcing the elfe which had those hags in fee,
To troth with apish pace unto some cave,
The halfe-lost use of daseled eyes to save.
The winged Goddess moude with high disdain,
So shrill a note from silver trompet sounded,
That slow oblivion posted thence amain,
Whose ears that strange unwonted noise confounded,
Ears where small help for memory was grounded.
Pale envy fled surprizde with doubtful fear,
Whose witherd cheeks with wrinckles furrowed were.
The filth boild up: the leaves wexd green again:
The Laurel flourisht in her former hue:
Fame bade Desert for ever there remain
With light and sound, to shield a Poets due,
By safe defense from wrongs that might ensue.
Thus I record that future age may tell,
Lo this is he that wished to Poets well.
Although he aymde his conceit at the merits of Grecian and Roman labors
only there preserved in a golden closure of perpetuity, under that ay-greene
ay-glorious tree, ever fair, because ever fresh, whose lasting flourish dated
with eternity, and cherished by the Christal-flowing Castalian spring, such
labors as either record the worth of those ancient Heroes, marshalling their
stately blasons in maiestique method with such success of acceptance and
admiration, as when an high-pac'd Muse treading a lofty march, leads honor
enchaind in an Epique pen, graced with the furtherance of historique Clio, or
treat the tragical tropheyes of the cothurnate Muse, uttering clamorous
complaints, and enwrapping complotted practices of blood and revenge in the
swelling pomp of hautie Iambiques, which yield matter for the Chorus to
complain, warbling sorrows with variable soundes: or the fair blossoms of
affection displayde in elegies, with the facetious grace of sharpe-cutting
conceiptfull Epigrams, limiting delight in compendious sweetness: with
Satiricall reprehensions, heavenly Hymns, and the pleasing solace of harmonius
Odes, not the least study of a Lyrique penman, with Eclogues, and the fruits
of Thaliaes favors suited in meanest robes. Though he I say aymde his conceit
at these only, yet may I aver with like truth, that the like modern taskes
publishd since by men of sundry nations especially in the Latin tongue,
absoluing all parts of poesy in several perfections, were likewise registered
in that holy refuge of such happy relics. But the Muses blushed, and Phoebus
frownd at the strict bounds of their bounties, whose favors were limited with
these two languages. For which restraint of their worth they provided this
remedy, that the divine Entheos inspiring such sap, such sweetness, should be
afforded to other nations, which decree being once ratified, conceiptfull
Italians obteind first place of this privilege, and did divinely absolve each
aboue-named part with several perfections: their names I need not to relate,
being famously known through Europe to the most. Poesy wauing thence her
golden wings beyond the Alps, though returning, established an habit of high
humors in France, the happy nourse of many rare spirits, which likewise with no
less praise have in lively colors expressed all perfections of Poetry, and
these being in like sort famous, need not to be by me memorized. To these add
the labors of Castilian pens. But in Albion the wonder of Islands lovely
Thamesis, fairest of the fair Nereides loves sea-borne Queen adoring, vaunts
the glory of her maiden streams, happy harbor of so many Swans, Apollos
musical birds, which warble wonders of worth, and chaunt pleasures choice in
several sounds of sweetness, pleasant, passionate, lofty, lovely, whose
matchless notes, the fair Nymph keeping time with the billowing of her
Crystal waves, carrying to the Ocean with her ebb, does there echo them to
her astonished sisters which assemble in those vast floods by timely confluence.
Baetis graced with many bounties, Po, and Arno, garnishd with many pleasures,
Rhone, and Araris, enriched with many royalties, yet none of these may vaunt
more heavens of happiness then Thamesis, in harboring such Swans, such
sweetness. Yet many most worthy monuments of heavenly wits wanted the honor
and safety of this seat, for they were drowned in the abyss of Lethes
silence, especially of the most ancient Grecian Authors, as Orpheus, Linus,
the first Musaeus, Aratus, Nicander, Theognis, Phocilides, and most of all the
nine Lyriques, and Elegiacke and Comicke Poets, and some taskes of tragique
pens, with the precious predictions of the ten Sybills, and many of the
Roman Worthies. Little remains of grave Ennius, who vaunted though
vaine-gloriously the transmigration of great Homers soul, seeking advantage by
that one point of Pythagorean doctrine to bositer his own ambition, but though
he were rude in style (which was the fault of his time) yet was he grave in
matter, and in this meriting praise, that being one of those that brake the
first ye, he rowsde the following rare spirits. But worse hap befell the rare
Smyrna of learned Cinna, and sugared passions of sweet Gallus, and of those
other both Greek and Roman works, many are blemishde with some blurs: so
that it was high time that Phoebus and the Muses should undertake their
protection, and become their patrones. But leaving this digression, let us
return to the matter.

Thus spent he some hours in these meditations, but when the long-expected
day of his desire approached, Damon taking his princely guest with him,
iourneyed to Sicyone, near whose suburbs that solemnity was ever celebrated
in a fair field hallowed for that yearly use. At their arrival in the
City, they found there innumerable Grecians, both native of the continent,
and Ilanders, whom awful zeal of pure devotion had induced to be present at
those holy rites: (such they termed them.) The next morning (for their
expectation lasted but one night) Arisbas and his host, leaving their lodging
betimes, went to the place, and there provided themselves an easy room without
the rayles: for within them none might stand, the Priest and his necessary
attendants excepted: with them infinite troops of the assembled strangers
hasted to prevent Titan, who shaking his deawy locks on the mountains, posted
from the watery cabin of Nereus, to be an ea^ely viewer of these solemnities.
But ere he had measured a tenth proportion of his daily pace, the Priest sute^
in a long sky-colourde robe, a wreath of Poplar branches, though consecrated to
Alcides, encompassing his Temples, came forward, and with him the ordinary
Ministers, the inferior assistants to his office, clad in their Ceremonial
robes, each attending on his several charge. Some carried silver basins to
receive the blood, some fumigations, one the knife, an other the hallowed fire,
brought from the euer-glowing altar of Delphos, every one somewhat, and two the
chief of them led the sacrifice, a young milke-white Heifar crowned with a
garland of flowers, whose free neck had not felt the heavy yokes bondage:
Next these, came the most lovely train, consisting of the fairest of both
kinds, flourishing in the prime of their youth, and in the pride of their
beauty, clad all in long white robes trailing after them, wearing on their
heads garlands of odoriferous flowers. They observed a rare method in their
comely march, pacing two and two, a fair boy and a girl.

In one thing the weaker sex, those wonders of beauties worth excelled, whose
amber tresses waued so on their shoulders, marshalled with sweet equality of
distance, that Phoebus feeling contrary passions, did both sigh and smile to
see them. But in this, the worthier kind far ouermatched the oth^^, in the
front of whose rank that wonder whereof Damon made late report was placed the
first, as of all the ^^ir^st, who turned the eyes of the beholders from not^ng
th^^e proceeding, to gaze on his perfections. Arisbas having before lost
himself in a desert of despair, and now finding an issue for hi^ hope, was so
ravished with ye sight, that he could scarce contain himself from leaving his
station, and running to embrace (as well he might.) For Arcadiaes triumph was
his Timoclea. Thus it seemed, thus he supposed, not gessing at randon, but
gathering by likelihood of his love: yet still he doubted because he dreaded.
The full trial of this seeming truth, was deferred till the solemnities were
ended, which thus they prosecuted. All the train being come within the railes,
a general silence mixed with reverence possessed all men. The sacrifice being
prepared after the usual manner, the accustomed sprincklings and other
ceremonies dispatched, that noble offering was laid on the altar and the wood
kindled by the consecrated fire. And forthwith the fair Chorus cast into a
ring began their hymn. In the same moment of time a shril harmony of
winde-instruments, sounding miraculously in ye air, not drowning with
ouer-loude noise, but consorting with the music of those well-agreeing voices
in a fit key, made divine melody. And for a second testimony of the gods kind
acceptance of their devotions, a stronggale snatched up the sacrifice, and
swift as thought bereaved their eyes of that object, before the Hymn was
ended, which I have here added.

The Hymn sung to Aeolus.
MOst just auenger of Arcadiaes wrong,
Dread God, high Regent of the worlds wide frame,
Enricht with titles of adored name,
To thee these rites, these honors do belong:
At whose dire frowns the amazed earth has trembled.
Patron of harmless men in hapless age,
Restrainer of thy furious servants rage,
Accept th'intents of us in zeal assembled.
Worker of wonders in the continent,
Prince of the air, distinguisher of time:
The calm relieuer of our troubled clime,
To thee these duties pure devotion sent.
We celebrate as ancestors before us,
With yearly thanks best fruits of swains degree,
The miracle and mercies shewde by thee,
Which Countries native plenty did restore us.
And our succeeding progeny shall know
From fathers mouth, the debt which children owe.
Scarce were the accustomed ceremonies finished, when Arisbas leaving his
station entered within the railes, and running with hasted steps to the lovely
leader of that beauteous troop of angel-faced boys, after many embraces
seasoned with a mixture of sweet kisses, began thus aloude: Dear of all the
dearest, if not mistaken, luckily met, happily found: thee have I sought,
successesse on sea, on land, in the groves, on the plains, in the Isles, on the
maine, wearying the world with iteration of my woes. Now have I found thee, if
thee, then am I fortunate: but if eyes deceive me, hope fail me, then may I
justly impute this mishap to the extremity of fortunes malice, which seemed to
ease me with a shadow of not-being solace, that she might plunge me in a deeper
sea of sorrows. Wen Timoclea (for she it was) saw her Arisbas, and heard him
speak, chiming in her ears charms of unthought pleasure, how she was
affected I refer to their censures, which after sour crosses enjoy sweet
comfort: blushing at her discovery, yet rejoicing at this happy accident, she
replied thus, gracing her proeme with a maiden-blush. Doubt not dearest Lord
the assurance of your hope, I am that Timoclea sought by you so much, that have
sighed for you so often, whose truth has had many trials in troubles, yet
vanquishing all distress, she beholds you, secure from danger. Think not this
disguise of mine attire, and dissembling of my sex, any reproach to the
modesty of a maidens behavior, for I have plotted this chaste policy to
prevent all perils of lustful violence, and preserve mine honor inuiolate,
that I might restore my self to you with the same dowry of virgins dignity,
for which you at the first affected me. This said, they shedding tears,
enterchaungeable tokens of their mutual joy, recompensed the long want of
loves delight, with sweet kisses, and Damon supplying the time of their
solace, stood up, and in a large discourse dilated the fortunes of Arisbas, and
the success of his love agreeing in effect of sense, with the former
relations, whose tale being ended, Timoclea prosecuting the discovery of loves
strange adventures, proceeded thus. Since those things are revealed which I
thought that the gods and our selves only had known, I will likewise in this
assembly publicly relate the many changes of adverse chances, from ill to
worse by me endured. Thus then dear Lord, and you strangers and friends,
receive a brief rehearsal of my troubles, and in hearing my discourse, dread
sovereign of my souls bliss, weigh the many dangers of thy dear too
dearly-bought Timoclea. When that il-boding tempest first cause of our ensuing
cares had secluded thee from the sea, me from the shore, our ship was
dangerously tossed on the troublous waves, and though within no small space a
timely calm had quieted the waters rage, yet the ungentle winds, lucklesse
instruments of fortunes spite, keeping their wonted quarters, drove us far
from the continent with continued adverse blasts. After long tumbling on the
flood, we descried a little desolate Island, and packing on all the sails, made
toward it amain, when sodeinly the Pilot causing them to strike the
late-spred sails, kept aloof from ye coast, and willed the boat-swain to
sound the depth, for he vehemently feared to be driven on some shelues in that
unknown current, but finding all sure in the safety of a wide channel, we
approached nearer. There was a small creek on the South side, making show of
an harbor, seeming then a fit haven for our weather-beaten vessel. Thereinto
we entered, bearing in close with the point, and having anchord, the chief
governor of the ship went on land with the stoutest of his Mariners to search
the country, and to find fresh acates, but he returned failing in his purpose,
only supplying our want of fresh water and fuel, and bringing aboard with him
a few strange ill-tasting birds which they had taken among the cliffes:
leaving this comfortless coast, we made again to sea, and on the seventh
night from our departure thence, we were engulfed among the Cyclades by the
winds thwarting alteration, fitly resembling the cross course of fortunes
wheel in perverting humane actions. In one of those Islands, the Governor
finding a fit haven, caused his ship to be had into a dock, and there he set
his men on work to stop leakes, and new trim her sore-bruised sides. I
unwilling and unable through my want to attend the issue of his delays, left
him, resolving to embarque in some other vessel sailing near Arcadia. But
remembering how many dangers were incide^t to our sex, and to how many perils
my beauty though small was subject, I sought to procure my safety and prevent
al dreaded ils by this disguise. Hasting to the next port, I found there a
Merchant of Hellespont ready to hoise sail for Byzantium: with him I
bargained for my passage: he accepted mine offer and taking me with him, after
a days tariance in ye haven, lanched aided by a prosperous wind. But though
heavens favored me, yet hard hap still followed me. Mark an other instaunce of
fatal spite. On a fair calm day though a foul storm in mine estate, the
^ilot mistaking his course, stemmed the ship on a rock, and ^he cruel winds
continual furtherers of fortunes spite, drove her on with such violence, that
she was there split. In this general extremity of life, each took what was
next his hand to sustain him in that hazard: I nimble through fear, got a
great piece of the maine Mast, and thereon committed my safety to the seas
courtesy, and though every surge threatened ouerwhelming, each wave menaced
death, yet I not daunted in these dangers kept mine hold. Often I beheld the
Dolphins mounting on the waters uneven superficies, but at my approach they
would cease their sport, in kind regard of my ruth, not raising the billows
with their tumbling, but gently on either side following me thus floating,
seeming to waft me with wary eyes as careful of my safety. The day being
far spent, I discried a sail Westward, and (such was my hap I know not how
to term it good or ill) it made toward the coast on which I was thus tossed,
when I saw it some what near, I made signs to them aboard, expressing my
danger and imploring their aid. They desirous to save me (for sometimes
miscreants feel passions of pity) sent two of their fellows in the long boat
to fetch me, who rowing to me, took me up (thus one affection wrought an
other) and carried me aboard with them, where, hoping for solace, I found
sorrow. Being in the sea, though ever dreading to be swalowed by the surges,
yet was I free: In the ship though sa^e from such perils, yet was I prisoner to
wretched Pirates from whose remorslesse hearts all compassion was exiled.

Yet, me they sought to win by allurements, hoping that I deceived by their
pretended kindness, would sooner yield to their filthy desires. The same
night they frolliked with great iollitie for joy (as they said) of obteining
me: when the wine had fired their enflamed lust, they solicited though
successesse, their former motions, and strove so long for kisses but got none,
that they left their kindness toward me and fell to contention among
themselves. Their Captain envying them, the public possession of his private
pleasure though but supposed, deeming me a pray fitter for himself and
judging a common good not current, appeased the fraie through his authority,
and did countermaund their passions, but privately he would assail me with all
the engines of loue-plotted policies, adding cruel threats to kind words,
sometimes entreating, sometimes menacing, now suing, then swearing, to obtain
his will, or augment my woe: now praying, then protesting to enjoy me, or
enjoin me perpetual slavery. I hearing him in these terms, fed his humor
with vain hopes, coining new occasions of delays, prefixing a time,
promising, that expired, to yield to al kinds of dalliance which he would use,
limiting my feined profer with ^his condition, that till then he should cease
from prosecuting his intended desires. He accepting this answer for an high
favor, protested to obey my doom, and observe the propounded condition. But
ere time winged with thoughts swiftness had touched the prefixed point of my
then-imminent peril, I was happily freed from fear of his force, and
delivered from dread of that danger by Anaxander, a valiant Gentleman of
Sparta, who having charge of a Galley scoured those seas, being sent by the
Ephori, and bound by strict commandment to execute severe justice on such
malefactors which infested the seas with piracies, and landing often on the coast
of Laconia, for raged the Country, took rich pillage, and committed many
spoils. But Anaxander meeting this neast of thieves, part of that accursed
society, encountered them, and having after small fight bourded them, put all
that crew of caitiues to the sword, accounting mercy to such offenders an high
blemish of justice. Me only he saved, and with gentlemanlike compassion
pitied my distress. You may perhaps suppose that now my sorrows were ended,
and I in protection of this worthy patron, without the compass of fortunes
reach: but if you so think, your judgments fail: these my sea-fortunes and
those unstaid waves, do in most lively sort express the uncertainty of
worlds wavering, as by attending the sequel, you may easily conceit.

When the report of this exploit was bruted to the ears of those other
monsters, (for the mind of man degenerating from the decorum of humanity
becomes monstrous, complotting mischiefs exceeding the vildenesse of beasts,
and the body the minds instrument, slave to that tyrannical government,
wherein affections rule and reason obeyes, effects them) they I say hearing
this, lamented the ill hap of their fellows, especially the Captains death,
whom they affected for his valor, and admired for his villainies, to them
seeming virtues. But co^uerting their mones into mad fury, they confederated
themselves in a bloody league, vowing extreme revenge on that worthy
Gentleman whom they opprobriously termed the proud Iusticier of Lacedaemon.
They had got together six vessels, and Resicles a Cretan was Admiral of this
accursed fleet: fortune sildome foe to worst attemptes, suited their
expectation with hoped success. For meeting the Spartan Galley, they
encompassed her, and commencing a bloody broile, after long fight laid us
aboard, slew them all, and not satisfied with this butchery, exercised more
barbarous cruelty, mangling the dead bodies into many pieces. Here again I
escaped death reserved by fortune, for a second brunt of dishonor which
likewise I prevented, not touched with the least spot of reproach. The
soldiers of Resicles taking me, brought me to their Captain, who fancying in
his fond thoughts a world of future imagined pleasures, entertained me kindly,
and wooed me with many courtesies, I filled him with vain hopes, limiting my
consent with delaie of time as I used the other before, and mean while plotted
means for my escape, which thus I effected. At the very time wherein the feast
of Thesmophoria was celebrated at Eleusis with mystical observations by the
Priests of Ceres, Resicles having left his fellow-Pyrats which dispersed
themselves to purchase booties, took a vessel of Samos returning from Syria,
a rich prize. The day ensuing, he and his accursed companions applied
themselves wholly to mirth and belly-cheere for joy of their good fortune,
seeming to celebrate the Bacchanals in their disordred diet, diet I term it,
because they often used such excess. When the wine had prevailed, and fumes
ascending from their stomaches had besieged their overwhelmed brains,
summoning their distempered senses to rest, they lay as drowned in a sleepie
charm, without fear or regard, in every corner some. The wind and sea the
one quiet, the other calm, did favor them: fortune their common friend did
not annoy them with approach of enemies: for if a tempest had been raised, or
the foe assailed them, doubtless they had received a full reward of their
dissolute demeanours. I judging this a fit time for my escape, slily conveyed
my self into the long boat, and cutting the roape rowed so well as I could, to
the shore which was not far off: leaping on land, I left my boat to the seas
direction, and running with hasted steps discryed two Arcadians, both which
are now present, the one a friendly relieuer of my distress. I entreated their
tariance by signs, and being come to them, was kindly comforted by them. Since
which time I have remained in this Country, where what fortunes I have felt,
most Arcadians can relate.

Thus have I contrived the rehearsal of my troubles into a brief discourse.
Timoclea would feign have proceeded, but a general murmr of admiration
raised by the whole assembly hindered her intended purpose. Aegon stood up, and
suing for silence by signs, having obtained audience spoke thus. Countrymen
and friends, doubtless the discovery of this rare secret and due guerdon of
loves long-suffering patience, was deferred to this time by just prescience of
the immortal powers. For next the rare hap of Hyalus whose memory we now
celebrate, what other accident could so directly fit the feast of Parthenia? As
his sex was miraculously changed from a fair ladde to the fairest girl that
ever lived in Arcadia, so this lamp of royalty, the Paragon of woman's
perfections, found in this place at this time, the only occasion of disclosing
of her disguise, and being supposed by all the mirror of our sex, may now be
termed the wonder of woman-kinde. The whole assembly applauded his words,
arguing hereby, that they confirmed his opinion by their co^senting censures.
Many flowers were thrown on those two lovers, the flowers of true affection,
and each departing, filled his native province with report of this rare
accident: so that the miraculous metamorphosis of Hyalus was almost drowned in
oblivion.

Arisbas having repossessed his Love the stay of his life, thinking it high
time to glad his aged father with his return, whose discontent (as he not
vainly supposed) his departure had bred, taking with him his dearest Timoclea,
with Damon and Aegon, tarrying little in Arcadia, hasted to the next haven, and
there embarked for Cyprus, where arriving in the haven of Famagosta, he found
a wonderful change. For the aged King dispairing of his eldest sons safety,
had matched Anaxilas the second brother of Arisbas, with the Lemnian Princes
daughter, whose father deceasing immediately after the marriage, he in right of
his wife reigned Prince of Lemnos. Arisbas nothing discontent with these news,
sent one to certify his father of his arrival. The old King replenished with
incredible joy, was transported into a trance: recovering himself, he hasted
his aged steps toward the haven and meeting his son by the way, fell on his
neck shedding many tears, sweet arguments of his high content. Arisbas
preparing to crave pardon of his departure, was prevented by his often redoubled
fatherly welcomes and embraces: with like kindness he entertained trembling
and blushing Timoclea, and spoke courteously to Damon and Aegon. Returning to
the palace he took great delight in hearing his son relate the troubles and
dangers with often changes of Fortune endured by him and his dearest Timoclea,
and judging it inexpiable impiety to hinder the success of so rare affection
resolved to give love his right and marry them honorably. For this purpose
he sent Herauldes to all the Islands adjacent, and Provinces situate in the
maine of Greece, which published in his name leave and liberty of access to
all whom soever, especially strangers of account which would repair to his
Court, and be present at the nuptial of his son, and honor him in such
princelike exercises as might best beseem the worth of that intended
solemnity, not omitting to express the time. These messages had such
success, that besides a troop of meaner persons, the most worthy Heroes of
Greece appeared at the appointed time, and being present at the ceremonies of
Hymen's rytes, gave honorable testimony of their perfourmance. The Cyprian
Kings second son then sovereign of Lemnos, and his fair Princess, were
part of that royal assembly, whereat the Nobles of Cyprus did glister in
almost-kingly pomp. Forthwith many honorable sportes and deeds of chiualry
were exercised, in which Arisbas and Anaxilas were chief challengers, suited
both in purest white, mounted both on milke-white Coursers, richly
caparrasoned. The old King entending farther favor to his son, and desirous
to disburthen himself of the heavy charge of government, and inuest his age
with ease, surrendered his estate, and resigned ye regiment to Arisbas, whom he
caused to be adorned with the royal Diadem, and he entending like favor to
his dearest Timoclea, caused her to be likewise crowned Queen of Cyprus.

These second solemnities thus finished, the princelyke strangers and others
departed, bruting an honorable report of the Cyprian Courts royalty. Damon
and Aegon having received rare entertainment and rich rewards for their former
courtesies, shipped themselves for Arcadia. Fortune ending frowns with
favors, did thus absolve the catastrophe of this roial Comedy, which was yet
imperfect. The old Cing of Epirus deceasing, his son Sostratus a man of
milder disposition, succeeded him in the Crown, who remembering the former good
service of banished Aristophon, and knowing his innocence, sent immediately
after his coronation, an honorable Embassage to conclude a league with the
young King of Cyprus, and reduce thence guiltless Aristophon from exile. The
Ambassador was royally received and entertained in the Court of Cyprus, and
having declared the cause of his coming, sped in both his demands. For the
league of amity between those two mighty Princes was solemnly concluded by
oath, and Aristophon desirous to lay his bones in the mother-soyle that
brought him forth, was soon persuaded to return. Taking his leave therefore of
ye old prince, the young King and his daughter raised to such royal estate, he
returned into his Country, having with him the other Peer of Epyrus, and a
noble man of Cyprus sent by Arisbas, to cause King Sostratus to swear
likewise, that the league might be confirmed by their mutual oaths. Such was
the success of this rare oft-thwarted love which my ouerbold pen has
presumed thus rudely to discyper, If any decorum be omitted, or indecorum
committed, I can not otherwise excuse it (courteous Gentlemen) then by your
favors which will (I hope) bear with such imperfections, and not impute it to
mine own desert, which was loath to pollish a toy, whereon I never bestowed
more labor, then sometimes an idle hour of recreation.

FINIS.

