THE SHEPHEARDES COMPLAINT. A passionate Eclogue, written in English
Hexameters: Whereunto are annexed other conceits, briefly expressing the
effects of Loves impressions, and the just punishment of aspiring beauty. By
J. D.

Breuissima, gratissima.

Imprinted at London for William Blackewall, and are to be sold at his shop
over against Guild-hal Gate.

TO all courteous Gentlemen Readers, Scholars, and whosoever else affect the
study of Poetry, John Dickenson presents this the fruit of an unripe wit,
done succisiuis horis: desiring them courteously to accept, and favorably to
peruse these his ill-pleasing labors, and protect them by their friendly
censures, from the malice of unfriendly carpers, not for their own worth,
which are worthless: but entreating them rather to allow his good will in
perfourming what he could, then accuse his want of sufficiency in not
affoording what they would.

VIdit Amor, visos legit, lectosque probauit
Anglia quos de se libros musaeque Britannae
Composuere: Deo placuit mutatus Amyntas
Vest nitens propria and Romana vest decorus:
Nec pla^uere minus viridi dignissima lauro
Aurifluis foecunda metris Sidnaeia scripta,
Et lauds Rosamunda tuae: nec numinis vllae
Subter fugerunt oculos visumue camoenae.
Singula dum lustrat, Pastoris forte querelam
Conspexit risitque parum, de in talia fatus
Sunt ait haec aliquid lauds spectantia nostras,
Et sint parua licet, non aspernanda videntur,
Haec Deus: haec nostrae praebent solatia musae.
The Shepherds Complaint.
PHoebus awaked with the early summons of Aurora, mounted his burning Chariot
bathed in the Chrystalline clear streams of aged Oceanus, while she moistning
the earth with a shower of silver pearled dew, did selemnize with her morning
tears, the neuer-ended obsequies of her dearest Memnon. But though the God
conpling his headstrong Steeds, had begun his daies-taske in the Eclipticke,
yet I, whose unquiet thoughts affoorded no rest to my ouer-wearied senses in
the silent night, resolved not to rise, til I had somewhat refreshed and
repaird the decaying vigor of my dulled spirits. As thus I lay musing on
sundry matters, gentle sleep recompensed my oft-interrupted slumbers with a
long repose, wherein me thought I was transported into the blessed soil of
heavenly Arcadia, the beauteous garnishing of whose fertile plains, decked
with the pride of Flora, which had there opened the royal Storehouse of her
pompous magnificence, did far surpass the triuiall pleasures of Thessalian
Tempe. I clean ravished with delight, solac'd my self in the view of that
Celestial plot, earths second paradise, whose pleasures thus briefly, though
badly, I will express.

1
FIelds were ouer-spred with flowers,
Fairest choice of Floraes treasure:
Shepherds there had shadie bowers,
Where they often reposed with pleasure:
Meadows flourished fresh and gay,
Where the wanton herds did play.
2
Springs more clear than crystal streams,
Seated were the Groves among.
Thus nor Titans scortching beams,
Nor earthes drouth could sheapheards wrong,
Fair Pomonaes fruitful pride,
Did the budding branches hide.
3
Flocks of sheep fed on the plains,
Harmless sheep that rom'd at large:
Here and there sat pensive Swains,
Waiting on their wandering charge:
Pensive while their Lasses smiled,
Lasses which had them beguiled.
4
Hills with Trees were richly dight,
Valleis stored with Uestaes wealth:
Both did harbor sweet delight,
Naught was there to hinder health.
Thus did heaven grace the soil,
Not deformed with workemens toil.
5
Purest plot of earthly mould,
Might that land be justly named.
Art by Nature was controlled,
Art which no such pleasures framed:
Fairer place was never seen,
Fittest place for beauties Queen.
But to our purpose. As I wandered along, the sweet chantresse of the field,
into whose gentle kind fair Philomele was erst transformed, did seem to
gratulate my arrival with divine melody, raising her harmonious lays in
highest tunes. And not respecting the safety of her tender charge scaled with
her wings the top of a lofty tree, where while she sat, a careless contemner
of worlds euer-changing chances, and pleased her self with the sweetness of
her own song, a Snake slilie creeping into the foolish birds late forsaken
nest devoured the silly yonglings not guarded as before with the wary Mothers
watchful eye: They straining their tender breasts, implored their wretched
dammes untimely aid, who hearing the sad exclaimes of her betrayed brood, and
being the sorrowful eie-witnesse of their misery, turned her joyful tunes
into passionate laments, moaning so sweetly, that Nature urged by fatal
necessity, seemed to excel Art: but complaints were bootlesse: for the cruel
deuourer had already engulfed the innocent yonglings in his venomous maw,
whose deaths she celebrated with her mournful cries, and framed their funeral
song in heavenly notes. But while she bereft of her pretty little ones the hope
of her future content, began fresh sorrows, a Fowler having espied the
hapless bird, and intending her like misfortune, took his station and
prepared the engines of his cruelty, thoroughly resolving to embowell a small
bullet in her guts, and so finish her hearts sorrow. But while he aimed at her,
desirous to effect his cruel resolution, the Snake whose entrals were yet
warm with the guiltless blood of those unhappy young ones, did sting the
greedy birders foot, who grieved with the sudden peine, left his former
interprise, and falling into a choleric humor, divided the mangled body of
that cursed Serpents brood into many pieces, employing his death-bodening
engine, the fatal receptacle of consuming sulphur otherwise than he had
determined. Thus he which made his belly the childrens grave, did with
remors-full recompense procure the mothers safety, satisfiyng her revenge with
his blood, and saving her life through his kind attempt. I thought the
strangenes of this chance worthy of recital. But going forward, I discried a
little thicket, a name well fitting the property of that place: for it was so
thick and close, that it seemed rather despairs mansion, then delights harbor.
Nature moderating her lavish bounty seated there this only blemish of
Arcadiaes bliss, whose other groves haunted by the wanton Satyrs, traced by
the light foo^e Hamadriades, and hallowed with the sacred presence of the
rural Dimigods, having clear springs to comfort the thirsty hunters, and
sweet Arbours to refreshe the weary Nymphs, wanted no perfections of pleasure
which Natures plentiful providence could afford, or heavens kind influence
maintain. But though this amasing object contrary to the rest, did somewhat
daunt me, yet armed with a firm resolution, I bololy entered to search the
secret corners of that affrighting place: Where what I saw, and how I saw, is
plainly discovered in this following discourse, the sad record of a mournful
Shepherds laments, which being the chiefest part of my dream I noted so soon
as I awaked, descanting on his estate in common verse, both before and after
the passionate Eclogue. But being loath it should come abroad so naked, I have
thus meanly clothed it with the addition of other accidents to make it a
perfect dream, though an imperfect matter. But be it as it will. I will rather
presume on the courtesy of your friendly censures, then lose time, and bestow
labor in refining a toy, which I have been occasioned to publish. But they
which have by their own mishappes experimented the force of Love, and
torturing troubles of enthrald affection, will I hope gently censure of his
Complaints, if not for the worth of his desert, yet for his passions fake.

WIthin a Grove encompast round with trees,
Whose close set tops clear sight of piercing eye,
Could scarce find passage through, by just degrees
Proportioned in distance equally
As done hy skillful Artists memory,
A pensive Shepherd stretched him on the ground,
Whose wonted joys sad passions did confound.
As when a black thick Meteore dothore-goe
Heavens light, whose vautie roof bright orbs embosse,
The vapors late exhaled from below
Dim that fair place with dregs of earth-bred dross,
Which striving winds does rough the welkin toss:
So this thick shade, dark mansion of despair,
Did scarce afford an entrance to thin air.
Under an Arboret embranched wide,
This fore-lorne swain oppressed with care did lie:
Upon whose bark approaching I espide,
And red engrau'd this doleful Elegy,
As every way I glaunc'd my rouling eye,
Sad Elegy which in few lines comprised:
Much care: and thus it was by him deuiz'd.
If I could carue on this thy tender rind,
Such deep characters with my feeble arm,
Arm feeble through distress of woeful mind,
As in my heart deep cut, thicke-set do swarm,
While earthes kind moisture fed thy blosomes pride,
These sorrow-seasond lines should firm abide.
UUhatere thou be that passing by this way,
Readst this memorial, search not curiously
My name, most hapless name, but have away,
Least heavens afflict thee with like misery:
And gentle passenger let this remain,
Long monument of unknown shepherds pain.
Hei mihi quam tardo mors pede lenta venit?
Scarce had I read this sad record enrold,
On winding bark, when lifting up his eyes
To heaven, though he no heaven could behold,
(For ouer-spreading trees did that disguise)
He filled the air with often repeated cries,
And began prepare in style Heroical,
To wail his loves loss and his fancies thrall.
Goddess and mother of the learned nine,
Mnemosyne rich treasury of Art,
Nourse of conceit, and mysteries divine,
Infuse a powrfull influence to my heart,
That outward mones be wraying inward smart,
My mindful pen making rehearsal true,
May register as thus they do ensue.
IF plaints could penetrate the sun-bright top of Olympus,
Whose lights sweet comfort these eyes, eyes moist with abundance
Of down-streaming tears since wronged by Fancy, beheld not:
Or the earth yield passage to my voice, voice hoarse with a thousand
More then a thousand mones, sending them down to the deep vawts,
Where Pluto Lord of Acheron enjoys his Empire,
Or some blustering blasts convey by force of a whirlwind,
These my sad laments to the wide world there to be talked of:
Gods that dwell on high, and Fiends that lurk in Auernus:
Men that live on earth, or sail through watery Tethys.
Gods, whose divine shapes loves force has often metamorphos'd,
Fiends, whose hellish hearts no remorse, no regard ever entered,
Men whom loves deep wounds have prostrate laid at his altars,
All these would pity me, but vain wish can little help me:
Yet though wish be vain, my sad complaints I will utter:
Though to my self I repeat as often ere now I repeated,
Mones mixed with salt tears for th'ease of hearts heavy burden,
Heart pressed with sorrow, heart with care heavily laden.
When Fortunes doom was equal, and loves fury forcelesse,
Arcadian pastures tending my flock I frequented
Chief among the shepherds for wit, for beauty, for all things.
Often did I win both prize and palm, when our ioly meetings
And yearly feastings solemnisd were to the great God
Pan, the God of shepherds sovereign defender of all flocks,
And Laurel garland has crowned me conqueror often.
Dametas pend sweet ditties, with comely Palaemon:
And with him Lycidas, and among Neat-heards many gallants:
But none of these durst, though each of these had a mistress,
Strive in praise of them with me, fearing to be vanquished:
Yet Lycidas had a choice, a fair choice, lovely Felisa.
Nymphs would sit in a round coming fro the chase to refresh them
Listening unto my songs, and unto the tunes that I gave the^.
With the Satyrs lightly skipping, where Flora reuested,
And with summers pride, earthes fair green mantle adorned,
And th'hornfeet halfe-gods, with all the progeny rural:
The wind-wing'd Naiads spring-haunting Naiades, all these
Did me requite, whose pen with praise they gently rewarded.
Each fair shepherdess was with my company gladded:
Me Galathea favored, yet was Galathea rejected:
Me fair Phillis liked, but Phillis could not I fancy.
Thestylis and Daphne, both fair, both wooed me with offers:
Thestylis and Daphne, both fair, were fondly repulsed:
Kind girls, fit epithete for girls so kind, but unhappy.
The snow-white Hyalus worlds wonder, fair as Adonis,
Scornd Nymphs allurements, and Heardmens gifts he refused:
But me the boy did love, and in cool shade I remember,
With me reposing often, Philomeles clear notes he resembling,
With voice Angelical, my ditties sweetly recorded.
But nor he, nor they could my fond affection alter,
Whose care-cras'd heart, and loue-pierc'd thoughts fair Amaryllis,
Held in pleasing thrall: for then it seemed so: but aie me,
Now I repent too late, too late I repent that I thought so.
Her did I greet, and fairly salute each morn with a present:
But proud girl, coy girl, though presents some she received,
Yet she refused the most, and better not be received,
Then be received so: with feigned smiles she rewarded,
My not feind good will: and when by chance I beheld her,
Walking on the plains, if I did draw near to salute her:
Then winged with desdaine, more swift in pace she returned,
Then light-foot Daphne shunning the sight of Apollo,
Flying his pursuit and bootlesse chase, with a stubborn
And perverse conceit: like her was coy Amaryllis.
For me she loathed, although her I loved, and in many ditties,
(Few such ditties were) her beauties praise I recounted.
Fames shrill eternal trumpet through Arcadie, sounded
Her matchless virtues, and gentle fame the revenger
Of my causeless wrongs, her coins has so recorded.
(Fame which from my pen large matterfully received)
That sea-bred Dolphins, and misform'd waterie Monsters,
Shall in the welkin sport them with lofty Laualt^s,
And saile-bearing pine glide through thin air with a Siren,
Swimming near the stern, and Jove's bird lodged in Olympus,
The royal Eagle chief Lord and lordly regarder
Of the featherd brood with his winged army repairing.
Down to the late-left boure of Nereus and Thetis and all,
That lodge in watrie cabinets, shall sooner abide there,
And for ever dwell there then fames sound which memorised,
Her desdainefull pride be clean forgot by the shepherds,
Or among th'Arcadians my sorrows not be remembered.
Yet vain was my labor small comfort thence I received,
For she loved an other though far unfit to be rival
With me which did surpass him that nor very witty,
Nor very comely was: all Arcadie knows that I feine not,
Nor fond boasting use, yet was he received, I rejected,
Pardon fair, fairer then any fairest Amaryllis,
Pardon sweet, more sweet then any most sweet Amaryllis,
Though thou absent be, yet crave I pardon O pardon,
Those my wrathful looks ore-cast with frowns never used,
Till thy misdeeming censure did wrong so the shepherd,
Whose match for loyal service wide world never harbourd*
Except loves martyr, loves wonder gentle Amyntas.
O pardon those impatient thoughts which I did utter
In blasphemous words, blaspheming thee Amaryllis,
Cursing those graces where with nature did adorn thee,
And on thy pride exclaiming fond passion urged me,
Then when I saw my riual speed, my self so rejected,
Then did it urge me so, that moved with more then a wonted
Grief of mind, I vowed to renounce the state of a shepherd,
State too good for me which vow too well I remembered.
For leaving all the pleasures which Arcadie yielded,
Clear springs, fair fountains, green meadows, and shady valleis
Where, while flock did graze, sometimes I sweetly reposing,
Did meditate on love, when love was friend to my fancy,
Leaving these, loathing my self, looking for a speedy
End of care, I remaind alone, all company shunning,
To grace thassemblies of Shepherds often I refused,
Sheep were left a pray to the wolf, sheep which me beholding,
Droupt in deep sorrow, with bleating seemd to bemone me,
Gentle sheep, kind beasts, more kind then coye Amaryllis,
Thus I resolved to seeeke a place, fit place for an abject,
Found this dark some grove, since when still here I remained,
Here to the woods I waild: woods seemd to groan when I wailed,
Here to the trees I mon'd, trees seemd to bend when I mon'd me,
Here to the winds I mournd, winds sent calm blasts to releive me
Thus to the woods, to the winds, to the trees, to the floods, to the fountains
and to the thinnest air, to the valleis and to the mou^tains,
Framing sad laments, more comfort have I received,
From these, then from the coye looks of proud Amaryllis,
Kind Echo was moved, her like mishap she remembering,
Joined her mones to mine, my last words gently repeating:
And the chirping birds attentive unto my sorrows,
Changed their pleasant notes for mournful tunes to bewail me.
But why talk I thus? all these could smally relieve me,
Slow death when come thou? slow death can wholly release me.
THis said, he sighd, as though his heart would riue,
Had she that wronged the sweet-tongud shepherd so,
Whose high thoughts fortunes malice did deprive
Of sweet delight, matter more fit then woe,
O would his fates had preordaind it so:
Had she been there to hear him thus lament,
Her eyes some tears, her heart some sighs had lent.
O how divinely would the swain have sung
In Laureate lines of beauteous Ladies praise?
Her fame emblason'd, far abroad had rung,
Where worlds bright eye his farthest beams displayes,
If Love had deignd his drouping quill to raise,
Whose heavenly Muse midst sorrow tuned so high,
Her Swan-like notes, as loath that all should die.
When I beheld the shepherd grieved so,
I did compassionate his heaviness,
And with sad sighs accorded to his woe,
Which in those former plaints he did express.
Yet loath to trouble him in his distress,
As vnespi'd I thither did repair,
So vnespi'd I left him in despair.
Most sweet Amyntas, if the heavenly Pen
That wrote the loyal issue of thy love,
Whose golden lines are among conceitfull men,
Esteemed as does his labors best behooue
Whose style th'applauding Muses did approve,
If that had written silly swains unrest,
Poor shepherds grief had sweetly been expressed.
But death that seasd on matchless Astrophel,
Bereauing still the world of worlds delight,
Has stopped his hopeful course that did excel,
Sweet Poet that divinely did indite.
Arcadians do him his deserved right,
And on his Tomb green Laurel-branches spread,
Which while he breathed on earth, ador'nd his head.
Dead though thou be, fair flower of Poetry,
Yet grateful Love has memorizd thy name,
A monument of lasting memory,
Enrold in endless registers of Fame,
Thou for thy self did in sweet Poems frame.
But what mean I in harsh ill-sounding verse,
Thy rare perfections rudely to rehearse?
Soli quidsit amorsciunt amantes.
Leaving this comfortless harbor of the despairing shepherd, I wandered half
dismayed through the spacious plains, covered with mulitudes of grasing flocks:
at last I discried a little hill, whose shadie top was thick set with Myrtle
Trees: approaching, I perceiud a little valley underneath, and therein a
pleasant spring: and at the foot of the hill I beheld a fair Shepherdess,
sitting and making a prettye Garland of odoriferous Flowers, to crown her
Swain which sat somewhat below, and ever as he durst, did cast up his eyes
the admirers of her beauty, yet fearfully, as not assured of her favor. Thus
while the one was busy with her hands, the other with his eyes: a young Heyfer,
whose neck was not yet tamed with the heavy yoke, did in the valley sport her
self now frisking, then leaping wantonly, sometimes tumbling her body in the
grass, and wallowing on the ground, suddenly leaping up, as if glutted with
the fruition of Floraes benefits: thus still she played, yet never weary with
play. The fair Shepherdess smild at this sight, as partaker of like
freedom: the Swain seemd to sighe, as deprived of like liberty: she renude
her smiles, as triumphing in his thrall, yet crownde him with the Garland which
she made, as loath he should despair, having received so fair a token of her
favor.

The Shepherd comforted with this unexpected courtesy, did resume his lost
courage, and began thus to descant on his fortune.

Fair mistress, when the Heifar plaide with pleasure,
You smild, I sobd, for smiles could not relieve me:
His fearelesse life, your freedoms worth did measure:
Which causd you smile, and with your smiles to grieve me.
But though you smiling seemed to deny me,
Yet this kind favor proves it was but to try me.
More faithful Swain was never tryde of any,
More true, more trusty, to his dearest love:
A rare example, and unknown of many,
Which do their servants lightness often reprove.
Henceforth bold thoughts: despair shall not confound me*
Eyes gald, smiles killed, but gentle hands have crowned me.
The Shepherdess glad to hear her swain in this pleasant mood, could not
dissemble her discovered affection, nor conceal that which she had already
opened: thus therefore she did reply, consorting with him in one key, and
consenting in one thought.

WHen wanton Heifar sported here and there,
I smild as sovereign of mine own desires:
When thou did sob, my smiles renewed were,
To see thee scorched with loves enflaming fires:
Yet loath to wrong the truth of thy intent
I gave thee hope, and staide thy sad lament.
I smild though not as moved with coy desdeigne;
But with a garland crowned thy head to please thee:
Smiles were renewd, not to deride thy peine,
But to rejoice that I alone could ease thee.
Sob then no more, but if thou love at all,
Esteem no freedom like this pleasing thrall.
Shepherd. SWeet thrall first step to loves felicity,

Shepherdess. Sweet thrall no stop to perfect liberty.

Shep. O life.

She. What life?

He. Sweet life.

She. No life more sweet.

He. O love.

She. What love.

He. Sweet love.

She. No love more meet.

Thus with her kind conclusion, knitting lives sweetness with loves solace,
she relieud the fainting Swain, which before half dismaide, was doubtful of
her favor, and droupt discontent. How happy had the siluer-tongud Shepherd
been, if coye Amaryllis had pitied his extremes, and with like kindness
converted his moan into mirth, his care into comfort, his despair into hope:
whose heavenly muse, sweet secretary of his divine conceit, would have
expressed the sum of loves happiness in matchless lines, and increased the
number of conceitfull Arcadians, whose wits sharpened with loves pleasures,
employing their pens in doing homage to loves Altar, and publishing their
Nymphs praises with neuer-dying blazons of their beauties worth.

Both true and often tried is that saying: Amor melle and fell foecundissimus.
Which I will thus English, following rather the sense then the sentence: Loves
sweet is often mixed with sour. The truth of which assertion is by his
misfortunes largely proved: who though wanting no deserts which love might
challenge, yet could not compass that whereto he aymd his desires: how justly
then might he set this Lenuoye at the end of his sorrowful complaint?

WHat life, what love, does rest in Women's looks?
What hap, what hope, have they whom beauty snares?
Coye dame no bold conceit in servant brooks,
But for her captive still new thrall prepares,
And loades his heart with new enforced cares.
Thus hopes he still for that he nere shall find,
Such are the trophaes of proud womankinde.
But this other Shepherd, whose fortune made him owner of his eyes choice,
would have contradicted his saying if he had heardit, accusing him of
impatience, because he pend his injurious censure in too choleric a vein:
and doubtless would thus have turned these disparaging lines, and annered them
to the end of all his devises, as the sum of his whole opinion.

WHat life, what love, if not in women's looks?
What hap, what hope, like theirs whom beauty snares?
Fair dame no fond despair in servant brooks,
But for her captive still new joy prepares,
Easing his heart of unbeseeming cares.
Thus what he hopes, he shall be sure to find,
Such is the sex of glorious womankinde.
But ceasing to destant on their thoughts, whose fortunes I have not tried, I
will proceed to recount what else I saw.

Name, loves wondrous stratagems deserve a deeper medetitation, and cannot be
thus slightly conceited. I wandered therefore, musing more then erst I did, on
the effects of love, not knowing how to term so strange a passion, whose
diverse success did cause several motions in their hearts, which were
enthrald by fancy, and captiuated by affection, yet all ending in extremes. I
thought then that Poets had reason to inuest him with the title of Deity,
whose powerful shafts had not only pierced the yielding hearts of mortal
men, but made a forcible entrance into the relenting thoughts of immortal
gods: Jupiter himself Hominum sator atque deorum, felt the force of his
aspiring Nephews fatal weapons, else would he not have courted Leda in the
shape of a Swanne, wafted Europa in form of a Bull, descended into Danaes lap
like a goulden shower, besides his other pretty sleights, which the amorous God
did often practice to beguile his jealous Queen.

Nor was Apollo ignorant of loves power, who being ouermatched by Cupid, to
whom he durst equal himself, was forced to ease his ouerburthened heart, and
utter his passion, exclaming thus in an impatient humor.

Hei mihi quod nullis amor est sanabilis herbis. Physics God knew no salve to
cure such a sore, whose incurable vehemency is proved by his most passionate
complaints, recorded by Loves Herault in his volume of transformed shapes. But
whether am I carried? it be seems not me to descant on loves powerful
souereigntie, but to employ my pen, in relating that which I saw or seemd to
see in my morning vision. Passing along, and viewing many trees, whose gorgeous
branches garnished with rural pomp, and the pride of Syluanus, did somewhat
darken the ground with a spacious shade: not far from the rest, I espied a
Myrtle tree, and approaching did read written near unto the top, thus:

Under this tree fair Phyllis did relent,
And Tityrus receiud his first content.
And a little underneath that, thus:

Fair Queen of love to whom this tree belongs,
Next Phyllis, thou shall grace the shepherds songs.
And underneath that again, thus:

Apolloes laurel to this tree shall yield,
For Phillis deems the Myrtle chief in Field.
And on the other side of the tree thus:

The silly Swain whose love breeds discontent,
Thinks death a trisle, life a loathsome thing:
Sad he looks, sad he lies:
But when his fortunes malice does relent,
Then of loves sweetness, he will sweetly sing:
Thus he lives, thus he dies:
Then Tityrus whom Love has happy made,
Will rest thrice happy in this myrtle shade,
For though love at first did grieve him,
Yet did love at last relieve him.
The seat underneath the tree was worn with their often sitting on it: for it
seemed to be much frequented by Phyllis and her beloved Swain.

Here by I gathered, that all Arcadians were not unhappy, but the most,
fortunate in love: what though Ovid censured thus:

Fastus inest pulchris? Tush, that is an imperfection incident to some few,
not a fault common to all. Amaryllis was coy, Helen had a gadding humor: yea
but Penelope was chaste, Laodamia loyal, Artemisia loving, Lucretia chaste: thus
have we many proofs to answer any instance of feminine imperfection: yet
nothing which is mortal, can be absolutely perfect: Virgils saying is most
true.

Varium et mutabile semper
Femina.
Euridice, which living could not be accused of inconstancy, was after death
blemished with unkindness, because forgetting the covenant of her return from
hell. she fondly looked back. The siluer-tongued Thracian, whom Apollo had
endued with a double gift of music and poetry, being moved with this,
hated and with hateful disgrace disparadged the worth of that scxe which
before he had honored by his matchless Art: but if I proceed in this vain,
I shall fall into a Labyrinth more intricate than the first.

Scarce had I left that place, when I heard a loud noise of Pipes: and looking
forward, I saw a great troop of mourners, toward whom I paced: and drawing
near, beheld God Pan foremost of this assembly, who sounded a doleful note
on his Oat en pipe: Next him came Syluanus, Pomona, Faunus and all the rural
powers, whom the light-foote Satyrs followed piping all, though harshly, yet
heavily. Next after these, the swift-pacing Wood-Nymphes came, whose golden
locks staining the beautye of Titans beams, hoong loose about their
shoulders: these did strewe flowers on the ground as they went, having their
lappes full, and with their voices agreeing in one sound, made a sorrowful,
yet sweet consort.

Next these, a coarse covered with a fair hearse curiously embrothered, and
ouer-spredde with choice plenty of sweetest flowers was carried by four
shepherds: on it this short Epitaph in red letters.

Here beauties wonder lately slain does lie,
Whom angry Cinthiaes wrath did doom to die.
A great troop of Shepheardes followed this breathless coarse, which made me
muse the more, thinking that it was some rare creature, at whose perfections
that angry Goddess did repine, as fearing that the report of her worth would
bring her deity into contempt: yet destrous to be thoroughly resolved, I
demanded of him which was the last of the company, what this solemn pomp did
signify: he courteously shaped me this answer. Stranger, (for so thou
seem) know, that these are the obite rites of fair Amaryllis, whom few
could match in beauty, none in pride. She refusing the love and service of the
best deserving Shepherd that ever was bred in Arcadia, bestowed her favor on
a clownish Swain, his inferior in all perfections: he it was whom thou
saw following the hearse clad in mournful attire: but suddenly repenting
her choice, she did coldly entertain him, thinking him to be honored enough,
and her self too much abased by such slight favors which she affoorded him
yet such, as they might have prolonged the other shepherds life, which could
not obtein the least courtesy, though worthy of the most. But proud Amaryllis,
deeming her self better than any mortal creature, durst attempt comparisons
with the immortal powers, matching her self in the height of her own conceit
with matchles Diana, the sovereign of these Groves: who though sprung of
heavenly race, yet deignes to bless Arcadia with her sacred presence. The
Gods jealous of her honor aimed at her one of those shafts, where with she
wounds the flying beasts: and deprived the coy girl of life, which would have
bereaved her of renown. Thus being slain by divine justice, she is honored in
her death, and her body accompanied to the earth with the rusticall music of
the rural Dimi-Gods, and the celestial notes of the lovely Nrmphes, which
tune their voice in a funeral song, they purpose to convey her body to the
darkesome Oroue, where it is said, the fore-lorne Shepherd by her desdeigned
leads a solitary life: who if he yet live, may see his wrongs revenged, and
the cause of his complaints, on whom before he durst not look, lying by his
side a breathless object, on whom he may now look his fill. If he be dead,
her body shall be interred where he spent his days in sorrow: But the loss
of Niobe, the metamorphosis of wretched Arachne, or the death of Marsias might
have warned her to avoid like presumption.

Thus have thou heard the cause of this solemnity briefly unfolded: but now
stranger thou must pardon me, I can spend no longer time in these discourses,
but must have after my company. This said, he left me in a deep meditation,
musing at the inevitable lot of destiny, whose successiue chances knit
together with the chain of necessity, follow each the other in fatal
course: the last finishing what the former left vneffected, and all discharging
the most certain ordinances of divine prescience. But sleep could not furnish
my fancy with such high thoughts, as my troubled conceit did affect: therefore
amidst my dumps, I suddenly awaked, and thus ended my dream, which if you
vouchsafe to peruse with favorable censure, I shall rest fully satisfied: and
though I can perform nothing else, yet of this I will be sure, not to trouble
you with tedious toys: nor manifest mine own insufficiency in long
discourses, for then misliking the subject, you would cast it away before ye
read half, or if you bestowed a few idle hours in perusing it all, you would
curse me that held you so long in reading a trifle, since you might have
employed that vacant time in viewing matters of more moment, and greater
pleasure.

But where Apolloes Lute is silent, Pans harsh Pipe may supply a room, which
else would blush at the sound of his own music. You know the saying of Horace.

Scribimus in docti doctique poemata passim. They which are not sufficiently
furnished with matchless perfections, wrought in them by virtue of a divine
Entheos, may yet talk of Parnassus, thirst for the silver streams of Helicon,
and honor the Muses in words, whose high conceited servants they cannot match
in worth. A Scholars Aliquid, is better than whole Uolumes of Clownishe lines.
drawn from the muddie fountains of Mechanical brains.

But seeking freely to excuse, I do fondly accuse my self. I will therefore
rest on the hope of your courteous acceptance.



Imprinted at London for William Blackewall, and are to be sold at his shop
over against Guild-hal Gate.


