MORIOMACHIA.



Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford. 1613.

TO THE MOST HAPPY AND GLORIOUS constellation of brotherhood, together with the
trinall knot of the most honorable family of the Howards, Robert Anton
sacrifices this newborn babe of his humble duty, wishing an everlasting
motion of happynes both the them, and that Honorable house (*)
RIght Honorable branches of a fair and spreading faily, under whose shades
my best fortunes ruminate, I have thought good to unite you all in a whole
piece, whom envious time cannot make merchandise in parcels. (to conioyne you:)
which to disioyne, were a sin as deep as a Lawyers pate in Term time, that
sings no song but De profundis. I honor that musical consent of fraternity,
and hold it not inferior to Pithagoras his harmony: let this modicum of
superfluous minutes crave but the privilege of a Seruingman, and wear the
cloth of your favor. Semel in anno ridet Apollo: Serious hours and grave
designs must needs laugh, and amongst them, my studyes at this time, are
turned merry Greek. I writ them in Dog days, and they must needs bite: but
what? not virtue, not honor, not nobility: but error, ignorance, and that
pesthouse of the time (foppery.) But what I would speak, silence shall be my
Attorney, and plead both for times reformation, and your perpetual
happiness.

Your Honors devoted servant, Robert Anton.

To the incapable Reader.
Give place, Ass-crapart,
Start back, A noisome Giant, whom Anus King of Pedolia, beat out of his
Kingdom.
Tatifart,
Colebrond, be a by-stander:
For here comes to fight
The Fayryes fair Knight,
ycleped Pheander,
To conquer full soon
The man of the Moon,
Sir Archmoriander.
The truth of which Battle,
This Book well can that tell
to each Understander,
Unless that he be,
As some men are, (we see)
a Goose or a Gander.
By which his rare works
He gives secret iurkes:
he one day shall wander,
Though yet he privy lurkes:
Against the big Turks
to be a Commander.
I mean, thou shall worke-ny
To conquer the Turke-hy,
Notorious Pheander.
Until when, let no man,
Of this Knight of the For being without a wife, he may be as honest as
honorable.
woman,
speak evil or slander.
Moriomachia.
ABout that time of the year, when siluan Pan pipes Roundelayes, and nimble
Satyrs friske about the timely Palms, old Tytan turned swaggerer, and reueld
in the Tauernes of the earth so late, that he durst not appear to a Lantern,
(fearing the rough examination of a Rugged watch, and the dogged authority of a
common Iaylor) before the fresh Aurora fetched him forth with a fiery face, and
alayd his high color with the cool mornings dew. Then Fayry Nymphs turned
Milke-maydes, and took pleasure in dandling the dug. The Fayry Queen herself
at that time disposed to recreation (and to try her huswifry) accompanied her
attendant train to their accustomed haunt: which was to a rare and delicate
pleasure-fitting meddowe, most copious, and neately furnished with diverse proper
bellowing Bulls, and many comely courteous gentle Cowes, where every pretty
Elfe betook her to her several task, to provide Milk for Ale possets, to
welcome home at night their ouerwearyed Knights in Arms.

No Art in arms gives Fayry Knights content,
Unless they have their Ladies sweet consent.
The Fayry Queen not acquainted with such rustic Dayry, most unfortunately
(but more Cockney like) by chance happened on a meek and loving Bull. She
(poor Lady) thinking he had bin a reasonable creature, made him low cursy,
and fayrely entreated him, to yield his consent to be quiet and gentle, until
she had finished her Milking. And so takes the Teate in her slender hand,
(which was somewhat too gross for her fine fingers,) she (kind Madam) drew
many a dry draught.

Good Lady she did seldom use to milk,
Or touch s things as were not clad in silk.
The poor understanding beast proud of his Milkemayd, seemed not so much as
once to stir, fearing to hinder what she did intend, but stood most loying
and kindly to her.

When she began to perceive her own mistake, and withal observing the strange
and unusual courtesy of the beast toward her, she pittyed his present estate,
and immediately called a council of her Nymphs about her, where all generally
yielded their voices, and concluded, to have him transformd into the habit and
shape of a man, but still to retain his brave beastly courage, wherewith he
might in time (by ye assistance of his stars) be ranckt in eminency with the
gallant seeming Courtyer, the valorous heir of a gowty Usurer, or at least,
with the Farmors proper Gentleman-like son. And for his qualityes and manners
(having so excellent a Tutres) he already was able to keep the company of a
Mere Scholar, a bold Bayliffe, or a brawny fisted Mechanicke: so being
provident of his welfare in pursuit of Knightly adventures, she suited him in
an Asses skin impenetrable, made after the newest fashion, and entitled him,
Tom Pheander, the maiden Knight her Champion.

The Ass did wear a Biggin being young,
Which kept his ears from growing ouerlong.
And for that she would at first let him understand the general dangers of a
Knight errant, she put him in a weather-beaten Bark with tottered sails,
fraighting it with a whole firkin of valor, and so exposed him to the Sea and
fortune, who with the favorable wind of her Fan, drove him with safety upon
the coasts of Morotopia, even at the mouth of a river, where grew a goodly
Viniger tree, which was very sharply besieged with fat and large ourgrowne
Salmons (between whom for this long time, has bin mortal war, and waste,
by fire and knife) where he so valiantly bestir'd himself, that he raised the
siege, and recovered the tree, which he carefully preserues with a garrison of
Fayryes, by reason of the abundance of Viniger it yeeldes, which he found
would be very commodious in his Turkish wars, as well to cool his double
dags, as also to make sauce to eat the hearts of all such Turks as he should
chance to kill.

So traveling up into yt country, as he passed through a Uillage, he espied
two men threshing out Corn in a Barn, which struck him into amazement, so
that he stood as mute as a politic Drunkard, to see them beat one against
the other with their flayles; But taking them to be Knights inchaunted, he
addressed himself toward them, and said, Fair Knights, remember your selves,
and call to mind your former estates, resume your noble spirits, and be not
thus ouerborne with Nicromanticke spells. One of them looking up, said, Honest
man, be gone: for thy fool speeches hinder our work, and our Dame will be very
angry, if our days task be not finished at night. (Quoth ye Fayry Champion)
Mistake me not, gentle Sirs: for fortune has sent me hither, to ease and
release you both from these Magical charms, if I may but see or speak with
that damned Magician. Mary Sir, my Dame and Marian are both within, and Marian
is even just now a charming: and if you will go in and speak with her, you
shall. (Quoth the Fayry Champion) With all my heart. So in he leads him to the
Milke-house, where Marian was charming butter. As soon as he espied her, he
said, Aha, have I found thee at thy charm, thou foul Inchauntresse? I speak
to thee that keep Knights in servile slavery. I Will dissolve your Charms and
Circles, your Inuocations and Incantations: and so takes the Charm and
Cheesefats, and throws them about the house. Which Marian seeing, she cried
out for help, to save her from the mad man: when presently one of the
servants of the house came with a cudgel, and there began a fearful fray.

Why do thou beat this courteous Knight, thou swayne?
Chud ha him catch his (woodcocke) wit again.
But Marian, like a wise Stickler or moderator, reconciled them with a
composition of sour whay, where each drank to other, and so parted loving
friends.

Now being in a strange country, and altogether unacquainted with the wares
and passages, or how to bend his course, straggling here and there (the weather
being exceeding hot, After honor.
and he extreme thirsty) at length he enquired of harvest people, entreating
their directions where he might get drink: who very courteously showed him a
plain beaten way, leading to a Noblemans house not far off.

The Fayry Champion put on a bold sharp face, went to the Noblemans house, and
desired the Butler to give him a cup of his giving drink. But the Butler (as
the custom is) churlishly denied him, and bid him be gone, for that he had not
any charity, much less commission, to give any thing to such an able wandering
fellow as he was, bidding him go look for work amongst harvest folks, and
take pains for his living.

Whereupon ye Fayry Champion, like a valiant sturdy Beggar, took the Butler by
the brains, and dashed his heels against the wall, made corkes to stop
Ale-bottles of his bones, and threw them into his Buttery, for all succeeding
Butlers (yt were not boon companions) to, take example.

He took his brains from forth his head before,
Else sore Kibe-heeles, perhaps, had made him rore.
So he drank up all the beer in the Buttery, before he could quench his
intolerable thirst: for the house was not then so well furnished as at other
times, by reason there was no household: for the Lord and his Lady were gone up
to Moropolis to take physic, and see the newest fashion at Court.

Thus he proceeded on his intended journey, and after he had gone twenty miles
or thereabouts, he began to find a fainting in himself, and felt his guts
shrink together like burnt parchment, yet he took as good courage as
necessity uses to drive men to, in such a case, and ere long, by good hap he
espied not far off, a very fair new built house, with many goodly turrets
and battlements, and whole clusters of chimneyes more then need required, for
that he could not see any use of those that were needful, in regard there was
not any Tobacco stirring amongst them, which argued there was but little good
fellowship: therefore his heart waxed cold; yet he went and knocked at the gate,
but all in vain: for there was not any within to give him answer, but only
Spyders: for all the Rats and Mice were either gone, or else starved with that
extreme dearth.

O Champion fair, what ill did thee befall,
To be deceived? it was no Hospital.
It fortuned, as he was thus standing at the gate, a husbandman of a near
neighboring village, came by and asked the Fayry Champion what he would have
there. Sir, quoth. the Fayry Champion, I am a traveler without money, and
altogether without any acquaintance, but only Hunger and Thirst, and this
place afar off promised relief to such wantfull travelers as I am. O Zur
(quoth the husbandman) the sea how you ma be desseyu'd: but come and go along
with me, to such vittles as old Madge my wife has puruided vor my dinner, and
cham suer ye shall be welcome to hur with all hur heart. Sir (quoth the Fayry
Champion) I rest much bound to your love, and will embrace your kind offer to
go along with you.

The honest plain country man in charity mild,
Took up at the gate, this poor fatherless child.
But I pray, sir, tell me: what Gentleman owes this fair house where you found
me knocking? (quoth the husbandman) Zuerly sur, he is no Gentleman, vor he is a
Knight, and my Londlord too, mary, and now both he and my Londlady lie in the
zitty, a vollowing a lawing matters, and they zay a haz zitch an intercate
troubling vowle zute, it is a shame to zee it, and that it is great chance
whether a conere get out on it or no: vor a has not been here in our country
this tweluemoneth and more, burlady, come the time: but I wudd to God a were
here vor me, vor we miste a great deal of good cheer, and dancing, and sport
at Kursmas, zince my old Lond-lord his vather dyed. Well, God rest his zoule,
vor a was the best hondler of a long whip in all our country: nay I may tell
you, a has not left his mate behind him: and cham zore a veard we zhall nere ha
zuch another man as he was, vor a wud be zo yarly up a mornings to vother his
zheepe himzelfe, as it was wondervull: and Lord, a wud tell zich a company of old
vables, a mon wudd be the better to be in his company. Chee ha heard him zay,
that his vather turned him out a doors when a was a little boy, to zeeke his
vortunes, with one poor single groat, all in three Hapences, in his purse: but
by my vaith chee know not how a got it: but cham zuer a dyed a mizerable rich
mon.

I wonder (quoth the Fayry Champion) much, that your Landlord being no
Gentleman, could come to be a Knight! (quoth the Husbandman) Chee ha oftentimes
heard him zay, that it cost him well and vanordly vor it, I may tell you.

When the Fayry Champion understood, there were more ways then one to attain
to a Knightship, he held himself in the most fortunatest place of ye earth;
for in the Fayry land they only have it by desert: and on the sudden he grew
to such an exceeding height of ambition, that with all haste he would be gone,
and to that purpose took leave of the Husbandman, who (as it appeared) was
high Constable of the hundred, by reason he went to the parish Clarke, and
caused him to make a pass for the security of Tom Pheander ye Fayry Champion
in his travels, wherein he charged all the petty Constables within the hamlets
of his hundred, to aid and resist the Fayry Champion against any one
whatsoever, that should seem to stay, defend, or any way distribute him in his
journey, but suffer him to pass quietly without any of their tolerations.

And although the Pasport was written by the hand of an old Wood-hen, (one
would have thought) if Hens had had hands, yet the countenance of a
Magistrates hand at it bore it out, and made it carry meat in the mouth. So he
thanked him for all his good cheer and much kindness, and departed in pursuit
of the fortunes he aimed at, which was to be a Knight at the least.

When he began to come near the heart of the Island, he heard of the rich and
flourishing City of Moropolis; thitherward he repaired with what expedition he
could devise, and drawing within sight of it, he met in the way a proper tall
trading Gentlewoman, set out after the finest fashion of new devices, with a
white loose body in a straight black Gown, hooped about with the flexible
bones of a slender Whale: the crown of her Cap was so deep in band, that it
durst not scarce peep out to be seen: her Mask came down to the tippe of
her nose, and her chin tied up with a laced clout (or handkercher,) as if she
were iawe-falne.

Her obsequious Usher, was a little lean fellow, with a fair smooth cloak,
whose fine thread was not ashamed to show it self to the uttermost: by his
side he wore a long sword, which was so quarrelsome, that it would draw upon
any thing it me withal: for the chape was worn out in drawing on the ground,
not much unlike a Munkey going upright on his hinder legs, drawing his tail
after him.

You do not much in your simile fail:
For he was an Usher unto a Wagtayle.
This Sir Pandarus, was vshering his Lump of food and raiment, For he had no
wages.
three Miles from the City, toward the diseased broken Chambers in a Brothell,
to give meeting with the wise profuse first fruits (or heir) of a rich Broker,
whose extorting Intrest money did so trouble the Use of his memory, at the very
last hour of his death, that he dyed without bequeathing the least spark of
wit to his soon, amongst his great patrimony; for he had not the time to
remember the least College of poor Scholars, nor the meanest Hospital of
diseased people.

He might have left something, although but little,
To cure his sons diseases in a Spittle.
This parcel of Sin, going toward the place of action, to meet her
Money-Paramour, had an Izeland dog newly shorn, which was going along with
her, and being in the fields, the dog fetched his courses to and again afar
off, so that she was fearful of losing him, and with a loud shrill voice, she
called him by the name of Lion. Which the Fayry Champion hearing, and withal
seeing the dog run toward her, he thought she had cried out to save her from
the Lion, and therefore drew his sword, and speedily ran to aid the
ouerpressed virgin, according to the oath and office of an arrant Knight.

When Tom Pheander espied this dogged Lion,
He drew his sword, and ran, till he was ny on.
And coming to her, he said, Fear not, fair Sweeting, the outrage of this
cruel ravening beast: for I will keep you from any evil whatsoever may
betyde you, that hereafter, Historyographers shall, Romanlike, stuff out my
valiant acts, with the bumbast of their perpetual Inkhornes.

The dog coming near her, began to leap and fawn, and lickt her hand: which
the Fayry Champion seeing, said, Now do I well perceive, that you are a most
spotless miraculous maid: for that you are armed with the armor of pure
honesty, against the insatiety of this all-deuouring Caniball.

Pheander showed his judgment was but poor,
To call her maid, that was a common ()
Although he spoke seriously to his own understanding, thinking indeed it had
bin a Lion: yet she (who scorned the name of a maid at those years) thought (as
well she might) that he had laughed her to scorn, and derided her with
scoffs; and therefore with her hand, she suddenly basht him on the lips, that
the very blood sprang from his teeth: which flirt he accepted as a token of
great favor from her bounteous fist, and with his handkercher spung'd the
blood from his mouth, which he said he would keep as a perpetual remembrance,
given by the hand of a fair virtuous virgin. With which speeches she grew so
exceeding angry, and was so highly incensed against him, that she commanded Sir
Panderus to set upon him with his long sword: which he refused to do, being
daunted with the fear of having his profession questioned.

A guilty conscience sometimes keeps in awe
That thing, which else would not be curbed by law.
The Fayry Champion seeing there were no further adue^tures, fitting the worths
of a Knight errant, he quietly departs, and addresses himself into that much
renowned City of Moropolis, where he purposed to spend some time about the
City, to learn a generous carriage of himself: and, for that he would avoid
to be deemed an Intelligencer to some forrayne State, he altogether abandoned
Ord'naryes, and Tauernes, and would not at any time seem to intrude himself
into the company of those that understood much, but took a Poetical Sculler,
(whose swift Muse borrowed the Poets pretty Nagge Pegasus to ride post: and
coming short of his Journey, Mariners seldom good Horsemen.
he brought him home pitifully Spurgal'd) and so crossed the water to visit the
Bears, and Puppet plays, the tall Dutchman, the woman Tumbler, the dead skin
of a strange living Fish, the Calfe with two heads, whose two mouths had
devoured more hay, then his one stomach could digest, so that it lies yet in
his belly as fresh, as when he first eat it, without putrefaction, as may be
seen. He likewise noted a very strange thing, which was, a Blind man led
through every street of Moropolis by a staff, which had eaten so much
Garlic, that he could follow it by the smell. And truly, many more great
observations he had gotten from amongst the Motion-mongers of Niniuy and
Babylon, so that now he had sufficient experience to maintain an argument by
Parrattisme after dinner or supper, with such ordinary company, as use to make
great talk of their small travels.

As their Journey by Land from Burmooda to Tunis,
And their Voyage by Sea, over the Alps to Venice.
And now having furnished himself with some reasonable store of coin, which
he had won at the excellent, and most ingenious games of Pigeon-holes, and
Trap, he put his fortunes on toward the Morotopian Court, where it pleased the
Pages of the Nobility to do him much favor, and the Ladies to grace him with
the honor of Knightsheepe.

The Lady laid the sword upon his shoulder:
He arose, and swore to beat her foes to poulder.
For which he was (Anabaptistically) created or nominated (at thyrty years of
age) Sir Tom Pheander, the Maiden Knight, or Fayry Champion, otherwise, The
Knight of the Sun, otherwise, The Knight of the Burning Pestle. And but that he
was most notoriously known to be a mere natural subject, the mutiplicity of
his names and additions might have brought him in suspicion, to be apprehended
for some seducing Spy, or at least, a Knight of the Post.

When the Fayry Queen understood by the invisible Attendant, which she sent
with him in his travels, of his grace in Court with Lords, his sometimes
desired company of Ladies, and the general love and laughter of his iollity,
and Natural conceits from the vulgar,

He oftentimes showed good pastime of body:
The whole Globe did think him a counterfeit Noddy.
She forthwith provided him a rich Coate-armour inchaunted, which had these
propertyes: that whatsoever he was (at any time) that put it on his back,
should not need to fear any terryble thing whatsoever, under the degree of a
Crabtree Cudgel, and whenever he should look in a glass, with the Helmet
on his head, he should be instantly so wise, that he should be for that time
always opposite to a fool.

This Coate-armour was of a singular proof, checkerd Motley, Vert and Argent,
party per Pale, ribd with rows of Gules and Or* from the very Gorget to the
skirts. The Helmet was of the same, on which was a device of four faces,
resembling the four winds. In the midst of those faces were raised little
mounts, appearing like Noses, on which stood pretty conceited Windmills, which
in the going made as pleasant a sound, as curious Fawlcons Bells. On the Crest
was advanced the Neck, Head, and Comb, of a bloody crested Cock, betokening
true valor even after death.

Wit eb'd from his Noddle like floods from a Rock,
Which made her provide him the comb of a Cock.
This complete Coate-armour was committed by the Fayry Queen unto the trust
and care of Madame Moriana (a Fayry Lady) to be with all speedy expedition
conuayde to her worthy merry Champion, the (now) Knight of the Sun.

Madame Moriana seemed to hasten, and with all possible speed dispatched
messengers with the greatest expedition that might be, and (Lady-like) made a
goodly show of that she never purposed, giving the Messenger direction to
hasten to the Morotopian Court, and there enquire after one Sir Archmoriander
Dunce-ll dell Cinthya, the Knight of the Moon, her Knight, to whom true reason
had far engaged hor love and due respect, in freeing her from the outrage of
Andromago a monstrous, strong and terrible little Giant: and thus it was.

Madame Moriana, upon a time, walking in an evening (as the custom is in Fayry
Land) down in a green valley, wherein Nature had seated a most pleasant
Grove, so fit for private recreation and delightful exercise that Art it
self could not devise a more curious frame: thither she often walked without
neglect, or missing ye least minute of her accustomed hour, who (by her often
recourse thither) was espied by Andromago, a mighty huge and chollericke Pigmey
Giant. He was a full half yard broad betwixt the eyes, and almost eighteen
inches by the rule (wanting but the breadth of a super-fine wire) from the
crown to the heel, and the rest of his body proportionable accordingly.

This monstrous grim-looking Giant, knowing Moriana's usual hours of resort
to the Grove, ambushed himself in a very great Thicket, (in the middle way)
growing on the side of a high cloud-pearcing Molehill.

The fashion of the country is, that the Nobles and Gentry of ancient houses,
have their Arms portrayed in a small Escuchion, which they evermore bear
before them, to the end they may be known from private persons, and that the
thronging multitude may give way, when they approach near; whereas otherwise,
they could not have that due respect which belongs to them, in regard it is a
warlike nation, and subject to Insurrections: THerefore for that they may be
ever in a readynes upon any domestic war, all go ready armed with Maskes and
Mufflers.

Now had Andromago the Giant, with his Fawchion, lopt down the great arm of
an Eglentine tree, where he (Salisberry plain like) looked through, to see
the passing by of Moriana, whom at length he espied coming alone afar off,
toward her wonted place of recreation. And drawing near within the
apprehension of his eye, he was well assured it was she, and knew her by the
Escuchion she carried before her, wherein was charged in chief, a half Moon
Gules, in a iagged cloud Sables, and the lower (or back) charge was, three
Drops Or, under a Fess Argent. This coat she gave, which was the most
ancientst in all the Fayry Land, and ever continued hereditary to the heirs
female of that house.

When she was come near the Thicket, Andromago watched his fit opportunity,
and suddenly rushed out like a Snake from a hedge, leaping thirty inches by the
rod, and caught her in his arms, and with very joy of his prey, ror'd like a
Bull of eight days old, This hideous yell so affrighted the poor Lady, that
she was ever after troubled with a kind of Falling sickness. So leading her
along as his prisoner, toward a Castle he had not far off, which was double
grated with huge Iron bars, not much unlike the mighty strong Baracadoed
windows of a monstrous ouergrowne Mouse-trap: wherein he had imprisoned many
ancient tooth-wanting Ladies, and fed them with nothing but hard candied
sweetemeates, and the sowrest juice of the sweetest Grape.

It was Sr. Archmorianders good hap, to take his way through the Fayry Land,
homewards from his travels, who had been amongst the barbarous Brasillians, to
see the fashion of the country, and also to learn the nature of the people,
by a most happy chance, he met the poor captived Lady, led by the hand of his
ugly Monster, who was near as high as the Ladies girdle, which compast her
delicate waste seven times, besides the knot.

The sudden appearance of the Giant to Sir Archmoriander (for he had never
seen in all his travels and adventures the like creature before) stroke him
into such a shaking palsy, that he could very hardly stand still on his legs,
He would have bin gone.
yet he took an indifferent strong heart, and addressed himself toward the
Giant, with a sweet quauering voice, saying:

Thou most monstrous and huge diminitiue of nature, which have always been an
enemy to Ladies, I advise thee surrender thy prisoner into my hands, or else by
the light of this marshall hand, thou shall well understand the price of her:
for thou have done her such skuruy paltry wrongs, as thy weak state cannot
counteruayle to make her satisfaction; for reason induces my worthy self to
wey both your causes in my upright balance of vnequity.

Andromago staring at Sir Archmoriander, like a wild Goose, ready to fly upon,
said, Thou foolish Knight, think thou I will so easily part with the thing I
have so long stood and waited for? No; I advise thee be gone, or else I will
wyther thy very face, and confound thy smelling sense with my breath: for I
scorn to stand to thy unequal Chaundlers weights.

The Giants threats could not discourage Sir Archmoriander one jot more then he
was before, (although surely the Giants breath was very strong, by reason he
was so short wasted, and his two ends were so near neighbors, that their
friendshipp were alike, and the one did participate the others strength and
savor) But Sir Archmoriander well backed with hope to win the Ladies favor,
and his affection to justice, made him look so near to his business in hand,
as an old purblinde Purblind men are good husbands, and look near to their
business.
Counceller (or rather concealer) whose velvet Ierkin is sufficient to make a
Justice of peace without a commission, that will not suffer the smallest
caracter of a fault to run at random unpunished: but binds it fast in
recognizance, to receive either corporal or pecunier punishment. Even so he
consideratly bare in mind the execution of some seuers justice upon a homicide,
and with warm courage betook him to his sword; which Andromago perceiving, he
likewise provided to defend himself against his adverse Assaylant.

The Justices law did so assist his Clyent,
As Morianders sword, the Lady from the Giant.
Sir Archmoriander, in the first encounter, had made an end of the fight before
they began, but that (being mad with fury) he mist the Giant, and run the
point of his sword into the ground. Andromago (leering like a Sargeant) espied
that advantage (seeing him tugging to pull it forth again) omitted no time,
but advanced his club, and with one blow pasht Sir Archmorianders head all into
a lump: which ever after looked like a Beetle: so that afterward, when he
came to be dressed, the Surgeons opinion was, that he was very likely to carry
that mark to his grave.

But Sir Archmoriander recovered himself so well as he could, and turned about
as swift as a Windmill sail in a hot Summers day, (with strong agility of
body, and resolution withal, to give a final period to the battle) and most
valiantly untrussed his points, put off his Doublet, snatched up his breeches by
the sides, and with his sword cut off the Giants right hand, so that it only
hung by the very bare bone and sinews.

With this blow, Andromagoes Club fell out of his hand: which Sir Archmoriander
suddenly took advantage of by closing with him* and with a nimble strength
threw him flat on the earth with as much facility, as if the Giant had been a
child of two years old.

Sir Moriander cut the Giant on the hand,
And hurt his little Toe, he could not stand.
The Lady Moriana standing by all the time of the fight, perplexed with an
extreme fear of danger, and now seeing a hope of victory attend her Champion,
she began to take comfort in a pretty Medley, between weeping and laughing.

Sir Archmoriander having gotten Andromago under him, lay upon him with such a
heavy weight, and pressed him so sore, that till then, Archmoriander lay very
heavy upon the little Giant.
Andromago felt not Sir Archmorianders heavy displeasure fall upon him: which
caused Andromago to cry out to the Lady, for pardon, and craved mercy of Sir
Archmoriander, with a great show of sorrow, for the exceeding injurious wrongs
offered to the Lady, and the heavy insufferable iniuryes intended against Sir
Archmoriander: All which was now fallen upon himself, and the burden did much
bruise his conscience.

Upon this submission, with penitency for his faults, Sir Archmoriander most
honorably (befitting his worth) cut off his head, and set it on his doublet
breast (where a button was lost in this fray) wearing it in token of his valor
and victory, and so set him at liberty to go whither he would.

Although the Giant would have given a groate,
Yet Moriander vowed, to see his naked throat.
Sir Archmoriander having thus freed the Lady Moriana from the outrage of
Andromago, he went to comfort her, who was then suddenly fallen into a deep
passion of sadness.

Sweet Madam (quoth he) you see your dangerous enemy here lie slain:
therefore, fair Lady, I much scorn your thoughts should be possessed with any
future fear. Let me be the example of your courage, to take a strong heart,
and valiantly bear up your Escuchion and Arms without fear: for under your
coat will I fight, whilst I can sland or breathe: for nature has taught man
to be an agent even to brute Animals, much more to fair Ladies, as for
example: The heavy Ox, he lightens with the Goade; the sullen Horse, he
quickens with the spur; and the Melancholy dull Lady, he stirrs up to mirth,
with the prick of witty invention from a good brain.

At these pretty Similes Moriana smiled, and bid him kneel down, taking his
sword, which was yet bloody with cutting the Giants throat, and laid it on his
shoulder, bidding him rise up, Sir Archmoriander, otherwise, Dunce-ll dell
Cinthya her Knight of the Moon, (dubbing him in the ordure of the Escuchion
she bore, and intitling him by her half Moon) which bargayne he sealed with
his lips, Not on the Escuchion,
on the back of her hand, with a smacking impression, and kindly said, Fare
you well, sweet Lady, and so departed.

Moriana thus was freed from the Giant,
And gave him thanks, with tongue which went most plyant.
This well deserved affection from Moriana to Sir Archmoriander, possessed him
with the Armor, which of right belonged to the Knight of the Sun, when he
(as many Gallants use) neglected not the least opportunity that occasion could
minister, to crake and brag of his Mistress favors most, when (if truth had
been known) they least concerned him.

Sir Tom Pheander, For he was ever a great dreamer of Fayry business.
the Knight of the Sun, had a vision, wherein he had intelligence of a
Coate-armour, that was sent unto him by the Fayry Queen, which Coate-armour
was likewise showed to him in this dream, whereof he took especial
observation for the marks and tokens, so that he could not fail in the
challenging of it.

It was likewise told him in this vision, that Moriana, a Fayry Lady, had most
trecherously betrayde it into the hands of the Knight of the Moon, who
wrongfully delaynde it from him.

Sir Pheander had the Armor showed in vision,
Which made him hold Moriander in derision.
This vision put the Knight of the Sun into such a passion of anger, that
like a foolish mad man he tore his hair, and vowed a revenge against the
Knight of the Moon, which he should be well assured to hear of, and hastens
with all speed toward the Court, to see whether he could meet with his
injurious adversary.

That very morning the Knight of the Moon was ready armed in the Knight of the
Suns armor, and almost upon taking horse, to ride abroad for some strange
adventures, even at the instant, when the Knight of the Sun came to Court.

Archmoriander was armed, I know not how,
To ride abroad to slay the savage Sow.
And meeting the Knight of the Moon, he was well assured (calling his memory
to advise, and summoning the remembrance of the marks) that it was his armor:
therefore he stepped to the Knight of the Moon, and said,

Sir Knight, my simple opinion cannot judge any of your actions less then
abominable honest, yet this Coate-armour (and clapped him on the shoulder)
belongs to me, although you most ignobly detayne it from me, yet I am sure it is
my right, and by Cocks and Combs (the badge of my honor) I look to have it.

The Knight of the Moon, thinking that he had strucke^ him in earnest, most
valiantly blurted out his tongue, and bade him come by it how he could.

This now likely to grow to a dangerous quarrel, the friends of both parts
used their mediations, and persuaded them to have the matter put to
arbitterme^t, and not fight, or go to law like brabbling fools, which arrest
one another for Moone-shine in water: and so with much ado they both yielded
to have the matter decided by two indifferent honest men. Not too honest by no
means.


So they were both bound, each to other in general acquittances of a hundred
pounds a piece: and the Knight of the Moon unarmed himself, and delivered the
Coate-armour and Helmet, (as he was enjoined) into the custody of the
Arbitrators then chosen, which were two Headborrowes of a Hamlet near
adjoining to the City Moropolis:

The one had no wit, the other had no land,
But botcht up his living by patching with Holland.
These Headborrowes being altogether unskillful in deciding controversies of
such nature, retaynde a common Lawyer, as an Vmpeere to assist them.

The Lawyer, when he had seen the Coate-armour, took a very great liking to
it, insomuch that he purposed to give the two Knights satisfaction by money,
and keep the Armor to himself, if it would fit his body (although his
conscience told him it belonged but to one, yet he would please both parties to
serve his own turn. So putting it on to try the fitnes, he felt it give him
such a shrewde pinch in the Gues, (by reason it was too little) that he could
never after graze any where, but on bare Commons.

O Gaffer Lawyer, stay, how do you look?
Sir Pheander will note down your name in his book.
So the Lawyer seeing his purpose prevented by misfortune, and no benefit like
to rise toward himself, he would take no further pains in the business, but
left it to the discretion of the two Headborrowes: who now having the whole and
absolute power of determining the cause, and withal the Coate-armour in their
own hands, they made no great haste to beat their heads together about an
award, but (like subtle Foxes) made good use of the Armor for the most part
of their whole year, to Watch and Ward in, and (having learned a trick of the
Lawyer,) fed the two Knights with delays, till their own turns were served,
and in the end, (because neither of them could write or read) they returned an
Ignoramus.

When the matter was understood to be so difficult, that such Understanding
men (as they were taken to be) could not decyde the controversy, it was held
fit, that they should try out their own rights in single combat, by reason
both challenged with like proofs, and the one would not endure the other, to
be rival in eythers absolute right: where indeed, necessity admits no
plurality in such a Case.

You say very true, the weather grows hot:
And two fools at once were too much in one coat.
The day for Combat was appointed, and the two Combatants had warning given
them, to provide themselves sufficiently for the mayntenance of their just
claymes.

Now does the Knight of the Sun lie ruminating every night, tossing and
tumbling in his bed without sleep, bethinking himself (being of a timorous
nature) what the issue of this dangerous quarrel may come to, and (oftentimes)
heartily wished, he had never challenged so worthy a Knight, for so small a
trifle.

On the contrary part, the Knight of the Moon seemed to be very unwilling to
expose his body to such an eminent danger, especially against a Knight of his
own order, but rather could wish him to sleep in peace, till he did awake
him, which he would not do for a world; but that his Knight-sheeps word was so
far engaged.

Alas, poor Knights, I much bewail their case,
To see how meager both look in the face.
The Knight of the Sun armed himself in a new white armor, which he never
tried before, and (for decencyes sake) went into his chamber, to his looking
Glass, to see how his Armor did fit and become him, and finding it to his
liking, he called his Page, and asked his opinion.

The Page answered, that the Armor did not fit or become him, in his opinion.
(Quoth the Knight of the Sun) No, my pretty Page? Why, the Glass in my
chamber tells me, it is very proportionable and fit.

Sir, believe not the Glass, (quoth the Page) for the knquish Opticke made it
to reflect many fair figures on foul faces, and they will flatter many, and
make them seem far better then they are. But, master, content your self:
for you look very well, especially when your Beuer is close locked, that a man
cannot see your face. Which answers pleased the Knight so, that he rested
passing well contented. But now the time is come, and the Combatants ready to
enter the lists.

Soft, who comes here? I pray can you tell?
The Knight of the Sun, what can you not smell? For there was civil wars in
his belly, and some run from the camp.

First came in the Knight of the Sun, richly acowterd in a white Armor,
adorned with a white and azure Plume in the crest, with black beaten buckrum
bases, glistering like the purest black Iet, beautyfied all over with painted
devices of Suns and Stars.

Jack (towering) Daw that tops the lofty tree,
On a Swines back, sits not so upright as he. His black Bases glistred like
a Crow on a Hogs back.

On either side were Emblemes of T P K, figured in Escuchions, far more fair
then the Shelfe-clothes in a new Grocers shop.

Direct before him, at his Saddle pummell, hung a Battle-axe, which had endured
the brunt of many a deep danger, shadowed under the mystery of a Burning
pestle, flaming out of a Common mortar, most artificially wrought in Natural
colors upon Holland.

By his side was clasped a dangerous pair of Hangers, wherein was wrought with
subtle imbrodery, of Moss and Peacocks feathers, a Landskipp of strong grated
Castles, high grown Woods, and large fields of Hemp: in which hung a sword
wrought with such cunning, that a man could very hardly judge which end should
hang downwards. In his hand he carried a proper tall slender Lawnce, so
straight as a bent-Bow, (against which, the Knight of the Moon did except,
fearing to be ouer-reacht with a crooked measure) and it was so sharp at the
end, that it would stick to a coat of steel like a piercing Burre.

He was mounted on a browne-bay Courser, of such a strange understanding, that
he would apprehend more then himself ^ could devise to teach him.

The Horses wit did work, as I suppose,
Over the Tubbe, and Barme dropped from his nose. It was not a Brewers horse for
all that.

For when he but presented his foot to the Stirrup, he would stand so gentle
as a block: but being up and surely seated, one very whiske of a birch rod
would make him fling out his heels like a Schoole-boy, and run with such
swiftnes, and wonder full speed, that the very stuffing of his head would drop
out at his nose like Turpentine.

The Caparisons of his horse were of the same piece that his bases were of, and
wrought all over with rich colors of painted Needleworke: which made a more
delightful show, then the brave Buceplialus of a Whitsontide Lord in his
Morris dance.

He had such small Spurs, that a man could very hardly discern the Rowels:
for they were no bigger then the little fore wheels of a small ordinary Coach.

His Lance the whip, his spurrs the wheels, the caparisons the Carre, and
himself the Carter.
His Rowels bore compass, extending so far,
He look like a Carter, with whip, horse and Car.
Before him was carried by strength of man, a moral device of
wind-Instruments, figuring a man troubled with the wind-chollicke, which could
neither have ease, or take pleasure, till he heard the wind break from him
with a melodious sound. These Instruments in the Fayry Land, are called
Poke-whistles; but here, the vulgar most deprauingly do give them the plain
attribute of Bagpipes.

At length his sullen pipes began to squeake: For he cannot hold his water,
when he hears a Bagpipe.

To save his breech, he did alight to leake.
On either side went a Squire in the habit of Turks, with red Turbants on
their heads, wreathed about with white Shashes, and Trunchions in their hands,
betokening Bandettors, or sturdy highway standers, captived to the mercy of
his victorious sword.

He was come into the Lists, (I mean not, of threedbare broad cloth,) and had
ridden so often about, to show himself to the people, He almost tired his
horse, before the combat
that it would have tired a horse, before the other Combatant came in. But he
is not long that comes at last.

Then came in the Knight of the Moon, making no great show, who was likewise
in a milk white Armor newly scowr'd: he bare a plume in his crest, as white
as a Goose feather, signifying his innocence (for that the Lady Moriana was
never had before any Justice, to be examined how she came by the Armor, nor
did the Messengers that brought it, acquaint him that it did belong to the
Knight of the Sun.)

He had party colored silk bases of a rich Mercers stuff, but the name I do
not well know.

His Sword and Lance were pattern'd by the Knights of the Sun.

His Horse was black, and so free-spirited, that he rid him without spurs.

He came in, I mean not Knights, that diet in Ord'naries.
like a plain ordinary Knight without Attendants, save only his horse -- had
rich trappings.

Sir Moriander's come, grim looked, as sharp as vargis,
Without Attendants* fie upon this charges.
A brother of their order, hearing of this combat, made his personal
appearance, with a blue flat Cap, wherein stuck a feather-bush, of all the
colors in the Rainebow.

He had a deep ruff band with wide sets, so great, as if the Lawndresse had
mistaken the steel, and poak't it with the Band-blocke. It bare a
circumference like the wheel of a Brewers Dray-Cart.

He had a long dropping Nose, like the pipe of a Still, to which, his lean
Chin, in courtesy (turned backwards) to give meeting half way, at the sign of
the Mouth.

No jesting fool, but a plain dealing Lad,
That speaks his mind, be it good or bad.
At his sudden coming in, the two Knights stomachs began to rise (but not at
one another) for they thought he had brought a Calves head and bacon (in a
Ruff Band.
Charger upon his shoulders) covered with a blue ( Blue Cap.
Chinay) dish, and a His feather.
bunch of Reddish: but it fell out otherwise: for he came like a voluntary
Trumpet, at his own proper costs and charges, to sound the terrible Alarm.

He blew alarm, so sweet as any figs:
Which pleased the ears, as Jews love roasted Piggs.
So taking his Cow-Trumpet from about his neck, Horn.
he sou^ded a charge: which the two Knights hearing, they put on courageously,
with as swift speed as their horses could go, Not run
to the very shocke, where both their horses most unfortunately started off so
far, that the one could not come near to touch the other with his Lance,
and running out their full careere, the Knight of the Moon, for want of
Spurs, could not stay his Horse, Or Picadilla.
which put him in such a mad standing Choler, that he forgot to bear up the
point of his Lance, in so much that the Burre had like to light upon the skirts
of some of the standers by, and made them cry, Beshrewe them that bear Burres.

The Knight of the Sun (premeditating the danger, and withal respecting the
meanest subjects safety, as also his own) most gravely let fall his Lance,
and took hold of the Saddle pummell with one hand, and checked in his Courser
with the other, so fiercely and short, that he made a sudden stand, in less
then a quarter of an hour, to the great pleasure, and wonderful applause of
all the beholders.

In the second course, the Knight of the Moon used his Lance for a Jacobs
staff, and winking with one eye, took the just height of the Knight of the
Suns breast, to which height, he most politikely glided his Lance, all along on
the top of the Bar, the whole careere to the very shocke, where (by great
chance) he broke his staff with such a counterbuffe, that the Knight of the
Sun was half way behind the saddle, before he could catch hold of his horses
main, which otherwise had kissed his tail to the very ground but his sure hold
so nimbly recovered him, that he brake his Lance athwart the Knight of the
Moons breast with such fury, that the Knight of the Moon was extremely
troubled with the passion of the heart: wherewith he was so grieved, that the
next course he was fully resolved, to seal the Knight of the Sun his Quietus
est. And for that purpose, he called for a stiff Lance, with a full resolve,
either to break the Knight of the Suns back, or at least, to dismount him
over his horses crooper.

The Lance was delivered to him, which was a great deal too big for the
graspe of his hand, and therefore he put it under his arm, and took fast hold
with both his hands on the Pummell of the Saddle: and running his full course,
he hit the Knight of the Sun, against the thumb of his Gauntlet, which beat
back the Lance quite from under his arm, and withal, near turned the Knight
of the Moon out of his Saddle to the ground, but that the buckle of a girt
caught hold of his Bases, and so saved his honor from the dust.

But recovering himself, and half mad with fury, he ran his horse about to
the same side of the Bar, where the Knight of the Sun was, and most
cowardly (against the law of legs) set upon the Knight of the Sun, Or,
arms.
with both his armed fists, when the Knight of the Sun had nothing in the
world to defend himself, but his Sword and Lance (which he so dearly loved)
that he carefully preserved it from breaking that course.

In this their last course of Tilting, Although they were not ale-tubs.
the very dregs of their malice began to appear, and therefore they were
resolved to run no more, but to try it out with their single swords at the
Barriers. So both of them drew, and laid on such heavy load, that the very
fire it self did not dare to appear from their valiant swords, for fear of
being quenched with the drops of sweat, that fell from their Knight-sheepes
hyde-bound faces.

In this conflict they were both so far spent and tir'de, as ever was Hackney
horse under prodigal Citizen, and the pride of their eager swords (now having
their bellyes full) were so rebated, that neither of them would bite: They
threw away their swords without scabbards.
And therefore (like old ouerworne Seruingmen, whose prime of youth was spent
in their masters service) had at last both their coats pulled over their ears,
and dismissed their masters service without wages.

The Knights of the Sun and Moon now being both on foot, made a pawse to
breathe themselves, staring in opposition one against the other, with full
big faces swollen with anger, foming or slauering at the mouth, like two
sucking savage Bores, whetting their tushes against a dugge.

And on a sudden they closde together, and so fell to wrestling, to try their
strength of arms: 14. days soon come about; for the Sun and Moon are in
conjunction.
but the Knight of the Moon (being the elder Courtyer) was too cunning for him
in the Gripe, and threw him down, The Moon overcame the Sun.
but so, as both were down together, and the Knight of the Sun undermost,
which seemed ominous, portending strange things to come. The Eclipse of the
Sun.


Why is it so dark? that I can tell soon:
The Knight of the Sun is the Man in the Moon.
The (Knight of the) Sun, and the (Knight of the) Moon, continuing thus in
conjunction, caused such an Eclipse, as has seldom been mentioned in any
hystories of your greatest ( Almanacke) writers for the interposition of the
body of the (Knight of the) Moon, did so darken and obscure the light of the
(Knight of the) Sun: that it made a pitch-blacke dark day, and wrought such
confusions and mistakings on earth, by reason of the darkness, that in
Moropolis, where the houses stood thick, one honest Citizen could very hardly
see another, without the help of Lantern light.

He was a happy man that could keep his wife to himself, for fear of losing
her: for many wives took other men in their husbands stead, for want of light.

It was so extreme dark, that Collectors for the poor could not see to
distribute the monyes, gathered to charitable uses, but were glad to put it up
in their own purses, and employ it to their own uses till this Eclipse was
past.

The poor Constables were glad to take money of Malefactors to buy them
fire-light, to see the peace kept, whereas oftentimes before, many of them were
forsworn, by reason they could not see to bring in true Presentiments.

The Lawyers could not see their briefes, not to make so much as one motion for
his (rich oppressing) Clyent, without three double fees for his motion and
Torch-light: but for his poor Client, if his cause were good, his charge of
torch-light was saved, by the presence of Angels.

And although Attournyes swarmed like the Grasshoppers in Egypt, yet they kept
so close, and were so hard to be seen, (by reason of this darkness) that a man
could very hardly have any one appear, not scarce for ten groats.

The fogging Solliciter could not see to follow a cause, as in honesty he
ought, but neglected the business of him that first retayn'd him, and for want
of Candlelight, took fees of the contrary party, which (after the Eclipse was
past) came to light, and he called coozening Knave for his labor, though sore
against his will.

In this dark Eclipse, the Bankrupt could not see to pay his debts: but his
creditors were glad to grope out half a crown in the pound, and thank him
for it.

The miserable Jewish Usurer would not be at charge, for so much light as would
search the odd corners of his Counting House, to find out, and deliver up
Morgages of Land, and old bonds that were formerly paid: but put off the
debtors with releases, and acquittances, with hope that time might neglect
them, or cast them aside to be los^: then would he but forswear the payment,
and all is his own.

The extorting Broker, (that suckes the very marrow from the bones, worse then
the foul disease) for want of candlelight, could not see the Devil at his
elbow with one pawe on his shoulder, ready to tear in in a thousand pieces,
for oppressing the poor pawning borrower with threescore in the hundred, and
in missing but one hour of his pay-day, he should be sure to lose more, then
thrice the value he borrowed.

Some wicked Mothers, after they came home from their Reuelling cheer and
Music, for want of Candlelight, became Bawdes even to their own Daughters.

In this dark Eclipse, the Peaking Pandar sneakt out with his bundle of rotten
commodity, which by candlelight made such a fair show, that he held it at a
Pockey dear rate; but the world was grown so cunning, that none but young
Heirs, and Fools would deal with him in Hole-sayle, and yet he made shift
to retayle it out to many Gallants by the yard, because they were his common
Customers.

The Tapster could not see to do any man right, it was so exceeding dark in
his Celler, that he thought the Devil had bin there, (so that he came running
up affrighted, before his Pot was half full.

By reason of this Eclipse, the Oftler could not give the horse hay, nor see
the age in his mouth, without a greazy candle in his hand.

O, 'twas a lamentable time with Dyers and Picture-drawers: for the one could
not see by candlelight to put in those true ingrediences that would hold
color, and keep from stayning: Nor the other by candlelight, could not take
the true picture of Man or Woman, without great faults.

This dark Eclipse was more beneficial to Tallow-Chaundlers, then three dark
Winters before, wherein Prentices to the trade took such pains, and withal
were so careful; that many of them were made free, which before were but
Screalings, and ever crawling in the Tallow, with their black flat Caps like
Maggots.

And this Eclipse did not much hinder Haberdashers of small wares, by reason
they kept so many lights: for by so much light, a man might well discern small
wares in many Shops.

It was a merry time with Carrmen, Watermen, and Porters: for in this Eclipse,
many of them did nothing but drink, domineere, and swagger in Alehouses; but
the often going to and fro of the Pot, made them talk of that, which they had
nothing to do withal, and many times their obtuse apprehensions would be
meddling with the wars betwixt the great Turk and Prester John, how it was
likely to end; because they heard (...) neighbor goodman Iobson say, they were
now grown friends, and had put the matter to a bickerment. So that State
businesses (which nothing concerned them) and the pot together, so stupefied
their brains, that many of them went raling out of doors. But if money began
to fail out somewhat short, before they came to the heyght of their State
matters, then many of them, (like a company of fowle-mouth'd fellows) would
swear, curse, and rail, even against those men that set them on work, from
whom they had their chiefest means of living.

This dark Eclipse was almost the undoing of many Bayliffes and Sargeants, and
the impouerishing of Marshals-men so much; that their Mercenary dependances
(whom they authorize to arrest) made men more fearful of their purses, then
of putting in bail to their actions; by reason their exacting fees, (for want
of businesses) came not in roundly, so that they could not better their
apparel, but went like Runegado Baccanalians, be dropped all before with greale
and ale, whose long continuance begot a glistering substance, which made such a
coogning show, that a man would have thought his preface had been all Sattyn,
although his Doubblet was not worth a Button, Not one button on his Doubblet.
and pind over before, as if he had bin in his swaddling clouts, or else borne
with those clothes on his back.

This dark Eclipse proved dismal to the chief Miller of a Windmill; for he
having been abroad amongst (...) companions carowsing, was so extremely
typpl'd ^ith drink, that he had much ado in the dark to find (...) Mill,
although it was but a coytes cast from the Alehouse where he got his liquor.
At length finding the Mill, by the noise it made in going, he groped for the
stayrs to go up, which he could not find, but wen^ under the Mill, amongst the
Sacks of Wheat that we^^ standing there ready to grind. Amongst these sa^^^
he found good easy elbow-roome, and leaning against them, fell fast asleep:
This Malt-sacke now among^^ the Wheate-sacks was so dead in sleep, that indeed
he was as senseless as his bed-fellowes. The Millers man above in the Mill,
had put up almost the last hopper full of all the wheat that was then ready
cran'd up* Therefore he let down the rope to crane up more, and afterward
came down himself in the dark (like a foolish knave without a candle) so
feeling for the sacks of corn, the first that he lighted on, was the
Malt-sacke his master, whom he took for a Sack of Wheat. Then the wicked
hangman put the ryding device over his masters head, where he felt a
handkercher (which his master did use to wear, with lace and buttons) about
his neck, ( after the effeminate fashion, forsooth A Caveat for Clownes in
fashion.
) tied with a knot, which his knotty-ioynted numbd fingers could not
distinguish from the strings of a sack: there he fastened the rope, and away
he goes up into his Mill to wind up the supposed sack, ( his master toward
heaven against his will) and having cran'd him up half way, he heard the
stones of the Mill begin to touch each other, for want of corn, whereby he was
enforced ^^ fasten the wrench of the Crane with an Iron pin, an^ so let his
master hang whilst he went up to put more corn in the hopper, (wherein he
showed his careful diligence, to look to his masters business, although h^
were hanged.) After ye Millers man had filled hi hopp^^ he betook him to his old
work, and cran'd ( by fauo^ his Master to the height of his ambition (but
pride (...) have a fall.) So he took ye supposed sack of corn in, ^ went to
fetch the candle, to see to unloose the strin^ and coming near, he perceived
it was his dead master: then did he wring him by the nose, and boxt him about
the ears, to recall life, but all was in vain. So he stayed his Mill, although
he durst not stay himself, locked up the door, and put the key in his pocket,
fearing his master should follow him to raise the town, and away he run, and
was never heard of to this instant day.

The (Knights of the) Sun and Moon, thus continuing their long conjunction
together, made the spectators weary by reason of this Eclipse: for it was so
dark, that those which stood nearest to them, could not possibly see any of
their valiant deeds, but only they might hear them puff and blow, and
therefore it was thought fit to have them parted. So they felt them out, who
lay so still (being both ouerwearyed) as if they had been in a sound sleep.

When they were both up, and had breathed themselves a while, the Knight of the
Sun was very earnest to be at the Knight of the Moon again, to try whether
he could regaine the light which so Eclipst his honor: but he was held back (
which made him the more eager) and might not be suffered, because the combat
was already adjudged to be lost on the Knight of the Suns part, and the award
given up, which was: As the custom is.


That the Knight of the Moon should have and iniuoy the Coate-armour and
Helmet, and his own proper right, without the least trouble or molestation of
the Knight of the Sun, and to wear the same, where, and when he pleased,
according to his discretion. Provided always, that the Knight of the Sun,
upon reasonable warning, should have the use of the Armor and Helmet, so that
at any time he could allege some great cause, without yielding any reas^n for
the same but to redeliuer the same again to the Knight of the Moon, as true
and lawful owner, without detayning it by delays, any longer then his present
use required, upon the forfeiture of his Knight-sheepe and Arms.

So the Knight of the Moon had the Coate-armour and Helmet delivered to him,
wherewith he was immediately armed, Boys.
and so departed the Lists, with a great applause (especially of the younger
sort of people) as Victor.

The Knight of the Sun, hearing the award proclaimed, and withal seeing the
Knight of the Moon bear away the Bell: he stood like a body without a soul*
or a man whose heart was fallen into his hose, or indeed like King Belins armed
Stake in the fields, which Archers shoot at.

So this (little dangerous) Combat was ended, which since the battle between
Clineasse and Dame^asse the like has not bin heard of, save only that of Don
Quishotte and the Barbor, about Mambrinoes inchaunted Helmet.

Thus ends the Legend of this fearful fight,
Twixt Pheander the maiden, and Moriander the Knight:
Which parted between them, their indifferent dealings
Did prove them to-meane Knights, not Giants, nor Screalings.
FINIS.

