Uhere it is so that every humayn Creature by the suffran^ce of our lord god is
born^ and ordeigned to be subgette and thral unto the storms of fortune And so
in diverse and many sundry wyses man is perplexid with worldly aduersitees. Of
the which I. Antoine wydeuille Earl Ryuyeres. lord Scales etc^ have largeli
and in many diffirent manners had my part. And of hem releued by thynfynyte
grace and goodness of our said lord through the mean of the Mediatrice of Mercy
which grace evidently to me known and understand compelled me to set a
part all ingratitude. And droof me by reason and conscience as fer as my
wrecchednes would suffyse to give therefore synguler louynges and thanks to god
And exorted me to dispose my recouerd life to his service in folowi^g his laws
and com^andeme^ts. And in satisfacco^n and reco^rence of myn^ Inyquytees and
fawtes before done. to seek and excecute the works that might be most
acceptable to him And as fer as my fraylnes would suffer me I rested in tht will
and purpose During that season I understood the Iubylee and pardonn to be at
the holy Appostle Saint James in Spain which was the year of grace a
thousand. CCCC. lxxij. I determynyng me to take that voyage shipped at
southampton in the month of Iuyll the said year. And so sailed from thens til
I come in to the. Spaynyssh see there lackyng sight of all lands. the wind
being good and the weder fair Then for a recreacion^ and a passing of time I
had delight and axed to read som^e good historye And among other there was that
season in my company a worshipful gentylman^ callid lowys de Bretaylles which
greatly delited him in all virtuous and honest things, that said to me he
had there a book that he trusted I should like right well, and brought it to
me, which book I had never seen before. and is called the saynges or dictis of
the Philosophers And as I understand it was translated out of latin in to
frenshe by a worshipful man callid messire Iehan de Teonuille sometime provost
of paris When I had heeded and well looked upon it as I had time and space I
gaaf thereto a very affection. And inespeciall by cause of the wholesome and
sweet saynges of the paynems which is a glorious fair myrrour to all good
christian people to behold and understand. Over that a great comfort to every
w^l dysposed soul. It speaks also universally to thexample. weell and
doctrine of all kings princes and to people of every estate, It lawdes virtue
and science It blames vices and ygnoraunce. And all be it I could not at that
season ner in all that pylgremage time have leyzer to ouersee it well at my
pleasure. what for the disposicions that belongs to a taker of a Iubylee and
pardon And also for the great acquaintance that I fond there of worshipful
folks, with whom it was sittyng I should keep good and honest company, yet
nevertheless it rested stylle in the d^syrous favor of my mind entendyng
utterly to take therwyth greter acquaintance at some other conuenyent time. And
so remaynyng in that oppynyon after such season as yt lysted the kings grace
comaunde me to give mine attendau^ce upon my lord the Prince. and that I was in
his seruyse / when I ^dde leyser I looked upon the said book. And at the last
concluded in my self to translate it in to thenglyssh tongue / wiche in my
Judgment was not before. Thynkyng also full necessary to my said lord the
understanding thereof. And leest I could not at al times be so well ocupied or
should fall in ydlenes / when I might, now and then I fell in hand with
all And drew both the sentence and the words as nygh as I could. Nevertheless
I have ^hen seyn and herd of other of the same books which difference and be
of other inportaunce* And therefore I dread that such as should list to read
the translacon^ and have very intelligence of any of thoos books either in
latyne or in frenshe should find errors in my work. which I would not
afferme cause of the contrary. But allegge the deffaulte to mine uncunning.
with the dyuersytees of the books. humbly desyryn^ g the reformacon^ thereof
with mine excuse. and the rather syn after my rudenes not expert I in my manner
followed my copye and the ground I had to speak upon as here after ensiewis.

SEdechias was the first Philosophir by whoom thorugh the will and pleaser of
our lord god Sapience was understand and laws resceyued. which Sedechias
said. that every creature of good believe ought to have in him sixtene virtues
The first virtue is to dread and know god and his angellys The second virtue
is to have discrecion to dis cerne the good from the badde and to use virtue and
fle ^ices The third virtue is to obey the kings or princes that god has
ordained to reygne upon him and that have lordship and power upon the people
The fourth. virtue is to worship his fadre and his modre The fyfthe virtue is
to do. Justly and truly to every creature aftir his possibilite The sixte
virtue is to distribute his alms to the poer people. The seuenthe virtue is to
^epe and defend strangers and pilgrymes The eight ver tue is to bind and
determine him self to serve onr lord god The nynthe virtue is to eschew
fornicacion The tenthe virtue is to have patience. The enleuenth virtue is to
be stedefast and true. The twelfthe virtue is to be peasible and attemperate
and shamfast of sin The thertenthe virtue is to love Justice The fourtenthe
virtue is to be liberal and not couetouy The fyftenthe virtue is to offer
sacrifices to our lord god almighty for the benefices and gracis that he
shows him daily The sixtenthe virtue is to worship god almighty and to put
him holy in his protection and defense for resistance of the in fortunitees
that daily falls in this world The said Sedechias said that right as it
apparteineth to the people to be subgect and obbeissant to the Royal mageste of
thayr king or prince right so it behooves their king or prince to entende
dyligentely to the well and governance of his people, and rather to will the
well of them than his own propre lucre. for by similitude right so is the king
or the prince with his people as the soul with the body. And said Sedechias,
if a king or a prince enforce him self to gadre money or tresor by subtyl
exortacions or other un dew means he ought to known he does amysse, for
such tresor may not by gadred without the sequel be to his danger or
depeopulacion of his Royaume or country And said Sedechias, if a king or a
prince be negli gent and sloughtfull and take no head to search and enquere the
disposicion and workis of his enemies. then^ent will and dedis of his
subgettys he shall not be long in surete in his Royame And said. Sedechias the
people is fortunat and happy that have a good and a virtuous king or prince
discrete ande wise in scyences And mykyl ar the people infortunat when any of
thyes things lak in their king or prince And said Sedechias if a king or a
prince for slouthe or leave to do any of the litil things that him ought, and
is ordeygned he should execute lightly after he leueth greter undone and so
consequently he may lose all, right as a litill sickness or hurt without it
be sone and well remedied, may cause the dystruction of all^ the hole body. And
said Sedechias if a king or a prince believe the fair words ande flate ^yngis
of his enemies having no Respect to their were ^ys it is meruaylle but the said
king or prince thereby suddenly take harm. And said Sedechias. It apparteygneth
to a king or a prince to enfourme his sone in virtue and science and how he
shall gouuerne his land aftir him how he should be rightwys to his people.
how he should love and haunte his knights not sufferyng them to use to mykel
hunting is nor other Idelnesses, but instruct hem to have good eloquence and
to eschew all vanitees. And said Sedechias It apparteyneth to a king or a
prince. if he wol have any nygh servant first to know his guydyng and
conditions and how he gouuerneth him silf in his house and amongis his
fellawes. and if he understand him of good condition and gouuernaunce having
patience in his aduersite reteyne and take him than hardely And ellis to beware
of him And said. Sedechias if thou have a verry true friend that loves the
well thou ought to take him more in thy love and favor. than any of thy
kennesmen desiryng thy death for to have the succession of thy goodys And said
Sedechias commonely every resemblance delyteth other And said Sedechias he that
will not be chastysed by fair and sweet words. ought to be cor rected by
sharp and hard corrections. And said Sedechi as the grettest richesse is
satisfaccion of the heart And said he is not rich, to whom richesse lasts
not, ne when they may be lightly taken away, But the best richesse is that
thing, that dureh perpetuelly And said Sedechias the obeissaunce don by love is
more ferme than that, that is don by might or dread And said that experyence is
a good chastisement And said the lokyng upon the end of the work, if it be
good. yeueth hope to the beginning And said, that good reno^mee and fame is
right prof fitable in this world / the deeds thereof avails in the other
world And said. it is better a man to hold his peace than to speak my^he to
any ignorant man^. and to be a lone than to be a co^payned with evil people
And said when a king or a prince is evil tacched and vicioux. better is to
thaim that has no knowledge of him than to thoos that be grettest masters in
his house And said. better is a woman^ to be. bareyn^ than to bear an evil
disposid or a wikked child And said. the com^panie of a pour wiese man is
bettir than of a rich ignorant that weneth to br wise by subtilitee And said.
he that offends god his creator. by gretter reason he fails to other And
said bileue not in him that seith he loves and knows trowth and does the
contrary And said. the ignorante men wol not abstyn^ them from their
sensualitees but love their l^f for their pleasaunces what defense so ever be
made unto t^m. right as children^ enforce them self to ete sweet thin ges. and
the rather that they be charged the contrary. but it is other wiese with
wiesemen^ f^r they love their lives but only to do good dedis. and to leave
Idelnesse and the delecta con^s of this world And said. how may be compared
the works of them that entende the perfection of the good things perpetuel.
to thaim that wol but their delites tra^sytory And said that the wiese men
bear their greues and sorrows as they were sweet unto them. knowing their
trouble pacie^t ly taken. the end thereof shall be to their merit And said tht
it is proufitable and good to do well to them that have deserved it And that it
is euille done to do well to thaym that have not deserved it / for all is lost
that is give unto them right as the reyne that falls upon the grauel And said
he is happy that uses his days in doing couenable things, and takith in this
world but that, that is necessary unto him and may not forbere, Applying him
self to do good dedis and to leave the badde And said a man ought not to be
demed by his words, but by his workis, for comenly words ben vain, but by
the deeds is known the harm or the prouf fit of every thing And said when
that alms is distribute to pouer indigent people, it proffiteth as a good
medicine couenably yeuen to them that be seek, but the alms yeue^ to the not
indige^t is a medicine yeue^ without cause And said, he is happy that
withdraws his ere and his eye from all vile things And said, the most
couenable dispen ce that any man may make in his life, is hit that is set in
the service of god and in good workis. And the second is that is spe^ded in
necessary things that may not be forborne as mete drink clothing, and for
remedies against sikenesse: the worste of all is that is dispended in syn and
evil werkis.

HErmes was borne in egypt. and is as mykyl to say there as mercuri, and in
ebreu as Enok which was sone to Iareth the sone of Matusale, the sone of
Malaleel, the sone of Caynan the sone of Enoes sone of Seth sone to Adam, And
to fore the great flode called Noes flode After that was there another litil
flode, which drowned, but the contre of Egypt only before the which the said
Hermes departed thens. and went through all lands till he was four soore year
old and. ij. And with him had lxxij, persons of diverse tongues which
alweye stered and exhorted the people to obey our lord. and edified Cvm. to
wues which he fulfilled with sciences. And was the first that fond the
science of scoles. and establisshed to the people of every clymat laws
couenable and apparteignyng to their opinions. to the which hermes the kyngis
in thoo days yaf great audience and obeissaunce in all their lands and so did
ab thenhahitantis of the. Isles of the sea he constreyned them to keep the law
of god in saing truth to despise the world to keep Justice, to win the
saluacon^ in the other world. he com^aunded orisons and prayers to be said
and to fast every wyke oo^n day. to destroy the ennemiyes of the law to give
alms to the pour goddis people. that is to say to the feeble and Impotent. he
com^aunded that porke flesh and camelys shold^ be eten^. and such semblable
me tes. and com^aunded them expressly. that they should keep them fro pariury.
he stablisshed many festis at certain seasons* and ordeigned also diverse
persons to offer sacrifices at the rising of the son. and some other at the
first new moon. and at the conjunction of the planettes and also when the
planetes enter in to their houses. and when they ascended and when they
descended. The sacrifices were of many things. that is to say of roses. of
flours of greynes of whete. of barley. of fruits. of grapes. of licours. of
wynes. And the same hermes said. that it was no Recompense sufficient. to
thank god only for the grace he has sent us And said. O thou man if thou
dredest god well. thou should never fall in to the patthes that brings man
to harm And said. make not your clamours to god as Ignorauntes full of
corrupt* will fullness. and be not inobedient unto our lord god. nor
trespassours to his law. And will noon of you do to your fellow. otherwise than
ye would be don to. but by concordau^t and love to gyders. use fastyngis and
orisons in pure and clean wills. constreyne you to do good deeds humbly and
without pride in such manner as of your works may grow good fruytes. and
keep you out of the companyes of thieves of fornycatours. and of thoos that use
eu^lle werkis. And said keep you that ye be not (...) and let troth be alwey
in your mouth, and swear not but ye and nay, enforce you not to cause them
swear that ye know will lie. lest ye be parteners to their pariury. put your
trust in god that knows all seccetes and he shall Judge you in equite. at the
great day of Judgment when he shall give remuneracions to the good for their
goode^ nesse and punysshe the evil for their wykkydnesse And said ye be
certain that the redemptour our lord is the great test sapience. and the
gretteste dilectacion that one ought to have. of whom all goodenesse comes,
and by whom all the yatis of wit and understanding ben opened* And god that
has loved his serua^tis has yeuen them discrecion and has establisshed
prophets and propheciers. and ministres fulfilled with the holy ghost by the
which he has manyfestely showed unto them the secretis of the law and the
troth of the sapience to ente^te that they should escheue al errors and apply
them to all good dedis And said use sapience and follow the laws, be
mercyfulle* and garnisshe you with good doctrines think and look well upon your
we^kis without hasting you, to mykyll and in especiaal when ye shall punissh
nnsdoers and if ye use any manner of thing likly to syn^e be not shamefaste to
with draw you therfro and to take penance for the same for to give other
exemple for if it be not punisshed in this world it shall be at the greet day
of Judgment and such shall be tourmented with great peines whitoute any pity
taken upon them And said correct you by your self and follow the wiese men
lernyng of hem good virtues and let all your desire be to win good reno^mee
and fame. employe not your time and your mind in ^^^^hede nor in malice And
said look ye set no vay^^^ to the noysaunce of any body. nor that ye seek
thaire hurtes by cautesses or sotiltees. For such works wol not be hid. but
at the last they wol apoere And said con^^^eyne you to annexe the love of god
and of your feith unto sapience. and if ye do so all your life. it shall be to you
a great and a profitable wynnyng. and of that noble virtue shall come unto you
greter benefices. than if ye should assemble great gold and silver or other
tresours not durable. for it shall be to you a great richesse in the other world
that never shall have end And said. be al one within and without in that ye
shall speak. and be were that your words be not contrary to the thoughts of
your heart And said humble and obey your self to your king and your princes.
and worship the great ministres under them. love god and troth and give true
counsel to that intent ye may the more hoolly with your good penan^ce be in
the way of salvation And said, yield loui^g unto your lord as well in your
tribulacion as in prosperity in your pouerte as well as in your richesse And
said. ye shall bear hens non other thingis but your werkis, and therefore, be
ware that ye Judge not unjustly and desire rather to have pouerte in doing good
deeds, than richesse in syn^, for richesse may soon be lost, and good dedis
shall ever abide And said be ware of to mykyll laughing and mokkyng any person,
al be it, ye perceive in him any foul or evil tache. yet rebuke them not
dishonestly. but think that god has made you all of one matere and might have
made you as evil as he, wherefore ye ought to thank his goodenesse that has
showed you such grace, and has kept you from myschef in the times past and
present, And pray him of his mercy he wol so keep you forth And said if it
fortune that the e^nemyes of our feith will dispute with you. by diverse and
sharp seyngyes, ansuere them in sweetness and in humylite prayng god to be of
you: counseile. and that he will address all his creatures to the good feith
for their perpetuel salvation And said be silent in counseil and be well ware.
what ye speak afo^ your e^nem^ lest ^e resem ble him that seeks a (...) to be
b^tyn wi^h all. And sai^ ye may not be Just withou^e the dread of our lord god
b^ which ye atteyne (...) of the holy ghost that shall o^n ^ou the gates of
paradis wherein you: soule^ ^hal e^^e with th^s that have deserved everlasting
life. and said eschew (...) co^pa ny of thoos that loves you not of (...)
people of (...) m^ and of ignorau^t^ And when ^e (...) any good thought e^e cu^e
it and ye may inco^tine^t lest ye (...) set or withdraw^n there fro by any
(...) or evil (...) And said have no envy though thou se any prosperice come
to an evil man for hy^ end shall not be good. And said* make your children
learn good in their youth or they fall to malice. and so ye shall not sin
in them And said. worship and pray to our lord with a clean will and adresse
al your desirs to him and he shall help and enhance you. what part so ever ye
go. and subdewe your enemies under you And said. when ye will fast. make
first clean your saules of al filthe that your fasti^g may com^ of pure heart
without any evil cogitacions which god reputeth vile. and as ye ought to
abstene your self from metis. so ought ye to abstene from sin for it
satisfies not to spare metes. and do evil dedis And said. in your young age
visit our lordis houses and let al your orisons be in swettenesse and
humilite without pompes or pride. And when ye be most merry in your houses
with your folks. have in remembrance our lordis pour in digent people. and
depart unto them your alms And said. give conforte to prisoners. to them
that be in sorrow and trouble / hele the seek. clothe the naked. give mete to
the hungery. dri^ke to the thurs^y. harberowe pilgrims make satisfacion to
your creditours. and patiently suffer the Injuries that been don unto you And
said. disconfort not them that been in affliction but help them with sweet and
pleasant words And if it be such as before have hurt you benignely for give
it them. satisfying you with the pain that they suffer And said. enforce your
self to win ne frendis. and than first preue them ar ye put to much trust in
them* lest it be to your hurt and that after thereof ye repent you And said.
he that god exalted in this world ought to take no pride nor vayneglorye in
hit. nor repute him self gretter than oon^ of his felawes for god has made
rich and pour of oon^ creacon^ through which all be egall And said beware
that in your Ire or Indignacion there escape out of your month no foul words
for it is dishon neste and engenders hate. it is not conuenyent for him that
will have science. to seek it by mede or for money. but only by delectacon^ and
by cause it is more precious than other things And said that king is good and
noble. that causith in his Royame good laws to be kept and mainteyned. and
the badde to be laid down And said largess and liberalite is known. when a
man is in neces site and pourete. and patience. when oon has pouwer to Judge
and be avenged And said. he that worshipped the wyese men loneth Iustce. and
does good dedis. and enforces him to win sciencis and good conditions and
therefore he shall find that that likes him in this world or in the other And
seith. he is unhappy both here and there that has wit and wol learn no
science ne doctrine And said he that wol not teache that that he understands
in science and good conditions. he shall be partenar to the Ignoraunse of
frouward folk And he that denies to teache science to him that it is couenable
unto. he ought to be deprived of his benefice in this world. but there is noone
that does so save Ignorant folkis which comonely been envious froward and il
willed And said. liberalite and largess is bettir in science than in richesse
for the renomme of a wyseman abides. and the richesses abides not. And a man
ought not to offend nor hate him. that has trespassed unto him. but ought to
do good against harm for the were kes of the wiesemen is preued in. iij.
things that is to seye to make his enemy his friend And to make the jude
connyng. And to reform the evil disposed unto goodenesse And said, He may be
called good when other fare the bettir for his goodenesse And said he that
loves the well of his neygbour as his own And said That great science
prouffyteth litill to a covetous man But lutil science prouffyteth much to him
that withdraws his courage from couetise And said. That the lyff may be
resembled to the fleyng of an arowe. And the death is like the lyghting thereof.
And said, It is more merytory and bettir to have pytie upon the fool than upon
the worldely wyseman And said, He that holds him not satysfied with that,
that god had sent him Deserves not to have more. And said, A reporter or a
contryuer of talys comonely, other he lies to him that he tells them, or he
is false to thoos that he has seyde yt of And said derysion and scornyng
puts a way and wastith love as the fiere does the bronde And said. The
enuyous man is frendely to him that is present, and in his absence is his
enemy, and so shows him his friend by word. and enemy by deed And said,
An envious man serves of noght but to dysprayse all other And said he is
right sure that feleth him self withouten gilt, and is in none surete that wol
not know his own gilt. And said. Beware obey not unto couetise for when ye
would it wol not obey unto you. And said, He that yeueth good conseille to
other folkis, begins to do prouffit to him self, and was axed of the said
hermes what it was that most let and troubles man, he ansuerd Ire and
envy, after they axed him wherefore. the wiese man stood more at yates of the
rich man, than the rich man at yates of the wiese man. And he answered. the
wiese man knows the prouffit of the rich. and the rich knows not the
prouffit of the sciencial wiese man And said. he that has wit and
discrecion and knows it not indede resembles the ^ree. that bears no fruit
And said. he is wiese that knows Ignorance and he that knowith it not is
igno raunt, and he that knows not him self. how should he know or deem
another And said there be. ij. manner of men the don seeks and can not find,
the other finds and can not profit And said sapience is like athinge fallen
in a watre. which can not be found. but by them that wol search and fette it
from the bottom And said with out chastity a man can not be very parfightly
wiese and without wit he may not be parfight in science And said discipline
is the ornament of wit. with the which every man ought to enriche him self
And said it is not honest to chastise a man before all folkis rather a part And
said when a man often^ excuses him self of his known gilt. it causith his
error the more to be remembered And said. the ignorant person is but litil.
al be it he be old. and the wiese is much. al be it he be young And the world
dispraiseth now adays thoos that a for it was wont to worship and the earth
wastes and eteth them that afor it was wont to norysshe and feed And said.
the fool is known by his wordis. and the wieseman by his werkis And said there
be few folkis envious of a deed man but there be many that wol lie upon them
And said be merry and glad and It suffyseth to anger thenuyous man And there
was axed of the said hermes, why he ma ried him not, he ansuerd, he that can
not swymme in the sea alone how should he bear another in his neck swymming.
And said keep the out of the company of a Iange ler which resembles to a
thing that seems good a far, and nygh It is right noght And said He that
wolle do evil at thyn Instaunce against another, Right to will he at his
Instaunce do against the And said He that will preyse the of virtues that been
not in the, and thou rejoice hit he may well allegge the vices that he seth in
the. And said, Ire troubles reason and lets all good werkis and
furthereth all evil, And said he that labors in that, that may not avail,
leseth therefore that, that might prouffite And said the hurt and the trouble
that is don and caused by evil people lettith the desire and well of the good
And said when thy friend erreth or mystaketh him against the. yet as much as
thou may depart not from his amytiee, but assaye the means to redress him
And said Wise kind and true is he, that will lightly foryete the error of
his friend And said, It is bettir chastyse thy self than let other do. And
said The goodenesse that comes of an Ignorant man, Is like therbys that grow
on adong hille And said an evil felawe is like atree kyndeled whereof the one
branche sets the other afiere And said, The noblest thing that god has
made in this world is a man, and the richest thing to him is reason b^ the
which he keeps justice and escheweth sin And said (...) fool wol know in
him self no vile thing and the ignorant weneth lightly a thing be other than
it is. and the suspec tious. man makes many doubts of that that he knows
And said a Right recom^endable thing in heaven and in earth is atrue tunge And
said a king or aprince ought not to give lorshippes nor auctorites. but to
good and merciable folks. And therefore they should love them as the fadre does
his children^ And said it should suffice a man and ought to hold himself
reco^pensed when his adverse party required him pardon And it was axed him
what was a liberal thing. he said to give silver to unknown men for the love
of the known men. and to for give them that have noied him. for the love of
them that have (...) him And said the life in this world is so short that there
ought none conceive hate nor will harm to other And said establisshe and ease
thyn Ire. with thy patience thin Ignorance with thy sapience. thy
foryetfulnesse. with thyn re membrau^ce And said it is a good sign, when a
child is shamefasee, for it shows he should have wit And said it is well don
that thou do good while thou art in prosperi te for parauenture in aduersite
thy pouer shall (...) And said he puttis him in danger that abides in a (...)
where there is no lord. that woll avenge the Ini^s done thert^ where there is no
Just Judge. where there is no wise (...). where there is non haboundant market.
and where there is no ren nyng water And said it apparteigneth to every man
with all his power to seek science. and the: with to fo^tif fi him having a
good eye upon his enemies. and beware he be not raised to high in pride by
lordship or other richesse. his will his words and his dedis always to be
egall and so shall god love him and his succession And said there may none
escape to be at great day of Judgment and his help shall be there by.iij.
things. Discrecion, chas tete, and good werkis. All things may be left,
Save good dedis All things may be changed, Save nature All things may be
redresshed and reformed, Save evil dedis, All things may be ess^ued, Save
death, and the sentence of our lord. And said It is no meruaille though he be
good, that is not covetous, But It were great meruaylle, If a covetous man
were good And said The error of a wysema^ may be resembled to a Crased ship,
which in dro wnyng her self, Dro wneth many other And said, trust is in manner
of a bondeship And mystrust is a liberte And the said Hermes correctyng king
hamon yaue him this precepte and charge, look that first affo re al thingis ye
love, dread, and obey, our lord god And said all men that have dominacion and
lordship upon the people ought always of necessite, to have.iij. things in
mind, First to remember the people, that be sugect unto him Secundely al be it
that they be in his seruitud, yet ought he to his power to keep them in
fraunchyse and liberte and not in thraldom / Thirdely How his lordship and
power in this world may not long endure And said, o king hamon it behooves
the to keep thy soul, Right wisely in will and word, and thou ought not to
be slowthful to the distruc tion of the mysereauntes, but to constreyne them to
obey our lord god and desire not to have any richesse without it be rightfully
gotten. For think verily the people wol always ^ye to them that do rightfully
and well, and that wolle mayntene them and there may no well be in a Royam^e
without it be habu^dau^t of people for the decay of a Royam^ is fawte of
people. And if they with draw hem the prince is left lord alone and therefore
remember well thy dedis and estsones think on thy saul and put in that
garrison all that thou shall have need of in the other world. And if it happen
that thou must goo in the werre in thyn own^e person. beware well that thin
enemies supprise the not by slowthfull soiournyng. And when thou ghost to
bataile look that first thou solicit and exorte thy people as corageousely as
thou can. and look that all thyn habi^ mentis of werre be ready. and every man
set in his ward and appointed how they shall fight and set out And beware
well that thou be not supprised by thyn enemies. for lakke of wache and good
espial. there fore multiply thy scowte wache and thyn aspies so that thou may
always know the guyding of thy ennemys and look that thou be sure they deceive
the not. And when thou shall command thy folks to do any thing look
secretly whether they have observed it after their charge or not. which shall
make them dread the more to offend the. And when thou shall command any
settres to thy klerke to be made, sign nor seal them not til thou have
ouerseen thaim. for many have been des^y ued thereby. ware thou be not to
familyar with them that thou knows not. vttre not the secrets of thy here but
to them that thou haste preued. and know true unto the. Gouuerne the so
wisely. that thy knights and thy people may have pleasir of the. and be glad
to be in thy company. And delight them to se the rightfulle and of good
governance. Sleep no more than shall suffyse only for the sustentacion of thy
body. and the rest of thy heart. and entremet^ not nor let thy werkys be, but
in rightwysenesse and troth without dissimulacion. and slouthe nor delay not
that thou must nedely execute. Sustey ne and love also thoos that be the great
multiplyers, that is to say. the co^mones that labor the earth, by tylth and
so wyng seeds upon the same by the which the royaumes and the people be
sustained. the knyghtehode multyplied and the houses fulle of richesse.
wherefore such wol be kept and cherisshed. And It behooves openly to worship
thoos that be good. every man after his discrecion condition and science to
that intent, that the people may so know them. and be bonteuous to all thoos
that seek sciences. to courage them the more to learn and entende To study. so
that the royaumes or prouynces may be the better for their connynges. Besye thy
self to punysshe malefactors. and thoos that puts the in danger or trouble
within thy wyaume or lordship. make stryke of their hedes publykely that other
may take example by them. to a thee^fe let his hand be stryken of To a robber
of the high way let him behanged. that the way may be the surer Bren the
Sodomytes and punysshe the men taken in fornycacion after their estate. And the
women in like wise. Ware the of the words of liars. and such punysshe. se the
pryfonners ones in a month And Delyuere thoos that ought to be delivered, and
give them of thyn alms: p^ ^sshe incontinent thoos that have deserved It, Yet
not so hastyly but that they may have dysir of repentance. and that other let
hem be kept til thou know the troth whether they be gylty or not Beware also.
Use not thyn own counsel only. But be auysed by men of Age and discrecion
And such as been expert in many things And when thou shall find any such
Just and rihtfully be coun seyled by him And else report the to the most
wholesome opinion of all thy counseyllours. and god shall help the. And said.
He Is noble that uses goodenesse. And It is a great goodenesse to use Justice
and chastyte. and to give lyberally or It be axid. And said. when A king or a
prince can nor will restrain his evil vices and couetise. how should he
repreue his servants. and when he can not correct his propre seruauntis.
how should he correct and gyde all his people. and specialy thoos. that been
far from him. Therefore It behooves A king or a prince first to be lord over
him self And after upon other by order. And said. A good king or a prince
should not be to full of Suspection for It wol make men draw from him. And
also he ought not to have any of that disposicion in his house And in
especyall. Bakbyters. Contryuers or Reporters of tales For when there Is
dyuysion or trouble in A kyngys or in a princes house. Lightly no good
Counseyllours or seruauntis will abide there.

TAc said, he that can not refrain his Ire has no power ouir his wit. And
said a wise king or a prince ought not to make comparisons nor dispute in
discrecon^ with a greter and myghtier than he is And said when a king or a
prince has conquered and over come his enemies he ought to maynteyne them in
Justice. in good custumes and liberalite and patience And so may he make of
enemies his fre^des And said if a king or a prince assemble an outrageous
tresur and dispende it not ^t it apparteyneth he shall lose both it and his
Royaume And said* the people ar to the king as the wind to a great fyere. for
the more the wind is. the stronger is the fyere And said a king or a prince
ought to know thoos that well and truly have served him and establisshe thoos
a boute him self after thaire troth wit and con^yng and ought to give and be
boun^evous unto them aftir their merits * And if he give by will to noughty
folkis that have not deserved it / it puteth a weye the courage of his good
sernauntis. to serve him well any longer. and so shall he be bastily so full of
noughty people that when he would he can not be delyuerede of them And said
it is conuement for a king or aprince to learn and know but not all for there
is many things that a king or a prince ought not to know nor understand.

Alquinus said. that men receive great benefices daily of god our creator al
be it that they be sinners Then they be bound to thank him for his graces.
and to ask him pardon for thayr trespasses And said many thyngis seem right
good. that be ^ull badde. and after gretely blamed. And many thyn^es be
dispraysyd in the beginning. that afterward ben found good and desired And
said Bettir it is to the to have great necessite, than to borowe of him in
whom thou have no trust And said If thou labor to teache a fool, the more
shall folly encresse And said I merueil of thoos that absteyne them from metis
noyng to the body and makes none abstynence of sin And said mul teplye
silence. for that auoydeth perelles and use troth Which discipline shall
maynteyne the and thy werkis and he that wol well keep the feyth, ought to leave
to his friend of his good, and to be gracious to them that he knows good and
no denyer of Justice to his enemy, and to eschew all thyngis. that touches
disworship.

OMer was an anucient vercifier in Greece and of the gretest astate there. he
was after moses. v. ^. lv. year he made many good thingis. and all^ the
vercifiers of greece followed his discipline. The which omer by fortune was
taken and emprisoned and put to be sold as a prisonner or a bondema* And t^an
one axed him. whens he was. He said of his fad^e and of his modre. will thou
that I shall beye the And ^e (...) why axest thou me counseyle what thou wo^
(...) with (...) silver And they axed him. Whereto he was goo^ (...) said To be
deliuerd. And so abode long in pr^son And at the last they let him go. He was
A man fair formed. and of large statu^e. and lived. Cviij. year. And here
after follow his seyinges. he is discrete that can refrain his tongue And said
^e that we^kith by conseil yeueth him self rest, and labor to other. And said
it is a frendely living to d^le without fraud and ^rat, And said acompanye
the with good people. and thou shall be on of hem. acompanye the with badde,
and thou shall be on of thoos And said he is good and liberal that applies
him to good werkis and ^lene. and that puts them in execu con^ or ever there
come any occasion of empeschement. And said the heart shyneth in virtue and is
sure when it is set in sapie^ce And fraud and barat is in the fruit of evil
though ^s And said the mouth shows often. what the heart thinks And said the
look shows sometime the dis posicion of the heart a fore the words been
spoken And said it is agrete surete for a man to purueye by time in his causis
And said it is merueile of a man. that may be in resemblaunce to god. and
enforces him self to be like beest^s And said beware thou do ne take no
thing that thou ferest to be accused of. for if thou do. thou shall be the
accuser of thy self And said pain thy self to win good conditions and
virtues. for thereby vices and harms (...) eschewed And said there was sometime
a wiese man skaped out of a broken and lost ship in to an Isle of the sea. and
so being there alone drew a figure of geometry upon the sandis. where with he
was fond by certain shipmen. that brought him to the king of that ground
tellyng him that cas and adventure. And therefore the king sent through all his
provinces. and charged them thy should enforce them self to learn and have
such connyngis as should bide with them after their ship were lost. that is to
say. science and good werk^s And a man berith with him.ij. vesse^s the on be
fore and the other be hynde. In that (...) be the (...) and vices of other
folkis, In that behind be his own And said to his sone. Beware that thou be
not covetous, for if thou be covetous, thou shall be pouer And said If thou be
pacient thou shall be preysed / If thou be proud, thou shall be blamed And
said. a man is bettir than al other bestes of the earth. And said Sapience is
to work by science And sai^e knowledge is bettir than ignorance And said this
world is an house of marchaundyse some win therein by their good dedis. and
sum liese by thaire evil governance And said by great dylygence some men
atteyne to their purpose. And said. he that has great might and governance
in this world, ought to have no great reioyssyng* and he that has noon, is
dispreysed And said there is no wikkedder thing than lyeng. and there is no
goodenesse in alyer

SAlon was of Athenes and made many bookis of predicacions And establysshed the
laws there which athenes was a Cite in thoos days fulfill led with wysemen he
had many verses techyng folkis to eschew their propre wills. And said When
thou will do any thing follow not thyn own will but seek counsey le and thereby
shall thou know, the troth of the works It was asked him, What was the
most difficulte in a man* He answered. To know him self. To keep his
frau^chyse or liberte. To speak in places where he ought not, To be angry, with
that he may not amend and to coueyte that, that he may not have. And said the
thingeis of this world ar establisshed by laws, and the lawees be sustyned by.
ij. thingis that is to say by sword and by banere And said to his disciples.
wave that ye be no mokers for that engenders hattered And said the ber tuous
lauds of a man be not thoos. tht he yeueth him self but thoos that been yeuen
him for his good works. And it was asked him who was liberal he said. he
that uses liberalite. not couetyng other menne^ goods And said an evil tongue
was sharper than a glay^e A rich man as ked him what were his goodis. he^
answered my tresor is such that no man may have yt without my will and may
not be mynisshed for no thing that I give of it. but thou may depart with
noon^ of thyn^ without dymynuacion And said if thou will. the love of thy
friend shall abide ferme unto the. be curteise to him and spare him in his anger
or error And said. thou owghtest not to give a man greter preisyng in his
p^sence than he is worthy for he knows the troth And was axed him how a man
should wynn^ friends. he answered in worshipping and seeing good of them in their
absence. And said agoode saul has ney there to great Joy nor to great sorrow
for she reioyseth not but when she sees good things and noon^ evil. and
has no sorrow. but when she sees the evil thingis and noon^ good And when
she looks on all the world she sees the good and the evil so entermedled
that she should not simply reioysse her self nor trouble her self angrely And
said a king that does right and Justice shall reign and govern well his
people, and he that does Injustice and violence seeks another to reign for
him And said it behooves a king or a prince first to order and dress him self
and after to dress other, or ellis he should be like him that would dress his
shadow a for him self, And yt was askid of him When Contrees and towns were
well governed, He answered and said when their princes rule them, after their
laws.

SAbyon was a great deffendour of his neighbors and had certain friends
which a king would slay And when the said sabyon understood it he went with
them in resistance of the said king which king assembled so great nombre of
knights against him, that he was discomfit and taken, and was commanded to be
put in engyne and tormented, without he would accuse them that were co^senting
to make werre against the king, which Sabyon ansuerd that for no pain, he would
not tell that thing, that should noye his friends, And in deed being in the
engyne cut his tongue with his own teth, to thentent that he might not accuse
his fellows and friends. And the said sabyon lived. xlviii. year, and her
after followed of his seynges to his disciples And said if ye lose any thing say
not ye have lost it but say ye have restored that was not youres And said to
one of his discipples, multiply thy friends and that shall assuage thy care And
said a wyseman ought to be ware. how he weddeth a fair woman for every man
will desire to have her love, And so they wol seek their pleasirs. to the hurt
and displeasir of her housband And said. Delectacion in richesse is a
dangerous vice And there came one of his seruauntis unto him on a time and told
him that his sone was deed. he ans uerd that he know well that he was mortal
and not inmortal and a man ought not to dread the death of the body. but the
death of the saul. Oon^ asked why he said so. considering that he held
thoppynion that a reasonable saul might not dye. he aunswerde when a reasonable
saul is converted to the nature of a best without use of reason al be it
that it be sustaunce incorruptible. yet is she reputed for deed. for she leseth
the Intellettif lyffe. he found a young pour man sitting upon the sea side
weeping thaduersitees of this world. to whom he said. dyspaire the not. for if
thou were with great richesse in the myddel of yondre see in great danger of
thy body. and of thy goodis, thou would wisshe right bertely to be here with
oonely thy life saved. Also. and if thou were prisoner. and the kepers would
selle the. and take from the all that ever thou had thou would be glad to
have oonely the deliuraunce of thy body the young man aunswerde that he told
him troth, well than said Sabion^ unto him. now think than that thou have
ben in all this danger and have ascaped them. and art now at thy free liberte.
therefore hold the content with the state that thou now stand in. And so
the young man departed gretely reecomforted.

YPocras was disciple to Esculapius the second which descended of blood
Royal. And he was the first fynder of the art of phisike. which he she wed
and taught to his children^ and com^annded it should not be learned to any
strangers. but oonely from the fadre to the sone And so the said science to
rest in them And com^an^ded that thy should dwell in the middel habitacion of
greece in. iij. Isles. And ypocras restd in the I Will of. Thau And in the. ij.
other Isles the study was lest in his days The oppinion of the first.
Esculapius. was that phisyke should be used only by experience for it was never
found but only thereby. and so was it vsid. M. CCCC. yer after til that
another phisicie^ came callid Methious whoos opynion was that experience
without Reason. was a dan gerous thing. And so thy used these. ij. opynious.
vij honderd year. till another phisicien came called Bramardos. which
dispraised thexperience. sayng that to many errors grew thrby and that in
occupying phisike a man ought to use reason only Not with standing he had. iij
disciples which held after him. iij. diverse opinions. The on used experience
only. The other reason only The. iij subtle crafts and enchantementis. and
so these. iij. weyes were vsid. vij. C. yer till that plato came, which taught
diligentely the seyngis of his, predecessors in his science and showed that
experience only was dangerous and reason only cowde not be sufficient and
took the books aswele of subtle craft, and enchau^^eme^t as thoos of only
reason / and brent them all but thoos that were of reason and experience to
gider he retained and kept ^em and com^anded that they should be used, and after
his death he left the craft to. v. of his disciples The first to ordeigne
phisike to the body The. i^. to box and to let blood. The iij. to hele
wou^des The. iiij. to bele seek ^yen. The. v. to knytte and hele broken bones
And after this came Es^ lapius the. ij. which caught diligentely the diverse
opinions And in especial thoos of plato, which he used and took for most true
and reasonable. And he left after him. three disciples that is to sey Ypocras
and. ij. other which dyed and so rested that science and craft only in him.
than rested ypocras alone parfight in virtues in his days using reason, The
which ypocras seeing the craft of physike in weye of perdicion because all
his felawes were deed. and that he was left only in the Isle of thau. Thought
that he would for the most prouffyt that the craft thereof were showed. ande
taught not only to his children and kynnesmen But generally to all that were
apt to learn it Ande dampened in that science diverse things and added to
certain compylacions in breue words. And commanded his, ij. sons that were
maistres of sciences that they should show It generally. for he said It was
more couenable It should be taught to strangers able and apt to the love than
to his own kynnesmen not dysposed to learn. And as he ordeigned was done ande
Is vsid to this day, and in his lyff he showed hit to diverse strangers and
made hem expert theerin, taking promysse of them to teache it further / It
happed that a king of perse callede defour sent unto the king of thysle of Thau
called pylate praieng him to send him ypocras, ande he would yiue him. C. kyn
tawes of gold, ande than was the land of greece divided in many kyngdoms, of
the which sum gaf truage to the king of perse, And so did that of Thau, The
which bade ypocras go to the said king of perse, for to hele certain
pestilences that were than in his Royaume Seyeng If he went not, It might be to
great a danger to the Isle seeing the said pylate was not of power to resist
the said king of perse, The which ypocras ansuerd that he would never goo to
hele the enemies of greece Also then habitaunties of the towns where he
duelled in. said they had lever deye than ypocras should depart from hem.
The said ypocras was. Cxlvj. year after Nabugodonosor. he made diverse bookis
of phisik of the which. xxx. be had and of thoos xij. the most be studied by
order Other bookis be also had of Galyens making. The said ypocras was of
littel stature great heded. croke backed. much studyeng and of littell
langage. and much lokyng down^ to the earth, holding in his hand a flabotomye
of munycion for latyng blood or a grene branch proufficable to the eyes, he
leuyd four soore. vj years where of he employed. xvii. in study and the
remenaunt in excercising of his connyngis. And here follows diverse of his
seyngis: Poverty in furete is better than richesse in fere And said that the
life is thought short. the pain is thought long / experience hard to com^e
bye, and Judgment dangerous And said the health is not to be slo withfull in
good excercises nor to fill his body with wynes and metes. And said it is
better to amynusshe that hurts than to encresse that helps And said. the
heart is tourmented by. ij. passions, that is to say, with sorrow and thought
of sorrow comes the dremes and the fantesyes. and of thought comes the
wakyngis and vnrestis. and sorrow is a passion of things past. and thought is
fere of things to come And said. that saul is lost that sets his intent
upon wordely things. that is to say in couetise. And said he that wol the lif
of his saul let him mortify hit and give it pain in this world And said
there may well be love bitwene. ij. wysemen. but not bitwene. ij. foles. all be
it that their foolyes be equal. for wit goth by order and may concord in one
sentence. but in folly is no due ordonnaunce and therefore may they never
concord in love And said a man ought not to swear. but yt is so, or it is not
so And said hold you content with that. that ought suffice you. and so ye
shall not have no gruggyng, the less grugge ye have. the more y^ fle fro
malice and wikkedenesse* withdraw you also from sin. and seek the end of
virtues and goodenesses And said. He that wol be fre let him not coueyte that
thing, that he may not have, for and he do he is bound thereto. and therefore
if thou will have that thou desire desire that thou may have. It was
as^red of him a question of evil and vile things To the which he ansuerd no
thing. They asked him wherefore he spoke not. He said that silence was the
answer of such questions And said / This world is to no creature
perpetuel. therefore then let noon differ^^ or delay to do good things as
long as he may. And namely that. that he should win good renomme thereby And
said He that knows not troth is rather like not to do it, than he that is
enfourmed and taught there to. And said Science is like a rote of a Tr^e, and
operacion is like the branches. and science is like a thing engendryng And
operacion is like a thing engendered And said, Take a litill of science at
ones. so that thou may keep it and learn more. For if thou wylt take more at
ones than thy wit may suffice thou may lightely forgete all.

PItagoras said, that it is a Right blessed and a noble thing to serve god.
and to sayntifie his saints to dispreyse the world. to use Justice and of
all virtues. the most principal is to absteyne him from sin. And it is good
to use fastings and studyes and to make him to be biloued. And it is good to
have science to understand the troth of things. and to learn it to the men
ande show it to the women he ordeigned also predicacions and to polisshe and
enourne the speech And said the saul is perpetuel and couenable to receive
merits and peynes. he moderated so his mete and his drink that he was at no
time fatter nor leener than other. he was a subtle man and loved aswele to do
good to his friends as to him self. sayng the goodis of friends ought to be
common He made. CC. four score volumes of books. and was borne in the country
of Samye And said an harm not durable is bettir than a welthe not abiding. And
that was wreten both in his seal and in his girdil And said as the beginning
of our creacion comes of god. right so is it behoueful. that at our end our
saul return to him. And said if thou will know god enforce not thy self to
know the wordely people. and said a wysman reputeth not the worship of god in
words but in deeds. And said sapie^ce is to love god, and he that loves god
does that god loves And he that does the werkis that god loves is toward god.
and he that is toward god. is nygh unto him And said god is not only
worshipped by the sacrifices or by other oblacions don unto him. but by the
will and acceptable ententis And said he that clatereth much it is sign that
he has litill knowledge And said at all times whatsomeuer thou do, have in thy
remembrance th^^ god is by the and knows thy thoughts, and sees thy deeds.
And therefore by reason, thou ought to be ashamed to do amysse. And said God
only knowith the wyseman that dredeth him, and merueylle not though the people
knows not the And said God has not in this world a more couenable place,
than in a clean and a pure soul. And said a man ought to speak of honest and
good things, ande ellis harkyn to them that will t^lke thereof And said /
grugge ande eschew al vile ^nges aswele of the, as of other / but in especial
of thy (...). And said purchasse the goods of this world in ^htfull laudable
and worshipful manner and dispende them in like wise And said keep thy
patience when thou herest lesinges, and do thoo dedis that noman may speak
harm of, and entende to the surety of thy body, be attemperate at thy mete in
thy drink, in thy lying with women and in all thyn other labors. And said,
enforce thy self to do so well that other men have envy at the. And said
Dispende not to outrageousely nor be not to scarce, so that thou be not bound
to thy tresore, have therein attemperaunce and mesure, which in all things is
prouffytable Ande said. Be wakyng and herkenyng to thy counseile. for thy
nedis, for if thou slougth it, or sleep it, hit might cause the to be partener
of thy own death And said medylle the not to do any thing. that ought not to
be done And said he that is not content can not atteyne to troth And said. he
that has no science, ought to be dyspraysid And said the Judge that demeth not
Rightfully, deserves great blame. ware that thy tunge speak no vilanye nor
that thou give thyn eeres to here it. And said a man ought not tenforce him
self in this world, to make pourchasses nor byldyngis to serve other after his
death. but ought to pain him to win and to get such thyngis as may prouffit
him after his death And said. It is bettir to a man to lie upon the hard
grownde beleuyng fermely in god. than to lie in abed of gold, puttyng doubts
in him And said. let thy marchaundise by spirituell and not corporell. and
thencresse and wynnyng shall be good. and durable And said. he that has (...)
upon his own saul fereth our lord. And said when thou will set upon any
man. think thou woldeste deffen de the if thou were set upon And said dispose
thy saul to receive all good and couenable things And said set a side the
vanytes of this world. for they let and empesche thy reason And said. thou
ought not to sleep any night. til thou have remembered and considered they
deeds of the day past. And if thou have weldoon be glad and Joyous therefore.
and thank god there of. And if thou have erred and do on a mysse. repent the
there of and ask forgiveness and pardon of god. and in so doing. thou may
opteyne unto his grace And said. when thou shall begin any work, pray god
of help to bring yt to a good conclusion And said if thou have haunted any
fellow. and se his company is not couenable unto the. spare it. and ye^ dele
so that he be not after thin ennemy, prove every man by his dedis, and not by
his wordis. for thou shall find many of evil werkis. and good words And
said. a man may not refrain him from doing amysse. but when he has
trespassed. let him beware to fall any more in that error. And said. wine is
enemy to the soul in taking of it outrageousely. and is like setting. fire
to fire. And said. aseruaunt ought to be obeissant unto his lord, but not so
absolutely that he lose thereby all his liberte and fraun chise And said, It
is more couenable for a man to suf fr^ does. than to put his soul in perpetuel
derknes. And soyde. Let not to do good dedis. though they be not plea saunt
to the world And said. dele always so to thy power. that thy soul may stand
in good and noble state whatsomeuer fall of thy body And said. Aclene and
pure soul has no delight in wordely things, And said, go not the paths that
thou may get hatered by Ande said. thou ought to win frendis, for the
maynteynyng of thyn astate. and do not thoo things that thou couetest. but
that thou ought to do. and take heed when thou shall speak. and when thou
should hold thy peace

And said. he refreyneth him from couetise that lets not to spend his
good for his friends And said. put all couetise from the. and than shall
thou apper ceyu^ troth. And said. He is not verry pacient that sufferyth but
as much as he may. But he is presentely pacient. that suffers over his power
And said Pytagoras. Right as a leche is not reputed nor taken for good nor
connyng that heleth other. and can not hele him self. right so is he no good
governor that commands other to eschew vices. and nether can nor will leave
them him self. And said the world varieth now with the and now against the,
If it be vith the, think to do well, and if it be against the, take it
patiently And said many harms come to beestes. by cause thy be domme. and
unto men through their own speech And said. hard it is to grieve him that can
absteyne him from. iiij. thingis that is to wit hastynesse, wilfulle
frowardenesse. pride. and slowthe. for hastynesse causith repentance. wilfulle
frowardenesse causes losses. pride causes hattered. and slowth causes
dispreysing. He saw a man right nobl^ and richely arrayed, which had vile
and foul words To whom he said. Other speak after thyn arraye. or let thyn
arraye be aftir thy words. The king than of Ceall^ desired him to dwell with
him To whom he said. the w^ kes and thy demeanyngis be contrary to thy
prouffyt And thyn office is not well executed. for thou distroyest the
fundement of thy feyth. wherefore I wol not dwell with the, for the physicien.
Is not sure. for amongis his pacientis. he may take sickness And said. If
thou w^ that thy childeren or thy seruantis do no fawtes thou (...) rest a
thing innaturall And said. The soul that is in the company of good people is
in delectacion and Joy And when it is among evil It is in sorrow and l^uines
se.. And said. The wyseman thenketh on the well of his soul as attentyuely as
other atte^de to the well of their bodies And said, take frenship of hem that
thou see follow troth, and think or thou work. And said right as a
physicien can not hele his pacient without he tell him the troth of his
disease. right so may not a man be well counseylled of his friend without he
tell him the playnesse of his cause And said many ennemytees gro wen for
fault of trust betwix parties, and trust causes often many harms And when
pytagoras sat in his cheyre he used in showing his doctrines to say. mesure
your paths and go the right weye. and so shall ye go surely Attempre you from
couetise, and your good astate shall dure. use Justice, and ye shall be byloued
and dredde. keep not your body in great delectacions for and ye so do ye shall
not con fusteyne the aduersites that might fall unto you. And he saw an old
man that was shamefast to (...). to whom he said Science is bettir in age than
in ^gth. And said. If thou wylt dispreyse him. ^at thou hate. show not that
thou art his enemy And said. a good king or a prince ought to think
diligenteli to the state and guydyng of his land. and ought to ouersee hit as
often as a good gardyner does his garden And said hit behooves a king to give
ex^ple him self to keep his laws / and se that his next kynnesmen and friends
do so after him and it apparteneth not to a king to be proud nor to do after
his own will only nor to ride couertely / nor in no der^re night but gladdely
show him self open faced a mongis his people and co^ueny ently be conversant
amongis them without over much famylyarite. And when a king or a prince shall
go to his rest. that he se there be good wache. and if thy faylle theryn that
he punysshe them well / and to beware to ete the mete that a Ialous woman
yeueth him or any other suspect person. And said. the well disposed man
remembers, but his sins, and the evil disposed has mind, but on his
virtues It fortuned his wyff was deces sed in aferre country, and some axed him
If there were any dyfference to dye in their propre land or ellis far from
thens, He ansuerd. whersomeuer one dye, the weye to the other world is all
like And said to a young man that would not learn in his youth If thou wolle
not take pain to learn thou shall have the pain to be lewd. and uncunning.
And said god loves thoos that be disobeissant to evil temptacions And
said, good praeyer is one of the best things a man may present to god, and
if thou axe him any boon let thy werkys be agreeable unto him

DYogenes otherwise called dogly by cause he had some conditions of a dog,
and he was the wysest man that was in his days. He dispraysed gretely the
world, and lay in a tonne, Which he turned for his auantage from the son
And the wind, as it pleased him, and therein he rested whansomeuer the night
fill upon him, He ete whansomeuer he was hungered were it by day or by night in
the street or ellis where without any shame thereof. And was content with.ij.
gowns of woollen cloth in the year. Ande so he leuyd and gonuerned him self
till his death Sum axed him Why he was called dogly, he said be cause I bark
upon the fools and fawn upon the wysemen. Alexsandre the great came unto him
of whom he took little regard. be axed him why he set so litil by him. seeing
that he was so mighty a hyng and had no necessite, he ansuerd I have noght
to ^o nor set by him that is bondeman to my thrall. why quoth Alexsandre. am I
so than / ye said diogenes. for I am lord and maistre to al couetise. and hold
her under my fete as my thrall and couetise is thy maistresse, and thou art
bound unto her. and so art thou bound to my thrall Than said alexsandre. if
thou wylt axe me any thying of this world I wol give it the Dyogenes answered.
why should I axe the any thing. while I am Richer than thou art. for that
littil that I have contenteth me bettir than all the great quantite that thou
have satisfies the. I pray the stand out of my light. and take not from me
that. that thou may not give me. well quoth alexsandir. who shall bery the when
thou art ded He answered. he that wol not suffer the french of my careyn above
the earth And the said diogenes said he is not parfitely good. that does but
only absteyne him from evil dedis. he saw a Iong man of good and virtuous
disposicion. which was evil visaged. to whom he said the goodenesse and
virtues that be in the give beauty in thy face And some axed him when it was
time a man to ete He said when he had apetite and mete. and if he had noon
/ when he might get it And said it is good a man keep him from the gyle of
his ennemy. And the envy of his friend And said right as a man appe reth
greter in a mist than in a clear weder right so appears more his vice in his
Ire than in his patience And said to alexsandre think not thou art the more
worthy for thy beauty. tresour and rich array, but only for thy liberalite
and goodenesse. And said when thou dispreysest a vice in another man. look that
thou use hy^ not thy self And said when thou see adogge leave his maistre,
and folo we the Drive him a way. for right so will he leave the to go to
another. He saw a man that prayed god to give him sapience, To whom he said
thy peticion avails not, with out first thou pain thy self to learn it. And
said. of all virtues of humanite, the greter quantite thereof is the bettir
save of words And said it is not honest to give praising to a man of a thing
that he has not deserved He saw a peyntour that was wax a physicien. to whom
he said thou know that men might se at the eye, the fawtes that thou did
in thy craft* but now they may not be perceived for they are hid vnther the
earth. And he saw right a fair person, which was a fool. and than he
said. there is a fay re house. and right an evil host herborowed therein He
saw also afoole sit in a wyndowe. And he said. Tlrr sittith astone upon a
stone. One axed him What was love He said. It was A sickness that grew of
Idelnesse and for lakke of virtuous exercise. One axed him What was richesse
He said Absteynyng from couetise

The said. Dyogenes was in a season seek. and his frendis came to vysite him.
Seeing dowte ye not. for your sekenesses come but of goddis will. He ansuerd
Therefore am I the more aferd. He saw an old man that dyede his heeres To whom
he said Thou maiste well hyde thy white heeres. but not thyn age And said. It
is more behooffull. thou goo to the leche. Than the leche to the. And semblably
I seye it of the leche of the soul. And said. Dyogenes If thou wylt correct
any man show it not by vyolence. But as the surgyen does to the seek. that is
to say softely and pacient ly but and thou will correct thy self. dispose the
as the hurt man. does to the leche. It was axed him how a man might keep him
from ire. he answered a man ought all way to have in Remembrance that he can
not at all times be served but sometime shall be feyn^ to do service. and also h^
^ul not be alweye obeyde but at sumtyme he must obey. and he shall not at all
times be suffered in his will but at sumtyme he must suffer having this in his
mind. it should appease his Ire And there come agester a fore Alexandre sittyng
at his dinner. which pra^ised him outrageosely. and diverse herkened gr^etely
there to, the said dyogenes began to ete faster than before. some axed him why he
herkened not the feyre seyngis of the gester / he an swered. I do more
prouffitably than to harken lesyngys what is shuche praising worth. when he is
never the better therefore And said if thou talk with astraunger speak not to
much, til thou have first made comparison by twene the connyng of his science
and thyn. and if thou find thyn better than his, speak the boldelier and ellis
hold thy peace and learn at him Diverse dylicious persons blamed him of his
manner of leuyng and he said. it lies well in my power if me list to live
after your guise / but it is not in your power to live after my manner And it
was told him that certain persons had said evil of him in his absence, he
answered it shall not hurt me though a man strike at me and touch me not. And
said. it is a churlissh condition to answer dishonestely, and a noble
condition to answer pacyently. And said, There is no greter tresour than
Dyscrecion and wit, Nor greter pouerte than Ignorance Nor better frendeship
than good conditions, nor bettere guide than Is good fortune. Ande said,
Sickness Is the pry son of the body. Ande sorrow Is the prison of thy soul.
There was a man of great birth that re buked him. To whom he said / My blood
ande lineage is enhaunsede by me. ande thyn Is hurt ande lowed by the The
said. Dyogenes was of lytille speech And one asked him Why he spoke no more,
He answered There was great virtue in a mannys eeres There was a man said him
great vylanye to whom he said No word One asked him Why he ansuerde not. He
said I could do him no greter dysworshyp than he does him self, For he has
contrybued blame unto him that has not deserved it. One asked him. How he
should trouble his enemies. He answered. Enforce thy self to be virtuous and
good. And If thou will. that thy goodenesse appear great unto strangers,
Repute them thy self to be litylle And said. If thou give power to thy wyff one
ly to trede upon thy foot on the morrow she would trede upon thy head, And said
Company of women Is an harm that can not be escheued And said He that does
good for the goodenesse of hit only, ought not to dread before whom he does
hit nor for the praising ne blame there of. One asked him when he should know
his friend he said in necessite for in prosperity every man is frendely There
was another man said vilanye unto him where at he took non anger It was asked
him why he was so pacient he aunswred other has he said soth or lied if he
have said troth I ought not to be angry. ande yet less if he have liede he
saw a man clater so much that there cowde no body make him hold his peace to
whom he said. friend thou have ij. eeres and but on tunge wherefore thou
ought to harken double asmoche as thou spekest. he saw a fair young man
that deed great diligence to learn to whom he said ye do pas singly well to
make your dedis assemble your beawte.

SOcrates in greeks tongue is to say. keeper of Justice he was married against the
custume of that country which was that good and virtuous people should be
wedded to gedres / to thentent that their lynage might be the better but he
wedded the worst woman that was in all the land ande had. iij. children by
her. he loved and worshipped sapience so much, that it was a great hynderaunce
to all his successors. for he would not suffer his science to be written^ And
said that science was pure and clean. wherefore it was couenable she should be
only set in mind and corrage and not in skynnes of deed bestes nor in no
such corrupt thingis and therefore he made no bookis nor yaue no doctrine to
his disciples. but only by words of discipline. and that opinion he held of.
Tumo which was his master for as the said Socrates bring of te^dre age axed
his master why will ye not suffer me to write the doctrines that ye teache me
Tumo answered him couetest thou more the wild breasts skynnes to be worship
ped with sapience. than thengyne of man I set the case that one mete the in
the wild feld. and axe the co^seile upon a question. were it good that thou
should say let me go home and over see my books first. It were more honest
to ha ue a recours to thy remembrance and thereupon briefly to de termyne, It
were so certainly said Socrates, well then reteyne it well in thy mind. that
thou shall learn. And put it not in thy book in which opinion the said
Socrates rested, he defended that no man should worship false ydolles but would
that all honnour and worship should be referred to the creator of all
thyngys. and for that opinion he was conde^pned to death by. xij. Iuges of
Athenes. which ordeigned that he should drink certain poisons, whereof the
king of that country was sorry. but he co wd not revoke the sentence. he gaf him
as long respit of his Judgment as he might. The said king had a ship charged
with things that in certain times should be offered in the temple to the ydoles.
he had a custume that he would give no Judgment and especyally upon man's
death* till the said ship were returned to athenes / which was not yet com
home And upon her com^yng home one of Socrates felawes called Inclites told
him in the prison / that the said ship should come to the port on the morrow
or the next day. where fore he said. It were good that we should give. CCCC.
pieces of gold to thy kepers. that they would leete the secretly escape and
than myghtest thou go to rome and nedest littill to dread them of athenes. he
answered. all that I have is not worth four honderd. pecis of gold. no said
Inclites. I and thy friends have so much which we woll gladdely give thy
kepers to save thy life if it please the. to the which socrates answered this
cite wherein I must suffer death. is the natural place of my birth wherein I must
dye without deseruyng only by cause that I repreue hem for doing in just
deeds, and for worshippyng the false and vain ydolles and that I would have
them honor the true god. wherefore I say, If these men of my nation persecute
me for sustey nyng and seeing troth. right so will strangers do whersoin ever I
become for I wol never spare to say troth nor use lesinges, and certainly
thoos would have less mercy of me than thoos of this town, were in I am born,
It happened that he therde day his disciples came unto him and fond him in
prison, by the commandment of the, xij* Iuges they axed him many dowtable
questions, touching the soul, he ansuerd them, as largely and as gladely as
ever he deed where of they merueylled to see so great constaunce in a man so
nygh his death, One of his disciples called Deman said maistre I know well* It
is an hard thing to the. for to show and teache us in the caas, that thou now
stand in and l^kkyng of thy lore is to us a damegeous thing, for in this
world have thou no fellow of good doctrine, Socrates ans uerd Spare not to
enquere of me what it pleases you for it is to me a great pleaser, they axed
him questyons of the soul, which he ansuerd, and after they axed him of the
state of the world, and composicion of the Elementis which al so he ansuerd
right xerfundely, And he said unto them I trow the hour of my death approaches
nygh I will bayne me and make me clean in this world, and sey mine orisons to
thentent that I shall have no pain after my death wherefore I pray you spare me
for a while, he entered a house and bayg ned him and said his orisons, and than
called his wife and child ren and gave them many feir doctrines and bad them
pain them for to do good adresse their saules to him that all created and
than came one from the Iuges to him with poison to drink And said O socrates
think not that I am he that makes the to dye / for I know thou art the best
man that ever came in this land but I am sent from the Iuges for to sle the,
and here is the co^fection that thou must drink ta ke it pacie^tly sithen thou
may not escape it / Socrates said I take it with good heart, and know well
thou art not gylty thereof, and so drink it And when his friends saw that they
made great weping and lamentacion whereof he blamed them seying I have sent a
way the women by cause they should not do as ye do, he went alitil from them
and said O god have mercy upon me, and anon his sinews shranke his fe^e
wexed cold, and than he leide him down, one of his disaples took a bodekyn
and prikked him in his feet, and axed him If he felt any thmg. And he said
nay, than he prikked him in his thyghes, and axed him if he felt it, he said
nay Anon the cold struck up unto his sides than socr^ tes said when the
cold comes to my heart I must nedis dye Than said Inclites O dear maistre
well of sapience and of science correct and teache us yet, while thy speech
lasts to whom he said I can non other wiese show you now dye ng than I have
done before in my life. the said Inclites sai de sir comaunde me what thing ye
will. he answered no thing. and lift up his eyes to the sky seeing I present my
soul to the maker of all the world and so dyed The said socrates had. xij.
M. disciples and disciples of his disciples. And in his life he devised that men
should be guyded after. three. ordres that is to say in Clergy, in knyghthode
and in commones, and ordeigned the clergy above the knyghthode. the knyghthode
above the people and that the clergy should pray for the knyghthode and the
people, the knyghthode should defend the clergy and the people* the people to
labor for the clergy and the knyghthode The said socrates was of read
color, and of competent stature hoar heded, and well faced, demure of speech,
a great studyer and loker upon the earth. and when he spoke he wagged his litil
finger, he lived four score. ij. years, and was written in his scale, patience
and good believe in god makes a man victorious, Ande was written in his girdel,
having respect and consideracion to the end of every thing causes the salua
ciou of the soul and of the body, he establisshed laws which were sent into
the Eest, West, South, and North, and* all was governed by them. And said the
first thing that thou should fix thy will in is to keep dyuyne Justice and to
apply thy will to the same, and not to do sacrefices nor no unjust things nor
to swear no false oaths, And said, right as a man is heled of his sickness, by
virtue of a medycine, right so is an evil man heled of his malice by virtue of
the law And said to his disciples I am a tilman, and virtues ben the seeds,
and study is the water that moisteth them Wherefore if the seeds be not clean.
nor the water sufufficient, what someuer be so wen profits litil And said one
ought to merueile at him that forgeteth the perpetual goodenesse of the other
world, for the goods of this world that is not durable And said. the well
disposed soul loves to do well. and the evil disposed soul loves to do ^rme
And said the good soul graffeth godenesse and the fruit there of is salvation
And the evil disposed graf feth vices, and the fruit thereof is da^pnacion. And
said the good saul is known by that she received gladly troth and the evil
saul by that she receives gladly lesinges And said that when apersonne
dowteth in dowtefull thingis and is steadfast in thoos that been open and
euiden^ to the eye, it is sign that he is of good understanding And said that
the saules of them that been good, been sorrowful of the werkis of them that
been evil And said the man that follows couetise leseth him self endelesly,
and at the last is al dishonored And whoo that hates it geteth enough, and at
the end is right well worshipped And said that the good saul saves him
self. and other ben saved by him And said the saul knows all things and
than he that knows his saul, knowyth every thing. and he that knows not
his saul, knows no thing And said he that is keytif to him self, he is more
keytif to another and he that is liberal to him self / is com^onely liberal
to another And said litil teching suffiseth to the good saul, and to the
evil saul much teching may not a wile And said that. vj. manner of men be /
that never be out of anger* that is to wit* the first is he that may not
forgete his trouble the. ij. an en^ous man that dwells with folkis newly
enrichyd. she. iij. he that dwells in aplace. where another has thriuen and
he can find no prouffit there. the. iiij. a rich man fallen in pouerte. the.
v. he that enforces him self to com to the state that is not bylonging to him
to have And the. vj. he that has dwellith with a wyeseman, and has no thing
learned of him. And said who so payneth him self to show doctrine to a man of
evil courage, resembles to him, that woll maistric a strong horse / which if
he give him not a strong bitte with a corbe, he shall never con gouer ne him And
said to much haunting felisship enge^dreth no great love bitwene them / and
absteynyng from them causes ennemytees, and than it is best to dele therein
moderately And said he that does good is better than the good. and he that
does evil, is wors than the evil And said science is had by diligence of
men, But discrecion comes of god And said wysdom is the leche of the law, and
money is the sickness and when the leche may not hele him self, how should
he hele a another And said thou may not be perfyttely good if thou hate
thyn ennemy, what shall thou be than if thou hateste thy friend. And said this
world may be likened to away full of thistles in a manner hid, where a man is
prykked that e^treth in it, and if he aspie them he wol beware of it, and said
he that loves the world, has but labor, and he that hates it has rest And
said he is right simple that is certain to depart from this world, and
besieth him to make in hit his bildingis And said thy world is like a light
bre^ning fire, whereof alitil is good to kyndylle his light to show him the
wey, and he that takes to much thereof may lightely bren hem self with all And
said he that sets all his mind in this world, leseth his soul, and he
that thinks on his soul hates this world And said he that loves this
world may not fail to fall in one of these. ij. inconuenientis or both, that
is to say, other to displease our lord god or ellis to be envied at of myghtier
men then he is And said a man that seeks to have enemies seeks his
distructio^ and he that has many enuy^rs and enemies is in the danger of evil
fortune And said this world is but a passage in to the other world, and there
fore. he that puruei^th him of thingis necessary, for that passage, is the
surer for all perils And said trouble not thy self greatly, with wordely ac
quisicions, but resemble the birddes of the sky which in the morning seek but
their refectio^ for that day and sembla by the wild bestes that com^e out of
the monteynes for to seek their fode, and cit night repeire home again And said
the error is known in the end to be evil and that that is good is the more
clerly seen after, there by Plato took upon him to go in a wyage and desired to
know of Socrates how he should govern him self there in and he said dowte the
of thoos, that thou know, and beware of thoos that thou knows not, and go
not by night, ete noon herbs that thou know not / and look that thou keep
the high weye, though i^ be the benger entende not to chastise him that is out
of all reason, for thou shall make him there by thin enemy And said lie not
with a woman without necessite constrayn the And said two things be laudable
that is for to say, law and sapience, law keeps rightwysnysse, and sapience
causith good conditions. Socrates acompanied him self with a Rich man. and
they met thieves in an high way, the Rich man said It were dan^gerous to me
if they know me And socrates said It were the better for me, If y were known
by them And said a wyseman ought to use his days in one of these two maneres
that is* to seye. in that that may cause him to have* Joy in this world and in
the other. or in that, that may cause him to have good name in this world And
sai de this world is delectacion of an hour, and sorrow of many days, and
the other world is great rest and long joy And said whosomeuer teache the one
word of sapience does the more good, than if he gafe the of his gold, And
said swear not by our lord, for no manner of lucre al be it thy cause be true
for some wol think thou forswerest thy self And said take heed how thou yeuest
thy yeftes, for some si^ple folks give to the vnnedy, and refuse hit to thoos
that have need And said If thou will win a friend speak good of him for good
(...) engenders love, and evil speech engenders hatered And said a king
ought to put from him al evil disposed ^sones for the harm that they of his
company do is reputed his deed, And said he that erreth and knows hit. and
after (...) him thereof has deseruid pardon And said he that ^dleth to correct
every man causes the most part to hate him. And said to a man that had
reproved his lineage If I be the worse for my lineage as thou say thy lineage
is the worse for the And said he that seeks the delices of this world is like
unto him that seeks to drink zarab we nyng it were water and renneth to drink
it till he be weary, and when he comes to hit, he finds no thing and than he
is more thristy than he was before, for zarab is a mist in a medew / which at
sometime by reflection of the son seems a water and is none in deed And said
a man has never perfyte rest and joy in this world* for he can not al way
persevere in delectacion and possess his winning and often has trouble and
angwysshe, aswele forlosse of his frendis as otherwise. And said the love of
this world stops man's erres, from hering sapience, and blynfildeth the
eyes from seeing troth. and hit causes also a man to be envied and keeps him
from doing good dedis And said he that loves and uses troth has moo and
greter seruauntis than a king And said he is not free that byndeth him to
another* And said afferme no thing, til thou know the troth nor do no thing*
but it be couenable nor begi^ne no thing, but if thou se how to bring it to
good conclusion, There was a rich man said to him, O socrates why art thou so
pour, To whom he ansuerd If thou know what is pouerte. thou woltdeste have
more sorwe of thy pouerte than of mine And said It is a great merueile to se a
wyseman angry. And said the death is a thing that may not be es chewed and there
ought none to dread hit / but such as have committed great imquite and don
litil justice, wherefore they should dread dampnacion for their demerites after
their death And said good death is not to be despised, but to be magnified and
preysed for it makith tra^smutacion from the world of uncleanness and shame to
the world of worship. from the world not durable to the world perpetuel* from
the world of folly and va^rites to the world of sapience reason and troth And
fro the world of traueile and pain to the world of consolacion and rest And
said, It is merueile of him that dowteth to dye, and does things contrari to
his salvation And said. death is lyffe to him that knows to have joy after it
And said he that lives well shall dye wose And said better it is worshipful
death than shameful life And said death is the rest of covetous people for the
longer they live the more multiply their couetises. and so death is they more
coue^ able for them, than life, for the death of evil people is the well and
surete of the good Because they shall do no more sin nor hurt to the people
And said the life Iugeth inderectely amongis the deed And said. one ought not to
weep for him that is slain with out cause. but for him that has slain him,
for he that sleeth unjust ly, dampneth him self. And said he that dredeth any
thing, ought to his power to be ware thereof Also he that dowteth to have peines
for his sins after his death ought so to dele, that he may escheue that parell
And said when thou wolt do any thing look for what occasion hit is And if thou
see the end thereof good / haste the conclusion. and ellis resist thy will
And said bettir is to a man to live hard. than to borowe of him that reputeth
his litil lones and yeftes to be great and without cause wol think a man to be
in his danger And said take in no preisyng the lone or yeft of him that has
disworshipped the for the dishonor and shame thereof is more than the wynning
He loved alwey to learn, whereof some rebuked him. to whom he said, the grettest
shame, that can come to an old man is to be ignorant, he for de a young man
that had folisshly spent and wasted his substance and was brought to such
pouerte. that he was feyn to ete olyues, to whom he said if the olyues had
be as good to the at the beginning, as they be now. thou should have had
yet largely of thy goods And said there is no difference bitwix agrete teller
of tydyngis. and a liar And said the noblest thing that children may learn is
science, for thereby they eschew to do evil werkis And said the gretest
wynnyng that a man may have, is to get a true friend, he herd a man say that
one was surer in keeping his tunge, than in much speking* for in much la^gage
one may lightli err. To whom he said one ought not to under stand that in
them that speak well. And said the proffit of silence is less than the
prouffit, of speech, and the harm of spe che is more, than the harm of
silence. And said one may know a wyseman by harke^yng and holding his tu^ge,
and a man may know a fool by his much clateri^ g And said he that wol not
hold his peace til he be co^streyned is to blame and he that will hold his peace
til he be boden speak is to be preysed And said It is an ignorant thing to
dispute in thingez that may not be understand. and said the mean is best in
all things And said much re^nyng makes much werinesse. and said if the
wit of a man over maistrie not his frailte, he shall sone be overcome and
brought to naught And said he is abeest that can not discern the good from the
evil And said he is a good friend that does the good, and a mighty friend,
that defends the from harm, he wrote unto a king re conforting him when his
sone was deed in this manner* god made this world an house of delectacion and
reward and the trou bles in this world causen remuneracion in the other And
said no man ought to repute him self wise And said this world yeueth exemple to
thoos that abide by thaim tht depart* And said the loss of so^me is lerni^g to
other. And said he that trusts in this world is deceived, and he that is
suspectious is in great sorw One of his disciples gafe him a gift and he was
troubled with all It was axed him why he reioysed it not he said the recepcion
of this gift has procured his worship and put me in his danger And said be to
thy fader and to thy mother, as thou will thy children ben to the And said be
not to angry nor to wrathful* for that is the work of a fool And said one
ought to have shame to spe ke that he has shame to do And said refrain the
from vices in thy youth and it shall be the feirest garment, that thou may
were And said govern the so to thy power, that noman say harm of the, albe
it, it were lesynges, for all men know not the troth, and yet they have
eeres, plato desired him to answer in. iij. thingis and he would be his
disciple the first was what manner ofmen one ought to have most pite of. the.
ij. where fore some mennis wirkis preue not, the iij. bow a man should do to
have retribucione of our lord The first he auswered that a man ought to have
pite in. iij wieses that is to seye of agood man in the ha^dis of ashrew^ for
he has there but al sorrow, and of a wieseman in the gouer nau^ce of a fool
which is to him gre heaviness and a liberal man in the subjection of a kaytif
for he has thereby great tri bulacio^ The ij. their werkis preue not that have
good co^n seil, and work not there after, and have richesse and will not dispen
de hit for their need The. iij. is the good retribucion, that one receives of
our lord god com^eth to be entierly obeissa^t unto him, and abstain him from
sin. and when plato was thus answered, he becam his disciple al his life And
the sai de socrates seide dispreise thy bodeli death and it shall be the life of
thy saul, follow Justice and thou shall be saved. And said awiesema^ rests
and deliteth him when he finds troth And said awiesema^ ought to speak with
an ignorant as the phi sicien does with his pacient And said he that takes
his pleasance in this world must nedis fall in one of these. ij causes that is
to say other to lakke, that he coueteth or to lose that he has won with
great pain And said to one of his disciples. suffice the to ete that will
take away thy hungere. and drink that will stanche thy thurst remembering well
thy soul. and follow good werkis, serne sapience of the most wysemen that be
in thy days, escheue the ginnes that women set to take men with all* for they
be hi^drers of sapyence, And said he that loves this world is like to him that
enters in to the sea for if he escape the parels of the same me^ wol seye he
is fortunat. and if he be perisshed they wol sey he is wilfully disceyued* And
said man has pouer over his wordis* til they be spoken. and when he has ones
uttered them he has no power over hem. And said he that has no power to
refreyne his tongue has no might to resist all his other delectacio^s, And said
silence and speech is good in diverse wy ses and places And said if a man be
much herd speak. one may know if he be discrete or not and if he hold his
peace or speak litil. one will the rather deem he be wise And said when a man
speaks he ought to considere what he will seye for better it is he co^sidere.
than another should. And said to one of his disciples when thou will speak.
speak cu: toisely or hold thy peace. and said he that holds his peace or
speaks litil lerneth at speech of other, and if he speak, other learn at his
words One axed him what was a good purchasse. he ansuerd that / that grows
in the spe^ding thereof. And said dro^kenship vndoth a man / and said one ought
not to axe co^sei le of him tht has his heart al set to the world for his
adius shall be but after his pleasa^ce, and said good co^seil shows often the
end of the work, there was a woman tht called him old and said his face was
right foul To whom he answered theu art so derke and so troublous amyrour that
my beawte can not be perceived therein And said he is discrete that keeps well
his secrets, and he is not wise that discouers them And said a man ought to
keep secret that he is desired to keep, and he is more to preise that keeps
that thing secret which he is not desires to keep And said if thou can not
keep thyn own^ secrets, much less woll he keep hit, to Whom thou have told
hit to. one axed him why a wiese man will desire to have counsel. he seyde
lest his will be in any wise meddled with his wit And said he that is of good
condition is of good and sure life, and is beloved of good people and he that is
of evil conditions is even the contrary. And said to one of his disciples,
trust not this world. for it paieth never that it promitteth And said
acustume you to be content with litil. for ye shall find hit for the best. and
that shall come unto you, repute it not for litil, for it may encresse, and
multiply, but seek to win friends in very love showing them no sign of
hate. and one axed him what difference was between troth and lesin gis, he
said as much as is bewene the eere and the eye And said he that desires to
have more than suffisau^ce has that proffiteth him no thing And said to one
of his disciples, trust not in the time. for it fails Inco^tine^t to him that
trustith there to And said ware thou be not disceyued by thy beauty, and by thy
youth. nor by the health of thy body for the end of thy health shall be sickness.
and the en de of they sickness shall be death and thou may not escheue the
diseases of this world, there was never Joy without sorwe nor never light
withoutderkenesse. nor never rest without labor nor assemble without
departing And said. like as the fortune of this world. shall make thy rejoicing
upon thin enemy right so may it make thin ennemy have reioy sing upon the. And
said he that stablissheth, and sets him self in couenable place, is the more
sure for the peryls of this world And said. he that is fulfilled with the
love of this world disposes him to. iij. things, that is to say, first to
pouerte, for he shall never atteyn to the richesse that he desires, Secundely,
to suffer pain, thirdely to business, without expedicion And said tell never
thy conseyle to him that is angry when one prays him to keep it secret, One
axed him what he had won by his science be said I am as a man sitting on the sea side and biholding the simple folks wraped in the wawes of the sea And
said great fredom growith by service, for the more one serves the more fre he
becomes, And said. he that will win friends let him look first if he can
refrain them from couetise, and if he can, rest than with them and ellis sone
to depart And said if thou be not covetous, thou may rest in every place And
the said socrates had many seynges against women whihe is not translated, And
it was axede of him to what science it was best to set his child to scole,
he ansuer de, to learn that. that is both proffitable in this world and the
other / one axed him when he began to be wise and virtuous he ansuerd / when
first I refreined my self will And said when a man is so diligent to learn, and
loves so well science that he takes non^ head of preysing nor dispreising for
the lo re thereof* than is he wise It was told him that there had de no credence
be yeuen to all his words he answered. so that my words have be good and
reasonnable I give no great forde who has believed them or no And said. he i^
good in the highest degree of goodenesse. that enforces him to be good him self
And he is in the. ij. degree that enforces him to cause other to be good, and
he that rekketh of none of thiese ij. is to be dispreised And said. to his
disciples be not d^sirous to have the good not durabll. but couette to have
that is perpetuelly good And said. be not inquisitif upon other folkys lest
they be inquisitif upon the And said put wit and discrecion before the in all
thy works. and thou shall be the better garnysshed when thou shall com to the
execucion of the same And said for bear not to do good dedis all be it they
be unknown There was one dis preysed his face, to whom he said it was not in
my power to make my face, and therefore I ought not be blamed if it be foul /
that that I have power over I have made fair and that that thou had power
over thou have soyled And said be true unto him that companyeth with the, and
beereth troth unto the. and thou shall be the more sure to eschew dan^giers
And said do to other as thou would they should do to the And do to noon other
but as thou would be done to And said a man ought to be corrected by
experience and taught by the mutacion of this world And said he is liberal
that has greter delectacion to have good renoume than money And said patience
is a strong castle. and hastynesse engenders repentance And said honor is
the fruit of troth, and for thy troth thy friends shall worship the And thy
goodenesse shall be known not spari^g to do that, that shall be profitable And
said, it ought suffice a man to know and understand that, that he sees dayli
fall in this world for there by he may learn new scien ces, he ought to be
worshipped that wills well to every man, and he that wol other menns harms
puts him self in great perille, but the Just man rests in surete And said
he that keeps him self well is a great conqueror, and he that settith so
litil by him self that he thenketh not on his saul, leseth him silf, he that
is pacient does well* and shall not repent him, and he that holds his peace
saves his danger And said let thy seeds be good works, and thou shall gadre
flours of Joy and of gladdenesse And said, thou shall have rest in the
company of a wise man: labor in the company of a fool And said to be satis
fied with littel is worship / and not to be satisfied with much is shame And
said enquere when thou have done any deffaulte, and if thou have erred correct
thy self and repent the and aftir that repentance ware thou fall no more
thereto, and look thou vaunte the not of any of thy good dedis And said he
that preiseth him that does well is partener of his good dedis And said
accompanye not with him that knows not him self And said he is in great rest
that refrayneth him fro anger And said he is well disposed that can tempre his
delyng and his speech And said take no shame to here troth of whom so euere
thou herest it, for troth is so noble that it worship peth thoos that
prouou^ce it And said that thing that keeps a man from shame is better than
the richesse purchase sed thereby. And said many men may aperceyue fawtis in them
self. that find fawtis in all other, And said to a man that fled venquisshed
from a bataille, thou do evil to flee from the honorable death to the
shameful lyff And said he that erreth, or he know the troth. ought the
sonner to have forgiveness And said much wine and sapience may not acorde,
for they be in manner contrarious And said suffisaunce is a castle that keeps
wysemen from evil werkis. And said if he can not eschew ire yet keep it
sekret. And said that thing that a fool leseth can never be recouerd, but a
wyseman can lose no thing, There was a fool that blamed him, wherefore one of
his felawes axed him leave to avenge him, to whom he said awyseman yeueth never
license to do amysse And said all things be stre^g thed and sustained by
Justice, and all things be amunysshed and feblisshed by Injustice And said all
that thou do may not be kept conseile, al be it, it be not new understand
den it shall be known at sometime. And said good renomme is bettir than richesse
/ for richesse woll be lost and reno^me wol last Sapie^ce is a riches that
will never fail nor adminysshe And said, ware the of dro^kenship for the wit
that is overcome with wine, is like the horse that casts his maistre And said
take heed of the guydyng of him that thou axes conseile of, it he govern him
self evil by liklyhode, right so will he guide the, for be reason he ought to
love him self better than the. And said he ware thou break not the laws that
be for the co^mone prouffyt And said pouertee is better than evil gotten
richesse* And said a man without science is like a royame without a king And
said a king ought to take none to his service but such as he has preued
before good and true And said he that takes al men in like condition, may not
make hem al his friends And said / commit all thy causes to god with out any
excepcion* And said, repute not thy sins litil nor magnifye thy good dedis
for thou shall have need of them if they were more And said to his disciples,
beware of this world and think it is a thorny busshe that thou must trede
upon And said like as thoos that be wordely wise keep them from anger in the
presence of their king by as great reason ought they to be ware, how they
a^gre them before god that is to understood in every place for god is over all
And said he that is long or he be angry, is har der to appease, than he that is
lightly wroth / right as the gre ne wode is hotter than the other when it is
well kyndelyd There were brought before him certain people which said die uers
Iniures to him, he answered, if ye have any other ma tere to win of me then
this, do it or ellis hold you^ pras There was greter reverence made to another
man than to him wherefore oon axed him if he had any envy thereat le answe red
if he had more science than I, I would have had e^uie at him or ellis not And
said. sapie^ce and good reno^me is not found but in good persons wherefore
they be better than the great richesse that is found in fools and evil
people. and said thy saul ought to think well, and thy body to help thereto
And said that thou ought keep secret in thy corrage dis cover it not to
every man And said oon unto him tht saw him in a pouer clothing this is not
Socrates thus pouerly arraied that yaue the laws to the people of athe^s to
whom he answered, the true lawis not mad by good arrayeme^t but by virtue reason
and science And said to his disciples Dyspreyse the death, and semblably dread
hit And said a wyseman ought to know what is his soul

PLaton is by interpretacion as much to seye as ended or fulfilled and was of
greece, by his faders side he was of the noble esculapius kynnerede and by his
moders side of the ki^nered of zalon that ordeigned diverse laws, as it is
aboue^ said, he dwelled with socrates the spa ce of / v, years, and after the
death of the said socrates he understood that in Egipte were certain of
pytagoras disciples to whom he went, and proffyted much in lernyng with them.
he returned then again to Athenes, and there he ordeigned.ij. scoles and used
laudable lyff, in doing good werkis helping and nourisshing the nedy people And
they of Athenes would have made him their lord. he refused hit utterly for as
mo che as he knew them of badde and wikked co^dicions / and knew well that he
could not lightly change their disposicio^s, and al so he wyste well if he
should correct them like as it appertey ned they would serve him as they did
socrates, The said plato lived. lxi. years a man of good discrecion.
disposicion, and right pacient, and a great yeuer of his good to pouer men and
to strangers and he had many disciples, among the whi che.ij. of them after
his death. that is to wit zenocrates and Aristotiles held the scoles. And the
said Platon did teache his sapience by allegorye, to thentent that hit should
not be understand but by wytty men, And he learned hit of Tymed and of
socrates, he made.vj. bookis and preched and taught the people that they should
give graces and thanks to god for his goodenesse and mercy and for that he
made them all egall in so much. that be a man never so mighty, his power can
no more, than if he were a pour crea ture, resist against death, semblably he
had thank god for the wit that he has yeuen to man. And said ymagyne no
thing to be in him, but that, that is nedfull good and couenable. And said, be
not couetons upon word ly goods / for god has ordeygned that we should have
suffisaunce in this world. And such suffisaunce is called Sapience, The
which ye ought to have with the dread of god. which is the keye of
goodenesse. whereby ye may enter and atteyne to the good and true richesse of
this world, le uyng to do all thing that may cause hattered and evil will, for
and ye wist how sum things that ye love and preyse, ar evil and vile, ye
would have them in more hatered than love. And said. direct and amend your
self and after labor to correct other and if ye do not ye shall be da^p ned And
I tell you. the thing that has made me most glad. Is that I have not set
by gold ne silver. for if I had gadred great tresor I should have hade many
heavy thoughts, where I have now Joy and gladdenesse. which encresse daily
in me in lernyng wysdom. And for to sete you wete. that gold and silver aren
not good. to be over much set by There is sum country that a littill yuory or
unicorn bone. Is bought for a great sum of gold And in other places. men
take glasses bras and other such things. for as much gold. And therefore if
it were perfytely good of hit, self, hit should be egally chosen and loved over
all like as sapience is chosen and loved in every Cuntre. And said. Enquere
and seek to have virtues, and ye shall be saved praise no foul thingis and blame
no thing that is laudable, and travail you not for to win things, that shall
lightly be lost, follow after your good predecessors arraye you with justice
and clothe you with chastity, and so ye shall be happy, and your works lauded
And said Custoume is a great thing. And said the wikked works dampne and
distroye the good as the bitrenesse of the aloe tree distroyeth the swettenesse
of the honey, And said. A wyseman ought not to think on his lossis, but ought to
keep well the remenaunt of his good And said he that does not for his frendis
while he may. they wol leave him when he shall have most need to them And said
that sapience is good, for she can not be lost as other catalles and wordely
goods may And it was axed him where by awyse man might be known, and he
ansuerd when he woll not be wroth of the iniures that been don unto him and
reioyseth him not when men preyse him. And It was axed of him / how men might
best be venged of their enemies, he ansuerd for to be virtuous. and to do
good and noble deeds And said to his disciples. Enforce you to get Sciences.
by the which ye shall dyrecte your souls And do your part for to keep the law
in such wise that your maker may be content with you And he saw a young man
that had sold, the lyuelode that was com to him by succession And he dispended
it amysse in great dyners and other mysrewle To whom he said the earth eteth
other men. but thy self eteste the earth. And it was axed of him. why it is
That tresour and science may not accord to gyder. And he answered and said
that one thing, hool a co^plisshed may not be d^uided And said that he that
trustes in his fortune. And is not some what besye and diligent to labor in
good werkis the goo de resorted from him, as does the arowe from the stone
that it has light upon And said. he that techeth good to other and does it
not him self. Is like to him that lights a candell to another, and goth him
self darkeling And said a king ought not to be gretely praised, that reygneth
only but upon his subjects, but he ought to have lawde that reigns and has
lordship wpon his enemies And said. he that gadereth and assembleth much
silver ought not to be called rich, but he that dispendeth it worshipfully and
laudably. And some asked him how one might keep hin from need, and he answered
if men be rich let hem live temperately, and sobrely. and if they by pouer
let hem labor diligentely. Than some axed him of how much good a man ought
to be content. And he answered to have so much as he neded not to flatre nor
borouwe of other And said to his disciples, when ye shall be we^y of studyeng,
sport you in redyng good stories. And said, that the wyseman ought not to
coueite the richesse of his friends. lest he be hated and dyspreysed therefore
And said Alitill good is a great thing if thou be content there with And said*
it is bettir and a more couenable thing to akyng, to remember and se to the
good governance of his people the space of aday, than for to dance and
sport him a hole year. And said werkis done by wysdom causes knowledge of
thingis and them discreteli to dis cerne, and works done by ignorance is an
unknown thing tille troth stable and set them in their right wey, and
workis done by lesingis is for to disordre good things and put them (...) of
their propre placis And said thou shall never be pacient while thou art
covetous, And it was asked him how he might have learned so much wysdom, he
ansuerd by cause I have put more oylle in my lamp to study by than wyn in
my cup. And it was axed of him what man is most couenable to gonerne a
town, And he ansuerd he that ^n well govern him self, And it was also axed of
him what man was most worthy to be called wise. and he ansnerd he that takes
most head to good conseile and casts most dowtes And said that the vessels
of gold be proved and known by their sown, if they be broken or hoole. so
ar men proved and known by their speech if they be wise or fools. And it was
axed him which be the most Ignorant men in their dedis, And he said such as
work most after their own conseyll, and that obey to them self, and for
deffault of good aduisement dispose hem hardely to do wykkid deeds And they
asked him who does most wrong to him self. And he said. he that meketh him to
thoos that he ought not* And said the ignorant people Iugeth lightly the
fairness or the filth that they se outward. and the wyseman Iugeth by that.
that they se of man's conditions And said he finds sapience that seeks her
by the right weye. and many err by cause they seek her unduly and blame her
without cause And said he that is ignorant of good sapience. knows not him
self. and he that knows not him self is of al igno ^untis the most
ignorant, And he is wise that knows Ignorance. and he that knows it not
is ignorant And said wrath ledeth shame in a lece. And said The king
resembles to a great Ryuere growyng of litil a^ d small rennyng watres and
therefore if he be sweet the litill should be sweet* And if he be salt the
litill should be salt And said be well ware that in bataille thou trust not al
only in thy strength dispreysing thin natural wit for often engine causes
victory without might, but vnuethe may men have victory by strength without
use o^ natural polycie. And said words without good effec^ is like a great
watre that drowneth the people and does it self no prouf fyt And said a
suspection man is of evil conditions and lives in sorrow And said be not
wyllyng to use any wordely delectacions / in to the time that ye se whether
wit and reason grant there to. And if thiese two accord thou maiste well
and lightly know the fairness. and the filth thereof. And in what wise they
wrie. and what difference is between hem And said. The Reames aren sometime lost
by negligence And sometime for using to much Idelnesse and also by to great
trustyng in fortune. Also when men entende not to encrese the people to inhaby^
the land And Also when werre lasts long there in And said. The end of
Indygnacion is to be ashamed of him self. And It was axed him how A wyseman
could be troubled And he answered. When he is com pelled to tell the troth of
an unknown thing to him

And said. When thou shall se A man of good disposicion. and fulle of
perfectyon. thou ought to do after him. fore couetise is both weke and seek in
him And said, dispraise not alitill good thing for it may encresse. And said,
blame not nor rebuke a man when he is wroth. for than thou may not direct
him And said be not glad of the evil fortune of another, for thou kno west
not how the world may turn against the. And said stable thy wit both at
thy right hand and thy left And thou shall be fre And said, there be three
things that does me harm to se, that is to say A rich man fallen in
pouerte, a worshipful man dispraised, and a wyseman in okked, and soorned by
ignoraunte people. And said. be not in felisship with the wikked men for, no
goo de that they can promise the. And said when a wyaume is in prosperity,
Couetise is bound to the king, and when it is in aduersite, the king is bound
to couetise And said. Co uete not that thy thing ben hastily don, but desire
only that they be well don And said a man ought to be better content and is
more bound to his prince, for oon fairre word of him than if other had
given him great giftis And said, the gifts that be yeuen to the good people,
asken retrybucion and the gifts that be yeuen to the noghty people, causen
them but to ask more And said, the wikkidenesse follows after the wikked men,
and dispraiseth all goodenesse. like as the fly that sets her upon corrupt
things, and leueth the sweet flowers. And said. haste thou not to preyse any
thing unto the time, that thou know if it be worthy, for to be praised or
not And said that a wyseman ought not to exalte him self by fore the uncunning
but meke him and thank god that it has pleased him to exalte him in grace /
and put pain to bring him out of his Ignorance in the way of rightwysenesse
and cortesie for if he should rebuke him shamefully it should be cruelte and to
istructe him easily is courteysie And said that. ij. disputers disputing and
arguyng. for to have knowlech of the troth of a thing, have no cause to be
wroth to gidre for their questyon falls to oo conclusion, but and if the one
thinks for to conquer the other, they may have lightely hatered to gider.
for as much as ich of them wolle brige his felawe to his own entente and so
to subdue his opynion. And said when thou will borowe or axe any thing of any
man, if it be refused the, thou ought to be more asha med of thin askyng than
he of his refus And said he that can not nor will govern him self is not able
to govern many other And said a wyseman ought to ask curteyse ly and mekely,
and with few wordis like as the leche that d^aweth more blood of a man mekely
and without noise than does the sincerolle that pryeketh faster and makes more
noise And said a man of feeble courage annoyeth him lightly of that he loves
And said enforce thy self to know god and dread him, and pain the for to
know thy self and to teache other and rather to do so than to besy the in thin
other daily occupacions And said Desire no thing of god, but that is
profitable but desire of him the good that is durable love not simply the
good lyff here, but principally the good end And said he is unhappy that
continues in his malice and thinks not on his end And said reken not thy
gettyng in things that been from the, ne carry not to do for them that have don
for the. tille they ask the, the recompense And said. He is not verry wise
that gladdeth or reioysed him in wordely prosperitees, and is troubled in ad
uersitees And said the filth of wordely wit is known in much speech And
said first think and afterward speak and than execute, for things change
lightly And said, anger the not suddenly, for if thou acustume it. it woll
turn ones to thy harms And said. If thou be will ling to give any thing to
any nedy body. tarry not till to mo rouwe. for thou know not what may befall
to the. And give to him that may not labor ne get his living And said be not
wise only in seeing. but in deeds. for the speech wastes in the world and the
sapience of dedis, is prouffita ble in the ever lasting world. And said, our
lord accepts him for noble. that does good werkis though he be peasible and
of few words. and reputeth for evil the praieres and sacrifices that been
done by evil people And said, If thou labor to do good. thou shall
therefore suffer no peyn. for if thou have difectacion to do sin. thy
dilectacion shall va nishe and be none, and thy sin shall abide ever with the
And said. have in mind the day that thou shall be called to thy Judgment, and
thou shall here nothing and than thy clatteryng tongue shall be still the thought
shall fail the, thyn e^n shall be derke, and thyn humanite shall be consumed in to
the earth, and thy wit so corrupt. that thou shall have no power to feel the
stenche of thy body. nor how the worms shall suke thy roten kareyn. Also have
in mind the plaor where thou shall goo. the lordis and the seruauntis shall be
all like in the said place. and that there may another fren de ne foo hurt nor
help the. And therefore ser^e good sciences and disciplyne. for thou shall not
know when thy departing out of this world shall be and yet be certain that a
mongis all the yeftes of god, sopience is the most exellent, she yeueth
goodenesse to the good people and pardonneth to the wikked their wikkednesses.
think and have in thy mind continually that thou haste a de, and trust not in
any thingis of this moeuaeble world. be well ware that thou do no foul dedis.
for no delectacion nor wi^ningis, and be ware that for the variable plaisau^ces
of this wikked world thou lose not the joyful and everlasting bliss And said
love sapience understand and harken the wysemen, and be obeyssant to thy lord
work not but in due time. and yet ta^ head how thou shall do it, look that
thou say no word inconvenient, and be not proud for no richesses. ne despeire
the not for no evil fortunes be well disposed to all people and dispray se no
man for his meekness And said that thou reputeste no vice in thy self, blame
not another though he does it. and thou ought not to desire to be preysed of
virtues that be not in the, ne do no such thing that thou woldeste blame or
disprayse another if he did it. Thou must do such thingis as ben good and
couenable though they be forboden the And said Awyseman ought to repute his
error great and his good dedis litill And said afolye is to cut the vynes, and
take awey the evil branches thereof and to leave within our self the couetises.
and other wikkidnesse. And said like as we keep our self from the multitude of
metes for the health of our body we ought to by as great reason to abstein us
from vices, for the salvation of our souls, And said he that adds to his
gentilnesse noblesse with good manners and conditions is worthy to be praised
And that he takes and suffiseth him only. with the gentilnesse that co meth
to him by his kynred, without purchassing any other virtues. ought not to be
called good, nor to be hold noble And said, if thou feel thy self more true to
the king, than other ben, and that thy wagis ben like to theires or less, yet
thou ought not to complain thereof, for thin ar lasting, and so are not theires
And said, If any have envy at the, and by envy says evil of the, Set not
thereby, and thou shall have peace with him, for he seeks not but for to have
noise with the And said men ought to keep well their halidayes, that is to
wit principally from evil doing. And said. the more that thou art exalted in
high astate the more thou ought to be meke and curteise to the people to the
end, that their love may abide with the, if any thing should befall the. other
wise than well And said onneth may a man keep the love of his fren des. if he
wol correct him rudely of his faults And said awyseman ought for to chese
good men to be his ser uauntes, like as men chese the good ground for to
labor hit.

ARistotle by interp^tacion in greeks tongue, is fulfilled or complete of
goodenesse. And he was sone to Nichomacus. the which was right connyng in
fisike and a good fisicien, and was boren in the Town of Stagree. and he was
of the kinned both by his fadirs side, and by his modirs side of Esculapius of
the which he re byfor has bemade mention for he was in his time the most
excellent. And the best of all the greeks, and when the said aristotle
was.viij. years of age his fadyr put him in the cite of Athenes that than was
called the Cite of wysedom. and there he learned Gramare R^torike and other
books of poetry. And therein he studied. the space of.ix. years prouffyting
greteli therein And in thoos days men set much store by the forsayde
sciences and was their opynion that it was the laddre to go up in to all other
sciences And certain other wise men at the same time as Pytagoras and pytoras
and diverse other reputed and held the said sciences for no sciences and did but
mock and scorn them, that learned them Sayng that such science as Gramare
Retorik and poetrye, were not couenable to come to any wysedom And that Gramare
is not but for to teache the children. Poetrye but for to tell falls and to
make lesynges, Retorike for to speak fair and in terms. And when Aristotle
herd this words he had great merueyle thereof and was gretely agreued with
such as held the same opinion. And strength him after his power to sustain
all manner of Gramaryens the po^s and also the Retoriciens And said pleynly
that Sapience can not excuse her of the said Sciences for Reason is an
Instrument of wit. as It appears openly. that knowing of any thing is to use
of Reason, and this preroga tiue. which god had yeuen to men is right noble
and worthy. to thentente that amongis the men he should be holden for the most
Noble and most wise that most uses reason And that better and more
couenably receives in his heart things. And tells hem in place. and time
couenable. And for as much as Sapyence is most noble of all other things
she ought to be declared by the best rayson and couenable manner and by the
most pleasannt and short words that can be done without error or letting the
sentence for if the reason be spoken inparfeitely the name of wisdom is lost
thereby, and so is the speker in fawte And so the herers resten in dowte of the
sentence And after that aristoteles cowde the sciences abouen said he learned of
plato in aplace Called Epidenie Ethikes ande the.iiij. sciences theolegi kes,
and at that time he was.xvij. years of age, and when plato went the second time
into Cecile, he left Aristotiles in his place in the said town of Epidenie, In
the which he taught the sciences and learned than after the death of plato the
king phelipe of macedoyne sent for aristotiles which went to him in macedoyne
and there dwelled with him du ring his life teching contynnaly the said sciences
and af tir the death of king phelippe Reigned his sone Alexandre the great And
when, Alexandre departed from macedoyne for to go into the Country and region
of dayse thoo returned Aristotiles to athenes and there he dwelled.x. years
studyng til that he becam a souuerain clerk, and apre^st accused him by envy
to the Citezeins telling hem that he worshipped not their ydolles like as other
people did (...) that time whereof aristotiles was advertised and hastyly
departed fro Athenes and went into that to wne of setagire where he was borne
fering that they of Athenes would have don to him as they did to socrates if he
had dwelled longer with them And he ordained aplace in setagire where he
held and kept the seoles yeuing many good in structions to the people. And
occupied the time in good deeds. And deed great almesdedis to pour people. and
married many pouer children that were fadir and modir lees and he taught
benygnely all tho that would study what astat or nation that ever they,
werof, and ediffied and bilded new again the said Cite of stagier and therein
ordeigned laws. and yaue instuictions to kyngis and princis whi che they took
and kepete right reuerentely. and after he deyde in the age of.lxiij. years.
they of Stagire took his bo nys and right worshipfully put hem in ashryne where
they held their counseile for his great wit, and also for the gre te and
fervent love that they had to him, and as often times that they had ado any
great matere for to ^ue tlr de claracion thereof, the men which were of
counseile wol^ ^o and stand as nygh the said shryne where the bonys (...) as
they cowde for to have knowledge of the troth of (...) in a tere, and thus they
did for to worship him the m^ and their opinyons and verry trust were for only
being (...) the said shryne their wits should be the bettir and their
wnderstandyng, more pure and subtle And the said Aristotill had in his time
many kings sons that were his disciples. and he made in his days well an. C.
bookis of the whiehe we have now.xxviij. in logike. v^ij. in natu re the book
of Ethik the book of politik the book of. Methafisike* that is named
theologike and the bookis of the wit tes of geometry, and plato rebuked him by
cause that he wrotte his sciences in bookis, to whom he said in excusiug him
that it is athing known and notified ynowe* that all, thoo that loves,
science ought to do nothing that should cause the loss of her And therefore It
is good to compose and make bookis by the which science shall be learned, and
when our memory shall fail it shall be recouerd by mean of bookis for he that
hates science shall not proffite in hit though it be so that he se the bookis
and biholde hem yet shall he set not by it, but depart wors and less wise
than he was a fore. and I have made and ordeigned my bookis in such form that
the wise men shall lightly and aisely understand hem but the ignorant men shall
have but litil avail by hem And the said Aristotiles held gladly in his hand
an Instrument of the science of the sterres. And said to king Alexander he
that has in this world good and laudable name and the grace of god ought to
ask ne desire non other thing And said thus to him, direct thy self first
for if thou be not just how may thou well direct thy people. and if thou
be in error thou can never govern hem well, for a pouer man can not make
another rich, he that is disworshipped can not worship another, he that is
right feeble may not help another and so may not goodely ne wese any man
direct another, but if he direct him self first. And therefore if thou woll
take of the filthes from other. cleanse thy self first, or ellis thou shall be
as the leche that is seek and can not hele him self and traueileth to hele
other that have the same sickness And said It is a great a vancement to the
people to have a right wys king And It is a great corrupcion unto them to have
a corrupt and mysruled king And said. keep the fro couetise for thou ought
to thynk and remember well that It is not laudable thing to have richesses in
this world. and shame in the other seeing that this worl de is no more but
only abaytyng place for to go to the other world. And said, If thou wol be
rich suffice the with such as thou have, for he that has not suffisaunce can
never be rich what goods that ever he has And said If it were so that by
evil doing It should fortune the to ha ue some good, and by well doing to have
some harm, yet eschew the evil orellis thou shall be deceived at last and
euir do well and at last thou shall be remunered therefore And said such
thing as thou praysis upon thy self blame it not upon another. and do nothing
to other, but as thou would se it were don to the, refrayn thyn own will, and
hate not other men be not envious, and have him not in Indignacion that has
offenseth the, for no man can sometime esche we error, be not covetous, for
couetise lettith the man's reason and takes aweye the knowledge of troth, do
not vncouenable werkis, take compaynie with wise men and study in their
bookis, fle lesinges, for the liars lies not but for vnkno wing of reason and
of her saules, the lest harm that can fall to alyer, is that no man bileueth
him of nothing that be says, nevertheless a man may bettir be ware of a theffe
than of alyer And said the hertis of good people accorden togiders, like as
renning watre with the watre of the sea. and the hertis of evil people can not
lightly accord, al be it that they be togidres, as the unreasonable bestes
that play and lepe togidre and suddenly fall to fighting And said, ordeigne
that your offices and auctoritees ben yeuen to them that lo ueth and follows
troth and right wysnes and cause them to have rigorous peynes tht ben
harmedoers and loves falshode and decepcion And said, If ye have do wte in any
thing counseile you to wyseme^ and if they dispraise you thereof be ye neu wroth
therefore* and if a man has some vice and beside that has many virtues ye ought
not therefore to let to ask him co^seile And said many man shall both let and
trouble them that can not help him And said Justice is a mesure the whi che
god has ordeigned upon the earth by the which the fe ble is defended from the
mighty, and the true from the un true And said the wyseman knows what
ignorance is, in asmoche as sometime he has been ignorant but the ignorant was
never wise and therefore he knows not what is wysedom And said to Alexandre,
there be may litil besinesses in thy Royame and many great and general and if
thou ye ue pouer to any person upon the great, and thy self to occupy the
litil thou shall well wit and perceive that great damage shul thereby fall to
the in time coming, if it fall not sonner And said liberalite is to give to
nedi people or to him tht has deserved it, so that the gift be after the
possibilite of the yeuer for he that yeueth over reason ought to be called a
waster and not liberal, And said sapie^ce is the defense of the soul and
myrrour of reason wherefore he is right blessid tht traueilleth to have her for
she is the fo^deme^t and the root of al noble deeds and laudable thingis and
by her we may win the good en de and keep us from pain everlasting, And said
O alex andre if thou use thy pouoir and lordship other wise than thou ought
to do, thou shall be envied, of envy shall com lesingis, of lesingis shall com
Injustice and ennemytee, of In justice and ennemyte shall com bataile. and by
battle the law shall be perisshed, the people hurt, and thy possessions lost.
But if thou use thy lordship as thou oughteste to do. troth shall encresse in
thy Royaume. of troth shall come Justice, of Justice love, of love great
yeftis, and su retie by the which. the law. the people and thy good shall be
maynteyned and encrece And said he that makes his Royaume servant to the law
shall reign, and he that takes and put out the law from the royame shall not
reign. And said. A king ought to be of good and strong courage, to remember
well the end of the werkis, and to be courtoys and fre. and to refrayn his
wrath where it apparteigneth and show hit where it needs, to keep him from
couetise, to be true to govern him as nygh as he may after his good
predecessors to give to his men as they have deserved. to deffende and keep
the law and the feith. and euir to do well after his might, and if the
strength of his body fail him then to keep the might of his courage, by the
which he shall be the more assured in all his nedis. And said the king that
governs him and his roaume well by his wysdom Is worthy to be greetly praised
and lauded And said to Alexander, seche to win the ri chesses that be not
tra^sitories. the life that is not moeuable the kingdoo^ that can not be taken
aweye from the and the ever lasting Joy, and be piteful but not somoche that
thou stand in daungir thereby, do pugnicion and Justice to thaim that have
deserved it without delay trauaille the to fortiffie the law for in that is
the love and dread of god. and when thou shall be compelled to take ve^geaunse
of thyn e^nemy put it not over til another day for the fortune, and co^dicions
of this world in oeue and change of te^tymes sodaynely And said thou ought
not to hate him that says the sothe nor to chide him that keeps the feithe
but he that shall do contrary to the feith be thou his e^nemy with all the pouer
of thy reame, and said It is bettir that thou correct thy self and amend the
after the exemple of thy predecessors, than thy successors should amend him
aftir the exemple of the And said worship the good men and thereby thou shall
have the love of the people and set not all thy will in this world in the
which thou may not long abide, And said worship sapience and for tiffie
it by good maistris disciples and scolers, worship hem pay for their expencis
and keep hem of thy household. aftir that thou shall se they shall be prouffited
and sped in the scien ce And thou shall find that great prouffit and worship
shall come to the therefore And said he is of bygge and strong courage of good
discrecion and laudable feith, that bears pacientely all his aduersitees for a
man can not be known in his prosperity. And said thou ought to think that
the wekest of all thyn enemies is stronger than thy self And said thou ought
to cherisshe thy knyghtis and thy yomanry, and to have hem in as great love in
time of peace as in time of werre, for if thou set litill by them in time of
peace, they shall forsake the when thou shall have more ne de of hem And said the
grettest prouffit that thou can do in thy royame is to take aweye the wikkid
people, and to rewar de the good. And said a man is of evil co^diciou that
takes no head but to the vices and fawtes of other in dispreysing of them And
said worshipful death is bettir than sha meful life And said the sapience of a
man of low degree is worship and the folly of him tht is of high degree is a
shame and avarice is the thing that takes awey the name of gentilnesse. And
said the good prince ought to goune the people as his good predecessors have
don and to love and cherisshe the good and true people more than his tresour or
other wordely goo des, and to delight him in that, that he has rightwysly, and
not wrougfully And said no man ought to be ashamed to do Justice, for if the
king be not iusticial he is not knig but he is violent and rapax And said the
wikkid men obey for dread, and the good for their goodenesse And said men
ought to do well to the good people and to chastise the wikkid by rigor. And
said wrath ought not to be to sharp ne to sweet, and he wrotte an epistyll to
Alexa^dre that the kings been worshipped for. iij. things that is to wit
for instruction of good laws, for conquestes of lan des and regions and for to
peoplishe and distroye deserts and (...) dernessis, and he wrotte also to
alexandre that he should not be willing to correct all me^nes faw^ to (...)
for it lies not entierly in man's pouer to kep^ him from doing evil, and
therefore it is good sometime to fory^ue (...) and if it be so that of need
pugnicion must be don, men ought to show that they do it by co^pulsion to
amend and pug^ the errors and not in manner no^ by weye of (...) and he saw
a man that had his hand smytten of for thef^e that he had don. And he said
for asmoche as that man had taken from other such as was not his own. men
have taken from him that, that was his. and said thou may not so well cause
thy people to love the as to cherisshe hem and show hem right wysenesse, and if
thou do the contrary though thou have the lordship of their bodies thou have
not the lordship of their her it is ne of their courages, and that shall thou
find when thou call upon their seruise at thy need wherefore it is a great
da^gier for a^ing to do injury and do make his people hade him And said he is
right happy that can chastise him self taki^g exemple by other, And said
fortify your souls with good deeds and depart you from couetises which
distroyeth the feeble corages There is nothing that makes a man less to be
set by, than to preyse and boste him self of his good dedis And it was axed
of him what is the cause that wysemen wol not be wroth and any man wol teache
hem. And he ansuerd for asmoche as wyseme^ known that science is a right
profitable thing. And said he that wol not nor can not do well at lest
ought to keep him from evil doing And said to his disciples look that ye have.
iiij. eeres. ij. for to herke^e and learn sciencis and proffitable thingis, and
the other, ij, for your other wordely besinesses, The most profitable thing to
the world is the death of the evil people. And said a man may not be so well
known, as in great auctorite. And said in all thingis the lest qua^tite is the
lighter to bear sauf only in sciences, for he tht has most thereof the
lightelyer may he bear it And it was axed of him what was the most couenable
thing for a discrete man to have, And he ansuerd that, that should abide with
him if he were ascapede out of a drowned ship in the sea, And said men ought to
love to learn the best of the sciences as the bees love the swetest of the
flowers, and he had a noble and worshipful heritage of the which he let ot^r
have the governance and would not go theder him self And it was axed him the
cause And he ansuerd that, he that oftenest goth to se his heritagis has the
mo displeasirs. And said the tongue of a fool is the key of his secret And said
to one that was slowthful and would not learn, sithen thou wol not take the
pain for to learn. thou shall have the pain to be lewd and uncunning. And
said keep the from the feliship of him that knows not him self. Tho that been
daily inclined and utterly disposed to vices may not encresse in good ne
proffyte in science, And said if thou woll haban done to thy body all his will
thou shall be the worse both in health and in all other things. and at last
thy soul shall be dampened therefore. He that is entierly inclined to do
fornicacion may not be praised ne come to good end And said a merry man wol not
lightly be wroth. A liberal man may not well be envious, ne a covetous man
content with his richesse. And said the man is preued and tried by his werkis
as the gold by the fire, One of his disciples made to him an evil raport of
one of his felawes. to whom ^e said I wol not believe thyn evil wordis against
thy felawe nor I wol not believe his evil words against the And said like as the
rayn may not proffite to the corn that is saw^ upon the dry stones, no more
can studieng avail to afoole A man's tongue shows his wit or his folly
Experience ought to correct a man and to help him to live well And said
sapience makes richesse to be faier and hydeth po uerte, It was axed of him
what was fayer speking. And he ansuerd to speak litille and laudably and to
give reasonable answers. and he wrote thus to alera^dre, ye be a noble and
migh ty king and more mighty than ye were and shall encrece if ye di recte and
govern well and justly your people / and in so doing the people shall obey
you, but if ye be an extorcioner and take all their good from them than ye
shall be lord of the pouer people and than shall ye be like him that has lever
govern the dom beestis than the me^, ne there is nothing so couenable to aching
as to coueyte unduly the goods of his people And said he that has a litil of
troth desires to have more, And said reason makes a man to be more souuerain
than beestis and he that has no reason is but a beeste in many things the
newest is the best, but love is contrary, for the elder it is the more it is
worth, and one Abrakyn lord of sciences axed him what thing a man ought to
learn first that seeks sapience, to whom he answered the government of the
saul, In as much as she is everlasting and more noble without any comparison
than any thing that we have Than they axed him how may the saul acquere
sapie^ce, and he answered as a seek man seeks his fisicien and as a blind man
enquereth of the colors to them that se hem / and it was axed of him, how a
saul might se her self, and he answered the saul that lakketh sapie^ce can se
nothing as the eyes with out light that nether se hem self nor other And said
all manner of things have propertes, and the properte of discrecion is to
chese well the good from the evil And said the lordshippes won by study
dangiers and peynes and so kept, ought well to continue and prospere And thoos
that be lightly won and kept in. Joy and plesaence, comme to a litil
prouffit at last, and we se co^moneli the towns wherein the inhabitauntes
take great labor be well maynteyned and encresse with great richesses, and the
towns full of pleasaunce and delices fall to ruin and destruction And said
hastiness of speech makes men to err And said I merueille how he tht men
lawde without cause accept it and is pleased with all, and he of whom men say
evil without cause is angry with all And said look that thou be not as the
bulter which castith the flower and keeps the brenne And said men ought not
to take the gouerna^ce of the people to a child to him also that can not know
the nedis of the pour people to him that is covetous, to him that will work
without de liberacion, ne to him that is ve^geable And said there is no
difference bitwix a child of age and a child of maneres as of condition what
age that ever he be of, for tbe condicio^s of men aren known and showed by
dedis and not by age And said It is nedeful to a man if he wol be good that he
be able of him self to know troth and do it in deed or ellis that he learn
hit of other / for he that of him self can not understand hit nor will learn
hit can not be good And said goodenesse is divided in. iij. maneres. the first
is in the soul the second in the body. and the therde in the operacions whereof
the most noble is the goodenesse of the soul for in using the virtue thereof,
is fond and known the form in good dedis And said a man finds sapience and
good conditions in long lernyng of very science, And said there be many
persons that known the good werkis and do hem not which res^ blen the seek
folkis tht axe help and co^seil of the leche and do no thing there aftir, and
therefore the bodies ben without health and the souls without blessidnes And said
one may know the in ward disposicio^s of a man b^ his outward operacions, And
said well doing is a laudable thing, neuthelesse it is somewhat hard to do /
but lightly one may do evil as an a^chier to fai le of the butte is no wonder,
but to hitte the prike is a greet maistrie. and said in diverse manner we may be
evil but we may not be good but in one wey, and said default of wit cau seth
many harms and makes many men to fall by ignorance Not knowing what thing to
be don or left And said Aged folkis louen togider / and so do not childeren
for old folkis have their delectacions like / and young folkis in diverse weyes
And said agrete aco^plissing of me^nes feli cite is to be well frended than a
man without felisship can not have hole felicite And said every man has need
of fre^dis, whether he stands in good caas or in badde, if he sta^ death in
evil condition, they for to help him, and if he stand in good caas, he to
make merry and cherysshe them that they may help him to resist inconuenientes
that might fall And said noon has delectacion in justice, but the just man,
none has favor to sapie^ce but the wysema^ and noon loves frendeship but the
true friend And said the wikkid men sustain their perilles by their bodily
strength and the good men suffer their parilles patiently by the ver tue of
their saules which patience comes not by might of arm nor of hand nor non
other member, but only of grace of the saul, and thereby to resist against
couetise and other grieves of this world trusting therefore aftir to come to
bliss and he wrote to king alexa^dre in this form, thou ough test to obey
well the co^mandeme^tes of god, for he has give the thy desires, and all that
thou have axed of him And said sapie^ce is life and ignorance is death and there
fore he that is sapie^t is a live, for he understands what he does and he
that is ignorant is deed for he understands not his doing And said the
a^tiquite of the time makes the werkis old* and bydeth no thing but reno^me
which rests in the hertis of the successors / it is nedeful than to co^q^re
good reno^mee and thereby shall e^dure noblesse, and said lesing is the sickness
of the saul which can not be heled but by the mean of reason which lies
never And said A much wyseman is he that pro nounseth not the things into
the time that he is present that wol understand hem. And the best speker is he
that speaks not til he is well purueyed what he shall say. and the best
werkeman is he that begins not his work into the time that he has well
disputed and auised it, in his heart Nether is none that ought to have so much
thought as the wyseman. for it is necessary to him to be purueyed and certain
of his werkis And said men are more inclined to couetise than to reason. for
couetise has acompaigned them from their childehode. and reason comes not to
them till that they be of parfyte age And said. the children hate their
maistres when they teache hem for they know not what good may befall them
thereby, but think only the labor of the pain of their lerning And the said
Aristoteles callid Alexa^dre axing him questions upon the gouerna^ce of the
lordis and of the people. to whom alexandre yaue good ansueres. But never the
less Aristotiles beet him with a Rod. And it was axed of him why he had beet
him with out cause And he ansuerd this child is like and able to be a great
lord and a mighty king. And I have beat him all only for to hold him lowly.
and in meekness for he shall be to soon proud And said If thou can direct
another. direct him as thy self. And a young man axed him why he was so pouer.
To whom he answered. My pouerte has no thing offensed me. ne does me no harm
But thyn has done the and shall do harms ynowhe And said. The Royaumes by
maynteyned by the laws ordeigned by the king and princes And said the kings
and princes ben sustained and uphold by knight hode, And the knyghtis ben
maniteyned by money, and money comes of the people, and the people is
governed by Justice without which no Royaume may prospere

ALexander the great was sone to phelip king of macedone, which phelip reigned.
vij. year. And the said. Alexander began to regne in the. x viij. yer of his
age And he said to his people in this wise, Fair lords I will in no wise be
contrary to your wylles ne to your deeds But I show to you that I hate
frawdes and malices, and as I have louid you during my faders life, so will I do
in time coming And I both counceylle and pray you that ye dread god obey him
as souerayn of all And chese him for king / and be most obeyssant to him that
shall best pour ueie for the good astate of his people and that shall be most debo
nayr and mercyful to pour folks that best shall keep Iusti ce, and the right
of the feeble against the mighty, him also that shall best dispose for the publyke
well, and for no delectacion of worldly pleasa^ces shall not be slowful to keep
and defend you and by whom ye shall be defended and all evil and harms, by
the mean of his good deeds shall be destroyed, and him that most hardyli shall
put him forth for to destroy your e^nemi es, For such ought to be chosen king
and none other, and when his people had herd the reasons abouesayd and kno wen
his great discrecion wit and understanding they were greatly ameruaylled and,
answered to him thus We have herd and understand thy great reasons. And have
resseyued and resseyue thy good counceyll, and therefore we wole and byseche the
that thou Reygne and have the lordship upon us during thy life. we hope that
there is none that has so well deseruid to be our king And thus they chees him
to there king and to their lord and coroned him and yaf him their blessings,
and praid to god that he would bless and mayntene him. To whom he said I have
herd the prayer that ye have made for me, beseching to god that he wol
stedefaste the love of me in your hertes and corages And that by no manner of
the delectacio^ he suffer me to do thing again your proffites ne to my
disworship, and sone af ter he sent lettres to all the princes and good
towns of his Royaume, And when he had sent his lettres One daire king of perce
and of mede sent to Alexandre for tribu te like as he had of his fader. And he
sent him word that the hen that leyd that egg was deed And after this
Alexander made great conquestis. and when he had co^iquered Inde he went to
^contre cassid bragman, the which when they wiste his coming, they sent many
wise men to him, which salewd him and said, sir Alexauder thon have no cause
to werre upon us, ne to be ^il willig, for we ben both pour and meke, and we
have no thing but only sapie^ce, the which if thou wolt have, pray god that he
wol give her the. for by battle thou shall never have her. Ande when alerander
herd hem say so, he made al his Ooste to tarry and with few of his knights
went within the said contre for tenquere further of the troth And when he
entered with in the same ground. he fond many pouer foolkes women and childeren
al naked gadering herbs in the feldes And he axid of them many questions. to
which they answered right wisely, and than he bad hem axe of him sum thing
that might do hem good and to all their people, and he would give it hem
gladdy And then they said. Sir we axe the none other thing but tht thou will
gyne us ever lasting life The^ ne Alexander ansuerd and said, how might a man
make other me^nes lives everlasting, wha^ he may not length his owen life an
our And that ye axe of me is in no man's power that lives. Than they said to
him. Sith thou have good ^nowleche thereof. wherefore trauayllest thou thy self
to dest^oye all the world, and to gadre all the worldly tresours and wost not
when thou must leave hem, Then Alexan der said to him. I do not all these
things that ye say of my self. but god has sent me through all^ the world for
te^alte and magnifye his law and to destroy them that (...) not in him. And
sometime. Alexander went (...) visyting his lords and enqueryng of her (...)
And upon atyme he came in to a town of his own

And saw two men of the same town bysore a Judge pletyng of the which one
said to the Judge. Sir. I have bought an house of this man. And long after I h^
ue found with in the same a tresour under therth^, which is not mine. And I
have offered to diliuere it to him. And he has refused it, wherefore Sir I
biseche the that he be compelled to take it for as much as he knows it is
not mine for I have no right thereto. Then the Judge coma^ded his adverse
party ^ansuere to the same. and then he said. Sir Judge that same tresour was
never mine but he has, edyfyed in that place that was before common to all tho
that would have edyfyed there in And therefore I have no right to take it. And
then they both required the Judge that he would take it to him self, to whom
he answe red and said / sithen it is so that ye say, that is ye have no right
to whom the heretage has longed and yet longs where the tresour was found,
hou should I have any right thereto that am but a stran^ger in that caas, and
never a fore herd speak thereof ye would excuse you thereof and give me the
charge of the tresour, that is evil do Then (...) axid of him that had
found the tresour whether he had o^ childeren, which answered he had a sone,
and he axed the other in like wise, and he said he had a daughter. Then t^
Judge said and Iuged that amariage should be made bitwen them and that they
should have the tresour by that mean And when Alexander herd this Judgment,
he had great meruayll thereof, and said thus to the Judge. I trow that there is
not in all the world so rightwis ne so true a Judge as thou art, And the Judge
that knew him not said and axed of him whether any Judge would have don other
wise Ye certainly said Alexander in many lands. Then the Judge having great
meruayll there of axed of him whether it rayned and the son did shine in tho
lands, as though he would have said that hit was meruayll that god should send
any light or rain or other good things to them that do not right and true
Justice And thereof Alexander had gretter meruaylle than before and said that
there were but few such people upon earth, as they were in that san^e And as
Alexander went out of that land he passed th^rgh a cite, in which all the
houses of that cite were of one ^igh (...) and before the door of every house
was a great pytte or grave in which cite there was no Judge, whereof he had great
meruaylle. And axed of the inhabitantis therein wherefore such thingis should
serve. The which ansuerd him and said First for the outrageous height of
houses. love and Justice can not be long in a town a mong the people, And they
sai de that the pittes or graves were their own houses to which they should
sone go to and there dwell until the day of Judgment And as touching that they
had no Judge, they said that they made good Justice of them self wherefore they
ne ded no Judge. Then Alexander departed from them right well plesed. And a
fore his death he wrote a lettre unto his mother desiring her to make no sorrow
for him And sone after Alexandre died and was put in a Coffre of gold and
buried in Alexsandre. and he was born theder with great reverence by kings
princes and other great lords, that kept and fulfilled his testament as he had
ordeigned. Then stert up one of the grettest lords of them that kept him and
said thus. They that never wept for other kings, now ought to weep for this
same And tho that never had meruaill of aduersite, should now have meruail of
the death of this king And he desired the other lords that they should say
sum good thing for to comfort the people that was gretli dismayed and
troubled for the death of king alexandre, or for the death of the worthyest king
that ever was Then one of them said king alexa^dre was wo^t to keep gold and
seluer, and now gold and seluer keep him And he said it by cause of the chest
that his body lay in which was of gold And another said alexander is depted
fro sins and filthes and now his soul is with the good souls which ben
purified And another said alexander was wont to chastise all men, and now he
is chastysed And another said, the kings were wont to dr^de him and now the
pourest man of all the world dredeth him not And another said, yester day all
the earth suffiseth not to Alexander, and now the length of his body suffiseth
him And another said Alexander might here yesterday and no bo die durst speak
against his will, and now every man may speak and he heerith not And another
said the more that thastate of king. Alexander was great and more exelle^t the
more is thoccasion of his death grievous and pytefull And a another said thoo that
saw not yesterday Alexander fe^ede him gretely, and now thoo that see him
fereth him not And there said Alexander was he whoos enemies durst not com^ nere
him, and now his friends dispreyse and will not see him And when Alexander began
to regne he wa^ bu^ xviij. years of age And he reigned. xvij.. year of the whi
che euiployed. ix. years in bataylle and in conquer^ng And. viij. year he
restyd him visiting the grounds and lands that he had conqueryd And he had
victory upon xxiiij. manner of langages And in two years he sought all thorient
and occident, And the nombre of his knights that were commonly of his retenew
and at his wages were CCC. xiij. M. without yoma^rye and other men necessary
to his werres And he deyde in the eage of. xxxv. years. and he was of sangweyn
color, his face full of poc^is. One of his eyes graye and that other black,
small and sharp (...) vi saged like a ly on And was of great strength and
loved much wars fro his chyldehode unto his lives end. And he commanded that
the people should worship god and ^epe hem from sin. And said the world is
not sustained but commonly by science* And the royames be not directed but by
the same, and all things ben governed by reason And said sapie^ce is
messagier of reason And it byfelle that Alexander passid through a town wherein.
vij. kings had reigned before And he askid if any of their kin^ede was alive,
And they of the town said ye, a sone of one of the said kings And alexander
desired to see him And the p^ple said to alexander that he was ever in the
chirchyerd And alexander went to see him. and axid of him wherefore he a bood
so in the chircheyerd, and why he would not take upon him such astate as his
fader had and his. Auncestris, as other men do. Seeing that it was the will of
all the people And the young child ansuerd and said O right bounte uous king I
have here a thing to do, the which when I ha ue don it, I shall do thy
comandemeut, To whom then alexander axed what thing it was that he had to do
there And he ansuerd I am sechyng the bones of my fader and of mine auncestris
kings for to put hem a part from the other but I find hem also semblable that
I can not know one from the other Then alexander said to him, thou ough
test tacquere worship in this world And If thou had good and strong courage,
thou might have all thy faders goods and of thy pr^decessours and all there
honors To whom the young child ansuerd and said. I have good her te. And
alexander axed him wherein. And he said by cause that I have found life without
death, ^ougthe without eage. xi chesse without poute, Joy without troble. and
health without sekenes Certainly said alexander of all these things have I
none, Then said the child if ye will have hem axe hem of him that has hem
and he may give hem and none other Then Alexander said that he had never seen
man of so great discrecion Alexander used every day to be in a cer tayn place,
for to here the complayntes of every body And it was so that upon a day only
there came none to complain unto him And therefore he would not that day should
be put in the nombre of the days of his regne And when he was ready to fight
with king daire, it was told him that the same daire had with him more than.
ccc. M. good fyghting men. whereto he ansuerd and said a good cook ought never
to be abashed to see in his kechyn many s^eep among other bestis And the
patryarkes and pr^lates that were for that time came and said to him. God has
give to the lordship upon many royames, regions and contree^ to thentente that
thou sholdest have many children begoten of thy body, for to have the
succession of the same after thy death, and therefore it were good that thou
sholdest ^aue ma ny wives Tho whom he ansuerd. that it should torn him to great
ashame that had overcome all the mightyest men of the world / for to be
disconfited by women There came to him a pouer man well and wisely spekyng which
was pourly arrayed To whom, Alexander said I have meruaylle that thy clothyng is
not after thy spech^, For there is between them great difference, Then the
pour man said O mighty king I may self learn to speak and to have reason with
me, and ye may resonably clothe me, then. Alexander made him to be clothd
with one of his best gowns Also there passed a thief before alexa^dre that was
going to be hanged, which said O worthy king save my life for I repent me
sore of my misdeeds. Then Alexander commanded that he should be hanged while
he had good repentance Also upon a time one axed of him x. pieces of goold,
To whom Alexander said thou art not worthy to have so much And he said to him
again, Sir if I am not worthy to have so much yet ar ye able to give it me And
alexander axid of Aristotle what thing a good and a manly king ought
conttnuelly do And he ansuerd that he ought to think every night to the good
governance of his people, and the day following to put it in effect And it was
axid of him what thing was most delectable in conquering of lands and of
contrees. And he said the most delectacion was to give largely and recom
pense them that have done him good seruise. And he axid of Aristotle by what
mean he should be counceilled And he ansuered and said, Ordeine upon the
government of thy household him that has many servants and can well rule and
govern them, and make him thy procurour and receyuour of thy money that has
great liuelode and spends discretly and notably And a Patriarch axid of him
what he would do with so many men as he had, And he an suerd I that am lord of
them that been great and mighty lords may well forbere to be lord of their
seruauntis, And there came two men before him different of opinions to whom he
said, the sentence that shall plese that one shall displese that other, and
therefore co^sente ye to the troth, and that shall plese you both And it was
axid of him why he worshippid more his mastir than his fadre And he ansuerd for
as much as I have of my master everlasting life, And I have of my fader life but
for a certain time And when dares dough ters were taken it was told him that
they were right fair and therefore he would not see them feeryng to have don
any dishonest things, sayng that great dishonor were unto him that had oucome
so many notable and manly men in the bataylles, if he should be oucomen by women
being in his prysons. And it bifelle that one made a long sermon before him
which noyed much to alexander wherf^re he said the predicacion is not to be
lawded that endures over the power of the herkeners but that is good that
endures after the possibilite of them that hereth it And it was axid of him
how men might acquyere the love of other men, and he a^s uerd in doing hem
good. or else at lest in doing hem no ne harm, And said men so^me time
throue better by their enemies than by their friends And it was axid of him
how he might be so mighty, considering that he was so young of age. And he said
for as much as I have tranaylled tacquere frendys, and yeuen to mine enemies.
and by this manner I have power upon hem all And said it is a great loss to a
man to lose his frendis and more than to lose his sone or his tresour And said
the friends that be acqnerid by good deeds. ben better than tho that been
acq^rid by force And upon a time as alexander went to sport him privily.
certain men being at a wyndow keste wa ter upon him, wenyng that he had been one
of their felaws and when they saw tht it was alexander they were gretely aferd
and alexander badde hem be not aferd sayng tht they had weted no ne but him tht
they thought to wete. and as aristotle taught many kings sons with Alexander,
he axed ones of one of hem, what shall thou give me when thou shall be a king
The which said I shall make the my great governor, and in like wise he axid of
another, which said I shall give to the half my royame, And then he axid of
alexander, which ansuerd him thus Maistre enquere of me not this day up on
that, that I have to do to morrow, for when I shall see that I never saw, I
shall think that I never thought, but if I regne as thou say I shall then
do as thou shall see and think to be couenable. And then Aristotle said to
him Certainly I wot well that thou shall be a great and a mighti king. for thy
face and thy nature shows it so Alexander said to one that long had been his
lieutenau^t and had never rebuked him of no vice I am no thing pleased with thy
service, Why sire said his lieutenau^t By cause said Alex ander that I am a
man as another and err and have erred ma ny a time, since thou came in my
service, and thou saw never no fawte in me therefore thou art not such, as I
ought to have to be my lieutenau^t, for thou art not wise, and if thou have
seen and known my fawtes and not corrected me thereof Thou art not true to me.
And he said Reason lets not to acquere science, but sloth dispraysith it.
And sum axed of a wise man called Nychomake, what was the cau se that men
obeyed so lightly to Alexa^dre. And he said by cause that he was virtuous, that
he has well kept Justice and he had been of good co^uersacion and of right
excellent go uernement And there were two men which axed euerych of them to
have to his wife the daughter of a rich man, of which two. one was rich and
the other pour And the fader yaf the daughter to the pour man. wherefore,
Alexander axid of him why he did so, And he said by cause the rich is
ignorant and like to become a pour man. and the pour is wise and able to
become a rich man, Alexander axid of a wise philosophre by what mean the
royames were well dire^ tid and holden in good astate. And he ansuerd by
obeyssau^ ce of the people and the Justice of the king And as Alexa^ der fought
ones in bataille many women came in the same bataill against him the^ue he
withdraw him hastily and said to his men if we should have victory of this
bataill where thise women ben, it were no worship to us, and if they had the
victory, then it were to us a ppetuel shame / wherefore we shall not fight
against them while the women ben there And said it is a perilous thing a man
tabide so long in the sea that the storm and tempest come upon him, that may
well dep^e during the fair weder In like wise it is of them that dwell in
princes and kings houses And said, it is a foul thing to a man to have great
words without effect, and it is a fay re thing to him that put his werkis
before his words And said the grettest and most laudable liberte that is to a
man, is to keep him from couetise And when his fader commanded him that he
should gladly here the co^maundementis of his maistre, he said, he would not
only here them, but he would fulfille them with glad heart to his pouere And
said It is worse a man to have defaute of discrecion / then of richesses

THolome was a right wyseman and well understood, and in especial in. iiij.
scie^cis that is to wit, Geometry music, arismetrik and astrology, and he
mad many good bokis a mong the which one is callid Almageste the which is of
Astrology, and he was borne in Alexandrie the greteste cite that is in the
land of Egipte. and there he made his consideracions in the time of king Adryan.
and made his dictions upon the consideracions at Roodes, he was not king all be
it that many persons calls him king. And he lived. lxx viij. years. And
said. he is wise that disposith his tongue to speak of god, and he that knows
him not is the most fool of all. And said, he that is enclyned to his will
is nyghe to the Ire of god, and the nerer that a man approucheth the death / the
more he ought to labor and traueyll to do well And said Sapience abides no
longer in the heart of a fool. than a fleyng thing that may not tarry in
thaier. And said good wit and good discrecion ben fellawes, And said A man of
good sapience can not dye, ne a man of good understanding can never be pouer
And said Sapience is atre that wexeth grene in the heart and fructifieth in the
tongue And said Beware that thou dispute not with him that has no knowledge, ne
give not thy conseyl but to him that askith it, ne tell not thy secret but to
him that can keep it. And said he that wol live well ought not to keep in his
heart all his aduersitees And said the mays tree of a great house has many
mela^colyes And said speak wisely aswele for thy self as for all other And said
if thou may not eschew sometime to be wroth at lest let not thy wrath
last lou^ And said the hertis of good people ben the castle and forterescis of
secrets And said a man that is not to be correctid by other me^ may surly
correct them of their faults. And said he that askid co^seil of the wysema^
and does there aftir whether it turns him to good or to evil he ought not to
be blamed thereof* And said. It is bettir, a king to direct his people, than to
have great habondaunce of knyghtis And said Surete puts a weye sorrow* and
fere empescheth gladness And said The wordis of god avails not to them that
have put al their heart to the world And said It is to great folly a man to
think to much on the things that passith his understanding And said men
been of two, natures some wolle never be content how be it that they find
enough, and some other seek and find nothing And said men cause tacquere and
geete money. And money is the cause tacquere men, And said. He of the which
the Science excedith his wit may be likened to a feeble shepherd that has a
great heep of sheep in his keeping And said he that has put al his entente to
his flessly delites, is more bo^de than a keytif* And said the higher that a
man is exaltid in his lordship, the more grievous it shall be to him to fall from
the same And said thought is the key of certaynete And said the reffuses of a
nygard ben bettir than the largesces of a prodygall waster And said. thou
can do nothing so acceptable to god as to do well to him that has offensed
against the And said if thou wol be wise be not in feliship with foolis. but be
ever in feliship with them that been wyser than thy self* And said the soul
can not be decey ued into the time that the body takes his end. And said
Folly is the gretteste ennemy that any body may have And said Good will is the
fondement of all good works. and good werkis is the messagier in the other
world And said he that kepith the good opynion and leueth the evil yeueth
great rest to his heart And said Sickness is the prison of the body and
salvation of the soul

ASsaron said that a king in his kingdom may be do^maged and hurt, and
specially by five things, the first is by to great drienesse as to be iij.
year without Rayn. the second is by expending more than his lyuelode comes to
the therde is, to use to much woo^men wine and huntyng, the fourth is to be
of evil maneres and of wicked conditions and also to be to cruel and
vengeable, the fyfte is, to have many enemies. And said the most notable
maneris and conditions and the most prouffyta ble is to be liberal and true of
his word. And said he that is liberal may not live amys, the true speker may
not be shamed of his speking, the meke and lo wly man can not be hated, the
sobre man can not be seek, and he that well and dyli gently vnderstondith to
his bysenesse may never repent thereof and brings him to good perfection And
said a king or a prince ought not to trust them that disprayse him in him that
is covetous, in him that is com from great poverty to great richesses in him
from the which he has taken the goods and lordshippes, in him that has
suffered many domages and hurtes for the wyall mageste and ordinance Ne in him
that has made any aliaunce or promise with his enemies, and he ought to be
well ware that he give no po were to non such as thoo abouesaide And said It is
an impossible thing a man to keep him from falling in some fawte that is exaltid
with a king in great magnificence without desserte And said when a wise prince
knows that any of his men had offenseth against him, he ought has tely to
enquere the troth of the deed. and the quantite of the trespass. and if it be
don wylfully or by ignorance, and also If he was wont to do so. and if he be
like to fall therein again. And upon every of the same pointis to Remedy
hastily And said. The kings seruauntis ought to show in seruyng him their
good virtues their feith the noblesse of their kynrede. to thenteute that the
king may bettir know hem and do to every of them as he shall have deserved And
said. If a king loves and cherissheth the untrue and wikkid men as them that
been good and true. he ought not to be called king for he is not like to reygne
long. And said. If the kyngis conseyllours his physicien and his confessor
deleth with other things. than langith to their offices The king shall
contynuelly be endommaged. seek of body. and of the soul And like to come to a
foul end

And said. He that says not troth to his leche And he that counceylleth with
his frend^ And ^elleth him not the troth of his counceylle. he distroyeth him
self. And Assaron said. A king should not commytte to another the besynes.
that is necessary to him self for to do And Assaron said. The most secret
counseylle of the king Is his conscience and his good deeds is his best
tresour. And of all men. the trewes^ is the best And the best Rychesses ben
they that be truly and duly gotten. And he says a king should commit his
besynesses to him that he has proved in faith in wit and in good
governance, and if he may find no such * take him that has ever be
conversant with wise men And he said a wise king of good understanding amendeth
and auaylleth much his counseillonrs And he says when a king of good
discrecion has to do two right hasty things, he should begin at the noblest
and at the most pronffittable And if they ben both two of one estate, begi^ne
at that which may best be recouerd in time coming And he says if a king be
merciful, his besynes shall goo well. his wysedom shall avail him in time
coming, if he be true his people shall rejoice with him, and if he be Just.
his regne shall endure And he says kyn ges should get good reno^me and other
mean dignitees by good mesure, for ontrageousnes is not enduryng. And he says
yt belongs to a conquerours king to set and keep good Justice in his Reames
and other lordshippes go ten And hou be it that it is a grievous thing to
conquer them yet is it a more grievous and more chargeable thing to keep them
well And he says he that is most complete of wit, is he that knows him self.
And that departed him not from thobeyssau^ce of god for what manner occasion
that comes to him, and that contynuelly thanketh him for the goods that he
has sent him And assaron says that an evil law and the love of a shrewe
lastth no longer than the shadow of acloude And assaron says that a wyseman
enforces him to fle and wythdraweth from harm. And the fool does great pain
to find hit And assaron says when a wyseman that is counceylour or offycer to
a king sees that the king will do or say any thing domageable and
harmefull to him or to his Royaume or to his people and subgettis he should
address and remember him of good examples of cronyckes and histories of his
noble and wise predecessor concerning unto that purpos in so much, that the
king conceive and have knowleche that he says it for his well and worship.

LEgmon was born in Ethyope and learned his science in the land of Asteyn in
the time of king david the prophet. And was bought by a Jew for an esclaue or
bondsman for. xxx. marck And his maistre pleyed gladly at dise. and there ran
by fore his maistres gate a River. And on a time as his master and an other
man playde at dyse, they leyd and set an owche to plege, that who of them
lost a game. should do the will of the winnar. or he should drink all the
water that ran and passed before his yate. So it happend that his maistre lost.
And that other commanded him. that he should do hoolly his coma^dement. And the
loser ansuerd that he was ready to be at his Judgment. Then he said to him.
thou shall give me all the good that thou have of any valewe. or thou shall
drink all the watre of this River. And he that had lost demanded only respyte
of one day for tauise him. and that other granted it to him And thus he abode
in his house right pensyf and full of thought how he might escape fro this
perille. And as he was in this thought legmon his bondsman and servant came home
and brouht upon his neck a burden of wood and salewed his maistre. The which
gaf him no answer. for the thought that he was in. How be it he was
accustomed for taraysone him for the good words that he fond in him, and
then legmon said to him Maistre who has angered or greuid the And he answered
nothing again And legmon said maistre tell me the cause of thy sorrow and woo,
For I shall lightly remedy it if I may. and then his maistre reherced to him
all the fayte as is before reherced, And then legmon said to him that he
should in no wise abasshe him For he would give him good counceyll. Thou shall
demand him said he. if thou shall drink that the ruyer co^teyneth now this
present time* or ellis all that, that shall run and come continuelly, and I
wot well he shall say that thou shall drink all that it conteyneth now, and when
he has so said, thou shall say to him, that he stop and make the riuyer to
stand without rennyng any more, and that thou art ready to drink hit that it
holds now, and thus thou shall win thy cause When the master, herd the
counseyll of his bondsman he was much recomforted And in like wise on the morn^
he said to him that had won the owche, and in this wise he escaped from the
paryll, and fro then forthon he afranchised legmon ande made him fre that a
fore was bond and thrall And he did and gaf him much good and was reputed
for right* a wyseman And one of his felawes of time past met him on a time
And demanded of him art thou not he that were wont to keep sheep with me. And
he answered yes, how said that other who has set the in this estate* I shall
tell the said legmon sayng of troth to be true, and not tentende upon
vnprouffitable things. And it was said. that a voys apperyd to him* which
said to him, wolt thou be a great lord upon therthe and he ansuerd if god will,
I will obey him but if he will yene me the choice and my playsir, I will peace
One asked him wherefore he would not be a king, he ansuerd / if I judge
rightfully, I may not eschew the hate of many men. And if I dissimile, I shall
withdraw me fro the way of paradyse I had lever have in this world
suffisaunce with pouerte and win the bliss of that other world than for to
love to be high raised in this world And da uid was in a place where much
people spack among whom legmon was stylle, and he demanded him wherefore spekest
not thou, as other do. he ansuerd by cause there is no word good but of god,
ner no good silence but to think on god And this Jew that was maystre of
legmon gaf him much good, the which he distributed in alms, and lent it
to pouer nedy people without usure. And therefore god multiplied all his goods
greatly And it is said he lef te all his richesses and made him self a recluse
in a temple solitair^y unto his death, and there prechid many fair thm gi^
wysedoms to his sone. And said, Sone take abstinence and restrain thy will,
For if thou preyse the wo^de and the diverse adventures that daily comen in
doing of fensis in thing deffended of god, thou desire but death there fore
enforce the teschewe the evil and to follow the good for the good mortifieth
and destwyeth the evil And said sone speak ever of god, and god shall ever put
good words in thy mouth. Sone set always thyn owen werkys to fore thyn eyes,
And other me^nys behind the a part Sone when thou see any synnar, repreue
him not of his fawtes, but think on thyn own where of thou shall give acompt
Sone employe not thy courage in the love of this world. which is a thing that
passes and deceyueth all them that affie in hit. And hold the content with
litill, and coueyte not the goods of other Sone set attemperau^ce in thy
living. and be replenisshid with Sapience and converse with wysemen and so
may thou get wysedom Sone be simple. well doing. thinkyng much. and of few
words, but if they be true, and be no great lawgher And be not dispreyser ne
mocquer of other, be stylle and not full of langage, for I have ofter repented
me of much speking than of being still. Sone Beware that the cock be not
erlyer awaked in the morenyng than thou And dread god and keep the from vayn
glory. Sone Beware that thou be defrawded for to believe. that thou have in the
thing. which thou haste not. though that men bear the it on hand by flaterie
Sone who loves god best, dredeth him most. Sone learn goodness and after teache
it forth to other. For doctors and techers with their techinges ben lykened
unto sprynging wells rennyng* of which the people ben continuelly seruid, and
yet they abide always full. And know thou sone that if a fool speak, he shall be
mocqued for his vncurtais speech, If he be still and speak not, he shall think
evil, if he do any thing / it is evil and loses his time, if he set him to
study, he shall lose his dispe^ce and shall not prouffite, if of adventure he be
rich he shall be proud and presumptuous, if he be pour, he shall fall in
despayr. If he have any good garment, he will be proud thereof, If he demau^ de
any thing, he shall axe it vncurtaisly, and if any man axe of him to borowe. he
shall deny it. If he give ought he shall reproach him. if a man give to him he
shall conne him no thank. when he is merry or Joyous* it is out of me sure. And
when he is angry he is in like wise, if men tell him any thing in secret, he
shall discover it, if he have puissance or might, he shall secretly seche
occasion to do evil and shall trete his subgettis by vyolence. if men
felawshipe with him, he shall make him angrye, if men follow him he flees the
people / who so will correct him, he will not do for him but shall hate his
corrector, And his felaws shall hate him, if he speak he will be herd. And if
other men speak he will not here them, if men pray him to pardone another he
shall not do it, he loves better deceyt than truth, a man may not put him
from his oppynyon, For ever he will have his by him self, and who so does
evil, he reputeth it fowel don, if he study or speak with wise men, he will
not me ke him self nor take heed to hem And if he be with a mo re fool than he
is him self, he shall deffame and mocque (...) he shall comande them to do well.
And he will do the worst he can, And he shall comande them to say truth and he
shall lie, his deeds shall be much discordau^t to his words* for if his tongue
says one, his heart thinks another* if thu be rich he says thu art an
usurer, if thou be pour he shall se^e noght by the. if thou do well, he says
thou do it by ypocrisie, if thou do evil, he will deffame the, if thou give to
him be will ^lle the waster, if thou give to him noght he shall hold the for a
kai tyf and nigard. if thu be debonayr, he shall say thou art a best. and who
so draws him fro his company, he says he does it for pri de. But the
wysema^ is al of other contrary condicio^s* for he has co^tine^ce, justice
besines foryeuenes and mekenes he ^an well speak, and be stylle in place and
time, he knows and does well. he has his seruau^tis in his puyssau^ce and
pour, he is li berall to demau^ders, he is wise in speking, and well
understanding the words of other, If he learn, he shall meue good questions, If
men do him good he shall thank hem, who tells him his co^seyll, he shall keep
it secret, and he shall trust well in other, if he give, he gives gladly
without reproach. he will do to none other man, but as he would be don to. If he
be rich he shall not be proud thereof, If he be pour or rich he shall not
forgete god. he shall always prouffite in science. he gives credence to him that
techeth him, he shall not grutche to a greter than he is, nor dispreyse a less,
he shall axe nothing but if he have right thereto, he is agreeable in his answers,
and says no thing but if he know it well, he hydeth not his science / the more
he accompanyeth the men, the more he loves them, he co^streineth his will to
troth, whether it will or not, he corrects him self giving example to other,
he is lightly turned to do well, if he bear witness, it shall be veritable, if he
be a Judge he shall judge and do all thing truly, if men do him harm, he shall do
good therefore, he coueyteth not the goods of other men. he reputeth him self
as a stranger in this world, and thinks not, but on his departing, he does
well and comandeth other to do the same, he defends evil and keeps him self
fro doing it. And that lies in his heart the tongue pronounces, and his deeds
ben according to his words. Sone understand wysdom and excersise the same
without thinking on other things for when thou have gotten it, thou shall be
ever in Joy And know that it is not gotten but by debonairte* and by good
keeping of thy tunge* For the tunge is the door of the almer^ye of sapience,
where in every man may well enter, if it be not shett, And therfo r^ men should
keep well the keye, that is to say the tunge more besily than his gold or
silver. Sone lose not thyn owen things, for keeping of strange things. For
thy propre things ben thy goods * which thy saul shall bear with him, And
the richesses that shall abide after thy death shall come to other men, Sone
honor wysedom. And deny it not to them that desire it, and show it not to
hem that despise it Sone who that has mercy on other, shall have mercy on him
self Sone be thou content with that thou have without coueytyng of the goods
of other, or of that which thou know, thou may not have Sone receive
pacyently the words of correction and, of prechyng though they be hard and
grievous And said he is right unhappy that hereth and vndersto^deth not, and yet
he is more unhappy that hereth and understands and nothing prouffiteth to him
sone aco^panye the with them that god loves Sone yield than^ kyngis to our
lord god of the goods that he has made the to resseyue in humilite / and
depart them to thoos that be nedy Sone if thou have don any good tht the
seems good, give no laud ne preising to thy self thereof, for thu wotest not
if god be pleasid with all or not, In every work is commonly some thing ever
contrary, and thaduersarye of the work is proud thought, sone coueyte not
the delites of this world but only them tht may make the nyghe to god Sone
trust thou very ly in god and love them tht obey him and have the^ in hate
tht disobeye him, sone there is nothing more acceptable to god tha^ goo de
understanding and that is in ten conditions that is to weten in not preysing
him self, in well doing, in being content of things nocessarie to the life, to
give of his goods for god dis sake. to will worship to him self, to keep him
self from doing shameful thingis in geting science and connyng all the days of
his life, to keep him self from anger. In giving his love to all them that
desire it. And to repute him self werst, and the other better. for the men ben
of two manners. Sum ben good. and some ben badde, Wherefore a man should homble
and meke him to both, to the good in praying god to make him semblable and
like to hem, to the evil for as much as it is not known. whether his goodence
be within him hyd. And he will not show it by wyn glory. And in doing thise
things is a man reputed for sage and wise. Sone worshipe god and pray him
that he will keep the from having an evil wife* and he will teache and inform her
for there is none other remedy. Sone show to other such as thou have learned,
ne felauship the not with shr^wys. that thou be not one of them, and have thou
none affiau^ce in the^hous where the people live this day and deye to morrow
Sone enhabyte thy self with the wise men continuelly, for god enlumineth their
hertes by words of sapience in such wise as the goods under earth ben
moysted by rain and with dewes. And sum men say that legmon is buried in a
town called karaualle bitwene the mesquitte and the march, And there ben
buried. lxx. prophets that deyde after legmon the which the children of
ysrael kept so long in hostage that they deyde for hunger And when Legmon was
nygh his death he wept sore. and his sone axid him why he wept for fere of
death* or for sorrow that he had to leave the world. He ansuerd I weep for non^e
of the two things but I weep because I have a way for to goo. from which I
saw never man come again, and I bear but litill vytaill with me. and am
charged with many great charges. And I wot never whether I shall be aleged and
discharged ar none when I shall come to the end of my way And he say de to his
sone, Sone thou ought to dread god and not only to be worshipped of men Sone
when thou come in apsa ce where shall be spoken of god, abide there, for if
thou be a fooll, thou may be amended. and become wise, if thou be wise thou
shall encrece thy wysdom, and if god send them any good thou shall have thy
part, but and if thou haunte places where god is not spoken of, all the
contrary shall happen to the so ne* be aferd of the vengeance of our lord as
much as thou may, and dread him and consider his right great puissance and
might And said in like wise as in giving largely a man makes of his enemy his
friend, right so by pride a man makes of his friend his enemy And said the
wode shewith the wysedom of the man and therefore ought a man to be well auised
what he says. And said atrewe man rests in his truth, and the reward of a
liar is, that he be not bileuid of that he reherseth And said reherce ne tell
nothing to him that will not bileue the* ne demand not that thing that thou
wost well shall not by granted to the ne promise no thing but thou may and
wilt hold and keep And said thou ought a love all thing fle the company
of a liar, and if thou may not eschew his compa nigh, at lest beware that
thou bileue no thing that he says And said sone set the not in the hiest
place for it is better that thou be taken up fro the lowest place for to sit
in the highest* than to be taken from the highest and be set al benethe And said
Sone yet ones I comande the that thou dread god above all things, for that is
thing rightful and profitable to the, And do so that all thy thoughts be
always in him and thy words semblably. for the spekyng and thinkyng in god
surmou^teth all other words and thoughts as he him self surmou^teth all
other creatures And therefore men ought to obey him. notwithstonding any other
thing that they ben constreyned to, Sone make thy orisons and prayers duly to
him. for prayer is as a ship that is in the sea. for if she be good she shall be
sauf and all that been therein. And if she be evil, she shall perisshe and all
they that be therein And said A man may lightly find his living and his
necessitees in this world. which is of litill during as to us creatures. but a
man should pour ueye him of things necessaries, for to bear with him when he
shall depart hens And said, How may a man make another to change his will.
that can not refreme his own will And said Good will is one of the goods
whereof god is seruid, And gladly to here things lowable is to him agreeable.
And a curtoyse ansuer ought much to be preysed If the behooves to send any
message or legacion. send a wyseman* and if thou may none find goo thy self
And said believe not him that lies to the of another man, for he shall lie in
like wise to another man of the And said it is more light to change
montaignes fro one place to another. than for to make him understand that has
none entendement And said do not that of which thou sholdest have shame to see
another do it. Two pacientis ben in this world of which one is he that sees
and endnreth patiently that he hates, and that other is to refrain his will.
There ben three estates of men that been known but in three manners, that is to
wit the pacie^t is not knou en but in his aduersite and in his Ire. The
valyant man is not known but in war And the friend is not known but in
necessite, Of all other manners and conditions the worst is a man to be
suspecionous of his friend. and to discover things secret, to have trust and
affiaunce in every man. to speak ouermoche of things unprofitable and to be
in danger of evil people for couetise of goods tem porell, And said the
thought is the myrrour of the man wherein he may behold his beauty and his
filth And he said beware and keep the for to be suspeco^us. for suspecion
takes a way the love fro the people Wit without doctrine is a tree without
fruit. And said for to be Joyous and to salewe eve ry man gladli, to be
liberal in gyuyng and receiving and to for give gladli his evil, will make^ a
man to belouid of each body.

ANese the philosophre says, When men were old Their virtues ben dispysed,
And the rich men ben more ferful than pour men. And he said the noble death is
better than a vile domynacion And said the most and grettest ewre or hap of
a man is to have a good felawe, now then accompanye the with good people and
thou shall be one of them One of the grettest vylonyes and iniquitees of the
world is for to do vylonie unto an impotent person And said If thou have don
any trespass or sin repence the anon without abiding unto the moren And he
said thou ought to give him thank, that does the good of what condition
that he be of, so that he do it liberally and in good entente And said he may
not know ne apperceyue many thingis, that can not apperceyue ne know him
self, And said if thou will have enduring love with another put thy self in
pain te^forme him in good manners and said if a king be just and rightful he
shall seygnorie and be lord over the corages of his people if he be otherwise
though he be named for thaire king yet will they have their corages

SAcdarge says that the works of this unto another world ben guided by two
thingis one is by science of which the soul is adressyd. and that other is
bysenes of which the soul and the body ben entreteigned and kny^ And said men
leave for to do much harm and evil when they doubt and fe re our lord, and
said noblesse of lignage is right couenable to receive science, Thentencio^ of
the man should be for to refrai ne his courage from fylth and foul things, for
the good life makes the good reno^me and causes a good end, he is right
exesse^t which is honorable in all his ^isportes, and of whom the wit
surmonteth the Ire* He said late it suffice to the to be so wise, that thou
can do well and keep the fro doing evil There is nothing so evil unto a man, as
to be evil en^ctri ned, and in especyall, when he is issued of noble and good
lignage And said for to conne science / it is a right honorable and
profitable thing For by her the goods of this world and of that other ben
gotten, A wise man will nothing have of his prince but that which he has gotten
by sayng truth and by his good works. And said he is a good lord that takes
upon him pain to keep his sugdttis in such wise, as he keeps his owen body.
and that he be not so rigorous and opressing. that them behooves to leave his
lordship And that also he be not to them so debonayr. that they dispyse his
maundementis And he said the most curteys gyuer is he. that gives without
axing And said In what someuer place thou be with thyn enemy / be it in
disporte or other wise. make all way good wacche on thy self though so be thou
be strenger than he and mightier yet laloure al way to make peace And said in
like wise as it is great pain to the body of a man to sustain thing that is
inpossible to him, right so is it agreuous thing to a wyseman for to teache a
fool And said A suspecious man may never have good life And said. he is right
Ignorant and unkind that can not give thankyng for the goodenesse that is don
to him. but yet he is more unkind that denies it to other And said. He that
demands but reason is able to wynquysshe and overcome his enemy

THesille said Thou ought to lone bettir the Rude words that been
profitable and true. than the sweet wordis that been of deceyte and flateringe
Some men put venym in sweet drinkis and the medicines that sonest heleth people.
aren byttre, and of euille savor And said. It is a foul thing to be so
curious for the fedyng of the body. that it hurts both it: the soul And
said as a shipman takes not the sea without he seth that he has a couenable
wind. no more should a man dispose him to any manner werkis without that it were
conuenable for the soul, And said thou ought to do that, that is most
proufytable for the body. and rather that. that is most couenable for thy
saul. and not to do the contrary And said he that can well conseille other,
ought to conseille well him self and have remembrance to the salvation of his
saul, for it is a great vice, to a man to worship and help ano there and
disworship and hurt him self And said as it bycometh evil a man, that has
afoule and unclean body to be clothed with cloth of gold or with cloth of
sylke. right so it is afoule thing to have great beawte of body and of vysage
and be full of evil werkys. And said we ought by reason to keep cleenly our
bodies. we are mor specyaly bound to keep honestly and wese that. that yeueth
us know lege of our lord god. that is the wysedom of the saul and not to hurt
or ouercom it with meets or drynkes. And it was axid of him how a man might
keep him from Ire And he ansuerd, in remembryng that it is inpossible he should
al weye be obeyed, but that he must sometime obey And that he shall not always
command but he shall be commanded. And also that god sees all thing. and if
he has this in consideracion. he should not long be wroth, and he saw agrete
fat man to whom he said thou pains the sore to break the wallis of thy
prison, And said when thou shall correct another show hit not like him that
would benge him of his ennemy but do as the phisician that cour toysely speaks
to his pacient. And when thou shall correct thyself show the as the hurt man
does to his leech

SAint Gregory seide Recomaunde to god the beginning and the end of al thy
werkis And said study, and trauaylle to know all things, and reteyne and
hold with the thoos that been most proffytable, And said. pouerte is evil.
but evil richesse much worse And said be thou pacient and have reason in thy
wrath, and light thy self with Sapience instead of ca^del and presume not to
be better than thou art. but think thou art dedely. Repute the for a stranger
and thou shall worship the strangers And said when thy ship shall be laden
with great transquillite than thou ought fere to be drowned And said men
ought to receive meryly all that god sends hem. And said the hattered of
good men is better than the love of evil people And said frequente and haunte
the companyes of wysemen and not of the rich And said dispraise not a litel
of good thin ges. for they may gretely encresse and amend And said Endure
patiently without taking vengeauce.

GAlyen was one of the. viij. leches Right excellent in medycine. which were
al. viij. superlatyf above all other lechis. of the which the first was
Esculapyus The second Gorius The therde Myrius The four the Promenides. The.
v. platon. The. vj. Esculapius the second The. vij. Ypocras The. viij. Galyen
which had none like to him, He was borne after the Incarnacion of our lord.
ij. C. years And he composed and made wese a iiij. C. volumes of bookis among
which therben, viij, that been studied in such things as men desire to learn
of the art of medicine. his fader was right diligent to put him to the scole
and spendid much good upon him, and sent him in to the country of Asie in the
cite of Pargame. Athenes Rome and Alexa^drie, for to find the best maistres,
And there he learned physik geometry, gramayre, and other scienc^es And he
learned physik of a woman called cleopatre which taught him many good herbis.
And profitable to all manner of sekenesses. And he dwelled long in Egipte for
to know all these herbis And long after he deyed nygh the Cite of Escam, fast
by the grene see. in the marches of egypt. And in his youth he desired greatly
to kno we the science demonstratiue. And he was so enclyned to learn hit. that
when he departed from the scole with other childeren his mind was ever upon
that. that his master had taught him. whereof his fellows mokkyd him And axed
him why he would not play, and sport him with hem. To whom he said. I take as
great pleasaunce to record my lesson. as ye do in your pleyes. where of his
said felawes had great meruaylle. And said that his fader was happy to have
such a child. and to put him to the scole. that so well loved wysdom. his
fader was a great labourer. his grant fader was a souerayn maystre carpen ter.
and his grauntsirs fader was an harper and meter of lands which is the
science of geometry. Galyen was at Rome in the reign of king Octauyen which
reigned after Adrien and their he made a book of anascomie and many other
traityes. Some sey that great part of his bookis were brent and among hem some of
aristotilles bookys written with his hand and of danagoras and of. Andromache
and a book that he had made of trya^les for venyms. and taught the king of
greece to break the hills. and fell the vallees and to make pleyne weyes in
there countres and edyfied. Cytees and closed hem with big walls and also to
make ryueres run thorugh the towns And in other places. where need was And
to do all other things that were to the commone proffyt And in thoos days
they had more delectacion and pleasaunce to the good rule and governance of
their lordship than to the ease and pleasaunce of their own bodies. And their
hertis were much set to have good vnyuersitees and scoles of great clerks.
And specially in physyke And also they ordeigned in every Cuntre and region
certain folkis to gader herbs and to breng them to the maistres of physyke for
to preue them by experience And the same herbs thus approved were sent to the
kings closid and sealled with their sealles. to thentent that they should not
be changed and than the kings ordeigned hem for seek folkis And the said
Galyen said wysdom can not prouffit to a fool Ne wi^e to him that uses it not
And said Heaviness comes of the things passed. and thought of things to
comme And Galyen was four score year and. vij. when he said that many great
lords be Ignoraunte. When they be more enclyned to have fair horses and
rich gowns. and other Jewels. than to win good fame by good conditions And
said The physiciens were wont to have lordship and to govern seek folkis and
to cause them to do such things as were most expedient and profitable for
their health. and no seek man durst disobeye his physycien but should be
compelled to obey him wherefore they were the the sooner recovered and hole. And
now the leches been subgettis to the seek folkis And be compelled to handylle
hem easily. and softely And to give hem sweet drinckis though it avails hem
but litill, and there fore is there the more sekenesses, and longer vnhelth And
said, sometime thoo that were most sobre in their metis and lest drank wine
were best byloued and most praysid, and now the most glottons, and thoo that
oftenest ben dronken ar the most set by, and the rather set at great lords
bourdes, which yeueth evil exempell to other And said thou may well
Instruct all men, sauf only thoos that be without shame. And said, a man
that knows well him self has pouer ynowe to correct him self And said a man
may love him self so much, that he is deceived thereby for we se many that wene
and seem to be good, and ar contrary, And said, he is just that may both do
right or wrong and yet keep Justice. And ^e is wise and dyscrete that knows
that, that suffisith to be known and that does vertuousely to every creature
And said like as a seek man desires, not to depart from his phisicien, till
he has recouerid his health which he cowde not do by him self In like wise a
man ought to desire the company of a confessor for the health of his saul And
he saw a man that was greatly made of and cherisshed with kings for the
strenght of his body of whom he said, perauenture It shall cause him to repent
hit at last

IT was asked of one called protege, wherefore it was that one of his neighbors
made dye his here in blak, he ansuerd, by cause no man should ask to learn
sapience of him, and plures said, the more good that a fool has the more he
is foul. And it was axid of one aristan, when it was good to lie with a
woman, he ansuerd, at altymes when a man will hurt enpayre and feeble his body,
And yt was asked of dymicrates whereby he knew and perceived best his wit He
ansuerd In that, that I think, I understand and know but littylle And said
the wyseman that replieth is bettir than the fool that accords to every
porpose, And there was awyse man called azee, that was a prisonner to whom his
mays ter axed, of what kynrede he was He ansuerd enquere not of my lynage, but
axe of my prudence and conning, and was axed of another called, Sygonce. also
prisonner of one that would have bought him, whereto he was good. And he ansuerd
to be deliuerd, and another man axid of him If it ware good that he should bye
him. To whom he ansuerd I am nothing worth but ye or some other bye me, and a
another said he dispraisith him self. that dispraiseth all other, and yeueth
him self lawde. And there was one that prayed god to keep him from the danger
of his frendis And it was asked him, why he prayed not rather, that god should
keep him from his enemies than fro his fre^des And he ansuerd, for asmoche. as
I may well keep me from mine enemies in whom I have no trust, but I may not
keep me from my friend whom I trust. It was axed of awyseman which be the
most noble worldly things To whom he ansuerd, to love sapience, and to hate
fooly not to be aschamed to learn And it was axed of Archasa^ which be the
sciences that children should learn He ansuerd thoos that cause them to hate
ignorance in their age

And it was axed of another. why he would have no silver and he answered. for
asmoche as it comes to men by fortune and is kept by nygardship and couetise
and is often fo lish^ly spent and to evil use, And another said the love of a
fool shall be more noysant to the than his hatered. And there was a man that
said to another, I shall put my pain and dyligence to distroye the. He
ansuerd and said I shall enforce me to distroye thy malice. and appease thyn Ire
And there came bysore a king.iij. wysemen The one was a greek. The other a Jew.
And the therde a sarasyn. of whom the said king desirid. that ych of them would
utter some good and notable sentence. Than the Greek said I may well correct
and amend my thoughtis, but not my words. Than the Jew said I have meruayll
of them. that say things preyudiciall, where scilence were more profitable.
And the sarasyn said, I am master over my words / or it be pronunced / but
when it is spoken I am servant thereto. And It was axed one of them Who might
be called a king And he ansuerd. He that is not subgect to his own will And
assaron said to an euille payer that desired to borowe money of him, that he
would lene him none. for I know well that he could not displease him so much
in refusing the lone, as in axyng him his payeme^t again And said, The wysemen
speak with good deliberacion, and the fools speak without aduisement And
Teofrates said he is of good condition that reports and says good of other
folkis, and keeps secret their defaultes And it was axed of disconie what
thingis were most necessary for a man to keep him out of other folkis danger
And he answered If he be rich to live moderately. and if he be pouer to
labor dylygentely And Nycomake said there is not so good a doctor, as
discrecion, ne so good apre cher as ihe time, and he that correctith him by
other is right diligent and well occupied. And it is bettir to take exemple by
other than other to take yt by him And Thymetus said. meddle nor undertake not
with the governance of a fool. for he can not peyse nor conceive, what good
thou do to him, no more than a horse or other beestis take heed wheder they
be charged with gold or gravel, and yt was axed of Aathelyn. why men been
punisshed for their misdeeds. and not for their thoughts He said their
thoughts aren reserved only to god And (...) menyus said, there be.iij.
thyngis that a prince ought to eschew. The first is to much drynkyng. The
second is to much delectacion in musyke. And the therde do tyng of women, for
these.iij. thyngis put awey all his other good thoughts And said thought for
thingis lost and evil done. that can not be amended foryetyng thereof is the
medycine. And said troth is good to be said. and specially when it
prouffyteth every body. And said. If thou can not atteyn to the wysedom of
ancient men at the lest study and see there bookis and sum profyt thou
maeyst have thereby. And quidarius said I have mer uayle of thoos that blame so
much the foul thingis upon other and think hem fair upon hem self Dimycrates
said patience is a castelle imprenable and worship is the fruit of troth and
repentance is the fruit of haast* And it was axyd of dithomages, why the
rich men be more proud than wysemen, and he said for the wysemen known and
dreede our lord and understand what offense pride is unto him. but the rich
man takes none head thereto. And some axed of him which was better to have
sapience or richesse. And he said. there is no good richesse, but it be aswele
proffytable in the other world as in this. but sapie^ce is good for either
world. It was told Aristotle's that a man had said good of him. And he said I
shall recompense it, They axed him In what manner. And he said I will seie of him
in like wise And Octyphon said A man's wit can not at teyne to do things
above his understanding. but under he may execute like as ye may put no more
wyn in a pype than it co^teyneth but less ye may And Oricas said a man of
good understanding may well eschew great qua^tite of the infortunes of this
world. like as the good shipman knows by experience the weder likly to be in
the sea Samaron said I have lost all that I had, and therefore I fere no thing,
And said In all thy entreprises, have more trust in thy science than in thy
strength Gregorius said, The peyntours may well make pictures semblable to
things But the propre thing none can make, but only god and nature And the
king Armesys calling to him his brethren said to them, If ye wol repute and
take me, but only as your brother I will show you that I am your king, but and
ye take me for your king I shall show you, that ye ar my brethren And Tales
milostius said I have great meruay le of them that for wordely goods put hem
daily in perille by land and by water of death / aswele by fete of mercha^dise
as other wise, not knowing who shall succeed or depart their good after their
death, and might with less danger and pain learn Sapience. by the which there
good name and fame should be more lawded and praised, as it is said in a pro
uerbe, he is not deed whoos renomme and fame lastith Pyctagoras said, Science
has non enemies, but ignorant men And said clateringe of fools is
displeysir to wysemen, Like as the stenche of a kareyn is to them that smell
it, for the fool knows no more the fawte of his spe che than the kareyn does
of his stenche, And it was axed of another how men might keep him from much
drynking And he ansuerd in beholding well the great Incon uenientis that be
fall to dronken men. And Eugen^ said Many persons having reason and
understanding axen candell, and light for to ete their mete, but few persons
there be that kyndelle and sharp their wits in geting sciences for the
prouffyte of their saules. And Esecon sa^ de, death is displesaunt to all
persons sauff to the wysemen for sapience is the thing that most lettith the
fere of death And adrien said, If I should not love sapie^ce, but be cau seshe
dispraised death, yet should I love her And hermes said the great prouffyt that
I have found in sapience Is that I have composed and knyt all my thoughts in
one And quiramis said Ama^ may not be without thoughts than he ought to
remember the things ppetuel And said some think it good, that every body were
of like condycion but thinks the contrary, for then every man would command
and non obey. And demepates said when thou to mest in to a strange country,
harken disigently. after the langage and reason of the people And if thou find
thy self as wise or wyser then they. Endoctryne them. And else peyn thy self
to learn of their lore and doctrine rather than to besy the in other ydell and
wine occupacions A philosopher which was dysciple of Pytagoras said, He ought
not to be callid manly that will strike him. that can not defend him self And
Silde seide in all thingis the mean is best And to line warely is a great
tresure And to live wastfully causith pouerte And it is inpossible to please
all men there with And said. be not wroth with him that says troth. have
patience and good shall come to the therefore And said the wykkid lordis resemble
to the dronken men that in their dronkenship hate all fair and good virtues.
and louen all vices and filthys but when his dronkenship is passed he is
ashamed of his dedis And said. A king of good wit and discre cion ought to
be well content and pleased, when men offer him their service And ought in his
peace and prosperice to worship and cherisshe his knyghtis and men of werre and
to pay them well their wages. all be it he wene to have none enemies, for he
can not be sure, how sone he shall have need of his seruauntis And Melious
said He is not rich to whom the richesses lasten but litil. ne fre when they
may be lightly taken. But the laudable Rychesses len thoos. that duren
perpetuelly And Brakalyke said, The covetous man. has no rest. And the
nygard may never by Rich, And Phelype king of Macedone said to thoos that
counseylled him to bren the Cite of Athenes when he had won it. We should
than seem men dyscounfyt. where we have ouercomme our enemies And Archydes
said. The tunge may well make lesyngis. without thassent of the heart And
there fore it is convenient that the tongue and the heart be of one opinion And
said, Make no desir to god for that, that thou may well have, which is
suffisaunce but pray and require him that, that thou have may suffice the
Pitagoras said, he that believes not the resurection of man is like a dome
beeste that fallith for febilnes And said A man ought to do his werkis, by
deliberacion, and by great provision and not suddenly And said if thou will
excede thyn ennemy, call him no fool nor taletellar nor obiecte none of his
vices, for thy blamyng were to him agrete laud. And said he that would be
laudid of his work^s ought to have a true friend to report them And said keep
thy friend above all thingis And think what ^est thou shall have, if thou lake
a true friend, if thy house fall down, thou shall not lose thereby, but the
departing of the sto: nes and the tymbre, but if thou lose thy friend, thou
may ge^ thereby many enemies. And said when a man is in great Ire and wrath,
he may be likened to an house taken with fire in which, for the qua^tite of the
smoke and of the noise of the fiere, there may no man see ne here therein and may
also be likened to a ship in an outrageous tempest in the sea, which will not
be well condyted nor stered for the feruentnesse of the same tempest, and so
when a man's blood and courage is ste red with wrath and Ire, there may no
persuasions nor hol some counseil auail nor stere him to his proufit, and is so
curs sid that a litill spark of hit makith lightly a great fiere yet wrath is
many atyme pacefied by silence, as the fiere quenchith when the brondis be
taken awey, Also a dronken man can not perceive his dro^kenship til he be
sobre, and after when he sees another dronken, he knows thereby in what was
he was in Also the angered man returned by his patience and sees another
angry, may well perceive his own defawtes And said. We see commonly women
sonner angry than men, the seek men rather than the hole. the old man
lightlyer than the young. wherefore it is to be thought that wrath comes of
feblenesse of courage, And a maistre rebuked his clerck seeing, hold thy peace
bondemans sone And he ansuerd, I am not the less worth for my kynne But thou
art the wors for thy conditions And said A wyseman ought to say that, that is
convenient and sometime to here that, that is not to be said And said there is
no thing that greueth somoche thy friend, as to show him that thou have him
suspect And said Company and dele so with the people, that they wissche after
thy p^sense. when thou art absent, and that they lament and be wail thy death a
man wept when his sone was boren, And it was axid of him why he wept and
ought rather to be ioyefull. And he ansuerd I weep for my sone that goth now
to ward his death, And it was axed of him what manner people be leest behated And
he ansuerd thoo that may another help nor hurt and that does another good nor
harm, for the evil people hate the good, and the good hate the evil And said
Custume is harder to bre ke than nature. And said there ben, ij, manner of
abstine^ce One is with good will. and the other by force. which is not good.
And a another said, speak but profitable things nor ete no more than for thy
sustynau^ce, and seek to have nothing, but that is possible to be had. ne
complain the not of thy frendis, take non^ vnhope of that. that thou may not
amend Ask nothing of the covetous man, teache that thou can, give that thou
have. have patience in thyn aduersitees Do to be written in thy seal or in thy
signet / both good pe ple and bad shall end, and behold that sentence often.
And said. Short remembrance and hastenesse of speech makes many a time man
fail and err in his Judgment. And one Rebuked a wyseman, To the which the
wyseman said. Thou rebukes me not of all my vices. And It was axid of him,
why he would have no sone. he ansuerd I had lever be without. for when I
behold the grette love that a man has to his child and the grette peynes and
troubles he has to bring him up, and at last must lose him, that sorrow were
more to me, than the Joy. It was advised one that was going in a far vyage,
that he should not hold his Iurney, lest he dyed therein And he ansuerd That
death is all one to me, be it in other Countrees or at home And It was axid of
another what thing is not to be don though it be just and true And he ansuerd
a man ought not to praise him self. of any of his good dedis And said It is
sometime good to spare the sothe for to give hope to his enemies, and to save
his frendis from death for troth needs not always be said And it was axid of
him what thing was most delectable And he ansuerd health which is not sure to
be kept long in one degree and is most diffycile. And said. A man that desires
to come to any great well, ought not to leave it though he atteyn not thereto at
the first. but ought to continue his entreprise for it comes at one time. that
comes not at. C. And said the wyseman is not deceived by flateringis
deceyuable or sweet words, like as the snake, which is taken and eten by the
pecok in beholding the fair fethres of his tail. And awitty prince may help
him in his wars aswele with bad people as with good in diverse manners And said
If thou have a man. thou ought not therefore hate all his servants And said.
Though a man have bought abooke It compels him not to study and read therm
And said. Men ought to serve god in. x. maneris. that is to wit. to yield him
graces. for the benefetes that he has give him. to bear patiently his
aduersitees to speak trewly. to pay all that he promytteth, to Judge right
wisely to be temperate. to do good dedis after his pouer or he be required. to
worschipe his frendis. to foryeue the fawtes of his enemies. to desire nor do
any thing to any man but as he would be don to And one was blamed because he
had yeuen his silver to an euylle person. being in ne cessite^ And he said I
have not yeuen him my silver for his badnes. but by cause he was in necessite
And said excercite of diverse labors is health and delectacion of the body And
was axed him. sithen when he was waxed wise. And he ansuerd. sithen the time
that I began to disprayse and mystxyst my self. he herd a man rehearse lesingis
and untrue words. To whom he said. If thou hardest another fey. that thou
say. thou would not believe him wherefore thou maeyst well think noman
bileueth the And Aristophanus said. Victory of word is not victory in deed.
but the very victory is in the work. And Anaxagoras said A good wyseman
fereth not the death for wysedom governs his wit. his tongue and his voice
troth gydeth his heart and his will, pytie and mercy ben his frendis. seking
of wysemen ben his fete, his lordship is Justice. his reign is mesure. his
sword is grace, his wepen is peace, his arowe is salvation, his knyghthode is
the counseylle of wysemen. his ornamentis ben strength, his tresoure is
discipline. his love is the company of good people, his love and all his desir
is to fle sin and to serve and love god. And said A grette tresour is to
have frendis and is a noble affection, wherefore it is convenient to cherisshe
and keep hem well, and to win one by another as oon byrd draws many moo
into his company And a king axid of a wrse man whom he reputed able to be a
good Judge And he ans uerd He that is not deceived by flateries / tht is not
corrupt by yeftes, and is not deceived for fawte of discrecion And another
said Sclandrers ben wors than thieves, for thieves stele but the goods and
sclandrers take and distroye love And another said worship yeuen without cause
at last tourneth to shame. And another said It were better to be in company
and conuersaunt with a serpent. than with an evil woman. And said one ought to
doubt the subtilitees and crafts of his ennemy if he be wise, and if ^e be a
fool the dread his folies And another said the most liberal in this world is
he that reputeth for a great thing the good dedis that be don to him and that
he reputeth for litil that he has don to other and that holds him content
with that he has be he pouer or rich. and said the most nigard of al men is
he that axid inportunatly after he is ones denied and refused his asking, and
another said envy distroieth the world and freteth and wereth it as the filth
of a gonge does every swetnesse. and another said, like as no thing may be
written in a peyre of tables all ready written in, with out the first writing be
put out, All in like wise the virtues and noblesses may not be had in no body
withouten the vices and wrecchednesses been first put awey And another said
like as a man may not all at ones, by hold with one eye the sky, and with the
other the earth, In like wise a man may not arredye and dispose his wit to
virtues, and to vices to gyder And another said the right stedefaste love is
when the frendis ben of like con dicions, and if they be diverse or contrarious
uneath that love many long endure And said people ought to dowte their king and
him obey with fere and in love. And some axed him when the wit of man was
parfeyte And he said when that he speaks troth And another said the enui ous
hates the liberal, and the nygarde is wroth with that another spe^deth* And
another said al getting may not be justified ne health may not be by glotonie,
n^ fre^deship with decepcion ne noblesse with badde discipline ne love with pri
de ne justice with necessite ne rest of heart with envy ne wit te and
discrecion with vengeance nor process without conseill And another said trust
not a fool another for love ne for neyghbourship for it were as good to have to
thy neighbor ahouse take with fiere. and another said he is thy great e^nemy
whoos werkis ben hard bittre and noyeng to the and his words sweet and
curtoys, and another said the wysemen endure here al their lives lasting, and
after their death their good worcester kes shall laste^ in me^nes minds. and another
said co^sideracio^ of the end of the workis helps much to the good
co^clusio^ And another said, thou ought to love though thou be not loved And
another said afoole weneth ener that god has no thing well don nor employed,
but that he has ye uen him and seems that he could have made and ordeigned
this world bettir than god has don, how be it he can not goune his own
person only And another said be willing to give the nedy people, and in so
doing thou shall do service and ple aser to our lord god And another said
bettir is a man to hold his peace than to contrary and argue with a fool /
and is as good to have the ennemyte of bad people as their friend ship, and the
hard and the sharp life in well doing. is bettir than the swettest in doing
evil dedis, and it is bettir to be without fame than to have hit bad, and
pouerte is bettir than the riches of keytyues. and the pour man without vices
is bettir than the rich man that is worshipped for his sins And ano there
said It were bettir not to know an inuiste king than to be his co^seyllour,
or next in his grace And another said If thou give for to have fame only thereby
that is not life ralite for thou do it but forthyn own auayse And ano there
said He is of no laudable life that is not this day as good or bettir* as he was
the day passed And another said thou shall not mow have that. that thou
desire without that thou bear pacie^tly the greues that thou would not
have And another said a man shall be in thy hands as long as he shall trust the
And it was axid of a wysema^, why he desired not to have a sone, he ansuerd by
cause that I have had enough a do for to chastise my body and to adresse my
soul without having any other person to rule or teache And it was axid of him,
who was he that most repents him in this world. And he answered. The wyseman
at his death, by cause that he has not wrought always after sapi ence and he
that has don good to an unkind man. And it was axed of him, what thing
e^cresed the law He ansuerd troth. And what sustyneth troth, Reason and
wit and whereby is wit governed, by keeping of the tongue, and how is the
tongue kept, with patience, what causes patience deed of god. and what causes
dred of god. Often to speak and remember death, and to considere and know his
fraylnes And other said superfluyte makes the body seek wyn troublith the
wit, wrath is contrary to wysedom, but tem perance conforteth the heart, and
put aweye al heuinesse and causith health. And said how be it that a wise man
be of low kynred yet is he noble, and though he be astranger he should be
worshipped, and though he be pouer yet the people have need of him And auother
said he that endures and takes no pain in his youth restith him not in his
age. And ano there said the error of a fool yeueth litille vest to his
thoughtis. And another said the tongue of adiscrete man is in his heart and the
heart of a fool is in his tongue, And a another said not withstanding thy
nature use ever more good and laudable co^dicions And another said a man ought
co^tinuelly to enquere what men say of him and where in they lawde him and where
in they blame him if they lawde him he to give that cause continuelly without
pride thereof and if they blame him, he to beware from falling any more in to
that caas and not to hate hem for their auertissement And said he is, wise
that is humble and meke in his might and pouoir. And when he is in great astate
to dysprayse the world, and is attemperate in great auctorite. And one desired
of a wyseman to tell him the difference bytwyx this world and the other world.
And he ansuerd. this world is Adreme, And the other world is a thing a wa ked
And another said. Bettir is to speak well than to keep scilence. and bettir to
keep silence than to speak evil And another said I have acompayned me with the
rich men and have seen their rich arraye clothing and other thingis better
than mine were. whereof I had such envy and mesan^o lie that I might have no
rest in my self, Than I acompayned me with pouer men, like as I was, and than
I was satisfied and in peace And another said like as a man that is in a derke
kaue may not se his propre figure. In like wise the soul that is not clean nor
pure may not clearly se perceive ne know the true and perfytte goodenesse of
almighty god And another said like as the children when they be borne in pain
and entered into this world reioysse hem after when they be great, and feel the
delices and eases thereof, In like wise men be sorrowful when they shall dye. yet
if they have lived well. they go after in to a (...) world. where they than
shall resioysse them perpetually And another said, As the goodenesse of wysemen
goth eumore in a mending In like wise goth the malices of the fools every day
in empayring And another said If thou correct a wysema^, he shall thank the
therefore, and if thou teache a fool. he shall dyspreyse the And said He is thy
verray friend that in thy necessite offerith him self and all his goods unto
the And another said the governor of a wyseman is patience and the goueruour
of a fool is pride. And another said a man that is slowthfull in his werkis is
co^monely envious of the well of other men And another said It is good
toenquere twies of things unknown, for the first question is of will, and
the second is of discrecion And another said troth is gods messager
wherefore she must be worshipped for the love of her master And another said,
he that multiplieth his temporal goods dyminueth his espu^alles. And another
said thoos that believe and dread god stedfastlye have not delectacion but
only in him and in his werkis And another said the most laudable werkis that
one may do is to obey the maundeme^tes and pleaser of our lord god, and the
work of the body Ioigned to the work of the heart is more laudable than the
work of the heart only And another said the euile creatures been wors than
serpents lions or caraynes, And in like wise as upon the earth, there is
nothing bettir than the good creatures Right so there is no thing wors than
thoos that be wykked. And another said he that takes upon him higher astate,
than to him bilongith, puts great peyn to be evil spoken of And a another
said he that will have rest in his life, ought to keep him from. iiij.
occasions, the first is that he ought not to be wroth though some creature live,
which he would have deed second is if some dye which he would have alive. the
therde is. if he has not that, that he desires. and the fourth is. if he see
that fortune raise and bring up somother of lower degree than he is And another
said to entermedle and dele litille with wordely werkis is a thing that may
best keep a man from all inconuenientis. And another said the more a wyseman
is alone the greter is his Joy be it day or night And another said the evil
disposed king is like a caraygne tht makes the earth stenke about it, and the
good king is like the fayer re^nyng ryuire that is prouffita ble to the
creatures And another said The wyseme^ ar not content to prouffite only them
self, but semblably do aua^tage to other, and the fools hurt not only them
self, but rather take great labor to hurt and trouble other folks And
another said, a fool for a litill thing exposes him ^ightly to fortune. And
said thou may not be so well arrayed nor be seen, as with troth, And
another said absteynyng from wrath and couetise is a laudable thing aswele in
this world, as in the other And another said, he that yeueth conseyle and
praysith it him self would feyn be callid (...) And another said let not to do
well though thy good dedis ben not known, for well doing is so good of hit
self that it shall be willable enough to the att^ last And another sai de, a man
of good discrecion, ought not to exercise him in things inpossible, ne say
things not willable, ^e spend more than his wynnyng is, ne promette more,
than he may fullfille And another said, a man may have but pain and labor in
this world And said he that eteth not shall dye for hungre, and if he eteth more
than enough he shall be seek wherefore it is a difficile thing to a man to be long
in health And another seide trust him not that forswerith his fe^th for worldely
things And another said Idelnesse eng^dreth ig norau^ce, and ignorance
enge^dreth error. And another said thou shall fi^de eueri where clothing mete,
and place for to dwell in if thou be ought, but and that suffiseth the not tht
is to the necessary, thou shall be subgect to couetise, and yet thou shall
lakke thy desir And another said In long sleping is no proffite, but harm is
to use it, and a man ought to beware that he dispe^de not half his life in
Idelnesse, And another said the good soul, wol have no rest in this world
than he that wol have a good soul, ought to beware of to much rest, And
another said beware of the company of a liar in all thy werkis, be they in
great auctorite or in small And another said he that loves the with feynt love
and for wordely thingis shall hate the in like wise, but he that loves the for
the perpetuel we le shall grow eumore in thy love. And another said goune the
so well that thou keep the from evil doing, and suffice the with the good
dedis that thou shall do beside, And another said he that will wite whethir his
soul be noble and clean. or foul and corrupt, he ought to co^sidere his
disectacio^ and his conscience, and if he delyteth him in doing good virtues
and noble thi^gis without harm, than his soul is clean and noble, and if he
delyteth him in doing foul and tra^sitorie things and of no value than his
soul is foul, for every thing resioyeth with hies semblable, the good with
the good, and the evil with the evil And another said, he is happy that
goes the right wey, for he finds so^ner thereby the place whedir he would go,
and he that gooth out of his weye / the more he gooth, the ferther he is
behind And it was axid of a wyseman what was per^aytte folly, he ansuerd to
think to com to a good astate and prosperity by bad werkis, to love falshed and
hate troth, to take delecta cio^ in richesses, and to trust every man. and it
was axid of him what is the sign of litil forsight and litill knowledge, he
ansuerd one to give trust where he has been deceived. And suffice you with the
tra^slacio^ of the sayngis of these philosopheres

HEre ends the book named the dictes or sayengis of the philosophres
enprynted. by me william Caxton at westmestre the year of our lord. M. CCCC.
Lxx vij. Which book is late translated out of Frenshe into englyssh. by the
Noble and puissant lord Lord Antone Earl of Ryuyers lord of Scales and of the
I Will of wight, Defendour and directour of the siege apostolic, for our holy
Fader the. Pope in this Royame of England and Governor of my lord Prince of
wales And It is so that at such time as he had accomplysshid this said work,
it liked him to send it to me in certain quayers to over see, which forthwith
I saw and fond therein many great. notable. and wise sayengis of the
philosophres Acordyng unto the books made in fre^she which I had often before
redd But certainly I had seen none in englissh til that time And so afterward I
came unto my said lord and told him how I had red and seen his book And that
he had don a meritory deed in the labor of the translacion thereof in to our
englissh tunge, wherein he had deseruid a singular lawde and thank Then my
said lord desired me to ouersee it and where as I should find fault to correct
it wherein I answered unto his lordship, that I could not amend it But if I
should so presume I might apaire it For it was right well and connygly made and
translated into right good and fair englissh, Not withstondyng he willed me to
ouersee it and shewid me dyuerce things which as him seemed might be left out
as diuerce lettres missiues sent from Alisander to darius and aristotle and
each to other. which lettres were lityll appertinent unto the dyctes and
sayenges aforsayd for as much as they specifye of other matters, And also
desired me that don to put the said book in enprinte. And thus obeyng his
request and commandment I have put me in deuoyr to ouersee this his said book
and beholden as nygh as I could how It accords with thorigynal being in
frensh And I find nothing discordaunt therein. Sauf only in the dyctes and
sayengys of Socrates, Wherein I find that my said lord has left out certain
and dyuerce conclusions towchyng wymen, Whereof I meruaille that my said lord
has not wreton them. ne what has meuyd him so to do Ne what cause he had at
that time. But I suppose that some fair lady has desired him to leave it out of
his book* Or ellyes he was amerous on sum noble lady. for whoos love he would
not set it in his book, or ellis for the very affeccion love and good will
that he has unto all ladies and Gentylwomen. he thought that Socrates spared
the sothe And wrote of wymen more than truth. which I can not think that so
true a man and so noble a Phylosophre as Socrates was should write other wise
than troth For If he had made fawte in writing of wymen. He ought not ne
should not be believed in his other dictes and sayings. But I apperceyue that
my said lord knows verily that such defautes ben not had ne founden in the
wymen born and dwelling in these parties ne Regyons of the world. Socrates was
a Greek boren in a far Contre from hens. Which contre is all of othere
condycions than this is. And men and wymen of other nature than they ben here
in this contre For I wot well. of what someuer condition women ben in Greece.
the women of this contre ben right good, wise, playsant, humble, discrete,
sobre, chaste, obedyent to their husbon dis, true, secret, steadfast, ever
besy, and never idle, Attemperat in speking, and virtuous in all their werkis
or at lest should be so, For which causes so euydent my said lord as I
suppose thought it was not of necessite to set in his book the saiengis of
his Auctor socrates touching women But for as much as I had coma^dement of my
said lord to correct and amend where as I should find fawte and other find
I none sauf that he has left out these dictes and saynges of the women of
Greece, Therefore in accomplishing his coma^dement for as much as I am not in
certain wheder it was in my lordis copye or not. or ellis perauenture that the
wind had blow over the leef, at the time of trans lacion of his book, I
purpose to write tho same saynges of that Greek Socrates, which wrote of tho
women of greece and nothing of them of this Royame, whom I suppose he never
knew, For if he had I dar plainly say that he would have reserved them
inespeciall in his said dictes Always not presumyng to put and set them in my
said lords book, but inthende aparte in the rehersayll of the werkis humbly
requiryng all them that shall read this little rehersayll that if they find
any fault tarette it to Socrates and not to me which writes as here after
follows.
SOcrates said That women ben thapparaylles to cacche men, but they take none
but them that will be pouer, or ellis them that know hem not And he said that
there is none so great empeshement unto a man as ignorance. and women And he
saw a woman that bare fire, of whom he said that the hotter bare the colder

And he saw a woman seek. of whom he said that the evil restyth and dwellyth
with the evil And he saw a woman brought to the Justice. and many other wymen
followed her weeping. of whom he said. the evil ben sorry and angry by cause the
evil shall perisshe. And he saw a Iong maid that learned to write, of whom he
said. that me^ multiplied evil upon evil And said that the Ignorance of a
man is known in three things. That is to wete When he has no thought to use
reason, When he can not refrain his couetises, And when he is governed by the
conceill of wymen in that he knows that they know not. And he said unto his
discyples, Will ye that I enseygne and teache you, how ye shall mow escape
from all euille And they ansuerd, ye, And then he said to them For what
someuer thing that it be. keep you and be well ware that ye obey not to wymen,
Who ansuerd to him again: And what sayist thou by our good moders and of our
susters. He said to hem. Suffice you. with that I have said to you, For all
ben semblable in malice. And he said. who someuer will acquere and get
science. late him never put him in the governance of a woman. And he saw a
woman that made her fresshe and gaye. to whom he said, Thou resemblest the
fire For the more wode is leyde to the fire the more wole it brenne. And the
gretter is the hete And on a time one axid him, what him seemed of wymen. He
ansuerd That the wymen resemble unto a Tree called Edelfla Which is the fairest
tree to be hold and see that may be* But within it is full of venym. And they
said to him and demanded wherefore he blamed so wymen. and that he him self had
not comen into this world ne none other men also with out hem, He ansuerd.
The woman is like unto a Tree named Chassoygnet. on which tree there ben many
things sharp and pryckyng. which hurt and pryek them that approach unto hit
And yet nevertheless that same tree brings forth good dates and sweet. And
they demanded him. why he fled from the wymen. And he ansuerde For as much as
I see them flee and eschew the good and commonly do evil And a woman said to
him. wylt thou have any other woman than me And he ansuerd to her* Art not
thou ashamed toffre thy self to him. that demands nor desires the not.

LO these ben the dictes and sayengis of the philosophre Socrates which he
wrote in his book And certainly he wrote no worse than a fore is rehearsed And
for asmoche as it is acordau^t. that his dyctes and sayengis should be had as
well as others therefore I have set te it in the end of this book* And also sum
persons perauenture that have red this book in frensshe would have arette a
grette defaulte in me that I had not do my deuoir in visiting and ouerseyng of
my lords book acording to his desire. And sum other also happily might have
supposed that Socrates had wreton much more ylle of women than here a fore is
specified, wherefore in satisfieng of all parties and also for excuse of the
said socrates I have set these said dyctes and sayengis a part in the end
of this book, to thentent that if my said lord or any other person what
someuer he or she be that shall read or here it, that If they be not well plesyd
with all that they with a pen race it out or else rent the leef out of
the book, Humbly requyryng and besechyng my said lord to take no displaysir on
me so pre sumyng but to perdone where as he shall find fault, and that it
plese him to take the labor of thenpryntyng in gre and thank, which gladly
have don my dyligence in thaccomplisshyng of his desire and commandment, In
which I am bounden so to do for the good reward that I have resseyuyd of his
said lordship, Whom I beseech Almighty god tencrece and to continue in his
virtuous disposicion in this world. And after this life to live euerlastyngly in
heaven.

Amen.
Et sic est finis.
Thus ends this book of the dictes and notable wise sayenges of the
philosophers late translated and drawn out of frenshe into our englisshe tongue
by my forseide lord Therle of Ryuers and lord Skales. and by his commandment
set in form and emprynted in this manner as ye may here in this book see
Which was fynisshed the xviij. day of the month of Nouembre. and the
seuenteth year of the regne of king Edward the. fourth.


