printer's or publisher's device Aedes Christi in Academia Oxoniensi


THE SECOND PART OF A PLAIN DISCOVRSE OF AN UNLETTERED CHRISTIAN, WHEREIN BY
WAY OF demonstration he shows what the reasons be which he does ground
upon, in refusing conformity to kneeling in the act of receiving the Lords
Supper. *

By Tho. Dighton. Gent.

PSALM. 119. 113. I hate vain inventions, but thy law do I love. Printed in
the year 1619.

TO ALL FAITHFVL MINISTERS AND CHRISTIANS WHO ARE persuaded of the lawfulnes of
kneeling in the act of receiving the Lords Supper; grace in Christ Jesus, and
satisfaction by these presents.
ALL this whole world and all the learning and wisdom thereof lies in wickedness
or darkness, 1. Ioh. 5. 19
and cannot possibly discern or judge and find out whether any gesture be
indifferent, Ephesians. 5. 8.
or if they were, which is the fittest gesture: for he that walks in darkness
knows not whither he goes, Ioh. 12. 35.
whither he conform to a right gesture or to a wrong it is all oneto him.
Harken not then to the arguments or reasons of Darkness or of flesh and blood
(though all the chosen chariots of Egypt go before the^) but let us go to the
light, not in the doctrine only, but in the Ceremony also, not in the
substance only, but in the gesture also, for no error may be conformed unto in
either: and whatsoever is not warranted by the light, must needs be darkness;
yea if it come not from the truth, of necessity it is erroneous and dangerous,
and therefore not to be conformed unto. If then Christ be the light of the
world, Ioh. 8. 12.
and his word be the only truth in the world, Ioh. 17. 17.
then whosoever follows not Christ in the gesture, according to the testimony
of the word, walks in darkness and conformes to error therein. Howsoever
therefore I do with all thankfulness to God, and due respect of you,
confess and acknowledge that I do highly reverence you with Peter: yet I do
avow in the sight of God, and of all his Churches, that all those are worthy to
be blamed, Gal. 2. 11.
who either justify or approve conformity to kneeling in that manner and order
as it is urged, (and by the meaner or poorer sort refused) or especially that
press it with such violence, as if they would take it by force: yea herein I
am bold through Christ, to resist you, because I know, Whosoever (be his gifts
never so excellent and admirable) does any thing (in substance or in ceremony
presumptnously against the apparent practice of the Apostolical primitive
Churches, Numb. 15. 30
grounded in the evidence of the spirit, upon the plain testimony of the
inspired Scriptures, being approved by Christ himself in the very institution,
and have no warrant from the word of God for their so doing, do directly
blaspheme the Lord; which place, that I be not censured to abuse, or any other
at any time upon this occasion mentioned by me, this once for always, I do in
all humility desire the godly to consider and remember, that howsoever every
place of Scripture has a particular intendment or special respect, yet in the
large extent thereof (as it has relation unto all ages, Churches, and persons)
there is also, and that warrantably a more general drift and purpose directly
intended: though therefore I press them not in that special or particular
intent, yet if according to the true Analogy of faith, I use and urge them in
the larger sense, and respective meaning of the Holy Ghost, I hope I may
sasely, yea in the assurance of faith justify, that I err not from the direct
purpose of the spirit of truth. As for example, the Holy Ghost says, that not
to hear the the voice of Christ even in all things, heb. 3 13. 15 with Act. 3.
22.
will harden the heart. Whence I conclude from the large extent and general
scope of these places. That not to hear and regard the word of God (which is
the voice of Christ) which plainly declares that Christ has approved a
table gesture, and no other, and yet to declare and teach the people that any
gesture ordained by the Church, and in particular this in question, is lawful
and ought only to be conformed to, or in cases of extremity may be undergone
as a burden, though Christ have given no warrant for it, I say such positions
and courses taken and maintained, will harden the wisest, most learned, best
disposed, and most zealous heart or hearts of the sincerest teachers and
professors in the best reformed Churches in the world. Again, it is said, When
Christ comes he will tell us all things, Ioh. 4. 25.
the particular intent of this place concerns the public worship of God;
from the larger and general scope whereof, I hold it a most warrantable
conclusion, that Christ in his word has certainly made known what gesture we
may conform to in the act of receiving the Lords Supper (being essentially
necessary in this part of his worship) but in the whole Scrip. Christ has not
given approbation to any but a Table Gesture: therefore no other may be
conformed unto. For these things were not written for them of those times
only, To. 4. 23. ver. 24.
but for us also: yea for all the churches to the end of the world.

Another thing I also desire not to be mistaken in, namely that though I do
verily believe and therefore confidently affirm, that Conformity to any
gesture of religious use in the worship of God, being not warranted by the
word, is absolutely unlawful and sinful, yet do I not thereby Judge, or hold
all Conformitants, to be vile and wicked persons: Phil. 2. 13.
or that such Congregations are not the true Churches of Christ, for I know, it
is God which works both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure, as
he sees best, not alike at all times, nor to all persons, but some shall
remain ignorant of some truths (yet not to be therefore separated from. ps.
119. 113.
Others hate all Inventions (yet not therefore to be run after as if they were
the only true churches, and salvation no where else to be found) some I say
ignorantly conform to error, others according unto knowledge abhor and hate
all false ways, ps. 119. 104. 120.
and yet both of these the true Churches and faithful servants of God. Only
my desire before the Lord is to strip hypocrites of that conceit which they
have of their wisdom, learning, authority, and great estimation which they
have purchased or obtained in the world, for nature, or the natural man,
putting on the show of grace, or the name and title of the spiritual man (as
the Ass in the lions skin) is presently conceated, that forthwith they are
Canonically holy, spiritual, or divine, because such traditionall titles, are
successiuoly compounded for the^ (though none in the world be more lycentious
and profane then even some of the^) yea and that in these outward forms of
Godliness divised by man for Gods divine worship and service, the very
substance of Religion so far as it is outward and subject to sense, does in a
special or principal part consist: for they hold, that no man need or ought
to make question, but that these humane inventions being performed (not in
superstition but in a good Intention,) are most acceptable and well pleasing
unto God, and therefore ought of very conscience to be conformed unto. In
which respect I do strive gladly to drive them from this deceitful and
conceited kind of pleading, by a Judicial proceeding to the trial of their
faith, for so shall we quickly discern what they are, Infidels or
Unbelievers; for profession of the truth (though never so fundamental) no nor
practice of it also, makes not a true believer, though a true professor, for
even that man of sin himself, and many other of like ambitious humor, know
and acknowledge, profess and practice many excellent truths; Heb. 4. 2. with
3. 19.
but faith only puts the difference, and proves who is for the Lord, and who
bolds on the other side against him. What action or ceremony then soever of
Religious use is not conformed unto in faith, is conformed to in infidelity,
unless we must admit of Agrippa his almost a Christian, Act. 26. 28.
half faithful, half infidel, half Papist half Protestant, half of God
and half of the Devil, half Turk and half Christian: not that I aim at
any other perfection but that which is Evangelicall, even sincerity and truth
in all things; Romans 11. 32
but to declare that all are shut up under unbelief, though they be never so
wise and learned, great and many, till they be enlightened. But these men say
and swear, they have faith, yea a justifying, living, and saving faith, as
well as the best of them all, and in their conformity do live and walk
thereby. This is soon said, but not so soon proved. Let us therefore come to
the trial: Faith consists not in good opinion, or well meaning, or preventing
inconveniences. For though I intend in kneeling before an image, only to
stir up my heart to devotion, that I may with greater feeling and fervency
call upon God in the confession of my sins, and craving pardon for the same;
yet this is not done in faith, no though I find that in my conceit such effect
therein, even as I did purpose and desire; for nothing that is in nature, as
wisdom, reason, sense, discretion, judgment, experience, or whatsoever can
be by any possible means, in any respect the true object of saving faith (for
the learned and devout of all nations have these, and yet all in the true
churches (though true professors) have not faith) but only the word of God is
the object of faith, yea true and saving faith in all things of holy and
religious use in the divine service of God, rejects not only what is forbidden
therein, but conformes to no thing but what in the evidence of the spirit is
plainly grounded on the Scriptures: for without the warrant and commandment of
the word, subscription to or approbation of any thing of divine use cannot be
an act of the faith of Gods elect, but of some other counterfeit faith,
transformed I confess into the likeness or appearance thereof, which (like
Will with wispe, ar Megg with Lanthorn, or some other hob-goblin with a false
light) having dazzled their sight, or darkened their judgment, will by degrees
lead them into the boggs and quagmires of Armenius his inherent grace,
free will, or other like deceivable fables, and damnable errors. So that this
is not an argument of true faith, if I do not conform, the people will be
untaught, or the church overtbrowne, and the like, or it is not forbidden in
the scripture, therefore though it be of religious use in the worship of God,
and be only devised by man, yet thou may, yea being commanded, ought to
conform unto it: but directly it is a plain doctrine of infidelity. For
whereon I pray you is faith grounded in such a case, but only upon mere and
wild uncertainty (a sea whereof this sluice will open.) As therefore it is the
property of fools to doubt of any thing which the Scriptures teach; Luke 24. 25
so it must needs be a special branch of infidelity, in matters of conformity
to things of religious use in Gods public worship, to ground our faith
therein (for hope they will not say but they do it in faith) on any thing but
the sacred Scriptures.

Now the Word tells us plainly that a table gesture was sanctified by our
Lord in the institution, are they not fools then (by Christ's own doom) who
will not believe that it is a good and boly gesture, and that our faith in
co^forming thereto is plainly grounded on the scriptures? and seeing no other
gesture is warranted by the Scripture, is not the doctrine of conformity to
any other whatsoever our faith therein being grounded on uncertainty a direct
doctrine of Infidelity? may not the Evangelists justly cry out, Lord who has
believed our Report? Esa. 53. 1.
why so I pray you will some say, what do they report? even this, that in the
first institution by Christ him self the sacramental gesture in the act of
taking or receving the holy bread and wine, was only a table gesture and no
other will the professing and believing many other truths, though thou
willfuly (against the plane ouidence of the truth) refuse to believe this, ever
prove the to be a sound Christian; has Christ honored a table gesture, and
do men only honor another gesture? will you say then conformity to them is an
action of faith and yet refuse thereby that gesture which Christ by his
presence and approbation honored? is not this to love the praise of men (or
that which men praise) more then the praise of God? Ioh. 12. 43.
(or that which his word commends) true it is I know, that men do prefer
those that conform unto them, and will not Christ do so also? Yea, is it not
a mark of infidelity to receive such honor one of another, Ioh. 5. 44.
and seek not the honor that comes from God alone? Will you fear the
displeasure of man if you do not conform? and will you not fear the
displeasure of God if you do not conform to his gesture in the act of
receiving? I say his gesture, for so none can deny but it was in the
institution, I mean of his direct appoynting; and did he ever cashiere it? or
did his Apostles or true churches ever dislike or refuse it? Take heed
therefore, for he that believes not every place of Scripture, being made
known unto him, will not be bound to be subject to any scripture further then
he lusts or likes: verse. 47.
They that will not believe Moses or his writings, will not believe the
doctrines or practice of Christ himself; reject one place wittingly, and in
effect thou renouncest all. Ioh. 4. 50.
Let us then believe the word of Jesus in this controversy; he tells us by the
Scripture, that a table gesture is a holy gesture, of divine institution; let
us never therefore conform to any other without like warrant. Eccles. 3. 14.
For whatsoever he has done, it shall be for ever (unless himself alter it)
to it can no man add (such deepnesse of learning is the very height of dark
ignorance) from it can none diminish (to assume such power is direct
presumption. Has Christ sanctified a Table Gesture? psalm. 95.
Come let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker, even
give this honor of devising his own worship and service, both in matter and
manner, both in substance and order to him only and to non other: for his is
the kingdom, in devising his own service; and the power, in making it
effectual to his church; and the glory, of praise and honor for making known
and exhibiting his eternal love thereby, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Egyptians by reason of the grievous plagues which God sent amongst them,
were content to let Israel go, so that they would leave their hoofes or
cattle behind them: We have thrust the Egyptians out, let us send their
hoofes after them, lest they come to fetch them, and God by a more grievous
hand then ever yet we felt, make us willing through experience of their blouddy
cruelty to be rid of all their Relics and Remainders whatsoever.

ROMANS 1. 16. I Am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ says the Apostle; nor I
of that gesture, which the Gospel mentions that our Savior Christ approved in
the Institution of his Supper.

Philip. 3. 17. Be followers of me and look on them which walk so as ye have
us for an exsample.

1. Cor. 11. 1. Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ

But Christ and all his discriples used a table gesture, and therefore unless our
adversaries can prove that they used some other gesture we may not follow or
conform to any other, then a table gesture in the act of receaving.

1. Cor. 3. 11. For other foundation can no man lay then that which is laid
which is Jesus Christ,

We have this foundation for the elements and for the gesture, to conform
therefore to other elements or another gesture is to lay another foundation and
so to follow some other Christ then our Christ or his Apostles, but we have not
so learned Christ.

Hebr. 4. 14. Seeing then we have such an high priest, let us hold fast our
profession.

Even profess him to be our high priest as well in the gesture as in the
elements, in the ceremony as well as in the substance.

1. Cor. 11. 24. Do this in remembrance of me. Master speak thou this to us
also?

All actions of Institution are for Imitation.

1. Ioh. 1. 6. 7. If we say we have fellowship with him and walk in darkness (
whether it be in substance or in ceremony) we lie and do not truly.

1. Ioh. 2. 4. He that says I know him and keeps not his commandments is a
liar, and the truth is not in him.

Yea but how may we know in this controversy what his commandment is?

Verse. 5. He that keeps his word, in him is the love of God perfect indeed:
hereby we know that we are in him. And hereby we know and are assured our
reverent pastors are of him and our godly brethren are in him because they keep
his commandments, and refuse Conformity to nothing but what is not in his word
nor grounded thereon* whosoever therefore professes or says he remains in
him ought even so to walk (both in substance and in Ceremony) as he has
walked. Verse. 6. and so have they done in these Controversies, never broaching
or reviving any new commandment, but the old which was from the beginning,
even the Word, verse. 7. which directs always to the institution, and never so
much as inferrer any kind of alteration from the same.

Math. 12. 50. Whosoever does the will of my father which is in heaven, the
same is my brother, and sister and mother. Christ preferres spiritual kindred
before carnal, because they hear and obey the word of God. And we prefer
this spiritual gesture of the table, being according to the Scriptures, and
warranted by Christ's own practice in the institution, before that carnal
gesture of kneeling having no warrant from scripture, and therefore cannot be
the will of our father which is in heaven.

Accept my willing endeavors herein good Reader, choosing rather to expose my
self the malice of the ambitious, then the light of this truth shall not be
maintained. All that love the truth, help me with your prayers.

DEMONSTRATIVE REASONS AGAINST conformity to kneeling in the act of receiving
the Lords Supper.
HAVE you not read in the Scripture, The stone which the Builders refused, is
become the head of the corner? And must a Table Gesture, which Christ himself,
and all his Apostles in the first institution used, as the very sole foundation
for all future ages to build upon, be therefore now rejected, and another
conformed unto (as far more seemly and significant) because it pleases
learned and wise men of special note and eminency in the Church (by
profession and reputation even chief pillars and arch-builders) to lay that
imputation upon it, and so by their canons to conclude and determine against
it? I beseech you rather to to consider, whether this disgraceful foundation
thus openly laid upon the divine doctrine of the holy ceremony, presage not
(though they pretend the contrary) some evil intendment closely to deprave and
corrupt by degrees the very heavenly substance. Look to their positions,
observe their discourses, compare their pretenses and practices together, and
so proceed to sentence.

May any thing appropriated to religious use in the public worship of God, be
profane or carnal? And are not the best devised devotions of the holiest and
devoutest persons that ever were, or ever possibly can be, of this very nature?
yea, does not the Scripture usually set in direct opposition unto God himself,
whatsoever being essentially necessary in his worship (as a gesture in the act
of receiving is) which is not ordained by God, or warranted by his word?
stiling them with the titles of Novelty and Innovation, or devises,
imaginations of their own hearts, new gods, strange or other gods, etc. not
that ever thereby (in the Church especially) any other Deity was once
imagined, or any foundation concerning the doctrine of the blessed Trinity,
shaken or controverted: but, though they held the doctrine of the inward
substance sound, as Jeroboam did, yet in the outward actions and ceremonies of
his worship, or outward manner of his service they erred, not only from the
particular directions of the ceremonial law, but from the general scope of
the second commandment, viz. to serve God only as he requires in his word.

Gods worship is either inward or outward: that concerns the soul and is
contained in the first commandment: this pertaines to the bodily exercises,
and is taught in the doctrines appertaining to the second commandment,
forbidding all other not required therein; not that these may be separated,
though distinguished: for as soul and body make an entire person, so do these
two make an entire worship, and neither of them can in this world be performed
alone: for as the inward is the life and soul of the outward, so the outward
is the instrument of the soul to express the inward; yea both these without
those affections of the third commandment, even holiness to the Lord, are in
vain; and all three (if possibly that can be) without a conscionable
observation of the Sabbath, are abominable. Now as all the inward graces of
the first commandment, are the mere and free gifts of God, and not at a man's
command: so all things essentially necessary in his outward worship (as a
gesture in the act of receiving the Sacrament is) are Gods instruments for the
edification of his Church, even his conduits to convey those inward graces by:
which supernatural virtue, or divine property they cannot possibly have from
the canons or precepts of men (though all the Christian world join together
therein) but only from the free will of God in making choice of them, and so
appointing and ordaining them to such holy ends and purposes. As therefore
nothing ought to be conformed unto in his outward worship, but what is for
edification: so nothing can possibly be for edification in any degree or
respect, but what the Lord himself has appointed for that use and purpose.
Either then kneeling for matter and manner as it is urged, is for edification
(as indeed is pretended) or else it may not be conformed unto: but for
edification it cannot be, unless God have commanded it; and therefore either
prove by the word, that God has commanded it in the act of receiving, or else
(though he have commanded it in other parts of his worship, and though you say
it is not forbidden in this) it is a humane device (which never edifies but
destroys) and therefore of absolute necessity to conform thereto in the act
of receiving the L. Supper, is sin.

The Jews silled the outward worship of God with actions, and ceremonies
devised by them selves or by some other bordring people whose affinity they
desired and whose conversion they perhapps intended not having the least
thought of setting up another God; or of declining from the true God, but to
stir up them selves with greater zeal and devotion to serve the Lord their
God and to draw others also to join therein with them. Yet, did not this turn
still to their confusion and many times to the overthrow of their state? The
Papists with the same consideration have ordained new sacraments, and others in
like humane boldness ordain new sacramentals or ceremonies in the administration
of the true sacraments, you refuse conformity to theirs, justly as you speak
because they are additions to the word, and may we conform to yours without
good warrant from the word? you Conclude against them that of necessity the
word must come to the elements, to prove and make it plain that God has
ordained these very visible signs to be his instruments of grace for the
edification of his Church, or else (though they have all the devoutest
significations that man can devise) there can be no sacrament, and have your
ceremonial signs such a supreme prerogative as without direct warrant from
the word they ought ipso facto to be conformed unto? Indeed if a Real presence
(which in the scriptures sense we acknowledge) had destroyed the nature as it
changes the use, of the elements then the breaden gesture, or the gesture of
kneeling used to the breaden god, had been an unavoidable consequence.

God is the God of the order, as well as of the substance of his worship, yea
the very outward order is a special part of the substance of his outward
worship, and a principal part of the proper subject of the second
Commandment, which honor of ordaining and ordering his own ceremonies in his
own worship he never committed to Angel prophet or Apostle, but laid the
government thereof only upon Christ, and will not give it to any other. Now
Christ's government for order in the act of receving, we see to be a table
gesture dare we then forsake this and conform to your order of kneeling
without any warrant from the word of Christ, no not so much as from an Angel, a
prophet, or an Apostle, or Apostolical Churches?

In the Institution, the Ceremonies of the sacrament had the same warrant from
Christ that the signs had. If then it be an infallible mark of Antichrist to
take away or alter the Elementall signs, in which spiritually Christ is Really
exhibited; how can you Justify the alteration of the ceremonial sign by
which every faithful believer does really receive him; are not both these
signs together sacramentally united, to be those very visible and graven
Images, or most lively and real representions, whereby as by his selected and
predestined instruments; God the father does give Jesus Christ his son, and
all his graces to his children according to the measure of every man, by the
effectual working of the holy ghost; yea, are not these together (for without
both nothing can be effected) I mean the elementall and ceremonial signs, by
Gods own ordinance efficient (instrumentally) to exhibit and receive whole
Christ and all his benefits? and yet will you (O what will not the Rebellious
will of man presume to do?) against his direct Commandment make unto your
selves other Images and alter these? Hereto you reply and say they are but
ceremonies; and thereto say I no more was the calf in Horeb or those in Dan and
Bethel: yea these are Christ's Ceremonies, and the very Ark or Cherubims were no
more. These are not therefore Idle,or for state and ornament, or upon any
respect or consideration to be varied, but purposely ordained and in the most
absolute perfection of the divine wisdom in the very institution, for the
help and strengthening of our weak faith, used and established: being therefore
by Christ united, and Joined with the word to make a perfect sacrament and a
complete manner of pertaking spiritual food, how may they by any humane
authority ever be altered? does not such a grant strike mainly and
fundamentally at the authority of the second Commandment? yea is it not high
presumption when the Lord offers this heavenly food, not by pieces but in
fullnes, neither seuering his graces from the substance, nor the substance from
the graces, but even whole Christ and all his merits, for us to alter not the
placing or order only, which himself used (and therefore being never
repealed, thereby established) which yet were a fault foul enough; but the
very dishes or ceremonies themselves, wherein this spiritual food is prepared,
tendered and received as some in restraining the cup, others in altering the
very elements, and you in altering the gesture (for so much does conformity
profess) wherewith it is received? As therefore no one part of Christ wrought
our salvation, but whole Christ, and as where there is no more but the body and
blood of Christ received (if that possibly could be, yea though really) there
is no Christ received, because it is the spirit or divine grace that quickneth
unto eternal life; and therefore the true receiving must be spiritual and of
whole Christ, God and man, or else no benefit is received: even so the visible
instruments (corporal substances or bodily exercises) which in the institution
our Lord united for the exhibiting and receiving this spiritual food, may not
be separated, omitted, altered, or displaced. Seeing then the Lord himself for
the effecting of this divine and spiritual work, has joined them together,
is it not high presumption I say, to alter them, or put them asunder:

True it is, that the spiritual eye, hand, and mouth, only sees, receives,
and pertaketh this heavenly food, and I dare appeal to any who have this eye
to be judge in this case, even which gesture is most decent and seemly, that
which out blessed Lord and Savior in the institution of the Sacrament made
choice of, as the very best of all other whatsoever (for I hope you will not
deny but that if he had known a better, I mean would he ever have had his
Churches to have a better opinion of any other as more dece^t, or in any
respect more useful or as fit, he would either then have chosen it, for some of
his disciples to have used, or else left warrant in the word for our conformity
thereto) or whether that gesture in case of deprivation be rather to be
conformed unto (for so much you infer notwithstanding your distinctions of
unwillingnesse, and I know not what) which many hundred years after was
devised by Antichrist: were his doctrines, doctrines of Devils because they
were of his own devising, and are not his ceremonies of the same disposition?
And yet must we conform unto them, or by your own confession, to the likeness
of them? Is there no transgression in this, have we no precept for things of
good report? Does no commandment forbid all appearance of evil, yea the use
of any thing (not being commanded by God, for then the abuse indeed is only to
be taken away) which has been an instrument of Idolatry?

This Sacrament was ordained, not to nourish to a carnal or temporal life,
but to a holy and spiritual, that so in all the occasions and occurrences of
this world, we might live by faith, and be made able more and more to bring
forth the fruits thereof, it must of necessity therefore follow, that this
ceremonial sign or gesture, or any thing essentially necessary in the act of
receiving this holy nourishment, may not be carnal, or of humane devising, but
holy and spiritual, not only in the intention of the party (for so was theirs
to the Calfe) but of divine ordinance, or else whatsoever the world esteems of
it, it is most abominable unto God, and dare we then conform unto it? so that
what gesture soever is proposed, if Christ have not ordained it, it is strange
and unlawful, and so not being holy, conformity thereto is hateful, for none
can make a gesture for the sacrament holy, but only he that may ordain a
sacrament.

As the elementall sign being delivered has relation to the spiritual thing
signified, so the ceremonial sign or significant gesture in the act of
receiving, has relation to the very true and assured partaking of that
heavenly feast and spiritual food which is the thing signified, and whereunto
the Lord has invited us as his most welcome guests, and dearly beloved
friends, even to his own Table to have communion and fellowship with him in
partaking of his divine nature in the act of receiving this sacrament.
Therefore as in cases of extremity to use other signs herein, is erroneous,
and wilfully to persist therein, is directly heresy, and as the Papists (in
ordaining an other manner of union or conjunction betwixt the elementall signs
and the spiritual things signified, then the nature of them will suffer) do
destroy the Sacrament, and by changing it into a sacrifice, commit most
damnable Idolatry: so you in justifying, defending, or excusing without warrant
from God, this gesture of kneeling as it is urged) altogether disproportionall
to a Feast, or Supper, and to a Table wherein the visible signs are set apart,
and prepared (though you wash your hands never so often, to give testimony of
your innocence) do give sentence against Christ his own practice in the
institution, the sole president of the whole action, and do directly infer
that you hane a more fit and decent gesture then he could find out and make
choice of.

As the sacrament admits no other conjunction betwixt the visible signs and
the things signified then a sacramental, which is not subject to sense and
reason, but is merely mystical, secret and spiritual, so the gesture by the
same ordinance of Iustitution is of the very same nature, and may not without
grievous sin upon any terms or consideration whatsoever* admit of any
Innovation or alteration though all the reason wisdom, learning common sense
and understanding in the whole world do never so highly approve thereof, but
must be mystical, secret, and spiritual perpetually, even hold proportion
with and have relation unto a table, and to a feast, and a great supper set and
to be communicated thereon. Whosoever therefore shall bnt ad any other mystical
signification thereunto, or translate this to any other gesture then was in the
institution seem it never so full of decency, devotion, and humility, yea
though the godly themselves protest they can as comfortably receive the
sacrament there with, as with that of the institution, yet shall they be Judged
as those that add unto the ordinances of Christ, and therefore shall receive an
addition of his indignation. Therefore no gesture but a sacramental (and such
in this case is the table gesture only, which our Lord him self in the
institution being author thereof) may upon any terms or in any respect, in the
act of receiving be conformed unto,

Unless you hold that Christ's institution is herein defective, and therefore
variable without his own warrant, which we have for the alteration of the time)
who but that blasphemous man of sin and his lovers or friends dare profess,
they have power to ordain a sacramental gesture, or any other essential
property of a sacrament, for it that of the institution by Christ be
sufficient (and else you deny his sufficience in this) then any other is
superfluous and therefore a humane addition? which admitted to have dominion in
one thing will be resisted in nothing. Is not this a special part of the
foundation of our Comfort and stay in all occasions that whatsoever God has
done must needs be good and just, and to open our mouths against it, is to
call in question his wisdom, goodness and truth, and yet dare flesh and blood
with voices of trumpets, or the flashing report of a thundering Canon proclaim,
that though Christ have done it, even approved of a table gesture only, in all
his disciples in the institution and never gave warrant for any other, yet
kneeling is better, more significant and decent; yea do not the best of you by
your unwilling conformity wilfully admit imperfection and defection in the
gesture of the institution seeing you have no warrant from Christ to vary from
it?

As the mystical, spiritual and secret Conjunction between the signs and
things signified, is not seen with the Corporal eye, nor can possibly be
apprehended or demonstrated by humane learning wisdom or sense? so I do verily
believe that they cannot chose but grievouslly err (be they never so wise,
learned, Judicious, zealous and holy) who take upon them to Indge and discern
the fitnes, decency and lawfulness of this sacramental gesture, or the
gesture in the act of receiving the sacrament, by the judgment of reason and
sense, without warrant from the word of God. For as the blind cannot judge of
colors, no more can the quickest or most learned and best qualified sense in
the world, discern or judge of that which is sacramental, or is of a
significant or spiritual use in the sacrament or public worship of God, but
as the blind esteems every color alike, so does sense think every gesture
indifferent, only the spiritual eye is able to put this spiritual
difference, and to discern of the mystery or spiritual secrecy of the Table
gesture (which in and by the institution only has ^^e seal and brand of
Christ set upon it) which must needs be relative or respective, even according
to that which on the Table is tendered, and by the guests or communicants
received, and so holds due Analogy, likeness or proportion therewith.

There be three things considerable concerning this blessed sacrament. First,
that which goes before: secondly, the action it self: thirdly, that which
follows after. Now as to omit any of these is a grievous sin, so to displace
them is wicked and abominable. As for example, preparation must go before, and
thanksgiving is to come after, and meditation properly belongs to the action it
self: he that leaves his preparation, and does not examine himself till after
the action, is an unworthy receiver, and eats and drinks judgment; yet I
confess that these are so united as they are inseparable, and that not any one
of the^ ca^ be alone in the faithful, but that they are all mixed one with
another, only the soul is properly to have respect unto these in this manner
and order; and so accordingly we are to esteem the fittest and most proper
time for preparation to be before, for meditation to be in the time of the
action, for thankesgiving after: which shows, that howsoever there is
thankesgiving in all these, yet it cannot properly be said, that the whole
action is a thankesgiving, and yet if it might, kneeling is not the fittest
gesture for thankesgiving in this action.

There be two sorts of signs in this sacrament. Elementall that is bread and
wine, and Ceremonial that is actions and gestures some of these concern, or
are proper to the past or alone, some to the people alone, some common to both,
and every one of these have divine significations peculier and several to
themselves even have a mystical and seetet Relation to an invisible grace or
heavenly thing, not by the appointment of any moral power, but by the
ordinance of God for all the Churches in the world cannot make or ordain any
thing of Religious use to have a spiritual signification, this power is proper
and peculiar unto Jesus Christ so that howsoever, wise, honest, learned and
godly men think this or that, may very well have such a holy use and
signification, and that they can with as good devotion and heavenly meditation
receive with this gesture of kneeling, as with a table gesture, and from their
own experience profess as much, yet all this is no more then Ieroboams
pretense for the calves, the inward substance he held and established, the
outward substance of action and ceremony he mixed with these diuises of his
own, which yet had by his appointment, reference and relation to the same
heavenly thing in their intention that the arc had, even to be the visible
representations of God presence, and not to signify or to have relation to any
other thing else whatsoever. But yet the Lord calls them devils, and why because
they did signify any devilish thing? nothing less. But though they signified
by common consent and public decree and Ecclesiastical canon the presence of
God even Jehovah, and many with great devotion and feeling made that
comfortable use of them as they thought, even as well as if they had gone to
Jerusalem, yet because they were not warranted by the word of the Lord,
therefore they were devils, and all the devotion that the people Imagined they
found themselves stirred up unto by their spiritual signification and
mystical relation was merely of a divellish disposition, leading from God.
Seeing then not man but Christ himself, is author both of the Elementall and
Ceremonial signs, and also united them sacramentally together in this
mystical action, that by our worthy pertaking thereof we might have an
inseparable union and everlasting fellowship with him, how dare we conform to
any alteration or innovation herein? If we reject the gesture which Chaist used
or approved in the institution, what right can we plead to the sacrament which
then and therewith he ordained?

Christ unites and ioynes himself to his own ordinances in the administration
of the word and sacraments, not fantastically, or doubtfully; but truly,
really, and verily, that partaking in sincerity of them, we might be assuredly
conjoined unto him, even as certainly as the elementall signs are united unto
us, and the ceremonial signs are performed by us. Let all Christians
therefore who love the Lord Jesus, and desire to partake of this heavenly and
spiritual union with him, take heed that they never yield to conform to a
fantastical gesture, or doubtful ceremony in the act of receiving, especially
having so essential a property as the gesture has, lest by casting off the
Lords gesture (or that gesture which our Lord himself caused his Apostles to
use in the institution of the sacrament) they cast off the benefit of the Lords
sacrament, or at least be found author of an anti-gesture which our Lord never
warranted; and therefore cannot to the conformers thereunto be ever sanctified.

It is our happiness to be united unto Christ in the sacrament, and is it our
misery to cleave fast to that gesture which in the institution thereof was by
all his Apostles used, and by himself blessed for that very end? Here is
spiritual meat, come thou with spiritual hunger: here is a holy table, come
thou with a holy gesture: and who can make a gesture holy, or of holy use, but
the Lord? Not that a right gesture is sufficient, unless thou come with a
right heart also, examined or prepared and purged, not only from Popery,
Non-residency, Atheism, usurie, ambition, oppression, murder, covetousness,
blasphemy, whooredome, drunkenness, and other bloody and abominable vices;
but from every worldly lust, or fleshly pleasure, which thy soul longs
after: that I doll I say must be thrust out before Christ ca^ be let in. It is
but folly to profess thy faith in him, and have not repented of that (I speak
not of their order which of these is first, but of their inseparation.) All
therefore who have not this spiritual hunger, and see not in the elementall
and ceremonial signs this holy union, have some invisible Idol in them, even
some secret corruption or bosom sin which lies lurking in the heart, the
custom or continual fume whereof has so darkened the sight, and flattered the
taste of the soul, as it cannot discern or judge truly in this controversy,
but esteems of one gesture as good as another, that which Antichrist devised,
as that which Christ approved and hallowed.

As Gods worship even for the substance of it, is partly inward and partly
outward; so this sacrament being a special part of his worship, is of the same
nature. The inward substance is the spiritual things signified: the outward
substance or essence is the visible signs signifying or having relation to
those spiritual things signified. Now whatsoever in Gods worship is conformed
unto, as having relation to these spiritual things signified (whether it be
purity or holiness of life, or humility, devotion, or whatsoever) must of
necessity be confessed to be (in the acceptance of these that so use it) a
part of Gods outward worship, which consists of outward and visible things, as
actions, gestures and ceremonies, signifying, and having reference unto some
invisible thing signified. True indeed, every thing used in the worship of God,
is not I confess of this nature, as our usual apparel, places of
assembling, seats in those places, and the like, which therefore come within
the terms of indifferency and decency, but to say and defend that any one
thing of significant use in the divine service of God is either not of the
essenc of his outward worship, or is indifferent and variable, is I dare say, a
fault more then remarkable: yet true it is, that he who makes such a part of
Gods worship of this or that spiritual use and signification, may verily vary
and alter it. But as no mortal or created power can give the spiritual gift
or grace signified, and therefore may not devise the thing signifying: so if God
have approved and sanctified any action, gesture or ceremony of such holy
significancie, none but he can alter the same, and therefore to hold that such
a thing is or can possibly be indifferent, or may in any case be conformed
unto, is sin. But the Table gesture in the act of receiving the sacrament of
the Lords body and blood, is of divine signification, assuring us that as
verily as we take and partake of those visible signs, so verily in that very
action we by faith take and partake of the very body and blood of Christ
signified and represented, yea truly exhibited in and by them. And this
gesture only was hallowed by the Lord in the institution of the Supper, in the
action of all his Apostles, who were the types of all communicants to the end
of the world, to that very end and purpose: therefore none but Christ may alter
it, who was author of it, and to hold that it is variable (whatsoever sense
and reason babble for it) is a fearful sin.

As the inward substance of the sacrament, and the outward signs elementall or
ceremonial, having relation thereunto, even the whole sacramental action is
holy and heavenly (which nothing can possibly be, but that which is of divine
institution) so let thy care in partaking thereof be faithful and zealous
according to knowledge and godliness. Look not so to the inward substance as
thou neglectest the outward signs and ceremonies, as if divine reverence
belonged not to them, being Gods divine instruments or holy mysteries, and so
might be varied according to the will and pleasure, or determination of man.
Neither yet let it suffice, that thou come with a right gesture, unless
thou come with a right heart also, lest in stead of receiving a blessing, thy
heart be hardened, and thou go away with a curse: for even as not to use Gods
ordinances with divine reverence, is the mother of Apostasy and Atheism, so
to use man's ordinances with divine or holy reverence in Gods divine service (as
every thing of divine signification ought) is the father of superstition and
heresy: to conform therefore to a ceremony of divine signification, not being
established by God, must needs be wicked and sinful.

As no person may meddle with the administration of a sacrament, but such as
are called by God in the word thereunto; so may not they who are truly called
of God, press to any thing therein, but what the Lord has in his word
required or commanded. For howsoever it is God only that gives the spiritual
grace, or heavenly things signified, so yet he is pleased to use the ministry
of man in the dispensation thereof by those means or instruments which
himself has appointed; and as we cannot have the blessing but from him, nor
from him by any other means then those which himself has appointed: so to
receive the signs at the hands of such as he has not sent or called, or to
conform to, or approve of any ceremonies of significancie in the worship of
God (though it be at the hands or by the advice of such as are truly called of
God) which himself has not ordained, is to be convocated or gathered together
against the Lord, as Corah, (though not every one in the same degree) for as
the best ministers in the world can exhibit and give no more but the outward
and visible signs (and yet even in such their exhibition the inward and
invisible thing and grace signified is given by God through Christ by the
effectual working of the holy Ghost) so to profess that either they have
power to give more then the sign, or have warrant to devise any sign to
represent or exhibit, or to receive grace by, is mere and high presumption
against the Lord* Conformity therefore for the approbation thereof, must needs
be abominable, upon what terms, or in what case soever it be.

Let us content our selves with the holy Counsel and determination of God
concerning the right administration of this sacrament, even whatsoever is of
ministerial elementall or ceremonial use therein, concerning all which the
institution is without all exception, and seeing it was to be the very pattern
and president to all Churches for ever (as Christ his precept Do this
undeniable includes) let us never conform to any thing of the nature of any of
these therein, unless we have from the pattern or from some other part of the
word, Christ's warrant so to do. And howsoever we shall hereby procure great
damage to our selves, yet seeing nothing that is in the flesh (or is not of
Gods own ordaining and appointment can possibly please God, let us remember it
is far less danger to offend those, that for not conforming to their Canons
can but deprive us of our goods and comfortable conditions, exposing us to open
disgrace and contempt, or at worst can but take a way our lives, then to offend
him that can do all this, and then cast our bodies and souls into hell. Let no
man therefore by conformity to kneeling intimate disability in the institutor,
or insufficiency in the institution: for either is a blasphemous sin.

He that is sole author of the sacrament, is sole author of all the ceremonies
and significant signs therein, either concerning minister or people: for he
that is the sole author of the blessing must needs be sole author of the means
and instrument whereby he will give it: therefore seeing the Lord only gives the
spiritual blessing signified, represented, and verily exhibited by the gestures
and ceremonies therein, and his word neither by precept nor example gives any
warrant for any other gesture in the act of receaving then that of the
Institution, (which on all sides is granted to be a table gesture) how dare
we by conformity vary from Christ's own practice without Christ's own
warrant.

It is said and that truly (but how fitly and wisely let others judge) that God
is the author of kneeling even in his divine worship, therefore we ought to
conform unto it in the act of receiving. I answer that God is the author of
images even in his divine worship as the Arc and Cherubims, yea differing from
the first institution as the brazen serpent, therefore we may conform to the
calves at Dan and Bethell which are but images and consecrated only to his
worship and divine service, but either let the Lord be God in the order of the
outward ceremonies as well as in the inward substance of his worship, or if you
will conform to Ball in the gesture or in the order, follow him even in all,
for God is the God of the order, as well as the God of the substance of his
worship (Inward or outward) let him be therefore either all in all, or else not
God at all.

By the word of God and by it only the minister knows what to deliver and
what not, how to deliver and how not, to whom to deliver and to whom not; the
guests also or communicants do thereby understand, at whose hands to receive
and at whose not, what to receue and what not, and with what gesture to
receive, and what gesture not to conform unto in the act of receiving: for the
word of God is the life or soul (as I may say) of the sacrament, and that not
only in general, but even of every particular, of absolute necessity required
therein (as a gesture is) so that whatsoever is ordained to be of holy use
therein (as the gesture in the act of receiving is) if it receive no life or
quickening warrant from the word of God, it is absolutely dead, or unclean, and
defiles, and therefore may not upon any terms be conformed unto, as good and
lawful.

The word of institution sets forth first the precept of Christ, Do this:
secondly the promise of Christ, This is my body: Thirdly, the practice of the
Apostles, having relation to the commandment or precept in their obedience, and
in their faith having reference to the word of promise, now this being the type
of all the true administrations of this sacrament to the end of the world does
plainly and undeniably teach this truth that what soever is of absolute
necessity in the sacrament (as a gesture in the act of receiving is) must, both
in minister and people have relation to the precept of Christ that so it may be
done in obedience and also to the promise of Christ, that so it may be done
in faith or else it is absolutely sin? and then, though kneeling which in that
act and manner as it is urged has neither precept nor promise of Christ would
convert Turk and Pope too, yet I hope you will confess we ought not to
conform thereto;

Is kneeling in the act of receaving the sacrament of the altar, the gesture of
the mass? let all that abhor the gross Idolatry of that, never conform to
the likeness of this (unless they have dispensation from the scripture so to
do) because in similitude though not in intention it holds proportion with,
and has Relation to the Coporall and Real presence locally. Yea let all
faithful Christians hold themselves only to the name and gesture and to what
soever else in the institution and word of God is established, and was therein
by our blessed Lord sanctified and ordained to be of perpetual use. unles him
self in the word shall teach otherwise.

The sacraments (even whatsoever is sacramental were ordained of God, not to
give any novelty or new thing by way of tran- or con-substantiatio^, or like
humane devise, but having respect to our weakness, to be a help unto us in
sealing up that righteousness which is by faith, even to increase that
assurance of faith, which we have through the word in a greater measure and
degree then is had by the ministry thereof (let every one labor to have the
feeling of this use) if then it be dangerous to add unto the doctrine of the
word, being the hand writing of the King, even his most gracious pardon for all
our sins and offenses, and his patent also for our liuelihood and hope of
eternal life. Surely it cannot in any respect be less dangerous (seeing
nothing passes by the writing alone without the seal (I speak herein after
the manner of men) to make (or conform to) any innovation in the Kings seal,
even in any thing which is of sacramental institution, being special and
effectual parts (instrumentally) of our spiritual Evidences, or assurance
which is by faith through the word. But if such co^formity be committed against
our knowledge. I leave it to the judgment of the godly learned, whether the
wilful persisting therein do not (though not alter the outward essential
form, yet) diminish and lessen every time more and more the powerful effect,
and comfortable benefit of this blessed and most holy sacrament. For seeing in
the institution this ceremonial sign has relation to that spiritual supper
and most heavenly food, or divine nourishment, it is most apparent to all that
will not wink lest they should perceive, that in the very manner of a table
gesture, there is by intimation a grounded expectancie and good assurance of
partaking that holy and divine nourishment visibly represented unto us, a thing
which in the matter the Lord saw to be needful for his blessed Apostles, and
therefore purposely caused them to use this very manner to be a help herein
unto them, and so to every communicant though never so learned and well
instructed.

This sacrament is called a communion, sealing up unto us our holy communion
with God in Christ, by the holy Ghost, and our fellowship with all the Saints
and faithful children of God. Can there be (by any possible means) therefore
any good discretion or decency, humility or devotion, to leave a Table
gesture which inferres thus much, and in this sense is so often mentioned in
the scripture, and conform to another, or the likeness thereof, which inferres
and intimates communion with Antichrist and his followers, or well-willers, as
kneeling does? Whereof therefore there is not only no mention in the holy
Scriptures, but continual intimations both in this and in all things else of
religious use to the contrary.

I confess it is very true, that neither the visible signs representing, nor
the ceremonial signs or gestures giving or receiving, have any natural or
inherent power, efficacy, or virtue to convey any manner or measure of
spiritual grace to the receiver more then kneeling, or any other gesture or
signs whatsoever; but the Lord was pleased to select and make choice of these
before all other, and so it was his very will (which concludes nothing without
consulting with his wisdom and love) to make these efficient (instrumentally)
hereunto. As therefore our Lords using the bread and wine in the institution,
and never approving of any other, made them the only visible signs, and no
other by any means may in the act of giving or receiving, be conformed unto,
so his very using a table gesture in the institution, and never giving warrant
in the scripture for any other, is a direct commandment to use this, and a
plain prohibition to conform to any other.

If a table and visible signs thereon, be necessary in the administration of
the sacrament, then the gesture of necessity both in giving and receiving, must
have reference thereunto: if there be a feast for the guests invited to that
table to eat and drink that provision which is prepared and set thereon, then
a festival gesture must needs be most seemly, as having relation to a feast
(even as at weddings wedding garments) yea if it had been left to the wisdom
and discretion of the Church, a table gesture by the natural Law of
Correlatiues must needs of all other be most fit and decent. Indeed seeing the
Papists have altered the Table to an Altar, and the feast of God unto man, to a
sacrifice by men unto God, they have very wisely enjoined such a gesture, as
may hold correspondency with, and has a most fit relation to an Altar, and to
a sacrifice thereon. Of all the gestures therefore in the world, the likeness
of theirs is most unlawful for us to conform unto.

As the heavenly things signified, are never received, if the earthly signs or
isntrumental means be neglected: so if the ceremonial sign or gesture,
wherewith the holy elements are received, be wittingly innovated, and against
our knowledge perverted from the order of the institution, such conformity has
no promise of a blessing from God; continuance or custom therein must needs
therefore harden the heart, which of all judgments and curses in this world,
is the most grievous.

Jeroboam and the Jews never purposed or intended in their calves or other
abominations of Molech, Ashtaroh, Baal or the like, to alter the substance of
Gods inward worshipe, no nor yet to vary from the maine end or intent of his
outward worship, which was to knit the heart more and more unto God, and
therefore these or any other of their images were nor representations of any
other Trinity or person then is therein but only in a diverse manner) of one
and the same Jehovah, for considering the natural disposition and diverse
education or customs of those several nations with whom they were mixed and
desirous to draw them to the true religion and service of God and salvation of
their souls they inclined some thing to the ceremonies and inventions of these
heathens in the actions and gestures of Gods outward worship, but were most
careful to have the doctrine of the inward substance and spiritual
significations concerning faith in the Messiah to come preserved sound, namely
to love the Lord with all their heart and with all their soul and to think no
thing too dear for him, whole Ryuers of oil, thowsands of Bullocks and Ramms,
yea the first borne of their children, and there was never people killed no nor
silenced or imprisoned for teaching this inward substance, though he were a
son of thunder, never so zealous and fervent therein, but only for refusing
conformity to their state, ceremonies, wherein yet many learned prophets, and
reverend Leuits, and grave priests protested there was nothing intended, but
the very same decency, humillitie, unity, and stirring up of the heart to
devotion, which the Lord aimed at and required, and diverse of them did vow upon
their salvation (I speak by way of supposition) that they having had
experience of both ceremonies or forms of worship, have found as much inward
comfort and heavenly consolation, and have been rapt up with as divine
meditations in the ceremonies of Baal, and of the Calves, as in those at
Jerusalem, and they yield a sufficient reason, which will give a satisfaction
to any honest and indifferent heart: for say they, it is true that these
ceremonies and gestures in their original among the heathens, were Idolatrous,
damnable, and divellish, for they used them to other gods, and not to the true
God. Now we have put it into the Magistrates head when he consulted for the
settling of the state in peace, that the retaining of these being purged from
their Idolatrous abuse, and the substance of the worship of the true God, being
preserved sound, and joined with them, and the mystical significations of Gods
ordinances being transferred unto these; will be so far off from confirming
them in their old superstitions, as it will prove the only means in all
learned probability and wise experience to make them all absolute prosolites.
But to this you say, that notwithstanding such pretenses, their sin is most
fearful and damnable, because they had the law of God as well direct for every
ceremony and gesture in the outward service of God, as either for the intent of
the outward, or for the substance of the inward worship: and God never left or
referred any action, gesture, or ceremony of religious use, especially in his
divine service to Moses, David, or Solomon, but referred his Church still to
the pattern which only by the revealed word was made known unto them, and
therefore though it be never so true that they intended to serve God in these
things, and had very considerately* and painfully purged them (in a devised
purgatory) from their black-Mootes hue; yet not being warranted by his word,
they offered their service in them not unto God, but unto Devils. For the Lord
is not therefore God unto men, because they suppose him so to be, or verily
intend to esteem of him thus or so, but because by his word, which is as true
as his own majesty, he has manifested and made himself known to be so; yea
whatsoever doctrine concerning God in essence, nature, person, property, or
attribute, is other then the word does teach, is an Idol of their own heart,
a vision of their own brain, an imagination of their own devising, yea
though all the learning and wisdom in the world do never so well intend
thereby, or religiously esteem thereof. Even so this gesture, or that ceremony in
divine worship, is not therefore done unto God, because in conformity thereto
it is simply and seriously intended to do it only unto him; but if it be not
warranted by the word, it is wicked and Divellish, what good intent soever be
in it.

Hereto the better sort of these grave and reverend Rabbis reply and tell you,
that though it be true, that the law is as direct for the ceremony as for the
substance, and that the Church is as strictly tied to the direction and warrant
of the word for every one of them as for the most fundamental point in the
doctrine of Justification, or the substance or inward worship, and may not vary
one jot therefrom, no not in any thing whatsoever, without warrant thereof; yet
seeing it is not in their choice to use or not to use them, but a very great
necessity is laid upon them by the Magistrate and the Church, who for some
secret causes, and State considerations, have in a most solemn Convocation or
Assembly, considerately by an universal consent determined the lawfulness and
fitness of the ceremonies of these golden Calves, and therefore have decreed,
that whosoever will not conform thereunto, shall be (after Canonical
admonition) deprived, and no longer suffered to minister before the Lord. In
this case of extremi^y therefore utrum horum? yea seeing the Magistrate
professes open detestation of all manner of Idolatry in these things, and the
Church condemns all Idolatrous or superstitious use of them, and they
themselves understand the use of them in a sincere sense (which qualifies
whatsoever can be objected against them.) Therefore rather then they will be
contentious and break (yea or disturb) the quiet peace of the holy Church,
and leave their flocks and charges so dear unto them, unto woolvish or
ambitious or carnal teachers, and so be deprived of their ministry, as dear
unto them as their lives, they are persuaded from these grounds, that in this
case they may very warrantably undergo conformity, doing it unwillingly, as
the Lord in whose pressence they stand, bears them witness, and bearing it as
a heavy burden till it please the Lord to visit his Churches with his
salvation, and to take from the shoulders thereof this heavy load, which even
bends the back, and at length will break the neck thereof. For prevention
whereof, they will teach and maintain, preserve and defend the substance and
foundation sound and sincere from error and corruption: and therefore though the
Magistrate and Church do grivously sin in commanding, yet they in conformity
unto them, are mere patients, and not agents, and therefore in so doing
incline rather to martyrdom for God then rebellion against God. Hereunto you
reioyne and tell them in loving (yea in most wise and learned terms, that if
their case had been indeed as yours is, they had well said, and most
sufficiently answered, and all the Universities in the whole world could never
have confuted them, but they having so direct laws for all manner of
ceremonies of religious use, and direct prohibitions against any other, though
an Angel from heaven should join with the Magistrate, they ought rather to
have followed that holy, remarkable, and matchless president of their zealous
fellow-Priests, and learned Levies, and other devout and just persons, who had
set their very hearts to seek the Lord, and with them to have left their
suburbs and possessions, their livings and free-holds, and so to have gone to
Judah and Jerusalem to have offered to the Lord God of their fathers, according
to the warrant of the word, and so to have strengthened the kingdom both with
peace and prosperity; whereas the varying from the warrant of the word in the
doctrine and practice of these ceremonies of religious use in the worship of
God, has the clean contrary effect, and strongly, yea strangely weakens the
kingdom, and Church by breeding diversity of opinions, schisms, divisions,
oppositions, heart-burnings and grudges, with infinite other muddy
perturbations, according to the variety of humor (which men experienced in
fishing can tell how to make use of, and therefore are content to foresee and
further:) therefore conformity in such a case, though never so unwillingly
undergone, yea though with all reasonable and wise considerations tempered, and
judicious expositions, and honest intentioms qualified, is so far off from
looking after, or inclining unto martyrdom, as it opens the very widest gate to
mutiny and rebellion both against God and man. If then we have as direct
warrant for the lawfulness of a table gesture, as ever the Jews had for their
worship at Jerusalem, and that the word of the Gospel be as sure and certain
being spoken by Christ and his blessed Spirit, as that under the Law (which it
cannot be, unless it give as certain and sound directions for the ceremonies
under the Gospel, as that by Moses did for the ceremonies under the Law: For
if it be an unsure word in the ceremony, how can we be sure, it is sure in
the substance?) then (I say) to err from the practice of Christ in the
institution, without a direct precept or warrant from the sure word of God,
though you have the same holy intent in such gestures, and the like reverend
respect to such ceremonies as you have to Gods own ordinances, yet conformity
thereto, even in them that do it ignorantly, is sinful, but in those that do
it wilfully against their knowledge, it is dangerous to the State and Church,
and breeds carnal, worldly, yea divellish dispositions and practices in such
hearts when time and opportunity shall call for the effects thereof.

Will any man be content that his lively Image shall in any part thereof be
defaced? The whole action of this sacrament both in signs and ceremonies, and
not some parcels thereof without the rest, is the most lively Image and
representation of the most precious body and blood of our Lord Jesus, as God
the Father has ordained and appointed to exhibit and give it to be the
spiritual nourishment of our souls (even meat and drink indeed) unto
eternal life. Suppose the gesture be but the meanest part of this Image of
Christ, yet if without his warrant it be altered from the first institution
(the very pattern for the pourtraying of all others afterward) is there not
just cause of offense? And dare any, by conformity to any alteration therein,
profess and vow that though it do directly differ in this and that, yet if we
think so, then it is his very true Image, though something be superfluous, or
out of the first order? Is not every error (though not in the same degree)
opposite to truth, and every defect contrary to perfection?

As there is difference betwixt the substance of the sacrament (Christ Jesus
our Lord) and the fruits and benefits of the sacrament (our holiness,
sanctification, and redemption) so I confess there is difference betwixt the
elementall signs (bread and wine) and the ceremonial signs (the actions and
gestures) but as the substance, and the benefits or virtues are inseparable
(for where the one is in truth, the other is also in power, and that not in
hypocrisy, though perhaps in mavelous great weakness) so the signs
exhibiting or giving the substance, or in which the substance is given or
exhibited, and the sign in the act of receiving or partaking the substance, or
by and with which the substance is taken and received, may not be parted,
changed, nor displaced, least by degrees the sacrament it self be perverted:
for he that instituted one, instituted all, even whatsoever is sacramental:
and a gesture in the act of receiving is as essentially necessary, as the
visible signs in giving or delivering, I mean, there is as absolute necessity
of that as of these. Now therefore, if you can show us the like divine warrant
for kneeling, or any other gesture in the act of receiving, as all the
Christian world sees there is for a table gesture, even by our Saviors own
practice, and most holy and matchless example in the behavior of all his
Apostles, we will most willingly and readily conform unto you therein: but if
heaven and earth (true Churches, nor false or counterfeit Churches) cannot
possibly produce such warrant, conformity thereunto is not only a most heinous
sin in all that command it, but a fearful transgression in all that
wittingly, though unwillingly yield unto it.

The gesture (as it is commanded and used in Gods service) in the act of
receiving, is either holy or unholy (though in civil actions it may be
indifferent) and all holiness comes from the Lord (for the Lords using or
commanding any thing, though it were never so vile and unclean before, makes
it holy, and his not using or commanding any thing, makes it in his worship and
service abominable and unholy, what reverend opinion soever men, yea good men,
have thereof.) Either then you must prove that kneeling as it is urged in this
act of receiving, comes from God, and was used or commanded by him, or else it
is unholy (though all the holy men in the world say to the contrary) and then
conformity thereto is unholy and sinful.

Not only the outward signs and visible substance or elements, but the very
outward form, and visible order also of the sacrament, even a table gesture,
was sanctified by Christ, and being never repealed, nor any other by divine
warrant established (the sacrament being perpetual, and a gesture in the act
of receiving therein essentially necessary) must needs be of divine institution
(for it was once divine, a face of brass cannot deny it) unless therefore you
can prove it by divine warrant repealed, or some other commanded, it is
perpetually to be observed, yea no other in any case, or upon any condition to
be conformed unto.

The Church may not (though civil authority for some urgent or weighty
occasions nearly and deeply concerning the welfare of the whole State, do
approve thereof) appoint Beef or Lamb, Bacon or Veale to be used in stead of
bread in the act of receiving the Sacrament, nor Bear, Ale, Milk, or Water in
stead of Wine (the fruit of the vine) no though we hold and teach the doctrine
of the invisible things signified never so soundly and zealously, and free all
the points thereof from Popish Apostasy, or other humane absurdity. And may
any pervert the order of delivering or receiving these unchangeable signs
without a command from God, as to deliver first the wine and then the bread
(may Christians in cases of extremity conform to such a Canon?) or to vary
from the gesture of the institution either in form or in order without a
divine warrant? has not the Lord always reserved this honor of devising all
the parts, whether actions, gestures, or ceremonies of his outward worship to
himself? And though he have given many high prerogatives and very great
preferments unto his deputies and vice gerents, yet he never imparted this to
any creature, but was always very jealous of it, as the very top of his
supremacy: yea do they not by a direct consequence destroy or deny this
essential property or attribute of God, who hold and teach that the Magist^ate
and Church may devise the visible parts, or actions and gestures of Gods
outward worship, even those that are of absolute necessity therein (as a
gesture in the act of receiving is?) is not this the very proper and peculiar
object of his burning and consuming jealousy? Let them be consumed and
destroyed then that herein rise up against him. Conformity therefore in this
case is the ready way to destruction.

It is objected, that the whole action of the Sacrament is a th^nksgiving and
kneeling (being the fittest gesture for thankesgiving) does best beseem the
whole action, and therefore also this particular act of receiving. The whole
action cannot be said properly to be a thanksgiving though it may be safely
acknowledged, that in the whole action, and every part thereof there is
thankesgiving; but the special end of this Sacrament is to work in us a more
lively feeling of our union with God, the increase whereof he conferres in this
Sacrament, and only for the effecting thereof did ordain it: and howsoever he
would not have his Disciples unthankful in the very act of receiving so
inestimable a blessing, yet in his wisdom (which is sufficient for our
warrant, and a plain proof that this objection is but a drugg of human
wisdom) he consecrated a table gesture for them in the act of receiving, and
not kneeling or any other gesture proper to thanksgiving. I confess, to be
unthankful is to be unfaithful: but as the proper time for preparation goes
before, and according to the truth and measure thereof, so is the blessing* so
the fittest time for thankesgiving comes after the act of receiving the benefit
and blessing: and according to the truth and measure thereof, so is the true
comfort and spiritual consolation. Let the practice of Christ stop the mouth
of babbling ^ence and iangling reason: and howsoever in respect of the soul
these duties are so mixed, as they cannot be one without another, but are
inseparably united, yet there is a distinct propriety of time peculiar to every
one of them: the sensible manifestation whereof gives true denomination to the
proper manner of their seasonable existence and visible subsisting. Howsoever
therefore the soul in one and the same act and instant, can hear, see,
receive, taste, and be thankful, yet cannot the body possibly in one and the
same act and instant, perform and use proper and fit gestures to manifest and
express the same: and if it could, yet the pattern of the institution
proclaims silence to all the wit and learning in the world, and therefore
kneeling cannot be the fittest gesture in the act of receiving, no though it
should be granted that the whole action were a thankesgiving.

Nothing can possibly be conjoined or united further, or in any other manner or
measure then the nature thereof will admit. As therefore you most justly and
religiously refuse conformity to the real presence either by
transubsta^tiatio^ or consubstantiation, because the nature of the signs
cannot possibly admit it, and there is nothing but the bare opinions, and
Canons or precepts of men to warrant it? even so in the act of receaving no
gesture in the world can possibly in the nature thereof hold proportion with,
or have relation unto our spiritual conjunction with Christ and Communion and
fellowship with the Saints, in the pertaking of this spiritual meat and drink
prepared and set on the holy table in this divine action, but only a table
gesture, and therefore we also, (according to your example in the outward
substance) do justly refuse to conform to any other gesture in the outward
Ceremony.

Reason must not be our guide in matters of Religion, or in ceremonies of
Religious use in the public worship of God, for take it at the very best,
without passion partiality or prejudice, yea excellently quallified with
learning, wisdom and experience, yet is it stark blind in these things and
will verily misleade us. In these controversies therefore concerning
conformity we must to the law and the Testimony, and whatsoever has not
warrant there from, by Gods own doom has no true light in it, or divine
warrant for it, but black darkness abydes upon it for ever. What Angellical
transformation soever therefore you provide for your significant kneeling, you
see from whence ir comes and whither it goes, and therefore in that manner as
it is urged, we dare not upon any terms or with any limitation conform unto it.

The conjunction in the sacrament is not sencible, but merely mystical,
spiritual and invisible: yet as the signs, and also the ceremonies therein
(not by nature or the ordinance and wise discretion or learned policy of man
but by the sole institution and will of Jesus Christ) have relation to the
things signified which are heavenly and spiritual, and not to any devised
unity, pretended humility, or manifestation of our corporal subjection to the
civil magistracy, (yea to brand them with such carnal relations or worldly
significations is the very high way to Apostacy) even so these heavenly and
spiritual things by the same law of institution, have Relation to those signs
only which are set apart by Christ, and not to any other; yea to hold that
they either have, or possibly can have relation to any other signs either
devised by man; or not ordained by God for this very end, is the next way to
heresy and Atheism. For the things signified and the things signifiyng
(either in the act of geving or in the act of receaving) are verily united by
this mutual relation or relative conjunction, which no mortal power can
ordeine or alter, he that has power to ordeine the relative* only has power
to ordeine the correlatiue, I mean he that has power to give the spiritual
things signified, only has power to ordein sings or ceremonies signifying or
having relation thereunto, either in the act of giving or receving. For mortal
power therefore to ordain any action or gesture of spiritual signification, is
spiritual adultery, and most gross abomination. Either prove then that the
sign or Ceremony you so eagerly press us unto, is in this very action
ordained of God, and so has a promise of a blessing from him, or else we dare
not conform unto it though for such ^efu^all we receive nothing but Curses
from you.

As the elementall signs (bread and wine) receive their heavenly virtue and
spiritual power only from Christ, and now differ from all other of the same
kind being truly and verily changed into holy and divine food, not in their
nature and substance (for then they could not be signs if they were changed
into that which they signified) but in their use and service which is
spiritual (and such a change no other creature but by Christ's own ordinance
can possibly admit or be capable of) even so the ceremonial signs or gestures
in the act of giving or receiving these element^ll signs thus spiritually
changed, do differ from all other signs or gestures whatsoever, and have from
Christ's institution a heavenly or spiritual power conferd upon them, which no
other gesture can possibly be capable of though all the humane power in the
world bestow all their craft and cunning upon it. For this power is proper
only unto Christ and not communicable to a creature, yea to intimate such a
power (without direct warrant from the word of God) is directly to band
themselves and to assemble together against the Lord and against his Christ.
Either prove then your conformity to be warranted by Christ, or else this
banding disposition aff^ights us from giving the least approbation thereunto.

They that admit or would countenance any other conjunction, in, by, with, or
under the elementall signs then a spiritual, must of necessity contend for
such innovation in the ceremonial sign in the act of receiving, as may hold
due proportion with that conceited conjunction of their own Imagination. And
hence it comes to pass that this carnal device in the ceremony is so eagerly
pressed and readily conformed unto, because not only the ignorant, and the
learned who are profane and wicked, but even the godly and the learned that are
holy, judge of the lawfullnes thereof by carnal sense and reason, and not by
the rule of the word, yea I would be heartily glad to meet with one good and
sincere argument which is not of this dissposition, yet I do confess I have
heard of many burnished with the gloss of humane wisdom and accademicall
learning, which makes indeed the very dross of nature to stroute it self out
because it glisters, and so looking bigg upon the matter seems to very many
like the very golden truth. But can the best quallified wisdom of the world
savor the things that are of God? yea are not the things which him self taught
and used or ordained for the spiritual uses of his Church (and therefore only
spiritually to be discerned) mere folishnes, yea very enmity unto nature?
and therefore if this ceremony have not a divine warrant how dare we conform
unto it;

So much in the sacrament of the Lords supper as every one sees, so much he
receives, and no more, they that see nothing but with bodily eyes, or perceive
no further then natural sense and wise or learned Judgment gives
understanding. Receive no more but earthly things, even the elementall sign,
and not any thing that is heavenly or spiritual, to make them the more holy
and virtuous, and any gesture or ceremony whatsoever, and whence soever it
comes, is comely and decent or good enough for such a piece of service, but all
those that see with spiritual eyes, yea they only receive spiritual things,
and they dare not conform to any gesture or ceremony, but that which is of a
spiritual or holy use, and such none can be, but those gestures and ceremonies
only, which are ordained by our holy God. In all and every one of which (being
faithfully used) as there is certainly and infallibly a blessing to be obtaind,
so whatsoever of religious use is known not to be ordained by God, but only by
man, it is at least utterly void of all spiritual blessing, if not filled
with contrary effects, and therefore not in any respect to be conformed unto.
But such is this ceremony and therefore unlawful.

They that conform to a right gesture or ceremony in the sacrament, and want
the inward eye, mouth, and hand of the soul, receive only the elements with
Judas, and not the spiritual things signified by which unworthiness, they eat
and drink their own damnation, because they discern not the Lords body though
they truly discern and use the Lords gesture, and will not by any means
conform to any other for they trample under foot the blood of Christ, as an
unholy thing, not that they esteem it so in their mind (for this trampling is
inward or spiritual) but where faith is wanting there is unworthy partaking,
and faith is as necessary in the action, or gesture of taking, as in the act it
self: for this whole action of the sacrament (and not some special or
principal parts therein) is the evidence or seal of our assurance of partaking
the divine mysteries or holy things signified; even of our true and spiritual
communion with Christ. To conform then to a wrong gesture having no promise of
any blessing, cannot be an action of faith, and therefore sin.

Eating and Drinking are sacramental phrases, applying that to the soul which
is proper to the body, but do necessarily imply, that there must of absolute
necessity be a spiritual eating and drinking in the very act of the corporal
eating, or else no benefit or spiritual blessing can possibly be sealed up by
that action, which necessarily inferres that such a gesture is only lawful in
this action, as in the nature thereof holds proportion with eating and
drinking, and has relation thereunto, which only a table gesture does, and
therefore was selected and chosen by Christ the Lord of the sacrament, and
sanctified in the institution, and so not only by his using preferred before
all other, but no other being commanded in the word, it is thereby made only
useful in the act of receiving, and no other to be conformed unto.

If a corporal or visible and local conjunction (which yet cannot profit the
soul) or any other learned device of the spirituality were sufficient to be
conceited, or with strong imagination to be believed, then indeed any gesture
or ceremony of carnal devising were indifferent or good enough, and might
safely be conformed unto, but faith being invisible, looks (according to the
nature thereof) not to reason and sense, wisdom and discretion, or other like
humane considerations, but to the things that are invisible, and therefore in
all the actions and ceremonies of Gods worship, dare only conform to such as
by his appointment who is invisible, have an inseparable relation (by his
divine institution) to the invisible things signified or represented, yea and
verily exhibited in them, and dare not conform to any other, though by the
learned Clergy the same relation be appointed thereunto.

Reason and Sense even in Nicodemus cry mainly out, How can this be? It is
impossible. And in others, Can this man give us his flesh? This is a hard
saying, who can choose but be offended at it? So also in Naaman, Why should not
the rivers of Damascus, being used with the like good intention and purpose, be
as full of virtue to wash away sin or leprosy, as that of Jorden, it is but an
idle conceit of guiddy heads that makes this difference, yea what good argument
can any such find out, that is able to assure their consciences, they do well
in suffering for refusing conformity herein? Even so concerning this blessed
sacrament, some cry out, How can a piece of bread, or a suppe of wine nourish
my soul, or increase my faith, or patience, humility and contentment. Others
(which is a branch springing from the same root) with open mouth exclaim, Why
should not all gestures in the act of receiving be alike, or any gesture in the
worship of God, (though devised by man) be indifferent? What reason can be
given that one should be better then another? and therefore why should not
kneeling be as good as the table gesture? Here wisdom, learning, discretion,
reason, and experience, in a temperate and grave modesty, lay hand upon their
mouths, and for peace sake, in this case of extremity, by silence do
subscribe; but faith knows full well (as a thing never denied, unless by
carnal and worldly minded persons) that every thing is therefore only good,
and better then all other, because God has commanded it, and that nothing can
possibly be of good or holy use in the holy worship of our most holy God, but
that only which himself has commanded, instituted or ordained, and therefore
that whatsoever (of religious use in his service) is not in the word directly
commanded, is by direct consequence by the same word forbidden: my reason is,
because every action of Gods worship is either performed in obedience or
disobedience: if it be in disobedience, though in a case of extremity and
danger, or in case of commodity and advantage, is it not (if performed against
our knowledge) direct rebellion, as in Saul? And you cannot for shame say, that
your conformity is obedience, unless a commandment from God go before. For if
our holy intentions and good considerations and purposes, or zealous devotions,
could make our devised gestures and actions in Gods service, works of
obedience; which of all the Kings of Judah had not just cause to punish and kill
the Prophets for reproving them for their inventions, which had as many good
intentions as any in these days can have? But the old rule holds, Whatsoever
is not done in faith (especially in actions, gestures, and ceremonies of
religious use) is sin. If then you bring faith to make trial of the
lawfulness of these things in question, it will not hearken what Canons this
Convocation made, nor regard what that Council decreed, or what such a State
commanded, or such reformed Churches practiced, or those reverent preachers and
godly people conform unto: but what God commands, or what says the Lord in
his word, and in this particular controversy, faith retires to the
institution, wherein is set down upon divine record what the Apostles received
of the Lord concerning the gesture for their direction in laying the foundation
for the ceremony in the act of receiving the Sacrament in any Church
whatsoever: yea faith dare not conform to any thing of divine use in Gods
public worship, without Gods direct warrant in the word, though all the
wise and learned men in the world do never so highly commend and extol it. So
that if it be not done in obedience, it is not done in faith: and then you will
confess it is sin, and then you know we may not conform unto it, though we
might prevent thereby never so great and fearful mischiefs, and procure
never so many benefits and blessings: and it cannot be done in obedience of
faith unless a commandment go before (for look whom you obey, his servants
you are:) that therefore cannot be Gods divine service, which God does not by
his divine word command: or that cannot be an action of faith which is not
commanded by the word? and every action of religious use, which is not of faith
is expressly forbidden. Try your selves therefore whether in conforming to
kneeling in the act of receiving the Lords holy Supper, you stand in the faith
or no: if you say you look to God, and have powered out your souls before him,
as your consciences, and many other can bear you witness, and you dare
appeal to him how dear your ministry is unto you, and how loath you are to
leave your flocks to a company of roaring boys, or raging beasts, etc. I
answer, if you look to God, then you must look to him in his word: (for else
whatsoever you intend, he does not intend to be God unto you) if you have not
his warrant therein, you do not look to the true God (no more then the
Barbarian or Turk does) but do make a very Idol of him; I mean, our God does
not bless or approve of any thing of religious use in his worship, as good and
lawful to be conformed unto, but only those things which himself requires
in his word, and he that will accept of any thing which is not commanded in the
word, is an Idol, and not the true God: for all things concerning him or his
worship, are only made known to his Church by the scriptures, and the Churches
never err in these things, but when they want the commandment or warrant of
the word, the defect whereof all the learning, devotion, wisdom, authority,
and zeal of the whole world cannot supply. I confess you make goodly shows
for excusing your conformity, but what have you said, or what can you pretend,
which Jeroboam would not have accepted at the hands of those Priests who left
their places and charges, because they would not conform to the ceremonies of
the calves? And if it be lawful in you, why not in them? I confess that which
you object, that their conformity overthrew the very substance of Gods worship,
but not that (you will not say) which was inward, but that only which was
outward, and which is required in the second commandment: for the doctrine of
the inward substance was (in the intention of that provision) preserved sound,
but the form of Gods outward worship was mainly and diversely I confess
perverted; and I also acknowledge, that your conformity is nothing so gross
and abominable as theirs, yet this I dare say and testify, that it is of the
same nature, and that it corrupts and perverts this part of Gods worship in the
act of receiving the body and blood of Christ: so that though they differ, and
differ very greatly, yet it is only in the Species, and not in the Genus.
Without further contention therefore let us bring it to the true rule. Whence
does your conformity come? It is a matter concerning Gods outward worship and
divine service, and so appertaining to the second commandment. What must be
the cause of this: for if the cause be good, the effect is good: faith is the
cause of all true obedience, and that obedience or conformity which is not an
effect of faith, cannot by all the tricks and devises in the world, ever be
made good (for where the cause is, there is the effect, and where the effect
is, there is the cause, the effect can never be in truth, whatsoever is
conceited or pretended, where the cause is not.) If therefore kneeling as it is
urged, be an effect of faith, then have you a precept and a promise for it is
in the word, upon which your faith is grounded, and so your obedience and
conformity is holy: but if it be not in this very kind required therein, it
cannot possibly be an effect of faith: and therefore set the best face you can
upon it, it is but an Idol of man's invention, and therefore conformity
thereto upon what pretense, or in what case of extremity soever, is unlawful
and wicked.

It is confessed and professed publikly by some of you that the magistrate sins
greevously in requiring this conformity. but yet you do well in yielding
thereunto rather then to suffer such a world of inco^veniences, which you wisely
and carfully foresee will otherwise fall upon Church and Co^monweale. Compare
your case with former times, David sinned grevously, though not presu^ptuously,
as I think some of you do not, in bringing the arc from Gibeah, in a new
Carte, this Arc or outward work (the glory of Israel) in this journey was so
dangerously shaken by the oxen (at the threshing floor of Ornan as if Vzza had
not put to his hand it was like to have bin broken all to pieces, did not Vzza
co^mendably therefore in putting forth his hand to prevent such a mischief; is
not this your very argument? many inseparable evils cleave to this consequence,
he was not stricken for touching the ark, for that the Leuits might do, but
only for the manner and order of touching it, being in a cart which was not
warranted by God, and I tell you the best and most learned men in the whole
world are but as oxen, and put the Arc of Gods word into the most temperate
Cart of their newest and best reformed Invention, they will grieuouusly shake
the very substance of it?

Seeing then the sacraments and whatsoever is sacramental (as a gesture in the
act of receaving is) are ordained not by man but by God, not for any worldly,
carnal or civil respects as to testify our obedience to the magistrate which
yet I confess must most cheerfully be manifested, but merely and properly for
spiritual uses, even to nourish our souls by sealing up unto our hearts the
assurance and certeintie of the covenant of grace in the free pardon of all our
sins through the sole merit of the most precious blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, most lively represented, and truly or effectually exhibited to every
faithful believer herein? let us hold fast the right order and form of
administration thereof in all the signs elementall or ceremonial, even in all
the actions, gestures, or ceremonies, which by Christ himself in the first
administration being used, and never after repealed not any other by his
warrant established come within the compass of divine institution? Jest
wittingly, though we pretend unwillingly conforming to the alteration of the
sign (though but ceremonial) we deprive our selves of that which stands in
relation thereunto (which is substantial).

The sacraments with all the essential properties therein, together with the
scepter of the word truly administered, are the undoubted marks or proper
Cognizances of the Churches communion both with Christ the head, and with all
the saints making one entire mystical body; and by these they may be known?
where these are, is a true Church whosoever say to the contrary. Let us
therefore preserve not some fundamental parts only but all things of
essential use herein, uncorrupted and undefiled, even pure and unspotted, and
therefore never conform to wordly rudiments, carnal innovation, and human
invention in any part of Gods worship lest we decline from our first love,
wherein we vowed and professed to have a sincere respect not to some
principal, but to all the parts of Gods worship, even to all his
commandments, and so shall we rteaine the infallible marks of the true
Churches of Christ upon us, but if we forsake the gesture or ceremony of the
purest Church that ever was wherein the heavenliest order, and diuinest decency
that ever was upon the earth was by our Lord and Saviors own presence and
practice in the institution, sanctified and proposed for all succeeding
Churches to follow for ever (as this never being repealed, nor any other
approved by the scriptures does plainly testify) do we not bespot and obscure
this mark of our visibilitie, especially by conforming to the ceremony (or
the likeness thereof) of the falsest, most perfidious, bloodiest and most
Apostate Church that ever was, or can be? is not every thing which is of
religious use in Gods public worship being without warant from the word
erroneous? and does not error in any one part, though but in the ceremony,
prove a direct defect in the whole sacrament, being an entire and an
inseparable action? if therefore we wittingly subscribe to the lawfullnes of
that which we know we are defective in, we have no promise of God for his
blessing upon us in our so doing, yea the very hoping of mercy in such a case
(I mean where there is no ground for it in the word but only in our own
intentions) is a main cause of Apostacy Atheism and like abominable
presumptions.

Rytes and signs of religious use in the public worship of God, which are not
ordained by him to be seals (for as all the parts of the seal make but one
seal, so every part not being divided may truly be faid to be the seal) of
his covenant and instruments of his grace, are not the true marks of the true
Church, though the true Church use them to that very intent, and indowe them
with the very same properties and intentions: for none can ordain a sign in
Gods worship, (whethere actions, gestures, or any kind of ceremony of holy or
religious signification, which indeed are peculiar marks of Cognisances) but he
only that is able to give that spiritual grace or heavenly and invisible
blessing which is represented therein, or signified thereby. Seeing then the
holy gesture in the act of receiving the most precious body and blood of our
Lord Jesus sacramentally, is on all sides confessed to be significant (and a
part of the individual seal, it cannot be denied, that none (of what
condition of quallitie soever) may ordain it, but he only who is able to
give the thing signified or received thereby. If then kneeling in this very
kind, manner, and order as it is urged, be not ordained by the Lord and yet
have a spiritual signification (as all men agree) though all the wisdom of the
world labor to grace it with all the complements, than art, wit and learning,
or authority can possibly confer upon it, we may not conform unto it,
neither is it a mark or seal of the true Church but a blot and stain
thereof, for the precept and promise of Christ have no relation thereunto, but
only to those gestuers and other ceremonies in his worship which himself has
ordained, and therefore no other may be with safety of conscience conformed
unto.

Nothing, of religious use but what is of divine institution, can be holy, and
all such are holy to the believer though wicked persons administer them, or be
pertakers of them, but if God have not ordained it to be of religious use, in
that very manner and order of his worship, it is profane to the believing
receiver, though the holiest men in the world administer it, and approve
thereof, for therefore only is any thing in divine service Gods instrument,
because he has ordained it so to be, whether it be a ceremony of p^aier or of
praise, of receiving a blessing or showing thankfulness for the same, whether it
be of humiliation or of ioyfulnes, or whatsoever is aimed at therein, there is
no blessing to be obtained where none is promised, for if God had appointed the
form of the altar of Damascus, it had been as good and holy as that at
Jerusalem, they were both altars and the same sacrifices to the same God
offered thereon, yet differing in the very form, made the whole worship
abominable: therefore those who dare so confidently affirm that God will bless
our conformity to ceremonial signs being some in matter, some in manner of
man's mere devising, is directly with the grossest idolators to adjure the holy
ghost to sanctify or make of holy use our, own carnal devises, because we
aim at nothing but devotion therein, is not this to go a whoring after our
own Inventions?

The end of all Gods ordinances is to unite us to himself, not carnally,
locally ot naturally, but spiritually, mystically, sacramentally or holily,
after the manner of contracts or covenants. What believing heart then dare
conform to any essential Ryte in this holy sacrament (a most special and
effectual instrument of increasing our assurance of this our spiritual union
with God through Christ) which is not commanded or warranted by the scriptures?
may mortal men, yea or Angels of heaven ordain any thing to be done in
remembrance of Christ (and without a gesture in the act of receiving, this
whole action of his remembrance vanishes) or to put us in mind of what he has
done for us, or to unite and knit us more firmly unto him, does not the
opening of this gap in the gesture, approve of, and (not whisperingly) recall
(always provided that a Canon wash and wype away their superstition and
Idolatry) all those fleshly and carnal abominations, which our forefathers
and Churches, both Princes and people, have cast out as the notorious works of
that infamous Beast? Is conformity then to this humane devices in the gesture,
the very best way you can devise to preserve the Churches from utter ruin? Are
carnal inventions, I say, in this clear light of the Gospel, the very best
course to preserve holy Assemblies and Ecclesiastical Ministry? will God else
quite forget to be gracious? Does the moisture hereof only preserve his hand
(of help and power) from withring and his arm of protection from being
shortened, do you verily believe indeed, that as the case does stand,
conformity to the liknes of Idolatrous and unclean ceremonies will distinguish
us from Idolatrous and unclean persons, and are your consciences persuaded that
this plain and apparent difference, and direct and wilful dissenting from
Christ and his Apostles in the ceremony of the act in receaving (so long as
we hold the doctrine of the inward substance sound; and free it in teaching
from fundamental corruption) having no warrant from scripture but only from
sense, and so conforming to a gesture which has been allwaies not in some but
in all true Churches of ill report will this course I say give sound
testimony of our union with Christ as our head, and with all reformed Churches
as fellow members? have you warrant from the words of eternal life for this
persuasion, or is it but a conceit of your own imagination arysing from an
honest affection to continue your ministry and to do good to your people? I
beseech you consider what is the true object of your faith in this choice which
you have so considera^ly made? for if faith do not guide you herein you have
done an abominable thing, and to ground faith on any thing but only the word
of God, is at best erronius, but wittingly persisted in, is Idolatrous, will
vtrum horum or in a case of superior reason satisfy in this case, and testify
for you that you are not gone from the truth in this conformity, because you
once were for it? search the scriptures you were best, and if you find no good
warrant there, repent and return, for else you cannot rest here, but do the
best you can you shall decline more and more. Remember Demas.

There have been indeed signs or sacraments, and ceremonies of religious use
in the public worship of God, which were variable and not perpetual, but
differed from the first institution, and came in and went out as the times and
occasions of the Church required, as the rock was called Christ, the sea
Baptism, the brazen serpent was a figure also of him, and diverse other, as
Manna and the Rock, but was it ever heard (unless in the mouths of false
teachers) that the Churches ought to conform to any sacraments, either
ordinary or extraordinary, or to any such significant Rite or ceremony as the
questioned gesture is, which are not expressly grounded on the word of God?
but as it ever was no great or strange thing that the Ministers of the Devil
should transform themselves, and by their teaching many fundamental truths,
and by many pleasing passages of their life, deceive the world; yea and
notwithstanding their abominable works, and most damnable hypocrisy, yet be
reputed and taken for the Ministers of Righteousness (being grown so absolute
in the trade of Deceitfulness:) even so let it not seem any wonder that men of
your parts and gifts having changed your minds, do labor to transform the
traditions of men, and ceremonies or rudiments of the world into the very
likeness of the ordinances of Jesus Christ: for whosoever lives shall see
greater things then these break forth in you. But as nothing in the worship of
God can possibly profit, unless it be mixed with true faith, so it is utterly
impossible that justifying faith should upon any terms, or in any respect be
mixed with any thing in the service or worship of God, which is not grounded on
the word of God; if then your contentious gesture be not in that very manner
and order as it is urged, warranted by the word of God, it is not, neither
possibly can be of faith, and therefore may not for prevention of the greatest
mischief in the world, be conformed unto: for we may not do the least evil,
though the greatest good that could be wished, would come to the Church thereby.

Some please themselves with a conceited evasion from the phrase of Supper,
earnestly contending that we are no more tied to Christ's gesture, then to
Christ's supper, which I willingly grant to be very true, even that we are bound
to both alike; but yet let them also be pleased to understand, that the purpose
of the Holy Ghost is not by this sacramental phrase to set forth the fittest
time (in the peaceable condition of the Church) for the administration of this
Sacrament, which being to succeed and come in the room of the passover, was
(as I may safely say) by a casual necessity enforced to attend the evening (or
Supper) passover, but to express for ever to all the Churches of Christ, that
this sacrament is the solemn and great feast of the Lord JEHOVAH, wherein he
keeps open house, and sets forth his rich love, exceeding bounty, and
admirable greatness, yea immeasurable goodness, by the surpassing excellency
of his all-sufficient provision, and by the hearty welcome, loving countenance,
kind and familiar entertainment of his beloved guests, who are invited to his
own table, not as strangers, or by way of courtesy, or to show his
magnificence and bounty, but as his dearest and most respected friends, to whom
only he admits this particular and special familiarity; must not therefore of
necessity (I speak but by the way) their gesture in this action hold
correspondencie with, and have relation unto a feast, and to a table, and to
beloved friends, of whose hearty welcome this whole action (whereof the gesture
is a part) is a most certain assurance. Yet the word Supper is not put in at
random, or accedentally, but purposely and for special instruction, to teach
the Church for ever, that as usually their greatest and most solemn sumptuous
feasts, wherein they desired to express and manifest the superabundance of
their love, and entire good will, were not at dinners but at suppers: so this
great feast or supper of the Lord does afford to every worthy partaker a most
plentiful and abundant increase of all those graces and heavenly comforts,
which are formerly or elsewhere obtained by any other of Gods ordinances
whatsoever: and that there is no where the like provision to be sound again
(for even ask the father what you can, here it is to be had) he that neglects
this, must never look for the like again any where else. Now I beseech you (I
mean those that stand so much upon sense and reason) consider whether it be
not very high, yea intolerable presumption for any invitant to think any
thing wanting in this princely feast of this King of eternal glory, and so to
take upon him either to ad matter of substance, or orname^t, or order; and
having seen the carriage and gesture of the kings own person, and of all his
most honorable guests, yet in a conceit of his own wisdom, learning, and
experience (having perhaps been a far traveller) undertakes to set down a
more seemly and decent ceremony for the gesture or behavior of the guests,
then then the Lord himself by his own presence approved and appointed: dare
we conform to the practice of such a device as lawful, and good, especially
being very like the behavior of the most mortal and deadly enemy that the
King has? Your conformity therefore may be far fetched and dear bought,
but yet not good for Lord nor Lady, nor any Invitant, at this heavenly banquet.

Whatsoever of essenciall necessity was in the first institution, and no
alteration thereof is in the word of God recorded, nor any varying therefrom
warranted, or so much as mentioned, must needs be for imitation: yea the
approbation thereof by Christ our Lord, is not only a sufficient warrant for
the lawfulnes, holiness, or decency and goodness thereof, but a direct binding
precept to use it, yea it only, and a plain prohibition for ever, upon any
occasion or condition whatsoever, to conform to any other. For as Christ his
using it made it holy and good, so none but he only can either make it
unseemly, or any other gesture lawful or comely. Consider therefore, yet not
by reason and sense (for they though never so wise and learned, are but blind
Judges in matters of Religion) but by the unerring judgment of true faith,
(which begins where these end) whether any gesture can beseem a guest, a
friend, a familiar, yea a son or daughter of years and good understanding,
at the Table and feast, yea at the great supper (of the immortal King indeed,
but yet) of our dear, loving, and well pleased Father, so well as a table
gesture, being not only directly intimated in these mystical phrases of
significant use, viz. Feast, Supper, Table, Communion, and the like, but
purposely also recorded to be the practice of Christ, and of all his Apostles
in the institution, and never altered or questioned, till the manifest
declaration of Antichrist, which was many hundred years after, who indeed by
solemn decree or canon, did ordain that a table gesture should be left in the
act of receiving, and having set up another Christ in his breaden devise, he
appoints kneeling in the stead thereof to be only conformed unto. Now as
Christ his using that gesture (the word no where commanding any other) is a
divine warrant for the goodness thereof: so Antichrists ordaining this (and the
word of God not commanding it) is a divine prohibition, never in the worship of
God to conform unto it upon any terms, or in any case whatsoever.

We do not conform to the blessed Apostles Paul or Peter, or to our most
godly and learned pastors, in using a table gesture, but only follow them
because they follow Christ, whose most holy and unerring practice) not any
where in all the scripture altered) we hold to be his express will, and
directly contained in his commandment, Do this, wherein he left it not to the
discretion of the Apostles or their successors, to dispose of the gesture, as
times or occasions should require, but to prevent al color of innovation
(which he full well foresaw matchless Ambition would audaciously presume to
bring in, and Machiuillian policy would arrogantly contend to continue) he
purposely administered this sacrament first himself both in the elements and
gesture, that (as to the very best and most unreprovable president, in all
controversies about this or any other ceremony herein) the Churches might
retire and have recourse, still to his own practice for their safe direction
and full satisfaction, for ever, so that as in matter of doctrine you do most
worthily answer the papists, with Thus says the Lord', or the Lord never
required this, so we say to you in the ceremony, thus did our Lord, he used a
table gesture, and there is no mention in the scripture that ever kneeling in
the act of receiving was used, therefore seeing, Non fuit sic ab initio, we
dare not with any limitation or favorable construction conform unto it,

It was not now a time in the act of institution, to use gestures at random,
or ceremonies of indifferency, but only that which is primarily or
principally, and therefore (unless himself give warrant to the contrary)
perpetually necessary, for even now was he to set upon the greatest work that
ever he did. Has he then at this very time, by his own personal practice,
bequeathed to all his Churches for ever (in this leagacie of his infinite,
eternal and incomprehensible love) the ceremonial sign of a table gesture?
where is then the faith and understanding of these learned scribes, and the
deep wisdom of these great disputers become, who reverently lapping up the
table gesture in a fair white Cloth, cast it aside into a corner of their
vestrie (that if it ever come in request again, they know where to fetch it)
and most eagerly contend for kneeling in the stead thereof, which in the act of
receaving this blessed sacrament was never approved of in any Catholic Church
through the whole world, till the darkness of the grossest Idolatry that ever
was, or can be, had brought confusion into the whole public worship and
service of God through the Ambitious Tyranny, of that man of sin, yet do I not
by any means infer, that those who being ignorant of the abomination that
lies lurking in this very gesture, and being therefore persuaded of the
indifferency or lawfulness thereof, do conform thereto, do not also receive
comfortably and effectually by the hands of faith, the very things themselves
which are signified; only I hold it a sin of their ignorance (which God
regards not) and therefore beseech them better to consider of it hereafter,
seeing the table gesture had been indifferent, yea unseemly, yet the practice
of Christ in the institution, using only it and no other, makes it now most
decent, and without all exception, yea only to be conformed unto before all
other, unless a divine warrant can be brought to the contrary.

Suppose that all gestures in the act of receiving were indifferent, Christ he
makes choice of a table gesture, and so by his very using it, sanctifies it,
and makes it of holy use: Antichrist he mislikes it, and takes up in the stead
thereof kneeling, and by his very using of it profanes it, and makes it
unclean; for he being the greatest Idolater that ever was, appropriated it to
the grossest Idolatry that ever was. Now I beseech all you that are
indifferent, utrum horum? Did CHRIST our Lord bless the whole action, or some
principal parts thereof only? Consider therefore not by natural reason, but
by the eye of supernatural aith, how far this precept, Do this, extends,
whether to the whole action of the sacrament or to the elemetall signs only;
or if so be, to some of the ceremonial signs, as setting aparte, breaking,
pouring out, and giving, why not to the rest also in taking or receaving? or if
to some of them as to the considerate beholding or looking on, reverent taking,
cheerful eating and comfortable drinking, why not to the very gesture also; or
if you cannot but grant, that a gesture, or some gesture is included within the
compass of this precept, why then not that gesture which our Lord and Savior
used at the very time of geving this precept, rather then that (or the
similitude thereof) which that man of sin the very child of perdition invented
and ordained, for this is a most undoubted truth, look how far the
commandment extends, so far does the blessing of the commander even of
Jesus Christ our Lord extend, and no further. Therefore whatsoever in the same
sacrament you have not a commandment for (and is of necessary use therein) you
have no promise from Christ for his blessing thereon, dare we then conform to
a gesture which the Lord has not promised to bless, yea which being not
warranted by his word he will verily curse and bring contempt upon though all
the world bless it;

I confess the table gesture does not so lively express and call to
remembrance the death of Christ, his torments and breaking of his body, his
greevous passion and sheading of his most precious blood, as some other
ceremonial signs do, for which cause it was not ordained to that end, and the
breaking of the bread and powering out of the wine, were appointed as perfectly
sufficient for that purpose and use, but no other gesture in the world can
possibly so lively express our communion with Christ our Lord through our
assured pettaking truly and really the very things themselves and the whole
merit thereof, which spiritually are represented and exhibited to every
faithful receauer in the visible elements, assuring us that they are as verily
ours as if we had done, and suffered the same things our selves, which are
herein called to our remembrance. Let not conformity therefore to any other
gesture intimate a grevous indiscretion in Christ, either in leaving this
weighty matter uncertain, and to be varied according to the humors of times,
or if making it certain, then in choosing, and so causing, all his Apostles
(representing all the communicants to the end of the world) to conform to a
gesture in the act of receaving nothing so de^rnt and seemly as that which
Antichrist ordained, especially nothing so comely and significant as the
similitude thereof, which others having purged, have also canonized.

In the institution of this holy sacrament there was nothing used or approved
by our blessed Lord, but what was holy and necessary, and never being by him
repealed, is still most precious. Let all that love him labor to keep it from
the vile, and never conform to any humane devise in the stead thereof, which
all the canons of all the learned men in the world cannot possibly make a holy
or precious use. It is necessary for all that desire to be saved or to have (by
worthy pertaking this sacrament) assurance of falvation, to have good assurance
for their certain persvvasion in these things, whom therefore in all hearty
humility pray and beseech, that they labor and strive to get the wedding
garment, and it will quickly teach them the supper gesture.

Revel. 14* 3. And they sang as it were a new song before the throne and before
the four beasts and the Elders, and no man could learn that song but the
hundred forty and four thouand which were bought from the earth.

Verse. 4. These are they which are not defiled with women for they are
Virgins, these follow the Lamb whither soever he goes, these are bought from
men, being the first fruits unto God, and unto the Lamb.

Verse. 5. And in their mouth was found no guile for they are without spot
before the throne of God.

Ezekiel. 16. 2. Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations.

Ps. 64. 2. 3. Hide me from the conspiracy of the wicked, and from the rage of
the workers of iniquity which have whet their tongue like a sword, and shoot
for their arrows bitter words.

Hebr, 2. 8. Thou have put all things in subjection under him, and left nothing
that should not be subject to him. Epes. 1. 22.

FINIS.

