Rams little Dodeon. A brief Epitome of the new Herbal, or History of Plants.

Wherein is contained the disposition and true declaration of the Phisike
helps of all sorts of herbs and Plants, under their names and operations,
not only of those which are here in this our Country of England growing but
of all others also of other Realms, Countries and Nations used in Phisike:

Collected out of the most exquisite new Herball, or History of Plants, first
set forth in the Dutch or Almayne tongue, by the learned and worthy man of
famous memory, D. Reinbert Dodeon, Physician to the Emperor; And lately
translated into English by Henry Lyte, Esquire:

And now collected and abbridged by William Ram, Gent.

Pandit Oliua suos Ramos.

Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling in the Cloth Fair, at the
sign of the three Crowns. 1606.

The Author to the Reader.
Loving and most natural countrymen: I have bestowed some time, in reducing
the most exquisit new herball or history of plants (first set forth in Dutch
and Almayne tongue, by the learned and worthy man, of famous memory, D.
Reinbert Dodeon, Physician to the Emperor, and translated into English by
Master Henry Lyte, Esquire) into a brief and short Epitome: wherein is
contained the disposition and true declaration of the phisike helps of all
sorts of herbs and plants, under their several names and titles, not only of
those which are here in this our country of England growing, but also of
others of foreine realms, countries, and nations, used in Phisike, (being now
brought into a very small volume) So as where the geat book at large is not to
be had, but at a great price, which cannot be procured by the pooret sort, my
endeavor herein has bin chiefly, to make the benefit of so good, necessary, and
profitable a work, to be brought within the reach and compass as well of you
my poor Countrymen and women, whose lives, healths, ease and welfare is to be
regarded with the rest, at a smaller price, then the greater Volume is: wherein
I have made declaration of certain dangerous Plants, with their corrections;
only drawing them into a special Title by themselves, which before were
dispersed in many places. This only observation I gave thee, that where, in
many titles of cures, all, or the most part of the herbs or simples for such
cure, are drawn within this direct, it is not to be intended, that all those
simples should be added together in the use of Phisike, but that every of them
by themselves are to be ministered for the cure of the disease under their
several tytles: and that this Caracter or mark, -- which you shall find in
many places of this book, is to give the right understanding of the herb (by
which it is set) by some other more familiar name, then in his first place: And
as it pleased that famous and worthy man, D. Reinbert Dodeon, the Patron of so
excellent and necessary a work, to offer the same into the world: And as the
said worshipful gentleman, master Henry Lyte, by his diligence has
translated the same into our English tongue, for the benefit of all his
countrymen, to the end the light thereof might not be hidden or extinguished,
to their great praise and co^mendations: Even so, my poor talent of endeavor
has been to none other end, but only to draw that into a handful, which before
was in the compass of a great garden: or else to bring that into a little
Garden, which before was (as to be looked for in many fields and disperced
places) not to be found but by great labor and industry: my only and greatest
care has been of long time, to know or think, how and upon whom to bestow
the dedication of this my small labor: And in the penning of this my letter, my
Affections are satisfied with the dedication thereof to thee my poor and
loving cou^tryman whosoever, and to whose hands soever it may come: For whose
sake I have desired publicatio^ of the same, beseeching Almighty God to bless
us all.

William Ram.

The Contents of this Book.
A Special note, that the first page of every leaf being opened, contains
the practice of M. R. Dodeon: And that the second opposite page, under the
Title Incidentia, contains the practices of others for the same Phisike
helps, collected and inserted by the Author of this Treatise. Certain
excellent approved experiments under the Title Incidentia, incident to the
cures of many, or of the most part of the same diseases, set on the other
opposite page. A declaration of many dangerous herbs and Plants, very
dangerous and hurtful to man, by reason of their malignant and hurtful
qualities. The correction of the same dangerous plants, or many of them.
Observations for every of the twelve months in the year. Observations of
times of gathering, ordering and preserving of certain herbs, fruits, seeds,
flowers and roots. Observation of gardening, by father Kinke of Tibolds.
Observation of diverse dangerous days in the several months of the year.
Certain general observations. Observations of Diet, good and evil for the
parts of man's body.
All these Plants, or the most part of them have their several dangers and
properties, and therefore they are to be corrected, or to be used by good
discretion.
Hemp seed, You tree, Agarick, Squilla, Leeks, Onions, Insdian Pepper,
Thlaspy, Coleworts; Orache, Poole reed, Bitter Vitch, Chich pease; Hemlock,
Solanam, Mandragora, Oleander, Licocktenon, Agconitum, Ranunculus, Fern,
Scamony, White Briony, Wallwort, Elder, Colloquintida; Lisimachus, Wyld
Cowcumer; Stanesacre, Mezerou, Camelea, Psillium, Laurel, Parmodactill,
Tapsia, Peplos, Spurge, Ezula, Tit^emall, Elebor, Ciclamen, Astcologia,
Euphorbium, Lacerpitium, Coriander; Comyu; Ameos, Carthamus; Flax^ seed.

All these simples and plants are not to be taken into the body, without great
skill, and good correction, by the learned and skillful Phisicions.
ALl the Crow-footes, especially Apium risum, taken inwardly, spoyleth the
senses and understanding, and draws together all the sinews of the face,
making them that have eaten thereof, to seem to laugh, and so they dye
laughing, except present remedy be provided.

Flannula, Wolfes bane -- Licoctinum, Nertum -- Oleander Oppium -- ^apauer,
Mand^agora, Solanum lethale, -- Dwale, Solanum somaiferum, Henbane, black
especially, Hemlock, Yewe tree not to sleep under.

The Corrections of dangerous Herbs, Plants, and simples.
THe danger of Sothernwood: Sothernwood. Carthamus.
it is a buctfull enemy to the stomach: wherefore Gallen would not have it
ministered inwardly in the body.

The danger of the seed of bastard Saffr^, it is hurtful to the stomach,
causing desire to vomit, of hard and flow operation, remaining long in the
stomach.

Put to that seed, Annis seeds, Galingale, Mastik, Correction.
Ginger, Salgem, or commen salt, which will hasten his operation, and correct
his malignity.

The danger is, being taken into the stomach, Flaxseed or Lyneseede.
Hempeseede. Lysimachus, his choice. Psillium.
it is a hindrance to disgestion of meat, and breeds windinosse.

The danger, it is hard of disgestion, contrary to the stomach, it causes
pain, grief, and d^^^es in the head, it engenders gross and naughty humors
in all the body.

When ye will use Lisimachus, take none but that with the yellew Flowers,
which is the right herb, and the other not.

The danger, it is hurtful to man's nature, it engendrech coldness, and stiffness
throughout the body, with pensidenesse and heaviness of the heart.

Provoke vomit, Correction.
with medicines convenient to cast it up: then give to drink of the best and
most sauory wine, being cow by it self, or boiled with wormwood, or mingled
with honey, and a little lie, or the decoction of Dill.

The best are those which grows in Slauonia. Flower de Lyce roots: their
choice.


The next in Macedonia.

The third in Afirica.

The white Iris is taken for the best.

The danger of the leede taken in too great quantity, Ameos.
it takes away the color, and provoke palenesse as in dead bodies.

The danger being too much used it decays the natural complexion, Cummin
and lively color, and causes a man to look wan and pale.

It ^reene Coriander be taken into the body, Coria^der
it causes horidnes, fransy and d^^nes of the understanding, it makes the
party seem as if he were drunken: the Juice taken in quantity of 4. drams,
kills the body.


The dest is that which is reddish, Lacerpitium the choice. Euphorbium the
danger. Correction.
clear and bright, and sauaring like m^rr^, not greenish, of a good pleasant
smell, which being diss^^ned, w^xeth white.

By reason of his extreme heat, it is hurtful to the lyuor and stomach and
all the inward parts, being received inwardly, it cha^^th and instameth out of
measure.

First anoint (...) with the oil of sweet Almonds, then put it in the middle
of a Cytron, and wrap it in leuened paste, and bake it, and then use it.

Manardus takes of mastick and gum Dragagant, as much as of Euphorbium, and
mingling them together, puts it into the midst of an vnbaked loaf, and
baketh it well, then he takes the c^^m of that loaf, and makes pills, and
gives it for the weakness that comes of the French pox, and all anguish and
pains outward.

Another mingleth Euphorbium with the like quantity of mastick, and makes
pills with the Juice of Citrons, or of Oranges, Astrolochia the choice.
and uses them much against the pestilence.

Round Astrolochia is of fine and subtle parts, and of stronger operation then
the rest, it mundifieth and cleanses mightily, it uppleth and maneth thin,
gross humors.

Long Astrolochia is vetter to incarnate, and to engender flesh in dicers.

Astrolochia Climatis has best savor, and therefore makes best ointments.

The danger: In what sort soever it be taken, Ciclame^ Sowbread.
it is dangerous so women with child: wherefore let them take heed not only
how they receive it inwardly, but also let them be advised in any wise not to
apply it outwardly, nor to carry it about them, nor yet plant it in their
gardens, for it will hinder them if they go but over it.

The danger: being unprepared, White Elebor.
and taken out of time and place, or too much in quantity, is hurtful to the
body: for it choketh and troubles all the inward parts, shrinketh and draws
together all the sinews, and slays the party: therefore unprepared it ought
not to be ministered, nor thou, without good heed and great aduisement: for
such as are either too young, or too old, feeble, that spit blood, that are
grieved in their stomachs, whose breasts are straight and narrow, their necks
long, such people must in no wise deal with it without ieopardie and danger:
therefore be advised by learned Phisicions.

Although black Elebor is not so vehement as the white, Black Elebor.
yet it cannot be given without danger, especially to people having their
health, etc. and not to be ministered but in desperate causes in the spring time
only: and not before it be advisedly prepared and corrected.

Elebor given with Long-pepper, Isop, Daucus, and Annisseeds, Correction.
makes it to work the better, and with less danger. Also, if it be boiled in
the broth of a Capon, or of any other meat: and that broth may be given to
drinks, and with less danger.

The danger of the Juice and seed of Tithimalles: Tithimalles.
it works violently, hurtful to the nature of man, troubling the body,
ouerturning the stomach, burning the throat, making it rough and sore:
wherefore Gallien wills not to have it ministered inwardly, but to be applied
outwardly.

Lay the bark of the roots to soke in Vinegar byra^ day, Correction and remedy.
then dry it and make it in powder, and put to it Annit and Fenell seeds,
Gum Dragagant and Masticke, and so ministering it with some cooling and
refreshing liquor, as Endive, C^^^bory, or Oringes, etc.

The danger is like to the Tithimalles, and hurtful. Ezula. Correction.


The evil quality is corrected as the Tithimalles.

The danger: it is hurtful to man's nature and body, Spourge
as the Tithimalles.

Take the seed of Spourge, Correction.
with Dates, Figs, or Gum Dragagant, Masticke, Annisseedes, or any
refreshing or codling herb: or if one drink water, straight ways it
corrects, etc.

The danger is hurtful to man, Peplos. Correction.
as Spourge.

Is as of Spourge.

Thapsia.
The danger: in drawing the juice from the herb and root, great inflammation
chances to the party that draws it, in his face: And received into the
body, it causes great windiness, blasting, ^^^^^oyling, and ouerturning the
whole body: and it hurts the bowels and inward parts.

When one will gather the Juice, Correction.
or strip the bark off the root, let him anoint his face and bare places,
with oil of Roses and wax.

When it shall be ministered inwardly to open the belly, put to it Long-pepper
and Sugar.

The danger: Wild Saffron, Hermodactil.
it stirs up gnawing and fretting in the body, as if it were all rubbed with
nettles, it inflameth the stomach, and hurts the inward parts, so as at
first it procures bloody excrements, and after brings death.

Drink a great draught of Cow-milke: Correction.
Put to it Ginger, Long-pepper, Annis seeds, Comin, and a little Masticke: it
corrects, and helps.

The danger: Laurel.
it does bexe and ouerfurne the stomach, it in^^^^eth, hurts, and burns
the inward parts.

The (...) are to be steeped one day in good strong Viniger, Correction.
then dry it, and keep it to use.

If first you lay to ^oke in that Vinegar, Quinces, or the seed of Barberies,
when you will occupy the leaves prepared, you must make them in powder, and
give it with Annisseedes and Mastick, or boil them in whay or sweet milk,
especially goats milk, or the broth of a Capon.

The danger is very near the nature of venim, hurtful many ways to mankind:
it greatly hurts the stomach, liver, and to all principal parts of man,
Chamelea.
chasing, and vehemently grieuing the inward parts.

The correction is as of Laurel. Correction.


Mezeron.
The danger, by reason that it is very hot, it is very hurtful, and of strong
and vehement working, grieuing the inward parts.

His correction is as of Chamelea. Correction.


Stauesagre.
His danger is very hurtful to Nature, for it cafeth and inflameth all inward
parts: it ouerturneth the stomach, being holden in the mouth: it causes
inflammation in the mouth and throat, and therefore it is to be ministered
outwardly.

Before you occupy the seed of Stauesagre, slipe it in Vinegar, Correction.
and dry it.

You may give it to be drunken with meat or Honied water.

Who that has taken in any of this seed, must walk without staying, and
should drink Hidromell often, when he seeleth any kind of choking.

Wild Cowcumer, the correction.
It must be given with meade, or with sweet milk, a little Annisseeds and
salt, or give it in powder with Gum Dragaga^nt, Annisseedes, and a little
salt.

Idem, Colloquintida Correction. Elder.
The danger: it hurts the inward parts, and opens the small veins; it
provoke gripings, and torments in the belly.

The danger is exceeding hurtful to the stomach, and Liver, hurting the
bowels and intrayles.

Put to the pulpe or pith thereof Gum Dragagant and Mastick, and after make
it into Troches or Balls with honey.

The danger it is very hurtful to man, it stirs vomiting, tossing and
tumbling the stomach, bowels, and belly, it makes the body weak and feeble,
and it wastes the strength of the Liver.

The danger: Wall-woort. White Briony.
it is noisome to the Stomach and inward parts, as Elder.

The danger is, the root by his violence troubles and ouerturneth the
stomach, and other inner paris, it is altogether evil, and contrary to women
with child.

The malice or naughty quality thereof is taken away, Correction.
by putting to Mastick, Einger, and Cinnamon.

1 The danger: the Juice is very strong and violent, causing wambling and
windiness.

2 It chafeth the liver and blood, and it ingendereth fevers to such as be of
hot complexion.

3 It opens the veins, and hurts the bowels and inward parts, to the
provoking of bloody excrements, very hurtful to the liver, heart, and inward
parts.

Boil or digest it in a Quince, Correction.
or paste of Quinces, until the Quinces be very tender and perfitely boiled,
and then it is called Diagredium.

2 Mix it with some cold Juice, as of Roses, Psilliu^, or Prunepulpe.

3 Put to your Diagredium, Mastick, or the juice of Quinces.

The danger is very great, Fearne. Polipodie the choice.
especially to women with child.

The root which grows at the foot of the oak is best, and most profitable
to be used in medicines.

Ranu^culus.
The danger: they al are dangerous and hurtful, they kill and slay,
especially Apium Risus, which taken inwardly, spoyleth senses, and draws the
sinews, as those which have eaten thereof, seem to laugh, and die laughing,
without some present remedy.

The danger is great, Acconite.
it kills wolves, swine, and all beasts both wild and tame that eat of it.

The danger of wolves bane, Licoctinum. Roseoleander Nereu^.
being taken in, it inflameth the heart, burns the unward parts, and kills
the body.

The danger: it is very hurtful to man, and kills Sheep, Goats, Dogs,
Asses, Mules, Horses, and all four footed beasts.

The danger: Mandragora.
it is most hurtful to man, to be received into the body, if it be taken in,
never so little quantity more then ought to be, it kills the body: the
leaves and fruit are also very dangerous.

The danger is great: Solanu^ somniferum.
if ye give more then twelve berries, it causes rauing, distraction, and
furiousnes, as much as Opium.

The root taken in wine, to the quantity of a dram, causes vain and idle
imaginations: two drams brings frenzy and madness, which lasts three or
four days: four drams taken in, kills the body.

The danger by his venomous quality is great: Hemblock.
for whosoever takes of it, dies, except he drink good old wine after it.
But if he takes Juice of Hemblock together with the wine, the poison is
augmented, and it kills.

The danger: Chiche pease.
the use of these pease is not very good for them that have any vlceration in
their kidneyes or bladders: for they be too much scouring, and do cause the
urine to be sharp.

The danger of Ers or Oribus: being used often, The bitter vitch, called Eruum.
and in too great a quantity, it causes headache and heavy dulnes: it
brings forth blood both by urine and excrements of the belly.

The danger of Poole Reed.
Poole Reed or Harundo vallatoria,is, that if the down that is in the top or
tufting tassell thereof chances to fall into the ears, it brings such
dullness and deafness as is hard to be cured.

The danger: the often eating thereof ingendreth many instrmities: Orache.
it ouerturneth the stomach, and it causes diverse spots, freckles, and
pimples to arise in the face, and all the rest of the body, also it is hard of
digestion.

The danger of them: eaten, Coleworts.
they engender gross and melancholicke blood, especially the red kind: the
white are better to digest, and engender more agreeable and better nourishment,
especially when they have been twice sodden.

The danger is: seeing thee seed is very hot, Thlaspie.
and of strong and vehement working, insomuch that being taken in too great a
quantity, it purges or scoureth even unto blood, and is very hurtful to
women with child, therefore it may not be rashly ministered inwardly.

The danger: it is dangerous to be often used, Indian pepper, Capsicu^. Omons.
or in too great a quantity: for this-pepper has in it a certain evil
quality, whereby it kills dogs, if it be given them to eat.

The danger: the often use of them causes headache, and overmuch sleep,
and is hurtful to the eyes.

The danger: they engender evil humors and windiness, Leekes.
they cause heavy and terrible dreams: they darken the eyesight: they are
very hurtful to them that have any exulcerations, or going off of the skin of
the bladder or raynes.

The danger: Squilla.
it is a very sharp and hard medicine, it is subtle and wasting, hurtful,
and forcing the nature of man, when it is taken or used raw.

It is not to be used into the body, Correction. Arbutus
without it be first sodden, roasted, or baked.

The danger: the fruit thereof eaten hurts the Stomach, and causes head Ach.

The danger: Agarick
it is of slow operation, taken in too great a quantity, it feebleth the
inward parts.

It is corrected being given with Vinegar, Sal gemme, Correction. Yewtree
and chiefly with Oximell.

The danger: it is altogether venomous, and against man's nature.

It is so hurtful, that if one do but fleepe under it, or the shadow thereof,
he becomes sick and sometimes dies, especially when it blows.

In Gascoyne it is most dangerous: if any eat the fruit, if causes the laske.

The birds that eat the Berries thereof, do either die or cast their feathers.

Observations in January.
With this fire I warm my hand.
IF frost and weather be not extreme, the wind not at West or North: set
trees, of Apples Quinces Cheries Rosters Pears Plums Filbirds Raspis Wardens
Damsons Walnuts Goseberies Barberies Quicksets Hawthornes Blackthorne
and generally all trees and plants, the younger the better.

In the wane of the Moon in the first quarter is best to set those and all
others that shall bear fruit or flowers, and to prune trees, to cause them grow
and bear the better.

In the wane of ye Moon, set beans, pease, and hastings, and sow parceneps,
carrets and onions, if the wether be mild and not too hard.

In the end of this month, in the new Moon it is indifferent good to graffe,
fell, and crop trees.

Forget not to look to weak cattle.

Give drink to sick cattle: to Kine with Vergis, and to horse with white
water made with ground Malt or Branne, or with some drink if need be.

If they be poor, give them sodden wheat.

Sow Lettice, Reddish and Spynach.

Drinch Hogs with whay, or take Ornament, alias Oxale, and Triacle of Ieane,
an ounce of each: Bolearmaniak half an ounce in fine powder, temper it in a
pottell of whay for a hog, and in a pint of vergis for a Cow, and give it to
drink warm.

Weane Calves and Pigges for store.

Now geld or lybbe, the sign being from the breast upwards, and from the
thighs downwards, the Moon being at land and at full: for it is ill cutting
at full.

Let not your cattle take any sudden heat, before nor after cutting.

Use little Physic but for great necessity.

Let no blood but in case of necessity, by skillful advice, and in good time.

Use warm meats.

Drink white wine fasting, if thy back be not weak, or that thou be not
subject to the gout.

Eschew all sweet meats and drinks, and use warm clothing.

Let not such as are subject to the Rhewme, take cold nor wet on their feet.

Such as have aches may sweat or bathe, taking no cold.

Cold January loves hot clothes.

Warm meats and broths are best.

Meats that are warm convenient be.

Bleed not, but bathes by counsel use.

Draw no blood from vain, but for necessity.

If thou bleed beware of cold.

Walk not abroad in the night time.

Use to eat the best confections.

Drink white wine, for that flewme increases.

To fast long is hurtful to the body.

Eat Sallets well prepared with oil and spices.

Wash not thy head.

Bathe in safety thy body warm.

To take a vomit is not hurtful.

Take every morning during this month, a little quantity of Rosed honey to
comfort the stomach, and to cleanse the body of choler and flewme.

Drink in ale or wine, Grains. Drink in ale or wine, Ginger, Drink in ale
or wine, Nutmegs. Drink in ale or wine, Cloves.
Observations in February.
With this spade I dig my land.
IN taking Physic be not too bold.

As yet no vain let opened be.

Be choice of food, provide for cold,

For fear lest Agues trouble thee.

Milk now and Fennish foul denis,

As now no wholesome mess.

Now medecines and flegbotomy

Are used with ill success.

Eat confections condited with honey, to purge the blood.

Eat apples.

To eat fresh beef often is hurtful, or other moist meats.

Use not to eat any pot-herbes, but Parceley, Smaledgs, and such like.

Eat rather sodden meat then roast, to keep thy body soluble.

To bathe is not hurtful, nor to take a potion.

Bleed in the vain under the Thumb.

Take pills to purge the head.

Eat honey with bread, to purge the head and bladder.

Sow Larksfeete, and Rocket, In ye old Moon. Sow Asparagus, and Eardus
benedictus, In ye old Moon. Sow Burnet, and Spinach, In ye old Moon. Sow
Artichocks, and Cucumers, In ye old Moon. Sow Harte-horne, and Parceneps, In
ye old Moon. Sow Samphire, and Coleworts, In ye old Moon. Sow Sauell, and
Cabage and Lettice, In ye old Moon. Sow Palma Christi, and Marygolds double,
In ye new Moon. Sow White Popie, and Coriander, In ye new Moon. Sow Rocket,
and Flowre-gentle, In ye new Moon. Sow Margeram, and Violets, In ye new
Moon. Sow Time, in the new Moon. Sow Pumpeons, in the new Moon. Sow
Purcelaine, in the new Moon. Sow Reddish and Borage, in the new Moon. Sow
Chickweede, and Fenell, and Parcely, in the full Moon. Sow Cichory white, and
Fenell, and Parcely, in the full Moon. Sow Beetes, and Fenell, and Parcely,
in the full Moon. Sow Onions, in the wane: and replant Cabages in the
decrease. Sow Cabages, in the wane: and replant Cabages in the decrease. Sow
and Leekes, in the wane: and replant Cabages in the decrease.
In the new Moon, graffe, plant, and set almost all trees: cut Quickset
hedges, set Roses and berry bushes, the weather good, and wind respected.

In the wane set Beans, Pease, and Hastings, and all kind of ligumen: and sow
Onions and Parceneps. And now good huswiues set forward their gardens, in
setting and sowing most kind of herbs and seeder, except Bazell, Margeram, and
such like, which cannot abide cold nor drought. Now sow kearnels of Barberies,
Pears, and Apples.

Set Hops.

Sow Mustard-seede.

Set Vines, and prune them.

Stake, and rear up Rounseualles.

Refrain all things that stop the liver or veins, or that thicken blood, as
Rice, Milke-pottage, with Mallows, and al slimis meats.

Forbear Physic, and bloodletting.

Beware of taking cold, for now Agues are apt to be taken.

Now it is dangerous to take sudden heat or cold.

Observations in March.
Here I cut my Vine spring.
STill have regard what food you take,

For now in man breed humors great,

The learned of your counsel make,

Before you bleed, bathe, purge, or sweat.

Such victuals March requires,

As are both light and pure,

Blood letting somewhat profits,

And medicines some what cure.

Eat pleasant and well spiced meats.

Refrain sharp meats.

Drink pleasant and the strongest wines.

Often times eat Leeke pottage.

To bathe often profits much.

Take no potion to purge or bleed by beine.

Eat often Pennyroyal, to heat ye stomach, and to make digestio^: in sallets
eat Bittony, to cleanse the sight, and to amend ye head.

Use Grains, and such like spices, profitable this time in drinks or meats.
Use Ginger, and such like spices, profitable this time in drinks or meats.
Use Nutmegs, and such like spices, profitable this time in drinks or meats.
Use Galingale, and such like spices, profitable this time in drinks or meats.
Use Pepper, and such like spices, profitable this time in drinks or meats.
Sow Cabage, Lettice, and Bazell, and Artichocks, in ye old Moon. Sow Cucumers,
and Saffron, and Cardus in ye old Moon. Sow Cardus benedict. and Harts-horne,
and Chickweed, in ye old Moon. Sow Samphire, and Harts-ease. and Burnet, in ye
old Moon. Sow Gilliflowres, and Walflowres, and Isop, sauory in ye old Moon.
Sow Reddish, and Margeram, In the new Moon. Sow Pumpions, and Violets, In the
new Moon. Sow Sauell, and Time, In the new Moon. Sow Corsa^der, Borage, and
Marigolds, In the new Moon. Sow Purcelan, and White popie, In the new Moon.
Sow Cabage coals, Onions, and Leekes, in the wane.

Sow Beetes, and White Cicory, In the full Moon. Sow Parcely, and White
Cicory, In the full Moon. Sow Fenell, and White Cicory, In the full Moon. Sow
Lettice, at all seasons. Sow Reddish, at all seasons. Sow Spynage, at all
seasons.
In the new Moon graffe any good fruit, respecting the wind: plant Quicksets,
so that the weather be not too dry.

Set Vines and prune them, set Hops and Willowes, and cut Quickset hedges.

In the waine, set Pease and Beans, and sow Onions, Parceneps, Otes, and
Field pease.

Good huswiues are now known by their gardens.

I need not to tell that it is now good to set and sow all herbs, except
Bazell and Margeram, and such like.

In ye end of this month set Cucumers, Melons, and Artichocks.

Sow Barley in moist and cold ground.

Gross feeding breeds evil blood and gross humors.

Use meats of good digestion, and such as breed good juice.

It is good to purge in warm and mild weather.

Now it is good to enter into the diet of Ginacom.

Sweet meats and drinks are now wholesome.

March said to Auarill,
I see three hogs upon a hill:
Will thou lend me days three,
Ize do my good will to make them die.
When three days were come and gone,
The three hogs came hopping home.
A shower in March, The third in Auarill,
A another in May, The third in Auarill,
The fourth about the Lammastide,
When Corn begins to fill,
Is well yworth a plough of gold,
And all that longs theretill.
I. D. Observations in April.
Here I hear the birds sing.
ALL things their strength now put in ure.

The pores are open, the blood abounds,

Let blood and purge: yet be thou sure,

From learned counsel no hurt redounds.

Those meats are meet in April,

Which March desired for to have.

Blood letting now does very well,

Now purging medecines do crave.

Eat pleasant meats.

River fish is wholesome.

Sallets are commended.

Bleed by any vain in the body except of the Lungs: to open that vain,
hurts, and to open the middle vain, profits.

Bathe often.

To purge the stomach with a potion or otherwise, is good.

Eat no kind of roots.

Eat all kind of flesh but pigges.

Take physic, but bleed safely.

Drink moderately.

Bleed for scabbes.

Eat Bitony and Mynts prepared in honey.

Drink in the morning fasting.

Use herb Grace in thy wine.

Beware of eating saltfish, which then ingendereth the scab and ytch in the
body.

Set or Sow Cardus, and Geliflowres, In the old Moon. Set or Sow Artichocks,
and Hartsease, In the old Moon. Set or Sow Walflowres, and Parceneps, In the
old Moon. Sow Flower gentell, and Margera^, in ye new Moon. Sow Rosemary,
and Violets, in ye new Moon. Sow Lauender, and and Time, in ye new Moon.
Sow Cabbadge Coals in the wane of the Moon. Gather Adders tongue, and Roses:
make Sirop of Roses, and Sugar Roset. Gather Camomill and Roses: make Sirop of
Roses, and Sugar Roset.
Purge, let blood and bathe.

Now go to Bathes: it thou can not, be nued at home, from the beginning of
this month to Midsomer, and from Midsomer to the end of September, or else it
is too hot or too cold.

Purge, and let blood in temperate time.

Now housewiues that forget their gardens before, will leave no vacant plot nor
hear be unset, nor seed from sowing and setting, and specially Cucumers,
Melons, Cithrons, Gourdes, and Artichocks.

In the wane of the Moon, set Pease, Beans, and pol^ Hoppes.

Dairy dames, beflur your families.

Let the Tanner look for bark.

Observations in May.
I am as fresh as bird on bough.
TO bathe and also to let blood

If need require do not refuse:

To rise betimes will do thee good.

Be merry, but no mirth abuse.

In May thou may with safety

Both bathe and take purgation,

Use Vencry and Phlegbotomy,

And like euacuation.

Wash thy face often with fair running water.

Use not to eat much meat of hot quality.

Bleed when need is in any place.

To bleed in the foot is most profitable.

Beware of eating any stale fish.

Eat no tainted flesh that smells ill.

Eat your sallet in dew season.

Drink but little wine.

To bathe is not unprofitable.

Drink clarified whey, simply or drawn with cold herbs.

Use to drink pure wine mixed with goats milk, and with that anoint thy head
and breast.

To drink sharp drinks profits.

Take Physic if need require.

Eat no head nor feet of any beasts, because of the moisture of the herbs
beasts do eat.

Wormwood wine is profitable to drink.

Use to eat Fennel roots tenderly sodden.

Take tender laxes to pourge the blood.

Sleep a littell after dinner.

To bleed on the head or liver beines profits.

Arise early: May loves no sluggards.

Walk into the fields.

Eat and drink betimes.

Sage leaves and butter and Sage ale is wholesome.

Eat no eggs, nor the heads, feet, or brains of any thing.

Drink clarified whay with these herbs,

Fumitory, Maiden-heare, Setrach, Sorrel, and Egrimony, of each of them half
a handful: a few tender buds of hoppes, with a little liquoris: Boil them,
strain them, and drink it at all times, except with meats.

Gather and make Sirrop of Roses, Gather and make Sugar Roset, Gather and make
Oil of Camomyll, Gather and make Oil of Lillies, Gather and make Opium,
Gather and make Rose mary flowers.
Sow Cardus Benedictus in the old Moon.

Sow Lettice, at all times. Sow Reddish, at all times. Sow Spinach, at all
times. Sow Parceneps, at all times.
Now cut, set, and plant all herbs and seeds: for it is fayd of old, Set or
cut in May, and grow all day.

Now sow Bazell, Margeram, Turnips, and all seeds and sallet herbs.

Sow Flare and Hemp, and set Artichocks.

Weed Hops, set young graffes.

Distill herbs gathered in a dry day in the after noone.

Now good Gentlewomen will distill May dew.

Now gather and make Rosa solis

Put your Lambs from the Ewes.

Refrain all things that stop and congeale the blood all the spring time.

The laboring man needs not use any rules of Physic.

Let weak stomachs use thin diet.

Receive physic, let blood, and bathe, and after this month refrain.

Drink clarified whay.

Observations in June.
My Corn is weeded well enough.
Abstain from drink both sweet and new:

From Physic do thy self refrain:

Bid riotous pleasures quite adieu,

Lest that they breed thy endless pain.

Cold herbs in June are very meet,

But such meat shun chiefly,

As shall be either new or sweet:

Take pleasures medicinably.

Abstain from meats that engender phlegm.

Drink the pleasantest wines.

Drink sometime tasting white wine, which purges cholet.

Eat Sallets of Lettice prepared with vinegar, to purge humors descending to
the kidneys.

Use meats of light digestion.

Arise always from the table somewhat hungry.

Exercise thy body with some long walk.

Use Phlegbotomy safely.

Eat no milk but that is well sodden.

Beware of eating Apples this moves.

To bathe is good, but not to tarry long in it.

To wash thy feet often in cold water is commendable.

It is now good time to make Syrop of Damask Roses, Co^serues of red Roses,
Violets, Borage and Buglos, and to distill Rose water, and to make oil of
Roses.

Weed Corn and Gardens.

When the Sun shines, make Hay.

Set Gilliflowres, Carnations, and Rosemary.

Sow sallet herbs, and Lettice iiii. days before the full Moon, and Reddish
iiii. days after the full Moon, in every month from March to September.

Set no herbs, hedges, nor trees in June, July, or August: and have an eye
unto Antes, Emits, and Snailes in your gardens.

Sow Lettice, at all times. Sow Reddish, at all times. Sow Spinach, and at
all times. Sow Parceneps, at all times. Sow Pumpions in the new Moon. Sow
Cucumers in the old Moon. Gather Town Cresses, Gather Peritory, Gather Lang
de bief, Gather Dragons, Gather Origanum, Gather Calamint, and Gather Mary
golds the xvi. day before the Sun, without knife.
If thou must needs take Physic, take it early in the morning.

Use thin diet of thy meat.

Let no blood, but in extremity.

Drink clarified whay as in May.

Take no great thirst: for the poores of the brain are open.

Observations in July.
With this sith my grass I mow.
COld herbs now wholesome be:

But let no blood in any wise:

By running stream and shadow tree,

Thy book thou may well exercise.

Sleep not too much, to cold Bathes go:

Refuse to use Phlegbotomie:

This month abstain from Venus: woe

To him that keeps her company.

Now make hay, fallow for wheat, forget not to carry out soil.

Gather such flowers and seeds, as you will keep all the year.

Dry your flowers in the shadow till they be almost dry, and then sun them
well that they mould not, and so also dry your herbs.

Beware of bread made of fusty or pind corn.

Take no great thirst, and use moderate diet.

Auayd evil airs.

Walk not abroad too early nor too late: especially where sogs, mists,
vapcurs, or stinkes in streets be or lanes.

Keep close your chamber windows shut all night, and open all day in fair
weather, but shut in mist.

In the evening perfume your chamber with perfumes of Benjamin, Storar,
Masticke, Frankincense or any of them.

Eat in the morning butter, with bread and Rue.

Steep Rue in Wine or Ale, all night, and drink it in the morning.

Fear GOD and serve him truly, lead a clean life honestly.

Sow white Succory in the full Moon.

Sow Lettice, at all seasons. Sow Reddish, at all seasons. Sow Spinach, and
at all seasons. Sow Parceneps, at all seasons.
Use moderate diet in meat, for the Stomach will better digest drink then
meat.

Take no thirst in June, July, or August, for nothing ingendereth more fervent
heat, Agues, and the Plague, then it.

Now extreme thirsts, heats and cold, do suddenly come upon them that are
subject to those diseases.

Observations in August.
Here I cut my corn full low.
LEt little sleep, and meat and wine,

And little or no venery

Suffice: abstain from medicine.

Fly cold Bathes, and Flegbotomy.

Good husband, his thee to have in thy Harvest, and let him that best besturres
him, have a Garland, and be Lord of the Reapers.

Give her that follows him best, preeminence to be Lady.

Deny none to give them largess.

Mow thy Fearne.

Gather seeds of thine own garden yearly, which are better then those thou
shall buy of others.

Sow Lettice seeds to eat at Easter, and to bring timely seeds.

Moderate diet is good Physic.

Beware of surfeit.

Take heed of taking great heat, or sudden cold upon thee.

Sleep not much at noone.

Take no Ague now, for the fits are extreme sharp and long, by reason of the
Canicular days.

Use glisters, and open a vein if strength will bear it.

Observations in September.
With this flaile I earne my bread.
SEptember yields fruits pleasantly:

Refrain, eat not thy fill:

Take medecines, use phlegbotomy.

Now spice in meats not ill.

Make conserues of Barberies. Make conserues of and Quinces.
Sow seeds of winter herbs, and set Artichocks.

In the new Moon cut Quickset, hedges of Roses, and borders of herbs.

Set Berry bushes, that are young. Set Apples, that are young. Set Pears, that
are young. Set Wardens, that are young. It is good to set Strawberies, It is good
to set Violets, It is good to set Gelliflowres, It is good to set Carnations.
In the new of the Moon sow Parceneps.

Sow Wheat and Rye.

Gather Crabbes, for Vergis.

Gather Akornes and Beech mast for hogs.

Take the honey from the elder Bees, and keep the younger bees warm and dry,
and beware of Myce, Antes, Snailes, Mothes, and such like.

Sty the Bore.

Put the Ewe to the Ram, that they may take by S. Edwards time: and come by
mid-March.

Pluck thy hemp, and cleanse thy seed.

Take Physic.

Bathe and be let blood, if need be.

Eat all ripe fruits that are not infected, if thy stomach be hot.

Observations in October.
Here I sow my wheat so red.
GO hunt, drink wine that's old and good,

Use exercise for health:

Now must thou take good store of food,

Which have good store of wealth.

Sow wheat, and cleanse thy feed corn in thy barn at home.

In the wane of the Moon, it is good to set young trees of Apples, Pears,
Wardens, Roses, and Berry bushes.

In the wane of the Moon, set Beans, and Rathe-pease, and sow Parceneps in
warm Gardens.

Send out boys to gather Acorns.

Set all kind of Nuts, as thick as they can stand in a pot or pale, and after
remove them.

Gather winter fruit.

Bid the boy go skar the Crows.

Finish up the Physic you mind to take, and rest till March.

Use good hot meats and drinks.

Drink wholesome wines to nourish the blood.

Go dry shed, lest the Rheum or Pose take thee.

Provide warm clothing.

Now it is dangerous, to take the quartaine Ague.

Observations in November.
With this axe I kill my Swine.
OLd wines and sweet are wholesome.

Let little bathing serve.

Count Venus now as loathsome,

If he alth thou will preserve.

In the new Moon remove young trees, and set crab stocks in November,
December, January, and February.

In the wane set Beans, Hastelers, and Rathe pease, and sow Parceneps.

Let none that can make Malt be idle.

Kill Biefe, and Bacon to hang in the roof.

Take no Physic.

Bleed not nor bathe.

Use good meats and drinks.

Use warm clothing.

Good exercise preserves health.

Observations in December.
And here I brew both Ale and Wine.
NOw fire and hot meats have thou must,

December loves warm potions.

Drink wine, beware of too much lust:

Go warm and use strong motions.

In the new moon, the wind being West or Southerly, the weather being not
extreme hot nor frozen, set or remove trees of al fruits, Roses, and Berry
bushes: in the wane set Beans, Hastlers, and Rath-pease.

Amend thy hedges.

Cleave wood.

Look to weak cattle.

Let thy horse blood on Saint Steuens day.

Cover such herbs as cannot abide cold and hard winter, with Fearne or straw,
and God send a merry Christmas.

Use Doctor Diet, Doctor Quiet, and Doctor Merry man, for thy Phisicions.

Let thy kitchen be thy Apothecarie.

Let warm clothing be thy nurse.

Let good company and good hospitality be thine exercise.

Let thy needy, old, poor, and hungry neighbors be remembered.

Remove and set trees, Roses, and Berry bushes, every new Moon, from the
beginning of September, to the end of February.

Graffe every new Moon, from January to mid April, the wind being not North
nor East.

Sow seeds and herbs, or set herbs to have seed again, every new Moon,
from February to June.

Cut hedges or herbs every new moon, from February to May: but V^^es only
in February and March.

Set or sow seeds as shall be round, as Onions, Turnips, Eabage, Lettice, and
such like, three or four days before the full Moon: Onions in February and
March, Turnips in May, Cabage in January, February, March, and September,
Lettice every month.

Sow all seeds that the roots shall grow downward: as Parceneps, Carrets,
and Reddish, in the wane of the Moon.

Gather Apples, Pears, and Wardens, in the wane of the Moon.

Observations for gathering of Herbs, Fruits, Seeds, Flowers, and Roots.
SHould be gathered when they be full ripe, Seeds,
and the moisture some deal dried.

Should be gathered when they be some deal open, Flowers,
before they fall or fade.

Should be gathered when they be full of moisture, Herbs,
before they do begin to shrink.

Should be gathered when the leaves do fall. Roots, Fruits,


Should be gathered when they be at the full greatness, before they fall.

The heavier and the sadder that the fruits be, the better they are.

Those fruits that be great and light, thou shall not choose.

The fruit that is gathered in rain, are not so good as fruits gathered in
fair weather.

That grow in the fields, Herbs,
are better then those which grow in towns and gardens.

Of those herbs which grow in the fields, such as grow on hills are best.

Commonly the herbs growing in the fields, are smaller then herbs of the
same kind, growing in towns and gardens.

Many herbs have their special times of gathering.

If they be gathered in that time, they have their virtues, but if they be
gathered in any other time, they are not so good.

Some herbs help whenever they be gathered: and some do not, if they be
gathered out of their time.

Swine-cresses, are to be gathered at all times. Red Docke, are to be gathered
at all times. Pedeleon, after noone, are to be gathered at all times. Wallwort
without iron, are to be gathered at all times. Groundswell, are to be gathered
at all times. Garlic, are to be gathered at all times. Dodor upon line, are
to be gathered at all times. Saffron before sun, are to be gathered at all
times. and Galingale, are to be gathered at all times.
Camomyll and Adder-tongue, -- in April.

Violets, -- in March.

Roses, -- in May.

Town Cresses, in June and July. Perretory, in June and July. Lang de biefe,
in June and July. Dragons, in June and July. Origanum, in June and July.
Ealamynt, in June and July. Marygoldes the xvi. day, before in June and July.
sun, with iron. in June and July.
Rose-mary flowers, -- in May.

Bittony and Colombines, -- in Lammas moon.

Tentory, when they flower. Wild garlic, when they flower. Agnus Castus,
when they flower. Water Calamynt, when they flower. Drawke, when they flower.
Hart's-tongue, -- in November.

Astrologia longa, in Harvest. Astrologia rotunda, in Harvest. and Fenell, in
Harvest.
Gourds, -- in the end of September.

Cucumers, -- when the first is ripe.

Citrull, -- when the first is ripe.

Fenell roots, -- in the beginning of the year.

Gentian, -- in the last end of the year.

Flower de lyce, -- in the end of veere.

Wild Neppe Berries, -- when they ware yellow.

Philipendula roots, -- in the end of Harvest.

Auens, -- at all times.

Grapes: before they be ripe, press out the juice or moystnes, and dry it in
the sun, make it into powder, and use it with meats, it is good against
casting coming of choleric humors.

Observations for gardening, by Father Kinke of Tibolds.
TRench and level your ground in summer, if it be not already broken in
winter.

Then may you sow all manner winter herbs, for Sallets, and for the Kitchen.

Foureseene days before Bartholmew-tide, set knots of all manner herbs, and
borders, with double Wall-flowres, Gilliflowres, Pinks, and such like.

If the ground be ready, sow Endive to make white, foureseene days before
Midsummer, and sow at every wane unto Hallownetyde.

Then must you take them up in a dry time, and set or lay them as close as you
may, that the earth come not among them.

At Bartholmew time is good sowing of white Cabage.

Take them up in January, in the wane of the Moon, or in February, and
replant them two foot asunder, and they will be ready to eat about Midsummer.

Sow of the same Cabage again about February, then shall you do as
aboue-said, and they will be ready about Hollomas and Christmas.

Sow about February Cabage Lettice, in the wane of the Moon.

Sow in March all herbs for the Kitchen.

Sow in May, Turnips, Reddish, and Carrets, to serve for winter.

Cut your knots and borders in the spring of the Moon, to make them grow apace.

Do the like by all quickset bedges.

If you will have them to grow softly, cut them in the wane, and it will be the
longer before they shall be cut again.

Set and lay red and damask Roses, and strawberries, after Bartholmewtide.

Begin to remove all sorts of trees for fruits, at Hallowntide.

In the latter end of April, or the beginning of May, prick in the ground,
Bazel, Margera^, Melons, Pumpeons, Cucumers, etc.

Lay your Cucumer and Melon seeds in milk to soke, a day and a night before
you prick them in the ground, in the wane of the Moon.

For sear of frost cover them in the night with pottes, and for sear of
snayles.

Cut your vine in January or in February, in the wane of the Moon, or at the
beginning of March, two or three joints: but in May cut it not too near, for
fear it bleed and hinder the vine.

If it be a young vine, cut but two joints, and cut it between the joints, not
too near any joint, and it will bear very well.

Set vines in January or February.

If in the end of April, or the beginning of May, you will cut a branch of a
vine, it will bleed very much: you may preserve that water in a glass for
your eyes.

Eather all fruit to last, in the wane of the moon, next before or after
Michaelmas, and lay them in a close chamber, upon heaps.

In distilling of any waters, when your glass is full, put in a Still full of
Roses, or of other things that you mind to still, and put your glass into your
Still uncovered, and let it stand till that be stilled: then close up your
glass, and never set it in the sun.

To graffe in the Shield, is to be done in June and July, with the rynde.

To graffe in te Stochin, is to be done in March and April, in the new Moon,
or a day or two before the change. First pare the skins ready to put in the
stock, before you cleave the stock: straight put in your skins, and clay them
sure: for if the sap of a Plumme tree take wind, it then will not prosper.

Kinke of Tibolds.

Certain observations.
ALL raw things annoy the stomach.

All roasted things, be dry. and all wines, be dry. Eat not too much,
whereby enjoy continual health. Eat but when need is: whereby enjoy
continual health.
A good perfume to burn.
Take Storax and Calamynta, a quarter of an ounce: as much Benjamin, as much
Lignum Aloes, beat the wood in powder, and then incorporate all the rest by
beating together, and make it in small Cakes to burn.

A pretty kind of bread to eat in the morning.
Take Sugar one pound, fine wheat-flowre a pound, eight eggs beaten: temper
them well together with a few whole Aunisseedes cleansed: make it in Coffins,
bake it, and eat it every morning.

For a web in a Horse eye.
Take Celidony and salt, and stamp them: and then put it in the Horse eye.

For a Horse foundred.
Take four eggs hard roasted, and all hot, lay to each foot one, shel and al,
and stop it fast about with horse dung, and so let him stand.

To make Vinegar.
Take a quantity of Bean flower, knead it with Vinegar, bake it, and twice or
thrice take it out of the oven, and moist it well with Vinegar, til it have
drunken well, then put it in wine, and it will turn to good Vinegar, and the
like you must do to make easell or Alleger.

For a Horse that has the Cough.
Take two eggs and bruise the shelles, but break not the yolks, put them into
one pint of Vergis al one night: the next day take out the eggs, and put into
the Vergis a pen^^y worth of Polipody of the oak, and boil it a good while.
And after, when it is luke warm, put in the eggs, shells and all, and stir
them well together, and give it the Horse to drink.

For Hogs murren.
Roots of Polipody are good.

For squinancy of Hogs.
Harts-ease is good.

Rub thy hands with the root of Dragons in May, and take Adders in them, and
they shall not sting thee.

Ad extinguendum Argentum viuum.
1 Argentum viuum extinguitur, been cu^ salina and cincere calid. been
confricando. 2 Melius tamen cum sulphur and salina. 3 Optime cum salina, and
calce vi.
For the Farcy on a Horse.
Allumen mixtum cum Aceto and galla equali pondere ad stringendum Farsam ne
sana loca perambulet, multum valet.

Observations for Diet.
Diet for all the year. Prime time. Chickens, and Eggs in mooneshew, Diet for
all the year. Prime time. Kids with vergis, and Roches, Diet for all the
year. Prime time. Borage, and Perches, Diet for all the year. Prime time.
Beetes, and Pikrelles, Diet for all the year. Prime time. Yolks of eggs, and
All scale fish. Diet for all the year. Harvest time. Capons, Diet for all the
year. Harvest time. Hens, Diet for all the year. Harvest time. Pigeons,
Diet for all the year. Harvest time. Good wines, Diet for all the year.
Harvest time. Good drinks. Diet for all the year. Su^mer time. Light meats,
and Melons, Diet for all the year. Su^mer time. Chickens we vergis, and
Gourds, Diet for all the year. Su^mer time. Young Hares, and Cucumers, Diet for
all the year. Su^mer time. Rabbets, and Pears, Diet for all the year. Su^mer
time. Lettice, and Plume, Diet for all the year. Su^mer time. Purcelain, and
and the fish aforesaid. Diet for all the year. Winter time. Beef, and
Partriches, Diet for all the year. Winter time. Porke, and Phesants, Diet for
all the year. Winter time. Brawne, and Hares, Diet for all the year. Winter
time. Hearts, and River fowls, Diet for all the year. Winter time. Hindes, and
Wine, Diet for all the year. Winter time. Other venison. and Good spices. Good
to comfort the brain. Smelto Musk, Quibibes, and Camomill: drink wine
moderately: cate Sage not too much: cover thy head: wash often thy hands and
feet: walk measureably: fleep reasonably: delight to hear melody and
singing: eat mustard and pepper: smell to red Roses: wash thy temples with red
Rose water. Evil for ye brain All brains of beasts, and Too much watching,
Evil for ye brain Gluttony, and Too much walking, Evil for ye brain
Drunkenness, and Milk, Evil for ye brain Late Supper, and Cheese, and Nuts,
Evil for ye brain To sleep after meat, and To eat before hunger, Evil for ye
brain Corrupt Air, and Bathing after meat, Evil for ye brain Anger, and
Ouyons, Evil for ye brain Heaviness, and Garlic, Evil for ye brain To uncover
ye head, and Great noise, Evil for ye brain To eat softly, and To smell to a
white Rose, Evil for ye brain Too much heat, and Much stirring. Good for ye
eyes, Look often on gold, and Pimpernell, Good for ye eyes, Red Roses, and Oculus
Christi, Good for ye eyes, Veruin, and Plu^ge clear water in yt eyes. Good for
ye eyes, Rue, and Look on green color, Good for ye eyes, Fenell, and
Measureable sleep, Good for ye eyes, Eufrase, and Wash hands and seet often.
Evil for the eyes, Garlic, and Lechery, Evil for the eyes, Onyons, and Sleep
after noone, Evil for the eyes, Hunger, and Much sleeping, Evil for the eyes,
Leekes, and Much waking, Evil for the eyes, Waking, and Blood letting, Evil for
the eyes, Wind, and Looking against the fire. Evil for the eyes, Hot air, and
Evil baked bread, Evil for the eyes, Cold air, and Dust, Evil for the eyes,
Gluttony, and Weeping, Evil for the eyes, Milk, and Looking against the sun or
Moon, Evil for the eyes, Cheese. and Evil for the eyes, Much to behold, and
Bright things, Evil for the eyes, Smoke, and Red color, Evil for the eyes,
Coleworts, and White color. Good for the stomach, Red mynts, and Calamynt,
Good for the stomach, Red Roses, and To vomit once a quarter, Good for the
stomach, Common, and Great hunger, Good for the stomach, Sugar, and Every day
to stand after meat, Good for the stomach, Sage, and Good for the stomach,
Wormwood, and Often walking after meat, Good for the stomach, Galingale, and
Every cold thing, Good for the stomach, Nutmegs, and Vinegar, Good for the
stomach, Measureable sleep, and Pepper. Evil for the stomach, Nuts, and Too
much casting, Evil for the stomach, Cheese old, and Too much bathing after
meat, Evil for the stomach, Honey, and Too much travel, Evil for the
stomach, Marow not sod, and To eat raw flesh, Evil for the stomach,
Heaviness, and Bread not baked, Evil for the stomach, Dread, and To eat not
hungry, Evil for the stomach, Falling, and To eat many meats at a meal,
Evil for the stomach, Fried meats, and Evil for the stomach, Milk, and To
drink not thirsty, Evil for the stomach, Stowping, and To eat stinking
meat. Good for the throat, Liquoris, soft Eggs, Isop, Sugar-Candie, Honey,
Sugar, Butter with a little salt. Evil for ye throat, Mustard, and Too much
waking, Evil for ye throat, Much lying on the breast, and Too much Rest, Evil
for ye throat, and Much drink, Evil for ye throat, Pepper, and Smoke of
Incence, Evil for ye throat, Anger, and Old cheese, Evil for ye throat, All
things roasted, and Much running, Evil for ye throat, Lechery, and Sour things.
Good for ye heart, Saffron, and Nutmegs, Good for ye heart, Bourage, and
Galingale, Good for ye heart, Laughing, and Red Roses, Good for ye heart, Joy,
and Violets, Good for ye heart, Musk, and Sugar, Good for ye heart, Cloves,
and Maces before all things. Evil for ye heart, Beans, and Anger, Evil for ye
heart, Pease, and Dread, Evil for ye heart, Leekes, and Too much heaviness,
Evil for ye heart, Garlic, and Travel, Evil for ye heart, Onions, and To
drink cold water after labor. Evil for ye heart, Heaviness, and
Rams little Dodeon.
For the afterbirth, secondine, dead child, or flowers.
CAmepites leaves decoct in wine and drunk.

Comiza leaves and flowers decoct in wine and drunk.

Marygold flowers decoct in wine and drunk.

Camomyl herb, flowers, and root, decoct in wine and drunk.

Time, boiled in water and honey and drunk.

Penny-royall, boiled in wine and drunk.

Masticke bark or leaves, decoct in wine and drunk.

Horehound white, decoct in wine and drunk.

Horehound black, decoct in wine and drunk.

Rue leaves, decoct in wine and drunk.

Lauender, decoct in wine and drunk.

Dictain, decoct in wine and drunk: or a pessary.

Cestly seeds, decoct in wine and drunk.

Daucus seeds, decoct in wine and drunk.

Saxifrage roots, decoct in wine and drunk.

Pannar seeds, decoct with Wormwood in wine, and drunk.

Pencedamtu^ root, yt sap by it self, or with hitter Almonds taken.

Oppopannax: a pessary.

Lacerpitium, with myrre and pepper drunk.

Sagapenum, with homed water drunk.

Galbanum, with wine and myrre drunk.

Amommacum, taken a little at once.

Aristologia longa, with pepper and myrre and drunk.

Centory maius, decoct in wine and drunk.

Heleborus albus, decoct in wine and drunk.

Heleborus niger, decoct in wine and drunk.

Cucumeris siluestris, decoct with honey, conveyed in the place convenient.

Bryony white root, a pessary.

Scamony, a pessary.

Mandragora, a pessary.

Lupines with myrre and honey, a pessary.

Smyrneum seeds, decoct in wine, and drunk.

Cresces seeds, decoct in wine and drunk.

Ciscus, taken.

Sauen leaves decoct in wine and drunk, or pessary.

Azarum with homed water drunk.

For the Ague.
SOthernewood soked in oil, and rub the body.

Tansey juice mingled with oil of Roses, anoint the body.

Hepatica decoct in wine and drunk. -- Liver wort.

Singrene juice with pepper drunk.

Bugle, or Prunell, decoct and drunk.

Violets the strrop taken.

Flos Armoris, the flower co^serued taken. -- Sweet Williams.

Daysies small, the leaves decoct in water and drunk.

Cotula lutea, decoct in oil put in Clister. -- wild.

Camomyll.

Oppopannar, drunk with homed water.

Rubarb insused and taken.

For hot Agues or Fevers.
PSillium or Flebane, the seed decoct or stieped and drunk.

Pirola decoct and drunk.

Violets sirrop taken.

White water Lilly decoct and drunk.

Scamony, the weight of six wheat graiues taken,

Cichory decoct and drunk.

Purcelain juice drunk.

Roses juice drunk.

Marrish worts black, eaten raw, or stewed with sugar.

Goose-berries, eaten raw with meats, green.

Barbery bush, green leaves made in sauce, eaten.

Apples eaten.

Lemons eaten.

Pomegarnets eaten.

Sebestenes eaten.

Cassia drawn, the pulpe eaten.

For tertian Agues.
BVglos decoct and drunk.

Hepatica boiled in wine and drunk. -- Bastard Agrimony.

Turnesole decoct in wine and drunk.

Hipericon decoct in wine, and drunk.

Sinquefoyle decoct in wine and drunk.

Planten decoct in wine and drunk.

Knot-grasse decoct in wine and drunk.

Varuin decoct in wine and drunk.

Penny royal decoct in wine and drunk.

Liver wort decoct in wine and drunk.

Trifoly decoct in wine and drunk.

For long Agues.
SAxifrage decoct in wine and drunk.

Master wort decoct in wine and drunk.

For old Agues.
CVscuta decoct in wine and drunk. -- Doder.

For to procure Agues.
CHerries eaten.

For to quench thirst in Agues.
GOose-berries eaten raw.

For to drive away shaking and shiuering Agues.
OPpopannax drunk with meat and homed water.

Lacerpitium taken with honey.

Sagapenum, one dram taken.

Aristologia decoct in wine or water, drunk.

Woodbine leaves sod in oil, and pund, the back or ridge anointed.

Mustard taken in meat or drink.

Pepper taken in meat or drink.

For S. Anthonies fire.
FEucrfe we green leaves, pund and laid to.

Tussilago leaves, pund with honey and laid to.

Penny wort on the wall, the juice laid to.

Peritory, pund and laid to.

Poliganum pund, and laid to.

Flebane seed decoct in water or stiped, and laid to.

Singreene pund alone, or mingled with parched barley meal, laid to.

Varuen pund with vinegar, laid to.

Water Singreene pund with vinegar, and laid to.

White Lilly roots roasted, pund with oil of Roses applied.

Saffron mingled with woman's milk, laid to.

Coriander juice with Ceruce, Literge, Vinegar and oil of Roses, applied.

Azarum stamped, and laid to.

Palma Christi leaves pund with barley meal, laid to.

Liuerwort bruised, and laid to.

Popie heads not ripe bruised with barley meal, laid to.

Nightshade leaves pund with barley meal, laid to.

Alkakengi leaves pund with barley meal, laid to.

Olive tree leaves decoct in wine, and laid to.

Melilot: a Quince and oil of Roses, laid to.

Orache pund with Saltpeter, Honey and vinegar, laid to.

Succory juice with barley meal, laid to.

Lettice green leaves bruised, and laid to.

Purcelaine leaves pund with parched barley, laid to.

Gourd juice with oil of Roses, laid to.

Garlic burnt to ashes, meddled with vinegar, laid so.

Roses juice applied.

Gooseberries green bruised, and laid to.

Acatia the juice, laid to.

Dates leaves and branches pund, and laid to.

Ciprus tree leaves pund, and laid to.

Turpentine, applied.

For to restore Appetite.
IMperatorium root decoct in wine and drunk.

Lupines soked long in water, eaten.

Sorell de-Boys and decoct, eaten or drunk.

Lettice crispe, eaten with meats or Sallet.

Sea-Purielaine preserved and eaten in Sallet.

Rampion eaten with vinegar.

Raphanum magnum eaten with meats.

Skirworts eaten boiled.

Parcely eaten with meat.

Charuell decoct and eaten, or Raw in Sallet.

Mustard eaten.

Pepper eaten with meat.

Onions eaten with meat.

Capers eaten in Sallet.

Barberies eaten with meat.

Lemons eaten.

Nutmegs eaten.

Maces eaten.

Olives eaten with meats.

For the Appoplexie.
LIlly Conualle, the flowers distilled with strong wine, drunk, one spoonefull.

Saxifrage, the root chawne in the mouth.

Sagapeum the weight of a dram taken.

Colloquintida the white pulpe, one scruple taken.

Briony root one dram taken.

For to restore speech in Appoplexie.
SMall Saxifrage the roots taken.

Euphorbium, corrected, taken.

Peach kernels eaten.

Viscus quercinus, the word hanged about the neck.

For the Ars-gut going out.
ASter Atticus, pund and laid to.

Wall flowers, pund and laid to.

For Air infected.
RVe, Walnuts and Figs, eaten in the morning.

Small Saxifrage seeds.

Angelica root holden in the mouth.

Pencedanum the sap taken with Rue, and bitter Almonds.

Ientian the root in powder taken.

Limons juice taken: and Juniper berries perfumed.

For the belly to purge mightily.
COlloquintida the white Pulpe taken one scruple.

White Briony root the juice taken.

Juice of Mandragora root taken in small quantity.

White Beese juice taken.

Buckthorne.

For the belly to purge gently.
CIclamen juice stroked on the navel or belly

Black Helebor taken by discretion.

Hoppes juice taken.

Horned Popie seeds decoct and taken.

Beans green, unripe taken.

Kidney Beans fruit and Coddes unripe eaten.

Bitter Fitches decoct and eaten.

Lentils decoct, the first decoctian taken.

Lupines decoct and taken.

Fenigreeke seeds, prepared and eaten.

Red Colewort leaves, decoct and eaten.

Sheep sorell leaves, boiled and eaten.

Cucumer seeds, drunk with milk and sweet wine.

Gourds juice boiled, drunk with honey and Saltpeter.

Omons eaten with meat.

Squilla with honey and oil.

Affodill, the root boiled and drunk.

Grapes green eaten: and Apples sour boiled and eaten.

Peach leaves, pund and taken: and Cicamor fruit eaten.

New Figs, Plums, Cheries, and Carobes ^aien.

For to cause blasting, and pain in the belly.
RAw Turnep roots eaten.

For to open and loose the belly.
SAffron seed juice drunk in milk.

Bastard Rubarbe leaves in meat.

Mercury boiled and eaten or drunk.

V^clet sirrop eaten.

Dayfies small decoct and eaten or drunk.

Origan with Hidromell or homed water drunk.

Trago Origan.

Betony with ^idromell or homed water drunk.

Pencidanu^ roots the juice with Rue and bitter Almonds.

Amomacum a dram taken.

Aloes the juice taken.

Palma Christi seeds taken.

Elder tender croppes in broth eaten.

Black Briony tender buddes in Sallet.

Bind weed leaves, the juice taken -- Helxine.

Orache in pottage.

Coleworts the juice by it self, or with Salt peter.

Lettice in Sallet with meat.

Mallows with meat.

Asperagus buds decoct with oil and vinegar in sallet.

Red Roses juice.

Qu^dimack of Quinces after meat.

Peaches, Mulberies, and Figs ripe eaten.

Mulbery root, the bark decoct and drunk.

Cassia, the pulpe eaten.

Eline tree y^ utter bark one ounce with wine or water.

Rosen of Larix tree licked with honey.

Rosen of Turpentine tree licked with honey.

For inward Scuruines of the bladder.
OPpopannax with meat or homed water.

For Vlceration or rawnes of the bladder.
CVcumer seeds drunk with milk or sweet wine.

Sebestenes.

Cyprus nuts leaves boiled in sweet wine or meat, drunk.

Hurtful to the bladder.
WHite Horehound taken in, any ways.

For inward scabs of the bladder.
BRoklem leaves decoct in wine and drunk with Asperagus. Myrtell berries.

Liquoris root and juice taken.

For pain or stopping of the bladder.
GReat Bur the juice.

Tausey juice with oil of Roses.

Philippen^^^^ roots boiled in wine and drunk.

Toade Flax decoct and drunk. -- Osiris.

Planten root boiled in wine and drunk.

Horsetayle boiled in wine or water, drunk.

Scordion decoct with wine and drunk.

Consound the juice taken.

White water Lilley root boiled in wine and drunk.

Camomill decoct in water, drunk.

Stecados decoct in wine and drunk.

S^xifrage root decoct in wine and drunk.

Pencedamu^ root, the juice, by it self or with Rue or bitter Almonds.

^^on roots boiled in water and drunk.

Dittain the seed one dram taken. -- Tragium.

Cuscuta decoct in wine and drunk.

Petti morrell stamped and applied outwardly.

Alkekengie fruit eaten.

Callomus Aromati^ns juice drunk.

Gum dragagant with bony and wine.

Mallow leaves with salt eaten.

Smyrneum seed decoct and drunk.

Scaudix, or sheperds needell decoct and drunk.

Water Cresses in Sallade. Dried Raisons eaten.

Nutmegs eaten or drunk.

For to cool the blood.
PVrcelain in Sallade eaten.

Marrish whortes eaten. Red Gooseberies eaten.

For to stop all issues of blood.
MEdesweet roots in ponder. -- drunk severally. Planten leaves decoct. drunk
severally. Knot grass juice. drunk severally. Great Singrene decoct, or the
juice. drunk severally. Sanicle boiled in wine. drunk severally. Coriander
seed roasted or partched in ponder drunk severally. Rubarb taken. drunk
severally. Henbane seed ye weight of i. d. ob. in ponder. drunk severally.
Read Rattell boiled in wine. drunk severally. Caroline Thistell the lesser
decoct in wine. drunk severally. Purcelein juice. drunk severally. Marish
mallows green or dry pund. drunk severally. Leek seeds and myrtle berries
like qua^t. decoct. drunk severally. Cistus flowers decoct in wine. drunk
severally. Tamariske bark decoct. drunk severally. Shomacke leaves decoct.
drunk severally. Pomegranate seeds dried in the Sun. drunk severally. Wild
plummes or snags the juice. drunk severally. Chestnut red bark boiled. drunk
severally. Withie leaves and bark decoct. drunk severally. Oak leaves, bark
and cups decoct. -- drunk severally.
Way bennet or barley wrapped in a crimosin skin or piece of leather bound to
the body.

Gallion flowers laid to or put in the nose.

Wild grape flowers and vuripe fruit eaten.

Yellow seed and fruit of Roses taken in.

Unripe gooseberries, the juice pressed out and dried, eaten.

Myrtie berries eaten.

Quince roste and eaten.

Oak apples burnt on coals, and quenched with wine or vinegar, or with bryne
made of salt and vinegar, stops all issues of blood.

Masticke taken and eaten.

Husbandmen of Kent, Ant -- plenty of grain. Husbandmen of Kent, W^hite worm
-- murrion of beasts Husbandmen of Kent, Spider -- pestilence among men.
Mathiolus super Dioscorides Fly -- war. Mathiolus super Dioscorides Spider --
pestilent sickness. Mathiolus super Dioscorides Worm -- scarcety of victual.
For to staunch blood of green wounds.
Herb Robert bruised bruised and laidt^. Woade bruised bruised and laidt^. Ye^^^
(...) bruised and laidt^. Sinkefoyle bruised and laidt^. Motherwort bruised and
laidt^. Pimpernell bruised and laidt^. Yelow Millefoly bruised and laidt^. Yarow
bruised and laidt^.
For to stop the blood of all wounds.
SAge pund pund and laid to. Aloes in powder pund and laid to. Liuerwort pund
pund and laid to. Lungwort in powder -- Pulmonaria pund and laid to. Astragalus
root in powder -- Pease earth nut pund and laid to. Couche grass leaves pund
pund and laid to. Parnassus gras young leaves -- Hepatica alba pund and laid to.
Cliuer or Goose grass pund and laid to. Galion pund and laid to. Pomegranates
leaves and blossoms pund and laid to. Cornell tree leaves and tender croppes
pund and laid to. Oak leaves pund and laid to. Ciprus tree leaves pund and laid
to.
To purge blood of all corrupt humors.
HOppes decoct and drunk.

Juice of Hoppes drunk.

For Inflammation of blood.
LIuerwort decoct and drunk.

Marsh whoorts decoct and drunk or eaten.

Pomegranat juice taken in.

For to cause to piss blood.
GArden Madder root decoct and drunk.

For to stop the Flux of the belly.
Sinquefo^le roots decoct drunk. Tormintilt root in powder, with wine or
water of a Smithes forge, wherein iron or steel has been often quenched
drunk. Planten leaves decoct, -- Knot gras the juice, drunk. Horstaile decoct
in wine, -- Great Singreene decoct, drunk. Yelow flower deluce decoct in water
drunk. Hyacinth root decoct in wine drunk. Fly orchis root boiled in water
drunk. Puliall mountain boiled in wine drunk. Trago Organum decoct in wine
drunk. Annisseeds decoct in wine -- Piony roots in powder drunk. Ciprus
seed -- Galingale decoct in water drunk. Hearts tongue leaves decoct drunk.
Maiden hair decoct in wine drunk. Black popie seed decoct in wine drunk.
Tares seed decoct -- Hares foot decoct in wine drunk. Phaenix or Waybennet
decoct drunk. Garden Purcelane juice drunk. Marsh Mallow roots decoct in
wine drunk. Gourdes tender tops bruised with wine drunk. Smyrneum leaves
decoct, and the roots in water ^^ped drunk. Chestnut red back boiled in wine
drunk. Lentisk tree leaves and barks drunk. Lacerpitium with honey and vinegar
eaten. Otemeale in meat -- Dry blanched Beans eaten. Tares seed decoct --
Earth nut boiled eaten. Smyrneum leaves and roots eaten. Hiponstus taken --
Unripe Gooseberries eaten. Fruit of White thorn -- Hawes eaten. Almonds before
meat eaten. Medlers eaten. Green Mulberies dried eaten. Wild Plums -- Lotus
eaten. Carobus dried eaten. Ciprus tree fruit eaten.
For windiness, and blasting of the belly.
Wormwood eaten in the morning fasting,

Hemp seed in small quantity,

Pellitorie of Spain rocte, decoct in wine and drunk,

Wild sea Purcelane kept in brine eaten in sallet,

Black Pepper eaten.

For griping pains in the belly.
COmza leaves and flowers decoct in wine or water, and drunk Varuin decoct,
and drunk Margerum decoct in white wine. and drunk Garden Mint boiled in
water, and drunk Cost mary alone, or with Parceneps seeds decoct, and drunk
Rue decoct with Dill, and drunk Annisseedes decoct with wine, and drunk Comin
seeds decoct with wine, and drunk Lybanotus seeds decoct in wine, and drunk
Cesely seeds decoct with wine, and drunk Daucus seeds decoct with wine, and
drunk Saxifrage seeds and roots decoct with wine, and drunk Louage root
and seed, decoct with wine, and drunk Asclepias root boiled in water, and
drunk Centauri mayor, the root two drams with wine, and drunk Rubarbe
infused, and drunk Walwort leaves and young tops decoct in wine, and drunk
Polipody of the oak in powder decoct, and drunk Pannax seeds decoct in wine,
and drunk Phoenix decoct with red wine, and drunk Gringus roots in powder, or
decoct in wine, and drunk Cardus benedictus boiled in wine, and drunk Sea
Purcelane decoct in wine, and Radish decoct, and drunk Parcely root decoct in
wine, and drunk Nutmegs decoct, and Juniper berries decoct, and drunk
Line seeds boiled in water and glistered.

Pencedamum root, the sap by it self, or with bitter Almonds eaten.

Parcely eaten, and Squilla roasted, prepared, and eaten.

Nutmegs eaten.

For to cure the bloody Flux.
Bistort Root, in wine decoct. and drunk. Periwincle, in wine decoct. and
drunk. Agrimony seed, in wine decoct. and drunk. Yellow Licymachus, in wine
decoct. and drunk. Shepherds purce, in wine decoct. and drunk. Cinquefoyle, in
wine decoct. and drunk. Tormentill root in smiths water. and drunk. Wild
Tansey in wine, decoct and drunk. Gnaphalion leaves in red wine, decoct and
drunk. Planten leaves in wine, decoct and drunk. Knot-gras juice drunks, decoct
and drunk. Horse-taile in wine, decoct and drunk. Flebane seed parched, the
powder in wine and drunk. Scordion dried in powder, two drams in wine and
drunk. Great Singrene in wine decoct, and drunk. Flex weed seed in wine or
smiths water, Sophia.
decoct, and drunk. White Molyn root, in red wine and drunk. Pimpernell in
wine decoct, and drunk. Millefolly in wine decoct, and drunk. White water
Lilly root or seed, decoct in wine and drunk. Yellow Flower de luce, decoct
in water and drunk. Costmary leaves alone, or we Parcely seeds in wine decoct,
and drunk. Sage decoct in wine, and Rubarbe infused and drunk. Polimomum root
decoct in wine and drunk. Pannax seed decoct in wine and drunk. Vine green
leaves and claspers decoct in wine and drunk. Pomegranat blossoms in powder and
drunk. Mulberries green and unripe, decoct in wine and drunk. Chestnut bark
boiled in wine and drunk. Oak leaves, bark, ano Apple, decoct in wine and
drunk. Pine Apple, fruit, and scales decoct in wine, and drunk. Nutmegs drunk,
and drunk. Turpentine leaves decoct in wine, and drunk.
Lentilles decoct, the first water cast away: and after the second decoction,
eat them. Lycium of bor thorn takne.

Cornelle Plums, and Rosen of Larir taken.

For spitting of blood or corrupt matter.
GReat Bur seed in powder one dram, pund with kernels of pine Apple in wine
drunk. Permacle in wine decoct drunk. Shepheardes purse in wine decoct
drunk. Tormentill root in powder with wine drunk. Knot grass juice drunk.
Black Molyn with his pleasant flowers decoct in wine drunk. Pimpernell in wine
or smithes water decoct drunk. Sanicle decoct in wine or water drunk.
Millefolly decoct drunk. Rumglyme juice half an eu^ce with vinegar drunk.
Mint juice with vinegar drunk. White horehound decoct in water drunk. Betonie
decoct in wine or water drunk. Capillus Veneris decoct in wine drunk. Moss
decoct in water drunk. Spelt Meal decoct with red wine drunk. Ladies
Thisiell root decoct in wine drunk. Purcelane decoct in wine drunk. Vine Ten
drels or Claspers boiled in wine drunk. Buxthorne, or the seed, decoct in wine
drunk. Withie leaves and bark decoct in wine drunk. Oak leaves, bark, and
acorne cups decoct in wine drunk Rosen of Larix, or Agarik decoct in wine
drunk Turpentine tree leaves and bark boiled in wine drunk Mastick or
Le^tisk tree leaves and bark decoct in wine drunk
Sage juice taken with honey

Wheat meal boyld to pap, and often licked

Bulba Casta. eaten.

Tamarisk fruit eaten.

Quinces Quodimak any ways taken

Almonds any ways taken

Chestnuts y^ meal made in electuarie, or Ciprus fruit eaten.

De Sanicula.
Ce lui, qui Sanicle a, de'mire il u'a.

Who so has Sanicle, needs no Surgeon.

For to stop pissing of blood.
A Grimony. -- decoct in wine and drunk. Shepherds purse. decoct in wine and
drunk. Planten leaves. decoct in wine and drunk. Coronopes, or Harts-horne.
decoct in wine and drunk. Knot grass. decoct in wine and drunk. Pimpinell.
decoct in wine and drunk. Knights yarrow. decoct in wine and drunk. Moss.
decoct in wine and drunk. Tribulus terrestris or Saligot nuts in powder.
decoct in wine and drunk. Myrtle berries. decoct in wine and drunk. Withie
leaves and bark. decoct in wine and drunk. Oak leaves, bark and Acorne cups.
decoct in wine and drunk. Masticke. -- decoct in wine and drunk.
Tormentill root in powder, decoct in Smithes water.

For to cause pissing of blood.
GArden Madder juice of the root much used.

For to strengthen the body.
SLandergrasse full and sappy roots eaten -- testiculus odoratus, Goats
Orchis roots eaten or boiled in Goats milk, drunk: Satirion roots eaten
boiled.

For obstructions and stopping of the body.
GArmaunder with his flowers boiled in water and drunk.

For to dissolve congealed and clottered blood in the body.
CAmepitis decoct. -- drunk. Wild Tansey boiled in salt and water. drunk.
Morsus diaboli root decoct in wine. drunk. Bugle decoct in wine. -- drunk.
Auens. decoct in wine. -- drunk. Time. decoct in wine. -- drunk. Mustard.
decoct in wine. -- drunk.
Figs decoct in water and drunk. -- Figs.

Murgerom, dried and taken with honey, -- eaten. Rue root, in powder, with
Honey dried, eaten. Amers, dried with Honey, eaten. Lacerpitium roots, stamped
with Oil, eaten.
Gentian roots, the juice taken.

White Bryonie, in Electuarie with Henie.

Wild Bryonie, in Electuarie with Honey.

Dulcamara, decoct and drunk.

Garden Madder root, or powder decoct and drunk.

Water Pepperwort leaves and Ale, decoct and drunk.

For windiness of the body.
NIgella Romana seeds with wine, drunk. Agnus castus seed with Wine, drunk.
For to strengthen the Bowels.
VVIlo Tanfie, decoct in Wine and drunk. Calamint, decoct in Wine and drunk.
Parnassus Grass, decoct in Wine and drunk.
Frangula Bark, boiled with Hops, Pontike, Wormwood, Eupatorie, Sinamen,
Fenel. Parcely, and Endive, with their roots taken, in quantity of five
Ounces.

For inflammation of the Bowels.
FLebane seed, boiled in water or stiped, drunk. Herb Bennet root, --
Auens, decoct. drunk. Trifeli by it self, or with the Flowers boiled in Meade
or Homed water, -- drunk.
Purcelane juice, drunk.

For windiness of the Bowels.
AEnus castus seeds, decoct in Wine and drunk. Juniper Berries, decoct in
Wine and drunk.
For to mundifie the Brain.
Penny Riall, pund with Vinegar, drunk.

Margerom bruised, put or snuffed in the Nosthrils. Orrigan juice, put or
snuffed in the Nosthrils. Sowbread juice, put or snuffed in the Nosthrils. Wild
Cucumer, delayed with sweet Milks, put or snuffed in the Nosthrils. Iuie juice
or fruit, put or snuffed in the nose. White Beete juice with Honey, put or
snuffed in the nose. Coleworte juice, put or snuffed in the nose. Onion juice.
put or snuffed in the nose.
Saxifrage root or seed chewed.

Oppopanax, two Drame taken.

Sagapenum, one Dram taken.

Amomacum, one Dram taken.

Sarcacoll taken.

Laurel leaves, chewed and holden in the mouth.

White Bryonie root, one Dram taken.

For to comfort the Brain.
BAzell, decoct and drunk, and often smelled on.

Rose marie flowers, in conserve, eaten.

Lauender flowers, eaten alone or with Sinamum.

Nutmegs and Cloves, taken any way and smelled to.

Stecados flowers smelled on.

Nigella seeds dried, pund, and wrapped in a Sarcenet, or fine linen cloth
smelled to.

Stauesakre, chewed in the mouth.

Iessamine dries Rhewmes.

For to warm the Brain.
COastmarie leaves, in construe.

Pellitorie root taken with Honey.

Rie-meale, put into a bag, laid to the head.

Iessamine, dries and warmeth the brain.

For to remove slymie phlegm from the Brain.
Wild Pellitorie, chewed and hold in the mouth.

White Elebor, the root in powder, snuffed into the nose.

For Impostumes of the Brain.
A Caricke with Sirrup, Acetes taken.

A comfortable Pomaunder for the Brain.
TAke Labdanum one Ounce, Beniamine and Storax, of each two Drams, Damask
powder finely searced, one Dram: Cloves and Mace, of each a little. A Nutmeg,
and a little Camphire: Musk and Ciuet, a little. First heat your Mortar and
Pestell with coals, then make them very clean and put in your Labdanum,
beat it till it wax soft, put to it two or three drops of oil of Spike, and
so labor them a while: then put in all the rest finely in powder, and work
them till all be incorporated, then take it out, anointing your hands with
Ciuet, roll it up, and with a Bodkin pierce a hole through it.

For to cleanse the breast.
LIne seed, mingled with Honey in Electuarie.

Scabius, herb and root, boiled in Wine and water, taken.

Scordion, dried in powder mingled with Honey, drunk.

Ethupis, decoct and drunk.

Roman nettell seed, tempered with Honey, licked in.

Auens, decoct with Wine, -- and drunk. Comphrie roots decoct in water, and
drunk. Iris roots, decoct, and drunk. Lyme with Honey, decoct, and drunk.
Penny Royal with Honey, decoct, and drunk. White Horehound, decoct in water,
and drunk.
Annis seeds, dried by fire, and taken with Honey.

Betonic decoct.

Oppopanax, two Drams taken.

Lacerpitium roots, boiled with Pomegranat pills and Vinegar, drunk.

Sagapenum, one Dram taken.

Ientian roots, or Cross wort decoct and drunk.

Enula campana roots, decoct in Electuarie.

White Brionie roots, decoct, the juice.

Eruum meal, or butter Vitch with Honey, licked in.

Fengreke seed, decoct with Dates and Honey, eaten.

Cardus benedictus, boiled and drunk.

Redish young, decoct and drunk.

Percenep roots, eaten.

Myrhis roots, boiled in flesh broth, eaten.

Cresses, the seeds boiled in the broth of a Hen or Pullet.

Erisemon seed, in Lohok with Honey.

Leeke juice, in Lohok with Honey.

Liquorice roots, mixed with other spices.

Musa fruit, eaten.

Fisticke Nuts, eaten.

Pine Nut kernels, eaten.

Liquid Pitch with Honey, eaten.

Rozen of Larix with Honey, eaten.

Turpentine, in Electuarie with Honey.

For stopping of the breast.
SOthernewood seed boiled in wine or water, drunk.

Saffron seed the juice broosed with homed water, or in the broth of a chicken.

Black Molin with his pleasant flowers decoct in wine or water, drunk.

Isop decoct with Rue, Figs, and Honey, drunk.

Botius boiled in wine, drunk. -- Oak of Jerusalem.

Sticados with the flowers, decoct and drunk.

Cummin decoct and drunk.

Amomacum, one dram taken.

Sarcacoll taken.

Lapsia, the bark of the root, one dram.

Feng^^ke seeds decoct with Dates and honey to sirop.

Mustard seed used in meats.

Liquoris juice mixed with Ginger and spices, and small Cakes made of it and
eaten.

Pine nut kernels eaten.

Liquid Pitch with Honey eaten.

Rosen of Larix with Honey licked.

Turpentine in Electuarie with Honey taken in.

For exulcerations or swellings of women's breasts or pappes.
Wheat bran decoct with Rue, laid to.

Spelt meal boiled with wine and Saltpeter laid to.

Ervum meal with Honey applied.

Dried Raisons the kernels pund small with salt laid to.

Roses pund and laid to.

For to dry up women's breasts.
A Ssarabacka leaves pund and laid to.

For impostumes of the breast.
TVssilage leaves dried, and a persume thereof made upon coals, taken in at the
mouth by a funnell or pipe.

Scabios boiled by it self, or his root in wine or water, drunk.

Asclepias leaves pund and laid to.

Carantia, the Oil, applied.

Erisarum seed with Honey, a Lohocke.

Yellow Affodill roots, boiled in Lees of Wine.

Kernels of dried Raysons and Salt, pund and laid to.

For old disease of the breast.
LIbamtus seed, decoct in Wine and drunk. Rue of the wall, decoct in Wine and
drunk.
For great pains of the breast.
HEnbane seed, decoct and applied.

For vnnatvrall swellings of women's breast.
CHestnuts, the meal in powder with Barley meal and Vinegar, Plaster wise
applied.

For hardness of women's breasts.
CHamepitis green, pund with Honey, and laid to.

Mint, mingled with Barley, laid to.

For shortness of breath.
SOthernwood seed decoct in water and drunk.

Tussilage leaves dried, and a perfume taken into the mouth by tunneit.

Iarmander with his flowers decoct in wine or water, drunk.

Roman Nettle seeds with bonie often licked in.

Stock Giliter flowers decoct in water, drunk.

Iris roots taken with Sugar or Honey.

Time boiled in water and Honey, drunk.

Margerom mingled with Honey and taken. Tragorigan mingled with Honey and taken.
Bazell decoct in water and drunk. Calamint decoct in wine and drunk. Rue and
Dill decoct in wine and drunk. Nigella seed decoct in wine and drunk.
Secilus seed decoct in wine and drunk.
Pencedanum roots, the sap by it self, or with bitter Almonds.

Oppopanax two drams taken in. Sagapene one dram taken in. Galbanum one dram
taken in. Amomacum one dram taken in.
Assarabacka roots boiled in wine, and drunk.

Dragunculus roots roasted or boiled, mixed with honey, eaten.

Rubarbe taken in.

Wiloe Csucumer Elaterium dried, half a scruple.

Briony root in Electuarie with honey.

Blessed Thistie powder in wine.

Smyrneum leaves decoct in wine.

Mustard taken any ways.

Erisimon seed with honey often licked.

Squilla prepared with oil and honey.

Bitter Almonds eaten.

Figs eaten before meat.

Phistick nuts eaten alone or with sugar.

Agarick one dram taken in.

Tansey seed taken. -- Saffron in sweet wine drunk.

Oak of Jerusalem decoct in sweet wine, drunk.

Honyfore fruit^ decoct in wine and drunk.

For pain in fetching breath.
SAffron seed the juice with homed water, or breath of a chicke^.

Phistick nuts with Sugar eaten.

For to amend a stinking breath, and to procure a sweet breath.
LAcerpitum roots eaten with meat or salt.

Pilies of Lemons condited and eaten.

Nutmegs eaten.

Mastick holden and chewed in the mouth.

For such as are bursten or broken.
A Canthus roots taken in drink.

Rubarbe infused, taken in.

Osmond, the heart or middle root taken in broth.

Garden Madder root, -- decoct in wine and drunk. Mouseeare -- Petisilla
roots or leaves, decoct in wine and drunk. Horstaile, or Shave grass decoct
in wine and drunk. Morsus Diaboli, decoct in wine and drunk. Adders tongue,
-- decoct in wine and drunk.
Comphrie roots, pund and applied to ruptures.

Clinopodion decoct in wine and drunk.

Carantia oil anoyuted.

Calamus Arromaticus, decoct and drunk. Caroline roots decoct in wine, and
drunk. Cruciata decoct in wine -- and drunk.
Parcenep roots eaten

Yellow Affodill roots decoct in wine one dram.

Ciprus nuts pund and laid to the rupture.

For children bursten.
FLebane seed with Vinegar, -- laid to ye grief outwardly. Water Crow foot
mingled we wheat flower laid to ye grief outwardly. Profoliatum pund with
meal and wine, laid to ye grief outwardly. Pencedanum juice, -- laid to ye
grief outwardly.
Profoliatum mingled with Wax, Oil or ointment fit to cure wounds, applied.

Sanicula decoct in Wine or water, and drunk. Pilostlla leaves decoct, and
drunk.
For burning or scalding with water or fire.
GReat Buglos root pund with Oil and wax, applied and laid to. Green Clote
leaves pund with whites of eggs, applied and laid to. S. John's wort leaves pund,
applied and laid to. Wild Mullen pund, applied and laid to. Green Piroll
pund, applied and laid to. White Lilly roots roasted, mixed with oil of Roses,
applied and laid to. Narcissus medio luteus root pund with honey, applied and
laid to. Iuie leaves boiled in Wine pund, applied and laid to. Tipha the down
mixed with swines grease, applied and laid to. Branke vrsine green, pund,
applied and laid to. Galion flowers pund, applied and laid to. Beete leaves
pund, applied and laid to. Lettice green leaves pund, applied and laid to.
Marsh Mallow leaves pund, applied and laid to. Gourd juice, applied and laid
to. Yellow Affodill roots boiled in oil, applied and laid to. Mulberie leaves
boiled with oil, applied and laid to. Ashes of Figtree with oil of Roses and
Wax, applied and laid to. Palm tree broken mixed with grease, applied and laid
to. Pine apple scales with the bark of Pine tree pund applied and laid to.
With Litarge of silver and frankincense, -- applied and laid to.
For Cankers.
SCrophularia leaves, stamped and laid to. Planten leaves, stamped and laid to.
Nettle leaves, stamped and laid to. Dragons, the fruste, stamped and laid to.
Orobus boiled, mixed with Honey and Barley meal, applied.

For to provoke carnal copulation.
SOthernwood laid under the pillow, bed, or bolster.

For to engender male children.
BArrous Mercury, or Male Phellon, drunk or eaten. Fly Orchis full roots, --
drunk or eaten.
For to engender female children.
Girls Mercury or Phellon, -- drunk or eaten by women. Fly Orchis withered
roots, -- drunk or eaten by women.
For pestilent Carbuncles.
MOrsus diaboli green, -- pund and laid to. Violets with Barley meal, pund and
laid to. Pomegranat seed with honey, pund and laid to. Ciprustree leaves with
parched barley meal, -- pund and laid to.
For choleric humors.
COmmon wormwood, -- pund and laid to. Fumitory, pund and laid to. Tormentill
roots, pund and laid to. Flebane seed, pund and laid to. Senie cods and
leaves one dram, pund and laid to. Olive treeleaues, pund and laid to.
For choleric inflammations.
FEuerfew green leaves and flowers, pund and applied.

Perritory stamped and applied. Saffron stamped and applied.
Mynts two or three branches, the juice drunk with juice of sour Pomegranate.

For the collicke.
SAffron seed the juice with homed water -- and drunk or eaten. Auens root
dried and wine and drunk or eaten. Cam^mil herb and flowers with wine and
drunk or eaten. Cotula Lutea with wine decoct and drunk or eaten. Mynts
boiled in water three days and drunk or eaten. Daucus seed boiled in wine or
water and drunk or eaten. Ricinus seeds pund with whay and drunk or eaten.
Tapsia the bark of the root, one dram and drunk or eaten. Colloquintida
white pulpe decoct in water and drunk or eaten. Honied water, and drunk or
eaten. Sea hull roots boiled in wine and drunk or eaten. Holly berries decoct
-- and drunk or eaten.
Oak fern root boiled in Mutton broth, or of a Chicken or Capon, or the
decoction of Mallows or Beets, and a little Annis, or the powder thereof with
homed water drunk.

For corns of the feet.
WHite Lilly roots boiled in Vinegar, applied as a plaster.

Lacerpitium with Rue water and Honey, applied.

For a consumpsion.
STandergrasse, full and sappy roots boiled in Grates milk, eaten, or alone.

Bay berries pund small, mingled with Honey or Syrop, often licked.

Pine Nut kernels eaten.

Agarick sodden in sweet wine, drunk.

For the Cough.
IErmaunder with his flowers boiled in water, drunk. Saffron seed juice with
homed water, drunk. Stock-Gillifer flowers decoct in water, drunk. Rue and
Dill decoct, drunk. Betony decoct, drunk. Lacerpitium roots boiled to
Electuary with honey drunk. Galbanum in like sort, drunk. Enula campana roots
decoct in homed water, drunk. Galingale roots boiled in wine or water,
drunk. Honysuccle fruit decoct in wine, drunk. Capillus Veneris decoct in
wine, drunk. Popie heads decoct in wine, drunk. Henbane seeds decoct in
wine, drunk. Marsh Mallow roots decoct in wine, drunk. Parcely decoct in
wine, drunk. Yellow A^odill roots decoct, one dram, drunk. Wild Cherry tree
gum decoct in wine, drunk.
Planten leaves eaten with meats.

Violets Syrop eaten.

Pencedanum juice with an Egg (rear) eaten.

Spelt meal with good sweet Butter, or new Goats suit taken, appeaseth the
Cough.

Colewort juice boiled in syrop, often licked.

Raysons dried eaten. Bitter Almonds eaten. Figs eaten. Sebastenes eaten.
Labdanum laid to the breast with ointments and plasters to mollify.

For the old Cough.
VEronica water distilled with wine, decoct and drunk. Peritory, decoct and
drunk. Munilaria in wine, decoct and drunk. Scabious, decoct and drunk.
White Molyn root in water, decoct and drunk. S^cilie seeds with wine, decoct
and drunk. Daucus seeds with wine, decoct and drunk. Young Radish with wine,
decoct and drunk. Smyrneum roots and leaves with wine, decoct and drunk.
Erisimon seeds, -- decoct and drunk. Line seed mingled with Honey, taken and
eaten. Scabious flowers conserved, taken and eaten. Germaunder in powder, taken
and eaten. Isop decoct with Rue and Figs, taken and eaten. Time boiled in
water and Honey, taken and eaten. White horehound decoct in wine, taken and
eaten. Aunis seeds with bitter Almonds and honey, taken and eaten. Oppopanax two
drams, taken and eaten. Sarcacoll one dram, taken and eaten. Dragon roots
boiled or roasted with honey, taken and eaten. Briony root in electuary, taken
and eaten. Leeke juice made in electuary, taken and eaten. Scilla prepared with
oil and honey, taken and eaten. Cakes made with Liquorice, Ginger and other
spices, taken and eaten. Meal of Chestnuts and honey in electuary, taken and
eaten. Kernels of Pine Nuts, taken and eaten. Agarick one dram. taken and
eaten.
For the Crampe.
VVIld Time decoct in wine or water, drunk.

Saxifrage root dried and chewed.

Betony dried, one dram with homed water.

Pencedanum roots sap, with oil of Roses and vinegar applied.

Oppopanax two drams taken.

Lacerpitium roots broken with the yeolk of an egg, taken.

Sagapenum one dram taken.

Euphorbium prepared, taken.

Assarabacka boiled in wine, taken.

Roots of Dragons, boiled or roasted with honey often licked.

Roots of Rha Ponticum.

Oil of Carantia anointed.

Sea hull roots decoct with wine and drunk.

Brank vrsine taken in drink, drunk. Carline root decoct in wine, drunk.
Purcelane roots decoct in wine, drunk. Marsh Mallow roots decoct in wine,
drunk. Yellow Affodill roots decoct in wine, one dram, drunk.
Bay berries with ointments and oils for Cramps applied.

For deafness.
GRound Iuy bruised and put in the ears.

Cardus benedictus in meat or drink.

Colewort juice with vinegar put in the ears.

Mustard seed pund with Figs, laid to the ears.

Yellow Affodil roots boiled in oil, put in the ears.

Bay berries decoct in wine, put in the ears.

Cedria or liquor of Cedar with viueger dropped in the ears.

For dissentery or dangerous flux.
IVy flowers made in wine, drunk twis^ a day.

For to cause good digestion.
CArroway seeds -- taken and eaten. Coriander seeds alone or with Sugar, taken
and eaten. Saxifrage root dried in powder with sugar, taken and eaten. Betony
decoct with Honey, taken and eaten. Ligusticum seeds taken and eaten. Master
wort the root decoct in wine taken and eaten. Gentian root decoct in wine or
water, taken and eaten. Enula Campana confected, taken and eaten. Condrilla
seeds taken and eaten. Parcely with meat taken and eaten. Mustard taken and
eaten. Rocket, taken and eaten. Long Pepper, taken and eaten. Orrenge or Lemon
pills, -- taken and eaten. Oil of Mace anointed on the stomach. taken and
eaten.
For biting of a mad dog.
CLote leaves pund with a little salt, -- pund and laid to. Planten pund and
laid to. Nettle leaves with salt, pund and laid to. Mynts with salt, pund and
laid to. Black Horehound, pund and laid to. Fenell roots with honey, pund and
laid to. Angelica leaves and Rue leaves with honey, pund and laid to. Master
wort, pund and laid to. Lacerpitium roots with honey and dineger, pund and laid
to. Asclepias leaves, pund and laid to. Capillus Veneris green, pund and laid
to. Wheat raw chawed, or -- pund and laid to. Juice of Rue with wine, drunk
Asclepias roots boiled in water, drunk
For the dropsy.
COmmon Wormwood decoct and drunk.

Juice of the seed of Saffron with honey pund, or chicke^ broth.

Penny wort on the wall, the leaves and root eaten.

Mercury boiled in water, drunk.

Water-Planten leaves laid to y^ shine and shanks in great abundance.

Sarisons consound boiled in water and drunk.

Polipodi in water or wine -- and drunk. Rue boiled in good wine to half and
drunk. Betony decoct and drunk. Laser decoct in wine and drunk. Asarabacka
boiled in wine and drunk. Galingale roots boiled and drunk. White Elebor
root decoct and drunk. Palma Christi seed with whay and milk and drunk.
Tripolium roots, two drams with wine and drunk. Laurel leaves decoct and
drunk. Wild Cucumer juice dried halse a scruple, and drunk. Elder seeds one
dram, and drunk. Mallow roots decoct in wine and drunk. Wild Briony root
boiled with sea water and drunk. Calamus Arromaticus decoct in wine and
drunk. White Camelion root with red wine decoct and drunk. Smyrneum leaves
and root decoct and drunk. Garlic boiled and drunk. Broom leaves or
branches boiled in wine and drunk. Barbery tree, the bark of the root in
wine and drunk. Ash tree leaves, bark and tender crops decoct and drunk.
Rue mixed with Honey and Figs, applied.

Black Elebor root made a plaster with barley meal and wine

Soldonella boiled in the broth of fat meat, eaten.

Solanum Somniferum the berries eaten.

Garlic eaten

Figs mixed with Barley meal, applied.

Frangula.

For to slake the belly of such as have the dropsy.
Leaves of the wild Ash tree boiled in wine and drunk.

For pain in the Ears.
IVice of P^rit^r^ -- dropped in the ears. Great Chickweed juice dropped in
the ears. Green Hemp leaves juice dropped in the ears. Great Pilofi^^a
juice dropped in the ears. Planten juice. Knot grass juice dropped in the
ears. Saffron with ^omans m^^ke dropped in the ears. Mynt juice with ho^^ed
water dropped in the ears. Rue juice warmed to a Po^^granet shell dropped in
the ears. Pencedanu^ juice with oil of Roses dropped in the ears. Dragon
culus juice dropped in the ears. Wild Cow^^^er juice dropped in the ears.
Hoppes juice Nightshade juice dropped in the ears. Myllelot juice dropped in
the ears. Goose grass juice dropped in the ears. White Beete juice dropped
in the ears. Gourd juice and oil of Rases dropped in the ears. Yellow
A^^odill root boiled in oil, dropped in the ears. Dried Roses steeped in
Wine, dropped in the ears. Ladanu^ with h^^ed water, or oil of roses dropped
in the ears. White Popler leanes, the juice -- dropped in the ears.
Black Hele^or root put in the ^are two or three days.

Opium laid to with oil of sweet Almonds, mirth and Saffron, cures.

Henbane leaves the juice dra^ne and laid in the Sun, mingled with Colleries
for the ears.

For Impostumes behind the Ears.
NEttle leaves pund with Salt, -- laid to. Night shade pund with Salt, laid to.
Sheeps Sorrel decoct, laid to. Marsh Mallows boiled in wine, and bruised with
homed water, laid to. Erisimon seed mingled with honey and water, -- laid to.
For worms in the Ears.
PSil^um decoct in water, -- dropped in the ears. Capers the juice of the
leaves, fruits and crops, dropped in the ears. Codria -- dropped in the ears.
For Impostumes in the ears.
LYneseed boiled in water, -- put to and applied. Planten leaves pund with
salt, put to and applied. Souchus juice, -- put to and applied.
Annis seeds with oil of Roses, pund and put into the ears.

Juice of Nightshade dropped into the ears.

Yellow A^^odelus the root bruised, and the juice with Franckincence, Money,
Myrrh, and wine laid to.

For running ears.
SEed of Fleband boiled, the water -- dropped in. Iuy leaves, the juice dropped
in. Shumak leaves, the juice dropped in. Turpentyne with Oil and Honey --
dropped in.
Myrtell Berryes decoct in wine and flower, laid to.

Licium, or Buxthorne boiled and laid to.

Olive tree leaves and juice applied.

For to cleanse the stopping of ears.
WHite Horehound juice, with honey and wine dropped in.

Onyon juice dropped in.

For singing or humming of the ears.
GRound Iuy bruised -- dropped in. Hoppes juice dropped in. White Beete juice
dropped in. Colewort juice, and viniger warm, dropped in. Onyon juice dropped
in. Bayberries decoct in wine, dropped in. Cedra, -- Liquor of Coder -- dropped
in.
Seeny pund with Figs, laid to playster-wise.

Figs and Mustard seed pund hard together, applied.

For inflammation and redness of the eyes.
SOthernwood pund with a roasted Quince, pund and laid to. After Atticus green,
pund and laid to. Great Chickweed, pund and laid to. Pimpernell, pund and laid
to. Vi^^^^ br^sed with B^^ly meals, pund and laid to. Magdalen Wort, and part
of wild Dazy, pund and laid to. Assa^^ back^ leaves, pund and laid to. Gentian
root juice, pund and laid to. Palma Christi, leaves, pund and laid to. Pety
Morrell green leaves, pund and laid to. Purcelane leaves with Barley meal,
pund and laid to. Pepin^ Pulpe finely stamped, pund and laid to. Gourd pulpe
finely stemped, pund and laid to. Green Par^ely with white bread or Barley
slower, -- pund and laid to. Planten juice -- dropped in the eyes. Great
Singreene juice dropped in the eyes. Marygold distilled water dropped in the
eyes. Lilium Conualle distilled water dropped in the eyes. Purcelane leaves
pund with Barley meal dropped in the eyes. Heath juice Acatia juice dropped in
the eyes. Wild Olive leaves the juice -- dropped in the eyes.
Henbane juice dried in the Sun, mingled with Cilliries, to be applied in
hot causes.

For dimnesse of the sight and eyes.
Wormwood mingled with honey, -- laid to the eye. Bazell pund with wine, laid
to the eye. Horinnium seed mingled with honey, laid to the eye. Fennel juice
and the gall of a Hen, laid to the eye. Libanotus juice of ye berb and root
with honey, laid to the eye. Great Sentaury juice with honey, laid to the eye.
Aloes Cicatrine with honey, -- laid to the eye. Wall-flower juice. -- put in the
eye. Saxifrage distild water alone, or with viniger. put in the eye. Sagapenum,
Sarcacoll, put in the eye. Gramen Pernasse juice, put in the eye. Saligot
leaves the juice, -- put in the eye.
For bloud-shotten Eyes.
Wormwood mingled with honey, laid to.

Chelubuy juice mingled with Honey, boiled in copper or brass, dropped into the
eyes.

Wall-slower juice dropped into the eyes.

Nigella seed mingled with Irios oil, put in the nose.

Ca^is seed laid to the forhead.

Sagapenum dropped in the eye.

Sarcacoll steeped in Asses milk four or five days, the milk every day
renewed, and the stale milk cast away.

For paynfull bleared Eyes.
Wormwood mingled with honey, laid to.

Time eaten in the morning fasting, and before supper.

Henbane leaves, the juice dried in the Sun, applied.

Grounds^ll, the down of the flower with Saffron and water, applied.

Roses the juice laid to the eyes.

For the Haw in the Eye or Pearl.
Armaunder juice with oil straked on the eyes.

Lacerpitium with Honey applied.

Sowbred mingled with honey, laid to.

Annemony root boiled in wine prepared, laid to.

Sweet Trifoli juice put in the eye.

Mellil^t juice dropped in the eye.

Onyon juice dropped in the eye.

Cedra dropped in the eye. -- Liquor of Ceder.

For Fistulaes in the corner of the Eyes.
MOuse core -- pund and laid to the eye. Camomyll pund and laid to the eye.
Alloes Cicatrine pund and laid to the eye. Oats green leaves pund and laid to
the eye. Raspis flowers with honey pund and laid to the eye.
Licium made of the branch, roots and seed of Bu^shorn^, laid to.

Lentils meal, with Melilot and Quinces, and oil of Roses, laid to.

Melilot boiled in sweet wine alone, or with the y^^lks of roasted eggs, or the
meal of Fenygreeke, or Linseede, or Comin applied.

For pain of the eyes.
WIue, wherein dried Roses have bin boiled, laid to.

Heath leaves juice dropped into the eye.

To stop the running eyes.
PLane tree young tender leaves pund and laid to.

For flowing down of humors to the eyes.
SAffron mingled with woman's milk, applied.

Bazell pund with wine, epplyed.

Nightshade juice dried in the Sun, mingled with Cillities, against heats and
Rhewines laid to, or taken with Hidromell, or homed water, the wayght of an
halfepenny, laid to.

Amilium or Starch made of Wheats, applied.

^epons pulpe finely stamped, and bound to the for head.

Plum^ree leaves decoct and laid to.

For to quicken and sharpen the sight.
FVmitory juice -- dropped into the eyes. Eyebright juice dropped into the
eyes. Libanetus roots juice dropped into the eyes. Sagapenum dropped into the
eyes. Yellow Devils bit juice dropped into the eyes. Wild Lettice juice
dropped into the eyes. Rampious leaves and stalks juice dropped into the eyes.
Onyon juice dropped into the eyes. Lyciu^ dropped into the eyes. Cedra --
Liquor of Ceder -- dropped into the eyes.
For to quicken and sharpen the sight.
HOrinnium seed mingled with Honey.

S^lubiua juice mingled with Honey in copper or brass.

White Horehound juice mingled with Honey and Wine, applied.

Rue eaten raw, or condited with Salt, or mingled with Barle^ meals, laid to.

Harmula stamped with Wine, Honey, Saffron, Fe^^^ll juice, and the gall of a
Hen, laid to.

Oppopanax -- laid to. Lacerpitium laid to. Sagapenum laid to. Amomacum laid
to. Sowbred root with Honey, laid to. Pernassus grass the juice in Cilli^ie,
laid to. Mustard seed juice dried in the Sun, allayd with honey, afterward
laid to. Yellow Affodill roots juice boiled in good old Wine, Mirth, and
Saffron -- laid to.
For enchauntments and bewitchings.
ALisson hanged in the house, at the gate, or in the entry.

Mullen.

Molye.

Rhamuns branches and bough^ hanged at do^res and wind owes.

For the falling Evil.
CAmock, or Pety Whyn boiled in honey and viniger.

Cherryes distild, the water powered in the mouth.

Mistell of the Oak hanged about the neck.

Agarick with Cirop Acetesi taken.

Annis seeds eaten by infants and children.

For bruises by falling or beating.
WOod Sage boiled in wine or water, -- drunk. Master wort the root decoct,
drunk. Oppopanax with mead or homed water, drunk. Gentian juice decoct,
drunk. Dulcamara decoct in wine, drunk. Eardon madder root decoct in wine,
drunk. Ciprus root bark decoct in wine, drunk. Juniper berryes decoct in
wine or homed water, drunk. Agarick decoct in wine or homed water, drunk.
Rubarbe infuied, drunk. Osmond heart or middle root boiled, -- drunk.
White Papier buds made in ointment, and used.

For one fallen in a swoone.
BAzell bruised with Vintger holden to the nose.

For to provoke carnal copulation.
GLadiolus upper root in wine, -- drunk. Saffron boiled in wine, drunk.
Standergrasse ^appy root decoct in drunk. Goats milk, drunk. Satir^on
roots boiled in wine, drunk. Horrinium seed with wine, drunk. Ash keys
decoct with Nutmegs, drunk. Turpentine tree fruit in wine, -- drunk.
Artychokes young tender ^^elles steeped in wine, eaten. Caret roots eaten.
Rocket -- eaten.
Clary any ways taken.

For proud flesh.
Oak Apples or galls steeped in Viniger, laid to.

For the Fistula.
CInque foil leaves pund and laid to, and mingled with Salt and honey applied,
closes up the Fistula.

Planten leaves -- pund and laid to. Yellow Milletoly. pund and laid to.
Testiculus Odoratus root -- pund and laid to.
Arisarum made in Cillirie and plaster.

Small Centory in powder, mingled in plasters, ointments, powders, and applied.

White Eleborus cut in gobbins, and put in Fistulaes.

Oats green leaves pund and laid to, with the meal of the seed of poor
Oats applied.

Pitch liquid pund small with Franckincence applied.

For to provoke flowers, and to bring them down.
CHamepitis leaves -- drunk. Sothernwood seeds green or dry, boyld in wine,
drunk. Crinza leaves and flowers decoct in wine, drunk. S. John's Wort with ye
flower and seed decoct in wine, drunk. Horsetayle decoct in wine or water,
drunk. Scordion with wine, drunk. Wall-flowers dried, decoct in water,
drunk. Stock Gille flowers decoct, drunk. Marigold flowers decoct, drunk.
Camomil, herb, root and flower decoct in wine, drunk. Time boiled in water
and honey, drunk. Winter Sauery boiled in water and honey, drunk. Poly boiled
in water and honey, drunk. Clinopodion decoct in wine or water, drunk. Botrus
boiled in wine or water, drunk. Calamus decoct in wine or water, drunk. White
Horehound decoct in wine, drunk. Rue leaves decoct in water, drunk. Harmula
decoct in water or wine, drunk. Lauender boiled in wine, -- drunk.
Nettle seeds pund with Mirth, used by pessary.

Iris roots receyned into the body by pessary, or bath.

White Lilly roots roasted and pund with oil of Roses, applied.

Clary any ways taken. -- Dretanium verum boiled in wine, drunk, or by pessary,

Nigella Romana decoct in wine, -- drunk. Libanotus roots, Cecily seeds,
drunk. Tordilion seeds, Daucus seeds, drunk. Saxifrage roots, Betony dried,
drunk. Pannax seeds with Wormwood and wine, drunk.
For to provoke flowers, and to bring them down.
LAcerpitium with mirth and pepper, -- drunk. Sagaprnum with homed water,
drunk. Astrolochia longa, with mirth and pepper, drunk. Assarabacca with
homed water, drunk. Great Centory with wine, drunk. Sowbred dried in powder
with wine, drunk. Enula Campana decoct in wine, drunk. Pyony root dried with
Hidromell, drunk. Setwall roots decoct in wine, drunk. Siragium seed one dram
decoct, drunk. Galingale roots decoct with wine, drunk. Trifoly leaves,
flowers and seeds decoct in water, drunk. Cardus Benedictus decoct in wine,
drunk. Crithmus leaves, flowers and roots decoct in wine, drunk.
Bulbacastanum seed decoct in wine, drunk. Reddish decoct, drunk. Wild Carret
seed decoct in wine, drunk. Mountain Parcely seeds with homed water, drunk.
Smyrneum seeds decoct in wine, drunk. Seeny seeds with homed water, drunk.
Cresses seeds decoct in wine, drunk. Garlic decoct with Orrigan, drunk.
Yellow Affodill roots boiled, drunk. Kneeholme decoct in wine, drunk. Laurus
Alexandriae decoct in wine, drunk. Eiprus roots decoct in wine, drunk. Lotus
shauings decoct in wine or water, drunk. Sauin leaves decoct in wine, --
drunk. Oppopanax, -- by pessary. White Elebor the root, by pessary. Black
Elebor root, by pessary. Wild Cowcumer sodden with honey, put in -- by pessary.
White Briony root, Scamony, by pessary. Lupines with mirth and honey, by
pessary. Garden Madder roots, by pessary. Wild Carret seed sodden in wine, by
pessary. Onyons decoct, by pessary. Agnus Castus alone, or with Ponny royal,
by pessary. Sauin decoct in wine, -- by pessary.
For to stop the inordinate course of flowers.
BIstort root, Peruincle, -- decoct in wine, and drunk. Tormentill roots,
Strawbery plants, decoct in wine, and drunk. Wild Tansey, Planten leaves,
decoct in wine, and drunk. Knot grass, Pimpernell, decoct in wine, and
drunk. Yellow Watter-Lilly, decoct in wine, and drunk. Piony roots dried with
homed water, as much as the quantity of a Beans, decoct in wine, and drunk.
Galingale, Black Poppy seed, -- decoct in wine, and drunk.
Yellow Lisimacus inice of the leaves applied outwardly.

Horsetayle juice decoct, -- by pessary. Singreene juice by pessary. Night
shade juice decoct with cotton, by pessary.
Comynmingled with Iuray meal and pulpe of Rayfins, applied to the belly
playster-wise.

Henbane seed one halfpenny weight with Hydromell, drunk.

Lentils twice decoct, the first decoction cast away: then put to viniger, or
Cicory, or Purcelayne, or red Beets, or Myrtils, or the pills of Pomegranats,
or dried Roses, or Medlers, or Services, or binding Pears, or Quinces, or
Planten, or whole Galls and berries of Shumak, decoct in wine and drunk.

Berryes of Shumak, -- decoct in wine and drunk. Pease earth nut, decoct in
wine and drunk. Phoenix or way Bennit, decoct in wine and drunk. Red Rattell,
decoct in wine and drunk. Yellow seed of Roses or Rose flowers, decoct in wine
and drunk. Hipocistis, decoct in wine and drunk. Bramble juice, decoct in
wine and drunk. Firzes, decoct in wine and drunk. Tamarisk, decoct in wine
and drunk. Acatia juice, Myrtill bettyes, -- decoct in wine and drunk. Shumek
leaves, -- decoct in Wine and drunk. Wild Olive leaves the juice, decoct in
Wine and drunk. Withy leaves and bark, decoct in Wine and drunk. Turpentine
tree leaves and bark, decoct in Wine and drunk. Caroline the lesser, -- eaten.
Barbery leaves, eaten. White Thorn fruit, eaten. Nut megs and Mace, eaten.
Quinces decoct, -- eaten.
Oak Apples decoct in water, and sit and bathe in it.

Raysin kernels broth, bath with it.

Sheeps Sorr^ll pund with viniger, applied to.

For white flowers.
Wild Tansey -- decoct in wine and drunk. Yellow water Lilly root in red wine
decoct in wine and drunk. Trifoly leaued decoct in wine and drunk. Yellow
seeds of Roses -- decoct in wine and drunk.
Shumak leaves eaten as sauce with meats.

For to ripen flowers.
MElilot boiled in wine and drunk.

Reddish broth decoct and drunk.

Feuerfew in powder with hody two drams eaten. Cods and sads of Seeny one dram
eaten. Polipody of the Oak, the root dried, eaten. Pepper in meat, eaten.
Buxchorne berries to young lusty persons, eaten. Figs eaten. Pyne Nuts eaten.
Turpentine with honey in Electuary, eaten. Juniper gum with honey, -- eaten.
For cold flewmes of the stomach.
Elm vnder-barke one ounce decoct in wine, drunk. Aller yellow bark steeped
in wine or beer, drunk. Iumper gum infused in wine, -- drunk.
Cardus Benedictus powder eaten.

Capers eaten in sauce.

For Frenzy.
SCamony juice dried, the wayght of six wheat corns, drunk.

For out-going of the Fundament.
ALoes Cicatrine boiled in Wine and Honey, applied.

For to settle the Fundament displaced.
ASter Atticus carried about a man.

Pomegranat pills and flowers in plaster applied.

Lentiske leaves and bark decoct.

For swelling of the Fundament.
ASter Atticus carried about a man.

Aloss Cicatrine in powder strowed, or playster-wise.

For chops, rifts and fistulaes about the fundament.
TAzell roots pund and boiled in wine, to the thickness of a plaster or
ointment, applied.

Agnus Castus seeds mixed with oil and ointments, made to heat and mollify,
applied.

Lycium made of the branches, roots or seeds of Bexthorne, applied.

Clear liquid Rozen of Fyrre tree, with Nutmegs and Sugar, the quantity of a
Nut, cures the excoriation of the secret parts, by the Flux of them.

For to open the stopping of the gall.
DOder boiled in wine or water, drunk.

For blasting or swelling of Genitors.
RVe leaves and Bay berries pund and laid to.

Gourd rynd burnt to a shes, strowed on.

Cyprus nuts pund with Figs, applied.

For spreading or fretting sores of Genitors, or Priuities.
FLowers of unripe fruit of the wild Vine, mingled with the oil of Roses and
viniger, applied.

For to expel Gnats and flies.
COmza strowed or burned in any place.

For swelling of the Gowt.
WIld Cowcumer made soft, or soked in viniger, applied.

For to assuage pain of the Gowt.
HEnbane seed pund with wine, applied, or laid to. Lentils boiled with barley
meal, applied, or laid to. Colewort juice, and meal of Fennygreek, applied,
or laid to. Turnips boiled in milk, applied, or laid to. Broom flowers pund
with swines grease, applied, or laid to. Cassia, applied, or laid to. Black
Poppler leaves, and young buds. applied, or laid to.
Plunge the patient suddenly into a heap of whole Wheat, up to the knees.

For Gowt in hands or feet.
PErritory juice mingled with Dear suit, pund and laid to. Turne^^^^ l^^^s,
pund and laid to. Singreene, pund and laid to. Penny royal, pund and laid to.
Libanotus seed mingled with Iuray meal and viniger, pund and laid to. Wild
Imperatoria, pund and laid to. Elder green leaves, pund and laid to.
Sea-mosse, pund and laid to. Acanthus green, pund and laid to. Orach green,
with Saltpeeter, honey and viniger, pund and laid to. Succory and Endsue green,
-- pund and laid to.
Lilly Conualle flowers distilled with good wine, one spoonefull drunk.

Time with wine, took in time and out of time of grief with Oximell.

Libanotos seed mingled with Iuray meal and viniger, applied.

Oppopanar applied.

Lacerpitium root in powder, with oil of Irios and war made into plaster,
laid to.

Ammomacum one dram taken.

Sowbred root decoct and laid to,

White Elebor root taken in small quantity.

Tapsta, the bark of the root, one dram taken.

Oppium with viniger applied.

Figs milky juice with meal of Fennigreek and viniger applied.

Plunge the patient suddenly into a heap of Wheat up to the knees.

For to avoid Gravel, and the Stone.
FEuer^ew without his flowers, -- pund in wine, drunk. Perritory, pund in
wine, drunk. Corompos, pund in wine, drunk. Sastron root, pund in wine,
drunk. Wild Time, pund in wine, drunk. Coche grane, pund in wine, drunk.
Cardus Benedictus, pund in wine, drunk. Salig^t, the Nuts dried with wine,
pund in wine, drunk. Carret roots in powder with homed water, pund in wine,
drunk. Gingidium pund in wine, drunk. Asperagus alone, or with Chiche pease,
pund in wine, drunk. Winter Cresses seeds, pund in wine, drunk. The rough
spongeous ball of yt wild Rose, pund in wine, drunk. Broom Rape, pund in
wine, drunk. Pety Whyn, tender springs, pund in wine, drunk. Knee Holme, pund
in wine, drunk. Rhamuns seed tertium genus, pund in wine, drunk. Meddler
stones in powder, -- pund in wine, drunk.
Cammomil decoct in water, applied outwardly in the Region of the bladder.

Mallow leaves raw eaten with salt.

Stone Parcely seed taken.

White Thorn fruit eaten.

Bitter Almonds with sweet wine taken.

Figs before meat eaten.

Plumtree gum dissolved in wine, drunk. Wild Cherry tree gum dissolved in
wine, drunk.
Nutmegs taken any way.

Cassia taken.

Fruit of Pyne tree taken.

Liquid Rozen of Fur tree taken.

Rozen of Larix tree taken, and licked in.

For to strengthen the Gummes.
PEnny Royal burnt to ashes, and rub the gummes.

Pomegranats.

For swelling of gummes.
DRyth Roses in wine, anointed or put to.

Bramble new springs boiled and held in the mouth.

Lycium or Boxthorne decoct and held in the mouth.

Plumtree leaves decoct in water, applied.

Olyue tree leaves pund with Honey, applied.

Mastick or Leutisk leaves pund and holden in the mouth.

For filthy moisture of gummes.
Oil of vuripe Oltues applied.

Oak Apples mixed with oily ointments, applied.

For Gouts fallen into the Cods.
CIprus Nuts pund and laid to outwardly.

For heaviness of the heart.
GArden Buglos eaten in Salade.

Garden Bugols flowers steeped in wine, or conserved, taken.

Pimpernell leaves, -- Burnet steeped in wine, drunk.

For to drive vennome from the heart.
TOrmentill leaves and root boiled in wine, drunk.

For to comfort the heart.
CLoue Gillosers conserved with Sugar, taken, or drunk. Lilly conually
distilled water, taken, or drunk. Bazell decoct in wine, -- taken, or drunk.
Sage decoct in wine, -- taken, or drunk. Balm decoct in wine, -- taken, or
drunk.
For stitches or gripings at the heart.
ORiganum boiled in wine, drunk.

For trembling and shaking of the heart.
SVccory and Endive leaves pund, and laid to outwardly. Bramble tendrels and
leaves stamped, and laid to outwardly.
Maces decoct and eaten.

Juice of Roses decoct or infused, drunk.

For scuruy heat or itch of hands.
SMall Chickweed boiled in water and salt, often washed.

For chaps or rifts, in hands, feet, or fundament.
IVuiper gum, with oil of Roses, applied.

Pitch liqute mixed with Sulphur, applied.

For headache.
FLebane seed mingled with oil of Roses, viniger, or water, applied.

Singreene juice mingled with Barley meal, and oil of Roses. laid to. Varuen
leaves pund with oil of Roses, and viniger, laid to. Violets alone, or with
oil of Roses, pund. laid to. White water-Lilly flowers conserved and eaten.
laid to.
Iris roots mingled with oil of Roses, applied.

Sage boiled in wine, drunk.

Rue leaves pund with oil of Roses.

Stecados with the flowers, decoct and drunk.

Annis seeds burnt, and the fume taken at the nose.

Nigella roots mixed with roots of Ireos, laid to the forhead.

Betony decoct in wine and drunk.

Pencedanum juice with oil of Roses and viniger, laid to the forbead.

Sagepenum, one dram -- taken. Amomacum, one dram taken. Euphorbium prepared by
discretion, -- taken.
For headache.
A Lees mixed with oil of Roses and viniger, applied,

Seeny leaves one dram taken.

Maydenhayre, a garland worn about the head.

Solanum Hortensis pund and laid to.

Melilot juice mixed with oil of Roses and viniger, powered on the head.

Cresses seed and honey laid to the head.

Vine tendrels or claspers pund with parched Barley meal applied.

Wild Time tendrels, with oil of Roses, pund and applied.

Double tongue, a garland worn about the head.

Marmalad, or Quodimack of Quinces eaten after meat.

Bitter Almouds applied to the forhead.

For giddynesse of the head.
FEuersew dried to powder, two drams taken.

Prunell bruised with oil of Roses and viniger, applied.

Running Time pund with oil of Roses and viniger, applied.

Lauender flowers alone or with Nutmegs, applied.

Synamom and Cloves applied.

Pellitory root with honey, eaten.

Collocinthid a boiled or soked in homed water or other liquor.

Briony roots one dram taken daily one year.

Blessed Thistle used in meat and drink.

Agarick with Cirop Acetesi, taken.

For scurfe of the head.
WHite water-Lilly root with Tar laid to.

Capillus Veneris steeped or boiled in Lie, to wash yt head.

Poole reed ashes mingled with viniger, laid to.

For to purge the head.
Mall Celidony decoct in wine, gargarized.

Pimpernell juice snuffed in at the nose.

Cele worts juice snuffed in at the nose.

Varnix perfume taken in at the nose.

For Impostumes and humors of the head.
CHrisantha^um slowers pund with oil and war, applied.

Sheeps Sorrel greens leaves pund with oil of Roses and Saffron, applied.

For dry humors of the head.
IEssamyn pund and laid to.

Vernix perfume taken in.

For to heal wounds in the head.
Clear liquid Rozen, applied.

For old pain of the head.
WHite Elebor root taken in.

Iuy juice with oil of Roses laid to the head.

Rye meal put in a little bag, laid to.

Garlic bruised between the hands.

For kybed heels.
PEnny Wort on the wall, laid to.

Bathe the heels in wine, and anoint the grief with gum of Lacerpitium
boiled in oil.

Sowbred root boiled and applied.

Beets boiled and wash therewith.

Turnips roasted with oil of Roses, applied.

Squille inner part boiled in oil or Turpentine, laid to.

Yellow Affodill root sodden in oil, laid to.

For the Hydropsy.
POly boiled in wine or water, drunk.

Orrigan eaten with Figs.

Bazell eaten.

Soldouella boiled with broth of fat meat, corrected with Aunis seeds,
Synuamom, Sugar and Ginger.

For the Emerods inward and outward.
DOgs tongue roasted in imbers, applied hot.

Small C^^dony pund in urine or wine, the root laid to.

Galeopsis the root eaten.

Capraria bruised with oil of Roses, laid to.

Wild Imperatoria pund and laid to.

Lacerpitium root boiled with Pomegrunat pills, and viniger, laid to.

Holy wort mingled with Popstion, applied.

Aloes boiled with wine and honey, applied.

Balsamum oil applied on cotton.

Purcelayne juice drunk.

Onyons eaten in meat.

Bramble tendrels and leaves stamped, laid to.

Shumak, or Rhus, pund with Oak coals, applied.

Figs milky juice laid to.

For the Yex or Hicket.
ALisson drunk, or held to the nose.

Mynts, two or three branches with juice of sour Pomegranats, drunk.

Dill seed chafed, and often smelled to.

Astrolochia rotunda given in drink.

Rubarbe taken.

Ceterach leaves decoct and drunk.

Sherit roots, the juice with wine or Goats milk, drunk.

Nutmegs eaten or drunk.

For to dissolve cold humors.
SOthernwood infused in oil, anoint the member taken with cold.

Harula decoct with wine and drunk.

Stechados decoct with his flowers, or alone drunk.

Wild Parcely root holden in the mouth.

For noise and sound in the ears, and to move hearing.
Figs and Mustard seed, pund and laid to.

For to waste waterish humors.
WIld Cowcumer, the juice of the bark of ye root with wine, drunk.

Wall-wort roots boyld in wine, drunk.

Wild Briony root boiled in wine or water, temperd with seawater, drunk.

Soldonella boiled with fat meat broth.

Wild Lettyce juice with Oximell, drunk.

Broom leaves or branches boyld in wine, drunk.

Spanish Broom sad taken.

For the launders.
TOrmentill leaves, decoct in wine and drunk. Cotula, decoct in wine and
drunk. Chrisanthemum, decoct in wine and drunk. Poly, decoct in wine and
drunk. Rosemary, decoct in wine and drunk. Doder, decoct in wine and drunk.
Succory juice, decoct in wine and drunk. Bay root, decoct in wine and drunk.
Plauten root, decoct in wine and drunk. Buphthalmus, decoct in wine and
drunk. Chrisanthemum seed, decoct in wine and drunk. Bazell, decoct in wine
and drunk. Dulcamara, decoct in wine and drunk. Cetrach, decoct in wine and
drunk. Souchus, decoct in wine and drunk. Frangula, -- decoct in wine and
drunk.
Varuen leaves drunk in old wine, one dram and half, xl. days.

Origanum boiled, and the patient bathed.

Libanotus seeds decoct with Pepper, taken.

Lacerpitium taken with dried Figs.

Alcakengi fruit eaten.

Garden madder root decoct in Oximell, drunk.

Carret roots in powder with homed water, drunk.

Erisimon seeds mingleb with homed water, drunk.

Squilla roasted and prepared, taken.

Red Rose juice drunk.

Frangula decoct and drunk.

For the Iaunders and yellow sought.
COmmon Mormewood infused, -- drunk. Chamepitis leaves infused, drunk.
Celidony boiled in wine with Annis seeds, drunk. Saffron flow rs with homed
water, drunk. Comza leaves and flowers decoct, drunk. Euphrase boiled in
wine, drunk. Hempseed stamped in wine, drunk. Tode Flax decoct, drunk.
Bugle decoct, drunk. Consolida boiled in water, drunk. Calamynt and homed
water, -- drunk.
For the Iaunders and yellow sought.
SMall Centory decoct, -- drunk. Sowbred root decoct, drunk. Black Elebor
boiled in water with Rue, and Egrimony, or bastard Eupatory, drunk.
Scamony juice dried, six wheat corns wayght with Orache seeds and homed
water, taken.

Sheeps Sorrel decoct and drunk.

Kneeholme decoct and drunk.

Cassia orawne and eaten.

For swelling and corruption of the Jaws.
SAligot leaves -- decoct and gargarized. Figs decoct and gargarized.
Plumtree leaves -- decoct and gargarized.
Mastick, the teeth and laws rubbed.

For Impostumes.
WOad of the Garden, pund and laid to. Lynseed with Figs, pund and laid to.
Planten leaves, pund and laid to. Cotula lutea, pund and laid to. Wild Cowcumer
root, with parched Barley, laid to. Sea-mosse, laid to. Chich Pease with Barley
meal and honey, laid to. Lupines flower, with parched Barley meal and homed
water, laid to. Juice of Endive with Ceruce, -- white lead, laid to. Vnguentum
popilion, -- laid to.
For Impostumes about the privy members or genitors of men or women.
SHerewort green stamped, laid to.

White Lilly root mingled with viniger, or the leaves of Henbane, or Barley
meal, laid to.

Dill seed burned or parched, laid to the pard, cures the swelling lumps and
ri^ts of the same, and of the fundament.

Dill herb made into ashes, strowed on the share or privy parts, cures moist
ulcers.

Astrolochia rotunda mixed with Ireos, and bathe the grief.

Galingale in powder, strowed on.

Alees in powder strowed on, cures the ulcers of the privy members and
Fundament.

Wall-wort leaves and new buds, pund and laid to.

Bean meal laid to.

Endive or Succory green leaves pund, -- laid to. Lettice green leaves pund,
laid to. Souchus juice, laid to. Erisimon seed mingled with honey and water,
laid to. Yellow Affodil roots, boiled in wine lees, laid to. Agnus castus
leaves with Butter, laid to. Plane tree young leaves decoct, laid to. Mistleto
leaves and fruit, with Tar and Wax, laid to. Plumtree leaves pund, laid to.
Fennel boiled in wine, -- laid to.
For to soften Impostumes about the fundament.
VIolets stamped with Barley meal, -- applied, or laid to. Roots of Iris
mingled with honey, applied, or laid to. Black Horehound pund, applied, or laid
to. Dill seed burned or parched, applied, or laid to. Libanotus leaves pund,
applied, or laid to. Melilot, a Quince and oil of Roses, applied, or laid to.
Melilot by it self decoct in sweet wine, applied, or laid to. Liquid Rozen
with Nutmegs and Sugar, applied, or laid to.
To break hard Impostunes, or swelling Ulcers.
NArcissus root mingled with Nettle seeds and viniger, laid to.

White Briony root pund with oil, -- laid to. Barley meal boiled in homed
water, with Figs, laid to. Iuray meal with Pigeons dung and oil of Lynseed
boiled and applied to, laid to. Fenigreek meal boiled in homed water, laid to.
New Figs with wheat meal, with Lynseed laid to. Fennigreek and roots of
Lillyes, -- laid to.
For inward inflammations.
PAunces flowers with the herbs and plant boiled, drunk. Wood Sage boiled in
wine or water, -- drunk.
For hot inflammations.
HOunds tongue boiled in water or wine -- and laid to. Tussilago green leaves
pund with honey and laid to. Pennywort on the wall, pund and laid to.
Knot-grasse green leaves, pund and laid to. Singrene alone, or with barley
meal, pund and laid to. Varuen green leaves, pund and laid to. Adders tongue
incorporate with Swines grease and laid to. Pimpernell green leaves pund and
laid to. Millifolli leaves pund and laid to. Comfry with the leaves of
Groundsell, pund and laid to. Violets bruised with Barley meal and laid to.
Trifoly leaves sod in oil and laid to. Cane reed green tender leaves stamped
and laid to. Cardus Benedictus, pund and laid to. Orache green bruised and
laid to. White Beete leaves bruised and boiled, and laid to. Colewort juice
alone, or with parched barley meal and laid to. Endive and Siccory green
leaves, pund and laid to. Acatia juice, and laid to. Rhamuns juice, and laid
to. Date tree leaves and branches, pund -- and laid to.
Red Gooseberries chawd and holden in the month.

For ache of joints that have been broken.
THe great Burre root, one dram pund with Pyne apple kernels, laid to.

Flebane seed mingled with oil of Roses and viniger, or water, playster-wise
laid to.

Dead Nettles pund and laid to.

For parts being out of joint.
SOwbred root boiled in broth, and eaten.

Cane reed, or Spear root, pound and laid to.

For itch of scuruinesse.
HIsoy decoct, and bathe the itch.

Stane sagre seed mingled with oil, and andynted.

Seeny leaves decoct with a Chicken broth, or with Perry, made with Pears, or
some other good liquor, drunk.

Bryony fruit anointed.

Sheeps Sorrel broth boiled in viniger, applied.

Lampsana bruised and laid to.

For hollow kybes.
POole reed cotton applied.

For the Kings Evil.
RVe leaves (...) with wiue and Pepper, All (...) and H^ny, or pund With Swynes
grease, and applied.

Coriander green with Bean meal, pund and laid to. Lacerpitium roots pund
with oil and laid to. Beupleros pund with salt and oil. and laid to. Saligot
leaves pund and laid to. Aperine leaves pund with Swynes grease and laid to.
Groundsell with salt, pund and laid to. Indian Pepper with honey, pund and laid
to. Pepper pund with pitch and laid to. Figtree leaves pund -- and laid to.
Squilla leaves laid to four days.

Sheeps Sorrel roots hanged about the neck.

For Ulcers of Kidneyes.
SAnicle decoct in wine or water, drunk.

(...), one dram boil and with Wine, drunk.

Mallow (...) leaves (...) S^llade, or with ^^lt.

Rozen or Fyrr (...) an (...) taken (...).

For stopping and pain of the kidneyes.
VEronica decoct -- and drunk. Pimpernell decoct in wine and drunk. Lode Flax
decoct and drunk. Plan^en roots and seed decoct in wine and drunk. Horietayle
decoct in wine and drunk. Devils Bit decoct and drunk. Fennel herb, root and
seed decoct and drunk. Betony decoct and drunk. Cuscuta decoct in wine and
drunk. Hops decoct and drunk. Melilot boiled in wine and drunk. Sea-hull boiled
in wine and drunk. Garden madder boiled in homed water and drunk. Tragagant
steeped in wine and drunk. Carret roots in powder with homed water and drunk.
Parcely roots decoct and drunk. Water Cresses decoct and drunk. Sebestenes
decoct and drunk. Cassia in decoction of Licoris, Parrely roots, or Chiches
and drunk. Fruit of Juniper decoct in homed water or wine and drunk. Pencedanu^
root by it self, or with bitter Almo^ds, taken and eaten. Sheep Chiches taken
and eaten. Purcelane in Salade taken and eaten. Buiba C^^stanea taken and
eaten. Petrociunum Macedonicum seed taken and eaten. Smyrncum seed taken and
eaten. Mess tree fruit taken and eaten. Bitter Aimonds taken and eaten.
Figs before meat taken and eaten. Nutmegs steeped in oil of sweet Almonds.
taken and eaten. Agarick one drem taken and eaten. Rozen of Turpentine free --
taken and eaten.
For to drive away Gnats.
YEl^w Lysimachus, dried and perfumed.

For lamenesse.
TAke Euphorbium, and twelve times so much oil, and a little wax, and lay it
so ache of joints, palsy, lamet esse, cramps, shrinking of sinews, and
against all aches, and pains of the same.

For to stop the Laske.
BIstort root in wine, -- decoct in wine and drunk. Peruincls in wine, decoct
in wine and drunk. Egrimony seed in wine, decoct in wine and drunk.
Hipericen with his flowers and seeds in wine, decoct in wine and drunk.
Shepherds purss, decoct in wine and drunk. Tormentill root in powder in wine,
decoct in wine and drunk. Strawbery plants in wine, decoct in wine and drunk.
Wild Tansey, decoct in wine and drunk. Horsetayle, decoct in wine and drunk.
Flebane seed, parched and bruised, decoct in wine and drunk. Flax weed or
sophia, in wine or Smiths water, decoct in wine and drunk. Yarrow, decoct in
wine and drunk. Flower gentle, decoct in wine and drunk. White water-Lilly
root or seed, decoct in wine and drunk. Hiacynthus Orientalis, decoct in
wine and drunk. Fly Orchis roots, decoct in wine and drunk. Wild Bazell,
decoct in wine and drunk. Garden Rue leaves, decoct in wine and drunk. Annis
seed, decoct in wine and drunk. Coriander seed parched, decoct in wine and
drunk. Dancus root, decoct in wine and drunk. Hearts touns, decoct in wine
and drunk. Moss, decoct in wine and drunk. Black Poppyseeds, decoct in wine
and drunk. Pannik seeds, decoct in wine and drunk. Lentils, ye second
decoction, the first cast away, decoct in wine and drunk. Pease earth Nut,
decoct in wine and drunk. Hares foot, decoct in wine and drunk. Common Rush
seed parched, decoct in wine and drunk. Dock seed and Sorrel, decoct in wine
and drunk. Great Condrilla tuice, decoct in wine and drunk. Roses yellow
seeds, decoct in wine and drunk. Castus flowers, decoct in wine and drunk.
Lotus wood shanings, decoct in wine and drunk. Oak leaves, bark, and Acorue
cups, decoct in wine and drunk. Pyne apple scales, -- decoct in wine and
drunk.
Swines Cresses roasted in ymbcrs, eaten.

Annis seeds taken any ways.

Rubarbe taken by discretion.

Endive and Succory beyled and raten with viniger.

Purcelayne seeds taken in,

Marsh Mallows, green seed or dried, pund and drunk.

Skerit roots juice drunk with Goats milk.

Rayson kernels broth drunk.

Unripe grapes flower, and unripe fruit of the wild grape, taken.

For to stop the Laske.
GReat Tamarisk the fruit taken, -- eaten. Barberies the fruit eaten. Acatia
the juice eaten. White Thorn the fruit eaten. Lic^m taken in, eaten.
Pomegranat seeds dried in the Sun, eaten. Quinces eaten. Almonds before meat,
eaten. Sour rough choke Pears eaten. Wild Plummes juice eaten. Black sour
Cherries eaten. Cornell fruit eaten. Sour Apples gathered before they be
ripe, dried in the Sun, -- eaten.
Oak apples or galls taken any ways.

Ciprus fruit, or decoction thereof taken.

To stop the Lask, coming of chollerick humors.
REd E^seberries eaten.

For to heal legs or arms broken.
Elm leaves, the broth, or the bark or root, to bathe the legs or arms
broken.

For sores that run in the legs.
POnd weed, or water Spike, pund with water and viniger, applied.

For the Litargy or sleeping sickness.
RVe juice with viniger given to smell unto.

Penced anum root given to smell unto.

Euphorbium mingled with oil, straked and laid to the Temples.

Senuy made in plaster with Figs, laid to the head.

For the Lazer and Lepry.
CAlamint boiled in wine and drunk, and the same eaten, and to drink whay of
sweet milk after it.

Tithemall root boiled in viniger, applied.

Briony fruit, applied

Vitis alba, or Clematis leave ^^ayd upon.

Juray meaie with sulphur and viniger, applied.

Senuy mingled with diniger, applied.

Garlic pund with oil and salt, laid to.

Figs milky juice with Barley meal parched, applied.

Olyue tree leaves pund with viniger, laid to.

For lice and nits in the body and apparel.
GOlden Stechas boiled in lie, and the hair washed.

Gum of Juy kills them.

Beetes broth, wash the head with it.

Wild Passerag boiled in lie, and wash the head.

Garlic decoct with Orrigan and wine drunk, kills them

Stecae, alias Philago, boiled in wine and washed.

To drine them from the head and body.
ORrigan decoct in wine, drunk.

Staue sagre mingled with oil, and anointed.

Tamarisk with the buds and tendrels decoct, and wash them.

Ceder decoct, the liquor anointed.

To strengthen the Liver.
AGrimony decoct in wine, -- drunk. White Horehound juice, drunk. Pentaphilon
juice, drunk. Seahull made in powder, drunk. Woodroue put in wine, drunk.
Orach fruit put in wine, drunk. Roses juice, or decoction, -- drunk.
Phistick Nuts eaten.

For inflammation of the Liver.
Roman Wormwood, decoct in wine and drunk. Bastard Egrimony decoct in wine
and drunk. Hepatica decoct in wine and drunk. Stordium, decoct in wine and
drunk. Small Daysies decoct in wine and drunk. Violets decoct in wine and
drunk. Liuerwort -- decoct in wine and drunk.
Pelymorell green leaves pund and laid to out wardly,

Whorts black stewed, -- Whortell berryes, eaten. Gooseberries green with
meats, eaten. Licoris root, eaten. Pomegranat juice, -- eaten.
For stopping of the Liver.
CAmepitis steeped in wine.

Chelubny root decoct with Annis seeds in white wine.

Flowers of Saffron with homed water.

Pimpernell decoct in wine, -- drunk. Carimony decoct, drunk. Hempseed
stamped in wine, drunk. Osiris, -- Tode Flax decoct, drunk. Tormentill
leaves and roots decoct, drunk. Planten root and seed decoct in white wine,
drunk. Bugle, decoct in wine, drunk. Auens, decoct in wine, drunk. Sarisens
consound decoct in water, drunk. Sage decoct in water, drunk. White Horehound
decoct in water, drunk. Stecados flowers decoct, drunk. Fennel, herb, seed
and root decoct, drunk. Betony decoct, drunk. Centauri maius the root
decoct, drunk. Rubarbe infused by discretion, drunk. Ptony root dried,
drunk. Eleboryne decoct in wine, -- drunk.
Sowbred root dried, taken with wine and Hidromell.

For stopping of the Liver.
SEeny leaves prepared, decoct, -- drunk. Dulcamara decoct, drunk. Hoppes,
drunk. Capillus Veneris, drunk. Liuerwort, drunk. Horned Popy root decoct
in water to half, drunk. Lupines with Rue and Pepper in wine, drunk. Succory
juice, drunk. Caret roots in powder with homed water, drunk. Parcely decoct,
drunk. Shepherds Needle decoct in wine, drunk. Asperagus by it self, or with
chiche pease, decoct, drunk. Juice of red Roses, drunk. Broom leaves, crops
and branches decoct, drunk. Agnus Castus seeds, drunk. Peach free leaves
decoct, drunk. Mulbery tree root bark decoct, drunk. Wild Ash leaves
decoct, drunk. Fruit of Juniper decoct in Wine or Hydromell, -- drunk.
Cetrach taken with viniger forty days, -- eaten. Chiches eaten. Beetes eaten.
Sampere in Salade eaten. Parcely eaten. Dried Raysins eaten. Capres in Salade
eaten. Bitter Almonds eaten. Nutmegs eaten. Pyne tree fruit eaten. Agarick
eaten. Rozen of Turpentine tree -- eaten.
For pain of the loins.
BVglos root boiled in wine, drunk.

To increase love.
Wild Caret roots taken any ways.

For inflammation of the Longs.
EThiopis root decoct or confect, and costonticked in ^^^h hou^.

Syrop of Violets eaten.

Pulmonaria made in powder, and drunk, -- Sea-mosse.

Bitter Almonde eaten.

For to cleanse the Lungs.
PAunces herb and flowers decoct, drunk.

Botrus, -- Oak of Jerusalem boiled in wine, drunk.

Iris roots new gathered, with Sugar or Honey, eaten. Penny royal with honey
eaten. Origan with honey licked in, eaten. Saicacoll one dram taken, eaten.
Licoris root -- eaten.
For roughness of the Lungs.
Fagges eaten.

Iuiubes in Electuary or Syrop, eaten.

Gum of the wild Cherry tree in wine, drunk.

For dryness and harm of the Lungs.
VEronica water with wine distild, and often drawn, until it be red of
color, drunk, -- decoct in wins and drunk. Munularia decoct in wins and
drunk. Sinkfoyle tender root juice, decoct in wins and drunk. Tormentill
root decoct in wins and drunk. Scabios herb or root, decoct in wins and
drunk. Black Molyn with his pleasant dowers, decoct in wins and drunk.
Sanicle leaves and root decoct in water and honey, decoct in wins and drunk.
Comphry roots, decoct in wins and drunk. Rue decoct in wins and drunk.
Stecados -- decoct in wins and drunk.
Ethiopis root confect with honey, often licked.

Garden Parcenep roots -- eaten. Raysins dried, eaten. Licoris roots eaten.
Peche kernels eaten. Bitter Almonds eaten. Figs eaten. Sebestenes eaten.
Fistik Nuts eaten. Pyns Nut kernels -- eaten.
Turpeutine in Electuary with honey, taken.

For to take away marks, coming by stripes or beating.
ISop decoct and washed.

Margerom dried, mingied with honey, -- laid to and applied. Origanum mingled
with honey and oil, laid to and applied. Calamynt boiled in wine often washed,
laid to and applied. Rue root in powder mingled with honey, laid to and
applied. Fennel roots pund with honey, laid to and applied. Ameos pund with
honey, laid to and applied. Lacerpitium roots pund with honey, laid to and
applied. Aloes Cicatrine with honey, laid to and applied. Tupsta, the bark of
the root with Franckincence and wax, laid to and applied. White Briony root
with wine pund, laid to and applied. Vitis Siluestris fruit, laid to and
applied. Dulcamara decoct, laid to and applied. Colewort leaves with parched
Barley pund, laid to and applied. Cenuy mingled with honey and new grease, laid
to and applied. Recket seed pund with honey, laid to and applied. Garlic pund,
laid to and applied. Water Pepper leaves and seed pund, -- laid to and applied.
Oil of Bay anointed.

Gyie of Nuts anointed.

For to take away marks with hot irons.
LIuerwort pund and laid to.

For to take away marks of small Pox.
SOwbred root stamped and laid to.

For to mundify the Matrix.
LAcerpitium leaves boiled in wine, -- drunk. Astrolochia longa with Pepper
and Mirth, drunk. Piony roots dried, as much as a Bean, with homed water,
drunk. Laurel of Alexandria decoct in wine, -- drunk.
For to close up the Matrix.
SAge eaten.

Lentisk leaves and bark, boiled and drunk.

For windynesse of the Matrix.
Common received at the place convenient, by glyster, pessary, or plaster.

Agnus Castus seeds drunk.

For blasting and windynesse of the matrix, or mother.
GEramum Tuberosum, the root taken in wine.

Pulegium decoct, and sit over the lume of it.

Peplos, the her be and leede kept in brine and eaten.

For the pain of the matrix or mother.
ANthilis mingled with milk and oil of Roses, laid to the belly out wardly.

Fever few boiled, and to sit over the sum and bathe it.

Peruincle with eyle of Roses and milk, a pessary.

Comza decoct, and sit over the fume on a close stool.

Lynseed boiled end glystred.

Varuen leaves pund with Swines grease, or oil of Roses, laid to.

Betony leaves dried, and drunk with homed water.

Rubath taken by discretion.

Briony root decoct, and sit over and bathe it.

Oil of Balsamum applied.

Henbane green juice with Colliries convenient, applied.

Dried Roses boiled in wine, anointed and laid to.

Nutmegs taken in wine.

For to resettle the matrix in the natural place, being moved.
CEnlios seed with wine, -- drunk. Paunax seed with wine, drunk. Double
tongue leaves decoct, drunk. Acatia with red wine, drunk.
Quinces decoct and bathe therewith.

Oak apples decoct, and sit over it.

Mastick taken in.

For suffocation and strangling of the matrix.
Bvtter Bur in powder with wine, -- drunk. Pannax seeds with Worm wood,
drunk. Piony seeds xv. or xvi. in wine or meade drunk. Black Briony decoct in
wine, -- drunk.
Cotula foetida boiled, and wash her seete.

Dill decoct, and sit over the fume thereof.

Pencedamum juice smelt to. Assafetida -- smelt to. Gum Sagapenum -- smelt
to.
Ealeanum perfume taken in place convenient.

Mustard seed sunsted into the nose.

Wild Caret seeds in wine, drunk.

For stopping, or hardness of the matrix.
FEuerfew boiled in wine, laid to the Navel.

White Lilly roots roasted or pu^d with oil of Rises, applied.

White Horehound decoct in wine, -- drunk. Astrolochia longa with Pepper and
Myrrh, drunk. Small Centory, -- drunk.
Ciprus roots boiled and bathed warm.

Wall-wortleaues, buds and roots decoct, and the persume taken.

Iuy leaves boiled in viniger, applied.

Fennigreek decoct in bath, sit over it.

Tormentill leaves and flowers, decoct in wine, drunk.

Moly root by pessary applied.

Leekes decoct, and bathe with if.

Ladanum by pessary applied.

Agnus Castus decoct, and sit over in bath.

Leeks decoct in sea water, and bathe with it.

For hot hard Impostumes of the Matrix, or Mother.
WAllflowers dried and decoct in water, drunk: and the grief sloued or bathed
in it.

Asclepias leaves pund and laid to.

Oil of Balsamum conneyed in by Instrument.

Melilot boiled in sweet wine, or with the yeolk of an Egg roasted, or meal of
Fennigreeke, or of Lynseede, or with fine flower of meal, or with Cicory laid
to.

Purcelane juice put in by discretion.

Mallow leaves decoct and bathe it.

Marsh Mallows pund with Swines grease, or goose grease, or Turpentine applied
by pessary.

Agnus Castus boiled and fumigated by sitting over it.

Pitch liquid laid to with Barley meal.

For rising of the Matrix.
STinking Motherwort to smell of it, or to lay of it to the Navel.

For to help Melancholy.
BOrage leaves and flowers put in wine, -- drunk. Time in powder 3. drams with
homed water, drunk. Balm in wine, -- drunk.
Tormentill root and leaves in powder, knodden with the white of an Egg,
eaten.

Bazell taken in wine, and often smelled to.

For members taken dead or benumbed.
A Gnus Castus mingled with oil and oyntmenis, made to heat, melli^y and
heal.

For to mollify stiff and hard members.
AGnus Castus with oil and oyntmentes made to heat, mollify and heal.

Oil of ripe Olives compound with good herbs.

For shrinking of any member.
GReat Centory root, two drams with wine, drunk.

For to warm all parts of cold members.
AGnus Castus with oil and ointments, made to heal, mollify, and heat.

For swollen members.
PLanten leaves pund and laid to.

For dislocation of members one of joint.
TVrnesols leaves pund, -- laid to. Iris roots laid to. Nar^^ssus roots laid
to. Acanthus green, laid to. Ashes of the Vine dissolved in oil of Roses and
viniger, -- laid to.
Acatia leaves and cr^ys decoct, and bathe with it.

For to strengthen and comfort memory.
Eyebright dried in yowder, three parts, and one part of Maces a spoon full
drunk at morning with wine.

Lilly Conually distilled water, drunk.

Rosemary flowers conserved with Sugar, eaten daily fasting

Stecad^s leaves and flowers often smelled unto.

Cardus benedictus in meat or drink.

For to make a man to be merry.
BOrage leaves and flowers put in wine, drunk.

Varuen steeped in water, sprinkled about the house, where banqueting and
company is.

Mynts smelled unto, and strowed abount the house.

For Meazels.
VEr^nica decoct and drunk.

Saffron mingled with woman's milk, laid to the eyes.

Figs eaten.

To cause plenty of milk in women's breasts.
BVgles in wyns decoct and drunk.

Milk-wort, or sea-Trifoly taken in meat or drink.

Fennel leaves eaten, or the seeds drunk.

Dill creps decoct and drunk, and the seed decoct and drunk.

Nigella seed decoct in wine.

Ciches eaten.

Souchus juice drunk.

Lettice eaten in Sallade.

Purcelane root eaten, -- Halmins.

Mallow seed drunk in wine.

Red^ish eaten.

To dry milk in women's breasts.
HEmpseeds applied.

Rue eaten,

For cloddered milk in breasts.
LEntils boiled in salt seawater, applied.

To cause Kyne to yield plenty of milk.
FOdder them with Sparry, -- Spargula, or Poligul^.

For to open the Mile or Spleen.
WHite Horehound decoct in water and drunk.

For swelling and inflammation of the Mylt.
PEnsedanum say of ye root eaten alone, or with bitter Almonds.

Petymorell pund and applied to the grief outwardly.

Garden Madder seed with Orimell taken.

Vine ashes dissolved in viniger and oil, laid to.

For stopping of the Mylt or Spleen.
IRis roots decoct and eaten.

Lonchitis drunk, or laid upon with viniger.

Lupines with Rue and Pepper boiled, drunk.

Broom leaves, branches, and crops, decoct in wine or water, drunk.

Tamarisk hoyled in wine, drunk.

Capres root bark with Oximell, or applied outwardly with oils and ointments
convenient.

Bay root bark decoct in wine, drunk.

To diminish the Mylt.
CResses seed eaten or drunk.

For hardness of the Mylt.
TOrmentill with viniger, -- drunk. Osiris, -- Tode Flax, drunk. Scordion in
ale or wine, drunk. Teuereon decoct in wine, drunk. White water-Lilly root
decoct in white wine, drunk. Stecades alone, or with the flower decoct,
drunk. Iuyleaues boiled in wine, drunk. Doder decoct in wine or water,
drunk. Male Fearne root decoct in wine, drunk. Oak fern decoct, the root,
drunk. Hearts tongue decoct, drunk. Lonchitis, -- Splenewort decoct, drunk.
Cetrach leaves, -- Asplenum decoct, drunk. Capillus Veneris decoct in wine, --
drunk.
For hardness of the Mylt.
GArden Madder root decoct in wine, -- drunk. Caret roots in powder with
homed water, drunk. Tamerisk decoct in wine, drunk. Mulbery root bark
decoct, drunk. Ash tree leaves and bark decoct, drunk. Mayle roots with
wine pund, -- drunk.
Nettle leaves mingled with oil and wax, laid to.

Stinking Gladeum half a dram taken in.

Permy royal mingled with viniger and honey.

Oppopanax -- eaten, or taken in. Sagapenum or taken in. Galbanum eaten, or
taken in. Amomacum in small quantity eaten, or taken in. Nutmegs or taken in.
Pine nut kernels eaten, or taken in. Rozen of Larix with viniger, eaten, or
taken in. Rozen of Turpentine, -- eaten, or taken in. Sheep Sorrel pund with
viniger, -- laid to. Radish root pund with viniger, laid to. Cresses seeds
pund with viniger, -- laid to.
For old griefs and ulcers of the mouth.
HOunds teng boiled with ye root in water or wure, wash the grief. Bistort
leaves decoct, wash the grief. Herb Robert decoct, wash the grief.
Stukefoyle decoct in water to the third part, wash the grief. Torenentill
roots and leaves decoct, wash the grief. Strawberry plants, wash the grief.
Wild Tansey, wash the grief. Planten leaves, wash the grief. Iacea, wash the
grief. Varuen leaves and root, wash the grief. Buyle leaves, -- Prunell,
wash the grief. Sauicle with honey, wash the grief. Wall flowers with honey,
wash the grief. Bell flower in water, wash the grief. Camomill decoct, wash
the grief. Testiculus odoratus with honey, wash the grief. Hysoy with Figs,
wash the grief. Great Vaierian leaves and roots, wash the grief. Aloes and
wine applied, -- wash the grief. Sorrel de Boys decoct, -- bathe. Saligot
leaves decoct, bathe. Sptalage juice, -- bathe.
For old ulcers or griefs of the mouth.
BRamble young tendrels decoct and wash, -- Acatia decoct, and bathe. Priuet
leaves decoct, and bathe. Figs decoct, and bathe. Walnut shelles, or gr^^^
bark decoct, and bathe. Oitue tree leaves decoct, and bathe. Oak apples
decoct, and bache.
For stinking of the mouth.
Herb Robert decoct, decoct, and wash or bathe. Strawberry plants decoct, and
wash or bathe. Consound decoct, and wash or bathe. Hauer grass -- decoct, and
wash or bathe.
For ulcers in childrens mouths.
Leaves Lynem tree decoct in water, and bathed.

To increase nature.
Moss tree fruit eaten.

Ash tree keys eaten.

For going out of the Navel.
PErfoliatum pund with meal and wine, applied. Flebane seed pund with
viniger, applied. Pencedadum juice or pulpe, -- applied.
For young childrens Nauels.
GAlega sryed in oil of Lynsetde, laid to,

For ange nails.
WHite Briony pund with wyns, applied.

For corrupt nails.
SMall Celidony pund, -- applied. Lynseede with Cresses and honey pund, applied.
Sinkefoyle root boiled in viniger, applied. Iris roots decoct with honey,
applied. Crow root leaves and roots pund, applied. Dry Myrtle leaves with
connentent ointments or salues, -- applied.
For the Kings Fuill.
LYnseede decoct in water, applied.

Bell flower decoct in water.

White Horehound leaves tempred with honey.

Barley meals mingled with Lar, waxs, oil, and the vrin of a chile, applied.

Leupieres with wine and salt pund, applied.

To procure sneezing,
BAzell with viniger bruised, put in the nose.

For to cause the nose to bleed.
NEttle leaves pund and put into the nose.

Iasmyn oil put in the nose.

For to staunch nose-bleeding,
PEruincle bruised, -- put in the nose. Yellow Lisimachus put in the nose.
Knotgrasse bruised, put in the nose. Moss decoct in water, put in the nose.
Galleon flowers pund, put in the nose. Leeke blades bruised, -- put in the nose.
Nettle leaves pund with ^alt laid the nose and forehead.

Rue leeues pu^o, and laid to the nose outwardly.

For to take away stench or smell of the nose.
HAuer grass, and the roose boiled in water to the third part consumed, and
after boiled again with body till it be thick, especially with a little Aloes
put in the nose.

To heal superfluous flesh in the nose called Polious.
POirpody powder after put in the nose.

^ipru^ ^r^ite put in the nose.

To open the condoits of the nose.
I Vice of Pimpernell snuffed into the nose.

For members taken with Palsy.
LA^ender (...) alone, or with Synnamom, Nutmegs and Houes taken.

Lauender water distilled, and wash the member.

For the Palsy.
PEnsedaunm sap with oil of Roses and viniger, taken.

Oppopanex two drams.

Sagapenum one dram.

Euphorbium prepared.

Ciprus root decoct and drunk.

For to stay perbraking and vomiting.
BIstort boiled in water or wine, or powder of it, drunk.

Tormentill root in powder knod with the white of an egg, eaten.

Running Time juice, half an ounce with viniger, drunk. Fennel herb or
seed with water, drunk. Pernassus grass decoct, drunk. Nutmegs, -- drunk.
Betony with clarified honey after supper, -- eaten. Lupines long soked in
water, eaten. Black Whortels, eaten. Rohob made of Khytes and Sugar, eaten.
Dry Dates, eaten. Ciprus fruit boiled in oil, eaten. Mastick taken in, --
eaten.
For perbraking and wambling of the stomach of women with child.
VIne young tendrels juice taken.

For to assuage all pains.
BAlsa^um leaves decoct in wine, drunk.

Henbane lee^e put in playsters, laid to.

Henbane leaves alone, or with Barley meal pund, laid to, mingled with other
playsters.

For to dissolve pestilent Carbuncles.
IMparatorium root by if self, or with the leaves, pund and applied.

Oppopanax laid to.

Lacerpitium with Rue water, and honey, applied.

Lupines, the meal with viniger, or boiled in viniger, applied.

Cardus benedictus green herb, pund and laid to.

For ^^egmes and hot Carbunclee.
VIolets pund with Barley meal, applied.

For the Tisick, or consumption.
BEtony decoct and drunk.

For to cause one to piss well.
SAxifrage root in wine decoct and drunk.

Bitter Almouds taken with Muscadell or Bastard.

For the hot piss.
A Nthilis halse a dram, drunk. Comza leaves decoct, drunk. Annis seeds
decoct in wine, drunk. Cecelios seeds decoct in wine, -- drunk.
Cetrach leaves taken with viniger, eaten.

Sebestenes taken in meat.

For such as cannot piss, but by drops.
TAnsey seeds with w^ne, -- drunk. Osiris, -- Tode flax decoct, drunk.
Saffron root in wine decoct, drunk. Margerom in white wine decoct, drunk.
Garden Kue leaves in water decoct, drunk. Kneeholme in wine decoct, drunk.
Nutmegs parthed, -- drunk.
A Preseruatine for the Plague or Peft^ence.
ANgelica root holden in the mouth.

Myrthis boiled in wine, drunk.

Orenges juice eaten or drunk.

Iumper berttes burned and persu^^d.

Against the Plague and ^^^^ent Fevers.
BVtter Bur in powder with wine, -- drunk. Tormentill root and (...) in a
^ne, drunk. Deoils bit in wine, drunk. Saxifrage root dried, with wine or
viniger, -- drunk.
Angelica holden in the mouth in the morning.

Cloue Gylloters conserved, -- eaten. Marygolds conserved, eaten. Monoph^ion
halte a dram eaten. Kue leaves alone, or with Wall^uts ard Figs, eaten.
Master wort with wine, -- drunk. Crosie wort Gen^^an in wine decoct, drunk.
S^twall root in ^^ue decoct -- drunk.
Angelica root holden in the n^ou^h at morning.

Caroline root in wine decoct, drunk.

Orenges taken any nayes.

For the French Pox.
BVtter Burrs in powder with wine taken.

Fumitory juice.

Galeopses leaves pund and laid to.

Planten stamped and laid to.

Liver wort pund with honey, applied.

For weakness coming of the French Pox.
EVphorbium prepared, and taken by discretion.

For the small Pox.
VEroniea decoct and drunk.

Saffcon with woman's milk mingled, and laid to the eyes.

Figs eaten.

Figs milky juice laid to.

For poison of Serpents or Vipers.
SMall Buglos in meat or drink, or to be carried about a man or woman.

Sinquefoyle root juice in wine decoct, -- drunk, Tormentill root and leaves
in wine decoct, drunk, Betony dried leaves in wine decoct, drunk,
Paunces seed and flower with oil applied.

For to cure poison.
Small stone crop juice with viniger taken.

Monophilon root half a dram in wine or viniger, or broth together taken.

Poly in wine or water.

Margerom compounded with smelling ointments, applied.

Rue leaves eaten alone, or with Walnuts and Figs.

Dictani juice with wine, -- drunk. Daucus root decoct in wine, drunk.
Saxifrage root and seed in wine and viniger decoct, drunk. Betony dried
leaves in wine, drunk. Angelica roots in wine decoct, drunk. Astrolochia
roots in wine, drunk. Assarabacka in wine decoct, drunk. Sowbred roots in
wine decoct, drunk. Gentian root in powder, i. dram with wine, Pepper and Rue,
drunk. Crossewort Gentian in powder, drunk. Setwall decoct, drunk.
Helebornie decoct, drunk. Galega juice, drunk. Camelion roots in wine decoct,
drunk. Cardus benedictus juice, drunk. Wild Pannar seed decoct, drunk.
Garden Parcely root decoct, drunk. Garlic decoct in wine, drunk. Affodill
in wine, drunk. Bayberries in wine, drunk. Plane tree fruit with wine taken,
-- drunk.
Betony leaves applied outwardly.

Lacerpitium roots taken.

Sharp wynd-weed leaves and fruit taken.

One betry, herb and fruit taken in, -- herba Paris.

Trifolium leaves or roots with Triacle and Mithredatu^ taken.

Wild Thistle root with viniger laid to.

Mallows herb and root decoct and taken in, and vomited vy again
incontiuently.

Turnep, or Rape seeds taken in Triacle.

Garden Parcely roots applied, decoct.

Eristmon seed steeped in water, and dried by the fire, or lapped in paste and
baked, taken with honey.

Garlik eaten.

Orenges seeds eaten.

Figs with salt, Rue and Walnuts eaten.

For ulcers of the Pulme and Lungs.
VEranica water distilled with wyns, drunk.

For clammy Phlegm and humors, to purge them.
TApsia the bark of the root, one dram taken.

Colloquintida the white pith, one seruple taken.

Cassia juice or pulpe taken.

To purge by vrin.
HOnysuckls fruit in wine forty days, -- drunk. Doder bayled in wine or
water, drunk. Wild Thistle root decoct in wine, -- drunk.
For to purge women of deliverance.
RVe juice drunk with wine.

To purge raw and gross phlegm.
SArcacoll one dram taken.

Sowbred root one dram taken.

To purge hot and choleric humors.
Wild Campions seeds, two drams taken.

Tragoriganum decoct, drunk. Ligusticsi root decoct with wine, drunk.
Euyhorbiu^ prepared drunk. Suiall Centory decoct in wine or water, drunk.
Rubarb one dram by discretion, taken. Ezula juice, seed and root, taken. Peples
juice and seed, taken. Wild Cowcumer juice dried, half a scruple,
Elder leaves and tender crops in broth or pottage.

Clematis altera seed with water or mead, taken.

Scamony juice dried, the weight of are wheat corns.

Doder, or Cuicuta decoct in wine or water, drunk.

Juice of red roses insused, drunk. Frangula decoct, drunk.

Buckthorne berries in small quantity.

For to purge hot melancholy humors.
PEuny royal taken with honey and Aloes.

Planta Leonis, or Christ's wort taken.

Seeny cods and leaves, one dram taken.

Elder green and middle bark in wine or beer.

To purge choler upward and downward.
THlaspy seed eaten.

To purge by siege downward.
SAffron the juice of the seed taken.

Great Turnesole a handful boiled and taken.

Mercury pund with Butter, and laid to the fundament.

Violets decoct and drunk.

Iris roots, the juice taken in small quantity.

White Lilly roots decoct in ho^^ed water.

Yellow Narcissus roots two drams decoct in wine or water.

Isop with Syrop Acetest taken.

Time in powder three drams with honied water, viniger and salt, taken,

Oppopanax two drams or less, taken.

Sagapenum one dram.

Euphorbium prepared.

Black Helebor taken,

Clematis altera fruit decoct and drunk with white wine xi. days.

Squilla prepared, first covered about with dowe or p^s^e, baked in an oven, or
roasted under coals, till it be soft and tender, and then a spoone full or two
thereof taken with the eyghth part of salt.

For rage or madness by biting of a mad dog.
ALlison taken with meats.

To make a man rave and mad.
SOlanum somniferum more then twelve berries eaten.

Henbane roots, leaves, or juice taken.

Against rauing and Frenzy.
EVphorbium mingled with oil, straked on the forhead.

To kill Rats and Mice.
ELebora root pund with meals and honey, laid for them.

For raw vnskinned places.
Green Fennigreeke pund with viniger, applied.

For pain of the Reins or Kidneyes.
BVglos roofs boiled in wine, -- drunk. Anthelis with wine, half an ounce,
drunk. Tordilion juice in wine, one dram, drunk. Horned Popy root boiled to
half in water, drunk. Calamus Arromaticus decoct in wine, drunk. Bulba
castanon. seed decoct in wine, -- drunk. Licorts juice -- eaten. Bitter
Almonds eaten. Cassia drawn, eaten.
For to refresh a man.
BArberry bush green leaves, made in greeuesawce, eaten.

For subtle Rhewmes and Cataries.
PApy heads boiled into a Syrop, eaten.

The little Carolius Thistle, called Spurrie Arrabica, taken any ways.

For all ruptures.
Pllosilla leaves and roots decoct and drunk.

For running and spreading scabs and sores.
PArritory pund and laid upon.

Galingale roots dried, and the powder laid on.

White Briony root pund, -- applied and laid to. Liver wort pund with honey,
applied and laid to. Spelt meal boiled with wine and Saltpeter, applied and
laid to. Iuray meal with sulphur and viniger, applied and laid to. Chiches
boiled with Orrobus, applied and laid to. Camelion root with Coperose and
swines grease, applied and laid to. Red Feet leaves pund, applied and laid to.
Sheeps Sorrel root and leaves decoct and bathe, applied and laid to. Smalage
juice, applied and laid to. Cresses pund with honey, applied and laid to.
Squilla roasted in y^^bers, applied and laid to. Bramble leaves pund, applied
and laid to. Myrile green leaves pund with oil of Roses, applied and laid to.
Licium of Buxthorne, applied and laid to. Almonds pund with honey, applied and
laid to. Figs milky juice, applied and laid to. Linde bark pund with
viniger, applied and laid to. Zuniper bark or tynde burnt, and with water,
applied and laid to. Sauia leaves pund with honey, applied and laid to. Scales
of Pyne apples, and the bark with litarge of gluer and Franckincence, and a
little Coperose, applied and laid to.
For scabs and scuruinesse.
VEronica decoct and drunk, -- laid to. Scabious mixed with ointments
convenient, laid to. Origan decoct in water, and bathe the grief, or wash the
body, laid to. Rue leaves mixed with Wine, Pepper, Niter, honey and Allome, laid
to. Euphorbium with oil of Bay, Bears grease, or Woolues preace, or such
like, laid to. Dragon roots dried, mixed with honey, laid to. Eleborus root pund
with Fra^kincence, rozen and oil, laid to. Wild Cowcun, er root in powder
with honey, laid to. Vitis alba leaves, -- Clematis altera, laid to. Scamony
juice with oil, -- laid to.
Hops decoct and drunk.

For Sciatica.
SOthern wood seed green, or powder decoct in wine or water, drunk.

Great Burre seed in powder decoct in wine or water.

Came pites leaves decoct in wine forty days, -- drunk. Ethiopis roots
decoct, drunk. Time boiled in wine or water, drunk. Penny royal puno and
laid to, drunk. Rue boiled with Dill, drunk. Assarabacka boiled in wine,
drunk. Asperagus decoct, drunk. Smyrneum seeds decoct, drunk. Spanish Broom
teuder branches steeped in water, and the juice pressed out, drunk, a little
Scrat or glass full, drunk. Capres roots, the bark decoct, drunk. White
Popler bark boiled in wine, -- drunk. Penny royal pund, -- applied or laid
to. Pencedanum root say, applied or laid to. Lacerpitium root with oil and
wax, applied or laid to. Amomacum one dram with oil of Ciprus and Niter
applied or laid to. Enula Campana leaves boiled in wine, applied or laid to.
Black Elebor root decoct, and taken in small quantity. applied or laid to.
Iuray meal boiled in homed water, applied or laid to. Luyines flower or meal
boiled in viniger, applied or laid to. Senuy with Figs made in plaster,
applied or laid to. Cresses pund with honey and viniger, applied or laid to.
Erisimon seed taken with honey, applied or laid to. Iberis root mixed with
Swynes grease, -- applied or laid to.
Rimus seeds boiled with meat and eaten.

Thlaspy seed glistred at the fundament.

To drive away Serpents.
YEllow Lyst^^achion -- perfumed. Pencedanum perfumed. Sagapenum perfumed.
Wallwort perfumed. Nasturcium perfumed. Agnus Castus perfumed.
For stinging of Serpents.
CAme Ciperessus decoct, -- drunk. Great Turnesole a handful decoct, drunk.
Lichenus seed and flower, -- Rose campio^ with wine, drunk. Wild Campions seed
and flower decoct, drunk. Garden Lark Spur seed, drunk. Iris roots with
viniger or water, drunk. Orrigane boiled in wine, drunk. Rue juice eaten,
drunk. Fennel herb and seed, drunk. Lettice seed decoct in wine, drunk.
Rocket seed decoct, drunk. Barberies in wine, -- drunk. Scorpion grass
pund, -- laid to. Margerom with salt and viniger pund, laid to. Lacerpitium
outwardly, laid to. Polymony pund, laid to. Galingale roots pund, laid to.
Acconitum pund, laid to. Spelt meal with red wine pund, laid to. Thistle
tender crops and leaves, laid to. Seeds of Docks and Sorrel decoct, laid to.
Milk Thistle roots and leaves pund, -- laid to.
Rue juice eaten.

For biting of Serpents.
ECkron root boiled in wine, -- drunk. Great Burre roots juice, drunk. Came
Ciperessus with wine, drunk. Scabios root decoct in wine, drunk. Camomill
and his flowers decoct in wine, one dram. drunk. Clinopodion, -- Plial.
montanum decoct in wine, drunk. Ocurastrum seed in wine, drunk. White
Horehound decoct in wine, drunk. Rue juice, drunk. Libanotus roots decoct in
wine, drunk. Betony dry leaves in wine, drunk. Paunces seeds, root and
flower decoct in wine, drunk. Ligusticum root decoct in wine, drunk. Hearts
tongue decoct, drunk. Ladies Thistle seed, drunk. Coleworts juice in wine,
drunk. Ash leaves juice, tender herb, crops and bark decoct, drunk.
For biting of Serpents.
THe great Burre leaves pund with salt, -- laid to. White Lilly roots roasted,
and oil of Roses, laid to. Masterwort pund, the root, laid to. Gentian juice
with viniger, laid to. Juice of the Aglets of the green Vine dissolved in oil
of Roses and viniger, laid to. Erica leaves and flowers pund, -- laid to.
Agnus Castus pund, laid to.

Agnus Castus fumed. Wallwort fumed.
For white naughty scurfe.
SCabios pund.

White Lilly roots mingled with viniger, or the leaves of Henbane or Barley
meal laid to.

For naughty white scuruinesse of the head.
LAcerpitium applied.

Sowbred decoct and bathe, -- or wash the grief. Myrtle berries decoct and
bathe, or wash the grief. Lie made of ashes of the Ash tree, and bathe, or
wash the grief. Aller yellow bark decoct and bathe, -- or wash the grief.
Tithyniall juice with honey, -- applied or laid to. Wild Cowcumer root in
powder and honey, applied or laid to. Iu^ay meal with sulphur and honey, applied
or laid to. Cices boiled in Oribus the pulpe, applied or laid to. Beete leaves
pund and laid to, and the grief to be rubbed with Saltpeter, applied or laid
to. Senuy mingled with honey and new grease, applied or laid to. Garlic burnt
myngled with honey, applied or laid to. Squilla inner bark boiled in oil or
Turpentine, applied or laid to. Yellow Affodill roots burnt to ashes, applied
or laid to. Ladanum with Myrrh, and oil of Myrrh, applied or laid to. Hazle
Nuts burnt with Hogs grease, applied or laid to. Lynden bark pund with
viniger, -- applied or laid to.
Seeny leaves one dram taken.

For foul scuroy tetters and scabs.
CRowfoot leaves pund and laid to a little, and then removed.

Wheat bread newly baked, soked in bryne or pickle, laid to.

Black Camelion root with a little Caperose and Swrnes grease, laid to.

Wild Thistle root with diniger, -- applied. Senny with viniger, applied.
Myrtle green leaves with oil of Roses, applied. Figs milky juice, applied.
Old oil Wallnuts pund, applied. Cline leaves with viniger, applied. Water
lound in the hollow Beech tree, -- applied.
For dry scurfe and mangynesse.
LIbanotus mingled with Iuray meal and viniger, laid to, Lacerpitium with
Coperose and Vardegreace, laid to, Eup^ordium mingled with Barrows grease, Bay
berryes, or Woolues grease, laid to, Tithemall juice, laid to, Briony fruit
pund, laid to, Rha Pontike root with viniger pund, laid to, Wild Cowcumer
juice with honey, laid to, Carlin root pund with viniger, laid to, Red Beet raw
leaves pund, laid to, Sheeps Sorrel roots decoct in viniger, or bruised raw laid
to, Raddish roots with honey, laid to, Garlic with oil and salt pund, laid to,
Squilla inner part boiled in oil, viniger or Turpe^ tyne, laid to, Innipet
rynd or bark burnt, mingled with eyle or diniger, and Turpentyne, -- laid to,
To drive away the Secondine or afterbirth.
MArigold flowers and herb in powder, -- perfumed in place convenient. Garlic
decoct, and sit oner the fume, or persumed on coaies, -- perfumed in place
convenient. Time boiled in water and honey, -- drunk. Penny royal in wine,
drunk. Cline podion boiled in wine, drunk. Clary decoct, drunk. Wild
Horehound decoct in wine, drunk. Rue juice in wine, -- drunk.
Clary any ways taken in drink or meat.

For to drive away the secondine or afterbirth.
LAuender decoct in wine, -- drunk. Dittayne decoct in wine, drunk. Daucus
seed decoct in wine, drunk. Saxitrage root decoct in wine, drunk.
Lacerpitium leaves boiled in wine, drunk. Astrolochia longa with Popper and
Mirth, drunk. Assarabacka with honey and wine, drunk. Smyrneum seed decoct
with wine, drunk. Myrthis roots decoct in wine, drunk. Cresses seed decoct
in wine, drunk. Garlic decoct, drunk. Anagaris leaves, one dram decoct in
wine, drunk. Sauen leaves decoct in wine, -- drunk.
Pencedanum roots juice the sap alone, or with bitter Almonds and Rue.

Oppopanax taken with honey.

White Bryony root, a pessary. Garden Madder root, a pessary. Onyon juice, a
pessary.
For the falling Sickness.
ANthilis with Oximell, -- taken. Comza with viniger, taken. Lacerpitium with
honey and viniger, a Syrop, taken. Sagapenum, one dram, taken. Amomacum, one
dram, taken. Pellytory root with honey, taken. White Elebor prepared, taken.
Seeny leaves by discretion, taken. Bryony root, one dram daily a year, --
taken.
Pentaphilon rubrum decoct in wine or honied water and Popper thirty days.

Time smelled upon.

Galbanum perfumed.

Male Pyony root hanged about the neck.

For falling sickness in children.
A Nnis seeds eaten.

For excoriation, or going off of the skin of the priuities or secret parts.
CIprus fruit or leaves boiled in oil, -- applied. Liquid Rozen with a Nutmeg
and Sugar the quantity of a nut, -- applied.
To make holes in the skin, or blisters.
ROs Solis with salt bruised, laid to.

Crowfoote leaves and root, laid to.

To take away hard skin of hands and feet, procured by labor.
AShes of Willow bark with viniger applied.

For roughness of the skin.
ELeborus inner root pund with Franckincence, oil and Rozen, applied.

Eleborus pund with oil, and laid to.

Tithimall juice applied.

Scamony juice with oil and honey, laid to.

Figs milky juice, laid to.

Ash tree harks burned to ashes, and lyt made thereof, and wash.

To procure overmuch sleep.
LEekes eaten raw.

For to procure quiet sleep.
VIolets pund with oil and laid to the head.

White water-Lillyes conserved.

Annis seeds kept at the nose to smell to.

Poppy heads and leaves decoct in water, drunk.

Black Poppy seeds decoct in wine, drunk.

Mandrake roots made a subpository.

Henbane decoct in water, and wash the feet, or use it as a glyster.

Garden Lettice in meat eaten.

For them that are very sleepy.
EVphorhium myngled with oil, and straked on the temples.

To restore smelling lost.
NIgella seed dried, pund, and put in Sarcenet, and often smelled to.

To provoke neezing.
SEnuy snuffed into the nose.

Onyon juice sunffed into the nose.

For to dry sores and Impostumes.

SMyrneum Creticum leaves laid to.

For old sores.
GReat Buglos root with oil and wax, -- laid to. Singrene alone, or with
parched barley meal, laid to. White Horehound leaves with honey pund, laid to.
Aloes in powder, -- laid to.
Cinoglosson in wine and bathe.

Great Burre green leaves pund with whites of Eggs.

Lynseede boiled in wine, and bathe.

Aligood green stamped, applied. The juice of the root of it takes
awayscabs, and makes the skin smoothe, especially if you mingle it with viniger.

For filthy fretting sores.
VFronica decoct and drunk, laid to and applied. Galeopsis leaves with salt
pund, -- laid to and applied. Peritory juice and Seruce made to ointment, laid
to and applied. Pimpernell pund, laid to and applied. Wild Woad pund, laid to
and applied. Singrene alone, or with parched Barley pund, laid to and applied.
Varuen green leaves pund, laid to and applied. Testiculus odoratus root
green, laid to and applied. Pannax flowers root green, pund, laid to and
applied. Astrolochia rotunda with Ireos and honey mixed, laid to and applied.
Dragons fruit pund, laid to and applied. Eentian root pund, -- laid to and
applied.
Tithymall juice applied or laid to.

Horned Popy leaves and flowers pund, -- laid to. Iuray meal with viniger,
laid to. Cole wort leaves pund, laid to. Radish root with honey pund, laid to.
Wild Cole worts with honey pund, laid to. Carets green leaves with honey pund,
laid to. Yellow Affodyll roots boiled in wine lees, laid to. Priuet leaves in
powder, laid to. Acornes very small pund, -- laid to.
For dullness or heaviness of spirit.
VIolets pund and laid to the head.

Charuell boiled in wine and drunks.

For the Sqinnancy.
LAcerpitium roots pund with honey, -- drunk. Spanish Broom steeped in water,
and the liquor pressed out, a little cup or glass full, -- drunk.
Holy wort chewed and holden in the mouth.

Elaterium with old oil or honey, or the gall of an Ox or Bull, applied.

Kadish roots bayled in homed viniger, gargeled.

Pepper laid to with honey.

For the Stone.
Fever few herb without flowers, decoct in water, decoct in wine and drunk.
Herb Robert in wine, decoct in wine and drunk. Peritory, decoct in wine and
drunk. S. John's wort, herb, flower and seed, decoct in wine and drunk. Wild
Lansey, decoct in wine and drunk. Coronopos, decoct in wine and drunk. Cotula
lutea, decoct in wine and drunk. Heranthemum, decoct in wine and drunk.
Saffron root, decoct in wine and drunk. Winter Sauery, decoct in wine and
drunk. Fennel crops, decoct in wine and drunk. Daucus seed, decoct in wine
and drunk. Auricula Leporis, decoct in wine and drunk. Sea holy, decoct in
wine and drunk. Starte Thistle in powder, decoct in wine and drunk. Sheeps
Sorrel roots, decoct in wine and drunk. Mallows, decoct in wine and drunk.
Bramble roots, decoct in wine and drunk. Rampions seed, decoct in wine and
drunk. White Thorn fruit, -- decoct in wine and drunk.
Cetrack leaves with viniger, drunk.

Alkakengy fruit eaten.

Saligot green Nuts broken and drunk.

To break the Stone.
PEnny wort on the wall, leaves and root, -- eaten. Garden Parcely, eaten.
Water Cresses in Salade, eaten. Cassia drawn, -- eaten.
Philipendula root, -- decoct in wine and drunk. Virga Aurea, decoct in wine
and drunk. The water of Virga Aurea distilled, decoct in wine and drunk.
Henny Royal, decoct in wine and drunk. Sage, decoct in wine and drunk.
Sexifrage seed and root, decoct in wine and drunk. Lacerpitium roots,
decoct in wine and drunk. Tragium seeds, decoct in wine and drunk. Capillus
Veneris, decoct in wine and drunk. Pernassus grass, decoct in wine and
drunk. Sea holy, decoct in wine and drunk. Sheeps Sorrel roots, decoct in
wine and drunk. Tender sweet milk Thistle inice, decoct in wine and drunk.
Turnep crops and young springs, -- decoct in wine and drunk.
For to break the stone.
REdish, decoct in wine and drunk. Parcely, decoct in wine and drunk. Stone
Parcely, decoct in wine and drunk. Great Parcely root, decoct in wine and
drunk. Winter Cresses seed, decoct in wine and drunk. Leeke seeds with other
herbs convenient, decoct in wine and drunk. Broom seeds, decoct in wine and
drunk. Roast Harrow bark and root, decoct in wine and drunk. Kneeholme,
decoct in wine and drunk. Bays, root and bark, decoct in wine and drunk.
Medler stones broken in poldder, decoct in wine and drunk. Plumtree gum
dissolved in wine, -- decoct in wine and drunk.
Clear Rozen of the Fyrre tree taken.

Things, hurtful to the stomach.
SOthernwood, not corrected, etc. White Elebor unprepared, not corrected, etc.
Colloquintida, not corrected, etc. Eliterium, not corrected, etc. Elder, not
corrected, etc. Orach often eaten, not corrected, etc. Turnips excessiuely
taken, not corrected, etc. Radish excessiuely eaten, not corrected, etc.
Cresses alone, and not in Salade, not corrected, etc. Mulber^y^s green and
unripe, not corrected, etc. New Figs in great quantity, not corrected, etc.
Mazers or small Charryes in great quantity, not corrected, etc. Dry Nuts in
abundance, not corrected, etc. Green Carodus, -- not corrected, etc.
To strengthen the stomach.
GAriofilata root, decoct in wine, and drunk. Saffron, decoct in wine, and
drunk. Calamynt, decoct in wine, and drunk. Secely seed, -- decoct in wine,
and drunk. Betony taken with homed water, eaten. Coriander prepared or
corrected, eaten. Foula Campana root conserved, eaten. Young Artychokes
boiled, -- eaten.
Aloes Cicatrine taken.

Imperatoria root taken with wine.

Saxifrage root in Sugar, in powder, taken.

Conorilla seed drunk.

For to strengthen the stomak.
PVrcelane, -- eaten. Sea Purcelane preserved in viniger for salide, eaten.
Earth Chestnuts, eaten. Vargis of unripe grapes, eaten. Dringes the juice and
fruits, eaten. Pomegarnets the juice, eaten. Quodimack, or Marmalade of
Quinces, eaten. Qutmegs, eaten. Fistick Nuts, eaten. Olives green vurips,
eaten. Oil in which fruit of Ciprus is boiled, eaten. Agarick dry without
liquor, eaten. Mastick, -- eaten.
For pain in the stomach.
COmmon Worm wood, decoct in wine and drunks. Scordium dry, decoct in wine and
drunks.
Penny royal taken with water and viniger.

Origan in water drunk.

Garden Mynt taken in drink and meat.

Rubarbe taken by discretion.

Set wall roots decoct and drunk.

Aloes Cicatrine taken.

Soucus fuits drunk.

Groundsel leaves and stalks decoct in water, drunk.

Parcely seeds decoct and drunk.

Juniper young fruit or bettes boiled in homed water.

Mastrick eaten.

Spelt meal boiled with Saltpeter, applied.

Melilot raw, pund or sod in wine, laid to.

For wambling or boiling of the stomach.
COmmon Wormwood with Annis seeds, decoct in wine and drunk. Fennel or the
seed, decoct in wine and drunk. Our Ladies Thistle root decoct, decoct in
wine and drunk. Sheeps Sorrel seeds, and Sorrel seeds, decoct in wine and
drunk.
Lettice in sallade eaten.

Wild Vins Claspers and fruit brought into a Syrrops, with the vargis of the
same eaten.

Bramble leaves and new springs stamped and laid to.

Dry Dates eaten.

Mastick eaten.

For inflammation of the stomach.
Roman Wormwood, -- decoct and drunk. Starwort or Share wort, decoct and
drunk. Lormentill leaves and root, decoct and drunk. Purcelaue raw, eaten.
Lettice, -- eaten. Whurts raw or stued with Sugar, eaten. Goose berries green,
eaten. Apples, eaten. Pomegranate juice, eaten. Cornell fruit, -- eaten. White
water Lilly, -- pund and laid to. Solanum hortense, pund and laid to. Endive
and Succory leaves, pund and laid to.
To warm the stomach.
LOuach root and seed dried, drunk in wine.

Alees Cicatrine drunk.

Sorrel de Boys decoct and drunk and eaten.

Great Kadish root or Kayfort eaten.

Senuy bruised, with viniger.

D^enges and Lymons pills and bark eaten.

Nutmegs and Maces taken in.

To refresh the hot stomach.
PEnywort on the wall juice, drunk.

Careway seeds decoct drunk or eaten.

Briony first sproughts (...) springs in Salade.

Yellow Succory in Salade.

Cowcumers with meat.

Pepon of the Garden his fruit well beyled, eaten.

Licoris root eaten.

Apples eaten.

Pome granat twice eaten.

For to ouerturne the stomach.
RIpe Olives eaten.

To purge the stomach of Phlegm.
Al^^s Cicatrine taken.

To cleanse the stomach.
WHits ^eets iuies drunk.

For to engender wind in the stomach.
LEntiles eaten too much.

Ripe Mulberies after meat eaten. Hazle Nuts, or Filberds eaten. Ripe Olives
eaten.
For cold windiness, or blasting of the stomach.
PHilipendula roots in powder with wine

Aanys seeds drunk, or eaten. Common seeds drunk, or eaten. Ligusticum
decoct -- drunk or eaten. Pencedanum sap of the root drunk or eaten. Enula
Campana root decoct drunk or eaten. Meon root boiled drunk or eaten. Stone
Parcely seed decoct drunk or eaten. Smyrneum Creticum seed decoct drunk or
eaten. Agnus Castus seed decoct drunk or eaten. Juniper gumms dissolved in
wine drunk or eaten.
For to comfort the weakness and ouercasting of the stomach.
LEntiles husked, thirty graynes swallowed downs, Cicory and Endive eaten.

Squilla prepared and taken.

Wild Lime leaves, branch and tendreis laid to the stomach.

Raspis flowers bruised, decoct in wine and drunk.

Blacks sour Cherries eaten.

Oriuge and Lemmons juice eaten. Caruell fruit eaten. Nuimegs eaten. Green
unripe Olives eaten.
For to comfort the mouth of the stomach.
STone Parcely seed decoct and drunk.

Nutmegs eaten and drunk.

Pomegranates juice -- eaten. Quinces, Quedimack and marmalad eaten. Rough and
choky Pears eaten.
For stinging with Bees or Wasps.
WAter-Mynt, pund and laid to. Rue the juice, pund and laid to. Mallows, pund
and laid to. Marsh mallows, pund and laid to.
For Strangury and hot piss.
ANthilis half an ounce, drunk. Iarmander leaf and flower decoct in wine,
drunk. Comza leaf and flower in wine drunk. Philipendela root boiled in
wine, drunk. Knotgras, decoct in wine, drunk. Cecilids seed, decoct in wine,
drunk. To^dilie^ seed, decoct in wine, drunk. Dautus seed, decoct in wine,
drunk. Saxifrage root and seed, decoct in wine, drunk. White Saxifrage root
decoct, drunk. Onyon roots soked in water, drunk. Tragium seed, decoct in
wine, drunk. Cetrach leaves, decoct in wine, drunk. Trifoly leaves and
flowers in water, drunk. Calamus Arromaticus, drunk. White Camelion root in
red wine, drunk. Star Thistle in powder decoct, drunk. So^^us juice with
wine, drunk. Wild Carot seed, decoct in wine, drunk. Winter Cresses seed,
decoct in wine, drunk. Charuell, decoct in wine, drunk. White Poplar bark
decoct in wine, drunk. The wild spurge in the Rose bush decoct, drunk.
Laurel Alexandria root decoct in wine, drunk. Plum tree gum dissolved in
wine, drunk.
Ciprus leaves voyled in wine, --

Asperagus first springs perboyled, eaten in ^la^^.

Water Cresses eaten in salade. Ceder fruit eaten.

Clear liquid Rozen with Nutmegs eaten.

To pronoke sweating.
CHamepitis rubbed all over the body.

Violets decoct, and sit over as a stew.

Calamynt drunk with homed water.

Libanotus seed mingied with oil, and ancynt the body.

Pencedanum root dried, mixed with oil of Dill, and anoint.

Pellitory decoct in wine, anoint the body.

Master wort, decoct in wine, and drunk. Cardus be^^dictus, decoct in wine,
and drunk. Smyrneum seed, decoct in wine, and drunk.
Figs eaten.

For hardness of swelling.
GAleop^ts seed, stalk and root pund, laid to. Lynseede boiled, laid to.
Bynd-weed leaves pund, laid to. Melilot raw pund, laid to. Kaysins kernels with
salt pund, laid to. Iessamyn pund, laid to. Oil of ripe Olives, laid to.
Acornes small with salt pund, laid to. Plane tree young tender leaves pund,
laid to.
For all hot swellings.
FLebane seed soked in water, applied and laid to. Water-Le^ttls, or grains
mingled wit wheat flower, applied and laid to. Bush-Bazell pund with Barley
meal, parched, applied and laid to. Corn Rose leaves and green heads pund,
applied and laid to. Mandragora fresh leaves pund with parched Barley meal,
applied and laid to. Melilot boiled with it self in sweet wine, or mixed with
the yeolk of a rostd egg, or with Linseede, or the meal of Fenigreek, or
Cicory, applied and laid to. Our Lady Thistle root decoct in wine, applied and
laid to. Saligot leaves, applied and laid to. Wild Cole leaves pund, applied
and laid to. Mallows with Swines grease, applied and laid to. Garlic with
Swines grease, applied and laid to. Olive tree leaves, applied and laid to.
Water of hollownesse of Beech tree, applied and laid to.
To dissolve hard cold swellings.
OXie pund and mingled with oil and wax, laid to. Stinking Gladin with
viniger pund, laid to. Gladiolus root with Iuray meal, pund and homed water,
laid to. Saffron mingled with womans milk, laid to. Hormium seed mingled with
water, laid to. Nigella with viniger pund, laid to. Libanotus leaves pund, laid
to. Oppopanar, laid to. Roots of Lacerpitium with oil pund, laid to. Sagapenum
soked in viniger, laid to. Galbanum, laid to. Amomacum, laid to.
For to dissolve cold hard swellings.
WElds Cowcumer root with viniger, -- applied and laid to. Wheat bread boiled
in homed water, applied and laid to. Leuin of Rye meal, applied and laid to.
Barley meal boiled with Figs and homed water, applied and laid to. Bean
meal playster-wise, applied and laid to. Fenugreeke meal in mead, applied and
laid to. Sweet Trifoly decoct, applied and laid to. Smyrneum leaves decoct,
applied and laid to. Water Popper leaves and seed pund, applied and laid to.
Pepper myngled with pytch, applied and laid to. Dried Figs pund, applied and
laid to. Liquid Rozen, applied and laid to.
Fod cold swellings.
SOthernwood seed with barley meal pund, laid to. Sinque foil root boiled in
viniger, Black Molyn boiled in water, or pund with honey, laid to. Time pund
with honey, laid to. Tragoriganum pund with honey, laid to. Daucus seed pund,
laid to. Scamony juice mingled with honey, laid to. Duch Brank Vrsine, laid to.
Mallows by it self, or with Swynes greece pund, laid to. Marsh Mallows pund,
laid to. Cresses seed with honey pund, laid to. Garlic with Swynes grease
pund, laid to. Onyons decoct with Figs, laid to. Wallnuts, Rue and Figs
pund, and with Raysins, laid to. Arbor inde young tender leaves, laid to.
Mistleto leaves and fruit with Tar and wax playster-wise, laid to.
For all swelling and scuruinesse about the Seege.
CInqu^foyle root boiled in viniger, laid to.

For to take away sweating.
DXy Myrtle leaves, with ointments convenient.

For hardness and shrinking of sinews.
SOthernwood seed, green or dry, decoct in wine or water, laid to. Hemp
root decoct in water, laid to. Cotula lutea bruised, laid to. Iris roots
pund, laid to. Oil of Lillies, laid to. Penny royal with honey pund, laid to.
Sagapenum, laid to. Gathanum mixed with myrrh, laid to. Assarabacca boiled in
wine, laid to. Rubarb taken by discretion, laid to. Balsamine oil, laid to.
Wheat meal and the juice of Henbane mingled, laid to. Acanthus drunk with
wine, laid to.
Yellow Affodils, one dram in wine drunk.

For drawing or aching of sinews.
PEncedanum juice -- laid to. Lacerpitium laid to. Amomacom -- laid to.
Colloquintida white pith in small quantity, laid to.

Acanthus root decoct in wine, drunk.

Groundsell leaves and flowers with powder of -- laid to. Frankincense laid to.
Withy leaves and bark boiled in wine -- laid to.
For pain, or swelling sinews.
CInoglosson beyled in wine or water laid to. Narci^us root with honey pund,
laid to. Euphorbium prepared, laid to.
For to soften sinews.
PRinit oil mixed with other things convenient.

For to join sinews cut.
WHite Lilly roots pund with honey laid to. Groundsell with powder of
frankincense laid to.
For to appease pain in the side.
Black Molyn, with Rue leaves decoct in wine drunk. Goats beard root boiled
in wine drunk. Time boiled in water and honey drunk. Sage decoct in water
drunk. Rue with Dill decoct drunk. Gentian root the juice drunk. Setwale
roots decoct in wine drunk. Lapsia the bark of the root decoct drunk.
Trisoly leaves, seed and flower decoct drunk. Caroline root decoct in wine
drunk. Parcely seeds decoct drunk. Yellow Affodill roots decoct drunk.
Leaves, root and bark of Ashtree decoct in wine drunk.
Oppoponar.

Calewort stalks burnt to ashes, mixed with swynes grease, applied.

Mistle seeds with wine lees pund and laid to.

Parceneps eaten.

Galbanum persumed.

For to dry a moist stomach.
LEntiles blanch deaten.

Garden Madder root pund and laid to

Myrtles juice drunk dried.

For to cleanse the teeth.
ARistrologia rotunda powder often rubbed.

Gingidium hard stemmes, or spikes used to pick the teeth.

For toothache.
CElidony root -- chawed. Peruincle chawed. Saxifrage root chawed. Pimpernell
juice snuft in the nose -- holden in ye mouth. Pentahilon decoct in water
holden in ye mouth. Planten root and juice decoct holden in ye mouth. White
Molyn root boiled holden in ye mouth. Upright Varuc^, or the root decoct
holden in ye mouth. Pellitory root decoct in viniger holden in ye mouth. White
Elebor root boiled in viniger holden in ye mouth. Fruit of Solanum somniterum
boiled holden in ye mouth. Henbane root boiled in viniger holden in ye mouth.
Cameleon root boiled holden in ye mouth. Ladies Thistle boiled in wine holden
in ye mouth. Caroline root boiled in wine holden in ye mouth. Sheep forrell
boiled in wine holden in ye mouth. Marsh mallows decoct holden in ye mouth.
Wild Parcaly seed chawed holden in ye mouth. Orrigan decoct holden in ye
mouth. Yellow Affodili root prepared, boiled in old wine holden in ye mouth.
Mirth and Saffron holden in ye mouth. Camok tender crops boiled in viniger
holden in ye mouth. Tamarisk leaves decoct in wine holden in ye mouth. Capers
seed boiled in viniger holden in ye mouth. Mulbery leaves decoct in wine --
holden in ye mouth.
Lacerpitium root chawed or put in the tooth holden in ye mouth.

Oppopponar applied. holden in ye mouth.

Sagapenum put in the hollow tooth. holden in ye mouth.

Balsam leaves put on the tooth. holden in ye mouth.

Milky juice of Figs applied. holden in ye mouth.

To provoke flowers when they be destroyed.
TAke the root of Mader green, make it clean, anoint it with honey, and
sprinkle powder of Mader on it, make a pessarie or suppository of it, and put
it in place convenient.

To deliver a dead child.
SCald Leeke blades, and bind them to the woman's navel, and it shall cast out
the dead child: and when she is delivered, do away the blades, or else she
shall cast out all that is in her.

Ague Cakes.
Drink Centorie water.

Fry red Mints, red Nettles, and Wormwood with butter, apply it hot as it
may be suffered, of each one dram.

Roast Onions with butter, streane it and anoint the grief.

Drink water of Isop.

Take Smaledge, chop it small, and make worts with otemeale, and eat every
morning for a time.

To abate extreme heat in Ague.
TAke French wine, a quart, and as much cunning water: Planten one dram: boil
the half, and to abate the harshnesse, put to it a good piece of Sugar: drink
this warm in extremitte of heat for want of French wine, take Gascoyne wine.

For S. Anthonies fire.
Stamp Adders tongue with sooines grease, and apply it.

Arache juice, laid to, eases.

Beetes -- Bursa pastoris severally applied. Succory roots and flower
severally applied. Lie made of ashes of Coleworts severally applied. Coriander
juice with vinegar severally applied. Endive with Ceruce and vinegar, applied
severally applied. Galion -- Gourdes juice severally applied. Henbane boiled in
water severally applied. Myntes juice with vinegar and brimstone severally
applied. Myntes, Rue, oil and vinegar severally applied. Opium with vinegar
severally applied. Perritory stamped, tempered with Ceruce severally applied.
Parcely with bread severally applied. Planten leaves bruised with juice of
Houseleeke severally applied. Green popie heads, not ripe, pund with barley
meal severally applied. Red rose dried leaves sodde in wine war me severally
applied. Rue with oil of Roses, Vinegar, and Ceruce severally applied. Sauin
stamped or the juice severally applied. Thorow-wax the water or herb severally
applied.
Boil the herb, root and seed of Holy hocke, with barley meal in water,
mixed with oil of Roses, or oil Olive, and apply it to the holy fire and
shingles.

The water or juice of Knotgras cures all Ringwormes, Letters, Shingles, Holy
fire and Infla^matio^s, stinking filth in ears, rotten sores, Gangreues of the
gu^mes, and all wounds new and old, but especially about the privy parts of
men and women, and preserves the same from Inflammation, and all other evil
accidents.

Take unset Porret and Tazels, wash them clean, shred them and stamp them,
and take some clear water, and some oil, and fry them on a soft fire, and
apply it warm as ye can.

For wild fire.
TAke dregs of wine or vinegar, and the yolks of Ranens eggs and whites by
even measure: temper them well together, and apply it to the grief, and it will
heal.

To make a man have appetite to his meat.
Boil Centory in fair water, and give the sick to drink thereof, at morn
iii. days blood warm: each day ix. spoones full.

A comfortable powder for digestion, and to procure appetite, with other good
properties.
TAke Pellitory of Spain, Centory, Annis, Liquoris, Grains of Paris, Ginger
and Sinamon: of each a like much beaten and serced, and drink thereof morn and
even, half a spoonefull in Wine or Ale.

Ipocras for a weak Stomach.
TAke one pint of Aqua vitae, put in a glass, the^ take ii. ounces of Sinamon,
one ounce of Ginger, two penniworth of Cloves, two pe^niworth of Grains, one
penniworth of Nutmegs, beat them al together to gross powder, put al into the
glass to the Aqua vitae, shake it every day often ix. days together and
drink it with Wine or Ale, half a spoonefull, or a quarer, with half a pint
of Ale.

For the Appoplexie, and to restore speech in Appoplexie.
Use to drink Borage water.

Bryony root one dram a whole year together cures.

Colloquintida taken in glisters and subpositories, cures.

Cowslip flowers condited with sugar often eaten, cures.

Mix Euphorbium with oil, and apply it to the nape of the neck, or the neck.

And also Margerom comfort and Mistelto of the Oak hanged about the neck,
the wood of it.

Drink the juice of Ros solis, and it cures the drawing of the mouth awry.

Sagapenum one dram drunk, cures.

Sothern wood juice drunk with wine, defends etc.

Water of Violets profits.

Lauender flowers steeped in wine and distilled, the water holden in the mouth,
restores.

Steep the kernels of Peaches in water of Penny royal, and drink it.

Powder of Saxifrage, and the seeds cures conuultions.

Saxifrage chawed restores speech.

Vinegar, Opimel, or Lohok of Squilla helps.

Steep flowers of Lilliconualle in wine xxx. days: then take it out of the
wine, and distill the wine five times over in a Limbeck or body of glass: this
wine with six grains of Pepper, and a little Lauender water drunk, is a
precious remedy against the Appoplexie, and more precious then gold.

For falling of the fundament or Matrix.
TAke oil of Camomill and Rose water, and anoint the grief.

Take Red nettles, bray them well, and put them in an earthen pot, with a good
portion of white wine, seethe it to the half, and give it the patient to
drink, and lay the herbs to the fundament, as hot as may be suffered.

For Ache in the back, a sovereign Medicine.
TAke Pigs grease, strike it plaster wise on a piece of leather, prick it full
of little holes, with a sharp pointed knife, and lay it to the Raynes where the
pain is.

M. Tibold.

Take Ache and Egrimony, and pun them with Mowse ears roots and leaves, and
barrowes grease, and distill and lay to the back.

Take Vnguentum Alabastrum, and Vnguentum Aureum, of each one quarterne, meddle
them together, and anoint the back.

A Receipt to make a Purgation.
TAke Seny 2. ounces, Epithimi 31. Ginger. 1. Racine, Sinamom. 31. Violets, a
quarter of a handful. Passes de sol 1. quart. li. damask Prunes stoned v. or
vii. dim. pint of fair water: put al in a pot closed, and let it boil softly
in another pot one hour, strain it, and put to it Penidros, and drink it. G.
K.

For going off of the skin of the Coddes, and the redness and inflammation of
the same.
TAke Chimolea^, Vernice, Nitre, Colofony, Rosin and Betony: beat them that
are to be beaten, and mix them with oil, and put to the Rosin, and
incorporate them, and wash the coddes with warm water, and being well washed,
put the receipt upon the red place.

A most approved experiment against the same grief.
TAke Tapsi Barbasti, small nettles, violets, mallows, bean bran and common, cut
the herbs, and put leaves of Ebul. eldar and worm wood to it, and boil it in
good wine: and after plaster it to the grief, as hot as may be suffered, and
put to it roses and the husks of garlic.

For warts and pustules on the privy members.
IT chances, that sometimes Warts and Pustules grow on the yard. To take away
the Warts, put to it the powder of Harmodactilus: which being done away, make a
medicine for wounds: but first let the place be washed with water, that
mallows and Brank Vrsine have been boiled in.

For inflammation of the yard ex Coitu.
TAke leaves of Willow tree and boil them in water, (in quibus pistatis) and
make thereof a plaster and lay to it.

IF any pustules be, lay to it Vnguentum album, and for vinegar, water of
roses, and for common oil, oil of violets.

Provlco in vesica.
TAke French Barley a handful: Plantine leaves, Honisocle leaves, Strawbery
leaves, of each a handful: the four cold seeds two drams: boil them in three
pintes of water to a pynte: put to it of Mel Rosarum two ounces: red Rose water
half a pynte, and use it by imection per virgam: when this imection is not
ready, then use an imection of Milk and Sugar lukewarm.

Abstain from wine. Use Cassia often. Abstain from strong drink. Use Cassia
often. Abstain from Vinegar. Use Cassia often. Abstain from Vergis. Use
Cassia often.
For pissing of blood.
TAke Ambrose Sanguinaria, and Parcely seed, of each an ounce, and drink the
juice with Goats milk.

Take Ambrose Saxifrage, and Purcelain the juice, and drink it with Cow milk.

For the bloody Flux.
TAke Yarrow and Waybride: stamp the juice with wheat flower, temper them into
dough, and make a cake and bake it in Ashes, and let the ficke eat thereof, as
houte as he may suffer it.

For to staunch blood of green wounds.
BRose one dram of wild Tansey, and bind it hard to ye wou^d, and it will
staunch the master vain cut, of man or beast.

If you see a man in great peril of bleeding, if the wound be about the foot,
bind him above the knee: if upon the hand, bind him above the wrest: if on the
arm, bind him above the elbow with a good iii. or iiii. fould, and it shall
stay soon after, sikerly.

Apply moss of the Hazell tree, the older and longer kept, the better.

To staunch blood when a master vain is cut.
TAke a piece of salt biefe, the leaner the better, and no fat, as much as will
go into the wound, lay it in the hot ashes in the fire, and let it roast till
it be through hot, and being so hot, thrust it into ye wound, and bind it fast,
it will soon staunch, and never after break, upon warrantise.

For pricking with a needle, or thorn in a Sinew.
TAke bolted Wheats stowre, ^e^per it with wine, and boil it till it be
thick, make a plaster thereof, and lay it to as hot as may be suffered, it will
ease the Ache, and heal up the hole.

Regula.
THere be certain places in man, which being pricked in a ^^new, except he
have ^espe within seven paies, he shall die: for there will come a ^^ampe from
the hurt place, to the neck and draw his Jaws together, that he shall not open
his mouth, which is called Spasme.

Therefore if a man be pricked in the sinew that accords to the same, take
good oil Roset, and chafe the hurt place as hot as may be suffered, and power
thereof into the same hurt, and lay wool upon it and hind it up, and use this
till it be whole, and none other, for this is kindly for it above all others.

For to stop the flux of the belly.
MAke powder of the bloomes of Walnuts when they fall, two drams, with a hard
roasted egg and oil, eaten three mornings fasting: if that serve not, take
three drams with an egg.

For a Marmoll.
FIrst give the patient this sirrup, that is, take Parcely, Fenel, Kneholme,
Sparage, Scabios, Enula campana, Affodill roots, Dock roots, round and sharp
Ebulus, Elder, Camedrios, Camepitis, Endive, Sorrill, hartstongue, Cetrack,
Politricon, Capillus Veneris, Adiantus, one dram. Violets, Scene, Polipody,
Electri, of each four ounces. Flowers of Borage, Maratrum, Time, Epithini,
Cuscuti, Sticados, Liquoris cleansed, of each one ounce: Borage juice, Affodill
juice, Fumytorie juice boiled with Siccory, one pound, Sugar four pound.

Give it the patient by nine days purged, vt potionatus rediget, and after
anoint the pustules places with juice of Affodils half a pound, Lapacii acuti
and Rotundi, juice of Celidoni, of each five ounces, Sulphuris viui, quick
Lime, Litarg. auri, of each two ounces: Madder, Citrine, of each three ounces:
Aloes, Caballine, Tartarum, of each one ounce: Viridis aeris, two ounces, Picis
natalis, one pound, Olei communis, two pound, Auximgie, Angrull. porci sals.
one pound, Petrocilini, 2. ounces: Omnia incorporentur, in manner of an
ointment, and therewith anoint the grieved parties by eight days, and then let
him enter into a bath, in which the leaves and roots of long and round Decks
and Scabious wild, and domestical great Laurel, and little Laurel,
Tithimall, Roots of Ebulus, Elder roots, and leaves of Enula Campana shall be
boiled, of each three drame: All which must be stamped and boiled in water,
and make a bath, and anoint the patient daily by fix days, and let him use
this for a competent season, until he be cured.

For fret in the belly.
Eat Tansey, Rue, and Sothernwood.

For hardness of the belly.
Drink three spoonefuls of juice of Iuie leaves three times in a day.

For griping pain in the belly.
TAke Sothernwood, and say it against the place of the contrary side where the
torment is, and it will drive it out: if it be laid to the navel, it will
drive away the pain.

For ache in the back.
Take Ache, Egrymony, Mouse-eare, Saincle, and Wormwood, of each a like much,
stamp them small with butter or barrowes grease and white wine, fry it, and
make a plaster of it, and lay it to the back as hot as may be suffered.

For ache in the bones.
TAke and old hoare Fox, bind him sure that he stir not, put him quick into
a brass pot, and put to him six or eight gallons of oil Olive, set them on
the fire, and boil it eastly fifteen hours, then let the fire cool, then
strain it through a clean linen cloth: with that oil anoint the ache, which
profits greatly: you may keep it forty years or more: when it is boiled,
you shall find of the Fox neither hair, skin, nor bones, but only the
claws, and the oil consumed to one gallon, or a little more.

For ache a Cerecloth.
TAke Rosen half a pound, Perrosen, one quarter of a pound, Dear suit two
ounces, Turpentine one ounce, Cloves and Mace of each alike, one ounce,
Saffron, one ounce, oil of Roses, two ounces: boil altogether, and use it.

For to cure the bloody Flux.
MAke powder of Acornes cups, and drink it with red wine, yolks of hard
eggs and cynamon^.

For bleeding at the nose or bloody Flux.
TAke a great Toade, ptu it in a glass, and stop it fast: then set it in a
dunghill, and all the great Teades thereabouts will draw to it: then take them
and put them inito an earthen pot, and stop them saft, and set that put on a
strong fire till they be dry: but come not to it, till they be cold, for the
stinch: then sow them in silk.

If it be the bloody flux, lay it to the right side: If it be for bleeding
at the nose, lay it to the stomach warm: But if it be great need, heat two
Toades thereon, and dry them and lay them to your stomach warm in silk as
aforesaid. etc.

A Caudle for the bloody Flux.
TAke a pint of red wine, and the yolks of 5. newlaid eggs, a good quantity of
Synamom, a little sugar, the pill of a Pomegranate dried and made in powder, a
good quantity: boil all together in a platter on a chafingdish, till it be
thieke, and let the patient eat of it early and late, and as often else in the
day, as his slomacke will serve him: and it will stop it, be the flux never
so great.

A singular approved remedy for the bloody Flux.
TAke as much fine linen cloth, as will make a suppositorie, being wrapped
round together, bottomwise, wetit in the best Aqua vitae or Aqua compo^ssita:
and let the patient conney it into the fundament, and within three or feure
times dressing, by Gods help it will do good.

Another.
TAke gads of steel made read hot in his drink, oftentimes quenched, and
drink thereof.

Another.
TAke Sinkefoyle, boil it in wine, and let the patient hold his mouth over it.

To remove a botch from one place to another.
TAke Wormwood and Mugwort Rodion, stamp them together, and drink the mice in
ale^ then take a quick Oyster, and lay it on the place that thou would
break, and thitherward it will draw it.

TAke Oculus Christi and Veruiu, make a plaster of them, and lay it from the
botch two fingers breadth, and eftsoons put it far, and do so till thou come
to the place where thou will break it.

TAke Colombind, stamp it, and with the juice wash the botch or boil well, and
make a strike with the same juice to ye place where thou would have it
break, and there lay a plaster of the same herb stamped with juice, and it
will break it.

THe iuce of Tansey in a nut thell does the like to remeone a Felon.

To ripen a Botch.
SEethe Otemeale in milk, and lay it playsterwise as hofe as may be suffered.

TAke Tormentill, Honey and Salt, tempered with the white of an Egg, and lay it
to, and i^ will break it.

TAke Singrene, Melilot, Linseeds, and Mints, boil the^ in water, make thereof
a plaster, and lay to, to break it.

Roast Toade stools hole, and lay to, to break it.

Lay Galbanum to it, and it will break it.

Take Sorell, the white snayle, and the lesser Brokelyme, a like quanticis,
stamp it, frye it with Shapes suit, and lay it to the grief.

To break a Botch when it is ripe within, and the skin thick and hard.
Stamp Sperewort with oil, and lay it on the head of the Botch.

To strengthen the body and stomach, and to procure good digestion.
TAke Malmesey one pint, as much Mint water, Synamom, Ginger, of each an
ounce, broose them and put them together with half a quarter of Sugar, let
them stand all night, and in the morning drink it.

Mistress Barret.

For a sore breast of a woman,
TAke Rue. Sage, Archangell, white Dayste roots, Planten, Angelica, Oculus
Christi, of each one Scruple, wash them and dry them in a cloth, shred them,
and stamp them with half a pound of fresh grease or Barrowes Grease: stamp
all together, and boil them with half a quarter of a pound of Rozen, and as
much new Wax: till the Ware and Rozen be molten with the herbs, then strain
it through a clean cloth, and it will be a fair ointment to use.

To purge the breast.
TAke a great quantity of Isop, seethe it in a pottell of good Wine, and
drink of it early and late, at Evening hot, and at Morning cold.

Take a good quantity of white Horehound, a lesser of Groundswell, and the
least of Walwort, boil them with fresh Barrowes Grease, incorporate it and
make a Plaster and lay to the Breast: in one night it will cause the Patient to
cast out much corruption, and profits against the Cough.

To clear the Pipes.
TAke a handful of dried Isop, as much of the root of Enula campana, and not
fully so much of good Liquoris bruised, boil them in running water, from a
galon to half: strain it, and put to it half a pint of clarified Honey,
drink thereof first and last.

Bladders called sire Bladders, or burnings.
TAke ground Iuie, alias Alehooue, Sheep dung, Housleeke, Goose dung. Sheep
tallow and fresh Butter: stamp all together, and let it stand two or three
days, then fry it, strain it, reserve and use it daily.

For a sore breast, where pieces fall out so broad as the bottom of a sawcer.
TAke the slip of Elder tree, scrape off ye russet vtterm off bark, and take
the middle green bark from the white next the stick, stamp it with Night
shade, 4. or 5. leaves of it: but if the breast burn sore, take the more Night
shade to cool it: then strain it through a cloth, and put to it the yeelke of
a new laid Egg, take away the scom of it, and put thereto pure honey combs of
the biue, fair strayned so soon as they are taken out of the hiue: then take
fair wheat flower, and beat all together. The young Elder buds that spring out
of the joints of the Elder tree is better then the rind: temper all these
together like a salve: if it be well made, i^ ^il look green: it must be
made sa thick as may lie on a linen cloth plaster wise, and dress the
breast: then take a linen cloth as big as the sore and some what bigger, that
it fall not in on any side: lay the same upon the plaster of lynnen cloth, and
so lay it to the sore breast, not coming near the fire.

If there be dead flesh in it, see the running water, Allom, and Sage, till
the strength of the Allome and Sage be in the liquor.

When the breast is to be dressed, wash it first with this water: cleanse the
sore, drse out the water, but take some fine lint scraped, and lay it on the
sore.

Let it be dressed morn and even.

This medicine is to be regarded, for it will heal any other sore, as has
been often proved.

If the breast be stiff, anoint it with Neates foot oil.

If the hole of the sore go in far, lay of the salve about mentioned upon
the one side of the lynt, and cover the sore withal.

And if there be dead flesh in it, then must you wash it with the said water
before you lay on the plaster.

You may put in Mallows to the Elder and Night shades, and it will be the
better.

Ad idem.
Boil Mallows with Sheep Suit, till they be very tender: then strain it
and keep if in boxes.

If the breast have need to be tented, take the stalk of Mallows that are
sodden, and tent therewith: this is approved to be very good.

For the breast and side.
TAke Sage Royal, Alexanders, red Neitels, Wormwood, red Fenell roots, all
of one yecres growing: then make a great fire on the ground till the ground be
hot a soote thick, then lay the herbs abroad on the ground, and a linen
cloth over them, and then lay the pained place on them so long as the heat
dureth: and cover him well about.

Take Ambrose, Rue, and Horehound, of each a like much, stamp them and drink
it with Wine.

Take Mints, and Oil Olive, boil them and apply it to the grief.

Scrape a Goats horn that is boiled, and give that scraping to the Patient.

For inflammation or swelling of the breast or elsewhere.
TAke leaves of Marsh Mallows, or Holy-bocke, sodde in white wine till they be
very tender, mince them small, and make them in a Cathaplasma, and lay to the
grief wheresoever the swelling is.

Take seed of Henbane, break it and boil it in Wine, and lay it hot to the
breast.

Take Linseede, and the white of an Egg, or the juice of Smalage and lay to
it: and if she lost her Milk, give her juice of Varuen, and it shall restore
Milk abundantly.

For rankling Teats of too much Milk.
MAke powder of Hempseede, and give her to eat and drink in all meats and
drinks.

To make Teats small.
Stamp Seed of Hemlocke with Vinegar, and anoint them often.

Powder of Auens and Vinegar do the like.

For Tisick and shortness of breath.
TAke Enula Campana the root in mid May, dry it, pate if, cut it small and put
it in Vinegar till it be soft: then dry it, and take purified Honey, and cast
both into a chafer, and boil them together, secundum artem, and box it.

Against the Tisicke.
TAke Barley of the cleanest, well ground in a Myll, that the husk and bark be
clean taken away, boulted in a fine cloth: of ye bran whereof make a powltis
in clean water, with a spoonful of butter thrice washed in water, and hereof
let the Patient often use.

Also boil the sweetest Apples you can get with new porke: let the Patient
eat the Apple, his breast and places anointed against the fire with fresh
butter.

Against horsenesse.
TAke Gum Arrabeck, Dragagant, Liquorice, Anudi, Cucumer seeds, Gourd seeds,
Purcelane, Pemdion, Horsehoue, Terrestris Canabi seeds, Acholus roots, Isop,
Mentastrum, Violets: boil them together in white wine and let the Patient
drink thereof morn and even, etc.

For wind and stitch in the side.
TAke Camomill and Wormwood, of each one handful, green Broom two
Ha^dfuls, stamp them small together: then make a bag that will go from the
Navel to the Reins, and put those things into the bag couched abroad that
will lie over the womb: then take a good quantity of Mallows, and boil them
in a pottle of rain water or clear running water, till it be thoroughly
boiled: then plunge the same bag in that water till it be thoroughly hot: then
squese out that water, and all hot lay it over the womb til it comes to the
reins, and when it is cold, heat it again, and renew it often.

A paste for stinking breath.
TAke Wine and Honey a quantity, boil them a little, the put to it grated
bread and stir it, put to it Annis seeds, Liquoris, and Pepper in powder, and
make paste of it: make it in cakes, bake them of any fashion, and eat of it.

Take two handfuls of Common in powder, seethe it in good Wine from a pottel to
half, drink it at even hot, and at morn as hot as you may suffer it: at even
and morn a pint, 9. days.

Take Puliall Montan, one handful, wash it, shred and stamp it, put to it
hafle an ounce of Common, pun and meddle them well together with white wine one
pottle boiled to half, and give the patient to drink hot as he may suffer
it, half a pint a day, once after meat and not before, and once at even hot,
and it shall be well in fifteen days.

For one that is bursten.
TAke roots of Comphrie with the leaves, Setwall roots and leaves, Polipody
roots, Centory called Peterwort, make it in powder, and drink it in Ale.

For to preserve one from bursting.
TAke Comphrie, Nep, Royal, and Egrimony: pun them and make a posset with the
juice thereof, and drink it: and sometime chip and fry them with Eggs, an eat
it as a Tansey.

Take tender crops of Osmond in May, dry them in the wind and not else where,
make it in powder, and save it in a bladder Winter and Summer, and drink
thereof: it will make the belly go as if it were new burst. Let the Patient be
well and easily trussed to go withal in the day, and to lie in the night,
till he be whole, which will be in 24. days, if he will be ruled.

He must lie upright as much as he may, and keep his bed every morning two
hours after he takes his medicine, and eat no white meats till he be
whole, nor strain him any ways.

For burning.
Take juice of the leaves and berries of Iuy, the oil of Nuts, of each 8.
ounces, Wax two ounces: boil it to an ointment, and use it.

For burning or scalding.
Take Nightshade, Parcely, Isop, Tim-houe, Sorrel, Marigold, and Setwall, of
each two handfuls: stamp them and strain the juice, and put to it a pound of
Spike, a quarter of a pound of Deere-suit well clarified, or fresh Butter, or
Sheep suit, boil all together a little while, then put it out and anoint the
grief: it will take out the fire in ten or twelve hours: then lay over it, the
soft Long wort leaf, but first wash the grief with salt brine, which will
speedily take out the fire.

Another for the same.
TAke Sallet Oil and running water, boat them together, and then lay a lawne
over the grief, and anoint it on the lawne without remooning till it be whole.

Take the black water remaining in the making of salve or ointment of Tobacco,
and anoint the grief, and it kills the malignant heat of any burning or
scalding.

TAke running water, a pottle, as much white wine or viniger, half a penyworth
of Honey, as much Allom as an Egg, white Coprus a quarter of a pound, Rosemary,
Rue, Isope, Time, and red Sage, of each branch: boil chem to half, strain
it and reserve it to use.

To destroy a Canker.
Take Chid soap and quick Lyme, make a plaster and lay it to the sore, and be
well ware that the Canker be there, for it will certainly slay the Canker: And
when it is flayne, lay to the sore a sword of Bacon, and it will heal it.

This is called Veni mecum, for it will not fail if it be laid to the quick
flesh.

For Cankers in teates.
TAke Culuer dung, Honey, Virgin wax, flower of Barley, Beans and Lyneseeds,
seethe them in Viniger or Wine, put thereto Rams tallow, make a plaster and
apply it.

For a Canker in the mouth.
TAke the root of Flower be iuce, wash it and slice it, and a few leaves of
Penny coyall, steep them in conduit water, and wash the grief therewith.

To purge Choler.
TAke Diagredij, one dram, beat it gross, put the powder of Aromaticum Rosarum
Gabrielis to it, half a scruple, Ginger fine sliced, half a spoonefull, and
Sugar as you lift: take a fair Apple, cut of the cap, take out the core, lay a
tyle upon embers, roast the Apple, and when it is roast, pare the Apple, and put
into white wine, and take it early in the morning.

D. K.

For the Collicke, and to cause disgestion, and for gryping pains of the belly.
TAke herb John, Ca^^^mill, Wormwood, of each one handful, the yeolkes of
two eggs hard roasted, shred the^ together, not overmuch, fry them with salt
Butter: then take a treene dish and fill it with warm ymbers, and lay the
fried herbs upon the embers, sprinkling the embers with wine vinegar: and lay
a lynnen cloth over the dish, and knit it fast in the bottom, and lay it close
unto the pain.

G. K.

For swelling of the coddes.
TAke powder of Common, Barley meal and Honey: fry them, and make a plaster
thereof, and bind it to the code.

For Corns in any place.
TAke crops of a Nettle, brouse them and lay them to the Corns.

Cut them till they bleed, and then apply to it ashes of Tobacco burnt.

For the perilous Cough.
TAke Sage, Rue, Common, and Pepper; boil them in Honey, and eat of tearely and
late a spoonefull.

Take Horehound and Honey, and eat of it three days and three nights.

For Gough of cold.
VVAsh his feet every even with hot water: then set his soles against the
fire: then stamp Garlic, and a little Horehou^d, strain them and anoint the
soles of the feet against the fire, at even when he goes to bed.

For Cough of phlegm.
TAke Figs a pound, a quarter of a pound of Liquoris, and a handful of Isop:
stamp them and seethe them in water, from a gallon to a pottell: strain it,
and do thereto half a pound of Annice and clarified honey, and drink of it,
as of a principal remedy.

For a Cough of Rewme in the lungs.
TAke Origanum, Isop, the root of Enula Campana, of each a good quantity:
boil them in water, and bray them well: strain it, and put to it halte a
pound of Annice, and seethe it again till it be thick: then take it from the
fire, and put to it a quarter of a pound of Sugar, and half a pint of
clarified Honey, one ounce of powder of Ieat, and so have you a singular good
remedy.

For the Cough, rutling of the breast, boyles and sores in the side: for the
Milt and stomach.
TAke Horsehelme, Groundswell, Isop, Centory, Smallage, Rue, Holewort, and
Puliall, of each a like, and do thereto Pepper and Honey, and eat of it early
and late.

For the dry Cough.
TAke Anet, Smalledge seeds, a like much: make it into powder, temper it with
wine, and seethe it till it begin to wax thick: then box it, and use it
first and last.

For the old Cough.
TAke white Horebound, a good quantity, Groundswell, a lesser quantity, and
Wallwort, the least quantity: boil them with water and fresh grease: temper
them well together; make a plaster thereof and lay it to the breast: in one night
it profits greatly, and expels much evil corruption.

A notable Electuary for the same.
TAke juice of Horehound, Feuerfew, Centory, Horsemynt, Betony, root and all,
and Fenel; boil them with powder of Pepper: look ye take like proportion of
the juices, and of Honey clarified, as much as all the rest: seethe it till it
be somewhat stiff, stir it fast, and give it nor too great a fair: cool it,
box it up, and eat of it.

For the chine cough.
TAke woman's milk, and anoint the childs breast about the heartspoone: then
take powder of Sauory and strew thereabout, and bind it with a clout: do this
three or four days, at even and morn against the fire, and keep the child
from cold and from all sour meat.

For the Crampe.
TAke an herb that grows on the root of Broom, one handful, as much
Laurel leaves, a quart of white wine, as much oil Olive: boil it till the
wine be wasted, cleanse it and keep it well, for it is full good for the
Crampe, being auoynted therewith.

Take, Rue stamp and mix it with fresh Grease, and keep it in a vessel nine
days well covered: boil it, and scomme it, and while it is hot, put powder
of Incense into it, stir it and make it into an ointment, and anoint the grief
with it.

For the Cramp or conuulsion of sinews.
TAke Olei Castorei one dram, Olei Inniperij half a dram, Olei Liliorum, Olei
Vulpini, of each six ounces, mingled all together: anoint at morn and even,
the hinder part of the neck, both the shoulder blades and down all the spoone
of the back even to the hips.

Adidem.
TAke Holy oil, oil of violets, and Barrowes grease, and anoint the grief.

To cause good digestion, and to destroy wind, and to comfort the reins and
side.
TAke Annis, Louage, Smalage, Canel, Cardamonium, Origanum, Caroway, Fennel,
Sicermontanu^, Sage, Comin, Calamint, Time, black Pepper, long Pepper, Isop and
Parcely, of each half a dram: Liquorice, Ginger, Pellitory of Spain, Nutmegs,
of each one dram: Amomacum three drams: Cloves, Galingale and Saffron of each
half a dram: and Sugar, as much as all the rest by weight, and use this powder.

Dropsy in the womb.
TAke Gour^s and Parcely seed of Alex^dria, Brom flowers, a like much: boil
them, and wring out the water when it is sodden: then take Charuel, Tamerick,
and the other Parcely, and stamp them all together, and wring out the juice,
and boil it till it be half wasted; put therein Cassia Fistula, and put
thereof into the patients drink, and keep him warm.

Dropsy and Iaundes.
TAke a great bundle of Broom that is green, and burn it to ashes: then take
Madder, and make Lie with good wine, and let it run through the ashes all
warm, and put to Spike, Sugar Candy, and Galingale, and let it stand a night:
This drink will destroy the Dropsy, used xxi. days at morn and even.

For Dropsy.
TAke Turmerick, Iuory, and the shell of Pomegarnet in powder, boil it in good
Ale or wine: put thereto juice of Celidony, Honey, and Spike: when it is cold,
give the sick to drink thereof in the new Moon, and leave at the old.

Hot Dropsy in the womb.
TAke juice of Cresses, and sweet wort a like much, and the third part of
clear Honey, temper them together, and strain if, and give to drink ix. days.

Cold Dropsy in legs and feet.
TAke young tendrells of Elder, such as be black, and bruise them with Eldern
leaves, and boil them well in clean water; put it in a vessel, and stew the
legs, and lay the herbs to them when thou go to bed, as hot as may
besuffred early and late.

Drink shine own water, and it profits.

For pain in the Ears, and to restore hearing.
BVrne young branches of green Ash; and take the water that droppeth from
them an Egg shell full, as much juice of Leeke blades, and of the dripping of
Eeles: boil them together a little: strain it through a cloth, and keep it
in a glass: put of it in the whole ear, and lie on the sore ear, and in nine
dressings it will be hole: then take wool underneath a black Sheep belly,
wet it in that juice, and lay it to the ear.

For worms in the Ears.
Take Honey from the Comb, and do it in the ear, and lie down on the other
side, and it will come out.

Juice of mynts mixed with hot wine do th elike dropped in. Juice of
Aris-smart with hot wine do th elike dropped in.
For aching of ears.
Take juice of Swings ^^e^^es, and put it in the ears.

Take juice of Reddish and Oil O^^e, and put it in the ears.

Take juice of red Mynts, and put into the ears.

For water fallen into the Ears.
TAke juice of Corpander, and put it in the ear.

A water for sore eyes, that if a man had lost his sight ten years, if it be
possible to be reconered, it will help in ten days.
TAke Smalledge, Rue, F^unell, Varuen, Egrim^ny, Betony, Auens, Scabicus, Ha^^
strong, Eufrase, Pimpernell, and Sape, a like much, distill them with a little
urine of a man child with five grayned of Franchincence: drop a drop hereof
every night in the sore eye.

To clear the sight, and remove the Web.
TAke red Roses, Smallage, Rue, Varuen, Maiden hair, Endive, Singreene, red
Fennel, Hollywort, Celidony, of ^che half a quarterne: wash them clean, and
infuse them in white wine four and twenty hours; then still them in a
stillitory: the first is like Gold, the second like silver, and the third part
like Balm: keep it in a glass as a precious water or Balm for all maladyes
of the eyes.

For a stripe in the eye, though the sight be perished.
TAke the whitest Salt thou can get, burn it well in a firepan red hot,
beat it in fine powder, and as the Patientlyeth in his bed, make three small
halles with clarified Honey and that powder, and put them in the eye once in
three days.

A Powder to conserve the sight.
TAke Betony, Rue, Celidany, Saritrage, Louage, Annis seeds, Synnamon, Fennel,
Origanum, Petrosilin. Siler. Montanum, of each a dram: Galingale, one ounce:
make powder of all those, and take it continually with meats.

To perfect the sight.
TAke Sage, Fennel, Var^^^, Bi^ony, Eye bright, Pini^ernell, Cinkesoln, and
Rue steeped in white wine four and swenty hours: distill it in a glass
Still, which is best. This water will restore sight perished.

For Eyes that water, run and itch.
TAke Lapis Calaminaris, burn it red hot, and quench it often in white wine,
till it full in powder, and put thereof in the eyes.

For swelling bladders in the eyes.
TAke Tutty, and anoint the sore eyes.

For sore Eyes in man or beast.
TAke a handful of Dazy roots, leaves and all, and the white of a new laid
Egg, beaten in a dish: let it stand half an hour, then scum it: then put the
juice to it with a little Honey, and the Egg, and anoint the eye.

For the Web in the Eye.
TAke the gall of an Hare, and Honey clarified, a like much, mix them well: lay
it with a feather on the Web, and it will break it in three days, and save
the sight.

For all pains in the Eyes.
TAke Fe^nell, Rue, Eutrase, Varuen, Tormentill, Bitany, red Roses, Grape
leaves, Smaledge, Egrimony, ground Iuy, and Iuy that grows on the Oak, a like
much, steep the^ one day in white wine, the second day in water of a man child
or virgin, the third day in woman's milk, the foursh day in clarified honey:
then distill all together, and use the water as procious, one drop at a time.

For eyes that swell, coming of cold.
TAke Egrimony, the leaves of Varuin, Fennet, Rue, and Roses, and distill them.

And if you will have it strong, do thereto leaves of Galetrium, and of Morsus
Galline, which is Chick weed with the red flower.

For inflammation of the Eyes.
TAke the juice of Morrell or Nightshade three or sour spoones full, the
whites of Eggs beaten, and the soame taken off: mix them, and strike them on
a linen cloth, and lay it to the temples and forhead.

For redness of eyes, and to clear the sight.
TAke fine Aloes, Tony, a new laid egg shell, of each the weight of a French
crown: beat them in powder, and put them in a clean cloth, and sow it as
near the powder as ye can: hang it in a wide (...) glass, in two ounces of
red Rose water, and one ounce of Eye bright water, and dip the cloth upon the
eyes as often as ye think good.

G. K.

A good water for eyes.
TAke Fennel, Varuen, Roses, Celidony, Rue, Philago, Eufrase cods, and
Woodbinds, distill them, and use it.

Ad idem preciosissima a qua.
TAke Smallage, Rue, Fennel, Egrimony, Bitany, Scabiou^, Auens, Hounds tongue,
Eufrase, Pimpernel and Sage, still them with a little urine of a man child,
and fine graynes of Franckincence, drop there of every night into the eye.

A precious water to clear the eyes, and to destroy the Pyn and Web.
TAke red Roses, Capillus Veneris, Fennel, Rue, Varuen, Eutrase, Endive and
Bitany, a like much, so that there be in all under six hands full; let them
rest in white wine, a day and a night: the second day distill them in a
Stillitory: The first water will seem in color like Gold: the second, Silver:
the third, Balm.

To purge the blood, and clear the sight.
TAke four ounces of Roses well picked, one pound of Time, Rosemary half a
pound, red Mynts iiij. ounces, Common iiij. ounces, Annis seeds one ounce,
Clones one ounce, bray them to powder, and steep them all together twelve
hours in three pynts of pure white Wine, distill it, and keep the water in a
fair glass, and set it to rectify in the Sun, and drink thereof every
morning fasting a spoonefull.

A good water for eyes.
TAke Fennel, Varuen, Roses, Celidony, Rue, Philago, Euphrase Cods, and
Woodbyne, distill them together, and use it.

Falling Evil.
KNead cakes of Wheat meal, with the Dew on Midsummer day morning: bake it
and eat it.

Gather Varuen whilst the Sun is in Aries, and drink it in white wine, and
powder of Penny seeds.

For a Salsiplen face.
LEt the Patient be competently purged, and then let his legs and thighs be
washed with the decoction of mallows, or Lapaciacuti, or Lexinij Sarmenti, or
white wine; boil them, and make this ointment:

Take Mastick Ceruse, Litarge, Enula Campans decoct in water, juice of Reddish,
Oil and Voriger, incorporate them, and use it.

For the green Sickness.
Steep thirty green leaves of Assarabacca in Wine all night: then strain it
and put it in a close pot, with a piece of sat porke: boil it, eat the porke,
drink the wine. It also helps the Iaundes, the Fever, the beginning of
Droply, Tympany, Quotidian, Worms, and swelling of the stomach: for all which
there is no better remedy.

Powder of Ash Keys with Bitany, red Sage, Mints, and Margerom, boiled in
running water from a pottle to a quart, a good draught with Sugar taken early
and late, is good.

Eat the Blessed Thistle, or drink the decoction thereof.

Eat Onyons.

Stamp Rue one handful, red Sage two handfuls, strain the juice, and put to it
a pynt of hot honey, well clarified, and a great spoonful of gross Pepper,
stir them well together, and give thereof one spoonefull and half, blood
warm, at even and morn, and let her eat four or five times every day six
or seven Raysins of the Sun at a time.

This will cure it, though it appear not at the first: and if she amend not at
the end of ten weeks, give her the same receyt again.

Take four drams of the powders of Iuory, six or seven drams of Turpentine,
four penny wayght of Saffron, and drink thereof with stale ale at morn and
even.

Boil cloves of Garlic in milk till it be thick, and let her eat it, and
walk after it boldly.

For a Felon.
TAke Rue, the yeolk of an Egg, and a little Bay salt, as much Soap and oil
of Snayles, a little wheat flower, a spoonful of honey, two spoonfuls of Aqua
Composita, bruise the herbs small, temper all together, and make plasters of
white leather, and lay to the gricle, which will heal the Felon, and preserve
the joint.

To draw out the Core and corruption. A white salve.
TAke oil of Roses, boil it over a soft fire: wash the grief first three or
four times with white wine: then put in a little Woodbine water, and boil it
to a perfect ointment: then take a handful of Wall-Gillofers, and a handful of
T^ntsaue, and make juice of all together, and boil it to a good salve for that
use.

To heal and close up the wound, after the other salve has drawn. A green
salve.
TAke Wax half a pound, May Butter a pound, set them on the fire and try
them: then take Planten one handful, Ribwort half a handful, Valerian two
handfuls, Broklem half a handful, Smallage half a handful, Orpin, Toutsaue,
Bifolium, Ground Iuy, Elder flowers, of each a handful, cut them small, and
boil all together, with Wax and Butter, and make it up to use for that
purpose.

There are four manner of Fluxes.
1 COlides, sickness of the flomake, coming of choleric humors: it makes a
man have a great Flux, and great casting: It slays within three days,
except it be prevented.

2 LYenteria, which is, when the meat departs vndefied.

3 DYaria is a Flux, dirt mixed with blood.

4 DIscintula, is where there flows blood and the shauing of the Guts
together.

To stop Whites.
TAke Beregood, and Rolemary dried, beat it in a powder, mix them and lay them
to the Navel.

To purge Phlegm.
TAke pure white Tutbith gum clean scraped, thin sliced, and fine minst as
may be, one dram, pure Ginger in like sort dressed, two drams, Sugar three
drams, make all in fine powder, and put it into an Apple that the core is taken
out, the cap taken off, and set a fair tyle on hot ymbers, and thereupon ^ost
the Apple, and turn it often: when it is roasted, pare away the rynde, and put
that apple in white wine, and break it in pieces, and add to it a little
Ginger early in the morning: and if ye take it at night, ye must supearly.

D. K.

To avoid slegme.
TAke Rose Water eight spoonfuls, Conduit or spring water four spoonfuls,
white viniger two spoonfuls, Isop water two spoonefuls, of fine white Sugar two
spoonefuls: boil them on a soft sweet fire, scum it clean, and use it.

D. K.

For Frenzy.
TAke of Wormwood, Sage, and Marygold, of each half a pynt, white wine one
pynt and a half, brew them together, and give the sick to drink nine
spoonefulls warm in the moring fasting, fifteen days together.

D. K.

Take the herb called Shepherds yard, stamp it, and lay it to the head
shaued.

Madness of Frenzy of Choler, makes a man harmfull and debatous. Madness of
Frenzy of Blood, makes him playing, finging, and not harmefull, Madness of
Frenzy of Melancholy, makes him sad, sullen, and dreadful of all things.
Fundament going out.
TAke Apostolicon, and touch it hot, and it shall go in: do so once or
twice, as need is, and after bathe it with water that Perritory has bin boiled
in, and the Fundament shall go to his place again.

Wash the Fundament that goes out, with thine own water.

For bleeding at the Fundament.
TAke Alloes and Myrrh, and make them into powder, and with oil of Almonds
anoint the sore, and cust on the powder, and put up the Fundament with a
Scarlet cloth, and it will help.

Make Worts of Waybred and Sanicle, and eat them.

For swelling of the Genitors.
TAke Bean meal and viniger, temper them, and apply it all about, and let it
not come necre the fire: and if you have green leaves stamp them, and temper
them with honey.

Juice of Wallwort and Eisell, a like much, and Fennel, boil them to
thickness, and apply it warm.

Powder of Common, Barley meal and honey fried, applied warm.

Take Wormwood, stamp it, and Bean meal, powder of Common, fry them, and
warm lay it to the B. This is good for all weakness of the B. and when ye take
away the plaster, wash the B. with warm viniger at each time. This is well
approved.

Take Scabious, ^atfelon, and Auens as much as both, grind them small, and make
thereof peliets: dry them in an Oven when your bread is drawn: then make
powder thereof, and drink thereof early and late: and if thou may have the
juice of these herbs, it is the better.

For the Gowt.
TAke Broom flowers, Penny Royal, Pillitory on the wall, a like much, stamp
them with May Butter, put the^ in an earthen pot, set it twenty days in hot
horse-dung close stopped: then fry it with a part of sheep fallow, strain
it, and vie it.

For the Gangreene.
Stamp leaves of Coleworts, and apply if, or the drine of him that uses to
eat Cole worts.

Stamp black Elebor with viniger, and apply it.

Stamp Nettles with salt, and apply it.

The water and juice of Knot grass applied.

Decoct Lupines in water and wash with it.

The juice and roots of Pellitory applied.

Reddish with viniger applied.

Take stones of Rapsins, stamp them, and apply them.

A plaster wherewith the L. R. was cured, when all Chirurgions thought him
incureable.
TAke unwrought wax half a pound, Rosen half a pound, Olibanum one ounce, fine
Litarge of gold a quarter of a pound, white lead three quarters of a pound
beaten to powder, and finely searced, a pynt of oil of Neats feet, set it on a
fire in a small vessel with the Wax and Rozen: and when it is molten, put
thereto the other powders, and stir it fast with a stick, and then put a
little thereof in a sawcer, and if it be hard so tried, take it from the fire,
and anoint a fair board with some Neats foot oil; and as you may handle it
for heat, work it as it were Cordwayners wax, and make it in rolls, and make
playsters of it with a chafingdish of coals, spread it thin on lynnen or
leather, and lay the plaster warm whereas the pain is, and so renew it at
morn and evening, until you be whole, or till the ache be driven to some
other joint, and so follow with the plaster as the pain remoueth, and beware
of cold, and hot wynes.

A plaster to cure the red Gowt, or Gutta Rolatia.
TAke old Lard, and put to it strong viniger by two days: then stamp it, and
put to it the bark Lappacij acuti roots boiled in water, Quicksiluer
sublimed, and Quicksulpher well incorporated together, and make thereof an
ointment, wherewith anoint the face when thou go to sleep, and in the
morning wash the face, and rub the face with the liquor.

A most excellent remedy for a cold Gowt, that is Oleum Benedictum, to heal
Guttam Rosatiam.
TAke a fat Gander, a fat Churl or male Cat, new Wax three quarters of a
pound, Nasturcium one handful, Barrowes Grease, beat them together, and put it
into the Gander: boil it and cool it, and with that ointment anoint the
grief.

For the cold Gowt.
TAke the juice of Nettles, the white of an Egg, Wheas^ bran, make a plaster
and apply it.

For a Canker in the gummes.
FIrst wash the sore with viniger and Sugar three days: but first rub it, and
then wash it with this liquor.

Take quick Lyme and Sage quenched at the fire in an earthen vessel, and put
to it Rozen and melt it: then cool it, and rescrue it to use.

The Canker ofentimes chances in the pallet, which ought to be burnt with a
hot Iron, or with Gold.

Sometime it chances int he nost ^ils, the roof or pallet of the mouth, the
lips, and the gummes.

The place where it is, is eaten and compassed, and is red, and sometime it
turns in theskin, and the skin is not eaten, but the flesh within.

Sirobis.
This disease comes of a melancholy humor, coming like to a Canker, which
in the beginning is called Sirobis.

Noli me tangere.
In the face it is called Noli me tangere.

Singulum.
In the mid body, A Girdle.

Lupus.
In the feet, thighs, etc. A Woolfe, which is incureable, because the feet
are the more parts.

Regula. In facie, Noli, in medijs partibus, Herpes, Si sit inferius, dicitur
esse Lupus.
And it is proper, vt omnis proprietas in solidiorisubstantia fortius imprimat
effectum suum, and fit vnus: and therefore is rather cureable.

For swelling of the guts.
BEat Wheat with viniger, and juice of Pimpernell, and make a plaster and lay
it to.

For fatness about the heart.
TAke juice of Fennel and honey, and boil them till they be hard, and eat if
at morn and evening.

For swelling and stitch at the heart.
TAke Nep two handfuls, Varuen, green Wormwood, of each alike, stamp them and
temper them with stale Ale, and drink it at meals.

For a Stitch.
TAke the bottom of a Rye leaf, and inch thick, tossed it, and then take a pynt
of good viniger, and sprinkle it, till it be well drunk in: then sprinkle a
little Malmsey on it, and lay it so hot as may be, to the stitch, and follow it
from place to place, warming the toste from tune to time.

For a stitch about the heart. A Cawdell.
TAke Common seeds, Alisander seeds, Clou^s and Mace, Grains, Licoris, of
each one dram in fine powder, a pint of stale Ale, sees it, and scum it clean:
then put in your powder, and make a Cawdle with an Egg potched as rere as may
be. Drink this fasting in the morning, and last at night with Sugar.

D. K.

Trembling and shaking of the heart.
MIrabolanes in gross powder taken, from two drams to fine drams, comfort
the trembling of the heart.

Myrtell leaves taken, profits.

Nutmegs eaten, comfort the same.

Oringes, the juice and inner part or substance where the juice is taken,
profit much.

This discase comes to women, by reason of the coldness of the mate^x, and is
thus cured:

Scrape a Goats horn that is boiled, and give that scraping to the patient to
drink.

For extreme headache.
STamp Violets alone, or with oil, and apply if.

For headache.
MIre Wheat bran with Pigeons dung, and apply it with the white of an Egg, to
the contrary side of the grief.

For head pushes.
Stamp Violet leaves with honey, and apply it.

For a scald head.
Stamp Primrose roots, fry them with fresh Butter and Tar, and lay to the
grief.

For qualifying of any hot matter, practiced by D. Achelo.
Distill Milk -- into a water, and use it. Distill Mallows into a water, and
use it. Distill Planten into a water, and use it. Distill Whites of Eggs into
a water, and use it.
D. K.

Kybed heels.
Boil Bengewyn, or Lacerpitium in Oil, and anoint the kybed heels, being
first long bathed in white wine.

Make a plaster with Wax and burnt Figs, and apply thereto.

For the Emerods.
TAke Flax seed, boil it in May butter, till it be soft and thick, and lay
it to hot.

Duglas.

Ad idem.
Take black soap one ounce, Swines grease one ounce and a half, a little bay
salt in fine powder, temper it and lay it to the grief.

Take beards of Leeks unset, boil them and stamp them with Saffron, strain
it, and lay that ointment hot with a cloth to the grief.

For the Yex or Hicket.
WHen the Yex or Hicket comes, let the patient speak as if it should be to
the Hicket, and say this word, Enough.

Duglas.

Ad idem.
TAke oil of Lillyes, and anoint the body of the sick with it oftentimes.

For Emerods.
TAke leaves of Nenupher, called Canell leaves, wash them clean put them in a
paper, roast them in ym^ers, and apply them hot as may be suffered: make powder
of them, and cast it into the sore.

For the same.
TAke red Worts, boil them in a pot, and sit over the fume in a close chair,
till it be cold, and anoint the grief.

For the same.
TAke a plate of Lead, and rub thereon Barrowes grease for a man, and Swines
grease for a woman, wash it out with white wine, and anoint the grief.

For the Pyles.
Roast unset Leeks in a Dock leaf, or a paper, stamp them, and put to them May
butter, and mix them well, and it will be a salve, and when the Pyles wax
angry, lay that warm to it: you must take the Leeks green and white, the
barbes cut: and when this medicine has drawn it well, wash the grief with
woman's milk.

To stay the bleeding of Pyles.
Drink juice of Myllefolly, which is approved good.

Apply powder of burnt Garlic, and the Pyles will dye.

Take oil of Roses, Franckincence, and honey, make thereof an ointment, and put
it into the Fundament with thy finger, and put thereinto myrrh, and let the
sum thereof go up into the Fundament.

Bynd black wool and black soope to the grief.

For the black Iaundis.
TAke wheat straw, and straw it abroad on the floor in a close house, and put
in Geese, and watch them when they dung: take it up whole, and with a knife
scrape off the white that is about the dung, till you have a good quantity:
then dry it in an oven, make it into powder, and drink thereof in Ale at morn
and even.

Take the gall of a Raven, dry it, and make it in powder, take a quantity
thereof in a spoone, temper it with Beer or Ale together, and drink it
fasting.

For yellow laundis.
TAke a big Apple, cut off the top as a cover, take out the core, and put into
it some sweet Butter, and a good deal of Turmerick, and a pretty quantity of
English Saffron, roste it very tenderly, and let the sick eat of it three or
four mornings or oftener together.

For the Yex or Hicket.
TAke bark of a Pamegranat tree, Seeny, Planten, Hearts tongue, Parcely, Bean
meal, 3. ounces, Saffron, make it in powder, and give it the patient to drink
daily fasting.

Take vrin of a maid child, Goose dung, and Goose grass, temper them together,
and let the patient drink thereof nine days together,

For the yellow Iaundes.
TAke Isop, Betony, Scabios, Egrimony, holy Thistle, of each a branch as big
as, both your thumbs: Borage, Buglos, Succory, Eudiue, Sorrel, Fimitory,
Planten, Violet leaves, of each a quarter of a handful, Spear mynts five crops,
Mercury leaves, Watercresses, Celidony, of each half a handful, Raisins of
the Sun stoned, half a handful, Damask Pruines stoned leven spoonefuls, of
Barley corns knocked and clean washed, 3. spoonfuls, of Licoris scraped and
thin sliced two spoonfuls, of water three pintes: boil all to the third part
wasted: strain it, and put to it Pemdios half an ounce, Synnamom the wayght
of eight pence bruised: then seethe it a little, and strain it again, and
give the sick to drink of it first and last, a draught blood warm.

D. K.

Ad idem.
TAke Turmerick, and the inuer bark of Piperich tree, of each an ounce, make
it in powder, and eat it in potage every morning and supper: and take Celidony
water, a good draught three hours after supper.

For black Iaundes.
TAke Aloes, Epatike, Azarum, Annis seeds, Synnnamom, Common seeds, Hemy seeds,
Licoris, Enula campana root, Broom seed, of each one ounce, make it in powder,
and eat it in potage.

For law-fallen, mould-fallen, or roofe-fallen.
Roast a handful of Chickweed in ymbers, and apply it to the boue of the neck,
and apply sour leuin of Wheat bread to the mould of the head ix. hours, to
raise if.

For the Ape gall.
BVrne a clean linen cloth to aspes, and meddle it with oil of eggs, and
apply it virgae.

Eurne Clay to ashes, and lay to the grief, and wray a linen cloth virgae.

For swelling of the P.
TAke juice of Morell, Lynseed and Barrowes grease, fry them, and lay to hot.

Or take four Figs and Oatemeale meddled with eyle Olive, and lay to.

Or take Lynseed in powder, thick boiled in woman's milk, and lay it all about
the Yard.

For scalding of the P.
TAke herb Robert, herb Walter, Buglos, Auens, Egrimony, Sanicle, Petymorell,
Sengreene, Pimpernel, He^bane, red Nettles, of each a handful, Waybred,
Mayde^heyre, Hemp, Orpin, Ribwort, Brier tops, of each a quarter of a handful,
wash and stamp them well, and do thereto a quart of good May butter clarified
stamp all together: then put them into on earthen pan and crush them well with
thy hands, that it be not hollow: then cover it well, and let it stand ix.
days and ix. nights: then work it, ^^y it well, and stamp it to an ointment,
and anoint the grief. It will heal the scalding, or any wou^d that is
cureable, on wairantise.

For sca^^ing or a woman's priuity.
TAke herb Robert, Rue, of each a handful, stamp them in a mortar, put
thereto honey, and fry them, make a plaster, and apply it ^s hot as may be to
the Fundament.

For Satirisis, or rising of the Yard.
Eat seeds of Agnus Castus, or boil it in wine, and plaster it to the reins
and e^ret parts.

Boil Common with wine or water, and drink it, or apply it to the grief.

Stamp water Lilly, and apply it.

To cleanse the lungs and breast.
Flowers of Hearts ease, or Paunces, boiled with the herb or plant, and
drunk, cleanses the lungs and breast, and is good against Fevers and
inflammations.

Vnguentum Album Camphoratum.
TAke oil of Roses half a pound, sweet veale suit fried, three ounces, white
Wax one pound, set it on a soft fire and melt it: then take it off, and put in
a quarter of lead, and the white of two new laid eggs, beaten with Rose water,
labor these in a mortar, and then put in the Camphire, fine brought powder,
one dram, the space of two hours: then put it in a gally pot.

This mitigateth pain, and quenches all hot cause.

For the scuruy itch^
Boil Rose mary and Selondine, of each one handful in half a pynte of
viniger, strain it, and put to it a quantity of white Copero^s, whilst it is
hole, and wash often with it.

Use salt with oil and viniger.

Boil small Chickweede with salt in water, and wash often the scuruy itch.

Worms in hands and feet.
Boil the juice of Wormwood in May Butter, and red Docks, and make it to a
iaiue, and anoint the grief.

Wash the hands with juice of Rue, and Rue water and sait. Wash the hands with
juice of Pettymorrell, Rue water and sait. Wash the hands with juice of or
Mynts, -- Rue water and sait.
To dissolve scriphules or kernels.
TAke Mustard seed, Nettle seed, Spumam Maris, Astrology, Armomacum, old Oil
and Wax, make a plaster and apply it.

For swelling and ache in the knees.
TAke Wormwood, Egrimony, and Varuen, Lou^ge, herb Bennit, Petty morell, and
Rue, of each a like much, stamp them and fry them with two parts of fresh
Butter, and one part of white wine, make a plaster, and as hot as may be
suffered, apply it to the pain.

Pain in the knees.
TAke Rue and Lonage, stamp them, and meddle them with honey, fry them, and lay
to the knees as hot as may us suffered two or three times.

For costiuenesse.
MAke a Subpository with honey.

Take Seeny, Soap, and the flower of wheat, and the juice of the root of
Wallwort, seethe them together, make a plaster, and lay it on the womb, and
it will procure a speedy siege.

Take Mallows and Mercury, and boil them with a piece of porke, make pottage
thereof, and eat well thereof, and drink white wine to it.

Take a piece of porke enterlarded, and boil it well in water: then take the
broth up in a dish, and cool it, till it be milk warm: then take Mercury,
Violet leanes, Borage, and Auens, a like much, make worts with that porke and
broth, and eat thereof a quantity; and in the middle of your eating, take a
quantity of stale Ale, and meddle it with the said broth, and drink it in the
middle of the pottage, etc. and use this.

An easy Laske for digestion.
TAke two penny weight Electuarij Rosarum, and eat it or drink it with Ale or
Wine, and it shall procure easy Laske. It is tolerable for a woman with child.

To stop the Laske.
TAke an Egg, and Aqua composita, boil it with the Egg till it be dry, then
eat it with Synnamom and Sugar.

Boil Starch in milk and Sugar to pap, and give it the patient.

For a sore shynne.
TAke Osmond, Bugle, Planten and Betony, stamp it well, and meddle it with
Bean meal, honey and oil, boil it well, and use it till it be whole.

For Lazer and Lepty.
1 ACatia being gru^od with viniger, abateth pushes of ye lepry. 2 Ashes of the
bark of Ash mixed with water, and anoint the Lepry. 3 Playsters made with
Barley meal applied, profits the scurse and Lepry. 4 Briony fruit good
against itch, lepry, and naughty scab. 5 To preserve thee from lepry, chewe
Calamynt fasting, and hold it in thy mouth, and it profits. 6 Let Lazers and
Lepers eat of Calamynt, and drink it in whey of sweet milk. 7 Stamp
Selondine with viniger, and apply it. 8 Mix three parts of the juice with two
parts of viniger, and anoint the scurfe. 9 Darnell with Brimstone and viniger
applied, cures. 10 Black Ellebore stamped with viniger, applied. 11 White
Ellebore boiled in wine, with Louage and Fennel, and wash the grief. 12 Boil
Eloer leaves in strong wine, and bathe. 13 Elm green leaves stamped with
viniger, anointed, helps greatly. 14 Figs milky juice anointed, cures, and
the same applied with the yeolke of an Egg, helps. 15 Veronica, or Finellen
stamped and applied, profits. 16 Mix ashes of Garlic with honey and May
butter, and anoint: or anoint with the juice thereof, or stamp it with oil and
salt, and apply it.
Lip salve.
TAke Rose mary flowers, Sallet oil, Rose water, unwrought wax, bruise the
buds, and boil them all together, but very little, for fear of burning black,
and use it.

For lice and nits in the body and apparel.
Air thy shirt over Qnicksiluer burnt upon coals.

Strew Horsemynts in your chamber.

Take juice of Rue, and anoint your body with it.

Take Gorst, boil it in water, and sprinkle the house with it.

To drive away lice.
TAke Quicksilueer, j. ounce, Saxifrage, two ounces, Barrowes grease fix
ounces, meddle them together, and anoint therewith the armeholes, and the
Navel, the breadth of a penny, and they shall go away: or anoint thee with
juice of Rue.

For scabs and lice.
TAke Quicksiluer, and stay it with fasting spittle, i. ounce, meddle them with
the white of an Egg, and do it on a woollen clout, and gird it about thy naked
middle, shaped like a girdle, and then cover it with a lynnen cloth, and gird
it as aforesaid, and wear it ix, days, and it shall slay all.

For the consumption of the Liver.
TAke a pottle of Wort, not strong, Maydenhaire one ha^dful, Liuerwort one
handful, Hearts tou^g ix. leaves, parcely roots one handful, Fennel roots
half a handful, the pith of both roots taken out: bruise the roots a little,
wash them and boil them to half, or three pynts: imediately after the first
boiling put to it Saunders one ounce, and when it is almost sod, put in a
quantity of Canell bruited: then strain it through an Ip^cras bag softly, and
let the patient drink thereof every morning five or six spoonesuis, one hour
before repast, and as much at night before rest.

A plaster to cool the Liver.
TAke a piece of scarlet, cut it like a liver, the juice of Sorrel, as much
viniger, and a little Rosewater, the powder of Saunders: boil all together,
and lay it hot to the place of the liver.

For to restore the Liver.
TAke a quantity of wild Tansey, stamp it, and drink it with wine or aie, ix.
days or more.

For to increase love.
Eat the roots of Carets.

A water to cleanse the lungs and stomach.
TAke new Ale out of the fat, one gallon, a good quantify of Licoris clean
scraped and shaued, as much Annis seeds, as much Fennel seeds, as much
Coriander seeds dried, Centory one handful: lay them in to steep xxiiij.
hours in the Ale, still it and drink of it, four spoonfuls every morning
fasting.

A maruey lous and precious water.
TAke Galingale, Cloves, Quibibes, Ginger, Melilot, Cardamomum, Mace Nutmegs,
of each one dram, the juice of Celidony half a pynt: mix all these made in
powder with the juice, and a pynt of good Aqua vitae, and three pynis of good
white wine: put all together in a Stillitory of glass, and let it stand all
night, and in the morning still it with an easy fire as can be.

It is of a secret virtue.
It dissolueth the selling of the lungs, without grieuance.

If the lungs be wounded or perished, it mightily comfort them, and suffieth
not the blood to putrify. He that uses this water, shall not need to be let
blood.

It suffers not the heart to be burnt, nor melancholy, nor phlegm to be lifted
up, or to have dominion above nature.

It expels the Rheum, profits the flomake, and conserueth a good color,
and youth in his estate: it also conserueth the visage and memory.

It destrsyeth the Palsy of the tongue and lymmes.

If one spoonefull be given to one laboring at the point of death, it reuiueth.

Of all waters arificiall, it is the best.

In the Summer use one spoontull once a week fasting, and in the Winter two
spoonefuls.

For the Marmoll, or Malum mortuum.
IT is an infirmity about the shinnes and arms, which is called Malum mortuum;
they he old wan sores, little matter gendring therein.

Other while it comes of melancholy, mixed with Salceplen: if it come of
melancholy, it is seen by black pustels without itching. If salciplen be mixed
therewith, the place waxes wan with itch and biting.

If it be clean melancholy, let the matter be digelled with Oximel,
Squilliticum, and Sirupus de Fumitorij, of rche a like.

If salciplen be mixed therewith, let the matter be digested with 2. parts of
Oximell, and the 3. part of Exisaccary, and the 4 part of Syrop of Fumitory:
and let it be purged with 2. pat is of Iera ligridion, and the 3. part of Iera
Ruffini, and the 4. part of Catarticum Imperiale, and let it be tempred with
Barley water, and give it in the morning.

The next day after be theremade a Stuphe, of Calamynt, Origonum, Rue, Mints,
Horehound, Bay leaves, and all kind of March Cresses, Scabios, Fumitory,
Specula fo^tida.

And going out of the Stuphe, give the patient Triacle, with juice of Fumitory
hot to drink it, if it be clean melancholy.

And if it be of Phlegm meddled, put thereto a good part of Rubea Trociscata.

If it be an universal Malum mortuum, let him blood of the vain Hepatike.

And if it be about the shinnes, thighs, or arms, let him blood on the vein
Sephone, within and without a little, and otherwhiles be there put to
Ventosites, upon the raynes. And if he be too costiue, and that need be, purge
him before inunction with Carticum Imperiale, or with a Glyster is more
convenient.

Remember, that at what time the cure is to be done, the patient must be kept
from cold, as a woman lying in childbed, Winter and Summer, with fire in the
chamber.

For wind passing by the Matrix.
TAke Rue, Pennyroyall, Camomill, of each a handful, chop them as great as
worts, bruise Fennel seeds, Annis seeds, Common seeds, and mix^ them: then iry
them with viniger, and make bags, and put the same in them, and lay to her
side, as hot as may be suffered; when one is cold, lay to another.

Or take flowers of Camomill, Millet, Mugwort, Isop, Sage, Feuerfew, Maydw^de,
Bay leaves, and Horehound, of each haife a handful, Annis seeds, Fennes, and
Caroway feeds, Bay berries, and Common feeds, of each an ounce: bruise the herb
and put all together, boil them all in a sufficient quantity of running water,
and half as much white wine: strain the herbs, and put them in a bag, and
apply them to the payned place or else wet a spuage in the liquor, and warm
lay it to the griese.

For a woman laboring with child, and that wants her throws at her
deliverance.
TAke Sinnamom, Saffran, and the bark of Cassia fistula, of each a like much,
make it in powder, and give her four penny wayght thereof to drink in white
wine or Malmesey, blood warm v. or vi. spoonefuls.

De virga virili swollen.
TAke Mallows and Violets, boyls them in conduit water, and wash the grief.

For scalding virge.
Boil Mallows in water, beat them in a mortar, fry them with oil or May
butter: then take a red Cole leaf, and lay it thereon, and wrap the fore
therein, and make a hole of the leaf ad iungendum, and sanabitur gratia Dei.

For the yard blorized.
DRy Burch leaves on a fyle, and make powder thereof, which powder will heal
the Blaynes, and consumes the Quitter: but the powder should not be strowed
for the Quiter.

For a woman whose child is fallen too low, to raise it.
Drive a red Cow till she dung, then take that dung, and honey, and boil them
together, and lay it very hot to the upper side of her Navel, till she be
well.

Against melancholy, an electuary.
TAke Borage flowers, and B^glos flowers alike by discretion, not exceeding
holfe a pound; steep them in as much Claret wine as will moist them: then
beat them in a marble mortar very small, put to it like weight of Sugar finely
beaten, incorporate al together: put it in a gally pot, and teserne it to use,
the quantify of a Chestnut at any time when the melancholy passion troubles
you. It is good against drought, beaumesse of the heart, body or mind, taken
in like quautity.

G. K.

To purge melancholy.
TAke Seeny clean picked, one dram, Epithiny, Mirabolinde, Hermodactili albi,
of each half a dram: make all into fine powder, and add to it powder of
Ginger and Synnamom, of each half a dram, make all into powder: then take a
fair apple, cut off the cap, take out the core, then put it all into the
apple: then set a fyle upon hot ymbers, and roast the apple, turning it that it
may be thoroughly roasted: when it is rested, pare off the rynde, and put she
apple in white wine, and break it in pieces, and take it carly in the morning.

D. K.

For stopping of the Mylt and Spleen.
Give the Patient powder of Cooste, with juice of Wormwood.

Use wine that the seed of Cockls is sodden in, and ea^^ the powder with all
meats.

Drink wine that seeds of Honysuckles of the hedge is fodden in: It makes
good digestion: It wastes winds: It opens the stopping of the Spleen, the
Reins and bladder.

For a sore mouth.
TAke white wine a quart, Licoris a quarter of a pound.

Annis seeds a quarter of a pound, Mace, a quarter of an ounce: beat all
together, and put if to the wine, and two spoonfuls of English honey, two ounces
of whife stone Sugar, one ounce of Roche Allome, a quantits of Honysuckles, as
much Endive, as much Yarrow, as much Buglos, as much Succory: distill the in,
and use that water.

Ad idem, an excellent remedy.
TAke Houysuckles, red Sage, red Rose Campions leaves,

Filberd leaves, Rosemary leaves, of each a handful, two spone fuls of English
honey, a good quantity of Roche Allome, boil it in ruuning water, and wash the
sore mouth.

For old ulcers of the mouth.
TAke a quart of white wine, still it with a quarter of Licoris, a quarter of
Annis seeds, half a quarter of an ounce of great Mace: beat all together, and
put it in the wyns, with two spoonsuis of English honey, two ounces of white
stone Sugar, one ounce of Rochs Allom, a quantity of Honysuckles, as much
Endive, as much Yarrow, as much Buglos, as much Succory, distill all together,
and use the water.

To increase Nature.
MAke powder of Annis seeds, Fe^nel, Galingale, Spikenard, Tamarisk, Nutmegs,
Cardamom, mire it with wheat flower, water, and red wine: make cakes thereof,
and cate them daily for wasting of nature, nature lost, and Gomera passio,

For the Naucll going out.
1 WAsh it with wine boiled with blessed Thistle. 2 Mix powder of burnt fair
lynnen, and of bitter Lupines, and lay it to the navel. 3 Fiewort with viniger
applied. 4 Stamp saine John's wort, and lay it to. 5 Through way stamped with
meal and wine helps, and the whole herb, leaves and seed applied,
profits. The powder thereof helps the Hermaries. 6 Boil Spike Celtike in
oil of Almonds, and a little Turpentyne: dip wool in it, and apply it to the
Nauel, iwollen after the cutting of it.
To provoke neezing.
TAke Nigella Romana, Labdanum, Storax, Nutmegs, of each sixpenny weight in
fine powder, the roots of neezing powder, the weight of all the rest: mix all
together, and take as much thereof as a pinnes head at a time.

G. K.

For the Palsy.
TAke a good quantite of Sage, put it in a coffin of paste, bake it in an oven:
and when it is well baked take the Sage forth, put it in a yet of Ale, and stop
it close, and let the sick drink thereof, and of none other drink.

Another for the Palsy.
TAke Pepper one ounce. Ginger half an ounce, Cardamomum, long Pepper,
Sinnamom, and Setwall, of each j. dram: Spikenard, Mace, and Saffron, of each
half a dram, make it in powder, and drink it with good Ipocras, or Malmsey and
when you go to bed, wash your hands with warm water.

Ad idem, when the speech is lost.
TAke Auens, one hand fall, leaves and roots, wash them, and boil them in a
quart of white wine to a pynt: strain it, and drink it three mornings.

If it be too bitter, put Sugar to it, and it will restore speech.

For him that pisseth blood.
TAke Ambrose and Sanguinary of each a handful, and as much Parcely seeds stamp
them, and meddle them with Goats milk and drink.

Take Ambrose. Saxifrage, and Purcelane: stamp them, and drink the juice with
Cow milk.

For him that cannot well piss.
TAke Rue, Gromel and Parcely, stamy them, and meddle the juice with white
wine, and drink it warms.

For him that cannot hold his water.
TAke the clawed of a Goat, and burn them to powder, and let the patient use
of it in pottage, a spoonful at once, and be shall be cured. The claws must
be burnt in a new earthen pot.

A perfume to ouoyd the infection of the Plague, Pox, or Meazels.
TAke saint John's Wort dried, the shaning of Juniper wood, Myrtls leaves, of
each a like much, Olibanum, Turpentine of Venice, a like much in weight: bruise
year Olibanu^, incorporate all into balls as big as a Chestnut, and at night
lay one upon note coals in a chasing dith^and let it ^moake: if the fire go
out, renew it.

Water of the upper busks of Wa^^^ts distilled in September, being drunk, is a
sure remedy against the Piague.

Against Poison, and the Pestilence.
TAke two dry Walnuts, two dry Figs, twenty leaves of Rue, and a grain of
salt: eat thereof lasting, and nothing venomous shall hurt thee that day.

For the Pestuence.
WAsh a Lilly root clean, and boil it in white wine, till it be halte wasted,
and give it the sick to drink. He shall break ou^ful of bladders, as if he
were burnt or scalded, which will dry, and (...).

For them that have the small Pox.
Keep them warm in all parts but the neck and head, and there let them have
air enough: and when they begin to come forth, get of Doctor Ludfords water,
and keep it continually dropping in their eyes: which water will keep them
out of their eyes: then take Beef, and powder it with dry Salt, two days and
two nights: then boil a peec^ of that Beefs well scummed; take the fat of that
broth, and a quautity of running water, and beat both together, till it come to
an oil, and so soon as the Pox come forth, anoint the face therewith
continually with a feather, day and night: and when the Pox are thoroughly
rips, let them out with a gold needle: when they begin to dry, let them not
hang too lang, but put them off seftly, else the scabs will make prints, which
shall be seen.

For poison of Serpents or Vipers.
Drink Dragons, Rue, and Betony.

Drink juice of Sinquefoyle.

Eat Garlic.

Boil Rue, Betony and Fennel in butter, and drink it.

To withstand poisoning.
Eat a Walnut with a Fig and Rue sasting.

Against Poison and Plague.
WAter of green Walnuts distilled about Midsummer 2. or 3. ounces dr^^^,
cools and resists poison and the plague.

Pare a way the uttermost of the bark of the Walnut, and make powder of the
rest, and steep it all night in water, strain it, and drink it fasting, to
cast out poison.

For the small Pox, a loueraigne medicine.
FIrst give the patient sodden milk, mixed with Saffron, or with Mithredatum,
and when they be perfitly come forth and begin to break, in no case let them
come into ye air: then distill of good apples sliced, viniger and milk with a
little Camphire, and anoint the face therewith.

G. K.

For to make the Pox come forth.
Give the patient Barley water to drink made sweet with Sugar.

G. K.

To know if the sick of the Pox shall live or die.
WHo that falls sick of that disease, and the Pox appear not till the sixth
day, and do come forth the fourth day after, then the patient is like to dye.

G. K.

To make the Pox come forth.
TAke (...) fat Fig^, (...) Dragagant, ij. drams, Fennel seed bruised half a
quarter of an ounce, bruised Saffred half a dram, boil all in a quart of
water, till thy third part be consumed: then strain it, and drink it warm early
and late.

G. K.

To take away the pits of the Poxr.
TAke milk and viniger of each a pynt, of appies pared and sliced thin 3.
handfuls, incorporate the^ with a little Comphrie: then stir it and wash the
face 3. times a day, and let it dry.

The cream of woman's milk anointed, is good also.

Powdered Beese broth, not too fresh, nor too salt, is good also.

G. K.

To purge melancholy.
TAke Seeny clean picked, one dram, Epithimi mirabolani, Hermodactili albi, of
each half a dram, Sugar one dram: make all into fine powder, and add to it
powder of Gynger and Synnamom, of each half a dram: make this in powder, and
put it into an apple, the top cut off, and the core taken out: rest it, and
eat it.

To purge choler,
TAke Diagredij half a dram, beat it gresse: then put to it the powder of the
root Arromaticum Rosarum Gabrielis, half a scruple, and Sugar as you list:
roast it in an apple, as before, and use it,

For running of the reins, and Gomora passio.
Drink seeds of Lettice with ale or water.

Use powder of Mastick, Olibauum, Storax, and Cardamonium.

Dry Mynts in an oven, and drink the powder.

Anoint the yard and clothes with juice of Morel and Compbire.

Carry about thee seed of Sorrel, gathered by a chaste boy.

For him that has lost his kind.
TAke a red Onyon and a Hen sod in a pot, eat it and drink it three days.

Or take seed of Fennel, Parcely, Caroway, Cardamonium, Lignum, Cloves,
Galingale, Cauel, of each a pe^ny weight, Rubarb two drams, and of Allome as
much, Mastick one dram: stamp them in a brazen mortar, and take a fair scoured
basin, and put a good portion therein, and melt it: then take the soresayd
things, and put thereto, let it boil till it be thick, as thou may hold it in
thy hand: then box it up, and use it first and last. This will restore thee
again, though thou were never so cold.

Or suck a woman every day till thou be restored.

Running of the Reins.
TAke Liuerwort, Longwort, Hearts tongue, of each half a handful, a little
Buglos, as much Succory, as much Endine, Violets, Sorrel, and Fiuefinger, of
each a little, boil all in a quart of running water to half, blaunched
Almonds two penyworth, stamp them with the pith of a Bullock: then put it to
the liquor with the herbs, and wring them, and take out the juice: then strain
it, beat it, and seizon it with long P^pp^r, a pennyworth. Nutmegs and Grains,
half a penny worth, some large Mace and Sugar, to make it pleasant, and drink
it often warm.

Take Saunders white and yellow, two ounces, Sinnamom one ounce, Mastick one
ounce, Sang. Draconis, half an ounce, one Nutmeg, conserve of Roses two
ounces, mix all together with Turpentine, and take it in often.

For a scall.
TAke Primrose roots, stamp them, and fry them with fresh Butter and Tar, and
plaster-wise lay it to the grief.

For a child's head having a white scall.
TAke Arse-smart a good quantity, stamp it small and put to it the like
quantity of Hogs Lard, stamp them and incorporat the^ together: set it on a
soft swaet fire, always stirring it, with a little water in it for burning to,
and let it boil til the leaves begin to parch: then strain it, and of that
liquor take two ounces, and add thereto of Storaxliquid one ounce, mix them
together, and therewith anoint the grief every evening or every morning, which
you will, and lay a cloth on it.

D. K.

For the Purples.
TAke Purple wort if ye can: it is a cloue^ grass, which bath a blew heart in
the midst of it: and if you cannot get that, then take Angelica, Betony,
Scabios, of each a branch as big as both your thumbs: stamp them, and seethe
them in posset ale: strain them, and put to it Sugar, Saffron, and a little
Triacle, drink it fasting at morning and evening without Triacle.

For angry scabs, night plo^ks, and watery wheales.
TAke Ra^sins the stones taken out, and Rue stamped together, and apply it to.

Stamp Daysy leaves, fry them with fresh Butter, and anoint the hands.

Stamp wild Tansey, and Daysy flowers with cold running water, and wash
therewith.

Stamp sharp leaued Docks and Fumitory a like much, make it to ointment with
May butter, or Barrowes grease, and Roche Alome, and anoint it.

Boil a bandful of Nettles with Sinnamom and Cloves, of each two drams, and
bathe thy hands with the fume thereof.

For worms in hands and feet.
Boil juice of Wormwood in May butter, and red docks, and stir it to a
salve, and anoint.

Boil Leuin in good ale dregs, and apply it to scabs.

Boil wheat bran with Rue in viniger, and lay it to.

For stinging of an Adder.
GRynd Centory with Butter, and give the sick to drink,

It will heal man and beast.

Stamp Garlic, and lay to.

For biting with a Dog.
INcorporate honey and Garlic, and eat it.

For biting of a Spider.
RVb the place well with Flies.

For biting or stinging of any venomous worm.
TAke Dragaunce one handful, Centory half a handful, half so much Rue, two
cloves of Garlic: stamp them, and wring out the juice, and anonyt the grief.

If thou distill all these, and drink the water, it does destroy all venom
within thee.

For shingles.
IF it gird a man, happily he shall never be whole. Take Culuer dung and Barley
meal, stamp them together, and temper them with Eyzel, and do it to the
grief till it be whole. This evil will spring like wild fire, but this is
greater and redder, and it euey springs arow.

Apply to them the Patients own blood, and he shall be cured.

For foul scuruy tetters and scabs.
WHeat bread soked in brine or pickle, laid to, the bread being new.

For bleche or swelling.
TAke Walnut leaves and Sotherne wood, of each a handful, Succory, Woodbine
leaves, white Archangell, wyles Tansey, Wormwood, Gosting weed, red Archangell,
of each a bandfull, chop them all together, and byle them in May vntter, till
there be a greent ointment, strain it, and keep it to use.

To kill a Ring-worme or tetter.
TAke Mercury and Daisy roots, of each a handful, ij. spoonfuls of cream,
stamp and strain them, and put thereto six spoonfuls of water made of
Mercury sublimatum, and wash the tetter or ring-worme therewith.

A water to heal in five days all scabs, as well inward as outward.
TAke Planten water a pynt, Rosewater half a pynt, water of flowers of
Cythrons, or Orenges, or of the juice of the fruits of them, a quarter of a
pynt: put all into a Vyoll of glass, and put to it of quicksiluer beaten to
powder one ounce: let them boil softly at the fire a quarter of an hour: then
cool it, and put it in a glass.

Wash the scabby place with it at night, and let it alone to the next day
without more washing: the third day wash it again, but not the fourth day.

At the first and second time you wash them, it will make all the scabs in your
body to break out.

At the third time they shall so ory up, that you shall find all neat and
clean, both within and without.

There is no remedy in the world more excellent then this, nor easter to be
made.

This water marketh a man's flesh white, and death out all ^^ill humors at the
body.

For the falling sickness.
Drink powder of Haris horue with wine.

The first syme he falls, when thou see it, put off thine own shoe, and
piss in it, rince it well, and give him to drink of it, and he shall no more
fall, nor have that evil.

Also at his first falling slay a Hound, and take out his heart and gall, and
being hot, grynd it, and give it him to drink, and he shall no more have it.

Cocks stones green, drunk, helps; but abstain from wine ix. days.

Bores stones eaten, or drunk with wine, pro^^teth.

Take a Fores brain, and give it often to children, and they shall never be sick
of that evil.

To provoke sleep.
TAke Lettice seed, and Smallage seed: stamp them, and temper them with the
white of an Egg, and lay it to the forhead.

Take powder of Smallage, Henhaue and Mynts, tempered with oil or grease, and
anoint the temples, etc.

Stamp Leeke seed, and temper them with woman's milk, and the white of an egg
bound to the temples.

For a scald head.
TAke honey a spoonful, wax and sheeps suit, of each a quarter, and as much of
the after-byrth of a woman as an egg, Rozen, Pilch, and Sparmacoeti, of each
half a quarter, boil them til they be molten, and well incorporated: then
strike them on a cloth, and make a plaster and apply: then take Rozen, pitch,
and the afterburden of a woman, and mingle them together over the fire, and
make a plaster; and this to be laid to vj. or vij. days: and then take of the
next plaster before, Brimstone, black Soap, and the burden, and anoint the head
without it, and put it in a cloth, and unoynt the head with it after ye it is
shaued, when the skin rises, and it will be whole: and if it be hard like the
brawne of ye thumb, it is not whole: and if it be very ill and thick of scall,
you shall let it lie vij. days: but if it be mean, then but v. days: a
little scall iij. or iiij. days: and lay it on a month or five weeks, till
the skin rise wrinkled: and if it be full in the skin, like the brawn of the
thumb, let it lie still.

A principal plaster to do away kernels.
TAke roots of Fern, roots of Affodil, and boil them in the best wine, put to
it a little quick brimston, make a plaster and lay it to speedily, which will
consume the grief.

For Glandils or kernels.
TAke roots of nettles, and roots of Ebulus, boil them in viniger, put to it
unslaked lyme, and Auri Pigmentum, make a plaster and apply it to the Kings
Evil or Kernels.

Take the green of brass, juice of Docks, Peritory, and inice of Leeks,
incorporate them, and in that liquor wetatent, and put it into the grief,
under a plaster, putting forth the corrupt matter.

A new kernel or scruphill is cured as follows, without cutting or rupture.
TAke Sinnamom, Cloves, Quicksiluer, quick Brimston, pitch, Virgin wax, ye root
of Enula campana, Sowes grease for a woman, and Bores grease for a man: boil
the root of Enula campana in water: then with the Quicksiluer extinct, Sage,
hogs grease pitch and wax resolved, set it over the fire: then add to the
powder of the spices and brimstone, and stamping them all together, let them be
well incorporated, and reserved to use.

For to stop spitting of blood.
STamp clote Bur root one dram, with the kernels of Pine apples, and drink it.

Decoct Pernincle with wine, drunk.

Drink juice of Bursa pastoris.

Drink powder of Tormentill roots with wine.

Drink juice of Knot grass, or the leaves boiled in wine, drunk.

Amyle or Starch being drunk, profits.

For a fore throat by sickness.
Drink juice of Woodroue with good ale.

For the Squinnancy.
TAke Goats milk, and in the beginning make a plaster of wheat bran, the juice
of Smalage in meal of Fenigrak with new Barrowes grease, and the juice of
Planten, and powder of Roses, and apply it.

Take roots of Mallows, meal of Fenigreeke, Flax seeds, Dates, great
Raisins, the stones taken out, with wheat brun: boil them in water, stamp
them, and make it with new Barrowes grease and a little heny into a plaster,
which is maruaylous riping, and lay it to the Squinancy.

Take honey, hogs blood, lard, meal of Flax seed, Fenygreek, and the dung of
Swallows: incorporate them, and make a plaster excellent to ripe the Squinancy.

And note, that the dung of all manner of Swallows, heals the Squinancy.

Let the Impostume be opened with iron, or a razer, or this breaking plaster
following.
TAke Bran, salt and oil, stamp them and incorporate them, and make thereof a
plaster, and apply it. This is used to cleanse and dry the same.

To procure urine, and to break the Stone.
TAke water Crisses handful, Parcely half a handful, red Fennel tops, Mercury
leaves, roots of Ciprus bruised, of each a quarter of a handful, Raysins of
the Sun, the stones taken out, half a handful: chop them small,and make
pottage with mutton or veale, and thick it with great Date meal beaten small:
season it with Pepper gross: add to it Gromet seeds iij. d. weight, beaten
fine, a little Saffron: eat a mess thereof at morning, noone and night, a
week together.

D. K.

Boil Virga Aurea in wine, and drink it, and drink one spoonful of the powder
thereof four hours before meat with a raw egg.

For the Collicke and the Stone.
TAke Stone crop, Parcely leaves and roots, and mother Time, of each a
handful, boil them in good stale Ale half an hour: strain it, and put to
it a good quantity of Graynes in powder, and drink it warm.

For the Stone. A powder.
TAke Barberies a handful dry them, Pench stone, Ash keys, dried Parcely
seed, Seahull, Saxifrage, of each a like much, dry them, beat them, and fearce
them: then lay a black flint stone in the fire till it be red hot, and quench
it in a pynte of Malmsey, and put in it a quantity of that powder, about one
spoonefull to as much Malmesey as your stomach will bear, and keep the
residue of the powder to use at need.

When the grief is on the patient, let him drink no other drink, but posset
ale, or some other warm drink, with part of that powder, until it break.

To break the stone in the bladder.
TAke Oleum simplex Scorpionis: and for an old man, mix oil of Violets with
it, and noynt the sides, by, over, under and about the privy members, from ano
upwards.

For the Stone.
TAke the stone in an Ore gall, as much as a Beaue, Turmerick ij. penyworth,
Bays; ounce, Cloves, Mace, and long Pepper, of each j. penyworth, ij. Acornes,
Sweet brier stones, Gro^nell seeds, clote Bur seeds, of each a spoonful, Hawe
stones half a spoonful: pun all together into fine powder, and mix them well
together, and put thereof into a reasonable draught of good ale in a glass or
cup, so much as ye can take with your thumb and ij. fingers, or more (the more
the better) and drink if off. If you feel it very bitter, drink two or three
spoonfuls of ale or other drink after it, which will lay the bitterness.

After you have taken this receipt, if it do not throughtly help after xiiij.
days or iij weeks, take a good ha^dful of wild Time, boil it in a quart or
white wine, and in the time of boiling, throw ij. or ^ij. pibble stones in the
fire, and burn them to coals, and cast them red hot into the wine being
bruised to pieces: then strain and drink it, fasting in the morning two hours
after.

To cleanse the stomach.
TAke Isop, Rose mary and Time, of each two crops, put them in a pynt of ale
with Sugar: let them boiled, and drink thereof two hours before meat.

To avoid sleg^^e out of the stomach, to be taken one spoonefull or two at any
time.
TAke eight spoonefuls of Rose Water, four spoonefuls of Conduit water, and
two spoonfuls of white viniger, half a quarter of a pound of fine Sugar, boil
them in a poringer, on a chafingdish with coals, scum it clean, and drink it
lukewarm.

For such as cast up their meat by weakness of the stomach.
TAke the nether trust of a brown leaf, teast it dry and leysurely, then
steep it in strong viniger a little while: then take it out, and spread on it
pounder of Claues, and warm it again, and tie it about the mouth of the
stomach, audit shall stay vomiting.

To comfort and strengthen a weak Stomach.
TAke malmesay one pynte, mint water a pynt: Synnamon and Ginger of echs an
ounce: bruise them and mix them together with half a quarterne of Sugar: let
them stand all night, and in the morning drink it.

Mastris Barret.

A good sauce to procure Appetite.
Make sauce with Orange, mynt, vinegar, Common and Pepper.

For the Collike of the stomach.
Take wormwood a pound and a half, peache leaves, mother of fyme, Red mynts,
Perritory on the wall, of each a handful, Saxifrage pennyroyal, of each half a
handful. Fennel seed a quarter of a pownd, Gromel seed half a quarter of a
pownd, of Annis seed and Liquor^s, of each half a pownd, bruise all the seeds
together, and put them into a gallon and a half of Sack and distill them in a
Limbeck.

Mistress Barret.

For a Fever in the stomach.
Take Common, Annis, fenel seeds, red rose leaves, wormwood, mynts, Auens,
vinegar, sour bread fried and laid in a bag luke warm to the stomaks, and
renem it often with vinegar.

Against daily pain and repletion of the mouth of the stomach.
TAke Liquoris, Sauery, Serp^^um, Enula campana, Reddish root, middle bark of
Elder, mynts, Sags and Rue: stamp them, and steep them in white wine, and
give the Pacient early and late.

A Purgation against Paralipsim, or coldness of the stomach.
TAke roots of Fennel, Parcely, grasss, Ireos, Sperage. Akorns, Triangulus,
Reddish, the bark of Tamarick: of these roots and herbs make a dece^tion in
white wine: being well made and collated, take S^^namum, Cleues, Nutmegs,
Zebary Galingale, long Pepper and Spikenard: beats them all in powder, and with
the dece^tion alo^e said, make a pig mentum with honey well clarified, and use
it.

For a hot stomach.
CVt the green of the flowers of Violets, and pun them small, and put to them
twits as much Sugar, and keeps it in a Cally put all the yets, and use it.

TAke one p^^t of make, two (...) of Ir^^s, and a little Sugar, and drink
thereof.

For the Collicke of the Stomach.
TAke of Wormwood, one pound and an half, of Peathe leaves, a pound: Mother
of Time, red Mints, and Perritory on the wall, of each a handful, Saxifrage
and Pennz-Royall, half a handiull of each, Fennel seeds, a quarter of a
pound, Grommell seeds, half a quarter of a pound, Annis seeds and Liquoris,
a pound of each: bruise all the seeds, and put them into six quarts of good
Sache, and distill them in a Lymbeck.

To elense the Stomach, and cause digestion.
TAke Mynt water and Wormwood water, of each a quart, Malmesey a pottell, a
good quantity af bruised Synnamum, and almost as much sliced Einger, a good
piece of Sugar: put them together, and stir them well, then put them in a
glass, and let (...) and till it be clear: and let the Patient drink of it
first and last six spoonsfuls a time, blood warm.

Ad idem.
TAke a pynt of malme sey a pynt of mynt water, Ginger and Synnamum one ounce
of each: bruise them, and put them together, with half a quartern of Sugar in
the malmeley all one night, and in the morning drink it.

For stinging with Wasps or Bees, and such like.
A North it with Mithredatum.

Anoint it with juice of Scordium.

For the Colic, Stone, and Strangury.
TAke the stone in an Ox gall, as much as a Bean, Torme^til ij. penny worth.
Bays j. ounce, Clones, Maces, long Pepper of e^^e j. penyworth, two Acornes,
Sweethrier stones, Gromell seeds, Clot Bur seeds, of each a spoonful, Haw
stones half a spoonful: make it all in fine powder, mix them well together, and
put thereof in a reasonable draught of ale, in a glass or cup, so much as you
can take by with your thumb and two fingers, or more, the more the better;
stir it well together, and drink it.

If you feel it bitter, two or three spoonfuls of ale after it, will abate the
bitterness.

After the taking of this powder, if it do not thoroughly help after a
fortnight or three weeks, take a good handful of wyld Time, and boil it in a
quart of white wine, and in the time of boiling it, throw two or three pibble
stones in the fire, and burn them to coals, bruise them, and cast them into
the wine, being hot: after strain it, and drink it fasting at morn, and fast
two hours after it.

Fr. Steuens.

Forth Strangury. A plaster.
TAke ashes of the root and leaves of Chameractis: actus fignifieth Elder, and
Chamer is ebulus: which herb or ashes, boil till it be liquid: then so hot
as may be suffered, pectini cum fastia ponas, and he shall presently make
urine.

And when by drop meal, and in extreme heat he painefully makes water, take
wheat bran, and thereof makea a pouitis, and let thereof be daily offered to the
patient fasting, and after make a plaster thereof with Popilion.

For Warts.
STamp Egrimony with salt, temper it with viniger, and lay it to the Wart, and
in four days it will be whole.

Roast the yeolke of an Egg well, stemp it with oil Olive, or of Violets, and
make thereof a plaster, and lay it to, and it will do away the Wart in one
night.

For thighs wearyed, and that ache, and that are stiff with travel.
TAke Brookelyms, Horehound, and herbs John: make a plaster of them, with
sheep tallow, swynes grease, and horse-donng, and lay to the pay^s.

For sinews shrunk.
TAke Rose nary, Tyms, Lauender, Dyll, Balm, Brookelyme, Yarrow, Lounage,
Smalledge, Varuen, Camomil, Planten, Nightshade, Herb Robert, Adders tongue,
Polypody on the Oak, W^^byndes, Dayfies, Cumfry, one handful, or half a pound
of each: shred them small, put them into a pan, take a gallon of oil Olive,
May butter, two pounds, new ware, half a pound: put all together in the pan,
and let it stand nine days, stirring it once every day, then seethe it, till
the wax and butter be molten and incorporated, strain it in a vessel, and
leave nothing in the strayner, then put your oil into a pot, in which oil or
fresh grease has been. This oil must be made between May and Bartholmew tide.

A precious salve for all wounds and sores.
Take pygs grease, Coliphony, brymstone, white incense, a good quantity of
each, stamp them, and mix them with the white of an egg, spread it on a
piece of parchment, press the wound with your fingers, to cause the blood come
out, and apply that plaster, which will heal speedily.

A precious oil to heal a wound in 24. hours.
TAke flowers of S. John's wort, and Rosemary flowers, of each an handful, put
them in a glass, and fill it with good oil, close it, that no air go
forth, set it in the sun 30. days, and in clear nights also. When the oil
has gotten the color of the Flowers, strain it, and put in it, of Ginger in
powder, one dram, and a little saffron dissolved in good wine, then set it in
the sunns again 18. days: warm the oil, and anoint there with twice in the
day.

For all swellings.
TAke Groundswell, Brookelyme, Chicken weed, Daily, petty morrell, and herb
Bennet: ^^a^pe and boil them with two parts of fr^sh butter, and one part of
white wine, and lay to the grief as hot as may be inff^ed.

Pain of the Spleen is thus cured.
TAke Fennel roots, Parcely, Smalledge, Kneeholme, Alperagus, with their
seeds, grass, the middle bark of Elder, Tamaricks old bark made clean,
Time bark and Ypericen: stamp them all, and keep them three days in viniger
and water, and after boil them, and put to the clarified honey, and boil all
to a thickness of honey, which is Oxunell, give it the Patient to drink early
and late, with warm water and sait, being diligently pund, and lay a plaster
upon the Spleen, and let the Patient take every day on an empty stomach, three
rolls of Radish dipped in honey, and make a (...) to this manner:

Make a ditch or hole in the earth, the depth and quantity of the Patient, make
is hot with burning coals: then draw out the coaies, and sprinkle the ditch
with viniger or wine: then strew it with diureticall herbs: then set the
Patient in the hole to the neck, and cover him with the diureticall herbs,
all but the head, and put a cloth (...) him till he sweat: then take him out,
and cover him in a convenient place.

A plaster for the toothache.
TAke ashes burnt of the Ash trees with keys, make a crust of bread round, and
wet it with your tongue, and lay on the ashes, then lay it playster-wise upon
the vein that lies under the eye which goes to the tooth, and let it lie the
space of an hour: then lay another like crust, and so the third: these three
playsters will make an incision upon the deyne, and there will be a drop of
blood in the midst of it, let it alone, and wipe it not, till it be dry as a
scab, and fall off by it self: for then the vein is stopped, so as the bleud
cannot come to the tooth nor gummes, which causes the ache. ^^^^^prooued.

For the same.
TAke juice of Kus, and as much in quantity of honey: and with lynt make little
balls dipped in that liquour: and if the tooth be hollow, stop the tooth: if it
be not hollow, lay it to the gum where the pain is, and it heals
wonderfully.

For toothache of Rhewme.
TAke running water and Nettles, boil them well together in a bresse pot, put
thereto a quantity of viniger, and a piece of Roche Alum, boil them a little,
then set the pot from the fire, and cast a cloth over the Patients head, and
let him hold his mouth over it wide open, so as the fume may go full into his
mouth, and let the cloth hung close about, that no air go out, and he shall
be cured: but keep him warm from cold half a day after.

For spreading Tetters.
VEronica decoct in wine and drunk.

For roughness of the thro^^e.
WHeats meal boiled to pasts or pay, with butter and unto licked in.

Starch mixed with milk, licked in.

Spelt meal boiled with fresh butter and new Goats suit eaten.

Figs eaten.

In^ubyes in st^^op eaten.

For Squinancy or swelling in the throat.
VIoleta, the yellow in the midst of (...), decoct in water, gargarized.

Bysed boiled with water and Figs, gargarized.

Elatertum laid to, with oil or honey, or the gall of a Bull, or Ox.

Saligot leaves boiled in water, applied.

Double tongue leaves and roots, gargarized.

Figs decoct (...) gargarized.

For Almonds or straynes about the throat, and the roots of the tongue.
MVsta^^ with honey and viniger.

Double tongue leaves and roots.

Malberine leaves and roots gargarized.

Figs eaten.

Walnut shall graene bark decoct in wine, gargarized.

Philberds husks and shells decoct in wine, gargarized.

FINIS.

