TEN SERMONS tending chiefly to the fitting of men for the worthy receiving of
the Lords Supper. Wherein amongst many other holy instructions: the Doctrines
of sound repentance and humiliation, and of Gods special favors unto penitent
sinners, and worthy Communicants are largely and effectually handled. The six
first, by I. Dod. The four last, by R. Cleauer. Whereunto is annexed, a plain
and learned metaphrase on the Epistle to the COLLOSSIANS, written by a godly
and judicious Preacher. There is also set before the Sermons, a short Dialogue
of Preparation: containing the chief points that concern the worthy receiving
of the Lords Supper, taken for the most part, out of the Sermons following: and
collected into a method for the benefit and ease of those that desire direction
in this matter.

LONDON Printed by William Hall for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his
shop, near the Conduit in Fleet Street. 1610.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL, THE LADY ANNE COPE WIFE TO SIR ANTHONY COPE of
Hanwell: and to her virtuous daughter the Lady ELIZABETH COPE wife to Sir
WILLIAM COPE of Hardwicke, increase of grace and all true happiness, etc.
IT is a thing better known, then well considered of, that in the mystical
body of Christ Jesus, every member has his several office, whereon it must
attend, the weakest as well as the strongest: and in the family of the great
Ruler of heaven and earth, each servant has his several talent, which he
must employ; the meanest, as well as the worthiest. To deny my self to be a
member of that body, a servant of that family, I cannot without injury to God
and myself: To profess to be such a one in word, and in deed to deny it,
were no less dishonorable to my head, to my master; then discomfortable to my
self. What then is to be done? I bethought my self (for the avoiding of
these rocks) what service I might perform, and in thinking, this which J have
now done, was offered to my consideration: whereby as an underling in Gods
household, for want of greater ability, I have done my best endeavor to put
forth to the best advantage others talents, which else (to the grief of many)
would have been hidden at least, if not utterly lost. For the doing whereof, I
had rather undergo the censures of such as are curious and carnally disposed,
then deprive those of a benefit, that are religious and spiritually minded.

Let it not be offensive unto your Ladyships that I have presumed to offer
these Sermons unto public view, sheltered as it were, under your names: for I
had sundry motives which eue^ enforced me thus to do.

First, in regard of the matter therein contained, much of it being delivered
in your hearing, and all of it suting unto your affections, whose religious
care for the preparing both of your selves, and of those that depend upon you,
for the worthy receiving of the holy Sacrament, is well known unto those that
are acquainted with your conversation in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, in regard of the Authors, whose affection I persuade my self is
such toward you, in sundry both Civil and Religious respects, that they would
most willingly consecrate themselves and their labors to your further
building up in Christ Jesus.

Lastly, in regard of my self, who for many special favors received, do
acknowledge my self vnrequiteablie indepted, and indissolublie bound unto your
Ladyships. And having nothing of mine own of any worth whereby to testify my
unfeigned thankfulness, I have borrowed of others for this purpose, and
withal annexed my handwriting, that if my ingratitude should hereafter
appear, I might by a public censure be condemned and made ashamed for the
same. Thus hoping for pardon of my boldness, and for favorable acceptance of
my good meaning in this behalf, I humbly take my leave, recommending your
Ladyships to the Lord and to the word of his grace, who is able to perfect that
good work which he has begun in you both.

Your Ladyships much bounden and in all Christian duties to be commanded JOHN
WINSTON.

To the Christian Reader.
Look not (good reader) to find in these Sermons an absolute discourse of this
subject of preparation to the Sacrament: for that was not intended by the
authors, but only the excitement of their present auditors, as they saw
occasion: whereby yet I doubt not but a Christian heart shall find great
furtherance in that work of preparation.

Furthermore let it please the Reader to be advertised, that the texts handled
in this book have neither so many doctrines gathered from them, as the authors
could have done, nor so many uses enforced upon the doctrines, but only such
as were thought most meet for their present auditorie.

In this which I have done, I had as the approbation, so also the help of
those that preached these Sermons following, for the reuising and perfecting of
diverse things: yet so as their leisure could afford and therefore what defects
soever shall be found in the manner of penning, let them be imputed to me (if
the Printer be not faulty) not unto them, who were content to put a finger,
but not their whole hand to this work.

John Winston.

A SVMMARIE COLLECTION OF THE HEADS OF Doctrine handled in the Sermons
following.
The Doctrines of the first Sermon on PROVE. 28.13.
1 HIding of sin, hinders all true prosperity. 2 He that would have pardon
for his offenses, must bring before God an acknowledgement of the same. 3 He
that would be assured of Gods favor, must join reformation with his
confession. 4 Whosoever confesses his faults and endeauours to amend them,
shall find mercy from God, how sinful soever he has been in former times.
The doctrines of the second and third Sermons on ISA. 1.16.
1 Whosoever would have God to wash him with the blood of his son, must wash
himself by godly sorrow. 2 Christians must have regard to the manner of their
good works, as well as to the matter. 3 All penitent persons must learn to do
well. 4 Every one must have a principal care of the duties that pertain unto
him in his own place. 5 Works of mercy are very acceptable unto the Lord. 6
In matters of Religion, men must hearken unto God, and not unto flesh and
blood. 7 If we become truly penitent, neither the greatness, nor multitude
of of our sins shall hinder our salvation. 8 God looks for truth not for
perfection, at the hands of his children. 9 Those that have soundly repented,
shall not only have spiritual graces, but also corporal blessings bestowed
upon them.
The Doctrines of the fourth Sermon on 2. CRON. 30.18.
1 IT is the duty of all governors to pray for them that belong unto their
charge. 2 Whosoever would receive mercy from God in the Sacrament, must come
with a sincere heart thereunto. 3 So long as we labor to keep the substance
of Gods worship willinglly, though we fail in some circumstances unwillingly,
God will be merciful unto us. 4 God does accept and will fulfill every
faithful prayer that is made unto him.
The Doctrines of the fifth Sermon. on ISA. 55.1.
1 The thirsty soul alone has interest in the graces of God, and shall reap
benefit by the means of grace. 2 Whosoever comes to Christ Jesus in the
religious use of his ordinances, shall have all his wants supplied. 3 The best
things are best cheepe. 4 Nothing can satisfy and content the mind but grace.
The Doctrines of the sixth Sermon on MATH. 22.11.
1 God is the only absolute king over all the whole world. 2 The Lord takes
notice of every guest that sits at his table. 3 It is not sufficient to come
to Gods wedding seast, but we must come as fit guests for so great a banquet,
and so glorious a presence. 4 When God has to deal even against sinners, yet
he deals in good and peaceable terms. 5 Sinners shall have nothing to say
for themselves when God en tereth into judgment with them. 6 The special time
and place of the punnishment of wicked men, is after this life in hell fire.
The Doctrines of the seventh Sermon on PSALM. 119.1.
1 Religion is the way to happiness. 2 So much sincerity as any one has, so
much happiness shall he have. 3 It is a marvelous great prerogative to be
freed from the bondage of sin. 4 Nothing is superfluous that is done in
obedience to Gods holy will.
The Doctrines of the eight Sermon on JOHN 6.
1 By fair speeches to us, or courteous usage of us, we ought not to be
stayed from telling men their faults, when by our calling we are required to
admonish them. 2 Christ Jesus is acquainted with the purposes of such as come
to his services. 3 A man cannot be both a worlding and a Christian. 4 They are
most provident for themselves, whose greatest labor is for grace. 5 The
efficacy of the word and Sacrament is from Christ his own hand.
The Doctrines of the ninth and tenth Sermons on MARK. 14.18.
1 Jesus Christ knew before what sufferings he was to undergo. 2 They are
likely to stand best who are most fearful of falling. 3 No bands of kindness
can make wicked men faithful unto godly men. 4 Wicked men fulfill the will of
God to their own condemnation. 5 All the delights and contentmenes of wicked
men in this world cannot counteruaile their miseries in the world to come. 6
The efficacy of the Sacrament is from Gods own hand. 7 Christ Jesus in the
Sacrament by Corporal food gives a most sure possession of himself, and
union with himself. 8 Christ in the Sacarment does make us a full meal. 9
Faithful communicants at the Lords table come to be enriched by Christ his
legacy.
Errata.
Page 5. Line 18. Read drowsinesse: Page 18. l. 38. r. full sore Page 23. l. 6.
r. thus. Page 35. l. 4. r. maine Page 39. l. 27. leave out id est. Page 69. l.
2. r. other Page 75. l. 6. r. souud Page 85. l. 18. r. must not Page 101. l. 5.
r. posterity Page 107: l. 12. r. impenitent Page 143. l. 9. r. gross Page 144.
l. 3. r. all Page 132. l. 3. r. relieved Page 147. l. 3. r. beloved Page 149.
l. 16. r. pay Page 150. l. 27. r. it Page 157. l. 2. r. condemned Page 163. l.
18. r. end l. 29. r. should Page 167. l. 6. r. distastefull Page 1 12. l. 9. r.
him Page 117. l. 24. r. grace Page 126. margent r. Joshua P. 1. l. 11. r.
blessed man where are declared p. 12. l. 10. r. make account p. 13. l. 3. r.
tribulations p. 15. l. 15. r. destroy p. 22. l. 22. r. as find p. 24. l. 35.
r. knife p. 33. l. 37. r. make good p. 35. l. 2. r. tongues and l. 4. r.
against all, etc. p. 4. l. 36. r. and such like sensuality. P. 41. l. 1. r.
ambitious desire of advancement or to become great men. P. 47. l. 8. r. labor
p. 55. l. 26. r. so in this will p. 59. l. 31. r. poison
A BRIEF DIALOGVE CONCERNING PREPARATION, FOR THE WORTHY RECEIVING of the
Lords Supper, taken for the most part, out of the Sermons following.
WHat is the Lords Supper?

It is a Sacrament of the eternal covenant, Math. 26.28.
whereby through the use of bread and wine, rightly administered, and faithfully
received, Ioh. 6.27.54. etc.
the souls of them that are ingrafted into Christ, are spiritually nourished
unto eternal life.

What then is required of those that will be partakers of this heavenly food at
the Lords table?

They must be prepared as meet guestes for such a banquet. Math. 22.12. 1.
Cor. 11.28.


For the better attaining to this preparation, how many things are there to be
considered?

Three: first, what is to be done before the partaking of it. Secondly, what at
it. Thirdly, what after it.

What is that which must be done before?

There must be 1. an examination how fit we are to receive. 2. A premeditation
of the benefits that we are to receive. And 3. faithful and fervent prayer
for Gods blessing upon our examination, premeditation and receiving.

Of what points are we to examine our selves?

First,

Secondly,

Concerning what matters?

Whether we have attained unto a competent measure of repentance, knowledge,
faith, and love: which if we can find in our selves, we may resolve our hearts
in that point of general examination, and conclude, that we are within the
covenant of grace, and have communion with Christ Jesus, and therefore are in
state to be communicants at his table.

How should we try our selves in the matter of repentance?

We must examine,

Is there any necessity of that searching of our selves?

Yes verily: See the Sermon on Prou. 28.13. Doct. 1. Job. 20.12.
which hinders all true prosperity, and argues plainly that there is in us
a love of iniquity, and abundance of hypocrisy, which will keep us from
reaping benefit by the word or Sacrament.

Whereby should we try our selves to the intent we may come to a more full and
particular sight of our corruptions?

By the law of God, psalm 119.59.
which is, the true touchstone: examining our selves by every commandment,
that so we may discern, if not all, yet the most part of the corruptions of
our souls, and errors of our lives: and for our more orderly proceeding
herein, we may use this direction following; wherein are set down the chief
heads of most of the sins against every commandment.

Sins against the first Commandment.
1 Atheism, which is, If any desire proves of Scripture for these particular
sins mentioned, he may use the help of M. Dods book on the commandments:
or of the True watch, where many of these are touched.
when men either think there is no God, or live as if there were no God.

2 Idolatry, which is, the having of a false God.

3 Ignorance, vncapablenes of knowledge, errors, and heresies.

4 Forgetfulness of good things, especially of those that most concern us,
and chiefly at that instant when we should make use of them. 2. Remembering of
evil things, especially of those that may most corrupt us; and chiefly then,
when we should be most free from the thought of them.

5 Unwillingness unto good things, principally to the best: readiness unto,
and wilfulness in evil, especially the worst. 2. Impatiencie under crosses.

6 Distrust of Gods power, mercy, etc. promises, and providence, whence
carnal fears are wrought and cherished, and the true fear of God is expelled
and banished.

7 Presumption upon Gods mercy.

8 Carnal confidence in wit, learning, wealth, strength, friends, etc.
thinking our selves the better or safer simply for them: whence arises pride,
and security.

9 Too much love of evil: as also of our selves, our friends, our pleasure,
profit, credit etc. 2. To little love of God and of goodness, of Gods
servants, and services.

10 Hatred of God and goodness. 2. Want of hatred against our own, and others
sins.

11 Abundance of worldly sorrow, shame and coffeehouse, 2. want of
spiritual grief, and indignation against our own and others transgressions.
3. Not lamenting for the calamities of Gods people, private, or public.

12 Immoderate carnal mirth: too little spiritual joy.

13 Hardness of heart, benummednes of Conscience: or hellish terrors, and
accusations, proceeding from doing things either without, or against the rules
of the word.

Sins against the second Commandment.
1 BAse and unwarranted conceits of God, as when we frame any image of him in
our minds.

2 Worshipping of images.

3 Adoration of Angels or Saints, observing holy days in devotion to them,
swearing by them, etc.

4 Approbation of Idolatry by presence, speech, gesture, silence, keeping of
superstitious relikes and monuments, keeping company with Idolaters, etc.

5 Neglect of any of Gods ordinances, as of preaching, hearing, reading,
meditation, conference, the use of good books, and of good company, of
private and public prayer, fasting, making of vows, etc.

6 Superstitious fasting, rash vows, breach of lawful vows, abuse of lots,
etc.

7 Want of sorrow for being borne of Idolatrous forefathers.

Sins against the third Commandment.
1 PRofession joined with profaneness, whereby Gods name is dishonored.

2 Abusing of Gods word, by 1. fruitless speaking of it. 2. framing jests out
of it, or against it, 3. maintaining of sin by it, 4. applying it to charming,
etc.

3 Abusing the names or titles of God. 1. By admiration, as by saying in our
common talk, o Lord, oh Jesus, etc. 2. by cursing etc.

4 Swearing vainly, outragiously, falsely, etc.

5 Blaspheming.

6 Taking a lawful oath without due reverence and consideration.

7 Praying without faith, feeling, reverence, feruency, not waiting for an
answer etc. asking evil things: aiming, morein our requests, at the releeuing
of our necessity, then at the advancement of Gods glory.

8 Hearing, reading, meditating, conferring, singing of Psalms, and receiving
the Sacrament without preparation, attention, reverence, delight, and profit.

9 Light passing over of Gods great works of creation, preservation,
redemption, as also of other his mercies, and judgments.

10 Abuse of our Christian liberty, to the hardening, insnaring, perverting,
or just greeuing of any.

Sins against the fourth Commandment.
1 NEglect of preparation for the Sabbath before it come, and of fitting our
hearts for holy services when it is come.

2 Profane absence from, or unfruitful presence at Gods ordinances.

3 Excessive eating and drinking, which causes drunkenness, and unfitness
for Gods worship.

4 Doing any ordinary work of our calling.

5 All recreations which distract.

6 Vain and worldly speeches, and thoughts.

7 A secret desire that the Sabbath were over.

8 Neglect of calling our selves or others to a reckoning after holy exercises.

9 Giving liberty to our selves in the night before the whole Sabbath be ended.

Sins against the fifth Commandment.
Sins of all inferiors in respect of their superiors.

1 Want of reverence inward or outward. 2. Neglect of prayer, 3. and of humble
submission.

Sins of all Superiors.

1 Want of love. 2. Failing in prayer, 3. and in giving good example.

Sins of Children in respect of their Parents.

1 Disobedience.

2 Murmuring at their parents corrections, though unjust.

3 Contemning of them for any defect of body or mind.

4 Unthankfulness in not releeuing them, not standing for their deserved
credit, etc.

Sins of Parents.

1 Negligence in not instructing their children betime.

2 Not correcting them till it be too late: or doing it with bitterness,
without compassion, instruction and prayer.

3 Giving them ill example.

4 Neglect of bringing them up in some lawful calling.

5 Not bestowing them timely, and religiously in marriage.

6 Light behavior before them, and too much familiarity with them, whereby
they become vile in (...) eyes.

7 Loving beauty, or any outward parts more then Gods image in them.

8 A sin peculiar to the mother is, re^^sing to nurse them.

Servants sins inrespect of (...) ^ouernours.

The three first sins of children may be in servants, as also these that
follow.

1 Idleness in their calling.

2 Unthriftiness and unfaithfulness in dealing with their Masters goods and
affairs.

3 Stealing, privy defrauding of them, etc.

4 Eie-seruice.

Diverse sins of Parents are found in Masters, as also these that follow.

1 Unadvised entertainment of sinful servants.

2 Not using religious exercises with them: not admonishing nor correcting
them, or doing it in an ill manner: greeuing more when they fail in their
business, then when they are slack in Gods service.

3 Not recompensing their labors, by giving them a due reward when they are
with the^, and when they part from them.

4 Neglect of them in sickness: unjust stopping of their wages for that time.

5 Not releeuing them (if they be able) in their age, who have spent their
youth in their service.

Sins of the wife in respect of her husband.

1 Failing in reverence, which appears in froward looks, speeches or
behavior.

2 Disobedience in the smallest matters.

Sins of the Husband.

1 Not dwelling with his wife.

2 Neglect of edifying her by instruction and example.

3 Denying her comfortable maintenance, and imploiment.

Sins common to them both.

1 Want of love.

2 Bewraying one another infirmities: discovering each others secrets.

3 Jealousy. 4. Contention.

Sins of the people in regard of their Ministers.

1 Disobeying and opposing against their doctrine.

2 Denying them competent maintenance.

3 Not standing for them when they are wronged.

Sins of Ministers.

1 Slackenesse in preaching. 2. Unprofitable or hurtful teaching. 3. Giving
ill example.

Sins of Subjects.

1 Rebellion, 2. refusing to pay dues.

Sins of Magistrates.

1 Carelessness in establishing and promoting true religion, 2. of maintaining
peace, and providing that malefactors may be punished, and wel-doers be
encouraged.

Sins of Inferiors in gifts or age.

1 Not acknowledging, nor reuerencing, nor imitating the graces of their
Superiors.

2 Despising of the aged.

Sins against the sixth Commandment.
1 RAsh anger, envy, hatred, malice.

2 Brawling, reuiling, threatening, and provoking of others.

3 Fighting.

4 Cruelty in punishing, oppressing, etc.

5 Murdering of our selves or others, or consent thereto.

6 Immoderate worldly sorrow: neglect of Physic, of wholesome diet and
exercise, surfeting, and drunkenness, all which are enemies to the health and
life of man.

7 Cruelty to our own, or others souls.

Sins against the seventh Commandment.
1 Adultery, fornication, incest, rape, Sodomie.

2 Al wanto^nes, secret or open, alone, or with others

3 Nocturnall pollutions, lustful dreams, etc.

4 Unholy marriages, in regard of religion, age, neerenes of blood, want of
parents consent, etc.

5 Abuse of the marriage bed, not observing the time of natural separat. o^.
Leu. 18.19. solemn humiliation.

6 Nourishing of the causes and occasions of wantonness, as impure lusts,
surfeting, drunkenness, Idleness, lascruious apparel, society with
lascivious persons, leaud books, songs, or speeches: wanton looks, pictures,
stage-plaies, dancing, dalliance, etc.

7 Wearing apparel contrary to our sex.

8 Unlawful divorce.

Sins against the eight Commandment.
1 Covetousness, and all desire of our neighbors goods, albeit through fear
or shame we cannot get them.

2 Church-robbing.

3 Robbing of our selves by wastefulnesse in diet, apparel, gaming, etc. by
idleness, unadvised suretiship, nigardlinesse, etc.

4 Robbing of others, taking away the smallest things, 1. by fraud, 2.
uncharitable enclosure, 3. dealing wrongfullie with the goods of the deceased,
4. deceit in buying and selling, 5. withholding, either things committed unto
us, or things found, lent, earned, or otherwise due.

5 Not making of restitution.

6 Counselling, or consenting to others in theft.

Sins against the ninth Commandment.
1 False-witnesse-bearing in public or private, or consent thereunto.

2 Raising, spreading abroad, or listening to false reports of tale-bearers.

3 Rash suspicion, hard judging, interpreting things in the worst sense.

4 Aggravating, and discovering others infirmities without care of their
credit, others edification, or our own good.

5 Flattery.

6 Lying, though in jest, or to a good end.

7 Boasting.

8 Injurious charging of our selves to be hypocrites in time of temptation.

9 Want of care, of our own, and others good name, that God might have more
glory.

The breach of the tenth Commandment: by,
MVltitudes of evil thoughts and motions against our neighbors, and scarcity
of such as are good.

When we have attained to a particular sight of our many and grievous
iniquities and transgressions, what is further to be done of us?

We must labor to bring our hearts to true sorrow and contrition for the same.
2. Godly sorrow.


What use is there of that?

It is very requisite in diverse respects; See the Sermon. on Isa. 1. Doct. 1.
Iam. 4.8.9. Iere. 4.14. Joel. 2.13. Zach. 12.20. and Chron. 13.1.
it being a special means to purge our souls from the pollution of sin,
to move the Lord to have compassion on us, and plentifully to pour down his
mercies upon us; without which, it is certain there is no sound repentance in
us, nor mercy to be expected from our God.

Since it is so necessary, show me how it may be gotten?

First, we must beseech the Lord (from whom proceeds every good and perfect
gift) to work it in our hearts.

Secondly, we must use all good helps to stir up our selves thereunto: as,

1 To call to mind the multitude, Neh. 9. Psalm. 51.
and grieuousnesse, and offensiuenesse of our sins, together with our long
continuance therein: aggravating them by every circumstance to make them more
odious to our souls.

2 To go to the house of mourning, and to make use of every stroke of God,
Eccles. 7.
as well upon others, as our selves.

3 Not only with patience to endure, but with earnestness to entreat, and
with gladness to accept of the help of such as have broken hearts themselves,
and so are more able and skillful to pierce and wound the souls of others.

4 When by our own sifting, and others faithful dealing, our hearts are
touched with some remorse, let us seriously and thoroughly ponder upon the
infinite mercy of God the father, in giving his son, and of Christ Jesus in
giving himself for us, who by reason of our sins were deadly enemies unto
him: the consideration whereof cannot but move our hearts to relent, unless
they be altogether flintie, and hard as an Adamant.

When our bearts are touched with inward grief for our special corruptions,
what is to be done in the next place?

We must bring them in an holy confession before God. 3. Confession Prou. 28.
See the 13. Sermon.


What motives are there to induce us so to do?

Diverse: for,

1 Without this there is no promise of pardon of sin, 1. John 1, 9. 2. Sam.
24.12
or sound repentance for sin.

2 This is a sovereign preservative against relapses, as may be seen in
David, Peter and Paul.

3 This is an effectual means to quicken our hearts unto prayer. Dan. 9.19.
Nehem. 1.5.6


4 Hereby God is much glorified in his Truth, Mercy and Justice. Joshua. 7.19.

Seeing this acknowledgment of sin is so needful, declare how it must be
performed?

These rules must be observed therein.

First, that it proceed from a good root, Viz.

1 From an utter hatred of sin: not from weariness under the cross, as in
Pharaoh, nor from some sudden passion, as in Saul.

2 From hope of mercy: for if that be wanting, 2 Samuel 14.12.
we shall never rest on God for pardon.

Secondly, that it be made in a good manner, Viz.

1 Heartily and sincerely, not coldly and hypocritically. Ier. 31.19.


2 Particularly and with enumeration of our special and most beloved sins;
as in Paul, and Ezra.

What will follow upon such a confession?

A desire of general reformation, and a full purpose to abandon the allowance
of every infirmity, Reformation. See the Sermon on Prou. 28.


How may this reformation be attained unto?

1 We must constantly and carefully avoid all the occasions of sin, Act.
19.18. Isa. 1.16.


2 We must conscionably and continually use all the means of goodness.

3 When we are overtaken through infirmity, we must presently and heartily
lament our fall, and seek a reconciliation.

4 If these means prevail not, we must bind our selves by a solemn vow,
to strive against our principal sins, and most dangerous corruptions.

What other notes are there besides these already spoken of, whereby we may be
assured that our repentance is sound, and that our hearts do not deceive us
therein?

These following. Notes of sound repentance. Psalm. 119 6. See the Sermon on
that place.


1 If we be universal in our obedience, desiring to practice or forbear
whatsoever God would have us: not giving a dispensation to our selves for the
committing of any sin, or for the omitting of any duty, but disliking all
manner of evil, both in our selves and others.

2 If we increase in goodness, neither waxing worse, Psalm 3.13.14.
nor standing at a stay, but daily getting ground of our corruptions.

3 If in all our intents and actions, Job 31.1. etc. 1. Cor. 4.3.
we look unto the Lord, as the searcher of our hearts, and the trier and
rewarder of our works: not discouraging our selves whatsoever men think, or
speak of us and our doings, so that God do approve of us and them: nor
contenting our selves with men's approbation, when the testimony of God is not
for us.

4 If welike best, and desire most that company in private, and that teaching
in public, where our special corruptions shall be roundly, and wisely, and
mercifully reproved and inueied against, and the duties wherein we come
shortest, most earnestly pressed, and stood upon. Neither falling out with
those that admonish us, nor denying, cloaking, excusing, or extenuating our
faults.

What else is required in a worthy receiver?

A competent measure of knowledge, Knowledge.
and the Lords body and blood: taking every thing in it own nature and kind:
not confounding the sign with the thing signified, nor putting no difference
between the Sacramental, and common bread, but using each of them in the
manner appointed by Christ, and with such reverence as is due unto them, and to
that end for which they were ordained; namely, the commemoration of Christ his
death, and our nearer and fuller communion with him.

What further examination must we use, before our communieating at the Lords
table?

We must try whether we have faith, Faith. Heb. 11.6. Romans 14.23.
or not: without the which it is impossible to please God, and whatsoever we
do is sin.

What then is to be believed concerning this particular ordinance?

That it is ordained of God not only to be a sign to signify, See the 2.
Sermon on Mar. 14.
and represent; but a seal also to confirm, and an instrument to exhibit
Christ with all his merits unto every believer.

Why is love unto men required in all faithful receivers?

First, Love.
because being destitute of that, we cannot be assured of Gods love unto us,

Secondly, 1. John 3.
we cannot with any confidence expect at the Sacrament crament a general
acquittance from all our debts unto God, Math. 18.35.
except we in love, can pass by small offenses in our brethren.

Thirdly,

What rules are we to observe in love?

First, if any indignity, or injury have been offered us, See the Sermon on
Isa. 1.
we must forgive, and forget the same, and overcome evil with goodness:
loving them that hate us, Math 18.35. Romans 12. Math. 5.
at least desiring and striving so to do.

Secondly, if we have done wrong unto others, we must undo it again:
otherwise our sacrifice and service cannot be accepted.

But what if those whom we have wronged be far off, that we cannot seek unto
them: or will not yield to a reconciliation when it is sought for?

God will accept of our true and unfeigned desire in that behalf, when a
reconciliation is desired, but occasion denied; and if others will not be
pacified toward us, it is their fault, and not ours, neither must that keep
us from the Sacrament.

Thus much concerning examination.

What is that Premeditation which much be used?

It is a serious consideration of the benefits which we are to receive by
Christ Jesus. Premeditatio^.


What are those?

They are set down in the new covenant (whereof the Lords Supper is a seal)
and they may be reduced to these heads. Ezekiel. 36.21. Ier. 31.31. See the Sermon
on Prou. 28.


1 First, freedom from all manner of evil whatsoever, whether of sin or
misery, in this life or in that which is to come.

2 Secondly the enioyment of all good things. and that on psalm. 119.


1 In this world: and that 1 For the inward man 1 Perfect justification. 2 True
sanctification. a good name, estate, safety, health, etc.

2 For the outward man
2 In the world to come, all manner of happiness.
Having thus examined our selves concerning our repentance, knowledge, faith
and love, and used premeditation of the benefits that are to be expected of
allworthy receivers, what remains further to be done by us?

We must before our approaching to the Lords table, earnestly beseech his
majesty to give a blessing to those our endeavors: Prayer.
and where we have come short in fitting our selves, we are to entreat him to
pardon it; to accept of us in the mediation of his dear son; and to make a
supply of all our wants, of his rich mercy and free grace.

But what if a man find that he comes very short of that examination, and
preparation that is required, were he not better to absent himself from the
Sacrament, till he be bette fitted?

In no wise: See the Sermon on 2. Chron. 30.
for if he be vpright-hearted, though never so weak, the Lord will accept of
him. And if he feel his sickness to be grievous and dangerous, Number. 9.

Thus much concerning the duties tending to Preparation before our receiving.

How must we be disposed in the present act of receiving?

We must present our selves with reverence before the Lord, How we are to
bedisposed in the act of receiving.
setting our senses and our faith a work, and heedfullie meditating on these
4. things.

1 First, when we see the bread broken, and the wine powered out, we must
consider of the bitter passion of Christ Jesus, who was wounded for our
trangressions, Isa. 53.
and broken for our iniquities: who encountered with his fathers wrath, and with
Satan, death and hell; and for our sakes in particular sustained such woeful
terrors in his soul, and torments in his body, that he cried out in the
bitterness of his heart, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; and at
length, shed forth his most precious blood for the pacifying of his fathers
displeasure, and the satisfying of his infinite justice. And withal we should
seriously ponder upon the inconceiuable love of God the father, in giving his
only and well-beloved son, to suffer such unspeakable tortures for us, who
were cursed rebels against him: and thence be drawn to think on the
heinousness and odiousness of our sins, which so far incensed the Lords
wrath and indignation, that nothing could quench the flame thereof, but only
the precious blood of his dear son.

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly, in eating the bread, and drinking the wine,

Well were it for us indeed, if we could look for these things to be bestowed
upon us: but the greatness and multitude of our sins is such, that we justly
fear they will keep good things from us.

This doubt should not perplexe, nor trouble us, See the Sermon on Isa. 1.
if we be truly penitent for all our transgressions: for Christ has paid
for many and great sins, as well as for fewer and lesser: 1. John 1.9. Ezekiel.
36.25.
and through him the Lord is ready to pardon all, and all manner of iniquities,
as well the greatest of them, as the smallest: and if once our sins be done
away, all the fore named benefits, do of right belong unto us.

Thus much concerning the meditations that are needful in the very act of
receiving.

What is to be done after our receiving?

1 First, we must give hearty thanks unto the Lord for this inestimable
benefit which we have received in being partakers of the Lords supper. What to
be done after our receiving


Secondly, we must carefully mark how we speed, and what success we find;
Psalm. 32.
as Adam was before his fall, and as the Saints and Angels are now in heaven;
yea as Christ Jesus himself is, I being a member of his mystical body.

And so for Sanctification, though I be tainted with much ignorance, with many
errors, with bad affections and evil actions; yet the Lord according to his
covenant, will reform all, and give me a mind to know him, and his will; and
a memory to hold fast what I know: he will give me a heart to love him, to
fear him, and to obey his commandments. I shall have Christ his power to
strengthen and uphold me, his wisdom to instruct and direct me, and his spirit
to work al needful graces in me; so that all the powers of hell shall never be
able to prevail against me, much less shall the affictions of this world be
able to separate me from Christ Jesus. I need not fear any evil: For all
shall work together for the best unto me: Romans 8.
neither can I want any thing that is good, for God having given us his son,
how shall he not with him give us all things?

Thirdly, Romans 6.14.
for the Lord has said that sin shall not have dominion over us.

So also when we find wants and imperfections in our best services, as
coldness in prayer, distractions in meditating, unfruitfulness in hearing,
deadness in singing of Psalms, etc. As also impatiencie or fainte-heartednes
under crosses, disgraces, persecutions, etc. Let us then relieve our selves
with these or the like meditations: was I not lately at the Lord table where I
received a pledge of my ingrafting into Christ, who is the true vine; and is
there not in him sufficient Juice of all good graces to be derived to every
branch that is in him; and is not the second Adam as able to convey his virtues
into me, as the first Adam was to convey his corruptions? why then should I
not seek to him in assurance of obtaining strength to do and suffer
whatsoever he will have me? yes, John 15.
I will run unto him, and crave power and ability from him, and asking I
shall obtain; for he has said it that will never falsify the least part of
his truth.

May it not then be concluded, if immediately upon the receiving of this
Sacrament we grow worse then we were before, that we came unworthily thereunto?

Yes verily: if we be indeed worse, and not in our own conceit only, it is
sure that there was some sin or other vnrepe^ted of, lying upon our
consciences, which caused Gods ordinance to be ineffectuall. Indeed the
worthiest receivers, in their own imaginations, and through Satan's false
suggestions, seem unto themselves to be worse, (when in truth they are not so)
because they feel their corruptions stirring more violently, and temptations
rushing upon them more fiercely then ever before: but this is so far from
being an argument of unworthy receiving, that if they set themselves to resist
in this combat, there can be no more evident testimony of their worthy
receiving: for now that their sin has had a deadly blow, it begins (like a
mad bull in the same case) to rage more furiously; and Satan being
dispossessed of his holds, plyeth his business with new and fearful
assaults; and therefore such have no cause at all to be dismated, but rather
very great cause to be comforted.

But (will some say) what shall I think of my self in this matter, when I
find that whereas I resolved upon new obedience, I come still far short of
that which I am desirous to perform?

You need not discourage your heart for all this: the sight of your
imperfections argues that your eyes are more enlightened then in former times,
and that you have gotten an humble and lowly conceit of your self, and your
good deeds, which are things very pleasing unto God: neither does he require
such strict observation of the commandments, See the Sermon on Isa. 1.
as that we should obey them in perfection, but only that we should consent
in our hearts, See the Sermon on 2. Chron. 30.
and of those duties which we perform, seeing that we fail not in the
substance of his service,

The first Sermon of the Lords Supper.
PROVERBS. 28. VER. 13. He that hides his sins shall not prosper: but he
that confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy.


THe drift and purpose of these words is, to stir up all men to true
repentance: whereunto that they might be the sooner induced, and therein better
directed, he sets down,

First, that hide their sin shall not prosper: so long as sin is covered,
it prospers in the soul: and so long as sin thriues in the soul, there can
be no true prosperity in the state, either for inward or outward things.

Secondly, the happiness of penitent persons: they shall find mercy:
whatsoever their iniquities have been, they shall be received into Gods
favor, and find all the fruits thereof, so that they testify the soundness
of their repentance by the performance of these duties following: to wit,

That they come to a plain and sincere confession which is opposite to the
former hiding:

Secondly, [and forsakes them]

Verse 13. He that hides his sin shall not prosper, etc.

From these words this doctrine evidently arises: that the harboring and
hiding of sin, Hiding of sin hinders mercy.
hinders us from all true prosperity and mercy.

Wheresoever sin has intertainment in the heart, sound happiness is as
far from that party, as he himself is from uprightness and goodness: God
never castes away his kindness upon them that endeavor not to cast all sin
out of their souls. psalm. 32.
This point is made clear unto us in the Psalm, where the Prophet describing
a righteous man, and showing that he, and he alone is a blessed man, sets him
out by this, that in his spirit there is no guile: verse 2.
Thereby implying, that guilefulnes and blessedness never go together. He that
with a false heart favors himself in any sin, has obtained pardon for no
sin; neither is he purged from any sin, what shows soever he may make to
deceive himself and others. And therefore all his iniquities shall be charged
upon him, the least of which is sufficient to make him accursed: and then how
far such a one is from happiness and true prosperity, any one may judge that
has the spirit of discerning: and this point David in that Psalm makes plain
by giving an instance in his own person. He was no hypocrite indeed, yet had
hypocrisy at that time a great place in his heart, and thereupon he begins to
hide his sin, and to invent shifts and devises to cover the same: verse 3.
but what followed hereupon? When I held my tongue (says he) (to wit from
confessing my sin, as afterward by his contrary practice it is apparent) my
bones consumed, etc. There he shows in many words what perplexity he was
in, when he was negligent in searching out his corruptions, and his heart had
made a kind of confederacy with sin: that howsoever he was not utterly
excluded from right to Gods favor and true felicity, yet for that time, he
could have no sound feeling nor comfort of it, till he betook him to true and
hearty confession; but then all was helped and remedied, as in that Psalm it
follows, Then I acknowledged my sin unto thee, verse 4.
neither hid I mine iniquity: for I thought I will confess against my self
my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou for gave the punishment of my sin.

To this same purpose there is a heavy threatening denounced against this
devilish cunning and craft in covering of sin, by the Prophet Isaiah. Isa.
29.15.
Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsels from the Lord, etc. they
that have such skill and art to hide their wickedness in the dark, and to
carry badde matters covertly and closely, what do they get by it? they think
thereby to have the credit and reputation of wise men and deep politicians:
but the curse of God belongs unto them, which there is denounced against them,
that shall pursue them, and his hand shall find them out, with all their
wretched and sinful plots and devises, which they have hatched in the
secrets of their brains, and thought to keep close from God and men: and he
shall bring to nothing both them, and their counsels; for all their deep
reaches God can ouerreach them, and his judgments shall overtake and
overthrow them.

Agreeable to this, is the place of Job, where it is said, Job 20.1.
that when wickedness is sweet to a man, and he hides it under his tongue, and
favors it, etc. then his meat shall be turned into the gall of Aspes, etc.
There that holy man of God shows, that when any one is a favorer, and a
hider of sin, every thing that should be for his good shall turn to his
hurt; his ordinary food, his wealth and substance: and in a word, whatsoever
otherwise might be comfortable unto him, all shall go cross with him:
nothing shall be prospered and blessed unto him. These places do in part
manifest unto us the danger of this cloaking of sin: what misery it brings;
what happiness it depriues us of: yet besides those, there are reasons that
may more clearly euict and prove that it must needs be so: for,

1 First, the causes of this hiding of sin are naught: The causes of hiding of
sin.


1 The first, is the love of iniquity: for sin is of that nature, Love of it.
that it will never tarry but where it is loved and much made of: it is such a
guest as rough intertainment would drive away in a short time.

And that such do love it, it is very evident in that former place of Job:
where it said, that first, wickenesse is sweet, Job. 20.12.
and then they hide it. Look what appetite and eager desire any one that has
a sweet tooth can possibly have after pleasant meats and dainty dishes: the
same or greater have they after sin: the love whereof must needs be odious,
because it is Gods utter enemy, and therefore the hiding of it must needs be
dangerous.

2 A second cause of this, is hypocrisy, that men would feign seem better then
they are, Hypocrisy.
and make show of that innocence which they are far from: this was the cause
that made David to dissemble and cloak his great offense in the matter of
Vriah, as the holy Ghost testifies in the book of the Kings: 1. King. 15.3.5
where it is said, that Abijams heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as
the heart of David his Father, who did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, and turned from nothing that he commanded him all the days of his life
(to wit, of set purpose, and against his conscience with any allowance and
approbation) save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite: as if he should
have said, therein indeed he was false-hearted, and that was the reason why
he was so long ere he acknowledged his grievous sin, and why he fell to
devising of naughty shifts for the covering of his wickedness: which brought
him little prosperity: nay, so far was he from gaining any thing by it,
that even one years cloaking of sin, procured him many soar and grievous
troubles inward and outward for many years together. Thus we see the causes
are bad, to wit, love of sin, and damnable Hypocrisy.

2 Neither are the effects any better: The il effects.


1 First, It hinders prayer. Psalm. 66.18.
he cannot pray: for (says David) If Iregard wickedness in my heart, God will
not hear me. Sins acknowledged and bewailed quicken us to prayer: but
sins allowed and maintained, utterly disable us for prayer: for they make a
separation betwixt God and us.

2 Secondly such a one can have no benefit by the Sacrament: Isa. 59.2.
It keeps us from benefiting by the Sacrament. John 13.27.
as we see by Judas: who being a cunning hypocrite, and a hider of mischeuous
plots against his master, whereas he was devilish enough before, he was wholly
possessed by Satan after the eating of the Passover and the receiving of the
Lords Supper: for so the Evangelist testifies that after the sop, (as also
after the others Sacrament, ministered at that same meal) Satan entered into
him: meaning more fully then ever before: the like may be said of Simon Magus
Act. 8.20. etc.

3 Thirdly the word is altogether unprofitable unto such: Or by the word.
it is choked in the heart that is corrupted with sin: it is even like pure
seed cast into a filthy sincke. There we see both by the causes and effects,
how hurtful a thing this hiding of sin is, and how it stands in the way of all
true prosperity, to keep the same from coming unto us.

But against this it may be objected, David says, Psalm. 73.
When I declare my pain, and am sorry for my sin, then mine enemies are
alive, and are mighty, etc.

But for the satisfying of this doubt, we wust know, Psalm. 38.18.
that howsoever these ungodly ones hold up their heads and prosper, Prospering
in evil courses, a sore plague of God.
and bring many of their purposes to pass, yet none are more wretched and
miserable then they. There is no more certain sign of Gods heavy
displeasure, then for one to thrive in his ungodly courses. That child whom the
father loves, he will correct betime: and so dealt God with David. There were
many greater offenders then he in Israel, and yet none was so much scourged,
because none was so well beloved. But for one to escape the rod, and to be
still further given up to his own hearts lust, to commit sin with greedines,
this is the most heavy stroke and fearful judgment that can possible fall
upon any man: Romans 2.
for by this means he still heapeth up wrath against the day of wrath, and
the declaration of the just vengeance of God upon all unrighteous and unholy
persons, when the Lord shall pay him home at full for all his cuill thoughts,
words and works.

Since then it is plain, Sorts reproved.
this makes for the reproof of four sorts of men, that offend in this point:
namely,

1 First, Ignorant persons.
nor the disserences of sin, which are greater, which lesser. For till the
Lord inform men by his word, and spirit, they can never see these things;
never discern betwixt good and evil, nor betwixt evil and evil which is more
or less offensive. For it is light that discouers darkness, and therefore
they being destitute of the true understanding of the word, and so consequently
of the spirit, must needs fail in the discerning, and so also in the
discovering and laying open of their corruptions; and therefore fail of sound
happiness.

2 Secondly, Deniers of sin.
who having the knowledge of sin, do yet deny their faults when they are told
of them, as Ananias and Saphira did, Acts 5. 1. King. 5.
and as Iehazi did when his master examined him. Those sins that are
smoothered and carried so closely, God will manifest and discover as openly, as
he did theirs: laying upon the one, the punishment of a sudden and strange
death: and on the other, the leprosy of his flesh, as a means to cleanse his
soul.

3 Here are an other kind of hiders to be condemned, Disguilers of sin.
that will not grossly deny the fact, but will cloak it, and disguise it, and
give good names to foul faults.

Such are they that would have their gaming, and unthriftiness, and cosonage, to
go under the name of recreation; and all their leaud meetings, and abuse of
the creatures of God, and of the glorious and fearful name of God, under the
title of good fellowship, and meerie meetings, etc. And so for other notorious
and grievous sins, which they paint over with fair colors: but do such
prosper? When they get a little money, Inconveniences that ensue on gaming.
do they not loose more in their souls then that comes to? and do they not
bring upon themselves hardness, and profanenes of heart: blindness, and
stupiditie of mind: unreadiness and unfitness for any good thing: unwillingness
to read, hear, meditate, and confer of holy things? are they not afraid to
come into Gods holy presence in prayer, to be in the company of such as will
admonish or rebuke them; to be alone in the night at such times as the Lord
does waken their drousie consciences? to say nothing of many foul braules, and
other heinous evils, which do usually accompany such exercises.

So others when they are passionate and distempered; tell them of it, and their
answer is ready: What? would you not have a man angry with sin? Oh this is
base hypocrisy, and sinful disguising of your fault: for tell me, you that
can be so eager against small offenses in others, when they concern your
self,

Others we shall find that will term their covetousness, frugalitte, their
pride in apparel, comlines and decency, Hurt that comes by disguising of sin.
and the like: all which persons little consider what great injury they do to
their souls this while: for now the word cannot cure them of those sins
which they would feign think (though their hearts tell them otherwise) to be
no sins: they can never humble themselves by repentance for them; and
therefore they stand guilty before Gods judgment seat to answer for them,
besides all the hurt they shall in this life sustain in regard of them.

4 A fourth sort that come under this reproof are such, Such as are negligent
in searching out their sins.
that they do not use diligence to find out their sins: such as are
partial in dealing with their own souls, and in searching to find out their
corruptions; that are loath to dig too deep, and thoroughly to ransack the
loathsome corners of their hearts. He that does not his best endeavor to come to
the sight of his secret sins, is esteemed by God, to be a hider of them, and
shall be destitute of that happiness and comfort that otherwise he might
enjoy: Psalm. 4.4.
and therefore as David exhorted his enemies for their good, to examine their
hearts upon their beds, that so they might desist from standing out against
him: so he practiced it himself for the good of his own soul, that he
might not long go astray from the ways of the Lord. I have considered my
ways (says he) and turned my feet into thy testimonies. Psalm. 119.59.


Secondly, When we prosper not, fall to examination.
or of the world, let us examine if there be not some secret sin that is the
cause of it. One comes to the word preached, and finds no help thereby
against the corruptions unto which he is inclined, nor for the practice of good
duties unto which he is slack: he cannot perceive that there is wrought in
him any great love unto the Saints, to the ordinances of God, or to the coming
of Christ, etc. but he is dull and heavy, when he is at it, and as dead and
lumpish when he is gone from it. Let him search, and he shall find that there
lies in his heart some sin or other unrepented, or the gilt of some duties
unperformed; the venom whereof does so poison his conscience, that the word of
life can find no place there; for when the word comes to a pure heart, it will
enter speedily, and work effectually.

Another comes to the Sacrament, and finds no benefit thereby. Let him look
if there lurk not within him some hidden corruption that is the cause hereof:
for the Sacrament is mighty in operation, if it be received with a pure and
holy affection: 1. Cor. 10.
it is the very communion of the body and blood of Christ. And therefore search
and cast forth that ill leaven that has infected thy heart, and hindered thee
from the comfort of this excellent ordinance of God. And the like may we say
for prayer and any other of Gods ordinances.

Likewise for the things of the world: do we not prosper in our estate, in our
bodies, in our children? etc. let us make trial if there be not some
wickedness that has countenance with us. the Lamentations of Jeremy.
Wherefore (say they) is the living man sorrowful, why does he turmoile and
vex himself? Lamenta. 3.39.40.
man suffers for his sin: what is the conclusion? Let us search and try
our ways, and turn again unto the Lord, etc. We have sinned, But we know no
special sin that should procure this hand of God against us.

Try your own hearts and ways diligently, Iere. 17.9.
let us therefore bring our souls to the touchstone of Gods Law, Iere. 77.10.
and then we shall not be deceived: as he himself says, I the Lord search the
heart: so his word is a discerner, and a discouerer of the thoughts, and
intents of the heart; Heb. 4.12.
and will make us able to descry the same. And this let us be assured of, for
our comfort, that he that is truly desirous, Lamentations) that he might be
brought to the sight and sense of his transgressions, and to sound humiliation
for them: and therefore they that upon a good and conscionable search made, can
discern of no gross or presumptuous sin in themselves, may be comforted
notwithstanding their crosses, and rest fully assured, that God will not lay
any thing to their charge, because they are enemies to sin, and not lovers
nor maintainers of the same. And thus much for the first point. It follows.

[But he that confesseth] this is contrary to the former hiding of sin,
when we so search and sift our hearts, that we come to the knowledge of our
offenses, and the acknowledgment of the same before the Lord. Whence this
doctine may be gathered: that,

Whosoever would find pardon for his sins, Confession necessary before
remission.


He that looks for remission on Gods part, must bring confession for his
part: wheresoever sin is vnacknowledged, there it is unpardoned: no mercy
till there be a sight and confession of iniquity.

Therefore Daniel confesses his own sins, the sins of the people and the
sins of their forefathers; and aggrauates the same in many words, Dan 9.5.6,
7.8.10.
saying, We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly,
yea we have rebelled, and have departed from thy precepts, and from thy
judgments. We would not obey thy servants the Prophets that spoke in thy name,
etc. Unto us appertains open shame, to our Kings, to our Princes, and to our
Fathers, etc. For we have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, etc. Yea
all Israel have transgressed thy law etc. therefore the curse is powered upon us.

And thus does Ezra likewise in the behalf of the people that had taken
strange wives: for having rent his clothes and his garment, he fell upon his
knees, and spread out his hands unto the Lord his God and said: Ezra 9.5.6.
O my God, I am confounded and ashamed to lift up mine eyes to thee my God: for
our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is gone up to
heaven, etc.

The same course does Nehemiah take: for thus he speaks, in the name of all
Isaael: Nehem. 1.7.
We have grievously sinned against thee, and have not kept thy commandments,
nor the statutes, nor the judgments which thou commandedst thy servant Moses,
etc. So those that believed Acts 17.19. came and confessed, and showed their
works.

And there is reason to prove that this confession is very necessary,

1 First, God cannot in justice forgive sin unless there be confession.
without it we have no promise belonging unto us: as God cannot in justice
withhold mercy from such as plainly lay open their tra^sgressions before him:
so can he notwithout violating, his truth, vouchsafe mercy to those that
smoother and hide their sins from him; for thus runs the promise: If we
acknowledge our sins, 1. John 1, 9.
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. Whence we see, that where there is a general acknowledgement
of sin, there is promised both a general remitting of sin, and purging from
sin: but where that is wanting, no such thing can be expected.

2 Secondly, shut against them, Without it, there is no repentance.
that do not confess their faults unto the Lord, because acknowledgement of
our guiltiness is one of the first steps to true repentance, and one of the
chief testimonies of a true penitent heart. As is manifest in David, who, when
his heart smote him after he had numbered the people, deals plainly with God.
O Lord (says he) I have sinned exceedingly in that I have done: now O Lord I
beseech thee take away the trespass of thy servant: for I have done very
foolishlie. And all those that are truly and thoroughly wounded in their souls
for their offenses, as David then was, will enforce themselves to do as he
did; for till men frame to this confession, it is certain they are not yet
fallen out with their sins.

3 Thirdly, It is a preservative against reuolting.
we must understand that this is a very sovereign preservative against
relapses and backslidings: for he that has once done this penance before Gods
judgment seat, it will be such a corasiue unto his heart, that he will
hardly fall into those open and gross sins twice, Peter, and David, and Paul
had attained to this, and laid open their sins in an unfeigned confession of
them to the Lord, they never returned to those ill practices again.
Infirmities and slips they had many in other kinds, but they were so fensed
and fortified against those particulars, that they stood strong against them,
and never fell again into them whiles they lived.

4 Fourthly, It quickens unto prayer.
that where there has been hearty confession, there have followed as hearty
petitions; as we see in the former examples of Daniel and Nehemiah. For how
vehement their requests were, may appear in the places before alleged, by the
manner of putting them up. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, Dan. 919.
O Lord consider and do it, (says Daniel) defer not for thine own sake, O
my God. And Nehemiah comes with the like importunity. Nehem. 1.5.6 11.
O Lord God of heaven, the great and terrible God, that keep covenant and
mercy, etc. I pray thee let thine ears be attent, and thine eyes open, to
hear the prayer of thy servant, which I pray before thee daily, day and night
for the children of Israel thy servants. O Lord I beseech thee let thine ear
now hearken to the prayer of thy servant, etc.

5 Fifthly and lastly, God is glorified thereby. Josh. 7.19.
in which regard Joshua says unto Achan, my son, I beseeth thee give glory
to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him: and show me what thou
have done, hide it not from me. Now if any inquire, how we by this means
should glorify God; I answer, that we give him the glory: 1. of his truth,
in acknowledging that which his word charge upon us: 2. of his justice, if he
should proceed against us: and 3. of his mercy, in that we thereby imply, we
have hope that he will forgive us. For if we did expect no favor, we would
never discover our filthy nakedness before the eyes of the righteous Judge of
heaven and earth. Since then, that without this confession there is no promise
made unto us, no sound repentance in us, no ability to resist corruption for
the time to come: and wheresoever this is (on the contrary side) it puts life
into our prayers, and brings honor unto Gods name; the point is clear and
evident, that this confession is so necessary, that without it there is no
mercy to be looked for from God.

Which makes for the just reproof and condemnation of those that fail in
this duty. Adams turn, that Eve persuaded him to eat of the forbidden fruit:
neither would that clear Ahab, that Iezabels hand was chief in the murdering
and robbing of Naboth. They should rather have harkened to Gods voice, then
unto the wicked counsels and persuasions of any: and if they had any work of
Gods spirit in their hearts, they would charge themselves and not others. For
grant that the occasion of their fall was more from them, yet the cause was in
themselves, even their own cursed corruption, and rebellious disposition. And
therefore their laboring to put off the blame and shame of their sins upon
others, evidently proclaims, that they have not an understanding mind, nor a
broken, and humble, and penitent heart. And the like may be said of those:
that howsoever they will come to a recital of diverse misdemeanors, either
before God or men, or both: as the quality of their offenses requires the
same, yet they do it so slightly and coldly, that though they name
particulars, it is sure they are not touched with them: such a cold confession
will bring as cold consolation; their faint and careless sueing for a pardon,
is the next way to procure them a denial.

Secondly, this is for instruction,

With earthly Judges, the more is confessed by a malefactor, the worse it is
likely to go with him: 1. Cor. 11.
shall our remission be: if we judge our selves, we shall not be condemned of
the Lord.

Now to the intent we may perform this duty the better, it will not be amiss
to set down some rules for our direction herein.

We must know therefore that in a sound confession, Rules for confession.
these things are requisite.

1 That it proceed from a good root. 2 That it be performed in a good manner.
1 For the first: if the root be rotten and corrupt, the fruit springing from
thence, cannot but be distastefull to the Lord.

Now that the rotte may be sound, these things must be looked unto in our
confession.

1 That it proceed from a hatred of sin. 2 From hope of mercy.
1 Concerning the former, The root of confession.
(as it was in Saul and Pharaoh, when they made acknowledgement of their
offenses) it is plain that the parties confessing are not weary of their
sins, It must proceed.
but of their plagues, as Pharaoh was: that their acknowledgement proceeds
not from inward remorse for their faults, From hatted of sin.
and from the force of their natural conscience; as in Saul it is evident: for
both of them fell presently to their old works and ways again, and returned
with the dog to their vomit, and with the sow to their wallowing in the mire;
and so it is with many: when the snares of death lay hold of them, or some
heavy plague lies upon them, or the flashings of a guilty conscience begin to
scorch them, When and why hipocrits confess.
they are in great perplexity and anguish, even at their wits end, and know
not what to do, nor what course to take for the obtaining of some ease: And
then even as a dog that has ouergorged his stomach, will vomit up that which
paineth and troubles him: so will they in like case vomit out some passionate
confession: look what comes first to their minds, and most troubles and
frighteth them, out it shall to one or other. But as the dog, when he is eased
of his former pain, will return again to his loathsome vomit, and eat up
that which before he had rid his stomach of: so will they betake themselves
to their old custom and fashion of life again, and fall to the fresh practice
of those odious and monstrous evils, which upon the bed of their sickness,
or in the day of their heaviness, they in word acknowledged, and renounced as
vile and abominable. If now of dogs they had been made sheep, they would
never have lapped up their filthy vomit again: that were enough to poison a
sheep that pleases a dog.

And as Saul and Pharaoh dealt, so did the Israelitet in the same sort: Psalm.
78.33.34.36.37.
when the wrath of God lay heavy upon them, and he consumed their days in
vanity, and their years in mourning, etc. they returned and sought God
early: but how ^ they flattered with their mouth, and dissembled with him with
their tongue. For their heart was not upright with him, neither were they
faithful in his covenant.

When misery pressed sore upon them,

This then is the first thing necessarily required, when we make our
confession, that it proceed from an hatred and indignation against our sins,
and against our selves for the same. 2. Cor. 7.11.

A second thing is, that it must come from hope of mercy. From hope of mercy.
our confession will be but a witnessing against our selves for our deeper
condemnation. And God may justly say unto us, as he did to that unprofitable
servant in the Gospel, out of thine own mouth will I condemn thee, Luke
19.22.
thou evil servant. If we plead guilty, and do not sue for a pardon (as we
will never if we be destitute of hope) our case is so far from being made
better, that it is a great deal worse. Judas confessed that he had sinned
betraying innocent blood, yea, and made restitution also: but it was wrested
from him through the horror of his conscience, and the fearful apprehension of
Gods wrath, beating upon his sinful heart; and therefore not expecting any
mercy for his heinous offense, he never offered any prayer to God, but made a
quick dispatch of himself. Whereas if his confession had been joined with
hope of favor, he would have fallen to mourning and lamentation for his
sin, and so to an earnest craving of pardon for it. Thus we see what is the
root of sound confession.

If follows to be considered, The manner of confession.


And the first thing in that is, that we confess heartily and sincerely, It
must be hearty. Luke 18, 13. Iere 31.18
So did the Publican when he smote upon his breast, and said, Lord be
merciful unto me a sinner. And so did Ephraim: of whom the holy Ghost
speaks in this manner. I heard Ephraim lamenting thus: Thou have corrected
me, and I was chastised, as an untamed calfe, etc. Surely after that I
converted, I repented: and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh:
I was ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my
youth. Where it is declared, that after they had been long and grievously
afflicted, and began at length to be soundly humbled, they did not only see
and acknowledge their sins, but were vexed and troubled, and even confounded at
the consideration, and in the confession of them, yea even of the follies and
vanities of their youth. Contrary to this practice of theirs, is the custom
of many, who will reckon up and recount their several iniquities before the
Lord, but they do it so idly and drowsily, as if it were nothing to offend
him. Whereas if a child should come with such a rude and bold confession of his
faults to his parents: or a wife speak so slightly of her unchaste and unholy
behavior before her husband, they would dislike the confession of the faults,
more then the faults themselves; and all that heard them would cry out upon
them, Drousie confession hateful.
there is an impudent wife, and a graceless child. And we must not conceive
then, that God will be pleased with such lame and maimed sacrifices. Let none
be deceived, God will not be mocked: he pronounces him accursed, whosoever
he be, that does the work of the Lord negligently.

A second thing to be observed in the manner of it is, It must be particular,
and of special sins.
and by whole sale as it were, but that we bring before his holy eyes our
particular, and special sins, which will be unto us a testimony of great
uprightness, for we are naturally prone, either to content our selves with a
generality of confession, that we are great sinners, the Lord be merciful
unto us, etc. which we may do for our credit that we would be esteemed
penitent persons: Note this corruption.
or if we come to particulars, we will rather meddle with any, then with our
beloved sins: as in the body, we would be dealing with any, rather then
with our particular soar, that will most pain us, if we should set upon the
curing of it: our chief sins are so deeply rooted, that we cannot get them
up, but we must break a great deal of ground round about. This therefore
argues great sincerity, when we can bring our capital and head sins to
arraignement: as the holy Apostle Paul did, when once he was thoroughly
converted: 1. Tim. 1.13. Ezra. 9.
I was (says he) a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and an oppressor. And
likewise good Ezra, who acknowledged in the behalf of the people their many
great sin of marrying strange wives. whose practice if we can follow, we
shall have that good evidence of soundness and uprightness in our souls that
they had.

3 Thirdly, Ioh. 16.8. Such have lowly minds, and broken hearts. The Law may
make one confess his faults to men in a passion, but it can never make a man
lay them open before God in true contrition: that is a work of the spirit of
Jesus Christ. Let such go on still and they shall find good success. 1. John
1.9.
and heal our natures when we have done our part, he should forfeite his truth
and his justice, and so he should be a greater looser then we.

[And forsakes them] This must, and will follow upon the former: and this
offers unto us another point of doctrine, namely: that

It is not sufficient to confess sin,

We must renounce and abandon the allowance of every infirmity, Sin must
be renounced as well as confessed. Isa. 55.7.
and the practice of every gross sin.

This, as it is commanded by the Prophet Isaiah, who says: Let the wicked
forsake his ways, and the ungodly his own imaginations, etc. So was it
practiced by those worthy and excellent conuertes, Acts 19.
mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, who did not only acknowledge their
vile and naughty practices, but to show their through detestation of them, and
their resolution to forsake them, brought their curious books and burnt them
openly,

And that a sound confession, and a holy reformation go together, might be
further proved, by the examples of David, of Peter, and of Paul, which were
formerly alleged: who having once made acknowledgement of their sins, never
fell to the committing of them any more. And reason will show the same more
fully and clearly: for,

1 First, Without reformation there is no sound repentance.
for if there were, the through hatred and unfeigned sorrow for sin (before
mentioned) would kill the same at the very root, and then it would die also in
the branches.

2 This redressing of a man's ways, as well as confessing of his faults, No
says.
is very needful, because otherwise one can have no assurance that he has
faith; for that purifies the heart: and if the heart be clean, Acts. 15.
all that proceeds from it will be answerable thereunto. A pure fountain
cannot send forth impure streams.

3 Further, dwells not in his heart: for wheresoever that takes possession,
There is not the spirit.
it expels sin, and will not suffer such filthy ware to rest in that room
where it does remain: and if it be not in the warehouse, it cannot be brought
forth into the shop.

This serves for the reproof of those, John 3.3.
have crucified the flesh, with the lusts and affections thereof: neither are
we any longer debiters to the flesh to live according thereunto: Romans 8.
but me must mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit: that howsoever
sin will still remain in us, yet it may not reign in our mortal bodies,
that we should obey it in the lusts thereof, or that our members should be
weapons of unrighteousness for the execution of evil any more. And this we
may boldly say, Romans 6.
that whosoever lives in those forenamed sins, never yet knew what
repentance for sin, and sound confession of sin means. And therefore what
good conceit soever such have of themselves, they do but flatter and
dissemble with a double heart. If they have had some gripings for their
scandalous and sinful manner of living, and thereupon have cast forth some
piece of a confession, the best that they can make of it, is but this, Dogsicke.
that they have been dogge-sicke (as was showed before) and so disgorged their
stomachs of that that pained them: not in any hatred of the things (for they
return to their vomit again) but in desire to be exempted and freed from
those bitter pangs, and hellish tortures which they find in their souls. At
most, they are but as the sow that has been washed, seeing that they return
to their old filthiness. There has been only a change of the outside, none at
all of the inside: for if their nature had been altered and renewed, their
words and works would have been reformed, and that not for a fit, but for
ever in the whole course of their carriage afterward. They might indeed now and
then meet with a rub, and stumble sometimes, but their walk for the most
part, should be in the ways of godliness; and though they did fall, they
should rise again, Psalm. 37.
because the Lord would put under his hand.

Therefore let all men carefully look unto themselves: if they were swearers
before the Sacrament,

In the second place, that we are touched with repentance for our sinful
courses, when we proceed not to a reformation of the same, Means to attain
to reformation.
therefore it behooues us to use all good means, whereby we may attain to
this reformation: such as are these that follow.

1 First, Avoid the occasions of evil.
we must constantly and carefully avoid all the occasions of those sins
which we pretend that we have been humbled for. If one would not be a gamester
any more, let him avoid the company of gamesters: if one would not be
overtaken with incontinencie, and intemperancy, or the like, let him never
frequent such places, nor associate himself with such persons, as that any
temptation should by such means be offered unto him. Our nature is as tinder:
Our pronenesse to sin.
if others do but cast the least spark upon us, we are in danger to take
fire presently: and therefore as we will not set flax, or any such combustible
matter near the chimney for fear of the worst: so let not us adventure to
thrust our selves into any place where there is peril of infection: but be
jealous of our selves in eschewing all inducements, as unto any, so especially
unto our own sins, and those vices that we are most prone unto.

Secondly, as we ought to forbear all means of evil: so we must use all
means of goodness: Vseal means of goodness.
not one or two of the means, but every one of them, in their places: for
otherwise if we refuse all of them, or any of them, it is a righteous judgment
of God, that we should live and die in our sins. Therefore let us give our
selves to reading, if we can: to heareing, if we cannot read, idest, meditate
on the word: chiefly on such places as make most against our own corruptions;
fast, pray, receive the Sacrament, and then using these means conscionably,
we shall find that every one of them will work some grace, and minister
unto us strength and virtue against our special sins.

Thirdly, Bewail infirmities speedily. James 3.1. Note.
for in many things we offend all) let us lament and bewail our offenses, and
that presently upon the committing of them: for if sin be quickly and
heartily lamented, the course thereof will be speedily stayed, and we shall
gain by an infirmity, which is by that means soundly healed. For our
experience of our own weakness, and so our humility will be increased: our
discerning of the subtilties of Satan, and the deceitfulnes of sin, and our
care and watchfulness to resist it hereafter, will be thereby augmented.

Fourthly and lastly, Covenant with God to fight against our master sins.
if none of these means will serve the turn, we must bind our selves by a
solemn vow and covenant, to labor and strive against our principal and most
dangerous corruptions; and to abandon them, whatsoever becomes of us. And
though we may be tempted, and that often and strongly, yet we must resolve (by
Gods grace) never to yield unto them again. If we could thus earnestly set
against our sins, satan's assaults would be nothing so strong: for if we did
manfully resist the devil, Iam. 4.7.
he would fiie from us like a coward: and his instruments seeing us resolute,
would have no heart to meddle with us: and if we should fall once or twice
afterward, the breach of our vow would so pierce and wound our hearts,

Thirdly,

Oh, How to discern that our sins are but frailties.
If our hearts check us, and we desire to have others reprove us, and use
the means before set down, whereby more grace may be every day conveyed unto
us, though we be overtaken many times as a bird in the snare, before we be
aware, and have a sudden flashing in our affections, that is ready to show
forth it self in our outward actions; yet our hearts are sound and sincere
notwithstanding: neither should we keep from our souls that comfort which
does belong unto us.

[Shall find mercy.] Here is the promise of God upon our obedience: and this
we may be assured of. Whence the Doctrine is:

That whatsoever we have been, Mercy for the Penitent.
or whatsoever our sins have been, if we can bring confession and
reformation, we shall find mercy: God will pity us, and have compassion
upon us. (as the word signifies) 1. First, Wherein it consists.
that we shall never be under the bondage of it any more. 3. Thirdly, the
Lord will accept of us, and of our services, and make all the means
comfortable and profitable unto us. When we come to the ministry, he will
write his Laws in our hearts. When we come to the Sacrament, we shall not
only receive the blessed bread and wine, but we shall have communion with the
son of God. When we offer up our prayers, 1. Cor. 10.
God will hear in heaven, and have mercy upon us, and fulfill our hearts
desire. All these things are promised in the covenant, set down, Ezekiel. 36.25.
and Iere. 31.31. as also Isa. 1.18. which text is handled in the next Sermon;
and therefore to that place the larger handling of this point shall be
referred. Only a word or two for the use of it.

Which is for very great consolation unto Gods servants: Luke 15.
and though he had been an unthrift before, yet he would now mend and reform
all: His father never charged him with old matters, neither needed he, because
he charged himself. If an earthly father will and should deal thus, how much
more will the Father of all mercies deal graciously with his children, that
humble themselves before him, and remove their sins out of his sight:
especially since the greater mercy he shows to his own children, the more
glory he shall gain to his own name.

Therefore let us make full reckoning, that we shall not only meet with Gods
minister at the means, but with God himself, who will pardon that which is
past, and confirm and strengthen us unto every good work for the time to
come: who will give us the power of godliness, and the life of grace: who in a
word, will grant us (and there confirm his grant unto us) the right unto, and
use of al his mercies and blessings whatsoever, with the remouall of all
hurtful crosses. When the first Adam did but once eat of the forbidden
fruit, it was enough to infect him, and all his posterity, though there were
but one threatening annexed to it, and none did taste of it, but he alone. And
why should not we expect on the other side, that when our second Adam Jesus
Christ has eaten of the commanded fruit, Note this comparison.
and has sanctified it unto us by his example, word and prayer, and annexed
many promises unto it, and we our selves also do often receive it: why (I
say) should not we believe that it shall be more sufficient and forcible to
minister holiness and happiness unto us, then was the forbidden fruit, to bring
sin, and misery upon us? especially since it is certain, that none ever
spedde ill at the Sacrament, but they that came with ill and hypocritical
hearts thereunto: and as every ones confession and reformation has been more
sound, and faithful, and his resolution to claue unto God more firm and
constant: so his comfort has been more large, and durable.

The second Sermon of the Lords Supper.
ISAIAH. 1. Verse. 16. Wash you, make you clean: take away the evil of your
works from before your eyes: cease to do evil: 17 Learn to do well: seek
judgment, relieve the oppressed: judge the fatherless and defend the widdowe.
18 Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord: though your sins were
as crimson they shall be made white as snow: though they were red like
skarlet, they shall be as woll. 19 If ye consent to obey, ye shall eat the
good things of the Land.

IN the former part of this Chapter, the Prophet had charged these Jews, that
though they carried the name of Gods children, and of Gods people, and thought
themselves in very good case, yet they were indeed notable traitors and rebels
against him; which rebellion of theirs is set out by two comparisons: for first
he compares them with the Ox and the Ass, which though they be of the
dullest sort of creatures, yet the one knows and remembers his owner: verse 3.
and the other his masters crib: and where they have received kindness, they
will acknowledge it, and do service for it. But these Jews though they had
been fed at full, and received innumerable blessings from the Lord, yet they
were unmindful of God, and of his favors, and more unteachable and
intractable concerning their duty, then were the Ox or the Ass. They
considered not whence, nor why, they had those many mercies which they enjoyed,
and therefore did service therewith, not to God, but to their own lusts.

2 Secondly, having compared them to the dullest beasts, and proved them to
be inferior unto those unreasonable creatures; He after makes comparison
betwixt them and the vilest sinners in the world, to wit, the Sodomites: to
whom they were so like for their idleness, pride, excess, and cruelty, that
he calls them by that name. Verse 10. saying, Hear the word of the Lord, O ye
Princes of Sodom: hearken unto the Law of our God, O people of Gomorah.

But against this, they might except, and say to the Prophet, you do us wrong,
in thus charging, and vilifying us: we are other manner of people then you take
us for, and would make us seem to be: we have some things to commend us,
which neither beasts nor Sodomites have: for we offer multitudes of sacrifices,
and observe solemn days, and feasts, the new moons, and Sabbaths, and the
like.

This he yields they did; but thence takes advantage, and doubleth his
accusation against them, turning all these things to their deeper condemnation.
Verse. 11.12.13.14. What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices,
says the Lord? I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, etc. When ye ^ime to
appear before me, who required this of your hands, to tread in my courts?
Bring no more oblations in vain: incense is an abomination unto me: I cannot
suffer your new moons, nor Sabbaths, nor solemn days (it is iniquity) nor
solemn assemblies. My soul hates your new moons, etc. and there is reason
why God should thus abhor both them, and the worship they offered unto him.
For, (as it is added) verse. 15. when they stretched out their hands in prayer,
their hands were full of blood. That is, they were full of revenge, full of
cruelty, and contention, and therefore they must needs perform those
religious exercises hypocritically and carnally: in which respect they were
worse then Sodomites: for they did but abuse their time to idleness, their
apparel to pride: their diet to excess, etc. but the Jews abused the word,
and the sacrifices, and the Sabbaths, and other ordinances of God: and
therefore as much as spiritual things are better then natural, so much worse
were they that profaned the former, then the Sodomites that abused the latter.

Thus having showed them how bad they were, Connection.
he leaves them not here, but tells them how all might be amended. Verse
16. Wash you, make you clean, etc. as if he should have said, I have showed
that you have polluted and defiled your selves beyond the Sodomites, and so are
become exceeding unclean, and unholy: yet if you will take my advise, and
follow my counsel, I will show you a way how you shall help all, and that is,
to wash and cleanse your selves from this your filthiness, by godly and hearty
sorrow for the same: and whereas you will be ready to conceive that this is a
matter easily and quickly done, I tell you that it is otherwise, and therefore
bid you wash you, make you clean: purge your hearts and your hands: wash and
wash; again and again: and never leave washing till you have made your selves
thoroughly clean.

Then further, that they might not deceive themselves, he declares unto them
more particularly what sins they should wash away: take away the evil of
your works, etc. herein including an answer to another objection, that the
hearts of some might make, concerning their sacrifices, and their prayers, etc.
before mentioned: for they might reply upon the Prophet in this manner: you
find fault with our oblations, and tell us that God loathes our sacrifices,
and services; what then would you have us do? should we leave off these works
of piety, and quite give over serving of God?

Not so (says the Prophet:) but take away the evil of your works. do the
works still, but remove that which God hates in them: re^ine the matter, but
reform the manner of them. Now whereas some might be so shameless, as to say,
we have done so already, and do so still: who can charge us with the evil of
our works, or with hollownes, and hypocrisy in the performance of them?

To that he makes answer in these words, take away the evil of your works,
[from before mine eyes.] As if he should say, if you might be judged by men,
like your selves, you would make a good shift: but in religious exercises you
appear before the Lord, who has fiery eyes, and espieth the least blemish in
your services: and therefore look that he see nothing in them displeasing unto
him: for otherwise, howsoever men commend you, and your works, God will reject
both them, and you. After this he proceeds, and shows, that if they must
take away the evil of their best works, much more must they desist from their
evil works: and therefore he adds, cease to do evil.

And yet this is not enough, but he exhorts them further to do well: and because
they were ill scholars, and altogether unskillful in heavenly matters, he bids
them [learne to do well:] as who should say: verse. 17.
you are naturally witty to invent mischief and iniquity: but for good, you
have no wisdom, nor sound understanding: you know not what to do, nor how to
do: you have neither a good judgment, nor a pure affection; nor know how to
get either of them, and therefore learn to do well.

Then for their better direction, he comes to the particular, seek
judgment, etc. as if he should have told them in more words: you have been
given to oppression heretofore, and have done much wrong to poor men, that
could not make good their part against you: this has been your sin, to
deal craftily and unrighteously: but now take a better course; seek judgment,
that is, labor to find out what is right; and when you know it, practice it
accordingly; and deal with others, as you would be dealt withal: give over
your cruelty; and exercise mercy: and be so far from oppressing any more,
that now ye relieve the oppressed: and so far from doing hurt hereafter, that
you forthwith strive to do good: especially to the poor, and such as stand
in most need of your help and relife: not such poor, as by their own
lewdness and misdemenour have cast them selves, and do still plunge
themselves further in misery: but judge the Fatherless, and defend the
Widdowe: and stretch forth your helping hand to relieve such as are most
worthy of it, and have most need of it.

Having thus urged them to sound repentance, that they might have no pretense
to keep them from setting upon it; he remoueth certain doubts that might
arise in their hearts to hinder them. Verse. 18. And before he comes to them,
he makes proparation thereunto, saying, come, let us reason together. As
though he should say, now I have plainly proved that it stands you upon to
repent, and have showed you how you should repent, I know you shall have diverse
reasons from your selves, and from the world to the contrary: but hearken not
what your flesh, or your friends say, but what God says, come let us reason
together.

Now, Sodomites, to be full of cruelty and blood, and our consciences tell us
no less: seeing then we are sunk so deep in our iniquities, it seems our
state is unrecoverable, and so it is bootelesse for us to set upon the work of
repentance.

Nay, (says he) not so: as white as snow. Albeit you have received a double
die of sin, one in your conception, and another in the whole course of your
conversation all your life long: Yet the Lord is of that power, that he is
able to make you white as well. There is no sin so heinous; no sinner so
abominable, but upon his humiliation and conversion, he can and will make him
as clean, and as pure; as just and as righteous as Adam was before his fall,
and as if he had never transgressed at all. Not that he shall be without
infirmities: but in Gods account, and acceptance through Christ, he shall be
as holy as the Angels are now in heaven, or as he himself shall be, when he
is an heir of glory in that blessed kingdom. Psalm. 32.
For wheresoever sin is pardoned, there it is covered from Gods eyes; he
will except neither against the greatness, nor against the multitude of them:
but where sin has abounded, Romans 5.20.
grace shall much more abound. Thus much for the first objection.

The second might be this:

For that he answers; verse 19.
that if they do but consent, and be willing to obey, (for so it is in the
original) they shall eat the good things of the land. Which is in effect, as
if he should have said: when once you have truly, and thoroughly repented, you
are not any longer under the rigor of the Law, but under grace: you come not to
a rigorous, and severe Judge, but to a merciful, and kind father, that looks
not for perfect obedience, but accepts of a mind that is willing to know and
keep the commandments: who does not require of penitent sinners that they
should fulfill the Law (for that Christ alone could do, and did in our
behalf) but only that they should labor and strive to do their best; and
where they come short, acknowledge their fault. And that God will take in good
worth this kind of obedience, he will testify and make clear, not only by
bestowing inward blessings upon the soul, but also outward blessings for their
estate: you shall eat the good things of the land.

But,

To this ^e makes answer, verse 20. telling them that if they refuse to obey,
and to do the former duties, they shall be devoured with the sword: that is,
they shall have some fearful judgment or other to overtake and consume them:
for by that particular of the sword, is implied any other that God should
think good. And to prove all, he brings one maine argument, The mouth of the
Lord has spoken it. As if he had said: though those that repent, see little
likelihood of recovery, let them not despair: and though those that be
impenitent see little danger of an overthrow, yet let them not presume: for the
Lord will assuredly bring to pass that which he has promised to the godly in
mercy, and that which he has threatened against the wicked in judgment.

So that you see the sum of these words is,

An exhortation to repentance; and an offer of reconciliation and salvation to
all repentant sinners. Wherein is showed:

1 First what they must do, to the 18. verse. Namely that they ought, 1
Bewail their sins, and forsake them. 16. 2 Learn their duties, and do them.
2 Secondly, reasons to stir them up so to do. 1 One taken from the benefit
that will redound unto them, if they practice the former things, to wit, that
they shall be sure of the free and full pardon of all their sins; and they,
and their services shall be accepted, and blessed of God. 2 Another taken from
the danger they are in, if they refuse to do this: they shall surely taste of
some fearful vengeance of God: Ye shall be devoured by the sword.

Wash you, etc. In these words he alludeth to the custom of the ceremonial
law, mentioned in Exodus, where God expressly commanded that before the people
should hear the Law delivered from mount Sinai, Exodus ^9.10.
they should sanctify themselves, and wash their clothes. Whereby two things
were signified.

1 First, that all in themselves are unclean, and so unfit to present
themselves before the eyes of the holy God.

2 Secondly, that (notwithstanding this) if they endeavor to wash themselves,
the Lord will be pacified toward the^, and receive both the^, and their
services. Now this washing which he exhorts the^ unto, is that which was
figured by that outward oblation, and clensing of themselves, and is to be
performed of all that hope for mercy from the Lord: and that, by lamenting and
grieuing for their corrupt and sinful nature and behavior, whether against
God or men. This is all the washing that we can attain unto, or that God
looks for at our hands. For to speak properly, nothing can cleanse us, but
Christ his blood, which is therefore called clean water, Ezekiel. 36.25. And none
can perform that work, but God alone, and therefore in that place, he
appropriateth that action unto himself, saying, I will power clean water upon
you, etc. From all your filthiness and from all your Idols will I cleanse you.
Ezekiel. 39.25


Here then, the purpose and drift of the Prophet is thus much, namely that we
should join with God, as working instruments in reforming our hearts, and
redressing our ways. Whence arises this point of doctrine; What washing is
required of us.
that whosoever would have God to wash them by the blood of his son, must
wash themselves by godly sorrow.

Before the Lord promises any cleansing on his part, he requires this kind
of purging on our part. Iam. 4.8.9.
This is clear in the Epistle of James, where he urges them to draw near
unto the Lord, (to wit, in the ministry of the word, in partaking of the holy
Sacrament, in faithful and fervent prayer, and the rest of God ordinances) and
then he tells them, that God will draw near unto them, namely, in his
mercy and goodness, and in all the fruits and effects thereof. But then they
must wash themselves: for he is a God of pure eyes, and cannot endure
iniquity, and therefore he says, Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge
your hearts ye hypocrites. But they might reply, and say, Is it so easlie a
matter to cleanse our hearts, and our hands? Does not sin cleave fast, and
stick close unto the soul?

It does so indeed; and yet if they would follow his direction, he shows them
a way how they might quickly be rid of their corruptions, so that they
should not reign over them though they did remain in them: and that is,
afflict your selves, and sorrow, and weep: let your laughter, and jesting, and
foolish sporting, be turned into nourning; and your joy into heaviness, and
lamentation for your iniquities and prouocations, whereby you have incensed the
Lord: and then though they were brought never so low, yet if they begin to cast
down themselves before the Lord, he will assuredly raise them up, as there it
follows.

This duty is further commanded in the Prophecy of Jeremy, where he
speaks to the whole Church of the Jews, Iere. 4.14.
in this manner: O lerusalem, wash thy heart from thy wickedness, that thou
may be saved: how long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within thee? In
which place is declared what they must wash; their hearts: For they being made
clean, whatsoever proceeds from thence must needs besutable theunto.
Secondly, from what they must wash them; from their wickedness: and lastly, to
what end; that they might be saved. As if the Prophet had told them in plainer
terms; God is ready to give you salvation, and deliverance, both from your
sins, and from your miseries: but your own backwardnes hinders good things
from you: you do not your duty, and therefore God withholds his mercy, and
therefore wash thine heart, O Jerusalem, that thou may be saved. And that
they needed this washing, he proves by this evil fruit that did continually
spring out of their sinful hearts, saying, How long shall thy wicked
thoughts remain within thee? As if he had said: If you doubt of the badnesse
of your hearts, look what thoughts you entertain therein; in the night, and
in the day: when you are at home, and when you are abroad: on the way as you
ride, or walk: on your beds as you sleep, or wake etc. Consider how many
vain and idle thoughts: how many worldly and covetous desires: how many
lustful and carnal, yea wicked and impious imaginations, you have swarming,
and as it were mustering together by whole troops and armies within your
minds, and within your hearts: every one of which is a sufficient summons to
put you in mind, to cleanse your souls: for if they were pure and undefiled,
such cogitations and affections woul dnot be stirring there, neither so often,
nor so much as now they are. Joel 2.13.


The Prophet Joel in like sort urges the same upon those of his time, saying,
Rent your hearts, and not your clothes, etc. But how must that be done? verse
immediately going before; Turn unto the Lordwith all your heart, and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning: which is thus much in effect; use
all means to get godly sorrow, and holy remorse for sin: for that is it,
that will bruise the heart indeed, The effect of godly sorrow.
and make it gentle and pliable. For as worldly grief and heaviness does harden
the heart, and make it like a flinte: so spiritual grief does soften it, and
makes it tender as flesh: and a fleshie heart is always a clean heart, as
does appear in that former place of Ezekiel, Ezeck. 36.25.
where softnes of heart is set down as an effect that ever follows upon the
through cleansing of the heart. And as this is commended: so the practice
thereof is Prophesied and foretold by Zacherie in his 12. Zache. 12.10. etc.
Chap. and the good issue and effect thereof declared in the 13. Chap. As
touching the first, we may read it in the 10.11.12.13.14. verses of the former
Chapter. I will pour upon the house of David (says God) and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace etc. and they shall lament, etc.
where we may note first, the grieuousnesse of their mourning, (when once Gods
holy spirit has entered into their hearts) in that they should make such
woeful lamentation, as one would do for his only son, and for his first
borne: or as the Israelites did for Josiah, their godly, and zealous, and
faithful King, and governor, 2 Chro. 35.25
when he was slain by Necho King of Egypt, in the valley of Megiddo, where
Jeremy, and all the rest mourned for him with an exceeding bitter lamentation.
And secondly, we may note the sincerity thereof, in that they should not
weep for company (as an hypocrite may do) but every one aparte, and in secret
before the Lord. For so it is said, And the land shall bewail,

Then for the good effect that should follow thereupon, it is contained and
expressed Chap. Zache. 13.1.
13. verse 1. the words are these: In that day there shall be a fountain
opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin,
and for uncleanness. Whence it may be gathered, that when once we fall a
washing in this sort, we shall not long wash alone, but God will join with us,
and open a fountain of mercy unto us, to wash away all manner of sins,
whatsoever they are, or have been; and to give us grace in steed thereof: And
this promise is made, not only to the house of David: that is, See Chap. 12.8.
for this interpretation.
to strong Christians: but also to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that is, to
weaker Christians. Till such time as we find this work of the spirit in us,
albeit we be of the number of Gods elect, we have nothing to do with that
fountain: no key can open it, but this alone, of true and hearty grief and
remorse for our evil works, and ways that are not good.

This point may be further confirmed unto us by plain reasons drawn from the
Scriptures of God: for,

1 First, there can be no sound repentance, No sound repentance without
mourning for sin.
therefore when Ephraim fell to repentance, God himself witnesses that he
heard him lamenting and bewailing his former sinnefulnesse, and the folly of
his youth. Till then, though there be many requests for the obtaining of
mercy; yet they proceed from the lips, not from the heart: and till such time
as men be wounded in their souls for their sins, they and their prayers
shall be rejected. For, The Sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: Psalm. 51.
a contrite and broken heart he will not despise. And when David's sin
troubled him, and was ever before him, Wash me thoroughly from my sin etc. And
again, Purge me with Isope, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shallbee
whiter then snow.

2 A second reason, No faith without it.
that without the same it is impossible we shoud have any faith: for the
promise is made to them that are weary of their corruptions; as a poor
prisoner is of his bolts and Irons: Luke 4.18
even to them that account sin to be a bondage and a captivity unto them.
Math. 11.28.
And none have any warrant to come unto Christ, but those that are weary and
heavy laden: if they feel not their sickness, the Lord Jesus Christ is not a
Physician for their turn: he will not bind up the wounds, nor cure the maladies
of any, but of those, who are touched and pained with the sense and feeling of
the same.

For reproof of those men and women that are audacious and venturous enough to
come before God, draw near with their lips, Matthew 15.8.
but their hearts are far from God: and therefore in vain they worship him.

Hence it comes to pass, that many offer themselves to receive the
Sacrament, the seal of the eternal covenant; and come to the word to hear
the promises of life, and yet depart without all comfort and assurance of Gods
favor, because they came not with tears for their transgressions and
rebellions against the Lord; nor with that piercing sorrow, which would go as
near them, and be as effectual in them, as if they shed abundance of tears;
because we will not do the lesser which belongs to us, God will not do the
greater which pertains to him.

Secondly, save his soul: and even in like sort will God deal with us; where
he loves most, he will check and rebuke most, till they grow to that
reformation which he requires, and aims at in their correction.

Now to the end we may the better get this holy affection of sorrow into our
hearts, Means.
we must use all helps needful for this purpose.

And first, because it is a supernatural work, Pray for it.
we must entreat the Lord according to his promise, Zach. 12. to put his
spirit into us, and thereby to mollify our stony hearts, as he has
couenanted, Ezekiel. 36. otherwise we may toil out our selves in vain, and
after a long and tedious strife be as far, nay, farther from a tender heart,
then we were at the beginning.

Secondly, as we must crave assistance from heaven,

1 First, to call to mind our many and great offenses against his majesty,
Aggrauate our sins.
and to lay before our eyes in as particular manner as we can, our corruptions
both original and actual, before and since our callings: considering how
grievous they have been; many of them being committed against our knowledge,
and consciences; yea and covenants made unto the Lord for the resisting and
forsaking of them. Further, we are to recount with our selves, of how long
continuance they have been: how offensive, how pernicious and infectious to
others; how many we have poisoned by them, of whose recovery we are altogether
uncertain: some of them (for ought we know to the contrary) being already in
torments in hell fire, for the sins whereinto we have drawn them: and
others (perchance) likely enough to go the same way after them, if the Lord
do not in mercy prevent them by his grace, etc.

These, and the like meditations, will cause our hearts (if they be not past
sense and feeling) somewhat to relent. Thus did Nehemiah aggrauate their sins
that lived in his time: Neh. 9.
and so did David his own corruptions; endeavoring in many words to make them
odious in his own eyes: Psalm. 51.
acknowledging that he was conceived in sin, (which was the fountain of
all) and brought forth in iniquity: that God requires truth in the inward
parts, but he had been hypocritical and falsehearted: that God had taught
him wisdom in the secret of his heart, but he had put that out of his
consideration, and cast it behind his back, when it should have restrained him
from all those ill courses that he took. These and many other circumstances,
are either plainly expressed, or by consequent necessarily implied in that 51.
Psalm, whereby he labors to set out the heinousness of his offenses, that
his own soul might abhor them, and all the world might see his utter
detestation of them.

Another excellent means is, Suffer admonition.
but with earnestness to entreat, the admonitions and reproves of those,
which have been, and are acquainted with our courses: for we are so full of
self-love, that others may easily discern more evil in us, then we can
epsy in our selves: and those of all other, are the best, and most faithful
friends, that will mercifully, and wisely (though sharply and roundly) tell us
of our faults: as Nathan dealt with David, when his heart had been a long time
hardened by lying in sins unrepented: 2. Sam. 12.
which private admonition of his (as we may observe) was a more effectual
means for his rousing out of that dead slumber, then any, or all the public
ordinances of God: as the sacrifices of the Law, and Sermons of the Prophets
etc. which all that while he had frequented. And sometime it is found by
experience yet still, that a wholesome, despise Prophesying, 1 These. 5.10. Heb.
13.22.
but suffer the words of exhortation in the assemblies of the Saints: so we
should admonish one an other, and be admonished one of an other, Heb. 3.13.
daily, in private, lest any be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin.

3 In the next place, Meditate of Gods infinite mercy in Christ.
when we by our own searching and examination, and by others plain and
faithful admonition, have found out a great sea of our corruptions, then let
us inwardly and seriously ponder upon the infinite mercy of the Lord our God,
in giving us his dearly beloved son: and the inconceiuable love of the
son, in submitting himself to become a ransom for us: and that without any
entreaty, desert, or desire on our part: yea, even then, when we were his
mortal enemies. This was it, that caused them, in the 12. of Zacherie, so to
mourn and lament, because they considered what Christ had suffered in their
behalf. And this should break and melt our hearts (as it did theirs) that we
wounded and pierced our dear Savior by our transgressions: for the
Chastisement of our peace was upon him, Isa. 53.5.
and by his stripes we were healed. If he would shed his precious blood for
us; why should we think it much to shed a few tears over him? and so the
meditation of the several sufferings of Christ, and of Gods gracious promises
made unto us, in, and through him, should cause our hearts to be dissolved into
tears.

4 Fourthly, we must as often as fit occasion is offered, Make use of others
crosses
where we may be put in mind of our woeful estate, by reason of our wicked
nature and sinful carriage, in violating the Lords holy precepts and
commandments: and this is commended as the part of a godly wise man by
Solomon, in Ecclesiastes; where it is said, Eccles. 7.6.
The heart of wise men is the house of mourning: but the heart of fools is in
the house of mirth. And the reason why this is a part of wisdom, is rendered in
the 4. verse. It is better to go to the house of mourning, then to the house
of feasting; because this is the end of all men; and the living shall lay it to
his heart.

And if others chastisements should affect us: Of our own
much more should Gods correcting hand upon our selves, move us: and and when
he smites us, we should join with him, and take his part, and smite our own
hearts; and then if Gods strokes on others, or on our selves, do make us
mourn for our rebellious behavior against the Lord, happy and blessed are
we: for so says the Prophet, Blessed is the man, O Lord, Psalm. 94.12.
whom thou chastisest, and teach in thy Law: and our Savior also, Blessed
are those that mourn, Mat. 5.4.
etc. therefore when we find our selves inclined to heaviness, in respect of
any outward scourge that lies on us, or on our friends; let us take hold of
the occasion, and turn the course of our grief another way: which if we can
attain unto, and make our sin to be our greatest sorrow, Christ Jesus shall
be our greatest joy: and we being mourners of Sion, shall be comforted in due
season: our iniquities shall be removed as a cloud, and scatered as a miste,
and we received into everlasting favor.

Thirdly, Sodom, and of Gomorrah, and have lived like beasts all their life
long? yet is there hope that they shall not be cast off: nay, if they can once
begin to rinse and purge their hearts, though their sins have been never
so horrible, and odious, and abominable; they may be assured of the free and
full pardon of them al; neither need they make any doubt at all hereof: for if
such kind of sinners might not attain to this, it were in vain for the Lord
to exhort them to repentance: but we see here, that though these Jews had
received many blessings; heard many instructions and threatenings out of the
word, and felt many corrections from Gods own hand, and nothing would drive
them from their accustomed course of rebellion, yet notwithstanding all this,
if now at last they would grieve their hearts in good earnest, and not pass
over the matter with some slight mourning, (for so far wicked Saul went,
when David had told him of his fault in pursuing him that was innocent) but
strive for a soaking, and working sorrow: if I say, they would labor for this,
the Lord offers them mercy, so that they should forthwith be disburdened of
the guilt, and freed from the punishment of all their former wickedness. For
when sin is once cast out of the heart, God has no quarrel against the
party; and it can never lurk there long, except it be fed with excuses and
allowance. It never sticks so close, nor cleaues so fast, but godly sorrow
will make a separation betwixt it and the soul, can say somewhat for it: but if
we do not nourish it in our souls, but ba nish it thence, we shall be accepted
whatsoever our life has formerly been: for as God will never sprinckle the
blood of his own son upon a carnal, and proud, and profane heart: so he
will never deny to give the merits of his son unto an heavy, and
sorrowful, and contrite spirit.

[Take away the evil of your works from before mine eyes.] As if he should
have said; hitherto you have but dissembled in the duties performed by you:
which hollownesse of yours, though men could not so well see and discern; yet
the Lords eyes have been and are still cast upon your doubling, and halting,
and false dealing: and therefore if you would have him to look favorably upon
you; take away from his sight that which causes him to frown upon you: not
only your evil works (for so hypocrites may do) but the evil of your good
works: for here (we must understand) God did not aim at the subversion and
overthrow of the former duties of religion, but wishes them to do the same
works of piety still, but in a better sort then they were wont to do them:
whence this doctrine offers it self for our learning; that,

A Christian must not only do good things, Good things must be done in a good
manner.
but must do them in a good manner: otherwise, God may, and will reject the
works, and confound the doers of them.

This people here had many ontward observations, as does appear from verse 12.
to the 16. Yet because their services were not performed in faith and love; God
did utterly abhor and detest them. They would keep the Sabbaths, and
frequent the solemn assemblies, but they would learn nothing at all: though
their bodies were there, their hearts were not there; but either about their
business in the family, or their affairs and dealings in the world; thinking
how to revenge such or such an injury; how to relieve themselves in such or
such a necessity, or the like, or perchance worse matters. They would make
long prayers, but their hearts were full of wrath, and their minds full of
doubting: and so in other exercises of religion, still they mingled their own
corruption, in so much that God could have no liking of them. Such were the
Scribes and Pharisees also, who used to preach, to give much alms; to pray,
and fast often; and had a very smoth outside: for so much Christ grants them,
that they were painted Sepulchers, fair to behold and look upon: and graves
so covered over with greensward, that one might walk over them again and
again, and yet never perceive any rotten bones therein. Notwithstanding all
this, the vengeance of God is denounced against none more often and earnestly
by our Savior, then against that kind of people, as appears plainly in the
Gospel. Mat. 23.
And why? because they took not away the evil of their works: for which
cause, the Lord Jesus tells them, Luke 16.15.
Ye are they which justify your selves before men, but God knows your
hearts: for that which is highly esteemed among men, is abominable in the sight
of God.

And the like, the Prophet Isaiah lays unto the Jews charge elsewhere, Isa.
29.13.
saying, This people come near unto me with their mouth, and bonour me with
their lips, but have removed their heart far from me. He blames them not,
for that they came not to Church, or that they refused to make an outward
semblance and show of worshipping him; either in word or deed, (for herein they
were very forward) but for that they brought a lame sacrifice, or rather a
dead carcass; presenting before God the outward man, but not caring to bring
before him the inward man, which he chiefly regards and looks after; and
without which the other is of no reckning with him, but is esteemed to be a
vain and sinful worship.

And the same detestation of such hypocritical serving of him, the Lord
shows in an other place of this Prophecy. Where first he declares what
kind of worshippers he requires and delights in. Isa. 66.2.3.
To him will I look (sath he,) even to him that is poor, and of a contrite
spirit and trembles at my words. Thus ought all to be disposed and affected,
that expect any favor from the Lord: that because he is so holy, and
mighty, and glorious, they must come with fear and trembling, through a sight
and feeling of their own baseness and unworthiness. Which if they strive to
do, the Lord promises that he will look upon them with a merciful and
gracious eye. Then in the next verse, he sets down what account he makes
of ceremonious worshippers, that contented themselves with offering oblations
of bullocks, and sheep, etc. thinking that God was beholding to them for the
same: they trembled not at the word, neither were sorrowful, nor heavy
hearted for their sins: yet because they were at cost and charges to serve
God in sacrifices and incense, they thought themselves as good as the best: but
the Lord shows there that he condemns and abhors them and their
oblations, saying, he that offers a sacrifice, and does not offer himself,
it is all one as if he were a murderer (for to that effect are the words) He
that kills a bullock, is as if he slew a man: verse 3.
and he that sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off a dogs neck, (which was
then an unclean beast, and rejected (amongst others) by the Leuiticall law) he
that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines blood: (which was likewise
forbidden at that time, and counted an abomination to be offered to the Lord.)
And as for their incense, and bowing down in Gods house, he shows that it is
as if they bowed to an Idol, and blessed it: it was as hateful and loathsome in
Gods eyes, as the most vile and monstrous Idolatry that was. For he required
of them in those outward oblations, that they should have spiritual
affections: verse. 1.2.4.
that his hand had formed the heavens and fashioned all the wonderful works
that are on the earth. And they were not so witty to deceive the Lord, as he
was wise and mighty, both to hunt them out; and to execute strange and
fearful judgments upon them.

Besides these places, there are reasons to confirm this Doctrine: for,

1. First, God does as strictly command the manner of our obedience, as the
matter of it; and looks as much that it should be well performed, as that it
be performed. He enioynes the Minister not only to preach true and sound
doctrine, but to divide the word aright, and to apply it wisely and fitly,
giving every one their portion in due season. He commands the people, not
only to come to the Sermon, (for so the wickedest may do) but to come with a
good and honest heart. He bids us not only to pray, but to pray in the
holy Ghost: (as Jude speaks) and to pray fervently, as James says, Iam. 3.16.
The prayer of the righteous avails much, if it be fervent. And so for all
other duties, he would have us to be careful how we do them, as well as
that we do them.

Secondly God is a spirit, John 4.14.
and therefore will be worshipped, not in outward ceremony alone, but in
spirit and truth: give him the best words that may be, if we do not give him
our hearts all is nothing worth.

Judas dealt best with Christ of all the disciples in appearance: for when all
shrunk from him, he stuck to him; came and bowed himself before him;
saluted and kissed him. Who would not say now (had he not been privy to Judas
his heart) that he was the true and faithful friend above all the rest, that
would show himself thus friendly in the time of adversity? Yet the swords and
staves of those that apprehended Christ, were not so odious unto him, as was
Judas his kiss that betrayed him, because he had an ill and corrupt mind,
and a treacherous and false heart in that which he did. And such are the
services of all hypocrites, even Judas his kisses: and therefore they shall be
requited with Judas his reward, except they reform their hearts, and amend
their works.

This makes for the great reproof,

Of the works 1 Of religion. 2 Of love and mercy. 3 Of our ordinary
callings. 4 Of recreation.


And first to give instance in the exercises of religion; Works of religion.
Evils of hearing.
who can clear himself therein? For if men come unto Sermons, and offer unto
the Lord their bodily presence, do not the most think they have acquitted
themselves well? Albeit in the mean while they be altogether negligent in
making preparation for this work, by searching their souls to cast out the
leaven of corruption, which will hinder the powerful operation of the word: and
by getting that sight of their wants, that might cause them to come with an
eager appetite unto Gods house. They seldom, or at least very coldly, pray
unto the Lord to give them an understanding mind, and a teachable heart to
profit by the means: but for the most part, thrust in themselves ruedly with a
proud and unprepared heart, and with unruly and distempered affections; that
when they stand in Gods holy presence, are wandering from the duties in hand,
and running after their covetousness, or after their delights: and so if the
word fly in at the one ear, it flies out as fast at the other. And they do
not mingle it with faith, as they should do, but with theirowne corruptions,
Hebr. 4.
which hinder the effectual working of it: and so it seals up unto many,
their own just condemnation, in steed of being an instrument of God for their
edification and salvation. And as for Gods own children, in steed of those
excellent graces that might be thereby wrought in them, it oftentimes hardens
their hearts, and fittes them for sharp correction.

So for prayer, whereas they should lift up pure hands without wrath, and
without doubting; Corruptions in prayer.
many never care what manner of sacrifice they offer unto the Lord: but are full
of passion which distracts them, and full of unbelief which excludes them from
having interest in God blessings: and so their prayers tumble down again upon
their heads, and bring upon them judgments in steed of mercies. They may truly
say, that they have sought for help often, and have had no hearing; but it is
long of themselves: for the sea is not more full of water; then God is full of
mercy to all that call upon him in truth: and if they could put away their
unbelief and hypocrisy, and other evils that are mixed with their suites and
supplications, they should find that none is so kind a Father, as God is: and
they should not be so ready to ask, but he would be more ready to give, if
so be they did come in faith, and ask aright as God requires. The like may
be said for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: diverse there are that partake
of it as often as their neighbors do; but they are so far from receiving
benefit and comfort therefrom, that it proves hurtful and uncomfortable unto
them: and why? because they put not away the evils of this work. Evils to be
removed by communicants.


But what are they (may some demand?) They are diverse.

One common evil,

2 A second evil to be removed from this work, notwithstanding their often
communicating at the Lords table.

The woman in the Gospel that was troubled with a bloody issue, said in her
heart before she came to Christ, Math. 9.21.
and according to her faith it was unto her: for that touch healed both her
soul and body: yet she had no special commandment to come, nor promise of
good success if she did come, nor experience of any in her case that had sped
well before her: if she were thus confident, having had so few means to
confirm her, what strength of faith should we come withal, and what a
steadfast expectation of mercy should we have settled in our hearts, when we
come to Christ Jesus in this his ordinance? seeing that we have both a
commandment, and a promise, and the examples before our eyes of such as have
found unspeakable good by this holy Sacrament: and there is more reason why
our Savior should pity us, then why he should pity that woman: for we have a
more dangerous issue of sin in our souls, then she had of blood in her body;
and many of us have been longer troubled with it, then she was with hers: and
he came rather to heal the sickness of the soul, then to cure the maladies
of the body. And besides all the former, he shall have more glory by saving
us from sin, then by healing her from a bodily infirmity: and the taking,
and eating of the blessed Sacrament of the eternal covenant, is much more
effectual to draw virtue from Christ, then the bare touching of his garment
was: and he is nearer unto us now in his gracious presence, then he was unto
her then, in his bodily presence.

This we should believe and rest upon: and if we do not, we offer unto the
Lord the greater injury: for he is no deceiuer, but purposes to bestow that
upon us in truth, which he makes offer of in show: even to give us as full a
communion with the righteousness of the second Adam, as we had with the
corruption of the first Adam. Even as the branches do partake of the sap of
the Vine: and the members of the body, have life and motion derived unto them
from the head: so shall we receive grace and life from Jesus Christ, in, and by
his holy means, so often as we do thankefully use them.

3 A third evil that must be put away, Uncharitableness.
is uncharitableness, and unmercifulness: for that is a feast of love, where we
are to receive further assurance of Gods love to us, and an increase of our
love to God and men. And how can we look for mercy, if we show no mercy? or
how can we expect from the Lord a general acquittance for all our debts and
trespasses, when we will not pass by small matters of offense in our brethren?
Therefore as we would find any favor in heaven, let us put away from us that
unloving disposition that is naturally ingrafted in every man's heart; and
strive to get in our souls, and to express in our lives, a true love and
Christian affection. And to the end we may show indeed that we have this
excellent virtue in us,

1 First, Rules of charity. Matthew. 18.35.
if thou have a grudge against any, labor from thy heart to forgive, and for
ever to forget, whatsoever injury or indignity has been offered unto thee.

2 Secondly, if thou thy self have done wrong to any other, seek to undo it
again. Many when they have been injurious unto their neighbors, and revenged
themselves upon them, will be ready to plead for themselves, and say, I am
satisfied, I hope I need not seek reconciliation with him, for I bear him no
malice. But have you not given him cause of grief; Math 5.23.
else your sacrifice cannot be accepted: though you have nothing against him,
yet if he have somewhat against you, the rule of love requires that you
should seek peace with him, if he will not seek it of you.

The like might be said for singing of Psalms, Singing of Psalms.
men will use it for a fashion sake, because they would not seem to reject any
religious service: But if they would have any edification or consolation
thereby, they must sing with the heart, as well as with the voice: and make
melody to the Lord, as well as outwardly before men.

And as these and the like corruptions are to be separated from the works of
piety toward God, so

Secondly, Works of mercy.
As in the matter of alms: if we think to merit thereby, as Papists do; or
seek vain glory thereby, as Pharisees do, we put not away the evil of that
work, and therefore God will reject the work itself.

So for admonition and reproof, Admonition.
they are very necessary to be given: yet if men do these duties in wrath and
distemper, they shall do more hurt by their bitterness, and passion, then
they can possibly do good by their admonition.

Thirdly, concerning the works of our ordinary callings, Works of our
callings
as

First, for masters; The masters duty.
as it concerns them more particularly in their places) it is their duty to
deal with their servants by admonishing them, and by reproving them; yea, and
if need be, Reproouing.
which is as necessary for them as their meat and drink: but then they must
beware of wrath and outrage; of bitterness and cruelty; and do as the Lord does
here; he tells the Jews, that they were worse then bruit beasts, and nothing
inferior to the Sodomites in sin, and impiety: but how; does he leave them
here? Oh no, he deals mercifully with them, and shows them how they may amend
all, for otherwise they would have fretted or dispaired. So must masters deal;
not minister a sharp and biting reproof, and then fling away from their
servants in a passion, for that were not to deal as a Surgeon that comes to
heal; but as a robber, many complaints: never man or woman was troubled with
such children, or such servants: Why? what is the matter. Oh we have reproved
them, and told them of their faults so often, and so earnestly, and yet there
is no reformation, nor amendment of any thing: but look back to your self
now, and perhaps the greatest blame will lie upon you.

You are still exhorting,

Therefore, let masters of families, and parents, (and likewise husbands when
they are to deal this way with their wives) be careful to do this duty in
wisdom and moderation, in love and tender affection to the souls of the
parties offending. If the faults be private, let the admonition be private:
if they be great, bring strong arguments to convince the offender, and to beat
down his sin: but spare tart, and bitter, and reuiling speeches, that will
rather exasperate, then work any cure upon them that are faulty, and
blameworthie.

So for laboring in our vocations. Labor.
and to eat the bread of painfulness, so that a moderation be kept, that
masters and servants be not oppressed; but then we must take heed that we
labor not for covetousness, nor in desire of filthy lucre, but in conscience
and obedience to God: continual coffeehouse; and ever turmoyled and tossed
with some inordinate affection: or otherwise if we can get advantage by doing
of wrong, we shall not much stick at it: and if a commodity lie in our way,
we will be sure our neighbor shall be a looser, rather then our selves.
Whereas if we aimed at Gods glory in our dealings and affairs of this life,
we would rather suffer wrong, then do wrong: and help others, then hurt
them, knowing that when we do best, we always speed best.

And as masters must herein look to themselves: so must servants in their
places; they must beware of eie-seruice: Servants duty.
for many there are, who when their masters eye is cast upon them, will bestir
them very busily, and do much: but when his eye is off them, and he absent
from them, they will either do nothing at all, or very little in comparison of
that they might and ought to do. Such must remember that they should serve the
Lord Christ in their places, whose fiery eyes are still upon them, to reward
them if they be industrious and paineful: and to punish them if they be
careless, idle and wasteful. Fourthly and lastly, for our recreations, which
being lawful, Recreations.
yet seeing they are mingled with many horrible corruptions by the users, or
rather by the abusers of them, we must be likewise careful to put away the
evils of them: as,

First, Corruptions thereof.
the evil end that is propounded by those that are much addicted thereunto:
and what is that? for the most part, not to refresh themselves, The evil end
of them.
either by Gods Law, or by man's: neither shall they ever be able to answer the
loosing or getting of such money before Gods judgment seat. Yet that is the
devils sauce, whereby their recreations are usually sweetened, which else would
not be so well pleasing unto their fleshly taste: which is a sufficient argument
to confirm the unlawfulness of such exercises, to those that so use them,
because that this mixture, with all,

A second mischief that usually accompanies such exercises, Mispending of
time.
is, mispending of too much time in their vain delights: which may well be
called vain, when they either wholly, or for the most part hinder men from
Gods service, and from the works of their callings, and make them altogether
vain, and idle, and unprofitable burde^s of the earth. Satan that old serpent
(whom they serve that are thus in bondage to their fond and wretched lusts)
has many cunning wiles, and crafty fetches, both to allure them into his
snares, and to hold them fast when he has entangled them: and this is one
amongst the rest;

And as in gaming, so in other pastimes (as they call them) they are so
excessive in respect of time, that in steed of the right end of them (which is
to quicken and revive the spirits, and to fit men for matters of greater
importance) they pervert them to a quite contrary end, and make them means to
weary and tire out themselves: so that they are for that day, utterly disabled
for any work of religion, or of their callings.

Yet it is strange to hear how those that carry the name and profession of
Christianity, will shift off every wholesome admonition and rebuke that is
brought against them, with this, what? will you not allow us recreation? but it
might be demanded of many of them, to their shame, what is your vocation, that
talk so much of recreation? what sore labor have you undertaken so to weary
you, that you should stand in need of so much refreshing? In truth if things
were well examined, we should find, that such make their sports to be their
vocation, (if they have any at all) not their recreation. For they do nothing
else, or very little else, but eat and drink, and sleep, and play, and so
consume their days, and spend the greatest part of their life like Epicures,
that dream of no other happiness, but of following their delights, and giving
themselves over to beastly voluptuousnes and sensuality. And whereas
recreation should be used only as physic, they make it their ordinary
diet. If we should hear a man always inquiring after skillful Physicians,

A third evil in recreations, is, inward fretting, Fretting and chasing,
blaspheming.
and fearful blasphemies against the God of heaven: and horrible
imprecations, and cursed speeches against his creatures; which are too too
usual in their carding and dicing, etc. For there are none more outrageous
people, then those that are carried away with the stream of those unruly lusts.
And whereas many of them will confess, that these things are amiss, and
should be mended, but they know not how to do it: let such know, that how
lawful soever such recreations are unto others, it is sure they are unlawful
to them. they undertake it, nor give thanks for, when they have finished it:
seeing that we are commanded, Whatsoever we do in word or deed, Coloss. 3.17.
do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks unto God the Father
through him. If such men therefore cannot remove the evils of this work,

Thus have we seen (as particularly as the time would permit) what dross of
corruption is to be purged away from the several actions and duties, wherein
upon several occasions, and according to our several callings, we are to be
busied and employed. These evils therefore we must with all conscionable and
faithful endeavor seek to remove: and that from before Gods eyes. For whereas
many may have this conceit: no man can charge me, I will never accuse my self,
and my companions will certainly conceal, and keep all to themselves, and
therefore I need not fear the disclosing of my actions and dealings, From
before mine-eies.
this will not serve their turns: for though men cannot touch them, yet there
is an all-seeing God, that always looks upon them: and where his eye is
displeased, his hand will surely be avenged. And therefore if we would have any
blessing from any of Gods ordinances, Psalm. 26.6.
let us wash our hands in innocence, when we compass his Altar, (as the
Prophet David speaks) and cleanse our inward parts from that that God may
dislike, as well as our outward behavior from that, which men may disallow of.

[Cease to do euil] From these words, this doctrine might be raised: that

It is not sufficient, Doctrine 3. where the reader may find the same
prosecuted at large.

The third Sermon of the Lords Supper.
ISAIAH. 1. 17 Learn to do well: seek judgment: relieve the oppressed:
judge the fatherless: and defend the widdowe. 18 Come now, and let us reason
together, says the Lord: though your sins were as crimson, they shall be made
white as snow: though they were red like skarlet, they shall be as woll. 19
If ye consent to obey, ye shall eat the good things of the Land.

Learn to do well.] All must be Christ his Scholars.
Now he proceeds to declare what they must do, and bids them do well:
and because there was in them no fitness hereunto, therefore he wishes them,
to [Learne] to do well. Whence the Doctrine is: that,

All godly, and penitent persons, while they live in this world, must always
be learning to do well: and apply their minds to know, what duties of
religion, and of righteousness they ought to perform, and in what manner they
must be performed.

So says our Savior, Take my yoke upon you, Math. 11.29.
and learn of me, etc. For I am meek, and lowly in heart, and ye shall
find rest unto your souls. As if he should have said: If any take up my yoke,
and continue not to be a learner, from my word, how to bear the same, either
he himself will be weary of it, or others will persuade him to take up the
devils yoke, or men's yoke: (which is much at one: for they are both of one
side) therefore learn of me, (says Christ.) And that they might the sooner be
drawn thereunto, he remoues the reasons that might discourage them. for I am
mecke, and therefore not so prone and ready to fall out with men that have
corruption, and are weary of it, as you imagine.

Another might say:

For the answering of that objection, he is lowly in heart: and the property
of those that are lowly, is, never to contemn any for their defects and
imperfections; but rather, to pity them, and help them: and therefore they
may boldly have recourse unto such a teacher as our Savior is, and expect to
be still further informed by him in all the ways of godliness and
righteousness.

In this regard, Math. 10.42. John 15.8.
Christians are called Christ's disciples, which signifies nothing else, but to
be Christ his Scholars. And it is given as a note and brand of a forlorn and
desperate wicked person, Psalm. 36.3.
that he has left off to understand to do good. And on the contrary, it is
set down as an evident sign of a marvelous sanctified and holy man, to
acknowledge still that he knows but in part: that he knows nothing as he
ought to do: and to cry out, 1. Cor. 13 9. 1 Cor. 8.2. Psalm. 19.12. Psalm.
119.33.
who knows the errors of this life? cleanse me from my secret sins. Teach
me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it unto the end: with
many the like requests. And it must needs be so; that they that are truly
converted, and in any good measure acquainted with their own hearts, should be
thus instant to be still further directed and taught.

First, The mind is blind, the heart deceitful.
have very little in comparison of that they should have, and might have had,
if they had constantly, and conscionablie employed themselves in the use of the
means which they have enioied. They know well enough, how ready their
fleshly hearts are to deceive them, unless they go often to God by fervent
prayer, and to men by holy conference to be directed in the right path wherein
they should walk. And this makes them so desirous of some understanding. They
wisely consider, that the drift, and whole scope of all their actions, should
be to please the Lord, and therefore they would most willingly be informed
what his good will and pleasure is in every thing.

2 Secondly, he has commanded them to grow in grace, 1. Pet. 3.18.
There is no further growth in faith, or in any other grace then there is in
knowledge. A man may know more then he believes; but he can never believe
more then he knows. True knowledge is as it were the chief wheel in a
clock, that draws all the rest of Gods graces after it: and if that stand
still, all the rest must needs stand still with it. And therefore it was, that
David prayed so often, and so earnestly, Psalm. 119.
Teach me thy statutes: open my eyes that I may see the wonders of thy Law:
etc. Why? (might some say) was not the Prophet well taught, when he was a
teacher of others, and one of the holy men of God, whom the spirit used as an
instrument to pen a great part of the Scripture? Yes surely, few were better
instructed then he was: yet he found such great blindness of mind, and
deceitfulness of heart still, when he came to matters of practice, that he
never cease crying for more understanding of heavenly things. As also the
wise man exhorts, to call for knowledge, to seek her as silver, Prou. 2.3.4.
and to search for her as for treasures. That as covetous men never think they
have gold and silver enough: so Christians must never think they have heavenly
wisdom enough, 1. Cor. 14.1.
but still covet more and more after spiritual things.

1 Here are those sharply to be reproved, families: they have not been so
many years married, nor lived so long in the world, but they know sufficiently
without teaching, what belongs to the duty of an husband, of a father, 1.
Sam. 1.11.13.14.
but they and others rued it, and felt the smart of their defects that way. How
foulely was Eli overtaken through ignorance, in censuring, and condemning good
Hannah for drunkenness, when she was pouring out her soul before the Lord,
because she moved her lips only, and uttered no words in his hearing, but
spoke in her heart unto God? And the like might be said of many indiscreete
speeches, and actions of the disciples of Christ, before the resurrection, and
till they had received the spirit of understanding in a more plentiful
measure. Want of wisdom.


And to come more particularly to our selves: who has that wisdom that he
should, have to make his use of prosperity, or adversity? to profit by Gods
hand in mercy or in judgment, upon our selves, or others? nay, who has
attained to that soundness of judgment, as to understand the Scriptures so
well as he should when he reads them, or hears them read by others? or
(which is a far easier matter) to make a right use of them in applying them
to his own soul, when they are plainly and soundly preached, and expounded
unto him? he that thinks that he knows any thing fully and perfectly in
these matters, let him be assured that he knows nothing as yet, Proverb.
as he ought to know: and as for him that is wise in his own conceit, there
is more hope of a fool then of him. For a natural fool, though he be not
capable of instruction, and advise, yet by the whip may be kept within some
compass: Prouer. 27.22.
but nothing will be available with a conceited fool. Though thou should
bray him in a mortar (as the wiseman speaks) among wheat braied with a
p^stell yet will not his foolishnes depart from him,: you may sooner drive his
soul out of his body, then you can drive folly out of his soul.

This is for our instruction:

Thirdly, here is matter of great consolation for us: learn to do well.
Proposing of good questions.
Therefore they may take this for their comfort, who are still proposing of
good questions, what they must do, and how they must do it? by what means
they may get out of this or that sin, and attain to such or such a grace?
how they may be most profitable, helpefull and comfortable to themselves and
others? this was the practice of the Publicans and fouldiers, and of all sorts
that were inwardly touched in their consciences by the preaching of John
Baptist: Luke 3.
every one of them came unto him, saying, what must we do? and of the Gayler,
who when once he began to be humbled, came trembling, and fell down before
Paul and Silas, saying, Sirs, Act. 16.29.30.
what must I do to be saved? for howsoever Gods servants have learned for the
most part, what things in general must be done, yet still they have many
scruples and doubts in their consciences: as, whether such and such things come
within the compass of their callings? what warrant there is for it in the
word? whether it may be done at such a time, in such a place, before, with or
amongst such persons? what circumstances they must observe in their proceeding?
what affection they must carry in the matter; and the like. For they find such
a Sea of hypocrisy and pride in their hearts, that they think they are never
sufficiently furnished with wisdom and goodness for the performance of holy
duties, but are still icalous and suspicious of themselves, lest they should be
led aside with byrespects.

Howsoever such men and women think, and speak hardly of themselves, and are
still bewailing their manifold imperfections, and failings in every good
exercise, yet the Ministers of God, Learn to do well.

[Seeke judgment.] Now because men will very easily shift off general
precepts, he contenteth not himself with the former exhortation, but as he
had bidden them to do well, so here he comes to particulars, and shows
them wherein their chief and special care and endeavor should be to do
well, Seek judgment, etc. He had before charged them, that their hands were
full of blood: and that their great men, and men of authority were notable
oppressors and spoilers of their brethren, and neighbors that were meaner then
themselves: following after rewards, and not iudgeing the fatherless and the
widow, nor suffering them to have equity according to the goodness of their
cause: but rather abusing their authority to the hurt of the good, and to the
maintenance of the bad, in their lewd and sinful practices. If honest men had
never so good a cause, and never so good a conscience, yet if they brought them
no bribes, they were likely to go by the worst: and if sinful and wretched
persons had never so ill a cause, yet if they presented them with great gifts,
they should carry it from all others. Now the Prophets purpose being to bring
these men to repentance, he says, Seek judgment, that is, Search
diligently, what ought to be done according to your places; and when you know
it, see that that you practice it. Whence arises this point: that,

It is a note of true repentance, and callings. For look what is here said of
Magistrates, Every one must do his own duty.
and men of higher places, that if they would manifest the soundness of their
repentance, and the uprightness of their hearts, they should leave off their
oppression, and fall to equal dealing betwixt man and man: the like holds in
all other callings, and among men of all sorts and degrees, to wit, that they
put to their utmost endeavor, to find out what are the works of that vocation
wherein God has set them, and accordingly to do the same, reforming the
special things, wherein they have faulted heretofore.

This Job sets down as a mark, that he was no hypocrite, (though his friends
injuriously charged him to be such a one) because he was careful of those
good duties that did pertain to him in his place, both as he was a
Magistrate, and as he was a rich man; in both which respects, he showed all
good faithfulness; for as he was a Magistrate, he says, I relieved the poor
that cried, and him that had none to help him. Job 29.12.
The blessing of him that was ready to perish, came upon me, and I caused the
widows heart to rejoice: I put on justice, and it covered me: my judgment
was a robe and a crown, etc. Neither would he shift off matters to ease
himself, and to free himself from pains and troubles; but (says he) If I
knew not the cause, I would search it out diligently: and though the pray were
in their hands, nay, as it were in the mouths of those that were strong, and
fierce as Lions: Yet he says, that he would break theiawes of the
unrighteous man, and pluck the pray out of his teeth. He would adventure
himself for the innocent in a righteous cause, though it were with as great
danger, as for a man to pull the pray out of the jaws of some hungry and
savage wild beast, that would be ready to devour any that should come near
him.

Then as he was a rich man, Job. 29. Job 31.16.
he shows that he disposed his wealth to that end which God had appointed.
I was (says he) a father unto the poor. I restrained him not of his desire,
nor caused the eyes of the widow to fail. I did not eat my morsels alone,
but the fatherless did eat thereof. And from his youth he grew up with me,
as with a father, etc. I saw none perish for want of clothing, nor any poor
without covering: but their loins blessed me, because they were warmed with
the fleece of my sheep.

Further, that this faithfulness in a man's own calling, is a notable
testimony of an honest heart, and of a good conscience, it appears by the
speech of our Savior, where he approves himself, and his actions unto his
father, saying, Father, John 17.4.
I have glorified thee on the earth: how proves he that? I have finished the
work which thou gave me to do. Many times men set upon works which God
never commanded them to do, but which their own flesh, and Satan bade them
do: or if they begin to go about good works that the Lord commands, they
do not go through with the same, as Christ Jesus did: and therefore they
neither bring glory to Gods name, nor comfort unto themselves by that which
they do: but this is it indeed that will stand men in steed, when they shall
come to make their accounts before the Lords judgment seat, if they can
truly say, Lord I have done the work that thou did appoint me; I have
been exercised in those businesses and affairs which thou did enjoin me,
and have gone through with the same. So, when the Lord Christ Jesus would
commend a worthy servant; what is the commendation that he has given him?
Matthew. 25.
that he has faithfully employed those talents and gifts, that his master
committed unto his trust, 1. Cor. 4.2.
unto his best advantage. And this (as the Apostle speaks) is required of
disposers, that every one be found faithful: That is, that they discharge
every one the duties that pertain unto them in their places, withal due care,
and conscionable regard.

This serves for the just reproof of those that make some show of
Christianity, obedient to their husbands, fearing to offend them: nor seeking
in all good and lawful things to content and please them. Such masters, and
husbands, and wives, can have little comfort of their faithfulness, when they
fail most in those things, wherein the power of godliness should most show it
self; namely in discharging a good conscience where they are tied so to do by
the nearest and strongest bonds.

And this is a great fault in diverse servants, who when they have gotten a
little knowledge of religon, and can discourse of some points thereof, begin to
think that then they have a dispensation to be idle and slothful: headstrong,
and masterfull, testie and impatient when they are told of their faults, and
the like. Oh this is a woeful use that they make of their reading, and hearing
the word of God: Titus 2.9.10.
if they had well observed that which most concerns them, they should have
found that the Lord commands servants, to please their masters in all things,
not answering again, and to show all good faithfulness, that they may adorn
the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. Ephesians. 6.5.
And again, Servants be obedient unto them, that are your masters according
to the flesh, with fear, and trembling, in singlenes of your hearts, as unto
Christ. And no less effectual is that other place of Paul to Timothy. Let as
many servants as are under the yoke, count their masters worthy of all honor,
1. Tim. 6.1.2.
that the name of God, and his doctrine be not evil spoken off. And they that
have believing masters, let them not despise them, because they are brethren,
but rather do service, because they are faithful and beloved, and partakers
of the benefit. And that was a thing worthy singular commendation in Jacob,
that he served Laban (though a covetous, Genesis 31.6.40.
deceirfull and hard master) with all his might. Being in the day consumed with
heat, and with frost in the night, his sleep also departing from his eyes.
And therefore those servants are much to be blamed, that make religion an
occasion of their unfaithfulness, which, by how much it is more thoroughly and
deeply rooted and settled in the hearts of any, should, and will make them more
true and trusty; more conscionable and fathfull to their rulers, and
governors. And the like may be said of children, what gifts of knowledge, and
speech soever they have, they can have no comfort of the same, unless they
give all honor and reverence, and show all duty and obedience unto their
parents, as the Lord commands them.

This may be an instruction unto us. we serve the Lord Christ in them, and
shall be sure of full reward from him. Oh but my calling is mean, and my
service base. Though your work be base, yet it is not a base thing to serve
such a master in it.

[Releeue the oppressed.] Having in the former words showed them that they must
do that which is just, and right: he comes now more particularly to declare
unto them wherein that consists, namely in showing mercy to such as are in
misery: and in being means of comfort unto them, that are in discomfor, tand
grief of heart. Whence this doctrine may be collected: that,

It is a most acceptable service unto the Lord, Mercy to the afflicted an
excellent service. Psalm 41.1.


This is a work so well pleasing unto God, that he pronounces him happy and
blessed that considers wisely, and judges charitably of the poor and needy:
though they have no ability to help them, nor to direct and counsel them;
yet if they can but prudently and mercifully consider with themselves, surely
this man or woman, have carried themselves so holily and blamelesly, that this
stroke is not fallen upon them for their wickedness, nor for their
foolishness, but for their good and comfort; as in the end it will appear.
This merciful judgment and censure concerning those that have many and
strange, and heavy crosses lying upon them, is a thing that God much regards,
and recompenceth in all that are so affected toward his poor distressed
servants. This also the Apostle James yields as an undoubted mark of true
religion, saying, Pure religion, Iam. 1.27.
and undefiled before God, even the father, is this, to visit the fatherless,
and widows in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of the world.
His meaning is not, that it is religion it self (for it is a thing belonging
to the first table) but a sign of the same, when our faith in God, and love
unto God, makes us pitiful and liberal toward the children and Saints of
God, and such as he would have respected and relieved.

So, at the great and general day of judgment, when all the world shall come
to receive sentence according to their works, whether good or evil, what is
the matter of commendation that is given to the elect, and the most evident
mark of difference between the sheep and the goats? even this, Mat. 15.35.
that they desired to do good, not in some one or two, or in some few, but in
every work of mercy, and of charity. That they fed the hungry, gave drink
unto the thirsty, clothed the naked, visited he sick and imprisoned. And on
the other side, the reprobate shall not be charged so much that they did hurt,
as that they did not the good that they might have done unto poor Christians
in their wants and miseries.

And further,

Every one will come to this, that if Christ Jesus should repair unto their
houses hungry, or thirsty, or cold, or naked, they would with all their hearts
part with any thing they have to refresh and relieve him: let such hear then
what Christ himself says to them that show mercy to the poor Saints. In as
much therefore as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren ye
have done it unto me.

Which is first for the great condemnation of them that do altogether shut up
their bowels of compassion from Gods children in their sorrows, Whosoever has
this worlds good, 1. John 3.17.
and sees his brother have need, (says the Apostle John) and shuts up his
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? This goes sore
against such; in not loving his children, they proclaim unto all the world,
that they love not God himself, and therefore are not beloved of him: and if
it be so with those that do not make manifest their love by showing mercy;
what shall we think of those that are so far from pitying, and releeuing
the distressed; that they are ready to add affliction to the afflicted. It Is
just upon you, (say they) your indiscretion and want of wisdom; in that you
made more ado then needs, and would be more precise then wise, and more
forward then your neighbors, etc. has brought you to all this woe and
misery. This is cruel and unmerciful dealing: if they would do them no good,
they should do them no hurt. Yet this was the case of Job and of David in their
great calamities and perplexities: and we may read of the lamentable
complaints that both of them made in that respect. If it be a mark of a
damnable person to withold mercy from the sorrowful and heavy hearted, then
what shall become of them that lay heavy burdens on those that are pressed
down too low before? if there shall be judgment without mercy, to them that
show no mercy, much more fearful shall their state be that are so full of
cruelty toward them whom the Lord so tenderly respects?

Here is a singular comfort for Gods children, who beholds their troubles, and
sees their tears, and is acquainted with all their griefs. And he that bids
others to be merciful, will not be unmerciful himself. And therefore it is,
that men do deny us help and comfort many times, because God would have us
draw nearer unto him; whose eyes are ever upon us,

Therefore let the Saints of God make full reckoning that one way, Psalm. 72.
or other they shall be provided for; if men will not, God will. Only let them
be sure that they be found in the number of those that be humble in spirit,
and broken in heart, for to such alone do the mercies of God appertain. If
one be a gamster, or an unthrift, a riotous person or a drunkard, or given out
to any such reproachful vice: or if there be any that will not take pains to
get their living, by diligence and labor in their honest calling, but give
themselves to idleness and sluggishnesse, God himself will not (in mercy at
least) and his children must relieve such kind of persons: He that will not
labor, must not eat: 2. These. 3.10.
and the best alms for such is, to give them nurture and correction, that they
may desist from their lewd behavior, and betake themselves to better courses,

18 [Come now, let us reason together.] Here the Prophet is about to meet
with an objection that they might make. It Is long ere men be brought to the
sight of their sins: but when they come once to perceive the multitude, and
grieuousnesse of them, they begin to think their case remediles, and that it
is in vain to hope for pardon: But God bids them make no such conclusions, and
therefore he says, [Come now, let us reason together:] which is in effect, as
if he should have said, If you hearken what the devil and the flesh can say,
that will rather make you despair, then believe: and therefore hear you
withal what I can say, which if we could do, we should easily see that the
arguments of Satan, and of our own wretched carnal reason, are but delusions,
and that Gods arguments will swallow them up all, even as Moses true Serpent
did the Serpents of the sorcerers. Hence we may learn this doctrine: that,

They that will come to the Lord, God is to be heard before any.
and do him service, must not hearken what reasons flesh and blood can yield
them against it, but what reasons God can give them for it.

The devil will have much to say against goodness; and our own fleshly
wisdom will have as much: and the world will be as great a pull-backe unto
us, if we will give it the hearing: but if we can lend an attentive ear unto
the Lord, we shall find that he will bring better arguments to persuade us to
goodness, then all those our enemies can, to diswade us from it. And therefore
it is that men are so often, and so groslie deceived, because they hear what
the one side can say to discourage and hinder them: but not what the other can
say, to hearten and draw them onward in good ways. For if they did bring a
spiritual ear to receive the proofs that are brought from the word, they
would be mroe forcible to bring them to God, then all other means could be
to allure them to forsake God, and to embrace this present world. Therefore
when the Lord would have men to practice any duty, or to forbear any sin,
we see what strong reasons he brings for that purpose: as is evident
(together with innumerable other places) in the second and in the fourth
commandment. And thence it is, that men do so commonly and so wretchedly
transgress those commandments, because they do not well weigh the Lords
reasons to the contrary: for if they did, they would never incline so much to
superstition, and Idolatry: nor ever so give themselves to the profaning of
the Lords day, but know that it is far better to procure Gods blessing by
keeping it, then his curse and vengeance by the violating of it.

Holy Job (we see) took that course that the Lord would have us take for the
repressing of all inordinate lusts and affections. Job. 31.1.
I made (says he) a covenant with my eyes; why then should I think on a
maid? A carnal sinful man would have thought this too much curiosity and
niceness: What? not to look on the beauty and comely visage of a woman? at
least not to take some liberty for thoughts tending that way? it is too too
much preciseness: who can take any notice of such things in us? Job) What
portion should I have of God from above? and what inheritance from the
almighty from on high? q: d: I durst not give way unto the flesh in any sort,
for that were the directest course to deprive my self of the comforts of the
word and spirit here, and of the crown of happiness, which is reserved for
the Saints in the world to come. Albeit I should speed little the worse with
men, yet I should be sure to come short of many special favors and blessings
of the Lord. And further he adds: Is not destruction to the wicked? Suppose
I should escape the censures of men, yet has not the Lord means that I cannot
conceive of, for the punishment of rebellious sinners: and though things may be
smoothered for a time, cannot be bring secret sins to open shame? grant that
it be kept close from the eyes of the world, yet does not he behold my ways,
and tell all my steps? though the eyes of men take a view only of the outward
actions, yet he looks upon the inward disposition, and affection of the
heart; these and the like reasons he used to keep himself in order, and to
fright his conscience from all manner of sin and impiety, as is more fully
described unto us in that Chapter.

And good reason there is,

The devil, the world, and the flesh bring only shows of reason, and pretend
love unto us, when they mean nothing less as the event will plainly manifest:
but Gods reasons will hold out when they are waied in the balance, and what
he says shall stand when heaven and earth shall fall: and if we take those
courses that he would have us, we shall plainly perceive at last, that he
meant us more good in so aduising us, then we could possible think or imagine.

This shows and condemns their folly, who, and course of life, will first
hear what their carnal friends can say, and what the world, and their own
flesh can allege to the contrary. Alas these men are more likely a great
deal to renounce all goodness then to continue in the practice of any
godliness. If once they give care to the reasons of the devil, and of the
flesh, they are gone. For as the persuasions of God, by his word and spirit
should make us begin, so must they cause us to hold on, or else we should
faint in the midde way, or rather turn aside, and walk in a quite contrary
way.

And as this is true in general for the profession of Christianity, so is it
as true in all particular duties; as to give instance in some: those that have
to deal in matters of strife and contention, for the most part, are possessed
with this conceit, that if they should not answer like for like, and return
one disgraceful speech for another, and requite one injurious action with
another, every one would in a short time grow bold with them, and be ready to
wrong and abuse them. But where does God say so? Nay the very truth is, that
when they seek by such means to right themselves, and by such shield, Mat.
5.44.
to bless those that curse them, and to do good to those that hate them, and
to pray for those that hurt and persecute them, and so overcome evil with
goodness, they should certainly have the Lord, and their own consciences on
their side, and it may be also make their foes to become their friends by that
means. Romans 12.20.
For the wisdom of God tells us, that this is the way to heap coals of
fire upon their heads: which shall either melt them, and turn their affection
to us: or burn them, and leave them more inexcuseable before God, and their
own consciences, and so hasten his judgments upon them. If men can be
patient, and content to sit down by wrongs offered, God will stand for them,
and revenge the quarrel of the meek; and that which men think will be the
ready way to draw infinite troubles upon their own heads, and utterly to
undo them, we shall find to be the directest path that leads unto peace,
and quietness, and that course which will indeed make us for ever. Mat. 5.5.
For (as our Savior promises) the meek shall inherit the earth.

Others there are that think: if we should make conscience of religion, and
begin to read the word, to frequent sermons, to have prayer in our families,
and the like, this would make us to be scoffed, and mocked at, and to be
termed precise fools for our pains. But let such hear what the word says,
that pronounces them blessed, Psalm 1. Psalm. 119.
that delight in the law of the Lord, and meditate therein day and night, and
that seek him with their whole hearts: yea albeit they should meet with some
disgrace, and opposition in the world: blessed are ye (says Christ) when men
revile you and persecute you, Matthew. 5.
and speak all manner of evil against you faisly, for my names sake: Rejoice
and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. Is it not better to endure a
little mocking from men for a time, and that for weldoing, then to undergo the
wrath of God for ever for ill doing? Consider in particuliar what benefit we
may reap by the ministry of the Gospel. Isai. 55.3. Iam. 1.21.
Hear (says the Prophet Isaiah) and thy soul shall live. Receive the word
with meekness (says James) which is able to save your souls. Revel. 1.3.
Prou. 28.9.
Blessed is he that reads and hears the words of this Prophecy (says the
spirit in the Revelation,) and on the other side; he that turns away his
ear from hearing the Law, his prater shall be abomination, Prou. 1.24.25.26.
(says Solomon) and again the wisdom of God speaks thus: Because I have
called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and none would regard:
But ye have despised all my counsel, and would none of my correction: I will
also laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear comes. These, and
the like places, if we could thoroughly consider of, they would work more
powerfully with us, to cause us to desire the word, and to retain, and keep
our hearts still in the love, and liking of it, then all the reproaches, and
persecutions in the world could, to withdraw our affections from it.

But for want of this, many sore and dangerous, yea, sometimes desperate evils
do befall men: for if we consult with reason, it will tell us that either our
sins are so great, that they cannot be pardoned: or else so small, that they
need not be repented for. This made Cain and Judas, those cursed and damnable
reprobates, to despair, and cast off all hope of mercy, because they would not
hearken what God, or his servants could say, but only what Satan and their
own flesh could say: whereas if it had been possible for them to have looked
into the promises of life made unto grievous sinners, and in assurance of
faith, have craved remission and pardon for their offenses, they might have
been forgiven; even Cain and Judas, as well as Peter and Paul: for they had
all committed damnable sins in themselves: and that repentance which prevailed
for Peter and Paul, would have been as effectual for the two other, if they
had attended to Gods voice, and humbly and earnestly sought for mercy at his
hands.

This serves for our instruction, Jobs friends did him; lay sorer burdens on
us, rather then ease us of those we carry already; and make our case a great
deal worse then it is, rather then minister any help and comfort unto us.

But if we can hear and believe what the Scriptures of God tell us; we shall
find that our state is never unrecoverable: but that if we can be truly and
soundly humbled, there is hope and help for us, that God will give us an happy
end of all our sorrows, and make us great gainers by all our afflictions and
temptations.

[Though your sins were as Crimson, they shall be made white as snow.] In
these words, the Prophet has reference to that that went before, where he had
charged them that their hands were full of blood. Verse 15. For hereupon they
might reply: if we be such grievous sinners, how can we dare to come unto
God for favor? is it not a terrible thing to appear before him, that is so
just, and so holy? how then can we look that he should be merciful unto us?
It Is a thing not to be expected.

They that wash themselves by godly sorrow, Penitent persons shall be washed
from all their sins.
that whatsoever offenses we repent for, we shall be sure to have a pardon
for.

So that the question is not what our faults have been, but what our
repentance is. If we be truly dejected on our part, it is all one with God
whether our transgressions have been more or less, greater or smaller: if we
repent truly, we shall be pardoned fully, be our sins what they can be,
secret, or known. So that though we see spots in our selves, yet God will see
none: nay when we see our deformity most, God will make it most clear unto
us, that his eyes are quite turned away from the same. This is evident in the
Prophet Jeremy, where he speaks thus concerning them that should be made
truly penitent for all their evil ways and works, after their seventy
years captivity. In those days, and at that time (says the Lord) the
iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none: Ier. 50.20.
And the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found, for I will be merciful
unto them whom I reserve: and the same is promised in another place, 1. John
1.9. Ezekiel. 36.25. etc.
where the holy Ghost speaks thus: If we acknowledge our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. And the like is couenanted in Ezekiel, where the Prophet
brings in the Lord, speaking in this manner. Then will I power clean water
upon you, and ye shall be clean, etc. where God himself undertakes to be
the washer, and the blood of Christ is the water. Now there are two things
which terrify penitent sinners, and cause their hope of obtaining mercy
either utterly to fail, or at least in a great part to faint and wax feeble.
Concerning both which, the Lord in this place gives them comfort. One is the
multitude and exceeding great number of evils whereof they are guilty, now for
that he tells them, that he would wash them from all their filthiness,
without exception.

Another thing that does usually disquiet the hearts of those that are turning
unto God, is, that their sins have been heinous and extraordinary, and many
of them such as have broken the covenant, of which sort is Idolatry:
concerning which, Zach. 13.1.
he adds, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you: and in an other place,
that he would open a fountain of grace to wash them from all sins, even
from sins of separation, and such presumptuous offenses as deserved
excommunication from Gods people, yea and to be cut off by the sword of the
Magistrate.

And there is no cause to the contrary, but that God may remit and pardon one
sin as well as another, (excepting only the sin against the holy Ghost,
which shuts up the heart from all repentance) and all as well as one.

1 Isa. 53.4.5.6.
for so says the Prophet Isaiah. He has borne our infirmities, and carried
our sorrows, etc. He was wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our
iniquities. The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we
were healed. All we like sheep have gone astay: we have turned every one to
his own way, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Whence
it is plain and evident, that Christ has paid our whole debt, and not a piece
of it only: he has discharged our pounds, as well as our shillings and
pence: and has suffered for our must horrible and fearful rebellions, as
well as for our smallest slippes. And therefore as an honest creditor when the
suertie has satisfied him for all that was owing, will not come with after
reckonings, nor challenge any thing of the debtor: so neither will the Lord lay
any thing to our charge, his son Christ Jesus having laid down the full
price for our iniquities, whereby his wrath is appeased, and his justice
perfectly satisfied. That is one reason on Gods part, why he must of
necessity blot out of his book and out of his remembrance, all the offenses
of repentant sinners, without any exception at all.

2 Another reason there is on our part, that he that repents truly for one
sin, does repent as truly for all the rest: and though none do particularly
know and discern all the errors of this life, yet God will accept of a
general humiliation for them, and confession of them, so that from both these
laid together: (that neither Gods justice is unsatisfied, nor any sin
unrepented in those that labor to wash their souls by true and godly sorrow)
it is apparent, that there is no transgression, no not the most hamous, that
shall stand in record against them, but all shall be remitted and covered from
Gods sight, that he shall never look upon them in anger and indignation for
the same.

Indeed those that have fallen in to more notorious and grievous crimes, Why
the pardon of great sins is not so soon apprehended.
cannot ordinarily get the assurance of their reconciliation unto the Lord, so
soon as others, that have not been so great offenders: but the cause hereof
is in themselves, in that such open and scandalous offenses do make an
exceeding great breach into their faith, and bring marvelous great hardness
upon their hearts: and they are very unwilling to set their consciences upon
the rack, and to sift and examine their own souls, to the intent their hearts
may be pierced and wounded for their sins: but they will rather shift and
scamble, and put off their humiliation as long as may be (as David did, Psalm
32.) so that it is a wonder they ever get out of the snares of the devil, till
God either by some sharp rebuke, or by some fore affliction do rouse them,
and as it were by violent hand pull them out thence.

But if once they come to great sorrow for their sins: and in humbleness of
heart, and assurance of faith can make claim to the blood of Christ, they
shall be discharged and freed from all their transgressions, and be brought to
that purity and whiteness, which they never dreamed such miserable ereatures
as themselves could have attained unto.

For confutation of that wretched error of the Papists, Against Purgatory.
that there is a Purgatory, where some men after this life must have a further
purging and scouring then here they have attained unto: but see here what the
Lord says: Though men have broken forth into never so many abominations,
though their sins were as crimson, and as scarlet, yet if they would seek to
wash and cleanse themselves by the means that God has appointed, he gives
them his faithful promise, that they shall be made white as wool, yea white
as snow, as if they had never offended at all. To what end then should men
appoint a second washing, when God himself has undertaken to wash us from all
our filthiness, and from our greatest corruptions? as has been more largely
declared before. What an absurd thing is it, to imagine, that we must go
through a strange invented fire, which may more thoroughly purge away the dross
of our corruptions, as if Christ his blood were not sufficient to make us white
as snow! This is but a carnal conceit of man's foolish brain: for if fire, and
enduring of pains and torments could have scoured off sin, the reprobates in
hell should have been purged therefrom long ago. But God alone has clean
and precious water, and a skillful and powerful hand to effect that work: and
in the Revelation, Christ Jesus, the true and faithful Witness, tells us
how all our uncleanness may be covered from Gods eyes: Reu. 3.18.
I counsel thee (says he to the Church of Laodicea) to buy of me white
raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that thy filthy nakedness may not
appear. Nakedness there is in the best: but Christ his righteousness is that
garment which must cover it, and then God will never in anger and displeasure
look upon it, but in mercy and goodness look upon the holiness of his
son, wherewith our souls are invested, and all our iniquities hidden and
covered.

Secondly, the^ to go through with that work: and therefore this should
encourage us unto the exercises of humiliation, and of examination and judging
of our selves: for are not a few tears well bestowed upon God, when he will
thereupon bestow on us the blood of his son?

Many are afraid to adventure upon the work of repentance, lest they should
be driven thereby to desperation: but let us never fear that, though our
uncleanness be never so great; though we be stained and died from top to
toe, within and without, in every part and power of soul and body, by reason
of our original corruption, and actual transgressions, so that all the men in
the world cannot take away the foul spots and horrible stains of sin that
cleave unto us, and are settled in us: yet the Lord of heaven, who has all
sufficiency of power in his hand, can and will (without any difficulty) purge
us from every one of our iniquities, by sprinkling on our hearts the precious
blood of his own son, which is as it were a sovereign Bath, ordained for
the cleansing of the souls of his elect from that contagious leprosy of
sin, wherewith they are wholly ouer-spread. And therefore let none be
discomforted in regard of his many and grievous offenses, seeing that the Lord
has entered into a sure covenant with us, for the pardoning and healing of them
all; who can as easily cure the most deadly wound, as the smallest scarre: and
the harder the cure is, the more he shall be glorified, in showing forth the
riches of his mercy toward poor sinners that stand in need thereof. Our
greatest extremity, is Gods fittest opportunity.

Now the chief means that he uses for our cleansing and sanctifying, Means
of cleansing.
are two:

One is the word, The word.
according to that of our Savior to his Disciples, John 15.3.
Now are ye clean through the word that I have spoken unto you.

Another means is the Sacrament, The Sacrament.
by the effectual operation of his spirit, that Christ may be unto us
holiness for our sanctification, 1. Cor. 1.30.
as well as righteousness for our justification. God does not offer unto us
only the outward elements, but he is more willing to give unto us the things
signified thereby, then any earthly father can be to give food unto his
hungry child, that cries for some relief at his hands when he has all
plenty and abundance whereby to supply his need: I say, he is so much more
willing then any earthly father, as God is kinder then man, and his store more
plentiful then man's: and it is less cost, and less pains unto him, and yet
more for his praise to refresh the thirsty souls of his poor servants, then
for a mortal man to satisfy the appetite of his hungry child. For (as the
Prophet speaks) Mercy pleases him: Micah. 7.8.
there is none that can take more delight in following after their recreations,
and pleasures that do most affect them, then the Lord does in showing himself
favorable unto those that seek mercy and grace from him in thevse of his
ordinances.

[If ye consent to obey.] Adam before his fall: but only that we should do
our best endeavor, and labor to conform our selves to his will, as near as
we can: if there be a true sincere love, and a hearty consent to show our
selves dutiful and loyal subjects to him in all things, it is as much as he
exacteth of us. The doctrine to be learned from hence is this: that,

God accepts of penitent persons, canceld the band, Coloss. 2.
and taken away the handwriting that was against us: Now this only remains
for us, that we have a good inclination, and a willing mind, to perform our
duty, and labor to the utmost of our strength so to do; seeing and bewailing
our manifold imperfections, errors and failings in every one of our services:
which if we can do, God will be as well pleased with us through his beloved
son, as if we had keept the whole Law, without any departing from it at all,
either to the right hand, or to left. That which is spoken in the matter of
communicating unto the necessities of the Saints in the Epistle to the Corinths
(to wit, 2. Cor. 8.12.
if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has, and not according to that he has not) holds as true in all other
services; that we are accepted with the Lord, according as we are inwardly
affected, albeit our actions be not answerable to our desires: for he that
has a ready mind to do what he can, and does the same, would be as ready to
do a great deal more, if his ability did serve: and therefore the Lord will
show his gracious acceptance of that which is done by him, though it be never
so little, as well as if it had been a matter of far greater worth.

Now that the true purpose and intent of the heart, is that which God
principally regards in his servants, may be made yet more clear by examples
taken out of the Scriptures. We may read in Genesis, what God says of
Abraham: Genesis 22.16.17
By my self have I sworn, (says the Lord) because thou have done this thing,
and not spared thine only son, Therefore will I surely bless thee. And why?
Isaac was not slain: but Abraham withdrew his hand from him, and spared him:
yet because he was content to kill him, and made all things ready for the
sacrificing of him, God accounts it as good, and rewards it as well, as if
he had killed him indeed.

So David had but a purpose to build the Temple; which work was afterward laid
upon Solomon, and by him performed: yet the Lord gives him a good testimony,
and a large reward for his readiness that way: he was content to spare him,
because he had been at great pains before, 1. Chron. 17.
in shedding the blood of many enemies of the Church, and some remained yet
still to be subdued by him: yet this he tells him for his comfort, 2. Chron.
6.8
Whereas it was in thy heart to build an house unto my name, thou did well
that thou wast so minded. And besides this, he bids Nathan to carry him
this message, that the Lord would build him an house, and would raise up his
seed after him, 1. Chron. 17.10.11.12.
and employ his son in that honorable service of building an house unto the
name of the Lord, and that he would establish his throane for ever. And there
is reason why God should accept of the will as well as of the deed: for

1 First, Philippians, Phil. 2.13.
It is God that works in you, both the will, and the deed, of his good
pleasure. And therefore if we can believe that he is pleased with our good
actions, we may be as well persuaded that he is delighted with good motions,
and holy desires that are stirred up in our hearts by his own good spirit.

2 Another reason, Psalm. 103. Mat. 3.17.
is, because he is both in name and nature a father, yea, an heavenly father,
and therefore has compassion of those that fear him, even as an earthly
father has of his child that serves him. Now he that is a merciful, and
wise, and loving father (as those will be ever most merciful to others, that
have tasted most of Gods mercy to themselves) when he sees that his child
does as well as he can, though it be but simply and poorly, yet he will
show his liking of it, and commend him for it: Adam, and have put on the Image
of the second Adam, and have changed the earth for heaven, then we shall not
only obey truly, The perfection of a Christian here. Nehem. 1.11.
but perfectly: but here it is in truth (and so it must be esteemed) one
degree of perfection to see our own imperfections. And that was in Nehemiah,
and in those of his time: O Lord I beseech thee, let thine ear now harken to
the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants, who desire to
fear thy name. He could not say, that they did so fear his name as they
should: but this they could say, that they desired to do it better: which
desire was a fruit of the grace it self.

This should instruct and encourage us still to be doing in the services and
works of God.

Oh, but we find many imperfections,

What of that? If we aim at perfection, Psalm. 130.3.
If thou O Lord (says David) should mark what is done amiss, who should
stand?

Therefore though we cannot pray with that feeling, hear and read with that
profit, sing Psalms with that ioyfulnesse and cheerfulness of heart, as we
should: though we cannot forgive our enemies, long for Christ his coming,
have such a tender feeling of the afflictions of the Saints, nor attain to
such heavenly meditations, night, or day, as we do desire, and as God does
command; yet let us not be discouraged: if we strive to bring our wicked flesh
to the performance of these duties, and though we have much ado with it, yet
if we draw it as a Bear to the stake, unto Gods worship, and to the
performance of Gods duties in public and private: and when we feel most
backwardness and untowardness in our nature, yet we consent in our very
souls, that the Law of God is holy, and good, and just: and that our wills and
affections, are indeed very corrupt, and rebellious, but we would rather then
all the world that things went otherwise with us: that sin might be subdued,
and grace planted in steed thereof: and it is our continual grief, that God
should be so gracious, and kind, and liberal to us, and we can be no more
obedient, and loyal, and serviceable unto him: if (I say) we find such a
heart within us, we need not be dismayed, but may cheerfully go on, with full
persuasion, and undoubted resolution, that the Lord will be merciful unto us,
and take our obedience in good worth.

Only, that we may not deceive our selves, let us be evermore careful to
use the means whereby we may grow better; and avoid the means whereby we
may be made worse. (As was more largely taught in the former Sermon, in the
end of the 3. Doctrine.) For if one say that he desires heaven, and yet will
never frequent Sermons, nor good company, where he may be instructed: nor
use any private or public exercises of religion, whereby he may be edified;
he is no more to be regarded, then a sluggard that pretends that he means
to have a good crop, and yet will neither manure, nor plow, nor sow his
ground; but when others are laboring, he is sleeping, or loytering: as no man
will ever look that the one should have a plentiful harvest of Corn; so will
no wise man believe that the other shall obtain a plentiful crop, either of
grace here, or of glory hereafter.

[Yee shall eat the good things of the Land.] Before has been showed, that
all repentant sinners shall have the blood of Christ to wash and cleanse their
souls: now in these words is declared, that they shall not only have
spiritual grace, but also right unto, and the right use of all the benefits of
this life. Whence this doctrine may be gathered: that,

Obedience to Gods commandments, True obedience brings outward presperity.
Deuteronomy. 28.1.2. etc.
brings the blessing of God upon us for outward things, as well as for inward.

This is promised in Deuteronomie, where Moses speaks thus unto the people of
Israel: If thou shall obey diligently the voice of the Lord thy God, and
observe and do all his commandments, which I command thee this day, then the
Lord thy God will set thee on high above all the nations of the earth. And all
these blessings shall come on thee, etc. Blessed shall thou be in the City,
and blessed also in the field, etc. and so he goes on, showing that true and
faithful obedience, is that which brings all manner of blessings for body and
soul, for name and estate, yea, and for seed and prosperity also. 1 Timothy 6.
and 4.8.
And therefore the Apostle telteth Timothy, that goodlinesse is great gain,
and that it has the promises of this life, and of the life to come: in which
regard David says, I have been young, and now am old; Psalm. 37.25.
yet I saw never the righteous for saken, nor his seed begging their bread. He
had seen (and so may we) that children of great men have broken forth into
many horrible sins, and so have been brought to a strange, and miserable, and
violent death, and to many woeful straites and extremities before their death:
but he never saw (neither shall we see) the godly seed of godly men, forsaken
of God and men, and left as vagabonds to beg their bread: but God has ever had
(and still will have) a special care of them; and ever made al necessary
provision for them: either he himself by a more particular providence of his,
casts sufficiently of these outward things upon them; or blesses their
labors, so that they are made a means of maintenance unto them: or if they
fail that way, he moves the hearts of some or other of his servants, to
pity them, and to supply their wants; so that whatsoever their necessities be,
they are freed from that curse that is denounced against the seed of the
wicked, to wit, Psalm. 109.^0.
that they should wander up and down as vagrants, begging their bread, and
making a trade of that vile and wretched course of life.

And there is cause why we should rest fully resolved of this point, not to
care what we shall eat, Math. 6.25.
or drink, or what we shall put on: but first to seek the kingdom of
heaven, and the righteousness thereof, promising us faithfully that if we do
so, all other things shall be east upon us.

And as he has promised this, so has he from time to time performed it; as we
may observe thorowout the book of Judges, of Samuel, and of the Chronicles:
for there it is to be seen, that when godliness prospered in the souls of
Gods people, they prospered in their outward estate: and when sin (on the
other side) made havoc in their souls then the Midianites, and the
Philistims, and other enemies, made havoc in their Country: when they and
their Kings thriued in piety, and in zeal for religion, and for Gods glory,
then it went well with them for outward plenty and abundance: but when
Idolatry and impiety began once to thrive in their hearts, and in their land,
they never had long, nor settled prosperity, but their enemies hands and swords
prevailed against them for the taking away of their lives, and the ruinating of
their estates.

Here is matter of terror for all wicked worldlings, Proverb. 10.2
that is an ill way to rise: for, the riches of iniquity shall not prosper.
Though they build their houses never so high, and advance their nests unto the
stars, yet the Lords hand shall pull them thence, and cast them down into
the very dust. They think their houses, their names, and their substance shall
remain for ever, and that they shall make themselves and theirs, by ioining
house to house, and land to land; by oppressing the poor and needy, and by
defrauding the fatherless and the widow, and such as cannot right themselves.
But alas, they little consider in the mean while, that God is the Judge of the
world, and that he will reward every man according to his works. They imagine
their estate shall be according to their wealth: and so it might be indeed, if
God were not the governor of the world: but since he is so, it shall go with
every one according to that he is, and not according to that he has. And
therefore as God would have it proclaimed to the godly, Isa. 3.10.11.
Say ye, Surely it shall go well with the just, for they shall eat the fruit
of their works: So he would have it denounced against the ungodly, Woe be to
the wicked: it shall be evil with him: for the reward of his hands shall be
given him. They shall reap that which they have sowed. It were an absurd thing
for one that has sown nothing but cockle and fitches, to expect a good crop
of wheat, or barley, or such like corn: and as contrary to all reason is it,
for them that sow iniquity, to think they shall reap any thing but
affliction. They may delude themselves with vain hopes, and brag, as much as
they will: but do we think such proud, and malicious, and cruel men, shall
obtain any happiness and prosperity from the Lord? Nay surely, he hates both
them and their practices, and therefore they and their wicked seed shall be
rooted out: as we may see it verified in many of the Kings of Israel, as in
Jeroboam, Ahab, Baasha, etc. and most notably in that place of Jeremy
concerning Iehotakim the son of Josiah: Woe unto him (says the Lord) that
builds his house by unrighteousness, Ier. 22.13. etc.
and his chambers without equity: he uses his neighbor without wages, and
gives him not for his work, etc. Shall thou reign because thou closest thy
self in Cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink, and prosper, when he
executed judgment and justice? etc. Where is declared, in the example of
Josiah, the godly father on the one side, that the true knowledge of God, and
the practice of godliness, and of righteousness, brings all true honor and
prosperity: and on the other side, in the example of Iehoiakim the wicked
son, is showed, that impiety joined with oppression and cruelty, with fraud
and deceit, and injurious dealing, does bring the curse of God in life and
death: that it makes a man live a base and dishonorable life, and die a
shameful and ignominious death: that while he is in the world, he shall live
undesired: and when he goes out of the world, he shall die unlamented.

This is also for our instruction; he feed on course bread, on green herbs,
or on pulse, as Daniel and his companions did, yet may receive his food more
cheerfully, and look a great deal more freshly, then wicked unregenerate men
do, or can do, when they have all abundance and variety.

Therefore let this encourage men, if they would have good things either in
right, or in possession, to labor to get religion into their hearts: and to
be as much afraid of sin, as of misery: and as desirous of grace, as they
are of prosperity. Which if we could do, we should find Gods eyes open to
consider of us, and his hand to relieve us continually in all our wants, and
necessities.

And as we shoudl be thus careful for our selves, so we should be also for
our children. There is no good parent but would wish his children might be
provided for, and live in the world like men: Now here is the way to purchase
them a good estate here upon the earth: use means to bring them unto the
fear of God, and to have faith in God: for when the Lions that are full of
might, Psalm. 34.10.
and rage, and cruelty, do lack and suffer hunger: then they which seek the
Lord, shall want nothing that is good. God will have a care that his sheep
shall have convenient pasture, and be in good liking, though the Lions be
pined and hunger-starued; and when strong and mighty men are in misery and
debt, in want and necessity, ever shifting and scambling, and yet getting
nothing: then Gods poor and weak servants shall have that which will satisfy
and content them: Heb. 13.15.
for God has said, that he will never leave them, nor forsake them. Therefore
are they the most provident and wise parents, Psalm. 37.11.
that bring up their children in the instruction and information of the Lord:
for such shall possess the earth; and the generation of the righteous shall
be blessed. Children are not always the better for the goods of their
parents, but they are always the better for their goodness: for when it is
said in that 112. Psalm. 112.2.
Psalm, that they are blessed, it is more then if it had been said, they
shall enjoy honor, credit, wealth, and whatsoever outward blessing else can be
named: for that implies thus much, that they shall have the good gifts of God
so far as they are needful for them, and that they shall have the right use of
them.

But this may seem quite contrary: The wicked flourish.
for commonly wicked and profane persons live in all manner of plenty, when
the godly sustain penury and scarcity: and therefore in appearance,
godliness is not the best course to procure a happy and prosperous estate.

For the removing of this doubt, we must consider,

1 First, they have right to nothing, They have right to nothing.
but are mere thieves and usurpers, and shall answer for laying hold of those
things, that are in truth none of their own. A thief may break into the Kings
treasury, yet it is none of his, but he shall quickly be thrust out thence:
and so may a moth creep into a velvet gown, yet has it no right there, Job.
27.18.
but may be brusht out at the owners pleasure: and the same is the case of all
unregenerate persons: they are intruders into other men's possessions, and the
great Landlord of the world may thrust them forth when it seems best unto
himself, and call them to a reckoning for meddling with those things, that they
could lay no lawful claim unto, by any one clause or title that is contained
in Gods Law.

2 Secondly, as they have no right to have any thing; They have the right use
of nothing. Isa. 57.20.
so neither have they any comfortable use thereof. There is no peace to the
wicked, says my God. But they are like the raging waves of the Sea, that
cannot rest, but are still tossed too and fro; from one side to an other; and
cast up filthy mire and dirt. And when they are most loud in their laughter,
and seem to be most pleasant and merry, even then their mirth is full of
hollownesse, and discontentednes: for let them but have some apprehension of
death, or of any sudden and extraordinary judgment likely to befall them: nay
let them be but a little crossed, and disgraced by any of their companions,
they will be suddenly distempered, and much daunted, and many times fall a
trembling, every joint of them, Dan 5.6.
as Belshazzar king of Babel did at the sight of the hand writing on the wall.
And if no such thing do betide them, yet they are still pursued by such
enemies, as will suffer them to have no great quietness, nor comfort in the
things of this present life which they do possess. If we should see a Bucke
hunted through a green pasture, where there is much pleasant grass, and many
sweet and pleasant flowers, and springs of water, we would not think his case
very happy, nor that he had any great inheritance there, when we perceived
the hounds following close at his heels: yet such is the state of all sinners:
they have a large and pleasant walk, perchance in this world, but they are
still hunted with many noisome lusts, of covetousness, and pride, and filthiness,
and the like: and Satan, and the world have them ever in chase, and shall
pursue them still, till they have driven them into hell it self, if they alter
not their profane, and wretched course of life.

3 Further, Gods curse is upon all.
they have the wrath of God lying on their bodies and souls, which poisoneth
and inuenometh all that belongs unto them. His terrible and unavoidable curse
shall ever close with sinners: so that though they eat and drink, and wallow
in their pleasures, yet they can find no sound delight, nor true contentment
therein: because being possessed with hardness of heart, and blindness of
mind, and being given up to a reprobate sense, all things that they have, are
imbittered by their own sin, and Gods heavy vengeance falling upon them.

Put case all a man's bones were broken, and one should put on him a velvet
coat, beset with pearls and diamonds, in the most rich and costly manner that
might be: and he should begin to think, and say, Now I trust I shall be at
ease, and shall have no more cause of complaint; alas poor man, his rich
attire cannot take away his pains: even so fares it with the ungodly: sin
has set them out of joint; nay it has so wrought on all the powers, and parts
of soul, and body, that it has, as it were, chrusht all their bones in
pieces: and what sound peace, rest, or comfort can they then find, from all
these outward things of the world that are cast upon them, till there be some
cure wrought on their souls?

But it is quite contrary with Gods children: though they be pressed, and
pinched with many distresses and wants, and driven to many extremities, and
straights, yet they may be fuller of joy in the midst of their afflictions,
then the wicked are in the midst of their iollity. Acts 16.
Paul and Silas were fuller of gladness, and of true contentedness in the
dungeon, when their feet were fast in the stocks, then Herod was on his throan,
having all his flatterers and Sycophants about him, Psalm. 37.
and thence it is that a little that the righteous has, is better then great
riches of the ungodly. Better is a dinner of green herbs, seasoned with the
blessing of God, then many dainty dishes poisoned with gods wrath and
malediction.

And albeit, the Saints of God be sometimes deprived of these transitory
things; yet they shall never be deprived of Gods favor: and that want of
outward things, shall be supplied with inward graces. They have a sure
promise, that they shall have sufficient: and God never gives less then he
promises, though many times he do give more: and if that which is wanting in
dross, be paid home in good Gold, we need not much to complain, as if we were
loosers by such an exchange. Therefore let us shut up all with that saying of
Solomon: Prou. 2.20.21.22.
Walk thou in the way of good men, and keep the ways of the righteous: For
the just shall dwell in the land, and the upright men shall remain in it. But
the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the transgressors shall be
rooted out of it. But if ye refuse, and be rebellious, ye shall be devoured by
the sword. if ye refuse to obey, and be rebellious, ye shall be devoured
with the sword. As if he had said, God indeed is ready to forgive and to
cleanse all sorts of sinners, that see how and wherein they have offended, and
are troubled for their offenses, resolving to leave and forsake them, and to
practice the contrary duties: but they that refuse to obey, and continue in
their obstinacy, the Lord will never forgive them, nor purge them from their
iniquities: but their sins shall cleave as fast unto their souls, as the die
does unto crimson, or scarlet, that can never by any Art, or strength of man
be reduced to their former witness again.

And therefore the Prophet tells them, if ye refuse to obey, ye shall be
devoured with the sword: it is sure some fearful and strange plague or other
shall fall upon you, and utterly consume you. As God has mercy in abundance
for penitent sinners: so has he judgments in as great plenty for obstinate
rebels, that refuse to submit themselves unto him.

Now the things before spoken of (both blessings and favors promised to the
penitent, and plagues and punishments denounced against the obstinate) he
confirms by one maine argument, The mouth of the Lord has spoken it. As if
he should have said:

Has God then said, Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, John
6.56.
has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day? then is it
impossible that such should ever taste of Gods wrath, or sustain the
punishment of eternal death.

Oh, but Christ is in heaven, and we are in earth, and how can we then eat
his body and blood?

Oh,

The mouth of the Lord has spoken it: cavil against it, nor make question of
it any more. Indeed unbelief cannot see how this should be effected: and
therefore ignorant unbelieving Papists have invented a carnal manner of eating
and drinking the body and blood of Christ: And have found out a Purgatory to
scour off that rust of sin, that has so eaten into men's souls: but all such
devises, for the washing away of sin, are but as muddy water, that will not
make us one whit whiter, but rather foul us a great deal more. Gods means
only are effectual to make us clean and pure in his cies, and able to stand
with boldness before him, without any fear, or trembling.

On the contrary, Eccles. 11.9.
and their carnal and wretched desires: but withal let them know that for all
these things God will bring them to judgment. And if ignorance will not wholly
excuse men, but that they shall be punished for their offenses: then how many
and how grievous shall their stripes be, that know their masters will, and do
it not? Surely if Christ shall come in flaming fire to render vengeance to
those that do not know him: 2. These. 1.8.
much more will he come in wrath and indignation against those that do know,
and yet will not obey the Gospel. But as for those that see their infirmities,
and daily lament, and grieve for them, and strive against them; let such be of
good comfort: Revel. 2.2.
their painful labor is known unto the Lord; and their earnest desire of
faith, and love, and repentance, is a grace well pleasing to the Lord: And they
shall not only find mercy for the pardon of their sins, and grace for the
sanctifying of their souls; but outward blessings also for their estate: for
the mouth of Lordhath spoken it.

The fourth Sermon of the Lords Supper.
2. CHRON. 30.19. etc. Verse 18. The good Lord be merciful toward him. 19
That Prepares his whole heart to seek the Lord God of his fathers, though he
be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary. 20 And the
Lord heard Hezekiah, and healed the people.

IN the former part of this Chapter, is declared, how King Hezekiah, in a zeal
of Gods glory, and love unto his people, made a proclamation throughout all
Israel, from Beersheba even unto Dan, that they should come to keep the
Passover to the Lord God of Israel, at Jerusalem: for they had not done it for
a great time, in that manner as God required, because of that Idolatry which
had ouerspred the Land. For this purpose, Hezekiah and his Princes sent posts
with letters throughout all Israel and Judah, even to the ten Tribes also, that
were full of sin and misery, to admonish them to turn again unto the Lord
their God, that he might return unto them: and not to be stif-necked, but to
humble themselves to serve the Lord, that his wrath might be turned away from
them. But when the messengers came, a great sort of the Israelites laughed them
to scorn, and mocked them: they were so inured unto sin, and infected with
Idolatry, that they set light by, nay utterly contemned all the wholesome and
holy exhortations of that worthy King, and his nobles.

Yet some of them whose hearts God touched, even diverse out of the Tribes of
Asher and Mamasseh, and Zebulun, came to Jerusalem: and the hand of God was in
Judah, so that he gave them one heart to do the commandment of the King, and
of the Rulers: insomuch that there assembled unto Jerusalem much people to
keep the feast of unleavened bread.

But by reason of the short warning that they had, a multitude of the people of
Ephraim, and Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun had not cleansed themselves
according to the Law in that behoof provided, Exodus 12. and Numb. 9. and
therefore were in danger to be cut off. Leui. 7.20.

In this regard they were in great distress, and in a sore strait, yet they
thought it better to receive the Sacrament, though they failed in some
circumstances of their preparation, then to omit it until the next year,
having wanted it so long before, whereupon they adventured to eat the
Passover; which being ended, Hezekiah, in fear of Gods displeasure, and in
commisseration of the people that stood in danger of Gods plagues and
punishments, falls to prayer for them, and is instant with the Lord in their
behalf: he saw their great desire to be made partakers of it: the pains
that they had taken to come unto Jerusalem for that very purpose; and
perceived a strange hand of God in inclining their hearts so far, and thereby
was he encouraged to become a mediator as, it were, betwixt God and them: and
thus he prayed unto God for them. The good Lord be merciful toward him, that
prepares his whole heart to seek the Lord God of his fathers. And the word that
is translated [be mercifull] signifies thus much in effect, as if he had said,
the good Lord pardon and supply that which is wanting in him that prepares his
whole heart. And now they wanted not so much willingness, as time to prepate
themselves, and therefore he prays the Lord to be favorable unto them. And
that he might have more assurance that his prayer should be effectual, he
builds it upon strong and sound reasons, taken,

1 First, from the nature of God, implied in the word [good:] verse 18.
which goodness of his, is never seen so much as in showing mercy to them that
are in distress. As if he should have said: Lord, thou art good in thy self,
and good unto thy people, and here are such as stand in great need of thy
goodness, and therefore be merciful and gracious unto them.

2 Secondly, from the name of God [Iehonah] implying his constancy and
unchangeableness in himself, and in his love, and the fruits thereof toward
his servants. Hezekiah knew that he had been merciful unto as great sinners
as they were in former times, and that he was the same God still, and therefore
he entreats to manifest so much,

3 A third reason is taken from the Covenant, that he is [the God of their
Fathers] by reason whereof he was bound unto them, and their children; so that
he could not deny them any thing that they should ask in faith. These
arguments are drawn from God.

Another argument there is taken from them, that they sought the Lord, etc.
which seeking of theirs, is set out by the manner of it, that they prepared
their whole heart to seek him: not as if their hearts were so free from sin,
or so full of grace as they should have been; but that they were true, and
plain, and sincere: not such as had no sin (for it is said they were not
cleansed according to the Purification of the Sanctuary) but that did love no
sin: not such hearts as wanted no grace, or preparation for Gods ordinance: but
such as were humbled for the want of grace, and of that preparation that they
should have made.

This was his prayer, with the reasons of it: the effect follows. Hezekiah;
that is, so heard him, as that he accepted and performed his request: for it
is said, he healed the people: that is, gave them that which God does offer
unto his people in the Sacrament: they received the seal of the covenant, and
he made good the Covenant unto them, as shall be showed afterward, more
plainly and particularly in the several branches thereof.

The sum then of these words is: the godly care of Hezekiah for those that
came in part unprepared unto the Passover. And here we may consider:

1 What he did, he prayed for them: where we may note, 1. The substance of his
prayer, to wit, that God of his rich mercy would supply all their wants. 2.
The persons for whom he prays: who are described, 1 By their sincerity,
that they were such as feared God, and sought him with their whole heart. 2 By
their infirmity, that they wanted the legal clensing.
2 The effect that followed upon his prayer, which was two-folde. God. 1 Heard
his prayer. God. 2 Healed the people.

Verse. 19. [The good Lord be mereifull.] Hezekiah being appointed by God to be
a governor, Prayer to be joined with instruction.
takes this course of seeking to the Lord for his people, we may from his
example learn this Doctrine: that it is the duty of all governors and
superiors, not only to teach them that belong unto their charge, and depend
any way upon them; but likewise to pray for them.

Good Rulers must not only inform those that are under them, what they must
do, and stir them up to good duties, by wholesome instructions: but they must
also become suitors to the Lord for them, that he would frame their hearts to
do as they are taught; and to pardon them where they come short.

It was well done of Hezekiah, to send abroad messengers to call the Israelites
to the worship of God: But this he knew was not enough, and therefore he
beseeches the good Lord to show himself favorable unto them. Thus also dealt
David (another King, Psalm. 51.18.
placed over Gods inheritance) Be favorable unto Zion for thy good pleasure,
(says he) build the wales of Jerusalem. And so did Moses that worthy
governor of the Lords people: not contenting himself to be often teaching
and instructing them whom he had the charge of; but ever and anon praying for
them as occasion was offered, that God would relieve them when they were in
wants: that he would defend them, when they were set upon by enemies: that he
would pardon them, when they had kindled his wrath against them, etc. The like
is noted of Job, how careful he was for his children, even when they were, in
a sort, from under his shadow, and had houses of their own to dwell in: for it
is said, Job 1.4.5.
that his sons went and banqueted in their houses, every one his day, etc.
and when the days of their banqueting were gone about, Job sent, and
sanctified them: and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt offerings
according to the number of them all. For Job thought, it may be that my sons
have sinned, and blasphemed God in their hearts: thus did Job every day. Here
we must understand, when it is said that he offered sacrifices for them, that
he prayed for them also; (for those two, sacrificing, and praying, ever went
together) that God would pardon them al their sins which they had committed,
while they were at their feasting merry together: at which times, many faults
escape young people, which they take little notice of: but Job considered
thoroughly of them, and was ever mindful and careful to use the means of God
for the remitting, and purging away of the same: that his childrens souls
might not be infected, nor Gods anger provoked thereby. A rare example, worthy
the imitation of all godly parents,

1 First, pray one for another. Iam. 5.16. Gods command.
are to be recommended unto God in our prayers; much more those whom God has
more especially united unto us either by nature, or by duty and service, on
their part to be performed unto us. Yea, Christ Jesus straightly commands us to
pray for our enemies. Mat. 5.44.
Now if that be a bounden duty; how much more is it to pray for our friends;
especially if withal they be Gods friends? seeing they by our prayers may be
much helped, and without them much endangered.

The Prophet Samuel understood that this was a duty, when he accounted the
neglect hereof to be a sin against God, as in that book it appears that
he did: for when the people were frighted and humbled, both by the words of
Samuel, and by the myraculous work of God, in sending extraordinary thunder
and rain in the time of wheat harvest, and thereupon came unto Samuel,
saying, 1. Sam 12.19.
Pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy God, that we die not: his answer was,
God forbid, that I should sin against the Lord, verse 29.
and cease praying for you.

A second reason is, No blessing to be expected without prayer. 1. Cor. 3.6.7.
they can look for no blessing upon the good lessons they give unto them. All
planting and watering is in vain, except God give the increase: and if we
would have any increase, it is good reason we should seek it at his hand by
prayer. Therefore both of them must be joined together: we must do the best
we can, and then say as Noah did, Genesis 9.27.
Lord persuade Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Sem. Except the Lord did
persuade the heart, as well as Noah did the ear, he knew all that he could
do was but lost labor.

Thirdly, unless they pray for a blessing, No thankfulness, unless that have
gone before.
they can never be so thankful for any good that is wrought upon such as are
under them. They have had no hand in pulling down Gods hand upon them, and
therefore they have no heart to give him praise for the same: but when any
governor or superior has had a strong hand in drawing down the mercies of
God upon any that depend upon him, and sees the good effect of his prayers,
and of his tears, this cannot but make him glorify and magnify the Lords
goodness, for hearing, and granting their requests, in remoouing evil things,
or bestowing good things upon such as are under their jurisdiction.

This serves for the reproof of those, For Superiors.
and sufficienly discharged their consciences, if they have called their
children, and servants, and whole family to the word and Sacrament, and to be
examined before they receive the same: though in the mean while they never
call on the name of the Lord to bless them, and the means; and to be good
and gracious unto them where they failed in preparing themselves. When Jacob
was to send his sons into Egypt to buy food of Joseph, he prayed instantly
that God would vouchsafe to be with them, to give them prosperous and good
success in the business they went about. God almighty give you mercy (says
he) in the sight of the man. Genesis 43.14.
Now if he thought it his duty to pray for them, when they were to come before
Joseph, which was but an vnder-gouernour in Egypt: how much more should we
count it our duty to pray for such as belong unto our charge, when they are to
come before the whole Trinity; even before that God, that is the sovereign
Lord and King of heaven and earth, full of glory, and full of majesty: how
much more (I say) should we desire, that they might find favor in his eyes?
especially considering that Jacobs sons went but for the food of their
bodies, which they might either have, or want without any extraordinary hurt
unto themselves: whereas those that are to be partakers of Gods ordinances, are
to be suitors unto him for the food of their souls, and so be everlastingly
saved, if they can obtain it; or else take their bane, and be liable to Gods
heavy displeasure, and in danger of judgment inward and outward, in body and
soul, not only in their life time, but for ever after, if they repent not for
their disorderly, and contemptuous approaching unto him in his holy services? so
that there is much more reason, we see, that governors should be earnest
with the Lord for those that are under their rooffe, then there was for Jacob
then to be earnest for his sons: and therefore let all those be humbled and
reformed, that have been slack and negligent in the performance of this duty.

Secondly, For Inferiors.
parents for their children, masters, and mistresses for their servants:) so
they on the other side, are to be gentle, and humble, and tractable, that
their superiors may have good incouragment, and good success in the
supplications that they make for them. We do not read that Hezekiah at any
other time dealt so earnestly with God in the cause of the people, as at this
time he did: and what moved him to be so importunate now? even this, that he
saw they had hearkened unto his persuasion, and taken great pains to come to
Jerusalem from all quarters of the Land: and being there, he perceived that
they had some sorrow and remorse for their former impiety, and some desire to
become better for the time to come: now when he discerned that they came on so
fast, and that they were half healed already, he bends all the force and
strength of his prayers for the obtaining of mercy and favor for them, and so
found that good effect that he desired and expected. And that was it, that
made David so plentifully and feelingly to pour out his heart before the Lord
in prayer, and in thanksgiving: for when the Princes and the people had
offered very largely, and very willingly, David rejoiced with great joy, and
blessed; 1. Chron. 29.9.10.14.18.
and praised the Lord before all the congregation, saying, Blessed be thou, O
Lord God of Israel our father, for ever and ever, etc. Who am I, and who are my
people, that we should offer willingly? etc. O Lord God, keep this for ever
in the purposes and thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their
hearts unto thee. Thus may we observe now the good affections and desires of
the people do stire up and strengthen the hearts of their Rulers to pray for
them: whereas on the contrary, nothing does so kill the hearts, and discourage
the spirits of Gods servants from prayer, as when they see those that are under
them, to be wilful, and heady, froward, and rebellious, and utterly void of
any good disposition unto piety, and religious exercises. They scarce dare
speak a good word for them, unless it be that God would humble them, and
convert them: they cannot pray as Hezekiah here does, The good Lord be
merciful unto him, that prepares his whole heart to seek the Lord, etc. but
the good Lord give them hearts to prepare themselves, and take away the stony,
and unbelieving, and carnal hearts out of their bodies. Elies sons) God has
a purpose to destroy them, or at least grievously to afflict them. And therefore
little do these stubborn and obstinate children and servants know, what
injury they do unto themselves, by entering into, and continuing in their
sinful courses: for they thereby not only provoke Gods heavy displeasure
against them, which is a burden importable; but also hinder, and it may be,
utterly cut off the prayers of those, that would otherwise cry unto God night
and day, for the obtaining of his favor, and the procuring of the light of his
countenance to shine upon them. Thus much for the first point.

Now further mark who they be that he prays for: not profane or careless
persons, but for those that prepared their whole heart to seek the Lord etc.
that is, which labored with a true and sincere heart to be partakers of the
mercy and goodness of God, which he made offer of in his holy ordinances. In
that Hezekiah neither does, nor dares pray for a blessing upon any, but upon
such as were true-hearted; The Doctrine is: that,

Whosoever would have any mercy from God in the Sacrament, Sincerity requisite
in all communicants.
must come with a sincere and upright heart thereunto. That howsoever he
cannot put away all sin, (for who can say his heart is clean?) yet he may,
and must put away the liking of all sin, and the purpose of sinning.

So far as any man has a love unto iniquity, and an intent of committing
iniquity, he is tainted with hypocrisy, and does pollute and defile every
good thing that he medleth withal, and so can have no benefit, but much hurt
therefrom.

If then we would have God to meet us in mercy, we must meet him in
sincerity: and if we would have him to come unto us in goodness, we must
draw near unto him in uprightness. Agreeable to this point is, that
exhortation to the Hebrews, Let us draw near with a true heart, in assurance
of faith, Heb. 10.22.
sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience, and washed in our bodies
with pure water. As if he should have said; except you come fitted and
prepared with a heart void of guile and deceit, as good not come at all: For
God will be so far from giving countenance, or comfort unto such, that he
will assuredly plague them for their fraud and falsehood that they have used
with him. This we may plainly see in that which befell the ill grounds: there
are three sorts of them mentioned, (all professors) that came to the word of
life, and yet had no benefit by it: and therefore by a necessary consequent,
good and honest heart, Luke 8.15.
as the fourth sort of hearers did, who received instruction, and comfort, and
the power of godliness, by the conscionable hearing of the word. But what is
that good and honest heart which they are commended for? it is a heart, that
does fully purpose to do well, though it fail much in that which it
performs: that resolves before hand to avoid the evil that shall be
reproved, and to do the good duties that shall be commanded, and to believe
and rest upon the promises that shall be pronounced, as far as God shall give
ability, etc. Now wheresoever there is such a ready inclination unto
goodness, there will be a bringing forth of fruit; though not in all alike,
yet every one will do somewhat: and God will acknowledge them for good ground,
and honest-hearted Christians, that yield him but thirty fold, as well as
those that yield him sixty fold, or an hundred fold: for a less measure of
fruitfulnes, is an argument of truth, as well as a greater measure, and
therefore shall be respected and rewarded: but as for those that have naughty
and deceitful hearts, they shall go away, as bad, or worse then they came:
and whatsoever fair colors they set upon their profession for a time, yet
sooner or latter their hollownesse shall appear to their shame and punishment.

Now the reasons that make for the confirmation of this doctrine, That if we
would find acceptance with God, we must bring sincerity with us: are these,

First, without this, we can have neither remission, Without uprightness
there is no remouall of sin. Psalm. 32.1.2.3.
that we are liable to his wrath, and lie open to the stroks of his revenging
hand. None are pardoned, and blessed, but those in whose spirit there is no
guile.

Secondly, except there be uprightness, hope of good success in any service
of God that we take in hand, John 9 31. Psalm. 66.18.
there being no promise made unto us: for as God hears not sinners in prayer,
so he does not help sinners by the word or Sacrament.

This is for the terror of those, Against unprepared receivers.
never examine themselves, nor look into the state of their souls: at most
they come but with a Pharisaicall washing of the outside of the cup, and of the
platter. As if there have been brawles between man and man, there shall be
some idle and formal reconciliation: they will be friends, and forgive one
another, before they receive the communion; but if there be any difference
betwixt God and them, they never look to the inward parts: such can expect no
blessing upon their coming, but may justly fear some grievous judgment,
because their hearts are unsound and unfaithful before the Lord.

Secondly since none have any prayer made for them, A trial of an upright heart.
let us take this direction following:

First, Renouncing of sin. Iam. 4.8.9.
greiue heartely for them: and put them aaway by true repentance. So says
James, Purge your hearts ye hypocrites: but what must be the purgation and
receipt which they must take? [sorrow and weep.] That man or woman that has
never done so, is not only stained with hypocrisy, but is a sinful
hypocrite. All men by nature are full of deceit and guile: and till they sit as
Judges upon their own souls, they cannot be cleansed from the same: but when
they have once thoroughly sifted themselves, and by godly sorrow labored to
purge their consciences, as near as possibly they can, from all secret sins,
then though they cannot say, I have no sin, yet they may boldly say, I allow
no sin: and therefore I am assured that I am no dissembler: and that Gods
judgments shall never light on me because I have prevented the same by
abandoning those corruptions which might procure his wrath and displeasure
against me.

Secondly, Using the means. Ier. 4.4.
and prayer: for though we mourn never so much, that is but as it were a
plowing of our hearts: That they did seek the Lord God of their Fathers, in
that means which he had ordained for the helping, and healing of them:
wherein, if we can imitate them, we shall speed as they did, all our breaches
shall be made up, and al our deadly diseases shall be by degrees healed, and at
length fully and perfectly cured. Thirdly, we must not only have recourse unto
Gods ordinances, Expectation of a blessing.
that we shall assuredly find the efficacy and powerful operation thereof:
and that God will not mock and delude us with vain hopes; but look what
promise he has made in his word, he will accordingly make good the same: and
not one word shall fall to the ground, of all the good things that he has
couenated to bestow upon us. And therefore (as we are exhorted in the former
place to the Hebrews) We must draw near in assurance of faith, Revel. 3.18.
and then according to our faith it shall be unto us. And the like we have in
the Revelation: I counsel thee (says Christ to the lukewarm Laodiceans) to
buy of me Gold tried by the fire, etc. teaching us hereby, that we must
highly esteem, and heartily desire the holy things of God, and be at cost to
part with our corruptions, and make account that we shall not be disappointed
when we come thus affected unto Christ Jesus. And then he will enrich us, that
before were poor; and cloth us that before were naked; and enlighten our eyes
that before were altogether shut up in blindness and ignorance.

Thirdly, approve the sincerity of their hearts by the forenamed trials. Who
before they dare present themselves at the Lords table, or presume to ask any
comfort from Jesus Christ, do first afflict themselves: and before they
entreat the Lord to bind them up, do first seek to break their own hearts
by inward remorse and contrition for all their offenses; and yet content not
themselves thus to break up the fallow ground of their hearts, but come unto
the Lord, as he commands them, to beseech him to sow his precious seed upon
them; and do rest and rely on him for the doing of it. Let such be of good
comfort: for undoubtedly the Lord will not send them empty away: their labor
shall not be lost, nor their hope be disappointed; but they shall certainly
have good success according to their expectation. 1. Because they have done
what they could for their part. 2. Hezekiahs prayer stands in as good force
yet still, as it did at that time when it was made: and the same in effect is
continually offered up unto God by many of his elect, for such as are so
humbled and fitted for that work: yea, and Christ Jesus also in his own
person has sanctified and blessed that Sacrament, to all believers that shall
worthily partake of it unto the end of the world: and therefore coming thus
affected and prepared, they cannot miss of the promised blessing.

[Though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary.]
In these words he preuenteth that fear and doubt of good success, that might
arise in their hearts for want of preparation: for the Law was, that no
unclean person should have anything to do with the Passover: now diverse of
them were in their uncleanness, because they had not time to purge themselves
according to the legal rites: therefore Hezekiah here seeks to help the
matter, and in effect he says thus: I confess Lord, there are diverse
ceremonial circumstances wanting in our preparation to the Sacrament: but so
the case stood with us, that we knew not how possibly to help it, and
therefore Lord be merciful unto us in that regard. In that he prateth thus for
the^, albeit they had so failed in want of due preparation, that they might
justly have been cut off from Gods people, if they had had time to have done
better, and had not this been an extraordinary case: the Doctrine hence
arising, is this: that,

So long as we labor to keep the substance of Gods worship, though we fail
in some circumstances thereof, Failing in circumstances of Gods service hinders
not the blessing. Iam. 5.11.
he will be merciful unto us.

If we embrace the substance thereof willingly, and fail in the circumstances
unwillingly, God will never lay it to our charge. Examples will prove this
more fully unto us. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, (says the Apostle
James) and ye know what end God made with him. Now if we read over the book
of Job, we shall find, that there was in him a great deal of passion and
distemper: and that he held out but very weakly in a great part of the
conflict: as when he cursed the day of his birth, and conceived hardly of the
Lord, and was ready to dispute and reason the matter with him: showing much
unwillingness to submit himself to those strokes which God had laid upon him:
for which he was justly reproved both by Elihu and also by the Lords own
mouth: yet because he held out in the substance of godliness, in the midst of
all his woes and miseries, and at the beginning thereof, humbled himself,
saying, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, Job. 1.21.
and naked shall I return thither: the Lord has given, and the Lord has
taken it: blessed be the name of the Lord: as also afterward he used many good
and holy speeches concerning his own ill deserts, and the righteousness of
Gods proceeding, if he should deal in extremity of justice with him: and in
the end acknowledged his fault and desired to lay his hand upon his mouth:
because (I say) these good things were found in him, God passes by his
infirmities, and takes notice of his patience, with high commendation thereof:
Setting him forth as a pattern most worthy our imitation, when we are pressed
down with the weight of adversity, as he was. For the Lord in his wisdom
considered, that it was not through any stubbornness, or rebellious
disposition that he brake out in that manner: but through the violence of his
affliction, and temptations, and thorugh the ignorance and indiscreete carriage
of his friends, who dealt very uncharitably, and unmercifully with him. In like
manner is Rahab commended, as one that by reason of her faith and works
perished not with them which obeyed not, Heb. 11.31. James 2.25.
when she had received the spies peaceably. Yet if we look into the story,
we shall easily discern a great deal of infirmity in that very work of love
and mercy, by which, she got the testimony of such a notable faith: for she
bewraied much unbelief inmaking a lie to preserve the spies in safety. Then
came men unto me (says she) but I wist not whence they were: Io^ ^2.4.5.
And when they shut the gate in the dark, the men went out, whither they went,
I wot not: follow after them quickly, for you shall overtake them. Every word
she here spoke, was false, and sauoured of much weakness: yet all this God
takes no knowledge of, when he is to speak or her, and of her faith, and love.
Indeed she was but a new commer on, and had not been instructed as yet what
the danger of a lie was, etc. and therefore notwithstanding her failing in that
particular, she is brought by the Apostle James, Iam. 2.25.
as an example of one that was justified, (or made known to be a just and
righteous woman) by her works: none other being reckoned up, but those which
she did at that time.

So the Angel (as is recorded in the Gospel) rebuked those good and faithful
women, Luke. 24.5.
for that they sought the living, among the dead: yet withal he tells them,
Be not afraid, ye seek Jesus of Nazareth that has been crucified. Mar.
16.6.
As if he should say, here is your error, that you seek Christ where you
should not: he is risen again, as he foretold you that he would: yet
herein does your vprightnes appear, that you hold out still in the love and
profession of Christ, even now, when he is in such disgrace and dislike,
almost, with all men: and therefore be not dismayed, but herein take comfort.
Thus we may perceive how favorable the Lord is toward his children, that
offend not upon set purpose, and presumptuously: but through Satan's
instigation; or through humane frailty: in which regard the Prophet Micah
bursteth forth into an admiration of his gracious dealing: Micha. 7.
Who is a God like unto thee, and why? because mercy pleases him. Verse 18.

This makes for the confutation of their error.

1 That think they have no calling to come to the Sacrament, because they see
more and greater faults in themselves, See the reasons in the former Sermon.
then they can epsy, or then, indeed, there are in many other Christians: and
it may be,

But we come far short of that that should be in us. Inconveniences that
arise from forbearing the Sacrament.
for the more dangerous any ones sickness is, the greater speed they should
make to the Physician: and the more grievous any man's wound is, the more need
has he to hasten to the Surgion. Neither is their absenting of themselves
from the Sacrament, Number. 9.13.
By the Law of Moses it was determined, that all those that were negligent to
keep the Passover, should incur the sentence and censure of
excommunication, if they were not in a journey, hindered by inundations of
waters, detained by sickness, or some extrordinarie accident of that kind.
Now if they were so strictly bound to repair unto that feast, when it was to
be celebrated at Jerusalem, which was many miles distant from the greatest
part of them that were inhabitants in that land: how much more are men now tied
to attend upon the celebration of the Lords Supper, seeing they need not
undertake such a teadious journey, but may have it ministered unto them nearer
at hand, and that with less cost (and yet a larger blessing) then they could
in the days of the ceremonial Law? surely if they do neglect so great
salvation, well they may escape the punishments of men, but they shall feel
the strokes of God, and shall be cut off from having communion with him, and
with his servants: they shall bear their sin, (as in that place the holy
Ghost speaks) which otherwise by receiving the Sacrament, they might have
discharged their consciences of, and put it over unto Christ's accounts.

Further,

Besides, Hezekiah, who does in assurance of faith, (as the effect manifestly
proves) make request for all such as prepared their whole hearts, (that is,
did their best endeavor with a true and sincere heart) to seek the Lord.

Lastly,

Secondly, 1. Pet. 2.25. John 21.15.
and of faith, and love, then we can attain unto. For Christ Jesus the great
shepherd and Bishop of our souls, takes order, that not only his sheep,
but his Lambs also may be fed. All the good grounds bring not forth a like
quantity of fruit: yet all agree in this substantial point, that they bring
forth good and ripe fruit: Mat. 13.23.
though some do not yield the third part so much as others do, yet they are
grounds blessed by God, and respected of God. Lord I believe, help mine
unbelief: Mar. 9.24.
which if we can do, the Lord will be merciful unto us, though we be not
fitted in every respect according to that which is required of us.

But my wants are such, as I am afraid I shall fail,

By these works that follow.

First, if we dislike all sin in our selves and others, Marks of
sincertitie.
and desire that all Gods graces might be wrought in our selves and others.
Hypocrites will allow foul faults in themselves, A general dislike of sin,
and liking of goodness.
and yet seem to dislike them, and much exclaim against them in others:
whereas first, they should be humbled, and grieved for them in their own
souls, and then proceed to speak against them in others.

Again, this hypocrisy is in our cursed nature, that, Hypocrisy.
whereas we could wish that we might live without offense, and that our names
might be preserved from reproach: yet we shall find a tickling delight in our
selves, when we see the nakedness of others discovered, and their faults
ripped up to their disgrace: that so their black may the more commend our
white. And again, we can be content to have many good gifts and graces, and
would not be much grieved, if we could get all other that we want: yet we are
ready to be offended, that others should be endued with the like, especially
that they should go beyond us in doing good, and in receiving praise suitable
thereunto. But this argues great want of sincerity: and if we be not
humbled for these corruptions, 1. Cor. 13.4.
it shows palpable and gross hypocrisy; for love enuieth not: but if we
carry an inward hatred of this evil disposition that is in us; and labor to
abhor and seek to hinder all manner of sins,

Secondly, Grouth in grace. Phil. 3.14.15.
never standing upon what we have done, but pressing hard to the mark: this
is an infallible note, that we are true-hearted. He that feels but a little
faith, a little love, a little repentance, etc. and would with all his heart
have them increased: and on the contraie, finds much deadnes, much
impatience, much unfitness for death, and much unwillingness to hear of the
coming of Christ, much distraction on the holy Sabbath, etc. but would most
willingly have these corruptions diminished; these very desires if they bring
him to the concionable use of the means, are evident signs of a faithful and
well-affected heart.

A third rule of trial, Forgiving.
desire to forgive those that have done us wrong, either in word or deed, and
are grieved at wrathful, and malicious, and reuengefull thoughts and motions
that do spring up in our hearts. Mat. 6.14.
Forgive (says our Savior) and ye shall be forgiven: and therefore being
able to do thus in some small measure, we may be assured that the Lord is
appeased toward us, and that we are in his favor, and therefore have hearts
without guile in his sight:

Therefore if God has wrought such a great work in our souls, as that our
hearts are inclined to forgive and forget abuses that are offered unto us, and
can pray for our enemies, and long for their conversion, and reconciliation;
first unto God, and then unto us; it is a notable testimony that we are truly
regenerated, and sanctified in the inward, and outward man.

There are none but they are apt to be angry with sin, either in themselves, or
others: but if we can spend our anger at home upon the evils of our own
nature, John 15.
yet being in the true vine, we shall receive sap, and juice from the root as
well as the fairest, and goodliest, and fruitfullest branches that are in it.
And thus much for Hezekiahs prayer, and the parts thereof.

Now the success follows to be spoken of: Verse 20. And the Lord heard
Hezekiah, etc. It being a prayer of faith that he made, for such things as God
had promised, and for such persons as to whom the promise did belong, he
receives an answer to his request: for so it is said, the Lord heard Hezekiah:
that is, accepted and granted his suit: whence this doctrine may be gathered:
that,

The Lord does accept, Prayers of faith granted.
either for our selves, or others.

For this favor that he showed to Hezekiah, and to them for whom he prayed,
is written for our instruction and consolation: to assure us that using the
like means, we shall find the same good effect that they did. 1. Ioh. 5 14.15
This is promised in the Epistle of John, where the words of this Text are
expounded, and the doctrine confirmed, This (says he) is the assurance that
we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears
us. But what is it to be heard? he tells us in the next verse, If we know
that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions
that we have desired of him. This Gods children may build upon, that if they
ask of God, lawful things, for righteous persons, in that manner as the word
prescribes, they shall have a comfortable answer, and speed according to their
hearts desire.

The reason hereof is, It is music to God to hear Christians prayers. Cant.
2.14.
as may be collected from the words of Christ to his spouse in the songs of
Solomon, Show me thy sight, let me hear thy voice: for thy voice is sweet,
and thy sight is comely. So that there is reason, why Christians should look
up to God, rather then be beholding unto men: and that they should utter their
complaints before his throane, rather then before men's judgment seat: for
whereas they many times cannot away with us and our suits, God delights to
look upon us; and there is no melodious harmony so pleasant in our ears, as a
prayer proceeding from an humble and broken heart, is in the ears of the Lord
of hoasts. Let us present our petitions with our souls full of grief, and our
eyes full of tears unto men, and we shall be teadious and troublesome unto
them for the most part: as the woman of Canaan was unto the disciples: Mat.
15.23.
Send her away, (say they to our Savior) for she cries after us:

Here may that folly, Iam. 4.2.
rather then unto the Lord that has ability and readiness to do both. James
blames those to whom he writes, for that they would be in wants, Ye lust,
and have not, etc. ye fight, and war, and get nothing: and what is the
reason? because ye ask not. As if he should have told them, you need many
things, and so you are likely to do still, except you take a better course:
for the way to obtain good things, is not to lust after them, and to brawle
and contend for them, but to become petitioners unto God for them.

Secondly, Hezekiah did. The Lord will not deceive them, nor shut out those
supplications that they make before him: but (according as they entreat of him)
where their faith is weak, he will strengthen it: where their repentance comes
short, he will perfect it: where their love is cold, he will increase it: and
in a word, where any good thing is wanting, he will supply it.

If Hezekiah, Hezekiah and his Princes, and being thus come, failed much in
that preparation which they should have made: if he, I say, had such good and
gracious hearing from the Lord, things standing as has been said; then how
much more may we expect mercy from him, when we entreat for our selves, who
(through Gods wonderful restraint, and gracious providence) have not fallen
into such notorious evils, nor into such grievous and monstrous offenses, as
they had done? especially if we have this witness unto our souls, that we
come voluntarily, and (in some degree) preparedly, unto the mysteries of
salvation: and are so far from looking for entreaty or exhortation
thereunto, that (through Gods grace and goodness) we would not be restrained
from it for any worldly gain.

[And healed the people.] For the understanding of this, we must know that
sin makes a wound, and that the word and Sacrament, are means and
plasters, as it were, to heal the same, if they be rightly applied and
blessed unto the receivers of them.

In that they found this good effect upon the eating of the Passover, and
Hezekiahs prayer made for them: the doctrine hence to be learned, is, that

The Sacrament worthily received, The virtue of the Sacrament.
but from the virtue of the Sacrament blessed unto them, at the earnest request
of that holy king? He tells us not the particular evils of which they were
healed, because we should conceive, that they were in a sort perfectly and
thoroughly cured of all. First, of the evils that were in their souls: they were
pardoned, their consciences quieted, and their hearts bettered: so that they
had a greater dislike of their own corruptions, and of Satan's temptations, and
more power to withstand them, and to overcome them, then formerly they had.
Then for outward evils, if there were any sickness, or weakness, or any
other crosses or calamities upon them, they had the same either quite removed,
or at least, sweetened, and sanctified unto them, for their profit and comfort.
For this is the substance of the covenant (whereof the Sacrament is a seal)
made unto penitent persons: Ezekiel. 36. which having been spoken of before, it
would be needless at large to repeat the same things again. Only in brief,
for the use of this point,

Let us then look for much, and we shall have much. Open thy mouth wide (says
the Lord) and I will fill it. Therefore when we behold with our natural eye,
the bread broken and the wine powered forth, and offered unto us by the hand of
the Minister; him the glory of his truth, in resting upon him for the
performance of all his promises made unto us through Christ Jesus: and
concluding every one in his own heart: though my knowledge be but small, it
shall be increased: though my memory be weak, it shall be confirmed: though my
affections be out of order, they shall be rectified: though my stripes be many,
the number of them shall be diminished: and though my graces be but few and
feeble, they shall be augmented, and still further strengthened. I shall have
Christ's power to enable me to do good, and to resist evil: his wisdom to
direct me in the right way, and to cause me to decline from all bypath: And
in a word, his good spirit to work all my works for me, and to perfect all
heavenly virtues in me.

And when, after we have been at the Lords table, we find any sinful motions
stirring within us, let us reason thus: Did I not lately receive the Sacrament,
for the curing of my soul? and did not God grant it unto me as a seal and
pledge, that he would take away my stony heart, Ezekiel. 36.
and give unto me a fleshy heart? Why then should I yield unto my corruptions?
Nay, I will not do so, but resist and strive against the same, and urge the
Lord with his own covenant sealed unto me in the Sacrament.

So likewise, when we see our manifold imperfections in Gods service; our want
of love and good affection unto his servants; our inabilitie to bear crosses,
and the like: let us repair unto the Lord, and beseech him that is true and
faithful in all promises, that he will make good his word unto us in those
particulars, giving us strength to do what he commands us, and to bear
with profit whatsoever he lays upon us. Which if we can do, so often as we
come unto the Lords Table, we shall receive great help and comfort against
all our sins and sorrows, and be much stirred up to love and praise the
Lord, for the continuance and increase of his heavenly graces and blessings,
which we shall surely gain by the right use of this his holy ordinance.

The fifth Sermon of the Lords Supper.
ISAIAH 55.1. etc. Verse 1 Hoe, every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters: and ye that have no silver, come, buy, and eat: Come, I say, buy wine,
and milk, without silver, and without money. 2 Wherefore do ye lay out your
silver, and not for bread; and your labor, without being satisfied? Hearken
diligently unto me, and eat that which is good, and let your soul delight in
fatness. 3 Incline your ears, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall
live.

IN the Chapter immediately going before, the Prophet from the Lords own mouth
pronounces many gracious promises unto his afflicted Church, bidding them
rejoice in regard of the deliverance that the Lord should work out for them,
and the many and wonderful blessings that he should bestow upon them: showing
them (to the intent they might give more credit unto his words) that he that
made them is their husband, Noah should no more go over the earth: so have I
sworn that I will not be angry with thee, nor rebuke thee, viz. in wrath and
displeasure: and therefore he breaks out into a patheticall and sweet
compellation, saying, O thou afflicted, and tossed with tempest, Sapphires: that
is, I will make of thee a precious building for my self. And as for their
children, he says, that they shall be all taught of God, and be far from
oppression, and from the fear of oppressors. And howsoever the enemy would be
stirring now and then, yet (says God) it shall be without me: and whosoever
shall gather himself in thee, against thee, shall fall: and that, because all
instruments of cruelty that could come against them,

Having thus declared what treasures were laid up for them through the rich
mercy of God in Christ; he comes in this 55. Chap. to exhort them to lay
hold of Gods gracious offer: and in this exhortation shows,

1 First, what is the duty that they must perform, which is set forth by
Metaphorical speeches, taken from natural things, and applied to spiritual.
Hoe, every one that thirsts, come to the waters, etc. Signifying that as for
the preservation of their natural life, they must first have a good appetite,
and then get meat and drink to nourish and refresh them: and if they cannot
have it otherwise, must buy it: and if it be not to be gotten at an easy rate,
they must be content to go to the price of it: so he that would have grace,
and have the life thereof continued, and the vigor thereof increased in his
soul, must get an hungry and thirsty desire after it, and be at cost to
procure it, though neither by silver, nor gold, nor any charges of that kind,
as shall after be showed.

2 Secondly, reasons whereby the same is enforced.

1 The first whereof, is drawn from the hurt that would ensue if they did not
follow his direction: they should misspend their money, and their labor, and
be never the nearer to the obtaining of that which might content them.
Wherefore (says he) will you lay out silver and not for bread: and your
labor without being satisfied?

2 A second reason, is taken from the benefit that they should find by
attending to his exhortation, to eat that which is good, and to bring their
souls to delight in fatness: namely, that all their needs should be
supplied, and their miseries cured: in brief, their souls should live, both
the life of grace, and of glory.

[Hoe, every one that thirsts.] In that he calls none to partake of the
holy things of God, but those that are thus affected. The doctrine is: that,

The thirsty soul alone has interest in the graces of God, Only thirsty
souls find refreshing from Gods ordinances.


Those only that feel their own barrenness and emptiness, and highly
esteem, and heartily desire the mercies of God through the merits of Christ:
they only, I say, have right unto and shall have a portion in the same.
Therefore when David would persuade God to bring him again to the assemblies
of the Saints, where he might enjoy the means of comfort, and of salvation, he
uses this as a forcible argument, My soul thirsts for God, even for the
living God: Psalm. 42.2. Psalm. 48.2.
when shall I come and appear before the presence of God? and again, My soul
longs; yea, and faints for the courts of the Lord, etc.

Now the reasons of this point are these:

First, no man has any warrant to resort unto the means of godliness, but
only such as were before mentioned: for, Else no commandment. Revel. 22.17.
thus the Lord inuiteth men unto him: Let him that is athirst come: and let
whosoever will (namely, that is so qualified) take of the waters of life
freely: so that none are bidden guests, but such as have thirsty souls.

Secondly, none else have any promise of speeding well, No promise Isa. 44.3.
I will power water upon the thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground. Till
then, we can never have assurance of any benefit by Gods ordinances: but when
once we come with a longing heart, that does as it were gape and enlarge it
self to take in the rain of grace, as the dry ground does to receive the
showers that fall upon it, then though we be never so thirsty, we shall be
fully satisfied; and though we be never so dry and barren, we shall be made
to flourish and grow as the grass, Peter, where he exhorts them in this
manner, As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby. q. d. You may repair unto the word as often as you will, and
give as diligent care as you can: but you shall never get any inward growth of
grace thereby, until you be as sharp set for the food of your souls, as
little children are for their mothers milk: but when once you attain to such
an eager desire of goodness, then you shall grow from a little measure of
strength, to a greater, and still increase in the inward man, as children do
in the outward: and find a progress in grace as they do in nature.

Thirdly, No fitness.
nor promise from God: so neither have they any fitness in themselves, because
they want that principal grace, which does fit men for the entertaining of
Gods holy spirit, which alone makes Gods ordinances effectual: to wit,
humility: which proceeds from a sense of our own misery, and a sight of
Gods mercy: now where this is wanting, there is no place for Gods graces: For
God resists the proud, James 4.
and gives grace only to the humble. Let a man bring unto the word never so
good a wit, capacity, and memory, he shall never take profit by hearing, till
he get a broken heart, and an humbled spirit: but God will ever resist and
cross, and thwart all his endeauours: because if he should get any benefit by
the Gospel, he would have no mind to ascribe the glory thereof unto God, to
whom it is wholly due:

First, and affections that do at any time arise in their hearts. These
wretched men are in a woeful case; for they rush upon the holy things of God,
without any commission; and therefore without expectation of good from them.
And howsoever they may talk and brag of their profiting by the word, yet God
that sees and searches their hearts, esteems of them, but as of dogs and
swine, that profane his holy things. If they would be partakers of the water
of life, they must be thirsty: and if they would eat of the bread of life,
they must be hungry: otherwise, though they be present in the congregation,
and hear the word preached, and see the wine powered out, and the bread broken
before their eyes at the celebration of the Lords Supper, yet they can have no
hope that they shall have one drop of Christ his blood, to wash away their
sins, but may rather expect the viols of his indignation, to consume their
bodies and souls: and it is a just vengeance of God upon such profane and
irreligious persons, that when they come to the Sermons and to the Sacrament,
they get no good, but rather much hurt thereby: and have their lusts stronger,
their hearts harder, and their minds far more blind and incapable of any good
knowledge, every day then other.

But what is the reason hereof? (may some demand) Is not the word of God
mighty to beat down the strong holds of the devil? and is not the Sacrament
powerful in operation, and able to work great things?

Yes they are so: and why then have such no profit by them? because they are
abusers and prophaners, and not meet receivers of the same: because they come
not with any preparation, or desire of a blessing upon the means, but for
custom and fashion, that they might not seem to be so bad as indeed they
are: nor to set so light by the holy ordinances of God as in truth they do.

Secondly, for instruction. others are feedings, it will not be well taken at
our hands, but we shall be as distastefull unto the feast-maker, as his
provision is unto us: and those things which are unto others the savor of life
unto life, shall prove unto us the savor of death unto our eternal
destruction, if our repentance do not prevent Gods judgment. If Gods own
children coming carelessly and vnpreparedly cannot escape Gods hand, 1. Cor.
11. then what shall become of those ungodly ones, who come not only
negligently, but altogether profanely: and so, defile the sacred ordinances of
God? (for to the unclean, all things are unclean) surely if judgment begin
at Gods house, there is nothing remaining for ungodly men, but a fearful
expectation of wrath and vengeance to be powered out upon them in full measure.
In which regard it stands us upon to look unto our hearts before hand: and
to the intent we may come with this spiritual appetite, the want whereof is
so offensive unto God, and dangerous unto us, let us use all good means for
the obtaining of it: as

First, Means to get a spiritual appetite.
to purge away that which may annoy our stomach and kill our appetite: and
what that is, Peter tells us when he says; Wherefore laying aside all
maliciousness, and all guile, Allow no sin. 1 Pet. 2.21.
and dissimulation, and envy and evil speaking, as newborn babes desire the
sincere milk of the word, etc. As if he had said, so long as you give place
unto, hear the word preached, or to receive the Sacrament when it is to be
administered, there is some sin or other not thorowlie repented of, which so
cloieth the soul, that it cannot delight in those holy exercises: and as our
hearts are more purged by godly sorrow, Matthew. 5.
so will our hunger and thirst after righteousness, and the means thereof,
be still increased in us. This then is the first rule that we must observe
for the getting of spiritual appetite, viz. to put away the practice of all
cross evils, and the allowance of all infirmities, great or small.

A second is, See thy misery.
and by desert in regard of our great and grievous offenses: that so being
poor in spirit, we may sigh and cry for grace; whereas those that are proud
in spirit, care not for it. We see this by common experience, that the
perceiving and feeling of grievous and dangerous diseases and distemperatures
in the body, will drive men to the Physician to entreat for physic, that so
their sickness may be cured: and in like sort, the discerning and descrying of
the loathsome and noisome corruptions wherewith our souls are infected and
endangered, will drive us unto the Lord to crave mercy and grace from his own
means, that our iniquities may be fully pardoned, and our sinful nature
soundly healed. For when nothing is more irksome unto us, nor more feared of
us then sin; then nothing is more desirable with us, nor more desired of us
then grace.

Especially, Consider the excelency of grace.
both from the guilt of sin, and from the punishment of sin: and withal the
enioyment of all blessings needful for body or soul, for this life, or that
which is to come. If (I say) the settled meditation hereof do once sink into
our hearts, it cannot but set our affections on fire, with an ardent and
earnest desire of the same. Nothing makes us so weak and cold in hearing the
word, or communicating of the Sacrament, as that we have not sufficiently
tasted how good the Lord is. And thus much of the means of getting a
spiritual appetite. Now it followteh.

[Come, I say, buy wine, and milk.] And verse 2. [Eat that which is good, and
let your souls deligt in fatness.] The drift of all these borrowed speeches
is to show, that God offers unto, and will bestow upon the faithful that
seek unto him, such spiritual good things, as shall much comfort, and refresh
their hearts, and make their souls as it were fat and well liking. Whence
arises this doctrine:

Whosoever comes to Christ Jesus in the religious use of his ordinances, All
the wants of the faithful supplied by Christ.
shall have all his wants supplied, be they never so many, and never so great.
Are they thirsty? he has water of life for them. Are they hungry? he has
all variety of dainties to refresh them. Are they babes? here is milk to feed
upon. Are they strong men, yet wearied out with afflictions and temptations?
here is bread that will strengthen their fainting hearts. Are they heavy and
pensive? here is wine to glad their sorrowful hearts. In a word, Christ Jesus
has plentiful provision of all sorts, and would have us eat that which is
best for us; commanding that our souls should delight in fatnes, and in the
good things that he offers unto us.

This doctrine is further illustrated and proved unto us out of Ezekiel: Ezekiel.
34.
where the Prophet having sharply reproved the shepherds of Israel, that fed
themselves, and not their flocks, that did not strengthen the weak, nor heal
the sick, etc. he promises that God will set a shepherd over them, even
Christ Jesus, verse 23. who should perform these two things: viz. feed his
sheep, and bring them to their rest: then he undertakes in all casualities
to look unto them, I will (says he) seek that which is lost, where observe
how he frames his remedy to their necessity: some have lost themselves, and
as silly sheep, would wander up and down, and never return to their
shepherd again, but become a pray to the enemies of their souls: those he
will seek, and not loose any of them, whom he has so dearly bought. Some are
as it were driven away by strong corruptions, and violent temptations: those
he will bring again, though they be carried never so far. Others have been
crushed and broken with many sorrows and miseries, even with one breaking upon
another by reason of their own sins: those he will bind up, and cure all
their wounds. Others again are weak and full of imperfections: those he will
strengthen by the power of his might, and at length make them strong men in
Christ. So that we see, every one according to his need, shall receive comfort
and relief from him: and there are reasons hereof.

The first is taken from the infinite power of Christ, Adam being only man,
He is able.
were able to destroy and overthrow all mankind: then much more is the second
Adam, being God and man, of sufficient power to recover his elect: especially
seeing that the means he uses are far more forcible to repair our
breaches, then Adams means were to make them: and more effectual to work out
our happiness and salvation, then his were to procure our misery and
destruction.

The second is taken from his readiness, He is ready.
As God the father gave him a charge, so he undertook it, and accomplished the
work which he gave him to do: John. 17.4.
it was his fathers will that he should save his people, and he willingly
performed whatsoever was required of him in that behalf, and therefore before
he yielded up the ghost, he uttered these words, It is finished: John 19.30.
signifying that he had gone through with that painful work which the Lord
had imposed upon him: now having done the greatest for us, he will not fail
us (we may be well assured) in smaller matters, which depend upon the former.

Thirdly he is also infinite in wisdom, He is infinitely wise.
and to determine of the fittest time (withal other circumstances) to relieve
and comfort us. There is many times, such confusion in the minds, such
hardness in the hearts, such blemishes in the names, such weakness upon the
bodies, and such woeful breaches in the estates of Gods servants, that no man,
nay, nor all the men in the world, know how to redress the things that are
amiss: but if it please our Lord Christ Jesus to take the cure in hand,
nothing shall be found too difficult for him: but that which seems impossible
in the eye of reason, shall appear not only possible, but very easy unto
him. and therefore in all these respects it must needs be a certain truth,
that those that seek to him, and wait upon him, shall in due season be
received by him.

Which may be an encouragement unto us, Prou. 9.2.
if we be hungry, our Savior will satisfy us with good things, and never
send us empty away: if we be babes, he has milk for us: if we be of
geater growth in Christianity, he has stronger meat for us.

Secondly, viz.

First, if we will have any refreshing at this feast, we must buy it: which
is twice repeated, to show that it is a matter of necessity, and a matter of
weight that nearly concerns us: not that we can give any thing answerable
to the worth of that which we shall receive (for grace is an vnmachable
treasure) but hereby these two things are signified:

First, How we must buy.
that as in bargains betwixt man and man, he that buieth a thing, Part with
sin.
And what is it that we must part withal? with nothing but our own sins
(which will do us no good, but infinite hurt if we retain them still) and
with those things which can be no longer kept without sin, as wealth, and
liberty, and credit, and life it self, when God calls for them. Mat. 13.44.
To this purpose, is it said, that the kingdom of heaven is like unto a
treasur hide in the field, which when a man has found, he hides it, and for
joy thereof departs and sells [all that he hath] meaning all that he has
by nature, renouncing all his carnal affections, and withdrawing his heart
from the things here below: for it is not intended that every man should sell
all his substance, and earthly possessions, and commodities: but only that he
should withdraw his confidence from these, and his immoderate love of these,
being content to forsake them quite, rather then to forgo Christ, and to
forfait his own salvation: so that as the price we pay for any thing is
altogether alienated from us: so must sin be, though never so much esteemed,
and believed before time. And so are these words expounded in this very Chapter
verse 7. Let the wieked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own
imaginations, etc. Many forsake some ill ways, but not their own: or if they
do leave their old ways and works outwardly, yet they do not forsake their
own imaginations: but to leave another sin for the procuring of this
pearl, is as if one should buy cattle, or grounds, etc. with another man's
money, which is plain theeuery, and will not go for current pay: the Lord
would have all penitent sinners, both to forsake their own ways and their
own imaginations.

A second thing in buying, is, Receive and retain grace.
and so would God have us to hold fast grace when we have got it. Therefore
the wise man exhorts us, buy the truth, and sell it not: likewise wisdom,
and instruction, and understanding. We may chaffer for other things as we
will, buy and sell, and sell and buy, etc. but here we must not do so: when
once we have obtained heavenly wisdom, and gotten religion in our hearts,
we must get as much increase to it daily as we can, but never let go any of
that we have. And thus much for buying, and the things to be observed therein.

A second thing required in the text, is, that we must eat, and this stands
in excellent proportion with natural food. If a man come where there is great
store of meat, and varietite of choice wines, and he see others have a notable
appetite, and himself none; all the cheer that is set before him will do him
no good, but rather vex, and trouble him: even so it is in the spiritual
feast: 1. Cor. 11.24.
and therefore Christ exhorteh us so often to feed upon him: take, eat (says
he) showing us what that is, viz. to believe in him: John 6.51.
in which regard he is said to dwell in our hearts by faith: whereas unbelief
chaset hhim thence, and will let him have no room, nor place of abode in our
souls. Therefore let us make account, that as the natural food, so the
spiritual also, is to be received into our stomachs, and there to be as it
were digested before we can have benefit by it.

[Without silver.] Hence we see that God offers us the greatest, and most
excellent things without money or money worth.

The best things are best cheap.

Nothing can be gotten at a lower rate then things that are of geatest worth.
God gives nothing on our delert. Revel. 22.
Therefore are we bid to drink of the water of life freely: and as grace, so
also glory is without any desert of ours bestowed upon us: for the gift of God,
(says the Apostle) is eternal life. Romans 6.

Now the reasons why heavenly things are not set at sale, but to be had of
free cost, are these:

First, From his glory.
We are too ready to boast now when we are pardoned, sanctified, and saved of
his free grace, and not by our own works: in that God puts life and strength
into us to be working instuments of our own happiness, though not of our
justification; what then should we do, if God should make us our own
Saviors, and propose heaven unto us as a price, bidding us win it, and wear
it?

Secondly, Our penury. Ephesians. 2.
he knows full well that we have nothing to give, but are mere beggars,
and could but pay God with his own: for in our selves we are poor,
miserable, naked, and destitute of all goodness: Indeed we have in us matter
enough to deserve Gods wrath, but none at all to procure his favor.

Thirdly, if we had somewhat to give, yet it were in no sort correspondent to
that which we shall receive: The inualuablenesse of Gods gifts.
for the graces of Gods spirit, and the crown of glory are invaluable, so
that nothing that is in the possession of any creature may be laid in the
balance against them. Therefore when Simon Magus would have bought but one
gift of working a miracle: Act. 8.19.20.
towit, that on whomsoever he should lay his hands, he might receive the holy
Ghost: Peter answered, Thy money perish with thee, because thou think the
gift of God may be obtained by money. Much more then, may this be spoken of
sanctifying gaces, which are far more excellent: they are not to be obtained by
money, or by any earthly treasure: for there is no price that can come near
them.

For the confutation of Papists, Simou Magus their father, and would rob God of
his honor, which he will not give unto any other: plainly manifesting unto
all the world, that they are grossly ignorant of their own vileness and
wretchedness, and of the worth and excellency of heavenly things.

For instruction, blessed are the poor in spirit. Matthew 5.
God is not like one that keeps an ordinary, where every one that sits at
table must buy his shot: but he is a royal feast-maker that keeps open
house for all comers and goers: and he paies best that sees he has nothing
at all to pay, and is thereby brought out of all conceit with himself. And
this should put an answer into our mouths against Satan's objection, that we
have nothing to satisfy God for our offenses against his majesty, nor for his
mercies offered unto us: we need not any such matter of satisfaction: because
God would have us buy and eat freely without money, or money worth; and our
humble and thankful acknowlegement of this his bounty and liberality, is all
the satisfaction that he looks for at our hands.

[Why do you lay out your silver, and not for bread? etc.] That is about such
things, as for which you are never the better: which will not breed any good
blood, or good nourishment; he follows the former Metaphor still, reproving
them for their folly, that whereas the Lord does offer them such good things so
good cheap, they would neglect, and pass by them and rather chaffer with the
world, and spend their thoughts and pains, about things of no worth, that
would no way satisfy them, but when they had toiled out themselves in the
pursuit of them, they should be as restles, and void of true contentment, as
ever before.

Nothing can satisfy,

Many things there be that make show as if they could do it, Grace only
contents the mind. 1. Tim. 6.6.
but the truth is, all will come to short, and be found too weak for the
effecting of it. Therefore the Apostle says that Godliness is great riches
with contentment. Other riches are of that nature, that the more we have, the
more we desire, and the more our hearts are disquieted with the care of
keeping them, and the fear of loosing them, But true piety is of that force
that it draws the soul unto God, and makes it to rely on him, and one his
treasures, and there is a sure stay indeed: for he will never fail nor
forsake such as cast their cares upon him. Psalm. 4. Phil.
That made David so to rejoice, when God lified up the light of his countenance
upon him: and that made Paul in whatsoever estate he was, therewith to be
content. And the reason of the doctrine is, 2. Cor. 3.18.
We all behold as in a mirror the glory of the Lord with open face, and are
changed into the same image from glory to glory, This is the virtue of the
word, that whereas looking into other glasses, we shall see our own faces,
therein we may behold Gods face: and not only so, but seeing and misliking
our own deformity, shall insteede thereof receive by degrees a glorious
visage, and be transformed into the image of God himself, which there we do
behold: and this image was it which we lost by Adams fall, and with all sond
contentment: and this may we recover again in Christ through the hearing of
the word, and with it true peace, and settled comfort. Let a man have the
command of all the world, before he have Gods image stamped upon his soul, he
shall have a restles heart, because he has a wicked heart: he shall be like
a beast, nay, worse then a beast. Adam after his eating of the forbidden fruit,
had his abod in Paradise for a while: but he found that a hell, which was
formerly as it were an heaven unto him: and why? because he had lost Gods
image, and consequently the sweet apprehension of his favor, which before made
all comfortable unto him.

Secondly, nothing can take away sin but grace; There is no peace to the
wicked, says my God. Isa. 57.21.
For when the mind is full of error, and the heart full of lust, there must
needs be a great confusion and distemper in the whole man.

Thirdly, until grace enter into the heart, and rule there, wicked men's
tongues are set on fire of hell: and what rest then can there be in that
soul, James 3.6.
which is so possessed by Satan, who will never suffer his members to desist
from inuenting, or executing some mischief or other.

Fourthly, they have no peace with God, Romans 5.1.
and therefore non with their own consciences: and what ease or rest can be
unto them, that have such a worm, as is a guilty, and accusing conscience,
always gnawing within them, and such a rack ever and anon (when God will)
torturing and tormenting them? surely if grace and peace do ever go together,
as the Scripture manifests, then where grace is absent, peace cannot be
present, and so the soul must needs be destitute of all true contentment.

Forth reproof of those that (as the Prophet says) disquiet themselves about
a vain shadow: vanity, and vexation of spirit: a brute beast is far
happier then they: and well had it been for them, if they had never been
borne: for what shall it profit a man to win the whole world and to loose his
own soul? to be a drudge to every base lust, to waste and consume his wit,
and strength, and al, and then to have hell for his pains? yet how busy are
most men in digging for dross, and refusing gold; in seeking earthly things,
and despising heavenly? but what will be the event? Such as trust in lying
vanities, forsake their own mercies.

For instruction,

The doctrines following, shall be but even named. [Heare, and your soul shall
live.] Whence this doctrine is implied, that,

All men and women are dead in sins and trespasses, till the word have
wrought life in them.

Another point from hence might be this: that,

They that conscionably use the means, shall receive the life of grace and
glory.

Provided that they come thereunto, with

1 Preparation, setting themseues in Gods presence. Eccl. 5.

2 With attention, hiding the word in their hearts. Psalm. 119. Pet. 2.

3 With an expectation of good success at length, though God make them wait
for a time.

The sixth Sermon of the Lords Supper.
MATTHEW. 22. VERSE 11. etc. Verse 11. Then the King came in to see the guests,
and saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment. 12. And he said unto
him, friend, how came thou in hither, and have not on a wedding garment? and
he was speechles. 13 Then said the King to the servants, bind him hand, and
foot: take him away, and cast him into utter darkness: there shall be
weeping, and gnashing of teeth.

IN the former part of this Chapter is set forth the marvelous goodness and
favor of the Lord toward the nation of the Jews, under the parable of a
King, the King being wroth, sent forth his warriors, destroyed them, and
burnt up their City: in which words our Savior has reference unto the
destruction of that nation, and of their City by the Romans who are called
Gods warriors, because howsoever they came against the Jews in maliee and
revenge, yet God had a special hand in ordering and disposing of all that they
did: so the greatest part of that people was utterly cut off, and the rest left
under a heavy stroke even unto this day, being destitute of the means of
salvation, which they contemptuously rejected, when they were offered unto them.

But howsoever these that were first bidden, would not come to the supper, yet
the Lord would not be unfurnished of guests, and therefore he sends his
ministers unto the Gentiles, which sat in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, who made their use of Gods message, and came abundantly unto the feast,
so that the wedding was furnished with guests, some good, and some bad. Thus
far the messengers had good success, that multitudes made profession, as if
they were desirous to live under Christ his government, and to feed of his
Supper, though many of them did it with false and hypocritical hearts.

Having thus showed what the messengers did, our Savior next declares what
the King himself did; the place being filled with guests, The interpretation.
[hee came to see the guests,] implying, that when men begin to make
profession, God uses a more deligent search and examination then his ministers
can do: for they can but judge of men by their actions, but the Lord deals
immediately with their hearts and consciences. And therefore it is added, that
when he came in, he saw (that which the Ministers did not) [a man which had
not on a wedding garment] where we must not conceive that their was but one
such present (for it is afterward said, that many are called, but few are
chosen, verse. 14.) but this is the meaning, that if there be but one hypocrite
amongst many thousands God will find him out, and single him from among the
rest.

The party being thus taken, the Lord falls to an examination of him, [
Friend (says he) how came thou in hither?] that is, how dare thou come to
the royal table of so glorious a King [and have not one a wedding garment?]
that is having no repentance for sin; no freedom from the guilt, or from the
power of sin; nor any saving grace at all: how is it (I say) that thou
should presume to come into such a place and into such a presence, having
made no better preparation?

When God began thus to examine him in his own person, it is said [hee was
speechles] having an ill cause and a guilty conscience, he had nothing to say
for himself. Hereupon the Lord proceeds to pass sentence upon him, which
is done after the manner of earthly Judges. [Then said the King unto his
seruants] that is, unto the Angels, whose office it is, as to gather the good
corn into Gods barn, so to bind the tarres together in bundles, that they may
be cast into hell fire; [bind him hand and foot] there must not be present
execution, but he must be dealt with as a prisoner, whose hands are bound that
he may not resist: and his feet that he may not run away; if either of them
had been at liberty, he might have made some shift: but when God comes to
proceed in judgment against men, he will strip them of all means, both of
defense and of escaping. Further they are bid to [take him away] to wit, from
having communion with God, with his Saints or Angels; he must be taken from the
place and means of all comfort and peace, and happiness: and is that all? nay
(says God) [cast him into utter darkenesse] that is, into hell, a place of all
misery and woe, which is implied by utter darkness: a fit punishment for such
kind of persons; for seeing they are full of ignorance, and of spiritual
darkness while they live, God has provided that they shall have enough of
it; they shall be cast into a place of utter darkness, where there shall be
nothing but horror, and anguish. And yet if this were all, their state were the
more tolerable: but this adds unto the misery of the place, that they shall
be very sensible of that misery: which is intimated, when it is said, [there
shall be weeping] not such weeping as many times befalls men here, when the
tears of their eyes abate the anguish of their hearts: but such weeping as is
joined with [gnashing of the teeth] signifying that they should not only have
sorrow and grief, but such as should be mingled with desperation, and with
horrible vexation, and torture: not such as should be an ease unto their
souls, but rather an addition unto their woe.

In these words then is declared the severity of God against those that come
unworthily unto his royal feast: where is showed,

1 First, the cause of this his severity, namely, because they abuse both him
and his banquet in coming with the most foul and loathsome garments of the
old man; which do more displease the eyes of the Lord, then the most base and
beggarly raiment in the world, can do the eyes of an earthly King.

2 Secondly the manner of Gods proceeding. viz.

1 That he conuinceth the consciences, so that they are speechless.

2 That he condemns the persons unto vnuoidable and yet unsupportable
torments.

[Then the King came in.]

God is the only absolute King over all the whole world.

He it is that is blessed and Prince, God the king of the whole world. 1. Tim.
6.15.
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. This Nebuchadnezzar acknowledged after
that the Lord had made him, being the mightiest Monarch in the world, to become
more wretched then the poorest man in the world, living as a beast for seven
years together: after that (I say) the Lord had abased him, and raised him up
again, he acknowledged that God was the King of all the earth, whereas he
thought before that he himself had been: showing what manner of King he is,
Dan. 4.31.32.
namely, the most high, everlasting, of an irresistable power, so that all the
inhabitants of the earth are to be reputed as nothing in comparison of him.

And the reason why the Lord does challenge unto himself this title,

This reprooueth them, such as care not for authority, and the like: Indeed
those that are such, are much to be commended. But in truth they themselves in
the mean while are the notablest rebels in that they stand out against the
Lord of hosts. But they will vaunt and boast that they carry themselves loially
toward their Prince, and are careful to obey authority: suppose for thetime
that they do yield outward obedience to the laws (which yet few such do)
yet if they do not submit themselves to Magistrates, in, and for the Lord, all
their loialtie is nothing worth: for the Apostle Jude speaks of some that had
men's persons in admiration because of advantage, Jude 1^.
against whom he pronounces a woe: they would fawn upon such as were in
authority, and have them in high admiration. Oh they were worthy men, and their
commandments much to be respected: so that if they would have them lie or
swear, or commit any villainy, they would be at their beck: and why? for their
own advantage: that they might get some commodity, or clime to some
preferment, etc. that was their drift, and further then to serve themselves,
they regarded neither the persons, nor places of those that were in government:
all their crouching was for advantage sake, nothing for conscience sake.

Secondly, Prou. 23.1.2.3
he should look unto his carriage, and restrain his appetite, and not behave
himself rudely and unmannerly: now if this be a point of wisdom, when a man
is to feast with one that is far his superior, to wash his hands, to have
respect of his apparel, and if he have any suit better then another, to put
that on; and in no sort to carry himself disorderly, and unbeseeming such a
presence: if (I say) a man would, and should deal thus before an earthly
Prince, that if there be any failing can but give him a rebuk and check, or
inflict upon him some outward punishment; how much more careful and
circumspect should we be, when we are to sit at the Lords table, who looks
not so much to the external behavior, as to the inward disposition of the
soul? and if he find us unprepared and unworthy, cannot only smite us in
the outward man, but cast both body and soul into hell.

Thirdly,

Now for his behavior, he does not only provide for his guests, but is there
present himself in the assembly of Saints [to see the guests] not, but he saw
them before, but this is spoken for our capacity, to signify that as God does
see through us, so he will let men know, and feel, and find, that he
perfectly discerns what they are, and with what hearts they appear before
him:

The Lord takes notice of every guest that sits at his table. Gods cie is
upon all his guests.


There are many comers, but not all of one disposition: therefore does he
take a view of them, that their intertainment may be according to their
condition and preparation: that if they be good, they may speed well; if bad,
they may receive according to their ill deserts.

This is euidentin Zephania, Zephan. 1.12.
where it is said, that the Lord will search Jerusalem with lights: not that
the Lord needs candles or torches; but to show that there are many dark
corners in men's hearts, where sin lies lurking: which if we will not search,
the Lord will, and find out every corruption therein, as men by burning Lamps
come to the sight of such things as lie hidden in obscure and dark corners.
Heb. 4 13.
To the same purpose is it said, that all things are open, and naked to his
eyes: and that his eyes are a flame of fire; noting unto us, that he pierces
and looks through, and through every man's heart, every man's conscience, and
every man's conversation.

Reasons: First,

2 Secondly, See Master Cleauers Sermon on Ioh. 6. Doct. 2. where this point is
more largely handled.
it is his office to reward every one as he knows his heart, and his works:
and therefore must he of necessity search into the same; for otherwise he
could not proceed like a righteous Judge, to give to every one an equal and
perfect reward.

First, for reproof of those, that because they are admitted by the Minister,
and allowed amongst men, and judged to be Christians, as men that can be
touched for no gross sin;

Secondly, for consolation: desire to be reconciled unto the Lord, and to
obtain such mercies as do belong to penitent persons, they shall receive
according to their hearts desire and expectation, even strength against their
corruptions and temptations, and freedom from or ability under all manner of
crosses and afflictions: for there the Lord of glory will manifest his presence
in giving to every one as he knows the integrity of their hearts. Earthly
Kings, though they be present cannot look on every guest, nor examine of what
country or condition every one of them is:

[And saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment.] In that the King
seeing this man at his table, does reprove him, and condemn him for his want
of good preparation; the doctrine is: that,

It is not sufficient to come to Gods wedding feast, Fitnes requisite in Gods
guestes.
and such a glorious presence.

Judas ate and drank the blessed bread and wine as well as Peter; yet because
he had a cursed and carnal heart, it was his bane, and laid him more open to
every hellish temptation, and made him more liable to every curse and plague of
God, this was all that he got by it. Matthew. 25.
So the foolish virgins went to meet the bridegroom, with lamps in their
hands, making a glorious show, and doing many things in the worship and service
of God, yet because they had not oil in their vessels, as well as in their
Lamps, that is, had not inward graces in their hearts and consciences, as well
as outward semblances and shows thereof in their carriage and behavior,
therefore their lights were quickly out, and when others were received as fit
and meet guests, they were rejected and excluded, as unfit an unworthy of the
Bridgroomes feast, and company, so that outward terms and colors of Religion
will not serve the turn: many shall cry Lord, Lord, who yet shall be bid to
depart from Christ, Mat. 7.22.23.
because they are workers of iniquity: They brag they have Propheced, and
cast out devils, and done many great works by his name, but they did nothing
for his name, but for their own credit, or gain, or for some carnal respect
or other: and therefore seeking and serving themselves, the Lord esteems them
wicked and ungodly persons, and punnisheth them accordingly.

Now the reason of this point is, because the Lord comman, death us as well to
come worthily as to come, and as the prayers of the wicked are an abomination
unto him, so are all other services of theirs: to the unclean, all things are
unclean: if men be dead in sins and trespasses, and live under the power of
presumptuous sins, the things that are most helpful and profitable in
themselves, are made hurtful and pernicious unto them, so that they are
thereby made more impure and more unholy.

Since there will be such strict examination, and such a sharp sentence of
condemnation past upon those that do not get them wedding apparel, when they
come to this wedding feast, this serves to humble every one that has at any
time come to this royal feast without his wedding garment: as every one has
so often as he came to any of the means of salvation before he was
effectually called.

Secondly, let us labor to put on this wedding garment, What the wedding
garment is.


Now, if we would know what it is, the Apostle describes it in part, Coloss
3.12. Now therefore as the elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender mercy,
etc. As if he had said, since God has chosen you to eternal glory in the
heavens, and proposed unto you a kingdom, that you may reign with his own
son, therefore do you lead such a life as becomes heirs of such a kingdom,
and adorn your selves with such graces as may beseem the spouse of Christ,
and those that are the chosen people of the Lord, even such as are called unto
holiness, and unto whom God has manifested his love: and seeing he has
forgiven you so many sins, and does continually pass by so many of your
infirmities, do you put on tender mercy, etc. he reckneth up diverse of those
particular virtues, whereby he would have them shine forth before men: and
first he wills them to put on [tender mercy] not only to have, but to put on
a merciful heart: many have this grace which do not put it on, that is, do
not stir up their hearts, nor make them sensible of the wants, and
necessities, and distresses of their poor brethren: the bowels of compassion
are not so moved within the^, that they out of a fellow-feeling of their
griefs, do proceed from pitying of them, to releeuing of them: but the
Apostle would have men so to be endued with these graces, that they put them
forth for the use of others, as occasion is offered.

The next virtue which we must put on, is [kindnesse] we must not be fierce,
nor froward, tart nor sower in our speeches or carriage, but be affable and
amiable in our conversation, that so we may not discourage, nor discountenance
those that have to speak or deal with us.

But how may we attain to this kindness? get [humblenesse] which is the next
virtue: for whence comes it to pass that men are so harsh and rough, so loud
and full of crying in their speeches? that very true reason is, because they
are proud: therefore the same mind should be in us, that was in Christ Jesus,
who was still ready to bear with infirmities, and to pray for his sorest
adversaries.

The next grace is [meekenesse] which consists in this, that we be not
busy and violent in our own private matters, but content to part with our
own right, so far as Gods glory, and a good conscience do require.

Another virtue is [long suffering] which is fitly joined with the former: for
some might say,

Oh, verse. 13.

But there is a quarrel betwixt us, and what shall we make of that?

The Apostle tells you how to make brief work, and how to make the best
cheapest, and most Christian end of all controversies, and that is, [freely to
forgine one another] Obie. Answer, Christ Jesus could: and therefore it is
added, Even as Christ Jesus forgane you, even so do ye. There is none of the
elect of God, but must be driven to confess that our Savior has passed by
far greater matters in him, then he can do in any man: yea, and does so
still, even every day and hour, or else it would go full ill with him: which
being so, they would not stick to forgive and forget one another trespasses
and offenses, of what kind, and of what degree soever.

These virtues if we can get and exercise, it is certain that we have the
wedding garment, and therefore may boldly and comfortably stand before him that
has pure and fiery eyes: for say that he hate all iniquity (as indeed he
does) with a deadly hatred: if we do so too, God and we are of one mind, and of
on side, and he will neuerlay any of our sins unto our charge.

Thus have we heard what the wedding garment is: now it is further to be
considered, Who must bestow the wedding garment. Revel. 19.7.8.
how we may come by it: and the way is, to go unto Christ Jesus for it: for
his spouse must be clothed and decked by himself, who is the Bridgrome: and
therefore he exhorts the Church of the Laodiceans that was poor, and
miserable, and blind, and [naked] to buy of him [white raiment:] Reu. 3.17.18.
(which is the righteousness of Saints. Renel. 19.8.) that their filthy
nakedness might not appear, but be covered through the righteousness of
Christ, which makes us as righteous here, Psalm. 31.
as we shall be when we come to heaven, though we cannot see it so clearly,
nor apprehend it so fully. Now we see where it may be bought; the next question
will be, how it must be bought?

And for answer thereunto, How it must be gotten.
we must know that three things are to be performed.

The first is, Put off our rags.
that we must put off our own filthy and ragged clothes, to wit, our sinful
and corrupt natures, and our bad and vile conversation, as the Apostle wills
the Ephesians, Cast ye offeoncerning the conversation in time past, Ephesians.
4.22.
the old man, which is corrupt through the deceiuable lusts. This then is the
first duty, by sound and hearty repentance to make a riddance of all gross
sins, and to purge our selves as much as possibly we can from all
infirmities: for certain it is, that the wedding garment can not be obtained,
until we be fit for the same. The old man and the new will not agree
together. Wherefore when the Prophet Isaiah exhorts men to come and buy, Isa.
5.5.7.
etc. he says, Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the ungodly his own
imaginatio^s, etc. now then we forsake them, when with purpose of heart we
cleave unto the Lord, and depart from iniquity: and that is as far as any
man huing can go, to intend and desire to do all good duties, and to leave
the contrary evils.

The next thing required of him that would buy this white raime^t is, Desire it.
that he must much esteem, and desire it for the thirsty soul alone shall be
satisfied with good things. Now that we may get this spiritual affection, Isa.
55.1.
we must labor to have a sight of our miserable estate while we are naked and
destitute of this raiment; and of our happy case when we shall be adorned
therewith, which being well considered of, will make us more to affect it, then
all the treasures of the world.

Thirdly, he that would be a good chapman, and procure himself these heavenly
robes, Seek it where it may be had
must come to the places and shops where he may buy and have choice for his
money: which are, where the word is powerfully preached, and the Sacraments
duly administered. Thence must these robes be fetched whereby all naked souls
may be covered, and the most deformed creature may be beautified: James 1.18.
1. Cor. 10.16.
the word is it which works grace and together with the Sacraments does
continually increase the same: so that thereby the Lord conueieth unto us
whatsoever legacies Christ has deserved for us. And thus we see how the
wedding garment may be come by: our own rags must be rejected, this must be
desired and sought for where it is to be found.

A third use of this point,

This is for terror unto those hypocrites,

Oh, but one lives in malice, an another in uncleanness, etc.

This is the most wretched excuse of all: What then do they deserve that will
absent themselves under this color, I live in malice, and therefore I cannot
come: I must follow my sensual and devilish lusts, and therefore I cannot
come? if the works of our callings may not in any case keep us from the Lords
feast, then much less may the works of the flesh and of the devil.

Verse 12. [Friend, how came thou in hither?] Doctrine. When God has to
deal even against sinners, God deals in a peaceable manner even with sinners.
yet he deals in good and peaceable terms. Friend (says he) how came
thou in hither? what warrant had thou thus to abuse my presence and mine
ordinances? Thus God debateth the matter with him peaceably and quietly, and
conuinceth him of his fault before he condemn him for it. So he dealt with
Adam when he had eaten the forbidden fruit, and thereupon fled from God, and
hid himself amongst the trees of the garden, Adam (says he) where art thou?
Genesis 3.9.
q. d. why do thou fly from me and leave the place of thy calling? Have
thou not eaten of the tree whereof I commanded that thou should not eat?
He comes not upon him in violence or fury, but quietly calls him by his name,
and in cool manner reasons the matter with him. In like manner deals Christ
with Judas, Friend, betraiest thou the son of man with a kiss? as if he
should have said, Judas, howsoever this kiss may seem to proceed from your
love, yet indeed it is otherwise, as being appointed as a token to destroy me,
that so I may be apprehended, and condemned, and put to death; this is not
plain and faithful dealing with your master.

The reasons, why God takes this course: are,

First,

Secondly,

This is for our imitation, that if we would have any party set down and
humbled for his sin; we should endeavor in the quietest and best manner to
convince him of his fault. Use as hard arguments as we will (for so the Lord
does) but withal look that we use soft speeches: for that is the way to make
men think hardly of themselves; whereas the contrary will cause them to think
hardly of us. And here are such to be blamed as when any thing is distrustful
unto them, are presently hot and boisterous, and loud, and crying: and so
rather hurt the ear by the loudness of their voice, then help the heart by
the force of their reproof: whence arise these two inconveniences. First, that
the party looks not so much to his own failing, as to their passion: and
secondly, as he is vnconuinced, so they are not esteemed: but though they have
the right on their side, yet they loose the due regard of their cause and
reverence of their persons. And therefore the Apostle tells Timothy that the
servant of God must not [striue] but must be gentle toward all men: he must
not be clamorous and violent, 2. Tim. 2.24.25
but suffer evil men patiently, instructing them with meekness that are
contrary minded, etc. for this is the way, if there be any, to bring them to
sound repentance that they may come out of the snares of the devil. This (I
say) is the way, to let them see good reasons against their sins, and a good
affection toward their persons: these are the best helps, and hereby we shall
be sure to please God; and if the party will ever be broken, it must be by
the weight of good arguments, pressed in meekness of wisdom, and proceeding
from a merciful heart.

But they are vile and wicked persons with whom I am to deal, such as deserve
little mildness: Be it so? Joshua with Achan, that had committed such
execrable wickedness, as that the whole host of God sped the worse for him:
Joshua 7.19.
My son (says he) I beseech thee give glory unto the Lord God of Israel,
and make confession unto him, etc.

Secondly, this is for consolation. then what may his friends expect at his
hands?

[And he was speechles.] Though sinners have many excuses and colors, Sinners
shall to be put silence.
when they are to deal with men like themselves, yet when God comes to
examine and sift their consciences, they shall have nothing to say for
themselves.

This is to be observed in Judas, that though he were very subtle, and a
notable cunning hypocrite, yet when the Lord wakened his drousie conscience, he
brake forth into a plain confession, I have sinned, betraying innocent blood.
He had no manner of defense or Apology for himself in the world.

The reason of this point is,

Further,

If then we would be able to stand before the Lord at the last dreadful day of
judgment, Job. 3.18.19. Chap. 5.17.
Thereby shall we assure our hearts before him, and have boldness in the day
of judgment: so that pure and Christian love with the fruits of it, is the
best means to make us with confidence and comfort to hold up our heads in the
day of accounts.

Secondly, hearing in their just and righteous eauses, and all evil men shall
be put to silence. Godly men shall lift up their heads with glory, and wicked
sinners shall stop their mouths with shame.

Verse. 13. [Binde him hand, and foot.] Hitherto of the examination, and
conuictio^ of him that had not on a wedding garment. Now follows this
sentence, well befitting the party offending, [bind him hand and foot] he had
abused his hands and his feet, and dishonored God by his whole body, and
therefore just it is that he should be punished in that: [take him away] because
he had only been in the Church, but not of the Church; at the means, but
not profited by them; therefore must he now be separated from all communion
with God, or his Saints: [And cast him into utter darkenesse] Seeing he loved
darkness more then light, therefore he shall have enough of it. He must be
cast into a hell of darkness. When and where wicked men's punishment shall be.
and the Saints of God are in greater restraint: but why is that? Because
sinners shall never have their full measure of woe, till they be cast bodies
and souls into hell fire: at which time they shall be made capable of the
extremity of all miseries, because their iniquities are grown to a full
height.

Therefore let us never envy their prosperity,

Secondly, but when we come to heaven we shall be quite freed from them: and
therefore in the mean time let us not take such offense at them as Brownists
do, but wait Gods time when he shall command his holy Angels to separate them
from amongst us, and to give them their due in the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone for ever.

Thirdly,

As sinners at that time shall be deprived of all good things, and be vexed
with all manner of evils, so the Saints on the other side shall be exempted from
all evil, and be brought to the enioyment of all good things: as sinners shall
be perfectly miserable, so shall the Saints be perfectly happy: as the one
shall be sensible of their wretchedness, so shall the other be of their
blessedness; and as the one shall be everlastingly misesarable, so shall the
other be eternally happy: in a word, there shall be every way as much joy and
felicity in heaven (and more too) then there shall be woe and anguish in hell.
Which should stay us from fainting under our crosses and sorrows, our
temptations and corruptions:

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
PSALM. 119. verse. 1. etc. 1 Blessed are those that are upright in their way,
and walk in the law of the Lord. 2 Blessed are they that keep his testimonies,
and seek him with their whole heart. 3 Surely they work none iniquity, but
walk in his ways. 4 Thou have commanded to keep thy precepts diligently.

IN this first part of the Psalm now read unto you, is set down a description
of a blessed man, the things that make men good, or at least, the marks which
show them to be good, which are two.

1 The first in their hearts, that they are upright and sincere, verse. 1. and
seek God with their whole heart, verse. 2. that is truly, not hypocritically:
and earnestly, not slackly and carelessly.

2 The second is in their outward behavior: that they walk in the law of the
Lord, verse. 1. and keep his testimonies, verse. 2. where are added also the
causes of their happiness.

1 One is their freedom from sin: Surely they work none iniquity verse. 3.
not but they are compassed about with many infirmities still, and fall into
diverse sins which Gods law condemns, but they do not wilfully, and
presumptuously, slauishly nor desperately work iniquity: as for their
frailties, the Lord passes by them: He will see none iniquity in Jacob, nor
transgression in Israel. Numb: 23.21.

2 Another is taken from this, that God has commanded them to keep his
precepts diligently, verse. 4. Now he never gives a precept, but he also
rewards those that yield obedience thereunto: he never sets any awork, but
he pays them their wages: and therefore all such as walk in the ways that he
wills them, shall be recompensed with that happiness that he promises them.

Verse. 1. Blessed are those that are upright in their ways, etc. IN that when
the Prophet would make known unto all the world, who are in the happiest
estate, and in the highest place of account with God, he describes and
sets them forth by this property: that they are sincere in heart, and
upright in life and conversation; in a word, such as truly fear the Lord. The
point hence to be noted in general, is this, that Grace and Religion is the way
to all blessedness.

This doctrine the Psalmist confirms unto us in sundry other places, Religion
is the way to happiness. Psalm. 1.1.2. etc. and 112.1.
as Psalm. 1. and 112 etc. In the former whereof he declares, who is a man
truly religious, to wit, he that escheweth ill counsels, and sinful practices,
and on the other side, embraces and delights in goodness and godliness,
and in the means of obtaining and increasing the same: and then he pronounces
such a man blessed: Blessed (says he) is the man that does not walk in the
counsel of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners etc. But his delight is
in the law of the Lord, and in his law will he meditate day and night. And to
the same effect is that in the other Psalm before named: Blessed is the man
that fears the Lord, and delights greatly in his commandments etc.
Throughout which Psalm, we may observe as the true and certain notes of a
righteous man, so also his privileges, which are very many, and very great,
both in regard of himself, and of his posterity, which shall speed the better
for his sake. Notable likewise is that place of Deuteronomy, Deur. 33.29.
where the Lord speaks unto his Church in this manner: Blessed art thou O
Israel, who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy
help, and the sword of thy glory? which speech is not to be understood, as
pertaining only to that nation, but as belonging to all that are the true
Israel of God, and that serve him with an upright and faithful heart. Now what
says he of them? Who is like unto thee, O Isral? Why, if they should have
looked to outward things, they might have answered, the Egyptians, the
Edomites, Assyrians, yea the very Canaanites themselves are like unto us, yea
far beyond us: for at that time when this was spoken, they were in the
wilderness, traveling toward the promised land: and what great matters had
they then? Moses who was the best of them, had not a house to rest his head in,
none of them could say: this is my ground, there is my corn, thus large are my
revenues by the year etc. but they were all tenants at will, at a days, or
at an hours warning or less, even as Gods pleasure was: yet the Lord makes a
challenge against all the world: Who is like unto thee O people saved by the
Lord? meaning indeed that no nation under heaven was comparable unto them in
regard of the wonderful things that God had wrought for them, and in regard of
those heavenly prerogatives which he had vouchsafed unto them: the meanest
hewer of wood, or drawer of water, amongst them, was to be preferred before the
mightiest Monarch in the world: and that may be said of all true Christians,
which was spoken of them: Who is like unto thee O people saved by the Lord?

The truth of this will more evidently appear, if we well weigh the things
that follow: Namely, 1. What misery grace does free us from. 2. What good
things it makes us to enjoy. 1. In this life. 1. Estimation. 2. Safety. 3.
Comfort.
2. In the life to come, all manner of happiness.



1 First therefore that we may see what misery it frees us from, 1. What misery
grace freeth us from.
we must consider, that men naturally are the children of wrath, under the
curse and malediction of God, subject to horrible vexations and terrors: all
their life long, they live in fear of death, and of such judgments as are
forerunners of death: their table is a snare, and their prosperity their ruin:
their adversity is imbittered, and their callings accursed, and in a word,
nothing makes them better, but every thing a great deal worse; all being
infected and poisoned unto them by their own sins, Solomon in the midst of
his royalty: though their robes were as rich as was Aarons Ephod, or
breast plate, or the most costliest parts of his garments, all were of no worth
without grace: though they fed on the daintiest dishes, and did eat Angels
food (as the Israelits are said to do) yet if they be sinful and rebellious,
they shall perish as Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and many other of them did.
Though their habitations were as sumptuous and delightful as Paradise was, yet
they could have no more comfort therein, than Adam had, who when he had once
broken the commandment of GOD, in eating of the forbidden fruit:
notwithstanding al things remained in their excellency as before, yet he was
surprised with the terrors and fears of a guilty conscience, and could take no
pleasure in the goodly rivers, in the pleasant fruits, in the variety of all
the creatures that were in the garden of Eden etc. but he was feign to fly
from Gods presence, and to hide himself among the tres of the garden. And last
of all, though their dignity were never so great: their possessions never so
ample and large, and their substance never so plentiful and abundant yet they
could have no more comfort in any, or all of these things, than Belshazzer that
impious king had: who for all his valiant Captains and soldiers, for all his
great cheer and plenty of wine: for all his iollity and triumphing over Gods
people: for all his merry companions that he had about him, and all the means
that he had to comfort him; yet was he in such horror, when he saw on the wall
the hand writing against him, that his countenance was changed, Daniel. 5.6.
and his thoughts troubled him, and the joints of his loins were loosed, and
his knees smote one against another.

This (and much more lamentable than can possibly be expressed) is the case of
all unregenerate men: and how great then must the excellency of Grace needs
be, which freeth a man from this woeful estate and condition? Yet this is not
all, but as it freeth men from this misery,

2 Secondly, What good things Grace makes us to enjoy.
it brings men to the enioyment of all good things: and that first, in this
life, it procures the^ the benefits following, namely

1 First a good estimation: so that it may well be said, A good estimation.
Prou. 12.26.
and that of all other, they are the most glorious people, that have the Spirit
of grace and of glory dwelling in their hearts. For they are precious in Gods
sight, as being his chief treasure: precious in the eyes of his people,
precious in the account of the Angels: yea reverent in the sight of the very
wicked, who esteem them to be honest men, and dare trust them before any
other many times, with their goods, with their children, and their portions,
yea and with their souls also. For when they are in any extremity, lying upon
their death beds, or the like, oh then they cry out, Send for such a Preacher:
send for this or that good man or woman: now their prayers and their speeches
might do me good, which heretofore I have rejected, or lightly esteemed: and
then none is to be compared to them, none to be sought unto in respect of them.
read, and confer, and to spend much time in prayer, as Gods servants do; but
they cry out, that they do not these things well, nor with a good heart. Now if
Christians consciences do bear them witness, that they do perform these
duties in uprightness, then they have the testimony of ungodly men themselves
on their sides: and till they can disprove the soundness of our hearts, they
must, whether they will or not, justify our behavior. Thus we see how
godliness wins us a good estimation. 2 Safety.


Now secondly it does also bring safety with it: it sets men out of gunshot,
so that neither the devil, nor all the powers of hell, can annoy or hurt them:
nor any, or all of the devils instruments in the world, prevail against them,
for their overthrow: for the Lord is evermore a shield and buckler unto them,
so that they must first strike through him, before they can come at them. He
will cover them under his wings, and they shall be safe under his feathers.
91.4.

Thirdly, Romans 5.3.
the virtue and power of grace is such that it makes Gods children to rejoice,
even in affliction; as was verified in David, who when he had many malicious
adversaries against him, and many troubles beset him round about, yet he had
more joy of heart then they had, when their wheat, Psalm. 4.
and their wine did abound. And so it is with all Gods servants: as their
sufferings are many, so are they refreshed with manifold consolations.

And when outward matters of rejoicing are furthest removed from them, then are
they driven nearer unto God, the fountain of all true comfort, and by that
means their hearts are exceedingly revived. And if they be so much cheared in
the times of their greatest adversity, how much more joyful are they in the
days of their prosperity, when he makes them to rest in green pastures, and
leads them by the still waters: Psalm. 23.
preparing for them a table, in the sight of their adversaries, anointing
their heads with oil, and causing their cups to run over; as the Psalmist
speaks. And they withal have a principal care to entertain Gods blessings
with thankfulness, and to serve him with a good and thankful heart, in the
use and enioyment thereof.

Now if their estate be so blessed in this life, what shall their happiness be
when they depart out of this life, to have the fruition of those joys, The
happiness in the life to come.
which are prepared for the Saints in the kingdom of glory? where all tears
shall be wiped away from their eyes, and they being altogether freed from sin
and sorrow, shall receive an immortal crown of blessedness with the Saints
and Angels, in Gods own presence, where is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.
and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore; where there shall be no
parting of company, nor possibility of any unkindness, nor tediousness in
conuersing together.

Much more might be spoken of the excellency of this estate, and yet when all
has been said that can be, it is nothing in comparison of that which the
thing is in it self, and we shall find it to be, when we shall lay down this
body of corruption, and be clothed upon with perfect glory. But yet that the
dignity thereof, may somewhat more clearly be seen into, let us consider a
little further of the 1 Price. 2 Rarenes, and 3 continuance
thereof

1 First, The price of Grace.
concerning the price that was laid down for the purchasing of it, it was the
greatest that ever was given for any thing; for there goes more to the buying
of a Christian, then to the making of the world: for in the creation, God did
but say they word, and all things were presently formed according to their
several kinds: but in the work of redemption, God was not only to say, but
to pay also, and that full dearly, even the blood of his own son, which was
of an infinite value. And therefore if things are to be esteemed according to
that which wise men will give for them, suerly the estate of Christianity must
needs be worthy high estimation, since the wise God provided it for his children
at such an inestimable reckoning.

2 Further in respect of the rareness thereof, The rarenes of it.
it is to be accounted very admirable. If things that are very dear were also
very common, that would diminish some part of their worth: Mat. 7.13.14. Luke.
11.32.
but as for this, it is both precious and rare. There are but a very few
selected ones, that the Lord has singled out, to be partakers of the life of
Grace, and to be afterward heirs of the kingdom of glory, which makes it to
be a gift of far greater estimation.

3 Lastly, The continuance of it.
it were the less to be regarded: therefore this addition there is unto the
happiness of this estate, that it is also durable, yea everlasting. And
whereas all worldly excellency, and all earthly promotions are temporary and
vanishing, so that a man may be very high this day, and as low ere the morrow,
and none can be happy in possessing those things, through the loss whereof,
he may so quickly become miserable: it is otherwise with them that are in the
state of grace, for that never fails: once a Christian, and ever a Christian:
as the Lords purpose changes not, so neither does our condition change: but if
we have begun in Grace, we shall end in glory, that never shall have end.
Psalm. 16.11. Dan. 12.2.

Is it so, Prou. 8.10.11.
Now concerning this heavenly wisdom it is said: Receive mine instruction,
and not silver, and knowledge rather then fine gold: For wisdom is better
then precious stones, and all treasures are not to be compared unto her. And
this should encourage us rather to use all industry for the obtaining of this
blessed estate, because it is a thing haueable. It were in vain for a base
person to sue to be a King, a Duke, or a Lord: none almost is so foolish, as to
seek for such preferments, because they know it would be but lost labor. But
there is not the meanest servant, slave, or bondsman, but may attain to this
spiritual dignity, which is far beyond all the advancement that the
kingdoms of this world can possibly yield. He that can pray, hear, meditate,
confer, and judge himself in secret before he comes to the Sacrament, and
with all good care and conscionable respect, use all Gods ordinances, for the
obtaining of faith and other graces which do ever accompany the same, shall be
sure of good and happy success: for the Lord will be found of those that seek
him with a true heart; therefore let us not so east our eyes on earthly
commodities, as that in the mean time we neglect this pearl of price, and
this inestimable Jewel, that will so exceedingly enrich us. The Apostle
tells us, 2. Cor. 9.21.
that those that run in a race for a prize, though it be but a garland that
is set up, so that they can gain only some small credit of their agility and
nimblenesse in out running one another, yet they will put off all that might
clogge and hinder them in their race; but especially if they should run for a
crown of gold: neither will they be so foolish as to stoop down to take up
every pin or point that lies in the way; and yet they run but at an
uncertainty: when they have done their best, another may carry away both the
honor and commodity from them: and certain it is, that but one alone can win
the prize: and even he also, though he have the applause at one time, may go
away with the disgrace at another, or if his credit do continue all his life
time, yet death will take it away at last. From all which the Apostle would
have us draw this conclusion, that if such kind of persons, notwithstanding
all that has been said, will so bestirre themselves, and seek to acquit
themselves every way like men: then how much more ought we to put our selves to
it, and with all alacrity run the race that is set before us, since we run
not at an uncertainty, but are sure to obtain the crown; one shall not
prevent nor deprive another, but all shall undoubtedly get that which they do
expect: and especially seeing that withal we strive for an incorruptible
crown, and shall attain unto, not a fading and vanishing, but an abiding and
everlasting dignity.

O but (will some say) if we bestow our pains and endeavors so much about
spiritual things, in the mean time, estate, 1 Timothy 4.8.
does never impair our present estate: for godliness has the promises of this
life, and of that which is to come: and thereby shall all matters be blessed
unto us.

Have we inheritance, wealth, reputation, dignity, etc. This will assure us
that we have a good title unto all,

Have we not these outward things? Godliness will make a supply in stead of
all: for that is great gain with contentment: in comparison of which, 1 Timothy
6.6.
all the promises of contentedness that other things make unto us, will be
found to be but mere illusions; because it certifieth our souls that God will
provide sufficiently for us, which persuasion alone is able to stay the
restless and unsettled minds of the sons of men, from pursuing after the
unprofitable, deceitful, and lying vanities of this present evil world.

Seeing religion is such an incomparable treasure,

The word is the key that must open hell gates, to set us at liberty from the
bonds of sin, of Satan, and of death; and to unlock heaven gates, that we
may have entrance into glory: in which respect it is, that Christ says unto
Peter, that he would give unto him (and consequently to all Ministers of the
Gospel) the keys of the kindom of heaven, that is the dispensation of the
word, which makes the way unto heaven ly open to al such as by faith receive
the same into their hearts. So that we should not come unto the means with a
base conceit, or light estimation thereof, but with a large and ample desire and
expectation of taking benefit thereby. If men can once espy a way how they may
rise in the world, either to great wealth or promotion, they will be most
industrious and laborious in that course, they will refuse no pains in seeds
time, though the weather be unseasonable and cold, and their work every way
troublesome: but they will put themselves to it with all care and industry, in
hope (though it be but an uncertain hope) of bettering their estate. So those
that live by faires and markets, will nor fail one of them ordinarily, neither
heat nor cold, wind nor rain, nor any the like impediments shall hinder them
from pursuing their commodity; and why then should we be negligent, and play
the sluggards while our seedes-time lasts, and the Lord bids us plough up
the fallow ground of our hearts that he may sow therein the seed of life,
which will never fail to yield us a plentiful harvest, if we can wait upon
him for the same? And why should we be slack and careless when our chief
market days and fair days come, and not rather set our hearts and endeavors
to seek after those things, which all that seek shall find, and being found,
will make us men for ever.

This should be an encouragement unto us,

Oh, but it is an hard matter (may some say) to fast, and pray, Difficulties in
Christianity.
and when we have done all, to be derided and maligned, persecuted and slain
for a good cause! and besides all these, to feel Gods hand scourging us,
sometimes with poverty, and want, sometimes with fears and terrors: sometimes
with temptations and inward conflicts, etc.

These things seem very great, and very tedious indeed, Baronrie, or a
Lordship, yea though it be but a Farm, if so be he will take the pains to
come for it: who is here (I say) that would take exception, and say, Alas the
air is clowdie, and the weather uncertain, nay it begins to rain, or hail,
or snow already, and therefore I will even stay at home, and never wet my
foot for the matter? Nay if there be but likelihood of some smaller gain, and
the weather foul, and the ways deep, and themselves somewhat out of temper
also, yet they will adventure to go through all, and rather ferry over, than
come short of that profit that is offered: how much more then ought we to
break through all impediments, and swallow up all difficulties with the
consideration of this, that our journey tends not to the getting of some
small commodity, or to the purchasing of some worldly possessions, or to the
obtaining of any earthly prehemine^ce or preferment whatsoever: but that we are
traveling toward our own country, where we shall receive an inualuable, and
eternal crown of glory? And albeit we must pass through many rough and
craggie and thornie ways, and meet with sundry things, that will be very
irksome, and unpleasant; yet let us account withal, that we shall find many
sweet comforts, and joys unspeakable, and glorious in the midst of our
pilgrimage, and in the end shall have the fruition of that happiness which will
make amends for all. And this was it that made the Apostle Paul so comfortable,
in the midst of al his sufferings: Therefore we faint not (says he) but
though our outward man perish, 2. Cor. 4.16, 17
yet our inward man is renewed daily. For our light affliction which is but for
a moment, causes unto us a far most excellent, and an eternal weight of
Glory. Where we may note, that when he speaks of the happiness of another
life, he magnifieth the same exceedingly, both for the worth of it, and for the
continuance of it: calling it a far most excellent, and eternal weight of
glory. To be excellent is much, to be most excellent is far more: to be far
most excellent, is yet an higher degree: but when he calls it a far most
excellent, and withal an eternal weight of glory, it makes a great addition
unto all the former, and shows that it is inded, an inconceiueable and
unutterable happiness that in the heaven we shall enjoy: but one the other side,
he counts his affliction light and momentany, because it passes as it were
in a thought, and is a thing of nothing, being laid in the balance against the
neuer-sading bliss, that we shall shortly come unto. And as for that weight
that is in the tributions of this life, it is but as an heavy bag of gold,
that will make the heart of the owner light, in the very carriage of it, and so
much the more light, by how much weightier it is. And therefore by all these
motives, we should persuade, yea even compel our souls unto patience under
the cross of Christ, and to perseverance in the practice of all the duties of
godliness: a pattern of which patience we have in the Hebrews, Who after the
had received the light, endured a great fight in afflictions. Hebr. 10.33.34.
Partly (says the Apostle) while ye were made a gazing stock, both by
reproaches, and afflictons: and partly while ye became companions unto them,
which were so tossed to and fro. For both ye sorrowed with me, for my bonds,
and suffered with joy the spoiling of your goods. And why? knowing in your
selves that you have in heaven, a better and more enduring substance. If their
riches had been of such value, as they made show of, and as the world takes
them for, they could not have been so quickly taken from them: but since they
had betaken them to their wings, these faithful ones knew, that heaven, which
was reserved for them in stead thereof, was far more excellent, and more
durable, and therefore full glad were they, that for the cause of God, they had
made so happy and so blessed an exchange.

Verse 1. Blessed are those that are upright in the way etc.

And verse 2. Blessed are those that seek him with their whole heart.

These words having been expounded before, offer unto us this doctrine: That
whosoever would have sound happiness, must have a sound heart.

So much sincerity as their is, Walk uprightly, and speak the truth from his
heart. And again in another Psalm, a question is made to the same effect, Who
shall dwell in the mountain of the Lord, and who shall stand in his holy
place? Psalm 24.3.4.
and the answer is: He that, has innocent hands, and a pure heart, which has
not lift up his mind to vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. In which words we have
a description of a sound hearted man.

1 By his actions, that he deals uprightly, and so has innocent hands.

2. By his affection, that he lifts not up his mind to vanity, that is,
sets not his heart on any earthly thing: in which sense that Phrase is used
in the original. Ier. 22.27.

3. By his speeches, that he has not sworn, nor any way spoken deceifully.

The reasons to confirm this point, are drawn from the great inconveniences,
that will follow on the contrary; for if there a be in any fraudulent and
deceitful heart:

1 First there is a deadly quarrel, God has a quarrel against hypocrites.
whose sins are covered by the righteousness of his son, so that they shall
not be imputed unto them? even they In whose spirit there is no guile. And what
will follow then for those, Psalm 32.3.
whose hearts are full of fraud and deceit, but that they must needs be
destitute of all hope of the pardon of their sins, and so consequently lie open
to the strokes of Gods vengeance due unto the same?

2 And as their persons are hateful to the Lord, He loathes their services.
for indeed they are not the services of God, but of Satan, and of our own
flesh: and therefore be they never so glorious in outward show, and let them
pretend never so much zeal, in the performance of them, yet the Lord has them
in utter detestation. As we may plainly see in the hypocritical Pharisees, they
would be every where praying with great devotion: and very often fasting, with
great austerity, and blowing a trumpet to give notice unto men of their
almesdeeds and liberality, and striving with all their might by external
observations, to win themselves the praise of holy and zealous men: yet for
all this, our Savior sharply rebukes the^, saying; Luk 16.15.
Ye are they which justify your selves before men, but God knows your
hearts; for that which is highly esteemed before men, is an abomination in the
sight of God. It is as loathsome unto him as carions, or toades, or any such
creatures as man's nature does most abhor, can be unto us.

Thirdly, this is another misery of hypocrites, They live in continual danger.
that they live in continual fear and danger: there are holes in their
maskes, (at least their will be) and their double dealing shall be seen into, it
shall sometime or other come to light, how they have abused Gods presence, and
dissembled with their brethren, by making fair shows, and pretenses of that
which they never meant: their sins shall not always ly hid, but either they will
give over all, in time of persecution, as the stony ground did; or in hope of
promotion, as Judas, and Achitophel did, Luke 8.13.
and so discover their false-heartednes: or else it shall be drawn forth by
their speeches, in their merriments, or in their distempers; or else Gods
spirit in godly men, shall destroy it, by working in their hearts, a vehement
suspicion of them, and causing them with a judicious eye, more narrowly to pry
into their works, and ways. By one such means or other, God will lay them
open to the view of the world: so that being in such peril, they cannot but
have a fearful heart, and a restless conscience. And to this purpose,
notable is that saying of Solomon: He that walks uprightly, walks boldly or
surely, but he that peruerteth his ways shall be known. Whence it is apparent,
that the upright man needs not to fear any thing, he needs not to be
afraid of ill men: for though they may disgrace him, they cannot shame him: he
needs not to be afraid of good men: for the oftener he speaks to them, and
conuerseth with them, the more he is approved by them: neither needs he to
be afraid of God, for he that searches the heart and the reins, knows and
allows of the integrity of their souls. They have no cause of fear for the
present, because all things go well with them: neither is there any for
afterward, because all things shall go well with them, for they shall never
fall away from God: None can pluck them out of his hand, Ioh. 10 29. Ioh. 4.4.
Satan cannot, because he that is in us, is stronger then he that is in the
world: sin cannot, because grace will prevail against it: the world cannot,
because this is our victory, 1 Ioh 5.4.
whereby we overcome the world, even our faith. And the Apostle concludes
generally for all other matters, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, Romans
8.38.39.
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. What follows now on the
contrary part for hypocrites? but he that peruerteth his way, that is, allows
himself in any ill course, though never so secretly, shall be known; that is,
his vile and wretched dissembling shall be detected, if not in this world, yet
when the thoughts of all hearts shall be made manifest: they shall be found out
first or last, and therefore they cannot but walk fearfully in their ill
courses, wherein they walk and give liberty unto themselves.

This should make us exceeding careful, Mat. 22.
as he did him that came without a wedding garment, whom he singled out from
all the guests that were present, and that not only to ignominy and reproach,
but to everlasting punishment and torment in hell fire. It is very dangerous
then we see to deal hypocritically with God; it is not safe with men, to
pretend and say one thing before their faces, and to speak and do another
behind their backs, because they may peradventure discern it: but it is more
dangerous to dissemble with God, for he does certainly discern it, and will as
certainly punish it.

Many when they are reproved, or admonished, will snuff at it, and say: What
need you be so hot in the matter? I hope you cannot charge me to be either
Whore or Thief. But though man cannot charge you, (which all cannot say) is
that a sufficient discharge for you? Nay you must look unto it, that God find
not matter sufficient to convict you, either of those particulars, or of worse
and viler offenses.

And let none reply that it is sufficient, that we frequent Sermons, and
partake of the Sacrament, and come to prayer in public, and use prayer in the
family, and perform other duties that Christian men and women should do, and
no more is required at our hands.

Yes, God does require more then this: Pro. 23.
he calls for the heart in all these: though a man be present at never so
many Sermons, yet if his mind run after his pleasures, or after his
covetousness, so that when his body travels one way, his affections travel
another way, all his hearing is nothing worth.

And so in prayer, though there be never so many excellent words, apt terms,
and goodly sentences, yet if they come from the head and not from the heart,
from wit and memory, and not from the inward feeling of the soul, they cannot
be accepted. Ier. 29.
God professes indeed that he will be found of those that seek him: but then
they must seek him with their whole heart: that is, truly and fervently: they
must not come with a part of their heart, for then they bring no part in Gods
account: but with all their heart: for he that gives him not all, gives
nothing at all. So for the works of our calling, if we do not labor therein
as Gods servants, we can expect no wages, we may have commendation from men,
but we shall have a check and rebuke from the Lord; men's tongues may magnify
us, but Gods hand will confound us.

Therefore let us, when we enter upon any good way, endeavor with an upright
and true heart to go forward in the same, otherwise it had been better never to
have entered thereinto. Now that we may make sure work in this regard, let us
try our sincerity by the good effects that do ever accompany the same.

1 One note therefore of a sound heart (which we should take for our trial)
is to be universal in our desires, Marks of an upright heart. 1 Universal
obedience. Psalm. 119.6.
and in our practice, that we have respect to every commandment of God, to the
first table as well as to the second, and to the second as well as to the
first: that we be righteous toward men, as well as religious toward God; and
so on the contrary, that we look to our hearts as well as to our actions, and
to our actions as well as to our hearts: Contrary to this rule is the dealing
of those that will give dispensations unto themselves for many things, so that
they can make a show of some things. What if we be not so strict for the
Sabbath? (think they) yet we are no swearers nor blasphemers: what if we take
a little liberty for vain sports and idle discourses? these are but trifles; we
will not be adulterers, nor filthy speakers etc. This is a shrewd sign of a
heart full fraught with guile and deceit: the property of a good conscience is
to be willing and desirous in all things to walk honestly. Heb. 13.18.
If one be never so strict for the Sabbath, if he will help himself by a lie
now and then, for his commodity, or for his credit sake: and if a man be never
so rigorous and severe for matters of justice, and yet will steal time from
the Lord upon his day, and spend the same in his own businesses and affairs,
whether secretly or openly: and so for any other thing, we will make bold to
borrow a little leave of God; this is an argument of a false and dissembling
heart: and therefore this must be taken heed of, as being very dangerous.

A second mark is to have a continual increase in godliness: Growth in Grace.
Phil. 3.13.14.
nor to stand at a stay, but still to strive to grow better and better, as the
Apostle Paul testifies that he himself did: I forget that which is behind,
and endeavor my self to that which is before: and follow hard toward the mark,
to the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus And having showed what
he did himself, he annexeth an exhortation also for us: Verse. 15.
Let us therefore as many as are perfect, (that is sincere, and void of gross
hypocrisy) be thus minded. He was not as a vain foolish man, who running in a
race will be ever and anon looking back how much ground he has rid: but his eye
was upon the mark, considering how much he had yet to run, how far off he
was from perfection: and the same mind should be in us, and will be in as many
of us, as are endued with the same spirit that Paul was. We must every day
labor to abound more and more in all wisdom and in all godliness. Romans
15.14.
If we prayed once a day in private, them more seriously and chearefully: and
the like may be said for all other duties. Thus if we can labor to do,

3 A third token of sincerity is, A constant and conscionable use of all the
means.
constantly and carefully to use all the good means of attaining to
goodness, and to eschew all the inducements that may allure unto evil. Does
any one hate swearing? then let him show it by avoiding the company of
blasphemers. Does any one hate impurity and filthiness? then let him testify
it by separating himself from all wanton and lascivious company, and from all
suspected persons and places.

So for the contrary, does any one desire that grace and religion may flourish
in his heart, and that the fruits thereof may appear in his life? then let
him use all private and public religious excercises, whereby these things may
be wrought and increased in him; and delight in such company, as both by
precept and example may further him therein. Does any one wish that he could
get victory over some special sins and corruptions that he is troubled withal?
then let him enter into combat against them, as the Apostle did, Romans 7. Let
him humble himself by fasting and prayer, and complain and cry unto the Lord
for the repressing of them, and get such forcible reasons against them out of
the Scriptures, as may quell the strength and violence of them; and thus a
sincere heart will do. But if we make show that we desire to be godly and
religious, and yet use not the means at all, or but some of them: or if we use
them all, it is but by fits and flarts: or if we use them constantly, yet we do
it but remisly and coldly, we cannot have any assurance that our hearts are
faithful unto the Lord.

A fourth argument of sincerity is to perform all duties as in Gods presence,
Respecting God in all things.
looking unto him, as the directer and discerner of our thoughts, words, and
works, and thinking it sufficient if he approve of us, though men do dislike
us; as the Apostle Paul tells the Corinthians: 1 Cor. 4.3.4.
As touching me, I pass very little to be judged of you, or of man's judgment,
etc. He that iudgeeth me is the Lord. And again in the Epistle to the
Thessalonians: 1 These. 2.4.
As we were allowed of God that the Gospel should be committed unto us, so we
speak: not as they that please men, but God, which approves our hearts. And
therefore he prays in another place, that the Corinthians might do none ill,
not that he might seem approved, 2 Cor. 13.7.
and have the credit of their goodness, as being wrought chiefly by his
ministry: but that they might do that which is honest, though he were
disallowed, to wit, by men: for with God the righteous Judge, he knew that he
should be both approved and rewarded. Thus he that is a servant, faithful and
trusty in his place, serving the Lord Christ in conscience, and not men with
eye service, albeit he should be accounted the most idle and vntrusly servant
in all the family, (being indeed the most diligent and painful of all) he will
still go on with his faithfulness, and not diminish any iotte of his industry
and laboriousnesse.

This Job alleges as a testimony of his integrity, that whereas he might have
given free scope to his eye for wanton looks, and to his heart for sinful
affections, Job. 31.1.
yet he says of himself: I made a covenant with mine eyes, why then should I
think on a maid? And why was he thus jealous of himself, and thus careful to
guide his eye, and to govern his heart in a right manner? the reason is
rendered, verse. 4. Does not he behold my ways, and tell all my steps? That also
is Joseph's commendation, that whereas he might have lived in impurity and
filthiness, not only without blame and reproach, but even with the favor of
his sinful and unchaste mistress, yet the fear of the Lord restrained him
from that monstrous, and abominable sin: How can I do this great wickedness
(says he) and so sin against God? Genesis 39.10.
Yea though she spoke to him from day to day, yet he refused, and would not so
much as be in her company, lest any tempation should be offered unto him by that
occasion:

Yea sometimes, when men praise and extol them, yet they blush within
themselves, and have an holy indignation against their own souls, that they
have dealt hypocritically, or vain gloriously, or lightly, or indiscreetly, or
passionatly. This is a very singular mark, and undoubted argument of great piety
and sincerity. As on the contrary, it is a certain note of gross hypocrisy,
ever to be caring what me^ think, and speak of us, To receive a rebuke will
ngly and profitablys


1 The last note (though many other might be named, shall be this, patiently to
endure an admonition, and reproof, and to be desirous of the same, to the
intent we may profit thereby: in public to like best, and desire most those
sermons, wherein our own corruptions are most thoroughly met withal, and
struck at with greatest sharpness, and vehemence:

Hypocrites, cannot abide that any should rub upon their galled backs as it
were, or come near the^ to touch their gouty, and festered, and corrupted
consciences, but they will wince and kick, and lay about them, and cry out on
those that are such iudgers, and such busy-bodies (as they term them) and so
reject all wholesome reproves, and carry a bitter heart against the reprouers.
Only those that are sound-hearted, can submit themselves, in the lowliness of
their minds, and meekness of their spirits, to bear admonitions, when they
need it, (be he a superior or an inferior that administreth the same) and
labor to make a right use hereof, and to love the party the better, that will
deal so mercifully and faithfully with their souls.

Indeed Gods best children, may sometimes fail herein, and begin to bustle,
and take on, when they are somewhat sharply dealt withal, and cannot so
readily and chearefully swallow and digest those bitter pills, as they should:
but if they be grieved in their souls, that they find so much pride in
themselves, and though they be a little diste^pered in company, yet when they
are alone, they are ashamed of their folly, and desire more wisdom and grace
to reap benefit by the admonitions that shall afterward be given them, and
begin to think more reverently of the parties that showed them that mercy and
kindness: they should not be dismayed, knowing that they are true Israelits,
in whom their is no guile, notwithstanding that unwillingness and
untowardness to undergo a rebuke, that they find in them selves, and their
corrupt nature.

Thirdly, 2 Chronicles. 30.18.19.
if we be troubled in our hearts with hardness, but are desirous of
softness: if we be humbled for that we cannot be humbled sufficiently, nor get
such a large heart as we would to desire and expect grace from heaven, let us
not be discomforted for our defects and frailties: for the Lord will spare us,
and be gracious unto us in his beloved son: according to that worthy prayer
of good King Hezekiah: The good Lord be merciful toward him that prepares his
whole heart to seek the Lord God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed
according to the purification of the Sanctuary.

Though many have been braullers heretofore, let them labor to be peaceable:
though they have been worldly, let them strive to be heavenly: though they have
been filthy, let them endeavor to get chastity: though they have been ignorant
and profane, let them study to obtain knowledge and holiness: and then they
may come to the Lords table, and welcome: the Lord will have respect unto them,
and grant them pardon for their sins, and supply all their wants, and give
them more grace to do their duty, in the remainder of their life, and in the
days of their pilgrimage that are yet behind.

Surely they work none iniquity. That is, they make not a trade, and common
practice thereof. Slip they do, through the infirmity of the flesh, and
subtilty of Satan, and the allurements of the world: but they do not
ordinarily and customably go forward in unlawful and sinful courses. In that
the Psalmist sets down this as a part, That they work none iniquity, A
prerogative. to be freed from sin.
which walk in his ways: the doctrine to be learned hence, is this, that it
is a marvelous great prerogative to be freed from the bondage of sin,

If there were no other reward but this, yet it were a happy thing to be
religious, even in this respect, that we shall be set at liberty from such a
service. Romans 6.17.
This point is evident from the Apostles words, where he speaks thus: God be
thanked, that ye have been the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the
heart unto the form of doctrine, whereunto ye were delivered. Where we see,
that this was not the least privilege that they had by being Gods servants,
but indeed a matter for which he was greatly to be magnified; that whereas they
had been the slaves of sin, and (as base drudges) at the command of every
vile and wretched lust: by the virtue of the word powerfully preached unto
them, and faithfully received by them, they had been delivered from that
bondage, and made the servants of God in righteousness, and holiness of life
and conversation. And therefore in that same Chapter, verse 14. it is promised
unto Gods children, as a special favor, That sin shall not have dominion
over them. It may sometimes tirannously usurp authority in them: but the
strength of grace, and the operation of the holy spirit of God, will still
diminish, and at last abolish the force and violence thereof: so that it shall
never bear such sway over them, as in the time of their unregeneracy it did.

The truth of this doctrine, For he is the God of this world, Ephesians. 2.2.
Satan is the master of all sinners.
and the Prince that rules in the children of disobedience: of whom all
unbelievers are held in captivity, and still employed according to his will and
pleasure. Now he is a more cruel and savage tyrant, then ever Pharoh was:
though he were very fierce against the Israelites, and exercised great tyranny
over the^, yet Satan puts his vassals to carry heavier burdens, Their
services
and to toil out themselves in baser works, then ever the taskmasters of
Aegipt imposed on the poor Israelites. For all impenitent sinners are in
thraldom to every brutish lust:

They cannot live peaceably in the day, nor rest quietly in the night: as we
may see in gamesters, who break their sleep, mispend their time and strength,
deprive themselves of a comfortable estate, and bring many miseries upon
themselves, and their families, by the over eager pursuit of their ungodly and
unthrifty courses. It is a woeful and lamentable case, that frantic persons
are in, that must have every one in the family to attend upon them, and to have
an eye unto them, least they should hang themselves, or drown themselves, or
get a kfe to cut their throats, or some way or other work themselves
mischief: but far worse is their case, that are possessed with a spiritual
frenzy, and led by the suggestions of Satan, who are evermore laboring to
work out their own overthrow, and to bring upon themselves destruction of
body and soul: which is the reward that Satan gives them, The reward.
for all their pains that they have taken in serving him, and in fulfilling
the lust of their own wicked flesh: according to the saying of the Apostle,
Romans 6.
The wages of sin is death: that is, everlasting death: Which is an utter
separation from Gods blessed presence, and from all manner of comforts
whatsoever, to endure unspeakable and endless torments in the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone, Revelation.
which is the second death.

Another reason, 1 John. 3.8.9.
because it is a testimony that we are the sons of God, as it is said by the
Apostle John: He that commits sin is of the Devil, and: Whosoever is
borne of God sins not. And why? because the efficacy of the word and spirit
do restrain him therefrom.

A third reason is, purging our selves even as Christ is pure. 1 John 3.3. Use.
1.


This serves for our instruction, that seeing it is such a pre-eminence (not
to be a worker of iniquity:) therefore we should hereby fence and arm our
selves against al enticements, whereby we might be allured to sin, either in
heart or in behavior, when pleasure smileth upon us, or filthy lucre sets
on our hearts, or preferment calls for us, etc. Let this be as a buckler
whereby to repel all the fiery darts of the Devil: It is a blessed thing to
work none iniquity, and, Luke 9.25. Heb. 11.25.26.
What should it profit a man to win the whole world, and to lose his own
soul? Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin, and the preferments of Egypt for ascason.

It was a foolish and mad part of the Israelites, to desire to return into
Egypt the house of their bondage, that they might eat of their flesh pots, and
of the leekes and onions, that in time past they had there enjoyed: but much
more void of sense and reason are they, that when they have been once delivered
from that spiritual servitude, will cast themselves into thraldom again: and
when they have been pulled out of the snares of the Devil, wherein they were
held at his pleasure, will return again to folly, and entangle themselves the
second time. Wherefore let this put strength into us in all conflicts, that we
may stand resolutely, as against other assaults, so against that of the
examples of great and mighty men, who usually take their liberty in all
voluptuous and licentious kinds of living. This consideration (I say) should
arm us against it: The Lord has pronounced them blessed that work none
iniquity: and if I be of the number of them, I shall be more happy in
renouncing sin, then the greatest Potentate in the earth is, or can be in
committing of sin. And therefore let us deal as Eliphaz did in the book of
Job: Job 5.2.
I have seen the foolish well rooted (says he) and suddenly I cursed his
habitation: not by way of imprecation, but of denuntiation of Gods judgments
due unto them for their evil works, showing that they took such courses as
did make them and theirs accursed, and bring the vengeance of God upon them:
the meditation whereof was a strong bulwark to fence him against all
temptations unto the like sinful and vile practices.

2 This makes for the terror of all such as do drink in sin with greediness,
and give allowance to themselves in blaspheming, in Sabbath breaking, in
wantonness, in lying, and slandering, and scoffing, and such other foul
vices. If they be blessed that do not work iniquity, then cursed are they that
make a common practice thereof.

But I hope (will some say) a man's heart may be good,

He does so indeed, Luke 6 45. Mat 7.17.18.
that an ill tongue and an ill life do always argue an ill heart: for out of
the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks: and a good tree cannot bring
forth such rotten fruit, nor a pure fountain send forth such muddy and filthy
streams, as do evermore issue forth at their profane mouths, and are derived
from their impure consciences unto all, or to the most part of their actions.

Thou have commanded to keep thy precepts diligently.

The doctrine that these words affoorde is this, that nothing is superfluous
that is done in obedience to Gods holy will.

The word translated Diligently, Strict obedience to be labored for. 2 Cor.
7.1.
does signify in the original tongue (wonderful much,) so that the words go
thus: Thou have commanded to keep thy precepts wonderful much. And this the
Apostle urges the Corinthians unto: Having such promises beloved, let us purge
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit: that is, from
all manner of corruption, as well inward as outward. And that was the drift of
Christ Jesus in giving the the true interpretation of the law, which the
Pharisees had corrupted by their false expositions: I say this was the drift,
to draw men from resting on the outward observation thereof, and to bring them
to have regard unto their thoughts, and to the affections of their hearts: and
more over in their practice to do those things which heathen men and hypocrites
could not attain unto: and therefore he often urges this sentence, to show the
slenderness and insufficiency of their obedience: What singular thing do ye?
Implying that Christians must in many things be singular, and differ from, and
go beyond the common sort of men.

If one could do as much good as an hundred, yet he could not do the hundredth
part of that which a Christian ought to perform. Luke 17.10.
Let him say still (for it is a truth) I am an unprofitable servant: I have
done no more then my duty, nor so much as my duty. As Christ came to fulfill
all that his Fathers law required, so it behooves us to observe every thing
that we are commanded: though not in perfection which we cannot attain unto:
yet in uprightness, and with our best endeavors. When the Israelits told Moses
that if he would go near, and hear what the Lord said, and declare it unto
them, they would hear and do all that the Lord should say, the Lord himself
testified the equity of their words, Deuteronomy. 5.28.29
that They had well spoken, all that they spoke, and wished that there were
such an heart in them, to fear him and to keep all his commandments always:
that it might go well with the^, and with their children after them. Whereby we
are informed what is acceptable unto God, and profitable for our selves:
namely, entire obedience for our comfortable welfare, and constant obedience
for our continual happiness: and to the same purpose tends that serious
instigation, 1 Cor. 15.58.
of S. Paul to the Corinthians: Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast,
immovable, abundant always in the work of the Lord: for as much as ^e know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

First,

Secondly, the Lord desires to be served with all due care, and faithfulness:
can any man say, I am before hand with him, and I have done more for his sake
than he has for mine? do we not receive from him breath, and being, and life,
and living, and preservation, and salvation it self, and all things else?

3 Thirdly, our labor is not lost, nor travel misspent in yielding obedience
to him: for he will reward it at the full, and above all desert. No man works
for him without wages: not a godly action, not a godly word, not a godly
purpose, not a godly motion of heart shall pass without pay and compensation.

Fourthly, every default and omission of well doing, at every time deserves
damnation: and either shall be recompensed with the death of the sinner, or has
been already requited with the torments of Christ.

For confutation of the Papists, Against Popish observations.
that little regarding the commandments of God, expect great matters for
their devotion, and their outward inventions and observations: but who has
required those things at their hands? the Lord commands them to keep his
precepts, otherwise they can expect no recompense from him; but that may be
said of all their invented worship, which was spoken of them that were so full
of external ceremonies (as touch not, taste not, handle not) in the Apostles
time: concerning all which he says: That they perish with the using, Colos.
2.22.
seeing they are after the commandments, and doctrines of man: So soon as the
work is done, the reward is gone.

Besides, here may be confuted all their works of supererogation: Against works
of lup^r^^^gaton.
If God God command us to observe his law in perfection, then what can there be
left for them to perform beyond that which he commands? Does Christ bid us
say, that when we have done all that we can, we are unprofitable servants, and
have performed no more then our duties; and will they be so audacious as to
brag of an overplus of well doing? Is it possible for obedience to exceed the
commandment? or for ought to be any thing worth that is not done in obedience?
but to let them pass.

This is for our instruction:

Sithence our master does require it as a due, and it becomes us to yield it
as a duty, and our hire is so great for the performance of the same, which will
also be enlarged as our integrity shall be increased; the greater our
faithfulness shall be found, the more praise we shall obtain, accompanied
proportionably withal other good blessings. And let this be a motive further to
incite us to such diligence, that the Lord is much displeased with remisnes and
negligence: sloathful persons are every where reprehended in the Scriptures,
even for being idle in human affairs, and matters that concern men's present
estate: much more then do they deserve to be sharply reproved, and also
corrected for their carelessnesse in those holy works, whereabout God sets
them: he that does not as much as he may in the services of God, may look to
have more strokes from his hand, and rebukes from his mouth, than will be for
his comfort.

THE EIGHT SERMON.
JOHN. 6.26.27. Jesus answered them, and said: Verily, verily, I say unto you,
ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye ate of the loaves,
and were filled.

Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat that endures unto
everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: for him has God
the Father sealed.


THe fleshly followers of our Lord Jesus Christ, having been miraculously
relieved at his hand with corporal food, once, expect as much again: and not
finding him in one place, where it was likely he would have been, they seek
him in another, where without a miracle he could not be: for the Sea was
between them, and ship they knew there was none left to transport him; whereby
they took occasion to demand of him when he came thither, insinuating that
they coniectured how he came thither, even by walking upon the waters. To these
our Savior directs the words of this text, and others that follow: not
answering to their question how he came, because it sauoured of adulation, and
was somewhat frivolous: but discovering their purpose, why they came, and that
was hypocritical and carnal. Now for the sense of the words, where he lays
to their charge, that they sought him not because they saw the miracle: it is
to be understood that they apprehend not his divine nature, nor sought to know
him as God and their redeemer, by virtue of the miracle: but only hoped that
he would work another to feed their bodies again, and make them to fare well
often. And having reproved them, he proceeds to instruct them, prescribing a
more wise and profitable course for themselves and their souls: and that is,
to prefer things that are everlasting, before those that are perishable and
mome^tany. Not that he precisely forbids to labor for food, and other
maintenance, but to labor couetously with too greedy a desire, to labor
immoderately, and with too great travel: to labor principally for that which
is earthly, and more remisly for that which is heavenly: this is that which he
here forbids. By meat, figuratively so called, which endures unto
everlasting life, he means the gifts and graces of Gods holy spirit, whereby
the souls of his people receive strength and comfort constantly: even until
the fruition of that bliss and immortality, whereunto they shall attain for
evermore hereafter.

Now for their better assurance, that they might certainly know that they
should not lose their labor in seeking for this durable food, this bread of
life, himself undertakes to bestow it upon them: and that by the appointment
of God his father, who has sealed him to this office, as Princes, and great
men do authentically confirm the authority of those whom they employ in
weighty affairs, by their seals and letters Pattents.

This answer therefore of Christ, consists of two parts: A Reprehension.
Exhortation.


In the reprehension he declares:

1 What they neglected: they made not a profitable use of the miracle which
they saw.

2 Wherein they transgressed: they had a sinister respect in seeking of him: it
was for their bellies sake, and not for conscience sake.

In the exhortation, he persuades them most to affect the spiritual meat by
two arguments.

1 In regard of the goodness and lastingnesse of it: It endures unto
everlasting life. 2 In regard of the Author of it: 1 Christ giving it. 2 The
father ordaining it to be given by Christ.

The words which they spoke to Christ, were reverent, they called him Rabbi,
and took knowledge in some sort of his strange manner of passing over the sea:
and had before in verse 14. testified that of a truth, he was the Prophet that
should come into the world. And not so only, but as it apeareth in verse 15.
They minded to take him, and make him a King: yet the first answer that he
gives unto them is a rebuke: whereby we learn, that

By fair speeches to us, Our best frinds must be adrao^^hed.
when by our calling we are required to admonish them.

It beseems not a good man, to suffer his heart to be as it were bribed with
kindness, that his mouth should be stopped, when God and fit opportunity calls
upon him to open it. Belshazzer would needs have Daniel clothed with purple,
and a chain of gold put about his neck, with promise of great preferment: yet
Daniel spared not to tell Belshazzer, that he had lift up himself against the
Lord of heaven, and profaned his holy vessels, and praised Idols, and not
glorified the GOD in whose hand was his breath, and all his ways.

The example also of Elisha will prove this unto us: when Iehora^ the King of
Israel made suit unto him for the obtaining of water for himself, 2. King.
3.13.14.
and two Kings more together with all their host, telling him that they were
undone, and should fall into the hand of their enemies, if he did not help at
this pinch and in this great strait; not withstanding this submisse and humble
manner of entreaty, he spares him not, being a wretched Idolater, 2. Kings 8.9
12.
but answers him roundly and sharply: What have I to do with thee? (says
he) get thee to the prophets of thy father etc. As the Lord lives, in whose
sight I stand, if it were not that I regard the presence of Iehoshaphat King of
Judah, I would not have looked toward thee, nor seen thee. Mark how lightly
he sets by this wicked king: telling him that he would not give him so much
as a good look, much less be an instrument of releeuing him and his army,
were it not for good Iehoshaphats sake, whose heart was upright with God,
though he were faulty in joining with those Idolaters. And again when Hazael
came unto him, with a present of every good thing of Damascus, as much as forty
camels could carry, and used him with all reverent respect, calling him my
Lord, etc. yet he dealt plainly with him, and with tears told him what a tyrant
he should be, and what havoc he should make amongst the people of God. So
Christ's Jesus, an undoubted pattern for our imitation, when he came to Martha,
a good woman, and very loving and kind unto him: yet being more careful, to
make provision for his body, than to get provision for her own soul, and
finding fault with her sister Mary, that was better employed then her self,
Christ's mouth was not stoped with her meat, for he reproves her, and
commends her sister, saying: Martha, Martha, thou carest and art troubled
about many things: Luke. 11.41.42.
but one thing is needful: Mary has chosen the good part, which shall not
betaken away from her.

Now the reason of this Doctrine, is 1. in respect of them,

2 In respect of our selves, if we be slack in admonishing our friends of
things amiss in them, because they speak lovingly, and carry themselves in a
friendly manner toward us, we shall thereby provoke Gods displeasure against
us: and so their fair words and cheareful looks, shall look angerly upon us,
and speak sharply unto us: and we by our silence, or by our flatery, shall
make their sins to become our own, and so both we and they shall be punished
together.

This makes for the just reproof of those that frame all their praises and
dispraises according as they themselves are dealt withal: if they be well
spoken of and well used, they will be altogether for the parties that do so
befriend them, and they shall be sure of their good word: but if others be
preferred and they neglected, especially if upon their just desert, they be
roundly taxed and reproved, then the case is altered, and the stream of their
commendation turned another way, and in stead of their former speeches of
approbation, you shall hear from the bitter inuectiues, and terms of reproach,
much unbeseeming the mouth of a civil man, much more of a Christian. Of this
sort were those false and deceitful Prophets, which were likened to dogs:
Michah. 3.5.
let men cast a bone unto them, as it were, and fill their mouths with
somewhat now and then, and they will fawn upon them, and tell them their case
is good, they shall be sure of peace and prosperity: God is well pleased, and
all things shall go well with them, albeit in the mean while, they be the most
vile and wretched men in the world. But as for those that will not feed their
covetous humor, though they were the best men that lived upon the earth, they
shall taste of their doggish behavior: they shall be snarled at, if not bitten:
if they put not into their mouths (says the Prophet) they prepare war
against them: they furnish themselves with a number of bitter and biting
reproves, with a multitude of heavy and grievous threatenings to power out
against them in full measure. But these are far from our Saviors spirit, who
would frame his speeches to the good of all without exception: not sparing
those that were kind unto him, nor laying load on men for witholding
kindness from him: speaking not pleasing but profitable things unto all sorts.
Thus true and fervent love unto God and men, made him to deal: and self love
and self respect makes false hearted hypocrites to take a quite contrary
course.

Here is matter of instruction for us to imitate our Savior in this point,
they may take comfort therein. For howsoever ignorant and carnal men's
consciences be against them, yet the testimony of God, and of their consciences
will be for them, and bear them out of all calumniations and reuiling
speeches, that are invented to defame and disgrace them: and this shall be
found true when all men shall be proved liars, that he that reproves (when he
has just cause and calling thereunto) shall find more favor at length then
he that flattereth. And thus much for the general doctrine. Now let us
consider the words more particularly.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye seek me not, etc. In that Christ Jesus
takes notice of the disposition and inclination of their hearts that do now
follow him, and intended the filling of their bellies, though they pretended to
seek after the satisfying of their souls; the doctrine hence to be collected,
is this: that our Lord Jesus Christ is acquainted with the purposes of such as
come to his services, and to the means of their salvation.

He observes what is the principal end that they aim at, Christ is the
searcher of the heart.
they afford Christ very good words, and are ready to acknowledge the miracle
that he had wrought: and yet he does not only see, but narrowly look into
that fleshly respect that they had in coming unto him, and tells them plainly of
their hypocrisy, and that with a protestation, Verily, verily, etc. q. d. I
say it for a truth, disprove me if you can, and I avouch it again, because it
is a matter of weight, that you come to feed your bodies under pretense of
feeding your souls. And as he did descend into their hearts, and find out
their fraud and guile, so does he continually behold all the windings and
turnings that are in the hearts of the sons of men. This may appear in the
Gospel of John, where it is said: that many believed in his name when they saw
the miracles that he did: they were moved in a sudden passion upon the sight
of such great wonders, to think that he was the Christ: but (it is added)
Jesus did not commit himself unto them, he would not trust them
(notwithstanding the fair show they made) because he knew the^ all, John.
2.23.24.25.
and had no need that any shoud testify of man: for he knew what was in man:
he proved that they were not sound, whatsoever others thought of them: neither
did he stand in need of the testimony of any, that should tell him, this man is
upright, this man is not: for he knows a man's heart better then himself
does: and it may be made yet more clear, by reason that God is privy to men's
thoughts, because he 1. publishes them, 2. reproves them, 3. punishes them.

First, Ezekiel. 14, 1.3.
Ezekiel, where the Lord tells the Prophet, that howsoever the Elders of
Israel came unto him, He publ sheth men's thoughts
and sat before him, yet they had set up Idols in their hearts: and howsoever
they would have men to believe that they were the holy servants of God, that
they loved the word of God, and came to hear what he would teach them: yet the
Lord declares unto Ezekiel, that their hearts were not withdrawn from
Idolatry and superstition, and therefore that he should think never the better
of them for their outward semblance of religion.

Secondly, Reproves them. Mat. 9.4.
as the Evangelist testifies, When Jesus saw their thoughts, he said:
wherefore think ye evil thoughts in your hearts? Where it is plain, that
therefore he rebuked them, because he discerned the corruptnesse of their
thoughts, in judging hardly of him, because he had said to the man sick of the
palsy: Thy sins are forgiven thee. And indeed what equity were it that
Christ should blame men for their cogitations, unless he were the searcher of
the heart? It is indiscretion, and an injurious part for a man to find fault,
unless he can directly prove that which he lays to another man's charge: and
how much unbeseeming the infinite wisdom and righteousness of Christ must we
needs think it then to deal with any in that sort? Nay he forbids us to
judge rashly, and commands us to judge righteous judgment: and therefore he
will much more observe that rule himself.

Thirdly, He panisheth them.
and therefore he must needs be a discerner of the same: for otherwise how
should he proceed according to every man's desert? And that he does inflict
punishment on men for thoughts, Isay. 29.15.
the Prophet Isaiah shows when God charge the people, that though their
bodies were near him, yet their hearts were removed far from him: and
therefore he threatens that he will do a marvelous work with them, to wit,
that the wisdom of the wise should perish, In their souls.
etc. that he would infatuate them, and give them up to blindness of mind, and
to senslesnesse of heart, as afterward it fell out in their children the
Scribes and Pharisees, to whom all things that Christ Jesus spoke: seemed
parables, so that they knew not the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but
had eyes and saw not, ears and heard not, hearts and minds, and understood not
the things that were taught them. And as God does lay judgments upon the
souls of men, which are the most grievous, so does he also on their bodies,
even for their defects and wants, as we see in the Corinthians, In their bodies
amongst whom many were sick, many weak, and many smitten with the stroke of
death, because they came negligently and vnpreparedly unto the Lords table: and
so does his heavy hand lie upon many now adays, being struck with the
pestilence, and such like plagues of God, for coming profanely, irreligiously,
and hy pocritically to the word and Sacrament: not in outward appearance for
ought that we can see, but before the Lords eyes who searches the heart and
reins, and lays his corrections according to the measure of men's inward
profane, and lewd disposition. Now this he would not do, unless he could
prove the^ guilty: but indeed he is able to indight them, and to produce
witnesses against them, that these and these have been their secret sins, such
and such vile thoughts they had at such a Sermon, at such a Sacrament, and
their hearts were wandering about their pleasures and profits: they were full of
malicious and reuengfull imaginations and intents, nothing regarding Gods
presence, nothing affecting nor reuerencing his ordinances: and these things he
can make their own consciences to testify against them, and therefore does
justly plague the^ for the same. And as in this life, so at that great assizes
at the last day, the Lord will lighten things that be hid in darkness, As in
this life, so in that which is to come.
and make the counsel of man's heart manifest: and bring every secret thing to
judgment, whether good or evil, that al may receive according to their works.

If then all shall be at that time judged and rewarded, according to their
thoughts, most sure it is, that God well observed the same while they lived
upon the face of the earth, and kept the same in his book of records.

Since the Lord marketh, Sincerity in Gods services.
whether men come in love and in sincerity, or for fashion and in hypocrisy,
let this teach us to present our souls before the Lord, and to serve him
soundly and religiously: not only behauing our selves in as orderly a manner
as others do, but in as holy a manner as we can. Diverse there are that will
repair to Gods house as often as the best and make a colorable show of
reverence in Gods worship, sitting modestly in the view of the congregation,
not gazing hither and thither, nor expressing any unseemly behavior: yet
nevertheless except God see their hearts well exercised, all that men behold,
and take notice of, is nothing worth. Isaiah. 58.2
They seemed to be very forward, of whom the Prophet Isaiah makes mention,
they would inquire after the ordinances of judgment and justice, and seek the
Lord, and not by fits and starts, but daily: they would be at every lecture of
the Prophets, and observe every Saboth, mark what was delivered, make
repetition of the same; and if there were any thing that they understood not,
they would ask direction, and search out the meaning of it: and yet the
Prophet is bid to cry out against them with full mouth: Cry aloud (says GOD)
lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and
to the house of Jacob their sins. And that because they came with hollow and
hypocritical hearts, as their unholy and unrighteous behavior afterward did
witness to their faces.

And therefore that must be looked unto, that we satisfy Gods eyes, as well as
men's, and to that end search out, and cast forth all the leaven of hypocrisy
that is in our hearts: for if we do not find it out, God will: and if we spare
our selves, God will not spare us. Well we may delude our own souls, but God
is not mocked: outward serving of him, may make the Minister think us upright,
and cause our neighbors to esteem us good Christians: but except God approve
of our hearts, we are never the better, for the good opinion that men conceive
of us.

This is for the exceeding comfort of such as are true-hearted, and that in a
double respect.

1 In regard of that approbation which the Lord will give us, if he be a
witness of our sincerity and faithfulness. Consol. in regard of 1.
Discouragement.
If we come to the Sermon in obedience to Gods ordinance, with a desire to get
grace thereby: if we come to the Saerament, that we may have communion: with
our head Christ Jesus, and that the new Testament or covenant of God, may be
sealed and confirmed unto us: if we see our weakness, and labor to get
strength against it: if we bewail our corruption, and strive to get victory
over it: if we perceive the imbecility of our faith, and would have it
increased: or want of repentance, and would have it renewed: or defect of love,
and would have it augmented, and so come to Gods holy feast with an hungry
appetite; we may comfortably partake of his heavenly mysteries: and whatsoever
we imagine of our selves, God will reward us according to that integrity which
he sees in us. Well was it for Nathaniel, that his heart was known unto
Christ, for otherwise he had lost the praise of his uprightness. And so is it
with many Christians: if one should demand of them whether they had faithful
hearts or not, the answer of many would be, I hope well, but in truth I dare
not say so much: and therefore this is not the least part of their happiness,
that god discerns the truth of their hearts, better than they themselves, do;
and whereas there is some deceitfulness in the most sincere and plain heart
that is, if there be any endeavor to shake it off, the Lord will certainly
pardon and remove the same.

2 Secondly, 2. Of slanders,
here is matter of consolation to those that are sound hearted, in regard of
the clamors and slanders that are raised against them: they are usually charged
to be all hypocrites, troublers of the places where they live, and such as
altogether serve their own turns, in that profession of religion which they
make: and here is their comfort, the Lord knows their hearts, and he will
clear the innocent, and make their righteousness shine forth as the noone
day: as he will iudgeand condemn all hypocrites, so will he manifest the
faithfulness of his own servants; Job 16.19,
and this was Jobs comfort when his friends accounted him a dissembler: My wit
nesse is in the heanens (says he,) and my record is on high.

Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for the meat that, etc. q. d. You
cannot do both together, you cannot seek the things of this life, and the
things that pertain to a better life both at once: whence this doctrine
arises, that

A man cannot be both a wordling and a Christian, A men cannot be a worldling
and a Christian
one can not labor for these transitory things, that is, set his whole desire
upon them, and bend his whole endeavor for the obtaining of them: and withal
labor for better matters, and religiously and unfeignedly seek after them. He
that persueth after earthly things, cannot follow after heavenly things: and he
that follows after heavenly things, will not pursue after earthly things. Not
but that one may be truly religious, and yet enjoy the commodities of this
life: but he cannot set his heart upon them, and upon matters of godliness: also
no man can be earthly minded and spiritually affected at one and the same time:
nor seek that happiness which is above, and that which is beneath at once: in
which regard the holy Ghost makes an opposition betwixt them, 1. John 2.15.16
saying: Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world: if any
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. Whence it is evident
that a man's affections cannot be fastened both on the world and on God. He may
use the world, and yet love God: but he cannot love the world, but it will
exclude the love of God: he that makes it his felicity to enjoy the things of
this life, the love of the father is not in him neither does he love the
father, nor apprehend the Fathers love unto him. But what are those things of
the world which we must not love? he tells us in the verse following:

The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. Where by
the lust of the flesh, are all kinds of concupiscence meant, as in eating and
drinking. 2. By the lust of the eyes, are meant al such things as content the
eyes, as fair houses, goodly pastures, great store of cattle, gorgious
furniture, etc. 3. By the pride of life is meant advancement and dignity, etc.
or great men in the world any way, either in place or in estimation for any
special parts or endowments. All the things of the world may be drawn unto
one of these three heads: of pleasure, profit, or credit. And concerning all
these he says, that they are not of the Father: honest delights, wealth, and
preferment are from the Father, but the love of these is not from the Father,
but from the world: and therefore whosoever inordinatly affects them, is a
worldling, not a Christian. Therefore the Apostle exhorts the Colossians: If
ye be risen with Christ, Col. 3.1.2.
seek those things which are above, and set your affections on things which
are above, and not on the things which are beneath: implying that they could
not do both. It is as possible for a man to rise and fall, to climb upward,
and to descend downward, at the same instant, as to be godly and worldly, to
ascend to heauenwards, and to grouell to the earthwards; they cannot be
verified of the same person, at one and the same time. And the reason is taken
from that of our Savior: Mat. 6.
No man can serve two masters; for being of contrary dispositions and
affections, as God and the world, or rather the Prince of the world are: either
of them would be whole master, and requires the whole man. Does
voluptuousness take place in the heart? it will not endure any matters of
religion to be thought of, or spoken of: but that must have the ordering of
the cogitations of the mind, and of the speeches of the mouth, and of the
actions of the body. Does worldliness or hautinesse bear sway? then will they
extinguish all the sparks of goodness that are in a man, and quite put out
the light of religion: carrying all the meditations and practices of the party
toward the obtaining of that which is aimed at. On the contrary, if religion
once get the better and begin to rule in the heart, it will root out sin, and
make those that were Satan's bondslaues before, to become Gods free men: it
will by degrees kill lust, and covetousness, and pride: grace will be still
increasing, and corruption decreasing: so that they can never agree together,
no more then can fire and water.

Which is for the confutation and overthrow of that dangerous error that is in
the most part of men, notable point of wisdom to join these together, to be
reoters in the earth, and yet prosessors of the Gospel: so ordering the matter
that they will neither be so apparently profane as others that notoriously
practice impiety and wickedness: neither be so strict as others that exercise
sound mortification and holiness. And herein they glory that they can carry
the credit both of husbands for the world, and of wise dealers for their
souls: that they can enjoy a present happiness in this life beyond the best,
and yet live in hope of blessedness in the life to come as well as the best,
and therein they applaud their own wisdom, and have themselves in admiration
and for want of this they censure their betters of folly, and have them in
derision. But of all silly men, these are the silliest, that think they can,
serve both GOD and Mammon, the Lord and the world. Christ had not found out the
depth of that wisdom: he professes that his kingdom was not of this world:
and bids us labor for the food that endures to eternal life, and not for
that which perishes. And therefore howsoever these vain men bless themselves
in the high estimation of their great policy, yet they do very palpably bewray
their gross ignorance and simplicity, as all shall do that will try
conclusions contrary to Christ's conclusions: whatsoever they dream of, in
seeking for both, they lose both, they have neither found comfort in God, nor
true contentment in the world.

Yet how general is this error amongst the sons of men? they make some
reckoning that there is a God: and therefore they will now and then hear a
Sermon, sit at it, and speak of it: but never make use of any thing that
crosses them in their pleasures, or profits: they will make a show of keeping
the Sabbath, by frequenting the public exercises of religion; but when they
are over, they betake them to their sports, and recreations: But what will be
the issue of these things? Our Savior tells us in the Gospel: for when men
shall say unto him: Lord Lord, and brag of the works they have done in his
name, he will profess unto them: I never knew you (or acknowledged you for
mine) depart from me ye that work iniquity. Matthew. 7.22.23.
Therefore it stands men upon to have regard hereunto, that they deceive not
themselves, in thinking to have fellowship with God and Belial together: the
Apostle Paul tells such persons of their end: Many there are (says he) whose
God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame, which mind earthly things.
They were professors, and would make shows of religion, for else the Apostle
would not have taken the matter so to heart: but they took carnal courses;
they were addicted to their bellies, and sought preferments in the world, and
minded these things that are here below; but their glory was their shame, and
their pleasure their perdition: and whereas they pleased themselves in their
wisdom, the Apostle could not speak of them, but he must weep for them: Of
whom (says he) I told you before, and now tell you weeping, etc.

Seeing that we cannot set our affections both on carnal things, and on
spiritual, let us reject the worst, He calls it meat that does perish. And
the like may be said of all other things: Labor not for the wealth that
perishes: when we have gotten all that may be gotten, what is it? it is but a
corruptible treasure, that is quickly gone: He that gets riches, and not by
right, shall leave them in the midst of his daeies, Ier. 17.11.
and at his end shall be a fool. When men have heaped up all the wealth that
possibly they can, it is but as a great heap of snow: let the Sun of Gods
displeasure arise upon it, and it presently melts and vanishes: but suppose
riches do continue with us, there is such corruption in our hearts, that they
are rather likely to poison and infect us, then any way to further us in the
course of godliness: therefore are they called wicked Mammon. We do account
him a silly man, that will accept of money, or meat, or garments that are
suspected to be infectious, in that they come from such as have had the
plague-soare running upon them: and yet certainly these things cannot be in any
degree so dangerous as riches are unto those that lay open their hearts as it
were to entertain the love of them: the former do but endanger this present
life: the latter do undoubtedly (without repentance) deprive men of everlasting
life: and therefore exceeding great is their madness that will so eagerly pursue
after such vanities, especially seeing by reason of the uncertainty of their
life, they have not any assurance to enjoy the^, no not one hour: whereas grace
(as after shall be showed) is an incomparable and an incorruptible Jewel, which
they must needs sorgo while they so greedily hu^t after these trifles of the
world. But that there be no mistaking of that which has been spoken, we must
understand that the purpose of it has not been to withdraw any from laboring
in his calling, and providing for himself and his family: but only to
persuade men in all their labors to serve God, and in seeking earthly things
to propose unto themselves an heavenly end: that in following the world they
may not forsake God, and in getting the things that are fading and perishable,
they do not lose the things that are permanent and eternal.

But for the meat that endures to everlasting life. We heard what we must not
labor for: now Christ shows what we must labor for, to wit, Grace and the
means thereof; whence the doctrine is,

They are most provident for themselves, They are the best husbands that labor
most for grace. Prou. 2, 4.
whose greatest labor is for Grace.

Therefore seeing it cannot be attained unto without diligence, Christ's
counsel is to use all careful endeavor to get it. So likewise Solomon
advises us to seek for understanding as for silver, and to search for it as
for treasures. So that it is Gods ordinance that men should labor for it, if
they would have it. Earthly things will not be had but by labor and toil,
much less these things which are of greater value. And whereas men may set
others aworke for the obtaining of outward matters, they themselves may be at
home in their houses, and others laboring for them abroad: it is otherwise in
the matters of Grace, a man must travel for it in his own person, if ever he
intend to get it: he himself must pray, hear the Word, understand it, apply
it and make use of it: the greatest Monarch^n the world, must perform these
and the like duties, and not bid his servants do these things for him. And to
encourage us the rather to set upon this work, Proverbs: If thou seek her
as silver etc. then shall thou find the knowledge of God. Others may take a
great deal of pains, and yet not speed well: Pro 2.5.
they may rise early, and go to bed late, and eat the bread of carefulnes,
hoping to be rich, and yet be still poor: men may labor to be applauded of
al, and yet be derided of all: seek to have all crouch unto them, and yet have
all to list up themselves against them: study and beat their heads how to
live a pleasant life, and yet none be more vexed and tormented then they: but
those that spend their pains in seeking of Grace, shall never lose their
labor, nor miss of their mark, but always obtain that which they do
desire. 1 Peter 1.4.
now grace is a perpetual inheritance that far surpasses all that the world
can afford. A man must leave his earthly inheritance and abundance he knows
not how soon, neither can his great substance descend into the grave with him,
neither can he so make it over unto his seed, Isal 49.17.
but that they may be defrauded of it: but the heavenly treasure is ours whiles
we live, and when we die, and after death, yea at, and after the resurection
for evermore. and when we leave the earth, we shall inherit heaven, that we
shall have peace at our death, and glory after our death? If the pestilence
enter into our houses, or take hold of our own persons, when none dare come
unto us, then God will be with us: though our bodies be insected, yet our
souls can never be so infected, if we have grace in our hearts, but that God
dares to enter into our houses to visit us; and when our souls shall be
parted from our bodies, he will not think it too much to give them a place of
rest with himself in his own kingdom, and at length unite them to our bodies
again, that they may enjoy everlasting bliss together, as they have been
employed in Gods service together.

Seeing then,

But we like of the Word, whosoever seeks, finds. Talking of gold and
silver and the like, and declaring to others how much we affect them, will not
keep us from penury: we must so labor for them, as that we get them, if we
would be rich men. A sluggard may desire to get the victory, but he must fight
for it that will have it: and the like holds in spiritual things: those that
would be partakers of them, must use the means that God has appointed for the
accomplishing of their desire.

And therefore this rebuke lights upon the heads of all such sluggards, as will
not bestir them in this weighty matter, nor live in the field of grace; nay
when the crop of grace is brought home unto their houses, they will not open
their doors to receive it: they will not so much as give attention to the word,
but are like the high way side, that does not so much as receive the seed that
is cast upon it, but let the Devil catch away all from them.

Secondly, Daniel: Dan. 12.4.
Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall abound. If men have a dangerous
sickness, they seek help from the Physician though far off, and none finds
fault with them, nor makes question, why they should seek to be healed. If
householders want provision at home, they will repair to the market, and none
cries out upon them, What wretched men are these that cannot keep them from
the market? have they not oxen, and sheep at home? for though they have, men
are so wise as to consider, that they are not made ready for their turn. Now if
they are not blamed, nor indeed blame worthy that do thus seek for corporal
Physic, and sood, then why should they be blamed by Papists and such as are
Popishly affected, that seek for that which is spiritual, Se the 2. Sermon
one Mark. 14. Doct 6.
it being far more requisite and necessary?

Which the son of man shall give etc. Doct. The efficacy of the Word, The
efficacy of the word and Sacrament of Christ.
and Sacrament is from Christ's own hand. Whosoever would have grace, must
receive it from Christ himself: hence is that promise made unto the
Israelites: The Lord thy Gods will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy
seed, that thou malest love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all
thy soul, that thou may live. They to whom it did belong to circumcise
their bodies, could go no further then the outward circumcision: it was God
only that could cut off the corruption of their hearts, and frame them unto
obedience: and that which is spoken concerning that one Sacrament, holds as
true in all the rest: man can give only the external signs, God must give the
inward virtue. And the reasons why it pertains unto Christ, and is a work of
the Godhead only, are diverse.

First, Him has the Father sealed: it is Christ his office unto which the
Father has ordained him: he alone has commission and warrant to deal in it:
and whosoever else does arrogate that unto himself, is an intruder, and shall
be punished, for that he goes about to thrust Christ out of his chair.

Secondly, Adam did kill us, 1 Cor 15.45.
so the second Adam must quicken us. No man can give natural life unto another,
no not that which brutish creatures do enjoy, nay nor so much as that which
plants do live by: much less can any one give spiritual life unto another.
Paul may plant, and Apolos may water, but God alone gives the increase.

Thirdly experience will confirm us in this point: Mat. 11.25.
etc. Our Savior magnifieth Gods name, saying: I praise thee Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and revealed them unto babes. And when the Apostle had spoken of many notorious
and abominable sinners, 1 Cor. 6.9.10.11.
as fornicators, Idolaters, adulterers, buggerers etc. he adds, And such were
some of ye: but you are washed, but ye are sanctified, etc. If we might make
the choice of those that should be converted, we would have good natured civil
men, and wise and politic men, and noble and great men to fill up the number,
that God might that way be more honored, and religion countenanced: but God in
his wisdom takes another course that makes more for his glory: he chooses
the worst to make them best: and not many wise, 1 Cor. 1.26.27.
nor many noble, are called.

But God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and
the weak things of the world to confound the mighty, etc. that the whole
work, and the glory thereof, may be attributed to him alone.

This should instruct us to go out of our selves,

Neither let us rest upon the act done in hearing of the Word, Judas and Simon
Magus did.

Further let us be admonished hence not to depend upon the excellency of the
Minister: for it is God, Moses was a rare Minister, yet he could not give grace
unto the Israelites, but many of them perished that received the Sacrament. 1
Cor. 10.5.
John Baptist also was a rare Minister, yet he could only baptize with water:
Christ must baptize with holy Ghost, and with fire.

On the other side, and in a plain box, as it were: neither let us lightly
esteem of pure gold, because it is carried in a leatherne bag, but let us
value the gift according to the worth of it, and according to the diguity of
the giver.

If men should judge according to corrupt reason, they would never think that
a poor man by speaking unto them, by pouring a little water upon them, and by
giving them a little quantity of bread and wine, should make them Kings and
fellow-heires with Christ Jesus for ever: but if in this gift we look unto the
Son of man whom God the Father has sealed and ordained for that purpose, and
cast the eye of our faith upon the promises that are made through him, and the
all sufficient power that is in him, we shall easily conceive that all this may
be well effected: for he is a rich fountain, Of whose fullness we all receive.
What though our capacity be slender? Gods word gives wisdom to the simple.
Psalm. 19.7. Ezekiel. 36.26.
What though our hearts be hard? GOD is able and ready to soften them. What
though we have played the hypocrites? So had these here unto whom our Savior
directs this exhortation. They pretended to seek for the bread of life, when
their coming was only to have their bellies filled: yet Christ does not cast
them off, but bids them labor for the food that endures to eternal life:
and then promises to give them eternal life. And so will he deal with us,
albeit we have been dissemblers: yet if now we turn from our hollownesse to
soundness, and from our hypocrisy to plainness, we shall be sure of a
blessing.

This is further for the great consolation of all Gods faithful servants.
Wisdoms own mouth: Blessed is the that man finds me, he shall receive life
and favor from the Lord: And therefore (as Christ tells the woman of Samaria)
if we knew who it is that offers such mercy, and what the gift of God is, we
would esteem it more highly, and seek it more earnestly then ordinarily we
do. The Manna that they had in the wilderness was counted excellent food; and
they extraordinarily graced and favored that did eat thereof, because Angels
were the Ministers of it: how excellent then is this heavenly Manna, which is
by Christ's own hand conveyed unto us, and made effectual for our good and
comfort? Surely we can never be joyful and thankful enough for this
inestimable treasure.

The end of the eight Sermon.
THE NINTH SERMON.
MARK. 14.18.19.20.21. 18. And as they sat at table, and did eat, Jesus
said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me, which eats with
me. 19. Then they began to be sorrowful, and to say to him one by one, Is it
I? and another, Is it I? 20. And he answered, and said unto them, It is one of
the twelve that dippeth with me in the platter. 21 Truly the Son of man goes
his way as it is written of him, but woe be to that man by whom the son of
man is betrayed, it had been good for that man if he had never been borne.

THis History contains in it especially and principally the Institution of
the Lords Supper: wherein 2. things are chiefly to be observed: 1 A conference
that was before it. 2 The manner and celebration of it.


First for the conference, it was between our Savior and his Disciples at the
eating of the Passover, before the institution of the other Sacrament; wherein
1. Christ Jesus does discover unto them the practice and treason that was
conspired against him; Jesus said: Verse 18.
Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me, etc. that is, shall
treacherously deliver me into the hands of the high Priests.

2. They make answer: where the affection wherewith the eleven delivered the
same, is expressed: Verse. 19.
Then they began to be sorrowful, and to say to him, one by one, Is it I? and
another, Is it I?

Sorrowful they were, because their Master had told them, that he should be
betrayed into the hands of sinners, and that one of the^ should do it, and
every one was doubtful and distrustful of himself: and therefore partly that
they might be better acquainted with their own hearts, to the intent that if
they were of such an ill disposition, they might be helped against it: partly
that each of them might have comfort that he was not the man: and partly that
they might be cleared every one of the^ before his fellows they ask our
Savior, saying: Is it I? Judas indeed proposes the same question, but not
with the like affection, nor to the like end and purpose, but only that he
might thereby cloak his unfaithful and ungodly plots and practices against his
Master, having before this compounded with the high Priests for the betraying
of him.

Next is set down the reply of our Savior upon this their answer: wherein he
declares 1 The grieuousnesse of the treason. 2 The miserable estate of the
traitor.


First the grieuousnesse of the treason is set forth, Verse 20, in that it was
contrived by (one of the twelve) one whom Christ had chosen to be an Apostle,
and a principal Ambassador unto himself: one that was so familiar with him,
as that he did sit at his own table, eat of his own mess, yea in his own
dish: It is one of the twelve (says Christ) that dippeth with me in the
platter.

2 Secondly, the wretched condition of the traitor is declared Verse 2^.
(Truly, the son of man goes, etc.) Where the Lord Christ Jesus preuenteth
some obiectio^s that might arise in their hearts: for thus they might reason in
themselves. Do you know of such a treason? and who it is that goes about it?
Why then will you yield your self into his hands? were it not good wisdom to
prevent it, and to use means to escape? No (says our Savior) that may not
be, (The Son of man goes his way, Ver. 21.
as it is written of him) I cannot, I must not avoid it, nor decline from it:
for the Lord has appointed it, yea manifested it in his Word, which cannot be
verified, unless this be fulfilled: therefore seeing the Lord in his wisdom
has made this to be my way, I will be contented to walk in it. Upon this they
might reply again: If the Son of man go away as it is written of him, then
he that does betray him, effects no more then that which the Word of God has
foretold of him* which may seem to be no fault, and therefore to deserve no
punishment.

Yes (says Christ) Woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed etc.
It was preordained indeed, but that does not lessen the fault, neither shall it
diminish the punishment of him that is the traitor: but woe unto him: it had
been good for that man he had never been borne, whatsoever matters of present
contentment he may seem to enjoy. And thus much concerning the conference that
passed betwixt Christ and his disciples: now follows

2. The manner of the celebration of the Lords Supper. Verse 22. And as they did
eat (to wit the Passover,) Jesus took the bread etc. In which words together
with those that follow, two things are to be noted: 1. The dealing of our
Savior with the Elements. 2. His speaking to the Communicants.


1 Concerning the first, it is said of the bread that he 1. took it, and 2.
blessed it, and 3. brake it, and 4. gave it. He took the bread) meaning that
bread which was prepared by them for the Passover, and by Gods providence for
this Sacrament. And when he had blessed it: that is, prayed for a blessing upon
it, that it might be effectual, both to his elect Apostles that were present,
and to all those that should faithfully receive it, to the end of the world:
and had also praised God, for giving himself to be the redeemer and Savior of
the world, and vouchsafing unto his Church this Sacrament, and causing the
bread to be of such great force and use, as not only to represent unto them
his sufferings, but also to confirm their faith in him, and to exhibit the
virtue of his passion unto them: having thus blessed it, it is said that (he
brake it); which he did in a double respect one was, that so it might be more
diuisible, to every one a part: another was, that it might be more significant,
to express Christ's sufferings. Concerning whom though it be said, that a bone
of him should not be broken: yet that phrase is used to declare the passion of
the whole manhood, that he was broken for our iniquities, Isaiah 53.5. When he
had broken it, it is added, that he gave it: assuring them thereby that he
bestowed himself upon them.

Likewise for the cup, it is said: He took it, and when he had blessed it,
that is, prayed, and praised God for it in the same sort as he had done for the
bread, he gave it to them. v. 24.

2. Now concerning this speech to the Communicants, it consists partly in a
Commandment. Promise.


1 The commandment is contained in those words, Take, Ver. 22.
eat: take the bread, and take my body: eat the bread, and eat my body: take
and eat the bread corporally and by sense: take and eat Christ spiritually,
and by faith. And the like commandment is here employed, and elsewhere
expressed concerning the cup, that is, Mat. 26 27.
the wine in the cup (drink ye all of this) which they are said here to obey.

2. The promise is employed in these words: This is my body: this is my blood:
that is, lively signs to signify, and effectual instruments to convey my
self, and all the benefits of my death and passion unto you.

Further concerning the wine it is said, This is my blood of the new Testament
or new covenant: as if he should have said, as GOD has bequeathed unto you
himself, his graces, his blessings, and his kingdom; so by the shedding of my
blood he will confirm this legacy unto you: and that 2. wa^es.

First because as others, so this Will and Testament could be of no force, as
long as the maker thereof was alive. Hebr. 9.16.17. Therefore by this Sacrament
Christ would have them put in mind of his death.

Secondly, as in other, so in Wills it was not sufficient that the party that
made it should be dead, but it must be proved by authority as it were, to be
good, and therefore was this authentical seal of the Sacrament set unto it. So
that this Testament was sealed by the blood of Christ, concerning the merit
and efficacy of it: but by this Sacrament, concerning the application of it.

It is called the new Testament or covenant, in respect of that which was under
the law, from which it differs, and goes beyond it in diverse circumstances:
as afterward shall be showed.

Ver. 18. And as they sat at table, and did eat, Jesus said, Verily I say
unto you, etc.

Doct. Doct 1, Christ knew before what he should Inffer.
The Lord Jesus Christ was well acquainted before hand with all that should
befall him: as may plainly be seen in this place and else where, in that he
foretells his disciples by whose means he should die, after what manner he
should die, with all other circumstances, Mar. 16.21.
which at large to relate were not altogether so pertinent: and this must needs
be so.

First, Acts 4 28.
being preordained by his own wisdom and counsel.

Secondly,

Thirdly, Achitophel; that he should suffer a very grievous kind of death, such
as was long before described with the particular circumstances that accompanied
it, both in Psalm 22. and Isay 53. besides sundry other places. Now he was
perfectly acquainted with all the Scriptures, and the meaning thereof, they
being written by his own Spirit, and therefore it must necessarily follow,
that none of his sufferings therein prefigured and foretold, could be hidden
from him: and as he foresaw what should befall his natural body, so has he a
continual foresight of that which shall befall his mystical body, that is, his
people, and every one of them.

The doctrine thus proved, one of them to live, but (if it were possible) to
root out their names from under heaven; though I say, their rage be marvelous
great, even as the rage of the Sea, yet neeed we not at all to be afraid of
them: for the Lord Christ knows all that shall befall us, as he did all that
should betide himself: for the case of his people is as much respected of him,
as was the state of his own body, since he took upon him an humane nature,
and suffered both in soul and body for their redemption and happiness.
Therefore is it that our adversaries attempt many things against us, which
never come to pass (as it fared with Jeremy in the times of old,) because God
foreseeth them, Ier. 11.18.
and disappointeth them.

But suppose some things do come to pass according to their hearts desire, the
Lord knew of them before, and therefore did not prevent them, because he saw
they could not be hurtful unto us. He is as a wise Father, that will have his
children to seele somewhat that may be for their smart and pain, as knowing it
will turn to their good at length: but he will stay any thing that might
procure their undoing and overthrow: and therefore Christ pronounces them
happy and blessed that suffer for his name sake, either disgraces, or loss of
goods, Mat 5.
or banishment, or imprisonment, or death it self. As far then as any of
these may hinder our happiness, we shall be sure to be freed from them, Reu. 2.
so that we need not fear any of the things which we shall suffer: for if we
be faithful unto the death, we shall receive the crown of life.

Secondly, this serves for terror unto wicked men,

Verse. 19. Then they began to be sorrowful, and to say to him one by one, Is
it I? etc.

Here we see that every one of the Disciples (except IVDAS) was mistrustfull of
himself, and yet none of them proved to be the traitor. Whence arises this
doctrine, that

They are likely to fall into least evil, Fear of sin prevents falling into
sin.


They who are most jealous of their own corruptions, are best fortified
against dangerous falls. Therefore is it said by the wise man: Prou. 28.14.
Blessed is he that fears always, but he that hardens his heart shall fall
into mischief. That was Hasaels case: he suspected not himself, and therefore
when the Prophet told him that he should be a cruel man, that he should slay
the young men of Israel with the sword, and dash their infants against the
stones, and rend in pieces their women with child: he said unto the Prophet,
What? Is thy servant a dog that I should do this great thing? 2 King. 8.12.23
As if he had said, I were worse then a dog if I should ever show such
immanity and fierceness, and such beastly violence: but the Prophets words
fell out to be true: he would not mistrust his own heart, and therefore he
became savage as a Wolf, and fierce as a Lion. The example of David will add
further light unto this point: for as long as he was awed by Gods correcting
hand, and fearing himself, kept a narrow watch over all his ways, he stood
firm and immovable against all assaults: but when he grew fearelesse and
careless, we know what a grievous and dangerous fall he had. So Peter and the
rest of the Apostles as long as they were afraid of themselves (as concerning
this matter of treason they were) none of them fell: but when he and the rest
grew confident of their own strength, then they all played the cowards,
especially Peter that was most resolute in an opinion of himself. For whereas
he professed that whatsoever his Master thought of him, he would never forsake
him: Christ must be content for once to be mistaken and deceived in him: he was
another manner of man then he conceived him to be: whereas (I say) he was thus
presumptuous of his own courage in holding out, he that boasted he would stand
it out even unto death, was daunted with a word: and whereas he thought if the
me^ of war had come against him with swords, he should have defied them all,
and stuck unto his master, a poor silly wench with the only breath of her
lips, makes him lie and swear, and forswear his Savior. So that from those
examples it is evident, that when men are doubtful and distrustful of
themselves, then they speed well: but when they are confident of themselves,
then they slip and slide, and fall exceeding dangerously. And this may be yet
further confirmed unto us by reasons:

First, he that is fearful of himself, blessed that fears always: P^o.
28.14.
for this his holy sear will stir men up to make many earnest and fervent
requests unto the Lord for his strength and gracious assistance, which he never
denies unto those that faithfully crave it at his hands: and thence it comes
to pass, that how weak soever they be in themselves, Ephesians. 6.2.
yet they grow strong in him, and in the power of his might.

Secondly, as they have God to keep them, and corrupting of their affections.
Whence it often times comes to pass, that they are very shamefully
overtaken: for when they wax so bold and venturous, it is just with God to
give them over unto themselves, Psalm. 30.6.7 2. Sam. 11.1.2.
yea though they be his own children. As he dealt with David when his heart
was lifted up, and he presumed that his mountain was so strong that he should
never be moved, when he gave him self to his ease, and took liberty for his
eye, as if there had not been in him an inclination to adultery, we read what
great sins and miseries he fell into: how much more then will the Lords hand
be upon the ungodly ones of the world, that do altogether harden their hearts
from his fear, never eschewing the baits of sin, nor the snares wherein
Satan seeks to take them, and to hold them fast unto their eternal
condemnation?

Seeing it is so, that as every one is more fearful of falling, (provided that
his fear be a godly fear, and do not drive him to despair, or to
discouragement,) so he is in less danger of falling; therefore whatsoever
sin the Scriptures tell us, that God does abhor, and man is subject to fall
into, we should conclude, that we are likely to be overtaken with the same, and
in that regard stir up our hearts to a holy fear and suspicion of our own
weakness, entreating the Lord to preserve us from them. Yea though they be
monstrous and so unnatural evils, such as are mentioned in the first Chapter
of the Epistle to the Romans, and 2. Tim, 3.2. let us be jealous of our selves,

For reproof of them that are bold and venturous, to be in dangerous places
with suspected persons, they will warrant you for ever being ensnared: but let
them know that none are more likely to be overtaken by idolatry, adultery, or
any such foul sins, then they are

Verse 20. It is one of the twelve that dippeth, etc.

Doct. No natural or civil band will hold, where men's hearts are not linked by
Christianity.
No bands of kindness can make wicked men faithful unto godly men.

That which is here related to have fallen out between Christ and Judas, will
hold true betwixt all Christians and Judas his fellows, that though they be
never so well dealt with, and never so courteously used, yet they will prove
unfaithful, and requite evil for good, if it may be for their advantage.

Christ Jesus (as we may observe) had dealt marvelous friendly with Judas: he
had admitted him to his service, to be domestical, to be one of his Apostles
(which was so great an office in the Church as never man had greater,) to sit
at his own table, to eat of his own mess, at so holy a banquet as was the
blessed Sacrament, etc. yet after all this he most lewdly and basely for a
little money betraieth and delivers him into the hands of his mortal
adversaries. This (as all must needs acknowledge) was exceeding great
unfaithfulness, and very wretched dealing: yet none other than is still to be
expected from men of Judas his spirit and disposition. This David complains
of, Psalm 41.9
and exclaimeth against in Achitophel, the figure of Judas: My familiar friend
(says he) whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lifted up the heel
against me. He had highly preferred Achithophel, made him of his Counsel, yea
the principal man of his Counsel: he used him as his familiar friend, not
only in matters of state, but in matters of religion, etc. Yet for all this,
he fell from him in hope of greater promotion, joined with his rebellious son
Absolon, fought to depose him from his kingdom, yea to deprive him of his very
life: He lifted up the heel against me (says that good King,) comparing him
unto cattle that are fat fed, who feeling the prouender to prick them, do kick
with their heels against their master. The like sinful and unthankful
dealing may be seen in Ioash. 2. Chron. 23.
Iehoiada the high Priest had preserved his life, by keeping him close from his
grandmother Athaliah, who had slain all his brethren: and this he did not
without peril to himself: afterward he caused Athaliahs life to be taken
from her, and the crown and kingdom to be established unto him: yet
notwithstanding all this kindness, when he fell from God and from religion, 2.
Chron. 24.20 21.22.
he forgot Iehoiada, and cruelly murdered his son, Zecariah an holy Prophet of
God, for doing the message of the Lord unto him, in reproving him and his
princes for their idolatry.

To this point our Savior gives further testimony, telling his Disciples what
should fall out upon the preaching of the Gospel: Mat. 10 21.
The brother shall betray the brother to death, and the father the son, and
the children shall rise against their parents, and shall cause them to dye.
What nearer bonds then these, especially that of children to their parents, who
have been the means of their life, of their education, and in a word, of all
the good things that they either do or shall enjoy, and that not without great
pains and charges, and troubles unto themselves? yet for all this, if children
be impious, and their parents religious, they will not stick to betray them,
and to put them to death. So that by these proofs it is clear and evident,
that no bands of kindness or of nature will hold, where the bands of religion
are wanting. And there is reason for it: for

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

For instruction, all sinners are so unfaithful, therefore we should beware
how we trust them, and how we commit our selves or our secrets unto them: for
albeit their looks be fair and smooth, and their speeches and outward carriage
seem loving and kind: yet if they fear not God, they will lie in wait for an
advantage, and do us a mischief before we be aware, if we take not the better
heed of them: and therefore let us not expose our selves unto them.

Indeed our Savior did lay open himself unto Judas, because he knew that
Judas was appointed for that work, and the will of his Father must needs be
fulfilled: but we not having the like reason, must not imitate our Savior
herein, nor acquaint such persons with our counsels: much less let us provoke
them, and cast our selves into their danger: for if they have us once in the
snare, there is no hope of mercy, except the Lord work for us extraordinarily.

Let men therefore look heedfully unto themselves, and beware as of others, so
of untrusty servants, of ungodly children, yea of unholy yoke-fellowes: for
there is no fidelity to be expected, where the true fear of God is not planted
in the heart. They are bound to pray for them, to instruct them, and show them
any kindness that ciuility or Christianity binds them to perform: but
herein their wisdom must appear, that they be not too open-hearted unto
them, nor too ready to put them in trust in matters of great importance.

Secondly, the same, this cannot possibly be in any, but in GODS people.

Verse 21. Truly the Son of man goes his way, as it is written of him, but
woe be to that man, by whom the Son of man is betrayed.

The death of Christ and the manner and means of it, were prophesied of
before, yet is not Judas thereby excused. Whence arises this point, that

A wicked man may fulfill the will of God to his own condemnation, The wicked
full fill Gods will to their ruin,
and do that which God has foretold, to his utter destruction.

God had said, that Judas should be a traitor: he is a traitor: God had
determined (and Christ had confirmed it) that he should be a devil he is such
an one, yet al to his woe. So was it declared before unto Abraham, that Pharaoh
should grievously afflict the Israelites: he did accomplish Gods will in that
behalf, and verified that which God had forespoken, but to his own utter
ruin. 2. Sam. 12.11.
In like sort the Prophet Nathan in Gods name denounced before hand this
judgment against David, that he would raise up evil against him out of his
own house: Absolon effected it accordingly, but to his own overthrow. So
Herod and Poutius Pilate, the high Priests and the Gentiles consulted together,
Act. 4.27 28:
to put to death the holy Son of God, and therein did nothing more then Gods
hand and his counsel had determined before to be done; yet notwithstanding
they perished in their sins, as many of them as repented not. And to heap
together no more proofs in a matter so evident, we may note in the Scriptures,
how the enemies of the Church are compared to Goldsmithes, Dan 11.31. Zach. 13,
9.
for that they purged Gods people from their dross: and to Launders, because
they washed away their spots, etc. and yet heavy judgments are denounced, and
have been from time to time executed upon them for such works. And good reason
it should be so.

First,

Secondly, Judas in a spleen conspired against his Master, because he found
fault with his hypocritical dealing. Mark. 14.6. etc. and 10. etc.

Thirdly, they aim not at Gods honor,

Which serves for the just reproof and terror of those, Judas? did not he do
that which God had decreed? yet our Savior says, woe to him: and we may as
well say, woe unto thee: for whatsoever they imagine, the necessity of their
sinning, in respect of Gods decree, does nothing diminish the grieuousnesse of
their offense, neither shall it at all mitigate the extremity of their
punishment.

This is for our instruction, Judas,) but that which the Scripture warranteth,
and in that sort as it approves: for so Gods servants are bound to do.

It had been good for that man, if he had never been borne. It is good for us
that he was borne, because we have benefit thereby: but not for him, because
whatsoever matter of contentment he had in his life time, turned at length to
the increase of his misery, and to his perpetual damnation. Whence this point
may be gathered,

All the delights and contentments of wicked men in this world, No earthly
contentment can cou^teruaile the punishments in hell.
cannot counteruaile the miseries that they shall feel in the world to come.

Judas had life it self, which is a thing very delightful, and of which it is
truly said, though by a lying spirit: Skin for skin, and all that ever a man
has, Job. 2.4.
will he give for his life. He had also great preferment, being one of the
Apostles: and the chief office amongst them, namely to be their pursebearer;
which liked him exceeding well, because he was a thief, and stole from them
much of that which was given: yet notwithstanding all this, and whatsoever else
can be named, our Savior says, it had been good for him that he had never
been borne.

The like may be said of Saul, Jeroboam, Ahab, and many other kings. Who would
account it a good bargain to have their kingdoms with all the honors and
delights which they could afford: and their victories with all the glory that
accompanies the same, upon this condition, that he shall endure the same
miseries and torments in hell, that they do? Certainly no wise man would
willingly make such a match: for what shall it profit a man to win the whole
world, and to lose his own soul?

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly, Revel. 18.7.
the more grievous shall their punishment in hell be.

For instruction, as Ahab did: not caring what miseries they cast themselves
into, nor what snares they entangle themselves in, so they may accomplish their
brutish and devilish purposes, being therein more silly then the poor bird or
fish, that once perceiving the snare or the hook, will not easily meddle, nor
adventure the danger the second time.

Secondly, if it be so, Rom 8.18
that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory that
shall be showed unto us: the one being light and momentany, the other weighty
and eternal. Let us suffer never so many disgraces and losses, and go through
never so many hard brunts, our blessed estate in heaven will answer for all: so
that as it was said of Judas, it had been good for him he had never been borne,
notwithstanding all the delights that he enjoyed; so may it as truly be said,
happy we that ever we were borne, notwithstanding all the miseries that we have
endured: yea though they have been as great as theirs, of whom mention is made
Hebrews, 11. that they were racked, and stoned, and hewn in sunder, etc. for
they endured all in hope of a beter resurection. Verse 35. and so should we if
God bring us unto the like extremities. And thus much of the conference, now
follows the institution of the Lords Supper.

The end of the ninth Sermon.
THE TENTH SERMON.
MARK. 14.22.23.24. 22 And as they did eat, Jesus took the bread, and when
he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to them, and said, Take, eat,
this is my body. 23 Also he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, gave
it to them, and they all drank of it. 24 And he said unto them, This is my
blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many.

ANd as they did eat, Jesus took the bread, and when he had given thanks
etc. or as the word fignifieth (blessed,) that is prayed unto his Father for a
blessing to be bestowed upon the receiving of it, not only upon those that
were then present, but upon all that should afterward to the end of the world
faithfully partake of the same. In that Christ Jesus seeks the blessing of
this ordinance from the Lord,

The virtue and efficacy of the Sacrament, The virtue of the Sacrament is from
Gods own hand. See the Sermon on John the 6.
is from Gods own hand, through the mediation of Christ Jesus.

God gives it, and Christ procures the benefit of it unto his people: and this
is common to all other ordinances and services with the Sacrament. To this
purpose it is said, that Moses gave not that Manna unto the Israelites in the
wilderness from heaven, my Father (says Christ) gives you the true bread,
John. 6.32.33.
which gives life unto the world: that no Minister nor creature in heaven or
earth can bestow upon any.

First, every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes
down from the Father of lights. James 1.17.
Now what more excellent and perfect gift can there be then the body and blood
of Jesus Christ? and therefore if God be the author and giver of all other good
things, this must of necessity proceed from his bounty in a special manner.

A second cause why God will have the disposing of his graces in his own hand,
gives the meat which endures to everlasting life. And the reason is because
the Father has sealed him, that is, the Lord has authorized him by the broad
seal of heaven, and will et none to be copartners with him in that office: he
is the Lord Treasurer of all graces, and therefore he must bless his
ordinances unto us, if ever we look for benefit thereby. In which regard John
Baptist says: I baptize you with water, and that is all that he could do; as
for washing of the heart, and purging of the conscience, that he attributes
wholly unto Christ Jesus: Matthew. 3.11.
He will baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire. John would not arrogate
that unto himself, lest he should treacherously lay claim to that which is
proper unto the crown. The like faithfulness in giving God his due, we see in
the Apostle Paul, who says, I have planted, Apollos watered, 1 Cor. 3.6.
but God gives the increase: thereby intimating, that the best Ministers are
but as Gardeners in the Lords Church: they can but put the scions into the
stock, or the root into the ground. And as possible it is for a man to make a
tree, as for a Minister to make a Christian: and as possible to put sap into a
dead block, and to make it grow and flourish, and bring forth fruit in
abundance, as for a Minister to put into any the least drop of grace, or to
add any whit unto it, where it is already wrought.

Thirdly, thing commendable) that they desire all might be faued. If Moses
could have given every man in Israel grace when he gave them the Manna, he
would have done it: he that could have been content, that his name should be
razed out of the book of life for their sakes, would not have stuck with them
for such a matter. If Abraham could have circumcised Ismaels heart, when he
circumcised his flesh, he should not have been excommunicated for his
profaneness: but God has always heretofore, and does still keep this power
in his own hand, that so he may enrich with grace those whom he thinks
fittest, and deal with every one as he knows their hearts. 1 Cor. 10.
Moses was the Minister of Baptism, to those that passed through the red sea,
yet with many of them God was not pleased: for only those that are good in his
sight shall taste of his good gifts. And therefore Christ prays not for the
world, but only for those which he has chosen out of the world, John. 17.
and such as shall believe through the preaching of the Gospel, that they may
be partakers of the benefit of his ordinances.

First for instruction,

Secondly, the imperfections of the Minister, shall hinder the powerful
working of Gods ordinance.

But we are base creatures,

Indeed if Grace were to be fetched out of such dirty ditches as we are, we
could look for little good;

But alas, neither we,

What of that?

Thirdly; this is for the reproof of such profane persons,

Verse. 22. Take, eat, this is my body, etc.
This is the commandment that our Savior gives unto the communicants, to
wit, that they should take the bread, and take his body: eat corporally, and
eat spiritually: receive the sign and the thing signified, the one as well as
the other: for so much does the promise which is annexed (This is my body)
imply. As if he should have said, This bread broken before your eyes, does
plainly represent unto you my body (that is the whole manhood, a part being put
for the whole) which is given for you, and shall be broken for you, that so you
may have a spiritual communion with me, as there is a natural union betwixt
you and this bread which I give unto you: and the like is to be understood of
the wine. The words thus expounded according to the simple meaning thereof,
afford us this doctrine, that

Christ Jesus in the Lords Supper, Our union with Christ by the Sacrament.
and near union with himself. The bread and wine are not only pledges of
what shall be bestowed on us, but effectual means to exhibit the things
promised unto us: and therefore Christ uses these words: Luke 22.19. 1 Cor.
11.24. Luke 22.20,
Take, eat, this is my body, which is given for you, which is broken for you:
and so of the wine: Drink ye all of it, this is my blood which is shed for
you. Now what can be nearer unto us then our meat and drink? We have greater
interest in nothing then in our food: for that is made a part of our selves.
If we eat meat in another man's house, after we have received it, it is more
ours, then his that prepared it; no one joint is so near another, nor the
soul so near to the body, as our food is near us, when once it is digested
and turned into nourishment unto us: which does plainly represent unto us the
near conjunction that is betwixt Christ and every worthy receiver. Hence
proceeds that speech of the Apostle: The cup of blessing which we bless, 1
Cor. 10.16,
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is
it not the communion of the body of Christ? that is, do not these cause us to
have an effectual communion with him in all his gracious merits?

Now if question should be made, why Christ should make choice of bread to be a
sign in this Sacrament, rather then of any other more excellent and glorious
creature:

The answer is,

1. Why GOD made choice of bread.
Because it was his will, as it is said concerning the Gospel, that it pleased
him by the foolishness of preaching to sone them that believe.

There is besides his pleasure, great wisdom in it,

Thirdly, God made choice of bread,

Seeing then that the bread (as also the wine) in the Lords Supper is of such
excellent force and use, as to put us in mind of Christ's death and
bloudshedding, to testify his undoubted, true and real presence to every
faithful communicant, and to refresh and feed the souls of the worthy
receivers unto eternal life: in which regard they do as far surmount common
bread and wine, as the wax wherewith a pardon or charter, or any other
evidence is sealed, is of more worth then that which is to be sold in the trade
man's shop. Seeing (I say) that the bread is of such singular use, this makes,
first, produce but only some few.

The first is taken from the express words of the holy Ghost in the Scriptures
who mentions bread after the words of consecration: Reasons against
transubstantiation.
saying (the bread which we break) 1 Cor. 10.16. and again, He that eats
this bread etc.) I Corinthians 11.27.28.

A second reason is this: Manna is there called spiritual meat, and the rock
is said to be Christ: now it is certain that they did not corporally eat the
body, and drink the blood of Christ, because he had not then assumed our
nature: and our Savior denies the Manna to be the true bread, John. 6.32.
which came down from heaven.

Thirdly, Paul says, 1 Cor. 10.
that all, good and bad did eat the same spiritual meat etc. as touching the
outward sign and Element,) and so cannot afterward perish, and be damned; for
that whosoever eats of Christ his flesh etc. John. 6.55.56.
has eternal life, and he will raise him at the last day: for he dwells in
us, and we in him. Now it is certain that there is no communion betwixt the
Lord Jesus and wicked sinners, neither are they in the state of salvation,
neither shall they be raised up unto Glory, at the last day: and consequently,
they feed not on him, and the Sacramental signs are not transubstantiated
into him.

A fourth reason is from the end for which the Sacrament was instituted by
Christ, Acts, 3, 21. Luke, 22, 29.
therefore (says he) do this in remembrance of me. Which should be
superfluous and needless if he were continually conversant with his members
every where in the Mass, and in the Lords Supper.

of transubstantiation, for

First, either one Christ in his bodily presence must be both in heaven and
earth, Absurdities,
and in innumerable places there at one instant: or else be multiplied, Peter,
another Christ to John, and to every Apostle one.

Secondly, how can cruelty be here avoided?

A glorious body may be in many places at once,

But when the Disciples first received him,

But he himself says, This is my body.

So it is sacramentally and by a Trope: the covenant, Genesis 17.13. the Lamb is
called the Passover, Exodus 12.11. the rock, Christ, 1 Cor. 10.14. And is not
the cup said as well to be the blood of the new Testament: and yet our Savior
calls the consecrated wine the fruit of the vine? Matthew. 26.29.

But Christ says, John. 6.53.55. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man,
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you: for my flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed.

He speaks not there of the Sacrament, thereof, it will follow, that either
Transubstantiation was before the Lords Supper, or the Lords Supper before the
night in which he was betrayed. And in this place he makes no mention of bread
to be turned into his body: and the words wrested, would rather argue his body
to be transubstantiated into bread, or flesh, then bread to be changed into
his body.

Secondly, Ester. 1:
It would have been a great disgrace for Ahashuerosh to have dealt so, when he
called all his Princes to a banquet: and therefore they are justly to be
reproved, that esteem so basely of this holy feast, seeing God offers, and
exhibiteth truly, though not corporally, his own Son, with all his precious
merits to every faithful receiver: so that every guest at his table may truly
be said to feed on Christ Jesus.

Thirdly,

Fourthly, here is another instruction, that when we come to this celestial
feast, we fall to it, and feed of it, as Christ bids us, Take, and eat,:
let us set our eyes, our ears, our taste, yea and our hearts also aworke, with
all serious meditation, to make use of those heavenly mysteries: and when we
see the bread broken, let us boldly conclude, Christ was broken for me, and
therefore I shall escape the breaking which I have deserved: and when the bread
is given unto us, let us resolve, Christ with all his benefits is bestowed
upon me: and when we eat the bread, let us assure our souls of this, Christ
is made unto me the true bread, whereby my soul shall be nourished unto life
eternal. This is the earing that the Lord requires and accepts and thus
doing we shall show that there is mutual love and kindness betwixt him and
us, which is a thing well pleasing unto him: and therefore he exhorts all his
servants, saying: Eat, O friends, drink and make you merry, Cant. 5.1
O well-beloved. None but those that are friends can eat of his dainties, and
all those that are friends will eat of the same: and therefore if ever we
would show our selves to be Christ his friends, if we would enjoy the feeling
of his love unto us, and be assured of our love toward him, let us refresh our
souls at this banquet, and not let our Savior be at cost in vain, in making
so good and so large provision for us.

Verse. 23. Also he took the Cup, etc.
In that wine is joined with the bread, Christ makes us a sull meal.
that Jesus Christ in the Sacrament does make us a full meal.

We have here not only bread, but wine, not only the body of Christ, but his
blood also, even the whole Christ with all his graces, offered unto us. This is
promised in the Prophecy of Isaiah, where it is said: Isaiah. 25.6.
In this mountain shall the Lord of hoasts make unto all people a feast of fat
things, even a feast of mixed wines, etc. Meaning that he would make for his
Church complete provision, whatsoever might be for health, or strength, or
delight. And the like is proposed in the ninth chapter of the Proverbs, And
there is cause why we should think this to be so, for

First he is of sufficient ability, so that he can do it.

Secondly, his love unto us his people is such, bountiful and will not spare
cost, so is he rich in all abundance of heavenly treasures, and needs not
spare cost, and therefore seeing Christ has prayed that al his ghests might
have of the best, they shall not fail of any thing that their heart can desire
and long for.

Especially seeing it is for his own glory. A mortal sinful man, even the
king of Persia, for the setting forth of his magnificence and greatness,
spared no cost in the feast that he made unto his Princes: Ester 1,
much less will the Lord of glory in this banquet which he provides for his
people, feeing that he is incomparably better able, and more bountiful, and
withal sees and considers the several needs and necessities of all his
children.

Here then in the first place,

See here how shamelesly they control Christ himself:

They answer,

So did he the bread also, words of Christ may decide this controversy when he
says, Drink ye all of this, this is my blood, etc. which is shed for you and
for many, for the remission of sins. And who are those many? even all that
should afterward believe in him. To those for whom Christ his blood was shed,
the cup must be administered: but his blood was shed for private men as well as
for Ministers: and therefore the cup must be administered to them as well as
unto the Apostles themselves.

A second use of this point is for instruction,

Thirdly, here is matter of rejoicing for Gods poor servants, David's comfort
when he was banished from the assemblies of Saints, and could not be present at
the Sacraments and sacrifices: when he could but remember that he had been at
them, and also been a profitable communicant as often as he could, it did much
refresh his soul, so that it was satisfied as with marrow and fatness, with
the very meditation thereof: he had received such store of grace from Gods
ordinances, and such a strong apprehension of his favor, that he counted it
better then life it self. And the consideration thereof did not only comfort
his soul, but helped him also in his bodily necessities, in so much that when
he was in a barren and dry wilderness, pinched with hunger, and pressed with
thirst, the very remembrance of those things that were past long before, did
cause him more chearefully to undergo all his penury and want. If he then
took such comfort therein in his absence, how much more should we being
present at the same?

Verse 24. This is my blood of the new Testament.
That is, this is a sign and seal of the new Testament: which is so called,
because thereby Jesus Christ does bequeath unto his people, as all the
benefits of (...) life, so the special blessing of all, even eternal life:
and this is termed a new Testament, in respect of that which was made the time
of the law. That was, and this is: when that was insufficient in some respects,
the Lord abolished it and established this in stead thereof, as being much
better then that; for though both of them aim at salvation by Christ, yet it
is in a different manner: for

1 Differences betwixt the old and new Covenant.
That was obscure, consisting in rites and ceremonies, where by Christ was
darkly perfigured: but this is more plain and perpicuous, so that Gods mercy
and goodness toward us in his Son may more clearly and evidently be
discerned in this one Sacrament, then it could by all their sacrifices. Then
the blood of beasts was shed in stead of Christ's, but now has he shed his
own blood for us.

Secondly, Jews alone: and if any other nations would have their part in it,
they must unite themselves unto the Jews: but this has a larger extent, and
pertains to all Gods elect throughout the whole world.

Thirdly that conveyed unto men a smaller measure of grace;

Fourthly that was temporary and to endure but a while; This is my blood of the
new Testament etc. the Doct. is that,

Faithful communicants at the Lord table come not only to be refreshed at a
feast, Faithful communicants enriched.
but to be enriched by a legacy: Christ's will and Testament being there
confirmed unto them.

The particular legacies with Christ Jesus has bequeathed unto them are
specified in the Epistle to the Hebrews: This is the Testament that I will
make unto them, after those days, says the Lord, Hebr. 10.16.17
I will put my laws in their heart, and in their minds I will write them, And
their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. The substance of which
covenant is this, that all their sins shall be forgiven, and both the guilt,
and punishment thereof wholly removed: yea they shall not only be justified,
but also sanctified, the laws of God and his promises shall be written in
their minds, so that they shall have the knowledge of them: and in their
hearts, so that they shall have the comfort and feeling and fruition of them:
they shall not only have interest in all Gods graces and blessings, but
according to their need shall have the use and enioyment thereof. And what
treasures are comparable unto these? if we should receive many ten thousand
pounds at every Sermon, and Sacrament, it were nothing to this legacy, which is
sealed unto us in the Lords Supper: the worth whereof is so much the greater,
by how much it has more excellent appurtenances annexed unto it beyond that
which other Wills have, for

First, when other legacies are paid,

Secondly,

Thirdly, Ier. 31.31.
and pawned his word and promise, his truth and fidelity, his oath, yea
himself, his nature, and all that he has: so that it is impossible he should
fail in performing the lest clause thereof. The use thereof shall be.

First, for instruction, Luke. 14
therefore we should not suffer any earthly commodities, as oxen, farms, or
the like, to keep us from the same.

Secondly, here is a comfort for Gods poor servants: have a fair living, and
a goodly heritage, the Lord himself is their portion: and therefore though
they have not these outward things themselves, yet seeing they have the owner
and giver of them to be theirs, they are, richly provided for; Christ being
theirs, all is theirs. And as in respect of themselves, so also of their
children, this offers them matter of consolation. Alas poor creatures (say
many) we have little or nothing to leave them: but have you procured them a
legacy in Christ his will? if you do so, though you have little, he has much,
and therefore never be afraid: they shall be sufficiently provided for.

Thirdly, Ier. 31.34.
They shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
(saying) know the Lord (they were past that) for (says the Lord) they shall
all know me (in a competent measure) from the least of them, unto the greatest.

The end of the tenth Sermon.
A profitable Metaphrase upon the Epistle of Paul to the Colossians.
CHAP. 1.
I Paul understanding that there are, that go about to spoil you, and to make
a prey of you, partly by show of wisdom and Philosophy, and partly by the
beggarly Elements of the world or Ceremonies of the Jews, thought it needful
to write unto you, that according as ye have received Jesus Christ at the
first, even so that you would both abide and proceed further in him, that you
may be rooted and further built in the faith.

Verse. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and Timotheus
our brother. ANd that I write unto you, know, that I do it with warrant: for I
am an Apostle of Jesus Christ, and not tied to any particular congregation, or
to one province, yea or to one kingdom; but am an Ambassador, and have
commission to all the world. Neither do I come to this charge of mine own
will, or of the will of any other man, but by the will of God, and the same his
revealed will. And albeit my authority herein be sufficient to convince all men
of the truth I write of, yet for further and stronger confirmation thereof, I
have joined Timotheus, my well-beloved brother, to bear record with me, that in
the mouth of two witnesses, the truth may be more surely established.

Verse 2. To them which are at Colosse, Saints, and faithful brethren in
Christ: Grace be with you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ. And considering that the blessing of all labor depends upon
the Lord, our beginning is with hearty prayer unto God for the grace and favor
of God, to be freely given, together with all blessings, both of this life, and
of that which is to come, from GOD the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ,
to you Colossians; yet not all that dwell in that citiy, but to those which by
faith are Saints and brethren, not in the flesh, but in Jesus Christ.

Verse. 3. We give thanks unto God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
always praying for you.

And that you may have further testimony of our love toward you, know you that
we do continually both pray and give thanks to God for you: whom, to separate
from all false Gods, I call the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Verse. 4. Since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of your love
toward all Saints.

For the report of your profession and piety in Jesus Christ, and of your love
toward all Saints, is come unto us.

Verse. 5. For the hopes sake which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye
have heard before by the word of truth, which is the Gospel.

Which both profession and love we know to be sincere, in that they are
vpholden in you through the hope and expectation of a treasure laid up, not on
earth but in heaven; which hope you have conceived, not of your own fantasy,
or of the word of any man, but by the word of truth, that is to say the Gospel.

Verse. 6. Which is come unto you, even as it is unto all the world: and is
fruitful, as it is also among you, from the day that ye heard, and truly knew
the grace of God.

And if you ask what is that truth or Gospel? verily none other then that
which is preached among you now: which is not among you alone, but is preached
in all the world: a certain note of the truth thereof: there having never bin,
nor ever shall be any doctrine, which has leauened so great a lump of dow as
is the world, but only the Gospel. And for further assurance that it is the
truth of God, I offer this to your consideration, that as in other places of
the world, so among you it has brought forth fruit, even from the first time
you have truly and sincerely acknowledged this grace of God.

Verse. 7. As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear fellow servant, which is
for you a faithful Minister of Christ.

Where if you say, we know not what doctrine is preached in all the world, nor
what fruit it has brought forth; although it be no other thing then the common
and constant report which many may bring unto you: yet to join near unto you,
and to rid you of all doubt, which is the true Gospel of Christ, it is even
the very same that you have learned of Epaphras; whom if you love me, you must
love, as being my beloved fellow servant in Christ: yea, if you love your
selves you must respect him, as being a faithful Minister of Christ for you.

Verse 8. Who has also declared unto us your love, which ye have by the
Spirit.

Who made manifest unto us your true love, not only natural, but that
especially which is spiritual, whereof the Spirit is the author.

Verse. 9. For this cause we also, since the day we heard of it, cease not to
pray for you, and to desire that ye might be fulfilled with knowledge of his
will, in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding.

And as we give thanks for your good, and so for the same cause that you have
well begun (both because you should not go back again, and for that you have
not attained to perfection,) even from the first day we heard of you, we never
give over praying for you, making this suit, that you may be filled with the
knowledge of his will in all wisdom and understanding, whereof the holy Ghost
is the Author.

Verse. 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all
things, being fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of
God.

Not that you should content your selves with a bare knowledge and
contemplation of heavenly things, but that you walk worthy of those whom the
Lord has called to such honor, to a full and whole pleasing of him, both by
bringing forth frunt in every good work, and by being increased in the
knowledge of God.

Verse. 11. Strengthened with all might, through his glorious power, unto all
patience and long suffering with ioyfullnesse.

Wherein because there are many difficulties and hindrances laid in your way,
our suit also is, that you may be strengthened with all manner of strength,
according to that glorious power, which being in God, he is able to furnish you
with; that even with joy, you may be able to bear all troubles, how grievous
and how continual soever they be.

Verse. 12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

And as we give not over praying for you, so do we not cease to give thanks to
God the Father, because that it is he that by his holy Spirit has made us fit
to have a part in the inheritance of Saints: whom whether we consider as they
are in this world by reason of the comfort and true knowledge of God, or as
they shall be in the world to come, by reason of their perfect blessedness,
may well be said to be in light.

Verse. 13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son,

This part of our inheritance stands first, in that God with a merciful
hand pulled us out, both of the present darkness of ignorance, and
disobedience, and from that which is to come, even the most fearful punishment
of them both. And secondly, it stands in this, that the same God has
translated us into the kingdom of his most dear Son, which being here
begun, shall be accomplished in the life to come.

Verse. 14. In whom we have redemption through his blood, that is, the
forgiveness of sins,

In which his dear Son we have a full redemption, whereof one part which is
our justification, we have already received, waiting for that which remains,
even the redemption of our bodies: all which redemption is purchased unto us in
the obedience of the Son, which obedience was specially and most
significantly declared in the shedding of his blood.

Verse. 15. Who is the image of the invisible God, the first borne of every
creature.

This Christ, that you may know what plentiful and rich redemption you have in
him, to the end that you may rest in him alone, is thus set forth unto you as
follows. As touching his person standing of two natures, he is the most
lively and express Image and character of God, not only of his qualities, (if
yet there were any qualities in the Godhead) but of his very nature and
essence: in whom we behold God which is invisible, and touch him which is
vnfeelable, which is the principal heir of all the creatures in the world, in
whom we that believe have right unto them.

Verse. 16. For by him were all things created, which are in heaven, and which
are in earth, things visible and invisible: whether they be Thrones, or
Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by him, and
for him.

For by him all things are created in heaven and in earth, visible and
invisible, even the Angels themselves, to the worshipping of whom ye are
seduced: and amongst them all of what degree or place soever they be: whether
they sit in Thrones, or whether they have Lordship, principality or power over
other Angels, all things are made by him, and for him,

Verse. 17. And he is before all things, and in him all things consist.

Wherefore he is before all things, and all things have their continuance, and
are vpholden by him.

Verse. 18. And he is the head of the body of the Church: he is the beginning,
and the first borne of the dead, that in all things he might have the
preeminence.

And as touching his office which he executes in respect of both natures, he
is the head of the Church which is his body, and he is the first fruits and
first begotten of the dead, not only in respect that himself is risen, but
also that he is the author of resurrection, which is here begun, and shall be
perfected in the last day, when he shall change these vile bodies, and make
them like his glorious body.

Verse. 19. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell.

For in him it is the good pleasure of GOD, that the grace of the Spirit,
should without measure fully dwell.

Verse. 20. And by him to reconcile all things unto himself, and to set at
peace through the blood of his Cross, both the things in earth, and the things
in heaven.

That by him he might reconcile unto himself, making peace by the death of his
cross, between God and all men, whether it be they which having believed in
him before his coming, are now in heaven: or those which being in earth, do
believe in him.

Verse. 21 And you which were in times past strangers and enemies, because your
minds were set in evil works, has he now also reconciled.

Wherefore having reconciled all unto himself, he has reconciled you also;
which benefit that it may be the better esteemed, consider what ye were when he
reconciled you, strangers from GOD, yea enemies in your very understanding,
which is the chiefest, and therefore much more in other parts: which enmity was
made manifest by your evil works.

Verse. 22. In the body of his flesh through death, to make you holy, and
unblameable, and without fault in his sight.

I say, now he has reconciled you in his human nature, like unto ours, by
his death, to the end he might make you holy and without spot, and blamlesse in
all sincerity, as before himself.

23. If ye continue grounded and stablished in the faith, and be not moved
away from the hope of the Gospel, whereof ye have heard, and which has been
preached to every creature which is under heaven, whereof I Paul am a Minister.

And this reconciliation know no otherwise to belong unto you, then ye abide
grounded and settled in faith, and be not carried away from the hope you have
heard in the gospel: the truth whereof appears, in that in so short a time
it has been preached to al nations under the cope of heaven; of which gospel
I my self am a Minister.

24. Now rejoice I in my sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake which is the Church.

Wherein it ought not to dismay you, that I am in bonds, seeing my self do
rejoice in it: seeing it is not for redemption (which Christ alone has
wrought) but for the confirmation of your faith, and example of your patience:
and seeing thereby are fulfilled the passions which are yet wanting unto the
body of Christ, which is the Church, which must be like unto Christ her head in
suffering, that it may be like unto him in glory. And finally since it is not
for your good alone, but for the good of the whole body of Christ, which is the
Church.

Verse. 25. Whereof I am a Minister, according to the dispensation of God, which
is given me unto youward, to fulfill the word of God.

Whereof as of the Gospel I am a Minister, and that by the ordinance of GOD,
who committed a stewardship unto me, that in you might be fulfilled the word of
God.

verse. 26. which is the mystery hid since the world began, and from all ages,
but now is made manifest to his Saints.

I mean the secret of the Gospel, so worthily called, for that it has been
hidden from all times and generations hitherto: and now is made manifest not to
all, but to his Saints.

verse. 27. To whom God would make known what is the riches of his glorious
mystery among the Gentiles, which riches is Christ in you, the hope of glory.

Even to as many as God of his good will would make known the glorious riches
of his secret among the Gentiles, which glorious riches is Christ in you, the
same alone, by whom we may hope for glory.

verse. 28. Whom we preach, admonishing every man, and teaching every man in
all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

The same also, whom we do preach, partly admonishing all sorts of men, and
partly teaching all sorts of men, all heavenly wisdom; thereby to present men
of all sorts, perfectly wise, and blessed through Jesus Christ.

verse. 29. Whereunto I also labor and strive, according to his working, which
works in me mightily.

whereunto I labor sore, striving forcibly, which yet would be unfruitful,
were it not that God works by his Spirit mightily with my Ministry.

The end of the first Chapter.
CHAP. 2.
Verse. 1. For I would ye knew what great fighting I have for your sakes, and
for them of Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my person in the flesh.

THAT which I say of my grievous labor and strife for all men, is truly
verified of you: for I would not have you ignorant of the great agony and
strife for you, and for those that are in the Church of Laodicea, and others
that are about you in the Countries of Phrigia, notwithstanding that they never
saw my person.

verse. 2. That their hearts might be comforted, and they knit together in love,
and in all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to know the mystery
of God even the Father, and of Christ.

And my care and thought is, that through the preaching of the Gospel you
might be comforted at the heart, by a knitting, settling together, and
compacting of your minds one to another, through abundance of persuaded
understanding, and acknowledgement of the mystery of GOD, that is to say, of
the Father, and of Christ.

verse 3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

In which Christ are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge treasured up,
but yet hidden from the natural man.

verse. 4. And this I say, lest any man should beguile you with enticing words.

T^^ drift of all the commendations of the preaching of the Gospel, and of
Christ, whom the Gospel does set forth and preach unto you, is, that no man by
apparent and perswasible speeches do transport you.

verse. 5. For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit,
rejoicing, and beholding your order, and your steadfast faith in Christ,

Where if you ask, how I that never saw you, should be thus careful of you:
and should care for you so much, that never came to see you? know, that
although I be absent as touching the flesh, yet I am present with you as
touching the spirit, rejoicing to see your good order, and policy of the
Church, caused through the soundness of the faith which is toward Christ.

verse. 6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him.

Wherefore as you have received the Lord Jesus Christ, so let it appear by your
conversation, as in all other things, so in holding fast the truth of the
Gospel.

verse. 7. Rooted and built in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been
taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.

Being rooted and builded in him, and strengthened in the faith, and that with
thanksgiving for the mercy you have received in Christ

verse. 8. Beware lest there be any man that spoil you through philosophy, and
vain deceit, through the traditions of men, according to the rudimentes of the
world, and not after Christ.

Look about you by sound knowledge of the truth, lest any of what opinion,
holiness, or learning soever, by either show of reason coming from the brain
of men, which has been received from hand to hand, and yet is nothing else but
a deceit or slight, or else by the ceremonies of the Law, wherewith as by
certain rudiments or ABC, the people of God as children were trained to this
perfection of doctrine, which now has shined out unto you, do vanquish you,
and draw you before them, as prisoners fast bound in chains and manacles of
errors: yea take heed of any doctrine whatsoever, that either takes any thing
away from Christ, or places any the least jot of salvation otherwhere than in
him.

verse. 9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily

For seeing that in the nature of Christ, the fullness of the Godhead does
personally rest and abide, that both the natures of the Godhead and the
manhood, make but one Christ, what is there needful for your salvation, that
you may not have abundantly in him?

verse. 10. And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all Principality
and Power.

Considering that this fullness of all graces which is in him, he has not for
himself but for you, with all whatsoever you have need of unto salvation.

And the same Christ howsoever a little inferior to Angels, as touching his
manhood, yet now according to his manhood is head, not only of the Church (as
is aforesaid) but of all Powers and Principalities that are in heaven; whereby
may appear their error, which worship Angels.

Verse 11. In whom also ye are circumcised with circumcision made without
hands, by putting off the sinful body of the flesh, through the circumcision
of Christ.

Having all fullness and sufficiency in him, it follows that what you would
have you seek it him, which is the circumcision of the foreskin, who was
circumcised not for himself, but for you. And in him you have a more
plentiful circumcision then that which you so greedily pursue: for that is
made with the bodily hands of man, which can go no further than the flesh:
whereas this circumcision is made with the finger of God, which enters into
the heart: whereof one fruit is, the cutting off of the whole body and mass of
sin, which rises and buddeth from the carnal corruption of original sin.

Verse. 12. In that ye are buried with him through Baptism, in whom ye are
also raised up together, through the faith of the operation of God, which
raised him from the dead.

Where if you reply, that Abraham and other godly Patriarchs, and Fathers under
the law, had this circumcision of the heart, and yet notwithstanding received
the outward cutting of the foreskin, for a seal of that inward circumcision,
I grant; and therefore you have for an outward seal of your inward cutting and
purging your corruption, the Sacrament of Baptism: a seal, that with Christ
you are buried unto sin: that sin is truly mortified and deadned in you, that
it should no more reign over you, nor you should live to it.

Another fruit also of this circumcision, whereof Baptism is a seal, is, that
with Christ you are raised up to newness of life, through faith, which God
has wrought in you by the same almighty power, whereby he has raised Christ
from the dead.

Verse. 13. And ye which were dead in sins, and in the uncircumcision of your
flesh, has he quickened together with him, forgiving you all your trespasses.

And no marvel though you have need of the same power to quicken you, which
the Father declared in the raising up of his Son, seeing also you are dead in
sins, shadowed and set forth by the circumcision of the flesh, and at once
quickened together with him, in having all your sins forgiven you.

Verse. 14. And putting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us,
which was contrary to us, he even took it out of the way, and fastened it upon
the Cross.

As by his death he has gotten us remission of sins, so by the same he has
blotted out the handwriting which was witness of our sins, as of a debt,
wherein we stood bound to God: which handwriting, stands in rites and
ceremonies of the law, which by his death is not only blotted out, but by the
same nails whereby the blessed hands and feet were nailed to the cross, as it
were nailed through and cancelled.

Verse. 15. And has spoiled the Principalities, and Powers, and has made a
show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in the same cross.

Neither is it marvel if by his Cross these enemies were done away, seeing
upon the same cross he has spoiled the Devil, and all the power and host of
Hell: and having disarmed them, he made an open show of them, triumphing upon
them in his Cross, where they thought utterly to have vanquished and overcome
him.

verse. 16. Let no man therefore condemn you in meat and drink, or in
respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath days.

Wherefore as by this means, circumcision is taken away, so likewise is taken
away difference of all meats and days. Therefore as in Christ, no man should
condemn you for the use of any meat and drink, or in respect of a feast day,
whether it be new Moon, or the three solemn Sabbaths; so if any man either
ignorantly, or maliciously do condemn you, you shall not need to fear their
judgment.

verse. 17. Which are but a shadow of things to come: but the body is in Christ.

Considering that these things were but shadows, which have no more place,
Christ the head being come.

verse. 18. Let no man at his pleasure bear rule over you by humbleness of
mind, and worshipping of Angels, advancing himself in those things which he
never saw, rashly puffed up with his fleshly mind.

Now having spoken of the Elements of the world, which are the ceremonies of
the law, I come to the vain Philosophy I gave you warning of; against the
which I observe this rule, that you give no man, of what show soever, this
power over you, that for his own lust, in matters pertaining to God, he usurp
authority, howsoever the doctrine he bring, carry a show of humility: as for
example, those that teach the worshipping of Angels, as means to come more
easily to Christ. In which thing, what do they else but thrust themselves into
things they never knew, only grounded upon a proud conceit of their fleshly
mind, notwithstanding their great pretense of humility?

verse. 19. And holds not the head, whereof all the body furnished and knit
together by joints and bands, increases with the increasing of God.

Which error ought so much the more to be abhorred, as they which are infected
with it, do not indeed, whatsoever they do in word, hold Christ fast, which is
the head of the Church: of who^ the whole body, as it were by ioints and bonds,
being furnished and compact together, is enriched and increased with an
increase, which God both allows and gives.

verse. 20. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ, from the ordinances of the
world, why, as though ye lived in the world, are ye burdened with traditions?

Now seeing you are dead with Christ, by whose death you are delivered from the
ceremonies of Gods own law, wherewith as with certain rudiments the people of
the Jews were trained to further perfection, which now they have attained unto
in the doctrine of the Gospel; why as though you lived still in the world, do
you suffer your selves to be charged with the ceremonies of the world?

verse. 21. As, Touch not, taste not, handle not.

I say that which you and your false teachers say, Touch not such a thing,
taste not such a meat, handle not such a one.

verse. 22. Which all perish with the using, and are after the commandments
and doctrines of men.

All which things seeing that through the use of them they are consumed, have
no strength to life everlasting, especially being nothing but the doctrines and
commandments of men.

verse. 23. Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in voluntary religion,
and humbleness of mind, and in not sparing the body: neither have they it in
any estimation to satisfy the flesh.

I deny not but that they have a color and show of wisdom, partly, in that
in them there is a worship over and above that which God has commanded, to
whom no service is sufficient which we can do: partly through a kind of
humility, and partly in a hard usage of the body: which yet are of no price,
seeing they are of things wherewith the flesh is filled.

CHAP. 3.
Verse. 1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above
where Christ sits at the right hand of God.

BEing through faith ingrafted and incorporated into Christ, (as has been
said, and as your selves profess) as touching, sin dead and buried with him:
and as touching newness of life, quickened and risen again: Now if in truth
you be risen with Christ, then as Christ rising remained not here on earth, but
ascended up into heaven, where under God, as touching his manhood, he is
exalted in power and majesty above all powers and principalities, in heaven and
earth; so you by seeing and seeking after the graces that come from above,
ascend up whither he is gone.

verse. 2. Set your affections on things which are above, and not on things
which are one the earth.

And to the intent you may carefully seek after them, ye must first favor and
set your affections upon the things that are above, and consequently not to set
your affections upon either the former corruptions of false doctrine, or else
upon the defilements of a corrupt conversation of life: or finally upon the
perishable transitory things of this base world, all which are mere earthly.

verse. 3. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.

Unto which distaste of earthly things you are called, in that you being risen
with Christ, are consequently dead with him. Where if happily you should object,
that there is small wisdom to quitte your former life, not being assured of
another, and should ask how it should appear you live, seeing besides the
afflictions you are exposed unto, you feel the daily encumbrance of sin,
which dwells in your mortal bodies: It is true that it is not so apparent,
as that which is hidden from the world, and of your selves not so fully and
feelingly understood. Howbeit that ought not to dismay you: first, for that it
is laid up with God, who is a true keeper of it. And secondly for that as your
life is hidden, so is Christ's life and glory, who is the head.

Verse. Isay 60 17.19. and 65.19. Mat. 17.
4. When Christ which is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear
with him in glory.

And lastly, for that when Christ, of whom you have life, shall be made
manifest in glory, then shall you also with him appear glorious.

verse 5 Mortify therefore your members which are on the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, the inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness,
which is idolatry,

Wherefore being assured of another life, mortify your members that are
earthly and carnal. If you ask what? I cannot reckon up all, but I will touch
some, those specially that you are infected with, whereby you may easily
conceive of the rest, such as are fornication, unclean behauior, wantonness,
evil concupiscence, and coueteousnesse, which besides the excessive desire of
goods, is a kind of idolatry, for that men do put their trust in riches, that
are covetous.

Verse 6. For the which things sake the wrath of God comes on the children of
disobedience.

For every one of the which, the wrath of God comes on those that remain in
them.

Verse. 7. Wherein ye also walked once, when ye lived in them.

And the rather mortify these sins as in times past you have practiced them,
when being given unto them, your natural corruption as a kind of life, gave
power and moving for the practice of them.

Verse 8. But now put ye away even all these things, wrath, anger,
maliciousness, cursed speaking, filthy speaking out of your mouth.

Now therefore that you are called to the hope of a beter life, lay aside far
from you, as things you cannot abide the sight of, not only the grosser sins
before mentioned, but also all manner of sin, without endeavor whereof, there
is no true mortification. For example, anger, heat, from whence comes
malice, which breaks out at the mouth, by railing and reuiling.

Verse 9. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with
his works.

Specially when you cannot truly charge them, take heed you lie not one
against another: but putting off as an old and rotten garment, the old man
which you bring from your mothers womb, with the actions thereof, as it were so
many tatters.

Verse 10. And have put on the new, which is renewed in knowledge, after the
image of him that created him.

Now lest being found naked you be ashamed, put on, as a new and comely
garment, the new man: which if you ask what it is, it is the same part which
is renewed in you, to the likeness of him that made you: which likeness
consists in the knowledge of God.

Verse 11. Where is neither Grecian nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scythian, bond, free: but Christ is all, and in all things.

Whereby shall come to pass, that howsoever the false teachers place it in
being a Jew, rather than being a Gentile: circumcised rather than
uncircumcised: and the opinion of the common sort is, that the Barbarian and
Scythian is in a far worse case than the Roman, and the servant but a beast
in respect of the free man: yet with God there is no difference, seeing Christ,
whom by a new birth they have put on, is in all, and is all that God
respects, and accepts of.

Verse 12. Now therefore as the elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender
mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering.

To come to a more particular description of the new man, deck your selves (as
it becomes the elect of God, and such as are holy through his love the cause
both of your election and holiness) with tender compassion, easiness to be
employed, humility, mildness, long suffering.

Verse 13. For bearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have
a quarrel to another: even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye.

Which virtues must be declared effectually, not only in forbearing one
another, but also in frankly forgiving one another, if any have a quarrel one
against another, even as Christ has frankly forgiven you, even so do ye.

Verse 14. And above all these things, put on love, which is the bond of
perfectness.

And though those be singular virtues, yet above them all, as the root and
mother of them, deck your selves with love, which is as it were a bond to bind
in a bundle those, and all other virtues tending to perfection; and without
which there is no foundnesse in any of them, what glittering show soever they
carry.

Verse 15. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which ye are
called in one body, and be ye amiable.

And though the spirit of the old man within you, has a desire to contend, yet
let the peace of God bear the sway and overcome: unto the which peace you are
evidently called, in that you are members of one mystical body. For the better
entertainment of which peace, be grateful one to another, as well in
conferring, as in requiting benefits.

Verse. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing your own selves in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual
songs, singing with a grace in your hearts to the Lord.

To the end you may refrain all the vices aforesaid, and practice all the
virtues before spoken of, together with all other vices to be avoided, and
virtues to be embraced, it is necessary that you be exhorted, that the word of
God be as familiar unto you, as if now in one house it dwelt with you; that you
have it also plentifully, and as it were treasured up against the day of need.
Last of all, that you have it in all wisdom, making choice both of the things
that are most important in it, and especially that which does most concern
your selves, and your own particular use, anoyding all curious questions,
tending rather to strife than to edification of God which is by faith. And as
you must have it for your own use, so also for the use of others, as well in
teaching those that are ignorant, as in admonishing those that walk not
according to their knowledge they have received.

And in your meetings to make merry, let your mirth be showed forth in Psalms,
singing as well with instrument as with voice: also with hymns of
thanksgiving for benefits received: and for further variety against
irksomeness which our nature easily falls into, with songs of praising God
for his noble acts: all spiritual unto the Lord, not only with the voice, but
especially with the heart, with such both tune and gesture as may give grace to
the hearer.

verse 17. And whatsoever ye shall do in word or deed, do all in the name of
the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God even the Father by him.

To conclude (because it is infinite to speak of all things particularly)
whatsoever you do in word or in deed, let it be such, as calling on the name of
God in Jesus Christ, for good direction in them, you may return with
thankfulness to GOD the Father through Jesus Christ, the only mediator
between GOD and us.

verse 18. Wives submit your selves unto your husbands, as it is comely in the
Lord.

Having instructed you in the duties which are general to all, I come to
inform you in those that are special, according to the several callings of
every one of you, as those which will easily come from you, if you have well
profited in the former. Now according to the order God himself keeps in the
5. commandment, I will begin with the duties of inferiors.

You wives therefore, notwithstanding you have other duties, I exhort you as to
that which is hardest for you, wherein you are customably shortest, and being
performed, others will easily follow; that you be subject and obedient, as to
others that may be above you, (as parents and Magistrates) so specially unto
your own husbands, as that which is the most comely thing of all, because you I
know strine to comeliness. Which obedience and subjection, is not yet so
absolute, and so general, but it has this exception, so far as you are
commanded things not unlawful by the word of God.

Verse. 19. Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter unto them.

You husbands, although you owe sundry duties unto your wives, yet specially I
exhort you to love the^ dearly, as that which you are most customably shortest
in: and which being thoroughly settled in you, will easily pull al other duties
after it. And therefore be not bitter toward the^, which cannot stand with love.

Verse. 20. Children, obey your parents in all things: for that is well
pleasing unto the Lord.

You children, from a heart subdued and truly humble obey your parents, not by
halues and so far as they command things to your liking, but in all things,
not contrary to the word of God, although it be to the crossing of your
desires: for which cause let it be always before your eyes as a goade to
stir you up to this obedience, that in so doing you shall not only please
your parents, but do a thing acceptable to the Lord himself.

Verse. 21. Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be
discouraged.

You parents abuse not your authority or the pliable minds of your children,
either by commanding things unlawful, or by hard usage of them to provoke them
to any undutifulness toward you, or to have no courage or comfort to do the
things required of them.

Verse. 22. Servants, be obedient unto them that are your masters according to
the flesh, in all things, not with eye service as men pleasers, but in
singleness of heart, fearing God.

You servants, from a mind subdued obey your Masters, whose commandment over
you is but for a time whiles you are in this frail estate, and that in all
things which may stand with the keeping of a good conscience. Now your service
must not be alone when your masters stand by and look one, as seeking only
to please your masters: but in singleness of heart as fearing God, whose eye
is always upon you, when your Masters eye is off.

Verse 23. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto
men.

Your service ought also to be voluntary and cheerful, as that which is due
to the Lord, who loves a cheerful giver, and not as unto man that cannot
discern, whether it be done frankly.

Verse. 24. Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ.

Knowing that you shall receive in reward from the Lord, life, as an
inheritance which he will freely as upon his children, bestow upon you: for it
ought to uphold you in your dutiful service, that you serve not so much your
masters, which are but men, and therefore sometimes unthankful and unable to
recompense; but the Lord, who is both able, and will recompense your well doing.

Verse. 25. But he that does wrong, he shall receive for the wrong that he has
done, and there is no respect of persons.

Remembering on the other side that whatsoever he be that does wrong, whether
master or servant, thereof he shall receive the punishment from the Lord: who
accepts neither the person of the servant to pity him, because of his poor
and base estate, nor of the master to spare him, because of his dignity, and
high degree.

The end of the third Chapter.
CHAP. 4.
Verse. 1. Ye Masters, do unto your servants, that which is just and equal
knowing that ye also have a master in heaven.

YOu Masters, look that you yield unto your servants both wages, and meat
and drink, as that which is ^ight: and with moderate rest and recreation, some
further recompense, according to the good service they have done; as that which
is equal: considering that as your servants are to render an account unto you,
so you must give an account unto your Master which is in heaven.

verse 2. Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving.

And now to return again to the general duties, and yet such as for the most
part belong rather unto you, than unto other persons and Churches not so stated
or affected as yours, I exhort you to take pains, and to continue in petitions
and requests unto God, with heed taken that it be not done carelessly and
drowsily; the which both with continuance, painfulnesse, and watching, must be
done and performed in thanksgiving for graces already received.

verse 3. Praying also for us, that God may open unto us the door of
utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ: wherefore I am also in bonds.

Praying in both sorts, as for all men, and the faithful above others, so
especially for me and Timothy, that God would open our mouths wide, as a gate
(otherwise shut) is set open, that we may speak the secrets of Christ,
naturally hidden from all men, and by dispensation of GOD, always to the
coming of Christ, obscurely known to the faithful, yea to the Angels
themselves: for which I am in hold.

verse. 4. That I may utter it, as it becomes me to speak.

In which respect you are yet further to strengthen and stretch out your
prayers for me, that all fear set apart, I may make it manifest as it is meet,
both in regard of the excellency thereof, and the special trust of the
Apostleship, which is committed unto me.

verse. 5. Walk wisely toward them that are without, and redeem the time.

And seeing you dwell amongst those that are strangers from God, walk wisely,
that you be neither infected with their evils, nor they have occasion to speak
evil of the truth; and that by the light of your godly conversation, they may
be allured to give ear to the truth: therein following the example of diligent
Merchants, that to redeem their losses that are past, watch to take all
opportunity of gaining.

verse. 6. Let your speech be gracious always, and powdered with salt, that ye
may know how to answer every man.

More particularly look to your speeches, in the wise ordering whereof
Christian wisdom is singularly discerned, that it be always (as sauory
meat) well seasoned, whiles you shall be able to answer every man according
as their particular estates require.

verse. 7. Tychicus our beloved brother, and faithful Minister, and fellow
servant in the Lord, shall declare unto you my whole state.

In the love and care I bear unto you, I have sent Pychicus unto you, who
shall inform you of all my estate, whereof I know you will be glad to hear:
whom that you may receive as it becomes, I commend unto you for a brother,
worthy to be beloved: also for a faithful Minister, and my fellow in the Lords
service.

verse. 8. Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know
your state, and might comfort your hearts.

Whom I have sent, as to let you understand of mine affairs, so to know what
case you are in, thereof to make report unto me, and especially that he may
comfort you at the heart, against the storm of persecution raised against you.

verse. 9. With Onesimus a faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you.
They shall show you of all things here.

And with him, that the embassage may have more authority, and that in the
mouth of 2. witnesses the things concerning you or me may be better assured, I
sent Onesimus a brother both faithful and worthy to be beloved, howsoever he
has slipped in time past; who is also one of the members of the same Church;
these two shall give you to understand of all things that may concern you,
that are done in those parts,

Verse. 10. Aristarchus my prison fellow saluteth you, and Marcus Barnabas
sisters son, (touching whom ye received commandments. If he come unto you,
receive him.)

Aristarchus in love saluteth you.

verse. 11. And Jesus which is called Iustus, which are of the circumcision.
These only are my work fellows unto the kingdom of God, which have been
unto my consolation.

So does Mark and Jesus: whom that you may be provoked to love again, I would
have you to understand, that touching Aristarchus, he is my fellow prisoner for
the Gospel: touching Mark, he is sisters son to Barnabas that notable
servant of God, of whom you have had commandment, that if he come unto you,
you should receive him accordingly.

And touching Jesus, his conversation has been such as thereby he has gotten
the surname of Just. ANd of them all three together, there are great causes why
you should respect them, for that they are of the race of the Jews, with whom
God has made special covenant: especially seeing that of so great a number of
Jews that are here, only these three, help to advance the kingdom of heaven
by giving assistance unto me.

verse. 12. Epaphras the servant of Christ, which is one of you, saluteth you,
and always strives for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect, and full in
all the will of God.

Epaphras saluteth you, between whom and you there is a special bond, by
reason whereof even now absent from you, yet he is one of you: and being as
you know a worthy servant of Christ in the Ministry of the Gospel, whereby his
prayers are more effectual, he prays continually with great strife and
earnestness for you; that having entered into the holy profession of the
Gospel, you may stand and abide in it, with daily increase both in the
knowledge and obedience of the whole will of God, until such time as by death
you shall be complete and perfect men in Christ.

verse. 13. For I bear him record, that he has a great zeal for you, and for
them of Laodicea, and them of Hierapolis.

For howsoever, I am not privy to his private prayers, yet I dare be bold so to
write, because I my self am witness, how (notwithstanding his absence) he
burns in much love toward you, and toward the brethren in Laodicea and
Hierapolis; the rather for your sakes, which may either be furthered by their
good, or hindered by their ill estate.

verse 14. Luke the beloved Physician greeteth you, and Demas.

Luke the Physician, one worthy to be beloved, saluteth you, and so does Demas.

verse 15. Salute the brethren which are of Laodicea, and Nimphas, and the
Church which is in his house.

Salute the brethren in Laodicea from me, especially Nimphas and his family;
which for their piety and good order in it, I may not unfitly term a little
Church.

verse 16. And when this Epistle is read of you, cause that it be read in the
Church of the Laodiceans also, and that ye likewise read the Epistle written
from Laodicea.

And when you have read this Epistle in the Church, to testify your communion
as in all other good things, so especially in this sacred treasure of the word
of Christ, procure it to be read in the Church of Laodicea; as of the other
side, that you also read the Epistle which was written from Laodicea.

verse 17. And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry that thou have
received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

Tell also Archippus your Pastor and ordinary Minister, from me, that he look
more diligently to his charge of ministry, which he has received of the Lord:
that he do it not by halues, but that he perform it in every respect, both of
cheereful teaching, and of good example of life unto the flock.

verse 18. The salutation by the hand of me Paul. Remember my bands. Grace be
with you.

Finally, I have sent you also my salutations, not by the hand of my Scribe,
Secretary, (as the other salutations,) but by mine own hand: whereunto (for a
close of my letters) I add my request unto you, that you would in your
prayers, remember my bonds, for the obtaining of whatsoever my captive estate
does require.

And further, my humble prayer is for the grace of God, to be with you: and so
I am assured that it will be.

FINIS.

