A PLAIN AND FAMILIAR EXPOSITION OF THE Fifteenth, Sixteenth, and Seventeenth
Chapters of the Proverbs of Solomon.

framed printer's device of Thomas Haveland, the crest of Christopher Hatton,
featuring a hind on a wreath (not in McKerrow) CERVA CHARISSIMA ET GRATISSIMVS
HINNVLVS


LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HAVELAND for THOMAS MAN, 1609.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful our approved good friend ERASMUS DRIDEN Esquire:
Grace and peace be multiplied.
SIR, having had long experience of your Christian and constant love and
favor, as also of your willingness to read our books, and your godly wisdom
to judge and discern of all that you read: we are bold to offer unto your
worship this testimony of our unfeigned thankfulness, and to crave your
favorable patronage for the same.

Our former writings coming only as strangers, yet always found all good and
kind entertainment at your hands. Therefore we cannot doubt but that this
present treatise shall be welcome and well accepted; not only for that it is
like to the former for matter and manner, but also because it shelters it self
under your name, and in special manner craves our countenance. And thus
beseeching almighty God to bless and prosper the faithful endeavors of all
that truly seek the peace and welfare of his Church, and daily more and more
to multiply his gracious mercies upon your self, your godly wife, and
hopeful family, we humbly take our leave.

Yours in the Lord to be commanded, John Dod, Robert Cleauer.

TO THE READER.
THis brief and summary collection of all the doctrines of the 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, and 17. Chapters of the Proverbs, which was intended for
private use, I have thought good (with the Authors consent) to prefix unto this
book, as that which (I hope) may be useful for many: for by this direction,
those that cannot read all, may make choice of that which most concerns them;
and those that have read all, may more easily find that again which most
contents them. The reason why some verses with the doctrines are omitted, is
because they have been handled before.

A brief Recapitulation of all the Doctrines of Mr. Cleauers books on the
PROVERBS.
CHAPTER IX.
Verse 1. Doctrine 1. AL true wisdom is contained in the holy word of God.
Doct. 2. It belongs only to Christ both to build and beautify the Churcb.
Doct. 3. The best way for good safety is to become a faithful Christian.
Verse II. Doct. 1. The best cheer is that which is made for the soul in Gods
house. Doct. 2. It is not the wit of man, but the wisdom of God that does make
the word comfortable. Doct. 3. Gods favor and grace is always ready to be
found when it is faithfully sought.
Verse III. Doct. 1. They that will come to salvation, must be brought to it by
the ministry. Doct. 2. Christ Jesus has appointed the preaching of the
Gospel to be most public, that all might be instructed by it.
Verse IV. Doct. Ignorance should not hinder us from hearing the word, but
incite us to it.
Verse V. Doct. It concerns us duly to embrace the mercies of God when he
does offer them unto us.
Verse VI. Doct. When we begin to clean to God and good men, we must
foortwith break off all league with wicked men.
Verse VII. Doct. The most faithful Ministers are commonly exposed to greatest
reproaches.
Verse VIII. Doct. Christian counsel is not to be offered to an obstinate
sinner.
Verse IX. Doct. 1. The best men must be admonished. Doct. 2. It is a note of a
man that is truly religious, to increase in grace and understanding.
Verse X. Doct. 1. No man can be truly wise before he be unfeignedly religious.
Doct. 2. Sound knowledge is the mother of true devotion.
Verse XI. XII. Doct. 1. Grace prolongeth men's days on earth. Doct. 2.
Christians are most provident to procure their own good prosperity. Doct. 3.
The wicked are most their own foes.
Verse XIII. Doct. 1. It is not a sure note of a good cause to be set forth
with many words. Doct. 2. So far as any man gives himself to be an agent for
sin, so far he bewraieth his own ignorance.
Verse XIV. Doct. 1. Great men without grace are as much subject to sin and
folly as poor men. Doct. 2. Great meetings are seldom without the company
of sinfulness and Satan.
Verse XV. Doct. So soon as any one begins to seek God, the devil and
devilish men will be ready to turn him out of the way.
Verse XVI. Doct. Ignorant persons that regard not knowledge, are the fittest
prey for deceivers.
Verse XVII. Doct. Those things that be most unlawful, do best satisfy the
humors of unregenerate men.
Verse XVIII. Doct. As every sin is more delightful, so it is more dangerous
and deceitful.

CHAPTER X.
Verse I. Doct. THE comfort or sorrow of parents stands much in the behavior
of their children.
Verse II. Doct. 1. No worldling is any thing the better for his wealth. Doct.
2. The goodness of a Christian will work him that happiness which no outward
goods could ever procure.
Verse III. Doct. Poor Christians are in better estate than wealthy wicked
men, even in outward respects.
Verse IV. Doct. 1. False dealing rather hurts than helps them that use it.
Doct. 2. They greatly help their own estate, that are painful and faithful
in their callings.
Verse V. Doct. Use is to be made of good opportunity.
Verse VI. Doct. 1. The greatest reward that God gives his servants in this
life, is to bless them. Doct. 2. When God enters into judgment with wicked
men, he will cause the plague so to manifest their sins, that they shall not
be able to deny them.
Verse VII. Doct. The credit of good men will grow, and the reputation of
sinners will be turned into shame.
Verse VIII. Doct. We ought to be tractable to the will of God, without
resisting or gainsaying.
Verse IX. Doct. All sound safety and boldness proceeds from sincerity of
heart, and integrity of life.
Verse X. Doct. It is not safe to use any member or gesture, though never so
closely, to commit sin.
Verse XI. Doct. A good man is never barren of good speeches.
Verse XII. Doct. 1. Not actions and speeches, but ill affections of the heart
are the cause of debate. Doct. 2. Christian love causes men to be merciful
to the souls and names of their brethren.
Verse XIV. Doct. 1. It is not enough to b^ing the ear to hear holy
instructions, but the heart must also receive and keep them. Doct. 2. The
tongues of ungodly men are always pernicious and hurtful.
Verse XV. Doct. The extremity of every estate is dangerous and no estate safe
without grace.
Verse XVI. Doct. Riches are either profitable or hurtful, according to the
owners usage of them.
Verse XVIII. Doct. 1. The Lord has dissemblers in detestation. Doct. 2. It is
a note of a ^infull person, to have a bitter, railing, and slanderous tongue.
Verse XIX. Doct. The multiplying of words does make a bad cause rather worse
than better.
Verse XX. Doct. 1. The best wealth of a Christian is laid up in his heart and
disbursed with his lips. Doct. 2. Wicked men have nothing of worth within them.
Verse XXI. Doct. It is the note of a faithful man, to use his knowledge and
other good gifts for the benefit of his brethren.
Verse XXII. Doct. A comfortable estate in this world is the blessing of God.
Verse XXIII. Doct. Sin is the delight of sinners, and grace of good men.
Verse XXIV. Doct. 1. Whatsoever is contrary to the affection of the wicked,
they may expect to be plagued withal. Doct. 2. The best way to have our wills
satisfied, is to be godly.
Verse XXV. Doct. The estate of the godly is more certain than wicked men's.
Verse XXVI. Doct. He that imploieth in any service unworthy and careless
persons, shall bring sorrow and molestation on himself.
Verse XXVIII. Doct. 1. They which depend on God in their afflictions, shall in
due season be delivered. Doct. 2. Ungodly men deceive themselves with a
deceitful expectation of happiness.
Verse XXIX. Doct. They that are most venturous to sin, shall be most
frighted with punishments.
Verse XXXII. Doct. It is a point of godly wisdom, for a man to speak as his
words may be accepted for his best advantage.

CHAPTER XI.
Verse I. Doct. I. AL instruments and means of falsehood are hateful unto God.
Doct. 2. God respects that justice which is performed unto men.
Verse II. Doct. 1. Pride is a forerunner of shame. Doct. 2. Every humble man
is a wise man.
Verse III. Doct. 1. Every godly man has a faithful counselor in his own
breast. Doct. 2. Sinners are the greatest workers of their own woe.
Verse V. Doct. Godly men have ability given them to walk in the Law of God.
Verse VII. Doct. The confidence of ungodly men is disappointed at their
greatest need.
Verse VIII. Doct. 1. The afflictions of good men are not perpetual. Doct. 2.
When Gods mercy begins to raise the godly out of trouble, his justice is
ready to cast the wicked into misery.
Verse IX. Doct. 1. Ungodly men are never more mischievous, than when they put
on the vizard of godliness. Doct. 2. The knowledge of the godly is a defensive
armor against the deadly tongues of the wicked.
Verse X. Doct. 1. Good men have not only Gods hand to give them good things,
but godly men's hearts to be ioifull for them. Doct. 2. Godly men are the chief
inhabitants, wheresoever they dwell.
Verse XI. Doct. A godly man (wheresoever he be) will be doing of good.
Verse XII. Doct. The most contemptible persons are the greatest contemners of
others.
Verse XIII. Doct. A standerous tongue will be as ready to defame them whom it
speaks unto, as whom it speaks against.
Verse XIV. Doct. Nothing is more necessary for any state, than good counsel.
Verse XV. Doct. A rash surette does seldom live in peace.
Verse XVI. Doct. They which have grace, shall never want honor.
Verse XVII. Doct. 1. Every man's dealing with others shall redound to himself.
Doct. 2. They are the best husbands, which best provide for the good of their
own persons.
Verse XVIII. Doct. 1. Ungodly men shall find their sins more hurtful than
they looked for. Doct. 2. God is a sure paimaster to every one that labors
faithfully in his service.
Verse XIX. Doct. 1. The Lord has not only appointed a certain reward, but a
precious for his servants. Doct. 2. The more violent wicked men are in their
sins, the nearer they draw to destruction.
Verse XX. Doct. 1. Whosoever is given to frowardness, is wholly void of
uprightness. Doct. 2. The love of God is not according to men's wealth, but
according to their hearts and behavior.
Verse XXI. Doct. 1. The plotting and combining of the wicked is of no force
for their preservation. Doct. 2. The best way for any man to do his children
good, is to ^e godly himself.
Verse XXII. Doct. 1. God makes no more account of sinful people than of
brute beasts. Doct. 2. Neither beauty, nor other outward gifts, do any good to
the hauers that are destitute of wisdom.
Verse XXIII. Doct. Godly men are most desirous to please God, and God does as
graciously accept of their desires.
Verse XXIV. Doct. True liberality is a furtherance to men's estate.
Verse XXV. Doct. He that expects comfort for sound mercy, must apply his
soul to well-doing.
Verse XXVI. Doct. 1. They are after a sort public enemies to the Country,
that procure or seek for a dearth. Doct. 2. It is a grievous plague to be
pursued justly with the outcries of the people.
Verse XXVII. Doct. He that uprightly seeks to benefit many, takes the best
way to win the hearts of the people.
Verse XXVIII. Doct. Though the stays of many wicked men seem to be the
stronger, yet the states of all godly men prove to be the surer.
Verse XXIX. Doct. He that would not undo himself, let him not disorder his
family and domestical affairs.
Verse XXX. Doct. 1. Of all people, none do so much good as the godly. Doct.
2. It is the note of a wise man, to show mercy unto men's souls.
Verse XXXI. Doct. 1. The best must look for stripes, if they will take
liberty to sin. Doct. 2. Every wicked man's state is worse than any godly man's
can be.

CHAPTER XII.
Verse 1. Doctrine 1. GOOd desires may be tried by our affection to the means.
Doct. 2. They that refuse Christian knowledge, are no better than if they had
no manner of knowledge.
Verse II. Doct. A man can no way be made so happy, as by being in Gods favor.
Verse III. Doct. They shall miss of their expectation, that hope to succor
themselves by sinning.
Verse IV. Doct. No outward thing in the world is better than a goodwife.
Verse V. Doct. The godly differ from the wicked as much in heart as in life.
Verse VI. Doct. 1. Violent men mix their cruelty with craftiness. Doct. 2.
It is a note of a good man, to have his good word ready for them that be
oppressed.
Verse VII. Doct. They that will not keep themselves from wickedness, cannot
keep themselves from desolation.
Verse VIII. Doct. The upright and wise shall not be destitute of honor.
Verse IX. Doct. They deal with best discretion, that yield themselves to a
low estate when God calls them thereunto.
Verse X. Doct. 1. Mercy to be showed to unreasonable creatures. Doct. 2.
Sinful men's favors commonly tend to hurt.
Verse XI. Doct. 1. Husbandry is a commendable vocation. Doct. 2. The idle
shall never want example nor company in it. Doct. 3. Every idle person is
foolish.
Verse XII. Doct. 1. It is the property of sinners, one to rely upon another.
Doct. 2. There is no danger to the faithful.
Verse XIV. Doct. A good tongue is a good helper in troubles.
Verse XV. Doct. The worse any is or does, the less he sees it.
Verse XVI. Doct. Angry persons bewray folly.
Verse XVII. Doct. 1. They that use not their tongues to speak truth in
private, can hardly be brought to deal truly in public. Doct. 2. True words
are no note of a faithful man, unless they be uttered in due manner, and
plain meaning.
Verse XVIII. Doct. No weapon is more hurtful than a wicked tongue.
Verse XIX. Doct. Only true men are constant in their words.
Verse XX. Doct. 1. Crafty persons shall feel the smart of their subtle
practices. Doct. 2. Wholesome counsel is comfortable to them that give it as
well as profitable to them that take it.
Verse XXI. Doct. Though God afflict the godly as well as the godless, yet it
is done in a far different manner.
Verse XXII. Doct. 1. Every liar is a loathsome person. Doct. 2. That truth
which is acceptable unto God, consists both in speaking and doing.
Verse XXIII. Doct. It is not good for any man to speak as much and as often
as he can, but as much and as often as he ought.
Verse XXIV. Doct. They that are laborious and faithful in mean places, do
take the way to rise to an higher degree.
Verse XXV. Doct. Immoderate grief does turn to great hurt and annoiance.
Verse XXVI. Doct. Grace makes good men to be the most worthy personages.
Verse XXVII. Doct. 1. Evil means of getting may bring goods to men's hands,
but not to their use. Doct. 2. Wealth well gotten by good men is great in
value, whatsoever it be in quantity.

CHAPTER XIII.
Verse I. Doct. 1. THE wholesome precepts of parents are not to be light set
by. Doct. 2. They that most deserve them, can worst endure reproves.
Verse III. Doct. The safety and happiness of the whole life depends upon
the well ordering of the tongue.
Verse IV. Doct. None more covetous than the slothful.
Verse V. Doct. 1. True righteousness consists not only in forbearing, but in
hating of evil. Doct. 2. He that nourishes in his heart, and expresses in
his life rotten affections, is far from true honor.
Verse VII. Doct. It is a sin for men to make their estate better or worse
than they know it to be.
Verse VIII. Doct. 1. Life is more precious than wealth. Doct. 2. As the life
of rich men is more fensed than poor men's. so is the state of poor men less
impugned than rich men's.
Verse IX. Doct. Only good men enjoy a comfortable estate.
Verse X. Doct. 1. So far as any man is contentious, he is proud. Doct. 2.
The more discreet any is, the more peaceable.
Verse XII. Doct. As hope is never conceived without comfort, so is it seldom
protracted without sorrow.
Verse XIII. Doct. 1. No sin is more dangerous than the contempt of Gods
word. Doct. 2. They that are religiously affected to the word and worship of
God are sure to speed well for it.
Verse XIV. Doct. Sin is Satan's snare to catch men unto perdition.
Verse XV. Doct. 1. So far as any is religious, he is sure to prosper. Doct.
2. Ungodly men's lives are full of vexation.
Verse XVI. Doct. He only deals well both for his comfort and credit, that
groundeth his affairs on certainty, and not on likelihoods.
Verse XVII. Doct. He that prospers himself, let him deal faithfully when
others put him in trust.
Verse XVIII. Doct. They only are provident for their estate and credit, which
are careful to get grace for their souls.
Verse XIX. Doct. Nothing is more offensive unto wicked men than to be brought
to goodness.
Verse XX. Doct. Much good or hurt comes by company.
Verse XXI. Doct. Sinful men live in perpetual peril of destruction.
Verse XXII. Doct. 1. They best provide for their posterity, that enrich
themselves with grace. Doct. 2. That which the wicked get, the godly often
enjoy.
Verse XXIII. Doct. A little with good husbandry is better than a great portion
with unthriftiness.
Verse XXIV. Doct. They are best parents, which show love to their children
without fondness.

CHAPTER XIV.
Verse II. Doct. THE faithfulness or falsehood of the heart may be discerned
by the course of the conversation.
Verse III. Doct. Proud men have arrogant and hurtful tongues.
Verse VI. Doct. 1. They are not capable of any grace, that will not be
brought to renounce their sins. Doct. 2. Understanding is neither impossible
nor difficult to be come by when men have discretion.
Verse VIII. Doct. So far is every one wise, as he is of godly and Christian
conversation.
Verse IX. Doct. Likeness of manners is a forcible means to link men's
affections together.
Verse X. Doct. 1. No grief is so great as that which lies upon an afflicted
conscience. Doct. 2. Gods people feel their greatest comfort after their
bitterest grief.
Verse XIII. Doct. The wicked are never heartily merry.
Verse XV. Doct. They which are least careful to learn the truth, are most
credulous to hearken to lies.
Verse XVI. Doct. They which are in greatest safety, are farthest from carnal
security.
Verse XVIII. Doct. A wicked man has no certain state in any thing but in
shame and misery.
Verse XIX. Doct. Godliness is no cause of contempt.
Verse XX. Doct. The friendship of fleshly men is grounded on men's state, and
not on their graces.
Verse XXI. Doct. It is not safe to despise poor Christians in their
adversity.
Verse XXIII. Doct. No man's thriuing consists so much in the gainfulnesse of
his trade, as in his faithfulness and diligence therein.
Verse XXIV. Doct. When the heart of a man is beautified with grace, his
outward preheminences are ornaments unto him.
Verse XXVIII. Doct. That which is good for the state of the Commonwealth, is
best for the Prince.
Verse XXX. Doct. No man lives so cheerful a life, as he that is most
mercifully affected.
Verse XXXI. Doct. All the wrong that is done to the poor; the Lord takes it
as done to himself.
Verse XXXII. Doct. 1. When godless men stand in most need of help and
comfort, they shall be most of all pressed with plagues and terrors. Doct. 2.
No danger or death can take away the comfort of godly men.
Verse XXXIII. Doct. Grace must have intertainment in the heart.
Verse XXXV. Doct. The honest and virtuous behavior of superiors is the best
way to get the favor of superiors.

CHAPTER XV.
Verse I. Doct. Mild behavior is the best means to procure peace.
Verse III. Doct. All men are always in Gods presence.
Verse VIII. Doct. He that would have his service accepted of God, must first
give himself to God.
Verse X. Doct. The worst men are most unwilling to be taught how to amend
their lives.
Verse XII. Doct. He that would not be reputed a wicked person, must not shun
good company, where he may hear of his faults.
Verse XIII. Doct. It is best both for soul and body to keep the heart
cheerful.
Verse XIV. Doct. Grace and ungodliness make the greatest difference between
the persons in whom they severally reign.
Verse XV. Doct. Every man's crosses are burdenous or easy, according to the
state of his heart.
Verse XVII. Doct. There is best cheer where there is best company.
Verse XVIII. Doct. Froward men are always troublesome.
Verse XIX. Doct. Every good service is hard or easy, according as men wills
are inclined unto it.
Verse XXII. Doct. He deals best for himself, that orders his affairs
with good advice.
Verse XXIII. Doct. Whosoever applies his tongue to do good therewith, shall
have the greatest benefit by it himself.
Verse XXIV. Doct. He that would have glory in heaven, must live after an
heavenly manner on earth.
Verse XXVI. Doct. The Lord is as well displeased with sinful thoughts as
actions.
Verse XXVII. Doct. That way which the world takes to be best to provide for
themselves and theirs, turns to be most hurtful unto them.
Verse XXVIII. Doct. He that would speak well and profitably, must not be too
sudden in his speeches.
Verse XXX. Doct. The Lord has ordained the senses of men for the benefit both
of soul and body.
Verse XXXII. Doct. The obedient only have the disposing of their own hearts.
Verse XXXIII. Doct. No man can have any godliness in him, that will not
learn to be godly.

CHAPTER XVI.
Verse I. Doct. THE Lord has the disposing of every man's tongue.
Verse III. Doct. They are sure to speed well, which do deal for God, and
depend upon him in their affairs.
Verse IV. Doct. The praise of God is set forth by the worst things.
Verse VI. Doct. 1. Salvation is given by God, not bought by men. Doct. 2. The
religious in heart will be innocent in life.
Verse VII. Doct. The best way to have man's favor to do us good, is to get
Gods favor.
Verse IX. Doct. Men do purpose many things, but God disposes all things.
Verse X. Doct. They that be in great authority, had need be well furnished
with wisdom and justice.
Verse XII. Doct. 1. The greater men be, the more grievous their faults are.
Doct. 2. The goodness and justice of men in authority does best uphold their
state.
Verse XIV. Doct. It is very dangerous to incur the displeasure of great
Potentates.
Verse XV. Doct. Great account is to be made of the favor and good countenance
of such as are in authority.
Verse XVII. Doct. 1. Though godly men do sometimes slip into sins, yet they
walk not in them. Doct. 2. So much assurance has every one of his salvation
and safety, as he is careful to keep himself innocent and righteous.
Verse XIX. Doct. Every proud man, though never so mighty, is in worse case
than the humble person, though never so poor.
Verse XX. Doct. A believing heart makes an happy man.
Verse XXI. Doct. Sound piety will make a man prosperous.
Verse XXII. Doct. Nothing is more needful for the body than grace is for the
soul.
Verse XXIV. Doct. Nothing is more pleasant and profitable than gracious
speeches to godly persons.
Verse XXVI. Doct. No turbulent man can keep himself from trouble.
Verse XXVII. Doct. A malicious man is always practicing of mischief, whether
he pretend friendship, or profess enmity.
Verse XXVIII. Doct. No bands of friendishp will hold where make-bates may have
hearing.
Verse XXIX. Doct. It is the property of ungodly men to seek to make others
as bad as themselves.
Verse XXX. Doct. A wicked man is most studious and cunning about mischief.
Verse XXXI. Doct. It is a great honor for a man to be both ancient and godly.
Verse XXXII. Doct. It is a point of greater valor to subdue corruptions in
ones self, than to prevail against other men.
Verse XXXIII. Doct. Those things which seem to be most contingent, are
directed by the providence of God.

CHAPTER XVII.
Verse II. Doct. GRace brings men to promotion, and so does sin to
debasement.
Verse III. Doct. No skill, nor power, nor means of man are sufficient to
deal with the heart.
Verse IV. Doct. It is the property of them that do and speak evil, to be
much delighted in hearing of evil.
Verse V. Doct. It is neither lawful nor safe to be glad at other men's sins,
especially if they be Gods servants.
Verse VI. Doct. 1. It is a great promotion, to have a long and large
posterity. Doct. 2. Good parents and progenitors are great ornaments to
children.
Verse VII. Doct. 1. Good words are unfit for bad men to utter. Doct. 2. Evil
speeches are most indecent in bad men's mouths.
Verse VIII. Doct. Great gifts win friendship sooner than a good cause.
Verse X. Doct. Easy corrections, where grace is, prevail more than great
severity does with graceless persons.
Verse XI. Doct. No wicked man is better, nor shall be otherwise dealt withal
than a rebel.
Verse XII. Doct. No wild beast is so savage and hurtful as a violent and
wicked man.
Verse XIII. Doct. Unthankfulness is a great sin.
Verse XIV. Doct. So soon as men fall into strife, they make way for trobles.
Verse XV. Doct. 1. It is a dangerous sin, to give allowance to evil men.
Doct. 2. It is not safe for a man to lay blame upon blameless persons.
Verse XVI. Doct. No means can make a man wise, that wants a good will to
heavenly wisdom.
Verse XVII. Doct. The change of a man's estate causes no alteration in the
affection and behavior of faithful friends.
Verse XXIV. Doct. A gracious heart will show it self in a seemly countenance.
Verse XXVI. Doct. It is very dangerous to deal hardly with good men for their
godly behavior.
Verse XXVIII. Doct. It is a point of singular wisdom, to be silent till it be
fit to speak.

FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION OF THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER OF THE PROVERBS.
CHAPTER XV.
Verse 1. A soft answer turns away wrath: but a grievous word stirs up
anger.
A Soft answer] Gentle, mild, and peaceable speeches, [turneth away wrath]
pacify the indignation of him that is displeased. He speaks of that which
comes to pass most commonly, though not always: for sometimes men of a
froward and servile disposition are the more violent, by how much they are
mildlier dealt with: and sharp rebukes prevail most with such, to tame them
with fear, which would not be entreated with fair persuasions. [But grievous
words] Bitter, biting, and provoking speeches [stirre up wrath] not only
increase it in them in whom before it was kindled, but kindle it in them who
before were kindly affected.

A Prince is pacified by staying of anger, and a soft tongue Prouer. 25. 15.
breaks the bones. This was Gideons armor against the rage of the
Ephramites; and this was Abigails armor for her self, her husband, and
household, when David, incensed by Nabals grievous words, was coming with
purpose to slay them every mothers child.











Verse 2. The tongue of the wise sets forth good knowledge but the mouth of
fools powers out folly.
THE meaning is, that godly prudent men will utter good matter, and their
speeches shall carry a grace and force with them, as being rightly placed, and
wisely ordered. And sinful ungodly persons on the other side, either vomit out
that which is hurtful, false, or vain: or else pervert and abuse that which
in it self is true and wholesome. See chap. 10. verse 32.

Verse 3. The eyes of the Lord [are] in every place, beholding the evil and
the good.
THE eyes of the Lord] His certain sight and knowledge. He speaks of God
according to man, attributing eyes unto him, (which he, being a spirit, has
not) because we see with our eyes, and best know the things which we see. [in
every place] wheresoever any man is: [behold] not only discern and perceive,
but purposely observe and mark, and that continually, as the form of the word
in that Participle imports: [the evil and the good] all sorts of men,
together with their hearts and ways.

David says, not concerning himself only, but every man else in the same
manner: Thou know my sitting and my rising: Thou understand my thought
Psalm. 139. 2. 3.
afar off: Thou compassest my paths and my lying down, and art accustomed to
all my ways.

Psalm. 94. 9.

lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the very counsels of the
heart manifest? How shall he bring every Eccl. 12. 14.
work unto judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil?
How should he pass an equal sentence upon every cause and person, as
becomes the righteous Judge of the world, if the knowledge of any thing might
be withheld from him?



of the place imbolden us not to do ought that we would be ashamed to have
publicly looked upon in an open assembly: because he which is more to be
feared than all the world, beholds what we do: And who shall enioine him to
be silent at our sinful behavior, that he publish it not to all the world?





Verse 4. A wholesome tongue is [as] a tree of life: but the frowardness
thereof is [as] a breach made by the wind.
THE purpose and drift of this sentence is, to declare that the course and
custom of godly men's speeches is both comfortable and profitable to them which
know how to make use thereof: as was that goodly tree of life in Paradise,
continually bearing fruit, so pleasant and precious. On the contrary side, as
a blustering wind, which throws down trees and houses, does much harm: so
a violent and venomous tongue, causing troubles and calamities, is very
pernicious and hurtful. For the former part, see Chap. 11. 30. For the latter,
look Chap. 12. 18.

Verse 5. A fool despises his fathers instruction: but he that regards
correction, is prudent.
A Foole] A wicked and ungodly child: [despiseth] either refuses to hear, or
else to obey: [his fathers instruction] that admonition or counsel which his
parents or other governors give unto him: [but he that regardeth] submits
himself unto, and is bettered by [correction] either in words or deeds, given
by whomsoever, having authority over him [is prudent] shows wisdom, and
receives the fruit of the same. See Chap. 13. 1.

Verse 6. The house of the righteous has much treasure: but in the revenues of
the wicked is trouble.
THE house of the righteous] that is, Either every righteous man has his house
replenished with great store of wealth and substance, or else a less quantity
does as well suffice him, God seeing it to be better and safer for him. And
whereas sometimes it falls out, that godly men have neither so much as others
possess, nor as themselves desire, and seem to stand in need of, it grows
from the defect of their godliness, for which the Lord corrects them with
some penury and want, and whereby their hearts fail of that fullness of
contentment, which more piety and grace would work in them.

The latter clause of this verse preuenteth an objection that might be made
against the former in this manner: Why should righteousness be commended for
making the righteous rich, sithence sin seems to make the state of sinners
more prosperous than theirs? To this it is answered, that troubles are
intermingled with their wealth and possessions; as pains and toil in getting,
and cares and fears in keeping, and grief and anger in forgoing of all, or
any part of them. See Chap. 10. 22.

Verse 7. The lips of the wise do spread abroad knowledge; but the heart of
the foolish, that which is not right.
HE compares the lips of wise men to the hands of good seedesmen; who
skilfully, and in due manner and measure, at every step, do scatter the
corn into the tilth: showing it to be a note of sound understanding, to take
opportunity wheresoever it is offered, at home or abroad, to direct their
talk to the benefit and edification of the company. On the contrary side,
the wicked, out of the evil treasure of their hearts, bring forth evil
things, uttering vanity, and errors, and noisome speeches, like those that
make it their work to sow Cockle, and Tares, and Darnell, or other weeds,
which are only venomous and hurtful. In the former part of the sentence, the
heart is to be understood, which ministers matter to the lips: And in the
latter, the lips are also meant, which are the instruments of the heart: as if
he should have said, The lips of the wise, out of that grace which is in the
heart, do spread abroad knowledge, and that which is right: and the heart of
the foolish, by the perverseness of the lips, does spread abroad ignorance,
and that which is not right. For the former part, see Chap. 11. 30. For the
latter, Chap. 12. 18.

Verse 8. The Sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord: but the
prayer of the righteous is acceptable unto him.
THE Sacrifice of the wicked] Their best works, even those which seem most to
savor of devotion, and their very prayers themselves [are abomination to the
Lord] sins which he abhors, and for which he will punish them: [but the
prayer of the righteous] and all other their services which they faithfully
perform [are acceptable to him] wherewith, through Jesus Christ he is well
pleased, and for the same will graciously reward them.



Therefore the Lord had respect unto Habel his offering, because he had respect
to Habel. And why had he respect to Habel? Because he was his godly faithful
servant. And therefore the Lord regarded not Cains oblation, because he Genesis 4.
4. 5.
regarded not Cain. And why did he not regard Cain? Because he was a wicked
unbelieving Rebel.









and such as the Apostle says, The world is not worthy of. They Heb. 11. 38.
are the favorites of the most high, having at all times access unto him, and
hearing of him, and that with delight and good effect. It is no hard matter for
them to procure favor for their friends whom they pray for, and displeasure to
their enemies whom they are sometimes compelled to pray against. Howsoever it
is, Their prayers prevail much if Iam. 5. 16.
they be fervent.

Verse 9. The way of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: but he loves
him that follows righteousness.
THE way of the wicked] The whole course of his life and behavior: whatsoever
he says, and all that he does [is abomination to the Lord] is filthy and
loathsome in his eyes, provoking him in anger to plague him. And this is not to
be understood only of the gross faults of sinful men, when they directly
transgress the Law of God, but of every thing else which they take in hand, as
long as they walk after the flesh: as labor and travel; their meat and
drink; their sleep and necessary refreshings: though in exercises not
utterly unlawful; though in matters that be merely civil; though in actions
every way commendable for others to perform. And hereof the Apostle speaks,
when he says to Titus, That to the pure all Titus 15.
things are pure; but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is
pure, but even their minds and consciences are defiled. But he loves him]
esteems him, and uses him as his own child; causes his heart to feel the
comfort of his favor, and will in due time make it manifest to all the world
how dear he is unto him [who follows after righteousnesse] which is not
cold, or slow, or unstable in doing of good; but with might and maine strives
constantly to obtain the habit and increase of goodness. The word signifies
earnestly to pursue, being a Metaphor taken from the eagerness of wild
beasts, or ravenous fowls, or of any kind of creatures that live by the
spoil of others, which will run or fly, both fast and far, rather than be
disappointed of their prey. True it is, that all are not of equal graces, nor
any one at all times equally affected to that which is just and upright; but
none must leave off endeavor to seek it. Every man is to make it his gain,
and to abandon all the impediments which would stay him from it. The sense and
meaning of the words will be the better discerned, if that be supplied which
is understood in either part of the sentence, in this manner: The Lord
abhors the way and person of the wicked, because he follows iniquity: but
he loves the person and way of the godly, because he follows
righteousness.



Verse 10. Instruction [is] evil to him that forsakes the way: [and] he that
hates correction shall die.
INstruction] Either wholesome doctrine publicly taught, or faithful
admonition privately given: [is euill] not in it self, (for the Scripture
calls it A pearl, and Holy thing in Matthew. 7. 6.
one place, and prefers it before silver and gold; and the richest gemmes in
another) but it so seems to him that is Prou. 3. 15.
not willing to obey it: in whom also it is an occasion of distempered
passions, and hardness of heart: [to him that forsakes the way] not to every
one that mistaketh the way, or through infirmity sometimes swarueth from it;
but to such a one as either obstinately refuses to choose and walk in the
right path of salvation, when the knowledge of it is offered unto him; or
wilfully departs from it after that he has made some entrance thereunto:
And [he that hates correction] which is imbittered by rebukes, and not
bettered by chastisements: [shall die] is in danger to perish eternally at the
last, and to be surprised with some speedy, sudden, shameful, or cursed death
in the mean season: and before that, to have some heavy judgment to fall upon
him.

Instruction is euill] The worst men are most unwilling to be taught how to
amend their lives: The sicker their souls are, the more they distaste the
Lords medicines: the more beggarly their hearts be, the less they desire the
riches of grace: and the greater speed they make toward their destruction, the
more offensiuely they take it to be recalled to the way of salvation. It has
been showed in the ninth chapter, and shall be again in the next verse (save
one) of this, that scorners use to hate them that reprove them. Nathan,
Proverb. 9. 8.
and Gad, and all that dealt with David, found always good success in
speaking unto him: for it was his prayer to God, that the righteous might smite
him with rebukes. But Eliiah and Psalm. 141. 5.
Micaiah, and such as had to do with Ahab, had an angry countenance, and hard
speeches from him: for he professed that he took them for his enemies.







from that which is good, of all men will like worst continually of them that
are the best; and of all speeches will least relish those which are the most
sauourie and wholesome.

Consolation to them that desire instruction, and learn wisdom from it, and
disdain not correction, but be reformed by it. This part of the sentence
cleereth them from the guiltiness of contempt: They refuse not to walk in the
way of God: and the next secureth them from the punishment of death; They have
not correction in detestation.

He that hates correction] Contempt of rebukes and instruction is a
forerunner of some grievous plagues to follow: Hereof the Holy Ghost speaks
at large in the first chapter: and there the point will more fully appear.

Verse 11. The grave and destruction are before the Lord: how much more the
hearts of the sons of men?
THE graue] The darkest places in the ground, or deepest places in the waters,
where any dead corpse is, or has been covered, and consequently all others as
obscure as they, or lower than they, even to the very center of the earth: [and
destruction] the place and state of the damned spirits: [are before the Lord]
he sees both how the bodies consume, and how the souls suffer, and what be
the thoughts of them that sustain such infernal torments: [how much more the
hearts] the counsels, and purposes, and discourses, and motions of all the
faculties of the souls: [of the sons of men] of every one in every age that
is descended from the race of mankind, so long as he lives on earth. Yet is
not this an argument from impuritie, in respect of God, as though it were easy
for him to behold some thoughts, and hard to find out others: (for all are
equally comprehended of him) but in regard of men, which with greater
difficulty attain to the knowledge of that whereunto their sense is not able
to reach, and with more facility discern that which is subject to their
senses: and so according to themselves they conceive of the Lord.

Now if they apprehend that he does continually observe and look upon things
that be so abstruse and hidden, they may be easily persuaded that he is not
unacquainted with that which is more conspicuous and apparent.



Verse 12. A scorner loves not him that rebukes him: neither will be go unto
the wise.
A Scorner] A leaud ungracious person, which obstinately has given over
himself to work wickedness, and derideth all that dislike of his ways:
[loueth not him that rebukes him] but hates both the reproouer and the
reproof, the man and his admonition: according as was said before, that
instruction is evil to him that forsakes the way: [neither will he go to the
wise] nor be willing that the wise should come to him. He affects not the
company and society of them that be godly, because he knows that they will
look into his licentious life, and tell him plainly of his inordinate
behavior.

He will not goe] He that would not be reputed a wicked person, must not shun
good company, where he may hear of his faults. Both Nathan and Gad, when need
required, dealt plainly with David, and told him of things that were amiss in
him: yet David did banish neither Gad nor Nathan, either from his Court or
company. The Apostle shows, that he that has grace when he is rebuked and
judged, will not rush out of the assembly, and be gone; nor exclaim against
the Ministers, or meeting; but humble himself, and honor the Lord, and give
good testimony of his servants. He will (says he) fall down on his face, and
worship God, and say 1. Cor. 14. 25.
plainly, that God is in you indeed.

as that he can always find out his faulting, and forsake his faults, without
the help of others: and therefore to keep our selves from them that may make
us to see our sins, and teach us how to reform them, is as dangerous as to
reject the Physician which would show us our diseases, and minister medicines
to cure them.





David would clear himself to be none of the wicked, he made it fully
manifest by this, that he haunted not with vain persons, Psalm. 26. 4.
neither kept company with the dissemblers: That he hated the assembly of the
evil, and companied not with the wicked. When he would prove himself to be
one of the righteous, he evidently confirms it by this, that he was a
companion of al them Psalm. 119. 63.
that feared the Lord, and kept his precepts.

Verse 13. A ioifull heart makes a good countenance: but by the sorrow of the
heart, the spirit is broken.
A Ioifull heart] A glad and merry mind, especially having peace with God, and
pardon of all his transgressions: [maketh a good countenance] causes the whole
body to be more healthful, but most of all shows it self in the
cheerfulness of the face: for the affections of the mind pierce into the
parts of the body, and chiefly appear and work in the countenance: [but by
the sorrow of the heart] when it is carnal or excessive, [the spirit is
broken] as the looks are marred, so the spirits are dulled, and men by
sighings and griefs are often brought to such extremities, as that they can
hardly draw their breath. The opposition stands thus: A ioifull heart makes
a good countenance, and by the comforts of it, the spirits are refreshed: and a
sorrowful heart makes an heavy countenance, and by the griefs thereof the
spirits are oppressed.

S. Paul, and David in Phil. 4. 4.
like manner, so often and so earnestly exhort us to rejoice in Psalm. 33. 1.
the Lord, and always to rejoice? And why does Solomon so confidently
testify, that a ioifull heart causes good health, but a sorrowful Prouer.
17. 22.
mind dries the bones?

Israelites. and therefore the services which are offered to him without all
cheerfulness, have seldom any acceptance from him.

minister unto them a force and power for the due performance of every good
duty. Be not sorrowful (says Nehemiah, Nehe. 8. 10.
with Ezra and others, when the people mourned unseasonably) for the joy of the
Lord is your strength. A heart replenished with hope and sound comfort, is
evermore in best readiness to praise the Lord, to pray to the Lord, to hearken
to the Lord when he sends his word, and to yield such obedience as his word
requires. They that are so affected, addict themselves to the exercises of
Religion with devotion; unto the works of mercy with willingness; and to the
affairs of their calling with faithfulness: whereas all commonly is contrary
in them which give over themselves to passionate griefs and heaviness.



Gal. 5. 22.
testifies to the Galathians: and withal, the company, and counsels, and
consolations of godly friends, which know how to minister a word in due season
to him that is weary, are of no small force to revive them that are oppressed
with affliction and anguish. Deal plainly with them, and they will deal
faithfully with you. Let them know the true cause of your fear and sorrow, and
you shall know the right remedy, whereby both may be helped. And add
heereunto, that their love and compassion, their skill and discretion, their
prayers and supplications, are like to be very forcible means to procure the
medecin to work upon the heart for the effectual healing of it.

Verse 14. The heart of him that has understanding seeks knowledge: but the
mouth of the fool is fed with foolishness.
THE heart of him that has vnderstanding] The upright desire, and sincere
affection of him that is wise unto salvation: [seeketh for knowledge] moves
his lips, and ears, and senses, diligently to labor for increase of that holy
wisdom wherewith he is already endued: [but the mouth of the fool is fed with
foolishnesse] that is, Lewdness of life, and practice of evil, are as
delightful to the mind of a sinful person, as delicious food is to the mouth
and taste: and he that has a wicked heart, will be as greedy to satisfy his
lust at every moment, as he that has a dainty tooth will be desirous to feed
on delicate dishes at every meal.

And so it is agreeable to that which is in the fourth Chapter, where sinners
are said to eat the bread of wickedness, and Prouer. 4. 17.
to drink the wine of violence: that is, It is meat and drink to them to do
mischief. The sense and opposition in effect tend to this, that the heart of a
wise man seeks for knowledge, and therefore his soul is fed with grace: and
the heart of a fool does hunt after folly, and therefore his mouth is fed with
foolishness. It is a Prouer. 10. 23
pastime to a fool to commit wickedness: but wisdom is the delight of a man
of understanding.







no man can serve two masters; when S. Matthew. 6. 24.
John says, that if a man love the world, the love of the father is 1. John 2.
15.
not in him; when S. James says, that whosoever will be a friend Iam. 4. 4.
to the world, is made the enemy of God?



Verse 15. All the days of the afflicted are evil: but he that has a good
heart [is at] a continual feast.
BY the next two verses following it may appear, that by the afflicted is
meant such a one as (through defect of faith and contentedness) is troubled in
mind for poverty, or other outward calamities, because his worldly estate and
condition is no better. And of him it is said, that all his days are evil:
that is, His whole life, during those wants, or crosses, or fears, till the
heart be helped by grace [are euil] grievous, tedious, and full of bitter
vexations: [but he that has a good heart] which is at peace with God, and
freed from the power of infidelity and sinfulness: [is at a continual feast]
is no more burdened with want at any time, than they which have variety of
dishes before them: and no less filled with delights at all times, than they
which are well satisfied with dainty meats and pleasant wines. For the
comparison is from the comfort and commodities of banquets, and not the surfets
and excess thereof. Yet this is according to the degrees of that goodness
which is in men's souls: so much godliness as they have, so much refreshing
they find in their afflictions: and because none can attain unto a perfection
thereof, therefore none shall be rid of all worldly griefs, and dreads, and
discontentments.

The sense and exposition tends to this purpose: All the days of him that
has an evil heart, are as grievous when he is afflicted, as if he were
pinched with continual penury: but all the days of him that has a good heart
when he is afflicted, are as ioious as if he were at a continual feast.

S. Paul witness by trial in himself, who found matter of reioicing in
necessities, in 2. Cor. 6. 4. 5.
distresses, iustripes, in imprisonments, etc. And let the godly Hebrews, in
stead of many others, be produced for the verifying of the same: for besides
the reproaches and afflictions which they sustained, being made a very
gazing-stocke (as the Apostle Heb. 10. 33. 34
speaks) they suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods, knowing in
themselves how that they had in heaven a better and enduring substance.

felicity in the same: and therefore when wealth and worldly things do fail,
their hope and happiness must needs also fall; whereas godly men make God and
his favor their portion, and heaven and salvation their inheritance. Now
because these are as much apprehended in lowest adversity as highest
prosperity, therefore their hearts be as ioifull when they are in boisterous
troubles, as if they were in peaceable tranquillity.





Verse 16. Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, than great treasure,
and trouble therewith.
BEtter is a little] A small portion of goods is more profitable and
comfortable, [with the fear of the Lord] with godliness causing a contented
mind with joy, and procuring Gods blessing for use: [than great treasure] than
the abundance of wealth: [with trouble] with sinfulness which brings
trouble, namely fear, care, sorrow, and many curses with the check of an ill
conscience: for where Religion is not, there griefs and vexations will be: and
the more riches a wicked man has, whereby he may seem to be free from all
molestations, the more encumbrances he has, which are always ready to molest
him.

precious riches, as he terms them in the twelfth Chapter, and 27. verse,
where the point has been handled in both the Doctrines.

Verse 17. Better is a dinner of green herbs where love is, than a stalled
Ox, and hatred therewith.
BEtter] More laudable in the house, and acceptable to the guest: [is a dinner
of green hearbes] very mean and slender fare: [where love is] where is
concord and hearty good will: [than a stalled Oxe] than great store of good
meat, and all manner of provision that appertains to a sumptuous feast: [and
hatred therewith] an evil affection, either toward the parties bidden, or one
toward another.

better is a dry morseil, if peace be with it, than an house full of
sacrifices, Prouer. 17. 1.
with strife.

There were many great Feasts in the time of the Apostles, and yet of them none
are so much commended in the Scriptures as the meetings of the believers, which
did eat meat Act. 2 46.
together with gladness and singleness of heart: notwithstanding they had
neither so much meat, nor so costly dishes, as diverse others had. It is noted
of Abraham, that he entertained God and his Angels to dinner. The Lord himself
would be his guest, sithence he would be so good an housekeeper: and yet the
victuals which are mentioned were only butter and milk, and veale that had not
time to cool between the killing and dressing: notwithstanding his
hospitality is preferred before the Persian Kings royal banquet: for the one
Ester 1.
purposed to show his greatness in pomp, and the other his goodness in love.
The one dealt exceeding unkindly with his own wife, and the other very
courteously with them that seemed to him to be mere strangers.



Saul intended on an holy days feast to kill David; and Absolon made a
sheepe-shearing banquet to dispatch Amnon. Now where love is, there every one
is cheerful to other, and edifieth others, and bears with others, and
deals faithfully with others: and so that which is wanting in their commons,
is fully supplied in their fruitful conference.



Nabal was but a Churl, though he killed both beeues and muttons for his
sheepe-shearers.

Eliiah at Sarepta had but one kind of food, as it may appear, all the time
of his soiourning there: and yet Ahab and Iezabel had not so much comfort in
their great varieties, as he and the Widow had in one kind of food.

Verse 18. An angry man stirs up contention: but he that is slow to wrath,
appeaseth strife.
AN angry man] Such over whom wrath and passion has power, and in whom it
reigns, (for in the original text he is called a man of anger) [stirreth up
contention] increases dissension where he finds discord, and makes debate
where peace was before: [but he that is slow to wrath] which can govern his
affections, and not be angry without cause; or beyond measure, [appeaseth
strife] endeavors to pacify that displeasure which one man has conceived
against another: so that he is not only unlike to him that is given to anger,
and will not raise contention as he does, but takes a course quite contrary
to his, in reconciling them that be at variance.

an angry man Prouer. 29. 22.
stirs up strife, and a furious man abounds in transgression.

Prouer. 13. 10
that seem to be offered unto them, are too many; and the duties that are
performed, too few; and the regard that is had of them, too little; and nothing
is enough to satisfy their desires; and therefore nothing will serve their
turns to keep them from brawling.

Secondly, they are void of love, and therefore full of strife, willing to
disquiet others with their frowardness, and glad to make others as unquiet and
froward as themselves. Now the contrary is in men of mild and moderate
spirits: their hearts are replenished with humility: they consider how
themselves have been pardoned by the goodness of the Lord, and therefore can
easily pass by the trespasses of their brethren: They are more ready to
perform duty than to require it: They deem themselves unworthy of that
estimation which is had of them, and therefore grudge not that they are no
better esteemed: and finally, their Christian love does cause them to seek the
means how they may show themselves peaceable toward all men, and makes them
desirous that all men should be peaceable.

Prouer. 22. 25
if we converse much with them that love contentions.



Verse 19. The way of the slothful is as an hedge of thorns: but the way of
the righteous is [as] a paued causey.
THE way of the sluggard] Not that leaud and licentious course of life which a
sinful slothful person does take, (for that seems plain and pleasant unto
him) but the good and honest conversation which he ought to walk in: [is as an
hedge of thornes] appears to him to be full of difficulties and dangers, as a
path that is all ouer-growen with thorns and briars: and therefore either he
dares not enter into it, because he fears perils; or else he will not
proceed forwards, because he finds inconveniences: [but the way of the
righteous] the use and exercise of those good duties which every godly diligent
man performs: [is [as] a paued causey] plain, easy, and commodious: and
therefore he goes on in the same with good contentment and comfort.



That Israel should root out the Canaanites, the unfaithful spies thought it
no less impossible, than for Grasshoppers to Number. 13. 34.
overcome Giants: but Caleb and Joshua knew it to be no more unlikely, than
for armed soldiers to vanquish naked people, or for hungry persons to eat up
meat. They are but Number. 14. 39.
bread for us (say they) their shield is departed from them, and the Lord is
with us: fear them not.

and strong as death, that nothing can withstand Cant. 8. 6.
it: and the other being destitute of all love to any goodness, are likewise
void of all power to proceed in, and go through with any work that is good.



A Lion is in the way: A Prouer. 26. 13.
Lion is in the streets?

good furtherance in the ways of the Lord. Every valley shall be Luke. 3. 5.
filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low, and crooked things
shall be made strait, and the rough ways shall be made smooth unto them. All
lets and impediments, both inward and outward, shall be removed: and all good
opportunities, and ability to take the benefit thereof, shall be offered and
yielded unto them.

Verse 20. A wise sonnereioiceth [his] father: but a foolish son despises his
mother.
A Wise sonne] A child that is endued with grace, and virtuously inclined:
[reioiceth his father] brings comfort to both parents for his piety and
fear of God (if they themselves be religious and godly, otherwise it may be
they will be the more vexed at it) for his obedience and dutiful behavior
toward them, and for his own good credit with all wise men that know his
ways, and the blessing of God upon his state. [but a foolish sonne] such a one
as is given to be leaud and wicked: [despiseth his mother] shows contempt to
mother and father, but especially to the mother, because he presumes to be
more bold with her, and because his state commonly does less depend upon her.
The opposition is thus to be conceived:

A wise son does honor his father and mother, and therefore does make them
to be glad: but a foolish son despises mother and father, and therefore
causes them to mourn. See chap. 10. verse 1.

Verse 21. Foolishness is joy to him that is destitute of understanding: but a
man of understanding will walk uprightly.
FOOlishnesse] Wickedness and sin: [is ioy] desired, and committed, and
continued in with delight: [to him that is destitute of understanding a^ ^ full
man that is without all saving knowledge, and heavenly wisdom: [but a man of
vnderstanding] such a one as is godly wise, whose mind the Holy Ghost has
enlightened with the sound knowledge of the word: [walketh vprightly] orders
his conversation aright, and that in the truth and sincerity of his heart.
Thus stands the opposition: Foolishness is joy to him that is destitute of
understanding, and therefore he walks peruersly: but wisdom is joy to him
that is a man of understanding, and therefore he walks uprightly. See chap.
10. verse 23.

Verse 22. Without counsel, thoughts come to naught: but by store of
Counselors they shall be established.
WIthout counsell] When men in difficult and doubtful cases will trust to
their own wit, and consult with no others whether their enterprises be
convenient, and by what means they may effect them: [thoughts come to nought]
either they grow weary of their attempts, or are defeated of their purposes: or
though they seem to succeed well for a time, yet their hopes are frustrate in
the end: [but by the multitude of Counsellers] which are wise, and give
faithful counsel, if their faithful counsel be harkened unto and obeyed:
[they are established] in the Hebrew text the Verb is of the singular number,
but collectiuely spoken: meaning that all and every one of those thoughts which
are so directed by counsel, shall have a constant prosperous success at the
last, if not at the first.

Establish thy thoughts by counsel, and by Prouer. 10. 18
counsel make war. So David did usually, inquiring of the Prophets and
Priests what he ought to do, and therefore usually he had good success: and
hereof he failed sometimes, as in the numbering of the people; and therefore
sometimes he brought troubles upon himself, as it fell out after the people
were numbered. This wholesome instruction Rhehoboam refused, when he declined
from the counsel of his ancient Senators: and Achab despised, when he
quarrelled with Micaiah: and therefore Rhehoboam had a rent made in his
Kingdom, and Ahab fell into utter destruction.







And it serves also for the reprehension of others, which earnestly desiring,
and certainly concluding of all good prosperity and happiness, do yet repose
so much affiance in their own understanding and wisdom, as that they think
they have no need either to be taught of God, or advised by man. But these
have been already spoken of upon the like occasion, Chap. 11. 14.



Verse 23. A joy comes to a man by the answer of his mouth: and how good is a
word in due season?
A joy comes to a man] A good man shall find either sooner or latter,
comfort and gladness [by the answer of his mouth] by the wholesome words which
he utters with his mouth, whether he answer to things demanded, or
otherwise: [And how good is a word in due season?] that is to say, marvelous
profitable and delightful to himself and others, a^e faithful speeches
discreetly delivered, all meet circumstances of time, place, and persons, being
duly observed.

A man shall eat Proverb. 13. 2.
good things by the (...) as it (...) Proverb. A man shall be sac^a^e (...)
good things by the fruit of his mouth, Prouer 12. 14
as (...) in (...) ^he Proverb.



S. Paul tells the faithful Philippians, who were converted by his
ministry, that they were his joy and his crown. Philip 4 1.




For all this, my Isa. 49. 4 5.
judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God, yet shall I be glorious
in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength.

and all the helps that we can use, may further the effect that we desire. By
this means, every sentence shall be of greater force and excellency than a
long Oration vnseasonaby made: which may appear by that elegant comparison. A
Prouer. 25. 12.
word spoken in his place is like apples of gold upon pictures of silver: and
by that which Job affirms and S. Paul intends, that Job 6. 6. Col. 4. 6.
true word, without discretion are as unsavory as eggs or meats without salt
and seasoning.

Verse 24. The way of life is on high to the prudent, to avoid from hell
beneath.
THE way of life] The way that leads to life, yea the very true life it
self: [is on high to the prudent] is not worldly, carnal, and earthly, but
spiritual, holy, and heavenly: and therefore so far as any man is wise to
salvation, he thinks or heavenly things, and in all his behavior tends
toward heaven [to auoid] that so walking therein, he may escape [from hell
beneath] from death and destruction, and the place of eternal torment, which a
sensual course of life, and the desire of earthly things will bring men unto.

they who have their belly for their God, and mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 19
20.
must look to have their end to b^ damnation. But our conversation says he)
^^ in heaven, from whence also we lo^ke for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus
Christ

First, the promise of salvation, and all the covenants of God, are
appropriated and made only to them that walk not after the flesh, but after
the spirit: all others have threatenings and curses against them.

Secondly, none have communion with Christ, or a^^ ^surance that their sins
are washed away with his blood (...) they that walk in the light, according as
he is in t^^^^^.

Thirdly, they that will escape the second death, mu^^ (...) their part in the
first resurrection: and they that have ^^^^ned to that, and are risen with
Christ, must seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the
right hand of God. They must set their affections on things which are above,
and not on things which are on the earth.



And next to these are greedy worldlings, which lie groueling on the ground,
and like moles are always digging down wards in the earth.

In the same state are voluptuous belly-gods, and all others which repose their
felicity and happiness in the earth.



And let them not be discouraged though they have so few fellows to accompany
them; for no man has power or will of himself to clime up to this causey, nor
very many have that favor from God to be brought into it.

Verse 25. The Lord will destroy the house of the proud: but he will establish
the border of the widow.
THE drift of this sentence is to show that the safety of no man's state does
stand in his greatness, nor peril of ruin in his smalnesse; but that Gods
displeasure does cut off the wicked how strong soever; and his favor
protecteth the godly though never so feeble. The Lord will destroy] at one time
or other, at once or by degrees, either by the wonted means of his plagues and
judgments, or by some immediate stroke from his own hand: [hee will root out
(as the word signifies) and utterly overthrow: [the house of the proud]
themselves, their seed, substance, estimation, and whatsoever belongs unto
them: [but he will establish] defend and maintain [the borders of the widow]
those livings and possessions, or whatsoever else pertains to poor helpless
persons, of any sort, which want power to resist their oppressors. Yet is it
not so to be understood, as though they that were without friends, were also
always without wrongs, (for we read, and hear, and see the contrary
continually) but that it is not in any man's power to spoil them at his
pleasure: and when they are oppressed, he will take their cause into his hands,
in justice and anger to punish their adversaries, and by grace and providence
to recompense them. This is the sense of the opposition.

The Lord will destroy the house of the mighty, when they grow to be proud; and
establish the borders of the Widows and weak ones, when they show themselves
humble. The former part, concerning the fall of the proud, has been handled,
Chap. 11. 2. and fit occasion will be offered for the latter in the 23.
Chapter, verse 10. following. Where an admonition is given, that we remove not
the ancient bands, nor enter into the fields of the fatherless because he
that redeemeth them is mighty, and he will defend their cause against them.

Verse 26. The thoughts of the wicked are abomination to the Lord: but the pure
have pleasant words.
THE thoughts of the wicked] Their desires, affections, purposes, imaginations,
and all the motions of their minds: [are abomination to the Lord] such as he
presently beholds with detestation, and hereafter will punish with great
severity: [but the pure] godly men, whose hearts are purified by faith, and
which are upright in their ways, [haue pleasant words] they speak such things
as are just and acceptable in the sight of God, and good and profitable for the
use of the hearers.

The opposition stands thus: The thoughts of the wicked, and therefore also
their words, are abomination to the Lord: but the words of the pure, and
consequently their thoughts, are pleasant unto him.



His eye does as evidently see what the heart does think within, as what the
hand does work without: and the evil that is conceived in the heart is no
better allowed than the sin which is practiced by the hand. When he
complains by the Prophet, of the grievous iniquities wherewith men laded
themselves; how that their feet, their hands, their lips, their tongues, and
all their members were prone and swift to work mischief, he inserteth this
as a principal among the rest, that their thoughts were wicked thoughts. And
Isa. 59. 7.
when he concluded to destroy all the world (excepting Noah and his family)
with water, and repented that he had made man in the earth, this is assigned
as a cause hereof, that All the in aginations of the thoughts of man's heart
were only evil continually. Genesis 6. 5.








Jeremy, saying, O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, Ier. 41. 4.
that thou may be saved. How long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within
thee?



But the pure] So far as any man is upright and godly, he may also justly be
called pure.

Full perfection remains for the Saints to attain unto in the life to come:
but purity in the measure thereof does accompany them thitherwards in this
life. This does our Savior confirm, when he pronounces them blessed that are
Matthew. 5. 8. Titus 1. 15.
pure in heart. And so does S. Paul when he says, that to the pure all things
are pure. And so does David, when he testifies, that with the pure the Lord
will show himself to be pure.

Purge me with hysope (says the Prophet) and I shall be clean: wash me, and
I shall be whiter than snow. Psalm. 51. 7.


Corinthians (after their godly sorrow, declared by their care and fear, with
indignation, zeal, punishment, and the like) that in all things they had
showed themselves 2. Cor. 7.
to be pure in that matter.

No man is charged by the Lord with the evil which he hates and strives
against, though he cannot avoid it: and every man is approved of him for the
good that he loves, and endeavors to do, though he cannot effect it.

Donatists or Catharists, that pervert this or other such texts of Scripture,
to prove a perfect purity necessary after repentance. Those Congregations
that have any defects, they bitterly disclaim, as being no Churches: and those
particular persons which are not free from faults, they peremptorily condemn
to be no Christians. But the Holy Ghost means no such matter: he is not
contrary to himself, which affirms elsewhere, that no man can say his heart
is clear, and that he is without sin. And therefore observe the difference
between these Heretical Puritanes, and the faithful pure men here
mentioned. The one sort arrogate to themselves so much goodness, as that they
be satisfied therewith, and seek for no more: The other acknowledge in
themselves so great want of grace, as that they strive for a daily increase,
and can never have enough. The one sort say all things are so well with them,
as that they would not wish to be bettered: and the other see so many things
amiss in them, as that they have cause continually to amend. The one sort are
unmerciful to their weak brethren, and without any compassion pass heavy
sentences against them: and the other are pitiful to them that have their
infirmities, and labor in all love to support them.

Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness 2. Cor. 7. 1.
of the flesh and spirit, and grow up to full holiness in the fear of God. It
is a duty needful to be performed, and much for their comfort and credit
that proceed in it, though they may look for mockes and reproaches from the
mouths of the wicked; for it is ordinary with wicked persons to deride their
betters, which endeavor to be more clean than themselves.

Verse 27. He that is greedy of gain, troubles his house: but he that hates
gifts, shall live.
HE that is greedy of gaine] which being discontented with his portion, does
rauenously covet after more wealth: [troubleth his house] subuerteth his own
estate, and draws misery upon his household and posterity: [but he that
hates gifts] not that all receiving of gifts is sin, for inferiors may take
that which superiors bestow upon them in mercy: and superiors may accept of
that which inferiors present them with in kindness: but bribes are here
spoken against, which are offered either to pervert judgment, or to buy
justice: whereas the former ought not to be yielded unto for the greatest
sums of money; and the latter should be granted without the least reward. And
here is a Synecdoche, one thing being proposed for a pattern of many others
of like nature. The Magistrates duty is set for an example of all others, and
gifts for all manner of unlawful gain and gettings [shall liue] safely and
comfortably in this life, and gloriously in the life to come. This is the
opposition: He that is greedy of gain, and loves gifts, brings trouble to
his house, and shall die: but he that has a contented mind, and hates
gifts, brings peace to his house, and shall live.



The love of their family is their pretext of loving wealth so well, and
thereby they annoy their family as much as an enemy could. Great store of
riches, they trust, will make them live, and live like men in great credit and
honor: and therefore their trust in riches does turn to their death: they
shall die like beasts with shame and reproach. Who is ignorant of the woeful
success which Achan found in coveting unlawfully the gold and silver at
Jericho? He hoped to get more there than any man in Israel: but no man in
Israel lost so much there as he: for himself, his gold and silver, his sons
Joshua. 7. 24.
and daughters, his Oxen and Asses, his sheep and Tent, and all that he had,
were destroyed. So Habakkuk vpbraideth the King of Babel with coveting an evil
covetousness to his house: for seeking Hab. 2. 9. 10.
to set his house on high, he had consulted shame to his house, and sinned
against his own soul.





Ahabs line, and many others.

David. The more we labor for heavenly things, the less Psalm. 112.
we shall like of earthly things, and yet take the way to have the greater
plenty of them.

when it is offered to them, the flesh cannot make heartily to love any other
corruptions. And observe, that under life he comprehends all needful things,
whereby men may commodiously live. Well is it with his estate who is firmly
estated in this life here promised. That family is in good case, whose
governor is so good a man. Happy are those children (if they will embrace
their happiness) whose parents are grown enemies to the world, and friends
unto their own souls.

Verse 28. The heart of the righteous studieth to answer: but the mouth of the
wicked babbleth out evil things.
A Good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good
things. He meditateth what to speak, that he may utter such matter as is most
wholesome and profitable; and that not only when a question is demanded of
him, or he is otherwise spoken unto; but upon any other occasion, when it
concerns him to say ought: For the word [answer] is more largely taken
sometimes in the Scriptures than we use it in our common speech, as Matt. 11.
25. at that time Jesus answered and said, I give thee thanks, O Father, Lord
of heaven and earth, etc. [but the mouth of the wicked babbleth out evil
things] he can neither be silent, nor speak well; but is full of discourse,
and always prattling rashly, vainly, offensiuely, and leaudly.

The opposition stands thus: The heart of the righteous studieth to answer,
and therefore he utters things that be good: but the mouth of the wicked is
hastily and rashly set on work, and therefore he babbleth out things that are
evil.



We shall find in the next Chapter, that the heart of the wise Prouer. 16. 23.
guides his mouth wisely, and adds Doctrine to his lips. And David directed
before by the spirit that Solomon was after, did fore-testifie the same which
Solomon has afterward confirmed: The mouth of the righteous (says he) will
meditate of Psalm. 37. 30.
wisdom: that is, utter wisdom premeditated. And his tongue will talk of
judgment. When Hannah would free herself to Eli from the imputation of
drunkenness, or other crimes, she has this to say for herself, that out of
the abundance of 2. Sam. 1. 16.
her meditations and grief she had spoken.

Eli deceived in his swift censuring of Hannah? How was Joshua, with the Elders
of Israel, ouerseene in making a league with the Gibeonites? And how did Nathan
mistake the matter, when he would have had David gone in hand with the building
of the Temple?







By this means they may be profitable for the edification of their brethren:
without it, they will be infectious and hurtful. By this, they may be
serviceable to God: without it, they are rebellious and froward. By this, they
may know and declare themselves to be righteous men: and without it, they show
themselves wicked and sinful.

Neither is it enough to begin our meditations when we should enter into our
speech, but to be always well stored therewith for all occasions, as good
householders have their victuals in a readiness, and not then to be provided,
when their guests are sitting down at the table.



Verse 29. The Lord is far off from the wicked: but he hears the prayer of
the righteous.
THE Lord is far off from the wicked] He is near unto them in his essence,
whereby he fills heaven and earth: and in his presence, whereby he beholds
their hearts, and all their ways: and in his justice, being at hand to punish
them. But he is far off in respect of his favor and help: yea even then
when they pray unto him in their manner: so that they get no more good thereby,
than if they should call upon one that is in another Country. Upon which
occasion the Prophet exhorts men to seek the Lord while he may be Isa. 55.
6.
found, and [to] call upon him while he is near. The cause thereof may be
gathered out of the eighth verse of this Chapter, where the Sacrifice of the
wicked is said to be abomination to the Lord. Who would willingly come nigh to
that which he much abhors? Who would not keep off from smelling of noisome
sents, or looking on loathsome sights? [but he hears the prayer of the
righteous] accepts of it, and yields to it: is well pleased with that which
they offer to him, and grants that which they desire of him.

This is the opposition: The Lord is far off from the wicked, and rejects
their prayers: but he is near to the righteous, and hears their petitions.
See what has been spoken to this point in the eighth verse.

Verse 30. The light of the eye reioiceth the heart: and a good hearing makes
the bones fat.
THE light of the eies] The beholding of delightful aspects [reioiceth the
heart] brings sound gladness to the soul that is seasoned with grace, and
looks on Gods favor, with his blessings: [and a good hearing] where there is
comfortable matter related, and an attentive ear to hearken unto it: [maketh
the bones fat] procures health, and good disposition of the whole body; by
means whereof, the bones are replenished with marrow within, and well stored
with flesh and fatness without: not that seeing serves only for the comfort
of the heart, and hearing for the health of the body; but each of them is
profitable both ways. And the same may be understood also, in due proportion,
of the other senses.



Goodly prospects and ornaments he offers unto the sight both above and
beneath, to please the eyes: pleasant speeches, besides music and other sweet
sounds, to content the ears: delicious food, to sweeten the pallat: and
redolent smells, to refresh the nostrils: and in all these he allows us a
natural delight, and a spiritual. And diverse objects he has consecrated
merely for holy uses, as under the Law, especially in Salomons days, and
after, were to be seen at Jerusalem; the sumptuous building of the Temple, the
gorgeous garments of the Priests, with gold and silver, and many precious
jewels and vessels, then used in that house: So were there also melodious
instruments and songs to be heard, odoriferous ointments and perfumes to be
smelt, feasts wherein much meat was dressed to be tasted. And so have we in the
time of the Gospel, our hearing, handling, seeing, and tasting exercised in
the Supper of the Lord, and many ioifull messages are brought unto us by the
ministry of the word: In all which the Lord respects the good of our
souls, and makes our senses as tunnels, through which he powers his graces
into our hearts.





Jews and Phariseis. When God spoke with his own voice from heaven, and
showed diverse strange wonders on the earth, and that every day for forty years
together, Yet (says Moses unto them) the Lord has not given you a heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and Deuteronomy. 29 4.
ears to hear, unto this day.



S. Paul says) we look but as it were through a glass, be yet so ioifull and
comfortable: if our hearing, which is mixed with much deafness, do produce
such lively effects to the heart and whole man, what shall be our felicity
hereafter, when we shall be able perfectly to apprehend all that we shall
hear and see; and all that we shall hear and see will be perfectly excellent
and glorious?

Verse 31. The ear that hears the correction of life, shall lodge among the
wise.
THE ear that heareth] The person which inclines his ears, together with his
heart, and yields obedience [to the correction of life] to wholesome
reproves, whereby we are taught to live well, and directed to life eternal,
[shall lodge among the wise] shall be wise, and receive the reward of wisdom,
as a domestical companion, and fellow servant with other wise men in the
family and household of God.



Every man is a Traveler, and every such Traveler sometimes does fall into
by-waies, and every by-way is exceeding dangerous; and therefore faithful is
that friend that reduces him into the right path, that wandereth aside: and
happy is he that is directed by his friends admonition. To this purpose is that
which is said in one of the former Chapters: He that regards instruction, is
in the way of life: but he that refuses Prouer. 10. 17
correction, goes out of the way. When Wisdom, near the beginning of this
Book, does proffer and publish her greatest favors, she makes a way to her
promises with expostulations and rebukes, saying, O ye foolish, how long will
ye Prou. 1. 22. 23.
love foolishness etc. turn you at my correction? Lo, I will power out my
mind unto you, and make you understand my words. And there we take to be the
fittest place for the prosecution of this point.

Verse 32. He that refuses instruction, despises his own soul: but he that
obeieth correction, possesses his own heart.
HE that refuses instruction] which disdaineth to be admonished of his faults,
and directed in his ways, [despiseth his own soule] deals as hardly with
his own soul, in bringing shame and destruction upon it, as if it were a
thing that he despised, and were a mortal enemy unto: [but he that obeieth
correction] which listeneth unto, and is guided by wholesome lessons, whether
sharp or gentle, [possesseth his own heart] has the use and ordering of his
mind, and whole soul, and preserves it from the power of death and damnation.

The opposition is this: He that refuses instruction, despises his own
soul, and casts it away: but he that obeieth correction, regards his
heart, and possesses it.



The madness and misery of such does Wisdom declare in the end of the eighth
Chapter, saying, He that sins against me, hurts his own soul: and all
that hate me, love death. And thither we refer this matter to be entreated
of more at large.



So meant Ecclesiastes, when he said that the heart of a wise Eccles. 10. 2.
man is at his right hand: but the heart of a fool is at his left hand. And so
did Hosea, when he said, that Ephraim was like a Dove Hosea 7. 11.
deceived, without an heart. And so did Solomon, when he said, Wherefore is
there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, and Prouer. 17. 16.
he has none heart?



the prince of darkness: He rules and reigns in the hearts of all them
that are overwhelmed with ignorance.

grief, etc. whereas others are commanded by the Devil and lust, and carried
away strongly to covetousness, pride, uncleanness, intemperancie, or such
like: but can never bring any faithful desire to any holy service.

True it is, that the godly obedient are often assaulted with the forenamed
vices, and yield too far unto them: but they are not vanquished of them, nor
disabled of recovery. And it cannot be denied, but that the rebellious wicked
have sometimes purposes to exercise those Christian duties, and seem to set
themselves thereunto: but it is merely in passion without uprightness;
neither have they power to proceed in the performance of them.

spoiled of their Heb. 10. 34.
goods, as were the faithful Hebrews: and slain and killed, as have been
the godly Martyrs: Yet in all this they are nothing endammaged in credit,
state, or body, in comparison of their blessedness, and most happy condition.
When they have lost all, they have gained more than all, because they enjoy
their souls, which are more worth than any wealth; and possess their hearts,
which are of greater value than the richest treasures, or life it self. He
that is owner of his soul, is a freeholder for ever; and the possession of
the heart is a sure evidence for the possession of heaven.

What shall it profit a man, if he shall win the whole Matthew. 16. 26.
world, if he lose his soul? as every one does which has resigned up his
heart to the power of Satan. We account it no great gain, to get goods with
the loss of our ears, or any other member: and yet it is safer to have our
ears cut off, and head also, and all our limbs torn in pieces, than that
sin should rule in our hearts here, and hell hold our souls in thraldom for
evermore hereafter.

Verse 33. Before the fear of the Lord goes the instruction of wisdom: and
before honor goes humility.
BEfore the fear of the Lord] Before a man be truly religious and godly,
[goeth the instruction of wisdome] he must be daily informed in the precepts
and doctrine of Gods holy will expressed in the Scriptures: [and before honour]
either that celestial glory which is prepared for Gods people in the life to
come, or any comfortable advancement in this life, or the undoubted note and
credit of unfeigned faithfulness and piety, [goeth humilitie] such as is not
counterfeit, and merely in show, but proceeds from feeling of corruptions,
and sight of ones own unworthiness, whereby he is induced in the meekness
of his mind, to esteem others better than himself. The word signifies
properly, in respect of the deriuation of it, such a kind of lowlines as is
wrought by afflictions, though it be also sometimes more largely taken. Now it
is to be inquired, what connection there is between this clause and the
former, which will easily be found if we observe that the virtue and reward
here lastly mentioned, depend upon the duty and grace in the former place
specified: for with instruction there is required humility, and to the fear
of God there is adioined honor.

The Prophet Agur, who is mentioned in this Book, confesses to God and all
the World, that therefore he was so foolish, and void of understanding,
because he had not learned Prouer. 30. 3
wisdom, nor attained to the knowledge of holy things.

The Apostle admonishes the Ephesians to walk in better ways than other
ignorant Heathen men did. For (says he) Ephesians 4. 20. 21.
you have learned Christ, and have heard him, and have been taught by him, as
the truth is in Jesus, etc. Whereby he intimates, that nothing is to be
expected from them that are untaught, but that which is unholy, as hardness of
heart, uncleanness of life, and such lascivious behavior as is there spoken
of. And where is pure and sound instruction, there may we look for sincere and
comely conversation.

There is a covering (as the Prophet says) that covers all people, and Isa.
25. 7.
a veil spread upon all Nations. Their minds are dark: Their hearts are
hard: Their affections perverse. Repent they cannot, believe they cannot, and
pray they cannot, unless they be effectually informed by the word of the Lord.
How shall Romans 10 14.
they call on him (says S. Paul) in whom they have not believed? And how shall
they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear
without a Preacher?





Confutation of their folly, which scorn to be taught of any, and yet for
godliness will give place to none, their own ripe wit and reason serving them
sufficiently for their salvation. But the weakness of their wit, and the
vanity of their reason is bewraied by their witless and unreasonable
presumption. Should a blind man become his own guide in an unknown way,
which is full of difficulties and dangers? Or is it safe for a naked creeple to
enter into a combat with an armed Giant? And what way is so intricate to him
that cannot see, as is the way of life to him that is not taught? And what
creeple was ever so infirm in body, as he that is wilfully ignorant is feeble
in soul? How then shall he think to make his part good with the Devil?

That humility makes a way for honor, we shall have fitter opportunity to
declare in the eighteenth Chapter, and twelfth verse, where the point is set
forth by the contrary, after this manner: Before destruction, the heart of a
man is hauty: and before glory goes lowliness.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER OF THE PROVERBS. CHAPTER XVI.
Verse 1. The preparations of the heart are in man: but the answer of the
tongue is from the Lord.
IT is far from the meaning of the holy Ghost, to ascribe here free will to
man, as though he had any absolute power to dispose of his own heart, though
by concession, according to the vulgar opinion, that seem to be granted: for
no man can think an evil thought without Gods providence, much less a good
thought without his grace: but the drift is to show, that albeit men devise
much, and have whole armies (as the word signifies) of cogitations in their
minds, and those placed in exact order, as it were in battle array, so that
they set down with themselves both what and how to speak, yet [the answer of
the tongue is from the Lord] they shall utter that which God appoints, and
not always what themselves do purpose.

own will. It was more than Esau minded (as it is probable) or than ever Jacob
did look for (as it is certain) that Esau should greet Jacob with so great
kindness, and offer so much Genesis 32.
courtesy to him. And Balaams voyage to Balak was not with Number. 23.
intent to bless Israel, but to curse them. Neither was Saul ever purposed to
commend David for his faithfulness and 1. Sam. 24. 18.
innocence, but to accuse him of disloialtie and treason. Neither was it in
Caiaphas thought to prophecy how happy all Gods children should be made by
the death of Christ, but to conspire his destruction: but God compelled all
these in that manner to bestow their speeches, and therefore every one of them
formed them accordingly.







When we are defamed, and evil spoken of, that we more look to the hand of
the righteous God, to be humbled, than to the lips of unrighteous men to be
vexed, according as David did, when he was railed upon and cursed by Shemei. 2.
Sam. 16. 10.


Gods appointment, who does never appoint ought that shall be pernicious to his
people. If Hamons accusations, and Ahashuerosh his sentence against the Jews,
had been to be executed to the destruction of the Jews, they should never
have been uttered by them. And why should any man therefore omit good duties
for fear of evil tongues? and forbear to perform that which he ought to
do, because he dreads that which others will say? The same Lord which
promises his servants defense from the stroke of violent hands, does also
warrant them safety from the scourge of virulent tongues, Job 5. 21.

Verse 2. All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes: but the Lord
pondereth the spirits.
ALL the waies] The purposes, courses, and proceedings: the deeds that are
done, the words that are spoken, and the thoughts that are conceived [of a man]
of him that is unregenerate, and has an ignorant mind, a proud heart, and a
sleepie conscience, [are clean in his own eies] seem commendable unto him:
he justifies and applaudeth himself in them: [but the Lord pondereth the
spirits] searches narrowly, not only into the behavior, but the hearts also
of all men, as it were putting them into the balance, and examining them by
number and weight, whether they be pure and upright, as proceeding from
sincerity; or profane and hypocritical, as growing from corruption and guile.

The doctrine that the former part of this sentence would yield, has been
handled in the twelfth Chapter, and fifteenth verse: and that which would arise
out of the other, has been entreated of in the fifteenth Chapter, verse 3. 11.

Verse 3. Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be directed.
THE word which we translate [commit] signifies to deuolue or role, meaning
thereby that God is chiefly to be respected in every thing that any man does
deal in: by taking direction from his word, both for matter and manner: by
proposing a right end, even his glory, in the performance of it: by asking his
help, and waiting on his hand, as well for success as recompense: [and thy
thoughts shall be directed] thy mind shall be informed in the right way: thy
heart shall be confirmed to proceed on with cheerfulness, and thou shall be
lead with a special guidance to think upon those means which will be most
effectual for the accomplishing of thy desire, if it be for his praise and thy
good to have thy desire accomplished.



There is a consent and agreement of sundry other texts of Scripture with this,
which persuade to the same duty that in this place is required, and confirm
the same promise that here is delivered. The Psalmist uses almost the same
words, saying, Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall
bring it to pass. And the Writer of this Book, elsewhere, Psalm. 37. 5.
does nothing differ from the same in sense, when he says, Trust in the Lord
with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own wisdom. In all thy ways
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy Prouer. 3. 5. 6.
ways.

Examples may be brought for proof hereof, both plentiful and pregnant: as
of Abraham's servants journey into Mesopotamia to fetch a wife for Isaac: and of
Jacobs to take a wife for himself. Who knows not that they altogether rested
upon the Lord in their enterprises? And who sees not the goodness of God in
their protection, and direction, and happy success? That his gracious
providence went thither with them, and was there with them, and returned back
with them, and wrought all for them?



counsel, and assist them with strength, and prosper them with a comfortable
event.

Whether ye 1. Cor. 10. 31.
eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.

Moses and Jeremy were troubled with such fears, but felt afterward by
experience, that they were causelessly fearful. At first they considered how
heavy the burden of their offices was, and how weak their own backs were to
bear it: but afterward they found that they and their ministeries were
supported and blessed by a divine hand from above; and so shall every godly man
be in all religious and righteous exercises.



Of all others, they would have least dealing with him: their hearts say to
God, as the devils said to Christ: What have Matthew. 8. 29.
we to do with thee? Art thou come hither to torment us?

Whatsoever has in it any stamp or print of his ordinance, is for that cause
distastefull unto them, though otherwise they see it would be commodious for
them. How can these expect so much to have their thoughts directed, as their
hearts more hardened, and their minds infatuated? And whether is it more
likely that they shall be blessed in their ways, or rather, according to the
threatening of the law, accursed in their courses? especially when their works
are so far from being committed to the Lord, as that they are opposed against
the Lord? when they be not done loyally in obedience to please him, but
contemptuously in rebellion to provoke him.

Verse 4. The Lord has made all things for his own sake: Yea even the wicked
for the day of evil.
THE Lord has made all things] By making is understood as well that
workmanship which was bestowed upon all the creatures for their form and
existence, as the works which he daily does in his perpetual government and
administration: [for his own sake] for his glory, which is seen in his
wisdom and power, in his mercy and righteousness, with all other holy
attributes. And this he does not only propose to himself, as an end that
were meet, and to be wished, but commands and causes, as an effect that is
necessary and certain: [euen the wicked against the day of euill] This clause
is annexed, as a prevention of an objection that might arise out of the former
words: How truly may it be said that he has made all things for himself,
when reprobates, both men and Angels, continually set themselves against him?
Now to this he answers, that he gets no small honor by them that are
most ungodly and wicked: for sithence they refuse to yield him glory by their
life, and to acknowledge his goodness in the time of their prosperity, he
will glorify himself by their death, and manifest his justice in the day of
their destruction. And to that damnable estate they are foreordained by Gods
righteous decree, as it is intimated here, and expressly affirmed in other
places, and yet made worthy of it by their own unrighteous behavior: as is
noted in Pharaoh, and other obstinate Rebels.



This does David acknowledge in the general, when he says, All thy works
praise thee, O Lord: and dilateth upon it Psalm. 145. 10.
in the particulars, when not only he provoke Kings and Princes, and all
people to perform this duty, but brings in all sorts of beasts, and fishes,
and fowls, and creeping things, Psalm 1. 48.
as occasions and means thereof.

When the Lord was sending the Prophet Isaiah about a most uncomfortable
message, even by his ministerir to harden the hearts of the people, to their
destruction, the Seraphims cried, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hoasts. Isa.
6. 3.


When S. Paul had discoursed of the reiection of the Jews from being a Church
for many hundred years, which misery he could have been content to prevent
with the price of his own soul, he concluded the point in this manner: Of
him, and through him, and for him are all things. To him be glory Romans 11. 36.
for ever. Amen.







And because we our selves are of his making, and he does give us life, and
breath, and all things; yea because we are of his second making, and he does
give us eternal life, and grace, and all blessedness, therefore ought we to
be for him, and his glory, against sin, and his enemies. And this may be a
forcible motive to make us patient in all the afflictions which he imposes
upon us, because they are his work, and for his honor, which will be the more
procured by our humble and fruitful submission to him in the same.

They are reserved (as S. Peter testifies) to the day of judgment to be
punished, 2. Pet. 2. 9.
though they should not be plagued sooner. The Lord will show himself to be
admirable in righteousness, when all the world shall see them miserable with
torments.

Verse 5. All that are proud in heart, are abomination to the Lord: [though]
hand [ioine] in hand, he shall not be unpunished.
AL] All sorts and degrees of men, male or female, young or old, high or low,
and every particular person, of what condition soever, [that are proud in
heart] whose hearts are lofty, and void of humility; and the heart is
therefore specified, because pride is seated in it, and flows from it, and
that no man should challenge to himself any immunitie from the wretched estate
of the proud, unless his heart be seasoned with humility. He that has an
high mind, though he bear a low sail, and keep a small port, without pomp
and bravery, may be as loathsome in the eyes of the Lord, as some others that
set forth themselves with greater shows. Yet note that he says not, all that
have pride in their hearts, for who can be fully freed from it so long as he is
clothed with mortality? but they that are proud in heart, and so be none that
unfeignedly fear God; for that manner of speech intends the habit or dominion
of pride, which is only in the unregenerate: [are an abomination to the Lord]
he has them in detestation, and cannot abide them: [though hand join in hand]
notwithstanding that they unite their forces, and combine themselves together
for their defense and safety, [he shall not be vnpunished] not one of them shall
escape the strokes of God, though for a time he defer his judgments.



The mischiefs that ensue upon pride, have been more at large entreated of in
the second verse of the eleventh Chapter: and the vanity of wicked men's
association for impunity, in the 21. verse of the same Chapter.

Verse 6. By mercy and truth shall iniquity be purged: and by the fear of
the Lord men depart from evil.
BY mercy] That kindness and free love which the Lord bears to his elect,
[and truth] the faithful accomplishment of his promises (and in the same sense
are the same words taken in Chap. 14. 8. 22. To them that think on good things
shall be mercy and truth) [iniquitie shall be purged] as well original guilt
as actual transgressions, and all that is amiss in the nature, and hearts,
and ways of Gods chosen, shall be remitted and washed away through the blood
of Jesus Christ. That this is the meaning of this sentence, it appears by the
force of the word, that signifies to make expiation, which properly belonged
to Christ to do, though typically the Priests of the Law were said to expiate
by the sacrifices which they offered. For he (as S. John witnesses) which is
our Advocate with the father, is likewise the propitiation for our 1. John 2. 2.
sins: [and by the fear of the Lord] the knowledge of his will, the
reverence of his majesty, and the regard of his favor, [men depart from
iniquitie] they decline from wicked ways, and do those things which are
lawful and good. Yet neither of them are in full perfection, though both of
them in sincerity and truth. So that he declares the causes of justification
in the former clause, and the exercise of sanctification in the latter: showing
by whom sins are pardoned, in the one; and to whom the assurance thereof
pertains, in the other.



That pride and presumption, to arrogate to ones self the praise of making
himself happy, is most loathsome to the Lord, and therefore he has stored the
Scriptures with testimonies and proofs, to help our hearts against it. And to
this purpose is that in Isaiah: I [euen] I am he that puts away Isa. 43. 25.
26.
thine iniquities for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. Put me
in remembrance; let us reason together: count thou that thou may be
justified.

The meaning of the latter words is as if he should have said, Show thy
righteousness, if thou have any, and I have forgotten it: Stand for thine own
worthiness: Recount the meritorious works which thou have wrought, to be
justified thereby: but all will be in vain. And S. Paul does expressly
disclaim all merits of this nature, both for himself, and all his brethren.
He saved us (says he) not by the works of righteousness which we had done,
but according to his own mercy. Titus 3. 5.




of our redemption must be absolutely righteous, and infinitely holy,
according as the Law broken, and the Law-giuers justice are.







They must earne some part, or have no part: They will either win it, or
never wear it. But it may be truly said of them, that they trusting in lying
vanities, do forsake their own mercies.

His loving kindness is mighty toward us, and his Psalm. 117. 2.
truth endures for ever.

After that we are estated in his mercies, we shall as certainly remain
happy people for ever, as we know him to be a glorious God for ever. He can
no more fail of any part of his mercy and truth, than of his whole nature and
Deity.

will not cast off his righteousness, as he will not fail of his mercy. For
if he should either punish his people that are penitent, or spare his enemies
that are obstinate, he should forfeit his truth: for he plainly professes,
that those that walk Deuteronomy. 29. 20.
after the stubbornness of their own hearts, he will not be merciful unto.

And by the fear of the Lord] According as any man is religious in heart, so
he will strive to be innocent, and honest in life.

He that is godly, will surely be good: and he that is impious, cannot choose
but be unrighteous. The Apostle chargeing unregenerate men with wicked
behavior, as that their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, and their
feet swift to shed blood, etc. assigns this as a cause of all those evils,
that the fear of God is not before their eyes. Where Abraham doubted that the
fear of God was not, he looked for dishonest dealing: Romans 3. 18.
and just cause he had so to do, though he used unmeet means to prevent it,
and extended his suspicion too far in misdeeming all, whereas it appears
that there was piety Genesis 20. 11.
and godliness in some.

Contrariwise, Job and Joseph, by virtue of this reverent awe of God, obtained
power, not only against the practice of gross sins, but over their eyes,
that they should not cast Job 31. 1.
wanton looks; and over their hearts, that they should not conceive unchaste
thoughts.

hatred of that which is evil; and we know no man will be desirous to meddle
much with that which he Prouer. 8. 13.
loves not.

What portion (says Job) should I have of God from above? and what inheritance
from the Almighty from on high? Is not destruction to the wicked, and strange
[punishment] to the workers of iniquity? Does not he behold my ways, and
tell all my steps? Job 31. 2. 3. 4.

bodies, and would not have them polluted with corrupt conversation; if we
tender our credits, and would not be blemished with naughty practices, then let
us seek to be sanctified thorowout with soundness of Religion and godliness.

Or would we be glad that our people should prosper, and our children take
good courses for our comfort? Are we loath to see them unthrifty, unchaste,
given to filching, or drunkenness, or any other misbehauiour? Let us then
teach them to know the Lord, and persuade them sincerely to worship him, and
that will be a preservative against all these mischiefs.





Verse 7. When the Lord is pleased with the ways of a man, he will make his
enemies at peace with him.
WHen the Lord is pleased with the ways of a man] When any person leads a
holy and righteous life, with faith and integrity, according to the rule of
his word, [hee will make his enemies at peace with him] he will cause his
adversaries to lay aside their hatred, and bear good will to him, and deal
friendly with him.

This comes to pass often, but not always: neither would the Holy Ghost
have it taken for a perpetual rule; for how then should that be verified which
our Savior told his Disciples, that they should be betrayed of their parents,
and Luke 21. 16.
brethren, and kinsmen, and friends, and be hated of all men for his names
sake: which we see usually come to pass also in our times? But this is the
best means to reconcile them unto us, and win their love either sooner or
latter, as experience diverse times declares. And this procures protection
from God, though malice be nothing diminished in them. And this may occasion
them now and then to do us a good turn in a fit, as the Egyptians did to the
Israelites; or before they are ware, as Hamon did to Mordecai, though they
bear no good affection to us.

The best way to have man's favor to do us good, is to get Gods favor. Jacob
was undoubtedly persuaded of this, when his brother Esau, whose wrath he
feared, was coming with a band of men to meet him: and that made him so
indefatigable in his prayer and wrestling with the Lord. And the answer which
he received, with the success that he found, was suitable to the means which
he used. Because thou have had power (says the Angel) with God, thou shall
also prevail Genesis 32. 28.
with men.

The same course took Mordecai and Hester to procure the favor and help of
Ahashuerosh; and Nehemiah to obtain Hester 4. Neh. 1. 11.
his suit of King Artahshashte. And it is said of the Jews that were in Babel
and other places, that when the Lord remembered his covenant toward them, and
repented according to the multitude Psalm. 106. 46.
of his mercies, that he gave them favor in the sight of all them that lead
them Captives.

Ahashuerosh to cast off Vashti, whom he doted on before; and to embrace
Hester, whom he never knew before. He caused the same King in a moment to
abhor and hang Haman, which had been his minion and principal favorite; and
to admire and promote Mordecai, whom he had formerly prescribed and destinated
to death.

of his servants, that it shall be observed of their enemies, and that to the
pacifying of their displeasures, and reconciling of their good wills: as their
mildness and mercy, their humility and patience, their diligence in their
callings, their faithfulness to their friends, their love to their enemies,
their innocence toward all, and readiness to do good to every one. By these
and such like, though some be moved to more envy, yet many will be allured to
better liking of them.





Let them know, that the friendship that is so gotten or retained, is either
unconstant and mutable, and is like to be lost as soon as it is found; or
unprofitable and barren, that will do them no good at their greatest need; or
dangerous and noisome, that will turn to the hurt either of their hearts or
bodies. For many of them whose favor they have paid for with the hazard of
their souls, do at length become their mortal enemies for the ruin of their
present estate: but which of them all will show his kindness in helping them
to Heaven, and seeking the happiness of their state to come?

Verse 8. Better is a little with righteousness, than great revenues without
equity.
BEtter] More comfortable and profitable [is a little] small substance or
maintenance [with righteousnesse] when the man himself is just and godly, and
his possessions are well gotten and used [than great reuenues] either a large
stock, and store of money, or any kind of riches, or lands, or pensions, or
commings in, whatsoever, [without equitie] which are unjustly come by,
unrighteously kept, or unlawfully spent. See Chap. 12. verse 27. and 15. verse
16.

Verse 9. The heart of a man purposes his way: but the Lord directs his
steps.
MAny devises, intents, and resolutions, are in the minds of men: [but the
Lord directs his steps] his providence causes their determinations either to
proceed and take effect, (when they intend to do that which he has decreed to
have done) or else to be stayed and hindered, when they purpose to themselves
those things which he has not appointed. And because the whole course of man's
actions is resembled to a way, he therefore does call all his particular
proceedings therein, his steps.



The Prophet David affirms the same point, saying, The Psalm. 37. 23.
steps of man are directed by the Lord. And Jeremy does also confirm it, when
he says, I know, O Lord, that the way of man is Ier. 10. 23.
not in himself, neither is it in man to walk, and to direct his steps. If it
had been otherwise, all Israel should surely have perished when the Egyptians
pursued them, with purpose, and resolution, Exodus 15. 9.
to overtake, and slay, and spoil them. Neither would Hezekiah and his people
have been much more safe, if Saneherib 2. King. 19.
could have done as much as he minded, and boasted, and threatened, for his
will was plainly enough declared by Rabshakehs words.

Psalm 33. 14.
their resolutions.

Herod and Pilate, with the Gentiles, and people of Israel, came together Act.
4. 28.
to do whatsoever his hand and counsel had determined before to be done.





in the ways of his word, for they shall never want the guidance of his spirit.
A promise is made to them for their good prosperity, and it is in his hand to
conduct them to it, and as easy for him to effect it, as to speak it. And
because the wicked are continually practicing against the godly (innumerable
plots being cast for their ruin and destruction) this is our comfort
concerning our safety, that whatsoever God has purposed in mercy for our good,
shall take place; and nothing that they have concluded in mischief for our
hurt, shall prevail. The Lord breaks the counsel of the Heathen Psalm. 33.
10.
(says the Scripture) and brings to naught the devises of the people. The
counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever: and the thoughts of his heart
thorowout all ages.

Verse 10. A sage sentence should be in the lips of the King: his mouth should
not transgress in judgment.
A Sage sentence] The word signifies a divination, being used very often in
the evil part for the predictions of the Soothsayers and Astrologers, and so
is forbidden in the Law, Deuteronomy. 18. 10. And sometimes in good part, as Isa. 3.
2. The Lord will take from Jerusalem the strong man, and the man of war, the
Judge and the Prophet, the Diuiner or prudent man, (who by observation of
causes can foresee what effects are like to follow) and the aged. And in Micah
3. 6. there is a threatening, that night and darkness (meaning Gods judgments
upon their minds, or bodies, or both) shall keep them from vision and
divination. And so here it is prescribed as the Kings duty, and commended as
his virtue, and not reproved as his fault. And hereby is intimated, that a
wise equal manner of proceeding in all causes [should be in the lips of the
King] in the words and sayings of the Ruler, and sovereign Governor, and of
the subordinate Magistrates under him, who are deputed to supply his place for
him: [his mouth should not transgress in iudgement] neither he nor they ought
to pass or award any unjust sentence, or otherwise utter unrighteous speeches,
but deal uprightly toward every man in every matter.



The prayer which Solomon made to God at the beginning of his reign, does
argue that he knew both these graces to be necessary for him. Give (says he)
to thy servant an understanding 1. King 3. 9.
heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and evil. Now
that which he asked, God was well pleased to grant; and that end which he
proposed, God also much respected; that he would therefore, he did afterward
in the case of the two victualing women or harlots about the child. And it is
said, that al Israel heard the judgment, and saw the wisdom 1 King. 3. 28.
of God to be in him to do justice.



This was the ground of Iehoshaphats admonition to his Judges, whereby he
persuaded them to be faithful in the execution of their offices. Take heed
(says he) what ye do, for 2 Chronicles. ^^ 6 7.
ye execute not the judgments of man, but of the Lord and he will be with
you in the cause and judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon
you: take heed, and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God,
neither respect of persons, nor receiving of rewards.

Solomon confessed in his prayer before mentioned. God is the master and owner
of the flock: the Prince his principal shepherd, and next unto him; and the
subordinate Ministers of justice inferior shepherds under the Prince.

for the most part, are prevented, or healed, by the wisdom and faithfulness
of righteous Governors.



And as they are much behoouefull for their reputation, so are they very
necessary for their consciences, because they must yield an account to God of
the manner of their administration and government. In which respect, every
sentence which they pass, and every work of their office which they perform,
does more nearly concern themselves, than the parties whose causes they deal
in. If they do justice, and decree that which is right, they shall have praise
for the same from the most righteous Judge at the last day: but if they have
perverted judgment, if they condemn the innocent, and if they confirm the
wicked in their wicked ways, they do all this against their own souls:
those matters will be called into question again at that time, and then they
shall have shame before the judgment seat of Christ, in the presence and
hearing of all the world.

Verse 11. The weight and balance of judgment are of the Lord: all the
weights of the bag are his work.
THE weight and balance of iudgement] Just, even, and equal measures, and all
upright and faithful dealing in every respect, [are of the Lord] commanded
and appointed by him, according as it is said in the Law, Thou shall have a
right and Deu 25. 15. 16
just weight: a perfect and a just measure shall thou have, that thy days may
be lengthened in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. For all that do
unrighteously are abomination to the Lord thy God. [all the weights] the great
and the small, and of the middle size [of the bagge] which men use to put into
the bag for the better and safer keeping of them, [are his worke] his
ordinance, found out and invented by his special providence and direction, and
warranted by his word for the benefit of humane society, and the preservation
of equity in the traffic of one man with another. Herein is a secret
admonition contained by consequence, that no man pervert them to fraud and
deceit, because that man is not only thereby damnified, but Gods own ordinance
is thereby violated. See Chap. 11. verse 1.

Verse 12. It is an abomination for Kings to commit wickedness: for the throne
is established by justice.
IT is an abomination] an horrible and loathsome thing, wherewith the Lord is
highly displeased, [for Kings] for great and mighty men, and Magistrates of
every degree, [to commit wickednesse] to walk in impious, unclean, and
unrighteous ways: [for the throne] their honor, and safety, and good estate
every way, [is established by iustice] made firm, and continued the longer, by
their faithful and upright behavior toward God and their people.



By this argument does Hosea exaggerate the offenses, and justify the
punishments of the Priests of his time. As they Hos. 4. 7.
were increased (says he) that is, grown richer, and exalted higher, they
rebelled against me, therefore I will change their glory into shame. And
Jeremy, by way of comparison, does somewhat extenuate the naughtiness of the
vulgar sort, to aggrauate the wickedness of the nobility, saying, They (this
common people) are poor, they are foolish, for they know not the way Ier. 5.
4. 5.
of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God. I will get me unto the great men,
and will speak unto them, for they have known the way of the Lord, and the
judgment of their God: but those have altogether broken the yoke, and burst
the bonds. Wherefore a Lion out of the Forest shall slay them, and a Wolf out
of the Wilderness shall destroy them, etc.



The Lord was wont to ebbraid great personages, when they committed great
transgressions, with the high places he had advanced them unto, as Saul, and
Jeroboam, and Eli, though better than they, and David himself, though best of
them all.

Jeroboam is mentioned, he is usually described by this, that he made Israel
to sin.

David did by his adultery and murder: and when he committed a smaller fault,
as was the numbering of the people. But the strokes which the fearful sins of
Manasse, Iehoiakim, and others, brought upon the City, Temple, and inhabitants
of Jerusalem and Judah, were marvelous lamentable in those days, and very
memorable still in these times.



They think their gentry will warrant all impiety, and their dignity assure
them of impunitie, and their eminent places a protection from all punishments.
And therefore so many are puffed up with pride, and practice cruelty, and
profess adultery, and breath out blasphemies, and live in voluptuousness,
and scarce forbear any kind of iniquity.

of theirs are very prone. Let them therefore read the Scriptures constantly,
as the King was commanded to do all the Deuteronomy. 17. 19.
days of his life, that he might learn to fear the Lord his God, and to
keep all the words of the Law. Let them meditate in the same with as great
diligence as was required of Joshua, who was to apply himself thereto both day
and night, that he might Josh. 1 8.
do according to all that was written therein.

Let them have faithful Ministers about them, which will show them their
sins, and deal faithfully with their souls, as Gad and Nathan did with
David: and let them hearken to their wholesome counsels, as David did to Gads
and Nathans.

The throne is established, etc.] The goodness and justice of men in
authority does better uphold their estate than greatness and riches.

The Lord by Jeremiah declaring how happy Josiah the father had been, and how
wretched Iehoiakim the son should be; and why the one did speed so well, and
wherefore the other could thrive no better, says, Shall thou reign because
Ier. 22. 15.
thou closest thy self in Cedar? Did not thy father eat, and drink, and
prosper, when he executed judgment and justice? When he judged the cause of
the afflicted and poor, he prospered. Was not this because he knew me, says
the Lord? But thine eyes and thy heart are only for thy covetousness, and for
oppression, etc. And so his ruin and destruction is showed in the words
following.





and stand in the greater awe of his laws: his authority will command the
very heart, so that none but such as are desperately rebellious, will dare to
attempt any thing against him. It is noted, that when all Israel had heard the
wise and righteous sentence that Solomon passed for the delivery of the child
to the right mother, they feared the King: and the reason is added, because
they saw the wisdom of God was in him to do justice. 1. King. 3. 28.




Verse 13. Righteous lips are the delight of Kings: and the King loves him
that speaks right things.
THE latter clause shows what is the sense of the former, that when it is
said, [Righteous lips are the delight of Kings] is meant, that Kings and great
personages will affect such as speak with truth, wisdom, and faithfulness.
This often comes to pass, but oftener fails, more mighty men favoring
flatterers and Sycophants, than such as are upright in their speeches. And yet
is there no untruth in the sentence, because the purpose thereof is to show
what is done by some, and ought to be done by all. It is therefore given as a
precept to Princes and superiors, to make much of them that speak plainly
with judgment and discretion: and an encouragement to subjects and inferiors,
to use their lips so, with expectation of favor thereby, if not from mighty
men in the earth, yet from the Almighty God in Heaven.

Joseph, in Daniel, in Mordecai, and others. And there is to the same purpose a
like saying in another Chapter: He that loves pureness of Prouer. 22. 11
heart, for the grace of his lips the King shall be his friend. See more for
this point in the 14. Chapter at the last verse.

Verse 14. The wrath of a King is as messengers of death: but a wise man will
pacify it.
THE wrath of a King] His indignation, justly and upon due cause kindled
against his servants or subjects, [is as messengers of death] does portend and
threaten some great punishment, if not present death, to the parties with whom
he is offended, if they fall into his hands: [but a wise man will pacify it]
he will endeavor either by his own means, fit opportunity being taken; or
by mediation of others, who shall be better regarded, to assuage his anger.



True it is that Pharaoh was very much moved against Moses, and yet Moses
nothing feared Pharaohs fierceness: and Nebuchadnezzar was full of rage
against the three children, and yet could do the three children no harm: And
Ahab stormed at Elijah, and sought to slay him, and yet had never power to
prevail against him, because the displeasure was without the desert of those
Prophets. But the case stands otherwise with those that exasperate their
Sovereigns with their rebellious behavior, or any other misdemeanures. To
such the fear of the King is like the roaring of a Lion. Prouer. 20. 2.
He that provoke him to anger, sins against his own soul. Witness for
this purpose, Haman, who notwithstanding all his former familiarity with the
King, felt yet what it was to Hester 7.
offend a King.

Where the word of the King is (says Ecclesiastes) there is power: Eccles. 8.
4.
and who shall say unto him, What do thou?

S. Paul testifies) Gods Lieuetenant and Minister to take vengeance on him
that does evil: and therefore the Lords anger is to be trembled at in his
indignation: and Romans 13 4.
he is many times made severe in his justice, and will not pardon malefactors,
because God is righteous in his judgments, and will surely have those
malefactors punished.

My son (says the wisdom of God) fear the Lord and the King, and meddle
not with them that are seditious. Prouer. 24. 21.


And this serves also to admonish them who are already fallen into the
displeasure of mighty and potent personages that rule over them, that they sit
not down securely while their danger is so great. The more eminent the person
is against whom the offenses are committed, the more imminent the peril is to
the party that commits the offenses.

What is then to be done in such a case, that the evil like to follow may be
prevented? Our text tells us, that a wise man will use his wisdom in
asswaging the anger, and reconciling the favor of Kings and superiors
incensed.

In the first place, seek grace from God, (as Hester did, and Mordecai, and
all the godly Jews) to turn away his indignation, and then is it easy for
him to mitigate and appease the Princes displeasure.

And next, either solicit friends to intercede for thee, as David did
Jonathan, and Mordecai Hester; or else deal so in thine own cause, as whereby
he may be most moved to show thee compassion. If thou be falsely accused,
make clear thine innocence with humility: if justly charged, acknowledge thy
fault with submission: if remission may conveniently be granted, beseech thy
Sovereign to pardon thee: if so much cannot be obtained, yet entreat that at
the least he would pity thee.



Verse 15. In the light of the Kings countenance is life; and his favor is as
a cloud of the latter rain.
THE meaning of this sentence is, that where the King and great personages do
affect, and make manifest their love, there is joy, and credit, and protection,
and preferment, and all such prosperity as man may be a means of: for so much
the word [life] does import: and the same is amplified by the two similitudes
of lightsome and comfortable sunshine, and of fruitful and profitable
showers; especially those which they called the latter rain, whereby the
ground was refreshed after the drought, and the corn was ripened before the
harvest. And yet are not all promiscuously, without difference, in so happy an
estate when superiors do set by them, unless the Lord do also grace them:
for man's friendship can never do good unto Gods enemies, as may appear by the
condition of Doeg, and of the noble man, upon whom the King of Jsrael leaned;
and of the Priests of Baal, whom 2. King. 7.
Jezabel maintained; and of the false Prophets, whom Ahab respected.



The cheerful looks of a good ruler upon a worthy person is as a bright
morning after a dark night, and as dew upon Prouer. 19. 12
the grass after a great drought, as the holy Ghost makes resemblance. It was
not a small comfort to Mephibosheth to find so much grace at David's hand; nor
a little honor to Daniel to be so much esteemed of Darius, and other Kings
under whom he lived. And the like may be said of Joseph and Hester, of Mordecai
and Nehemiah, whom the Scripture mentions to have been in great credit with
those Monarchs whom they served, and were in subjection unto.

S. Paul witnesses, is the Minister of God for the wealth of them that do
well. Romans 13. 4.




as may be exemplified in those faithful favorites formerlie specified.



That was one of the principal clauses of David's Vow which he made to God
before he entered into the possession of his Kingdom, that he would know (or
rather acknowledge by any kind and familiar usage) no evil man. Mine eyes
(says he) Psalm. 101. 4. 6.
shall be unto the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me. He that
walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me. Great men's kindnesses have as
much operation in the people, as seasonable showers in the herbs and plants.
And is it not then to be wished that they were restrained from sinful weeds
and nettles, lest they grow ranker, and smell the worse; and reserved for
virtuous herbs and flowers, which may be the more odoriferous, and flourish
the better? Certain it is, that the hands of ungracious wretches are greatly
strengthened, and made able to do much mischief, by being favored of men in
eminent places, which may easily be prevented, or stayed, by frowns, or
checks, or disgracings from them.

And this serves also for a motive to inferiors, to incite them to seek by
due desert in good services, to be well esteemed of, and in credit with those
that bear rule over them. Who knows whether the Lord may not direct their
eyes to take notice of them, and incline their hearts to be affected toward
them? But because it is scarce possible for a Prince to grace all, or to know
every one of his dutiful subjects, therefore they which (according to S.
Peter's precept) do religiously fear God, and loyally honor the King, have
cause to comfort themselves in the favor of the most mighty Monarke of heaven
and earth, which does infinitely more exceed the greatest kindness that all
the greatest states in the world can show to their dearest friends, than the
Sunne-beames at noone, in the clearest Summer days, do excel the smallest
spark of fire in the earth in brightness. It is everlasting, as he is
eternal: It is unchangeable, as he is immutable: It is effectual, as he is
almighty: It is most glorious and comfortable, as he is the God of glory and
consolation.

Verse 16. How much better is it to get wisdom than gold? And to get
understanding is more to be desired than silver.
HOw much better] It is so far better to seek and find heavenly wisdom,
and the knowledge of God rather than gold, yea even that which is fine and
precious, (as the word imports) and silver, as that the ods and difference is
inexplicable; the greatness of it cannot be uttered.



Which point is more amply prosecuted by the holy ghost himself, Chap. 3. 14.
etc. and 8. 10. 11.

Verse 17. The path of the righteous is to decline from evil: and he keeps
his soul that keeps his way.
THE path of the righteous] The wonted and most constant conversation of all
good men, that which they most desire and endeavor, [is to decline from euill]
to abstain from sin and iniquity, and all that may allure thereunto: and
contrariwise to perform, as far as in them lies, every Christian duty that
is required at their hands: [and he keeps his soule] he preserves himself,
both soul and body, from destruction, and all kind of plagues, [that keeps
his way] which orders his life aright, and walks uprightly in obedience to
Gods holy Commandments.



S. Paul confesses, that diverse things he did amiss, but Romans 7. 15.
with no allowance, for he hated them: and sundry good works he failed to
do, but not to desire, for his will was to have performed them. And God gives
a testimony of integrity, and a promise of happiness to his faithful
servants, in that divine and holy Psalm. Blessed (says he) are those that
Psalm. 119. 1. 3.
are upright in their way. Surely they work none iniquity, but walk in his
ways.





walks in evil, nor allows himself to continue faulty. Shall a
rebellious traitor, that conspireth against his Prince, or takes up arms
against him, be therefore justified for a good subject, because the most
faithful subjects may be convinced of the breach of some penal laws?



And he keeps his soule] So much assurance has every man of his salvation
and safety, as he is careful to keep himself innocent and righteous.

To this end tends that saying of Moses after he had delivered and declared
the Law of God to the Israelites: Behold, I have set before thee this day life
and good, death and evil, Deu. 30. 15. 16
in that I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his
ways, and to keep his Commandments, etc.







he that refraineth from Isa. 59. 15.
evil, makes himself to be thought a mad man. As who sees it not, that they
are little better accounted of, which fly from those sinful delights which
others follow? That dare not join with swearers, Sabbath Breakers, and men of
other leaud conditions, in fashions or fellowship? That dare not lift up
themselves in pomp and pride, and will not revenge the wrongs that are offered
unto them? That choose rather to live poor and godly, than wealthy and worldly,
and to get goods by guile and falsehood? What are you the better (say the sons
of Belial) for your precise course of life, and strict restraint of your selves
from that liberty which other men take? Here is an answer to them, and a
comfort to us: This text tells wherein we are the better, and what gain we
do get by the exercise of godliness, shunning of licenciousnesse, than which
nothing is more contrary to liberty. We keep ourselves in keeping our way:
We escape much mischief in shunning of sin: We are delivered from
destruction by ordering well our conversation. Who now does call into question
the wisdom and providence of Noah in declining the universal corruptions of
his days, though then all generally derided him? Was not he protected when
others were punished? Was not he preserved when all the world perished? Right
wise then, and happy is that man which proceeds in the good way, though it
be never so rough, that is safe, and leads to salvation; as he is most
sottish and miserable that turns to the paths of sin, how smooth soever
they seem to be, which are full of perils, and will bring him to perdition.

Verse 18. Pride goes before destruction, and an high mind before the fall.
PRide goes before destruction, etc.] That commonly comes to pass, that
before any great plague befall the wicked, they grow insolent and presumptuous,
setting forth themselves ambitiously, and seeking vain glory, in words and
deeds, in gestures or countenance: or at least their hearts are lifted up, as
it is testified in the latter clause. And where either stately or stubborn
behavior, or an hautie mind do go before, there some notable judgment of
God will certainly follow after, unless humiliation and repentance come
between. See Chap. 11. verse 2.

Verse 19. Better it is to be of an humble mind with the afflicted, than to
divide the spoils with the proud.
BEtter it is] It is more comfortable, more honorable, more profitable, more
safe and easy [to be of an humble minde] or as the Hebrew word is, [of an
humble spirit] not artificially in pride or policy to make semblance of
humility, or only by natural disposition to be less ambitious than many
others; but to have the true habit of humility, being beautified and
sanctified with the grace thereof, [with the afflicted] albeit we should be
poor, or oppressed, or pass under any other crosses, as many, and the most,
and welneere all do, or have done, that are heartily humbled, [than to divide
the spoils with the proud] than to prevail in our attempts, and get victories
for glory, and riches for state, [with the proud] in that manner, and with
that mind, as violent and arrogant oppressors use to do.

He alludeth to the winning and sacking of Cities, and prefers the condition
of the people subdued, and spoiled of their substance, if they be lowly, before
the state of the warriers conquering, and carrying away the wealth, if they be
puffed up with pride.



The one sort in the book of Ecclesiastes is no more reckoned of than servants
and slaves mounted on horsbacke: and no Eccles. 10. 10.
less account is made of the other, than of Princes, and great noble men,
walking on foot. And in one place of that book he comes as directly in
express terms to the point, as in this our text, saying, The patient in
spirit (meaning the humble, Eccles. 7. 10.
so described by his effects) is better than the proud in spirit.









It is not unlawful for a man of great state, if God advance him, to be ranked
with men of great degree; but then he must take the more pains to keep down
his heart, that it may not be lifted up above his brethren of lower place: for
he that admireth himself in the opinion of his own excellency, makes
himself base in the sight of God, and contemptible in the judgment of wise
men.

all indignities by proud persecutors and contemptuous scorners: The despite
that is offered unto them does not cause the Lord to despise them, but to make
them contemptible that are despisers of them. No disgrace can take away any
part of their honor, if they be faithful; and no high looks shall prevent
the low fall of their enemies, if they be cruel. The abiects of the world (as
they were accounted of and used) the poor distressed Israelites, were Gods
sons and dearelings, when the burden was upon their backs, and the strokes on
their bodies; and the mightiest Potentate then of the world, as is probable,
even great Pharaoh, that played the tyrant with them, was but a great beast, a
Serpent, or Dragon, when he most flourished, and sat upon his throne. They
were appointed to an honorable deliverance, and he was ordained to a memorable
destruction.

Verse 20. He that harkeneth to the word, shall find good: and blessed is he
that trusts in the Lord.
HE that hearkeneth to the word] which applies his ear, and mind, and heart
to the sacred word and doctrine of God, both written and preached, [shall find
good] shall obtain all such graces for his soul, and blessings for his body,
as may testify Gods favor toward him. [And blessed is he that trusts in
the Lord] This latter clause is an explication of the former, showing the good
that is promised, to be blessedness it self; a sufficiency of comfort and
prosperity in this life, and a full perfection of glory and felicity in the
life to come: and the attention required to be such as is accompanied with
faith, that the word be not only marked, but also believed; and God when he
speaks, have not only heed given to him, but confidence likewise reposed in
him.





Nothing is more frequent and common in the Scriptures than promises to the
faithful: It is the current of them all, and that which they principally drive
at, to assure them that rely upon God, that their state is most comfortable.
How often are the acclamations added to the end of sentences in the Psalms:
Blessed are all that trust in him. O Lord God of hosts, Psalm. 2. 12. Psalm. 84.
12.
blessed is the man that trusts in thee, etc. And how evidently and elegantly
does Jeremy, among the rest of the Prophets, declare the same, saying, Blessed
is the man that trusts in the Ier. 17. 7. 8.
Lord, and whose hope the Lord is; for he shall be as a tree that is planted by
the water, which spreads out her roots by the river, and shall not feel when
the heat comes: but her leaf shall be green, and shall not care for the
year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit.



And as faith and affiance in God are themselves very acceptable to him, so do
they make, through Christ, all our other services accepted of him.

sin do? And what can death do? or the devil? or the power of hell? Much
less shall malicious men effect their mischievous purposes to hurt them: and
least of all shall any other creature be able to work their woe, when the
Lord of all creatures is at peace with them, and their protector: when he is as
firm for their defense as the mightiest mountains, and makes them stand as
fast as the hills, according to that saying of the Prophet; They that trust in
the Lord, shall be as Psalm. 125. 1.
Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but remains for ever. And for the
fruition of good things, let them ask and have; for he will give them their
hearts desire. And though they ask not, nor desire enough, (as who is that way
so provident for himself as his own state does require, and Gods goodness
does offer opportunity?) yet he will bestow upon them all that (in their
behalf) Christ has bought, and paid for; and that is incomparably more than
they can beg, or pray for. It is said for their provision, that nothing shall
be wanting unto them. It is said for the salvation of their souls, that he
that hears the word of Christ, and believes in him that sent him, has John
5. 24.
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation. And it is said for the
resurrection of their bodies, that every one that believes in the son of
God, shall have everlasting life, and he will John 6. 40.
raise him up at the last day. And it is said for the fullness of their
comfort, felicity, and everlasting bliss, that the Lord God is a Sun and
shield [vnto them.] The Lord will give grace Psalm. 84. 11.
and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

greatness, for thy great heavenly glory: his absolute all-sufficiencie, for
thy complete and entire welfare.

Achas his mind, and show it in deed, though they say not in word, that they
will not tempt the Isa. 7. 12.
Lord, that is, put themselves upon him for protection against perils, and
provision against poverty, without shifting for themselves, through fear lest
he should disappoint them?

There be many that give him as much credit as they would yield to any
bankerupt, being willing to traffic with him in his services, and trust to
his promises, so long as they see ready pay, and may attain to present
preferment, or profit; but further they dare not take his word. Foolish people,
that forsake their own mercies, and trust to lying vanities: that make gold
their hope, and men their arm: that deifie base creatures, by putting
confidence in them, and vilify the glorious God by withdrawing their hearts
from him: which obstinately refuse a blessed estate, by forsaking the fountain
of living waters; and wilfully choose a cursed condition, by digging to
themselves broken pits, that can hold no water.

Verse 21. The wise in heart shall be called prudent: and the sweetness of
the lips shall increase Doctrine.
THE wise in heart] He which is godly wise, and wise to salvation, who has
knowledge and sincerity mixed together in his soul, [shall be called prudent]
shall show himself, be known, and justly commended, to be a judicious and
discreet person, both in the mouths of godly men, and in the consciences of
wicked men, and by good effects at last in the sight of all men: [and the
sweetness of the lips shall increase knowledge] The former part of the sentence
declares what good the wise do get by wisdom; that they attain to the
virtue and praise of prudence: and in this latter, what good they do by the
same to others, which is specified only in their words, in their wel-seasoned
and comfortable speeches, called the sweetness of the lips, that thereby
grows [increase of doctrine] to every attentive and diligent hearer, both for
admonition, instruction, consolation, and every other use, as opportunity
serves.



Their wise behavior will so well become them, and their good success in the
end will so much advantage them, that the eyes of many will observe their
comely conversation, and their tongues commend their happy condition.

The Laws (says Moses) which I have taught you, keep and Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
do them; for that is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the
people which shall hear all these ordinances, and shall say, Only this people
is wise, and of understanding, and a great Nation. And it may be noted
thorowout all the Scriptures, that none have with so great dexterity and happy
effect discharged the duties of their callings, in what place soever, as they
which are most praised for their godliness, as Joseph, and Moses, and David,
and Daniel, and many other Worthies.

I Wisdom Prou. 8. 12. 14.
dwell with prudence, and I find forth wisdom, and counsels. I have
counsel, and wisdom: I am understanding, and I have strength.

Proverbs does witness, abounding every where with rules and instructions to
that purpose: As with admonitions against idleness, and rash suretiship:
persuasions to thrift, and good husbandry: directions for seasonable silence,
and speaking: lessons how to deal with superiors: aduertisements how to
govern inferiors: counsels how to match in marriage, and well to use and live
with a good yokefellow, etc.

Joshua, if he would religiously seek to know his will, and faithfully obey
his word: Then (says he) shall thou make thy way prosperous, and Joshua 1. 8.
then shall thou have good success. And that which is said to him, is spoken
of every wise hearted man, in the Psalm: Whatsoever Psalm 1. 3.
be shall do, shall prosper.



Abraham found this true by good experience, in sending of that devout and
trusty servant to fetch a wife for Isaac: and so did Laban, in vising Jacob
about his flocks: and so did Potiphar, in committing such trust to Joseph in
his family.

Reproof of their folly, that think it impossible for those that are truly
religious, either to show themselves prudent, or that others should commend
them for discretion: and therefore they reject the wisdom of the word, because
they fear it will make them to be derided; and wholly embrace the policy of
the world, because they hope it will make them to be admired. Or if at any time
profession of piety and Religion may be for their advantage, as often it is,
they will only make a show thereof with their tongues, but never give
entertainment thereto in their souls. Sorrow and shame will teach them in
time to know, that neither they which contemptuously despise the wisdom of the
spirit, nor they which dissemblingly pretend a love of it, had ever any good
forecast for themselves, but only they that are wise in heart shall be called
prudent. We are taught by Jobs faithful testimony, that they which say unto
God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge Job 21. 14. 17.
of thy ways, shall have their candle put out, and destruction come upon them.
And we learn by Achitophels woeful example, that no wit nor subtlety can
preserve an hypocrite from working his own misery.

The doctrine that arises out of the other part of the sentence, concerning
the fruit that comes by wise, wholesome, and comfortable speeches, has been
observed and handled Chap. 10. verse 11. where the mouth of the righteous is
called a wel-spring of life: and Chap. 11. verse 13. where the fruit of the
righteous is said to be as a tree of life.

Verse 22. Understanding is a wellspring of life to them that have it: but the
instruction of fools is folly.
VNderstanding] The true knowledge of Gods holy will [is a wellspring of life]
a precious possession, as fountains were in those Countries; and a
comfortable, constant, necessary, and effectual means of salvation, [to them
that have it] whose minds are soundly illuminated, and their hearts graciously
seasoned therewith: [but the instruction of fooles] those persuasions which
sinful men use, and that advice which they give in stead of instructions, [is
follie] corrupt and wicked for matter, and pernicious and hurtful for effect.

Thus stands the opposition: Understanding is a Wellspring of life to those
that possess it, and therefore the counsel of wise men is wisdom: and
ignorance is the fountain of death to them that are possessed of it, and
therefore the instruction of fools is folly.



He takes his comparison from that which every man, besides many other
creatures, has necessary use of for preservation of life; and whereof the
plants of the earth stand in need for growth and fruitfulness, and the ground
it self for moisture and fertility. By the same similitude the Lord Jesus
does commend and set forth the excellency of his grace and Gospel to the
woman of Samaria, when he told her, that whosoever should drink of the water
that he shall give him, shall never be more athirst: but the water that he
shall give him, shall be in him a Well of water springing up into everlasting
life. And not much unlike to this is that which he so solemnly proclaimed in a
solemn assembly, and that in the last and great day of a solemn feast,
saying, He that believes in me, as says the John 7. 38.
Scripture, out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life.



Ahab: but this accompanies the owner whithersoeuer he goes, and wheresoever
he is; and no drought can possibly dry it up. That has no force to preserve
life against violence, or mortal diseases, or fullness of old age: but this
has power to protect the soul against all assaults, and suffers not any
malady to kill it, and makes it the more fresh and lively, by the greater
multitude of years that it lives.

much it does every way exceed all worldly possessions, by so much to be the
more industrious and diligent to possess it. It is a wellspring of life to
the owners of it, and not to the talkers and hearers of it. The enjoying of
wealth does make a man rich, and the receiving of food does nourish him, and
not the bare sight of either of them. One may see meat dressed in other men's
kitchins, and plate and jewels in other men's shops, and yet live in hunger, and
die a beggar.

Philistims maliciously did fill up Isaacks Wels: and this Well is never empty
of water, and this water never wants an effectual virtue for conservation of
the soul.

But the instruction, etc.] Good counsel is not to be expected from sinful
and ignorant men's mouths: they are full of vanity and foolishness, as sinkes
and puddles be of muddy water and filthmesse; and therefore it is not likely
that they should send forth the pure streams of wholesome instructions. They
know no good: they learn no good: they love no good: and is it possible then
for them to give exhortations, and precepts of goodness? When Rehoboam left
the judgment of the prudent, aged, and leaned on the sentences of the wild
headed yoongsters, the advice that he took, was suitable to the Counselors
that gave it; namely, rash and dangerous, exceeding pernicious and hurtful. We
shall see in the 29. verse, that a wicked man deceives his neighbor, and
leads him into the way that is not good. And there we shall have better
occasion to handle this point more at large.

Verse 23. The heart of the wise guides his mouth aright, and adds doctrine
to his lips.
THE heart of the wise] His knowledge and judgment, his prudence and
discretion, [doth guide his mouth aright] direct him when to speak, and when
to hold his peace, and what to say, and what to conceal. His love to goodness
induces him to declare that which is good; and his hatred of naughtiness does
cause him to refrain from all words that are naught: [and adds Doctrine to
his lips] ministers matter of wholesome lessons for them to deliver. It
gets knowledge, and keeps it, and they being stored therewith, do utter
the same for the instruction of others. See Chap. 15. verse 28.

Verse 24. Fair words are as an honey comb: sweetness to the soul, and
health to the bones.
GOdly and comfortable sayings rightly grounded on the holy Scriptures, and
fitly applied to the use of well prepared hearts, whether publicly or
privately, [are as an honycombe, sweetness to the soule] they bring great joy
and gladness to an upright heart, as honey or other sweet things do much
delight the taste, [and heals the bones] are means of good to the whole
body, for conservation of health, or restitution to it, by the cheerfulness
of the mind, and the favor and blessing of God.



In this place they are compared to honey by Solomon, as being equal to it in
deliciousness: but in the Psalms they are preferred before honey by David, as
being every way more Psalm. 19. 10.
delightful than that is.

Neither was he ignorant of the operation thereof, when he besought the Lord
to make him hear joy and gladness, that Psalm. 51. 8.
the bones which he had broken might rejoice.

I create the fruit of the lips to be peace: peace unto them that are far
off, and to them that are near, says the Lord, for I will heal them.

God to the souls of his faithful servants, is such as far surpasses all
things which are subject to any of the senses. His own love and favor is
thereby declared unto them: remission of sins is thereby assured unto them:
everlasting glory is thereby confirmed unto them, and the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, with his holiness, merits, and graces, is thereby exhibited to them.
Every one of which, as it is incomparably more delectable and sweet than any
thing that is sensible and for corporal use, so it is also infinitely more
durable, as being for eternity, and making him eternally happy that enioieth
it.





Verse 25. There is a way that seems right to a man: but the issue thereof
are the ways of death.
THere is a way] an ungodly, but a common course of life, which all
unregenerate persons do take, [that seems right to a man] wherein he
pleases himself; and being either blindfolded by lust, or misled by carnal
reason, custom, or company, thinks it not to be very displeasing to God, or
dangerous to himself: [but the issue thereof are the ways of death] in the
end it will bring them to destruction, toward which they have been traveling
all their life time before. See Chap. 12. verse 15. and Chap. 14. verse 12.
where the self same words have been expounded.

Verse 26. The troublesome person brings trouble to himself, for his mouth
does recoile upon himself.
THE troublesome person] which takes a delight, and seeks occasions to
molest others which have done him no hurt, [bringeth trouble to himselfe]
procures his own hurt or vexation of mind: [for his mouth recoileth upon
himselfe] his false or malicious speeches, whereby he diffameth his
neighbors, or otherwise seeks to work their sorrow, turn to his own shame
and discredit, if not loss, or further punishment.



It is a righteous thing with God (says S. Paul to the Thessalonians) 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6.
to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you.

Pharaoh with the cruel Egyptians felt this true, and Saul with his malicious
Courtiers, and Haman with those violent men that attempted the ruin of the
Church in Hesters time. Though Achan minded not to molest Israel, nor had a
purpose to do them harm, yet because he did it in deed, and drew down a
plague and judgment upon them, therefore said Joshua to him, In as much as
thou have troubled us, the Lord Joshua 7. 25.
shall trouble thee this day.



Ismael, His hand shall be against every man, and every man's hand against him.
Genesis 16. 12.


Haman found, to his coffeehouse, even whiles Mordecai was under him; but
felt to his anguish and destruction when Mordecai was over him.



Verse 27. A wicked person diggeth up evil, and in his lips is as it were
burning fire.
A Wicked person] A naughty, leaud, and wicked man, [diggeth up euill] secretly
under hand lays plots for the subversion of his neighbors state, whom he
maligneth, as pioners undermine the foundations of Cities or houses: [and in
his lips is as it were burning fire] he breaths out pernicious and evil
words, tending as much to the ruin and destruction of the parties against whom
they are spoken, as fire kindling upon an house does to the consumption both of
the building, and stuff that is in it.



At one time David must be Saul's son in law, he is so far 1. Sam. 18.
in his favor, and no dowry required at his hands, but an hundred foreskins
of the Philistims: but Saul's purpose was to make David fall into the hands of
the Philistims. Another time David is reputed a Traitor that has conspired
against Saul, a rebel that seeks to kill the King: and why is this charged
upon him? Not because David was guilty thereof, but that Saul might have some
color of reason to kill David.

Micah complained, that every man hunted his brother with a Micah 7. 2.
net. And David says, that his adversaries were fierce Lions, that they were
set on fire, that their teeth were spears and arrows, Psalm. 57. 4.
and their tongue a sharp sword. So craft and cruelty are ever at the hand of
malice, ready to serve her turn, and each of them to be employed for great
advantage. See Chapter 12. verse 6.

And his lips, etc.] Many and great evils are wrought by the poison of a
mischievous mouth.

A few evil words, quickly spoken, may minister a multitude of troubles and
stirs for a long time, as the hot breath of Rehoboam and his Counselors did
against himself and the whole nation for many ages. What a flame was kindled
by the mouth of Sheba the son of Bichri, who by one mutinous saying caused
all Israel to go from David, and follow him, so base a companion? And how many
millions, by the like means, have been drawn from the Lord himself, to fall
to Popery and treasons, and to follow sin and Satan?



Behold (says S. James) how great a thing a little fire Iam. 3. 6.
kindles. And the tongue is fire even a world of wickedness: so is the tongue
set among our members, that it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire
the course of nature, and it is set on fire of Hell, that is to say, by Satan
that hellish spirit.

houses, and goods from the flame of burning fire, lest otherwise their
friendship do scorch our souls, or else falling out devour our states.

And it is needful also for godly men always to have innocence, wisdom, and
patience in a readiness to prevent the hurt that may grow from these Juniper
coals, and firebrands: for though they will take occasion, by maligning these
graces, to blaze the more, yet they shall be restrained by the same from
burning so much, or annoying them whom they malign. And withal it shall be
very expedient to have often recourse to God for remedy against them, without
whose help there is no hope of safety: the whole Church, and every part of it
would be burnt to the ground (there are so many every where that spit fire
against the faithful) were it not that the Lord sends water from heaven to
extinguish the force of their maledictions. David knew that Achitophel had a
virulent tongue, and such an one as was like to do much mischief, if it were
permitted to take place, and therefore he sought succor at Gods hand against
it, for he prayed that his crafty counsel might be turned into foolishness,
as it fell out, to 2. Sam. 15. 31.
the destruction of the giver and receiver of it, and the preservation of him
against whom it was devised.

See the violence of an evil tongue more largely described Chap. 12. verse 18.

Verse 28. A froward person sows strife, and a tale-teller separateth chief
friends.
A Froward person] A man of frowardness (says the original text) he that is
given to unquietness, and to be a busy body, perverting other men's words and
ways, and nourishing peevishness and sinfulness in himself, [soweth strife]
raises contentions, and causes debate between man and man which agreed well
together before: [and a tale-bearer] a pickthanke, which under color and
pretense of love does secretly whisper in men's ears, and maliciously inform
them against their innocent and faithful well-willers, [separateth chief
friends] the word that often signifies a Prince, a Guide, or Captain, is
sometimes taken also for a principal friend, or, as we say, a Prince of
friends, as here and in the next Chapter following, verse 9. and Psalm 55.
verse 13. It was thou, O man, even my companion, my especial friend, and my
familiar. And Micah 7. verse 5. Trust ye not a friend, etc. The meaning then
is, that he sets variance between those that were inward together, and
singularly affected one toward another.



One false-hearted lying sycophant will cause many trusty friends to seem
unfaithful and treacherous, as Doeg did Ahimelech, and the other Priests to
Saul. It is easy for a makebate to incense a master against his best servants,
as Potiphars wife did her husband against Joseph: or a Prince against his
loyallest subjects, as Haman did Ahashuerosh against the Jews: or the father
against his dearest son, as some of Saul's Courtiers did Saul against
Jonathan: or the husband against his most kind and loving wife, as daily
experience declares.

A makebate will provoke any degree of superiors to reject and cast off their
inferiors that depend upon them: A makebate will stir up every kind of
inferiors to grudge and murmur at their superiors that are careful for them:
A makebate will set all sorts of equals at variance, that erst were united
together with love and hearty affection.



Galathians and others from the Apostle S. Paul.

David will entertain the report of Ziba, he will make him believe that
faithful Mephibosheth is turned to be a perfidious Traitor. Such a poison
there is in a slanderous tongue, to send out infection; and such an aptnes in a
credulous ear to receive it. As the coal makes burning coals, and wood a
fire, so the contentious man is apt to kindle Prouer. 16. 21
strife.



He that raises up contentions among brethren, makes war between the Lord
and himself; for the doing of that is one of the greatest of those
abominations which the soul of the Lord is said to abhor; and whomsoever the
Scripture charge to have been offenders in this, are noted either to have
carried misery with them when they died, as Doeg, and Daniels adversaries, and
Haman; or to leave infamy behind them after their death, as Joseph's
mistrisse, Rehum, Shimsai, Tabnai, the accusers of Christ before Pilate, and
they that complained on Paul to Felix and Festus. The naming of them provoke
a loathing of them, and the reading of their malicious practices reuiueth the
memorial of their mischievous behavior.

2 To esteem of a bate-maker, and so to deal with him, Cast out the scorner,
and strife shall go out; so contention and reproach Prouer. 22. 10.
shall cease. He that will whisper an uncharitable tale against his brother in
secret, is well rewarded if he be sharply rebuked in public. Nay David,
after a sort, vowed to do more than that, which he might very well have
performed upon Ziba. Him that privily slandereth his neighbor (says Psalm.
101. 5.
he) will I destroy. It is a great wrong that thou offerest unto thy friend,
but greater to thy self, when thou give leave and encouragement to thy
friends enemy to traduce him, and conspirest with him to rob thy self of an
unfeigned well-willer.

Verse 29. A wicked man deceives his neighbor, and leads him into a way
that is not good.
A Wicked man] He that is headstrong, and wilfully given to transgress the
laws of God, in regard whereof the original text calls him, a man of
violence, [deceiueth his neighbour] infecteth the minds of those with whom he
conuerseth, with errors, persuading them of the lawfulness of that which is
unlawful, and of safety where is peril; and that that is evil which is good
and laudable, and sometimes necessary, [and leads him into a way that is not
good] corrupts his conversation with vices, and draws him unto such courses
as are both sinful and hurtful.



S. Paul knew their disposition, what was to be looked for from them, and what
always will be found in them, saying, That evil men and deceivers shall grow
worse and worse, deceiving 2. Tim 3. 13.
and being deceived. And our Savior Christ notes it in the Scribes and
Phariseis, that they would compass sea and land to Matthew. 23. 15.
make one of their profession; and when he was made, they would make him
twofold more the child of hell than themselves.



Secondly, they think that sin will lie the lighter upon their own
consciences, if others can be drawn into guiltiness with them; and that they
shall be the less blemished by that wherewith their neighbors are so much
blotted, though they make their burden heavier, and their faults fouler by
seducing their brethren.

are of their father the devil, and the lusts of their father they must and
will do. He has been a deceiuer from the John 8.
beginning, and sinful wretches will be factors for him until the end: they
can no way else so much resemble him, or so well content him.

Whosoever is simple, let him come hither, and he that is destitute of wisdom. And
Chap. 11. verse 9. that an hypocrite with his mouth corrupts his neighbor,
but the righteous shall be delivered by knowledge. In which places see both
the point and uses entreated of more at large.

Verse 30. He shuts his eyes to devise wickedness: he moves his lips, and
brings evil to pass.
HE] The wicked man formerly spoken of, [shutteth his eyes to devise
wickednesse] seriously sets his mind upon mischief, and would not have his
thoughts distracted and drawn away from it, by looking here and there upon
any objects; meaning that he is very intentive to invent that which may do
hurt: [he moves his lips] he speaks softly, and whispereth; he deals
closely, and would not be known in his practices, lest he should be prevented,
[and brings evil to passe] by his industry and secrecy does many shrewd
turns, and works much villainy.



His mind, and his members, and the whole man join together in the service of
sin, as Isaiah instanceth in the niggard: He will speak of niggardnesse, and
his heart will work iniquity, Isa. 32. 6.
and do wickedly, and speak falsely against the Lord, to make empty the
hungry soul, and to cause the drink of the thirsty to fail. And Micah his
testimony tends to the same purpose, when he says, that they imagine and
work wickedness upon their Micah 2. 1.
beds, and when the morning is light, they practice it.

For they cannot sleep, except they have done evil; and their Prouer. 4. 16.
sleep departs, except they cause some to fall. For they eat the bread of
wickedness, and drink the wine of violence.

Secondly, they are wholly bent to their designements, and fully resolved in
their purposes, and therefore muse and meditate of all such proiects as be for
their furtherance, and avoid all the lets and impediments that any way may
hinder them.

Instruction for all that fear God (for against them commonly most hurt is
intended) to be as watchful and wise for their own preservation, as the other
are painful and crafty to undermine them. When the one sort shut their eyes,
and fall to plotting, it concerns the other to open their eyes, and fall to
prayer, that God would behold how their enemies winked wiles, and by his good
providence prevent them. Then let them speak out, and cry aloud to the Lord
for direction, help, and deliverance, when such as seek their ruin begin to
fall to muttering, and to conspire together against them in secret. And for
further use of this point, it is not to be passed over, that the studiousnesse
of these malicious men is imitable, though the matter which they study for be
odious and damnable. If they cast about how to fulfill their wicked wills, shall
not we meditate how to accomplish our godly desires? If they beat their
brains to find out devices for the service of Satan, the hurt of their
neighbors, and their own perdition, ought not we to bend our thoughts to
learn the best means for the glory of God, the good of our brethren, and our
own salvation? The Prophet Isaiah condemns the Churl for devising wicked
counsels to undo the Isa 32. 7. 8.
poor with lying words. And the same Prophet in the same place commends the
liberal man for devising of liberal things: and this man (says he) will
continue his liberality.

Verse 31. The gray head is a crown of glory, when it is found in the way of
righteousness.
THE gray head] Old age, whereof gray hairs and a hoare head is a sign, [is a
crown of glorie] yields commendation to the aged person, and makes him
reverent [when it is found in the way of righteousnesse] when the old man does
show himself to be religious and righteous, whether he has led his life in
that manner from his youth, or whether he has been converted to it now in his
latter time.



When the head is decked with gray hairs, and the heart with heavenly graces,
and the life with virtuous behavior, he is more gorgeously apparelled than if
otherwise he were clad in gold. He wears a Diadem, which not the art of man,
but the finger of God has fashioned, and set upon his head.

This was one of the ornaments of those holy Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob: and for this is that worthy widow Anna commended by S. Luke: and by
this does the Apostle partly challenge to himself authority among the people
of God, as appears by his Epistle to Philemon: Though I might Philemon 9.
be bold to command thee that which is convenient; yet for loves sake I rather
beseech thee, though I be as I am, even Paul, aged.

length of days is in wisdoms right hand, and in her left hand Prouer. 3. 16.
riches and glory.





Daniel calls The ancient of days. Dan. 7 13.


Thou Leuit. 19. 32.
shall rise up before the hoare head, and honor the person of the old man, and
dread thy God. I am the Lord.

What though their beauty be withered away, and their bodies grown crooked?
What though their strength be diminished, and their memories impaired? What
though they retain not their former freshness of wit, or elegancy of speech?
What though their state be but poor, and their parentage obscure? Yet their
honorable place of age, especially being garnished with wisdom, justice, and
piety, does counteruaile and far exceed all the rest of those ornaments.

It serves also to admonish them that would not be contemned, and have the
world weary of them when they shall be old, to lay the foundation of a constant
and durable estimation whiles they are young. If they treasure up
understanding, and good discretion, and other spiritual graces whiles they
have the benefit of strength, memory, senses, and capacity, they shall have
that which will comfort their hearts, inform their minds, direct their
behavior, and maintain their credit at those years, wherein others will
dote, and deal absurdly, and be full of contempt and tediousness.

a sinner (says Isaiah) of an hundred years old shall die Isa. 65. 20.
accursed.

Verse 32. He that is slow to wrath, is better than the mighty man; and he
that rules his own mind, is better than he that wins a City.
HE that is slow to wrath] which will not be provoked to anger without due
cause, neither having due cause to be angry, will pass the bounds of
moderation and measure, [is better than the mighty man] is more to be commended
for his strength and fortitude than he that is boisterous, and strong of
body: [and he that rules his minde] which represseth and keeps under his
intemperate passions and violent affections of every sort, [is better than he
that wins a Citie] has greater power, and does a more worthy exploit, than
he which by force of arms does overcome and conquer whole Cities, Castles,
and Countries.



The Scripture testifies of the force and might of Esau, that from the womb
he was far more strong and sturdie than Jacob: but it praises the patience
and mortification of Jacob, that he was incomparably more meek and moderate
than Esau. And that staidness of affection which was seen in poor lame
Mephibosheth, who was neither perplexed with perils, nor imbittered with
wrongs, has won him more honor than Ioab could get by all his martial
prowess, or Sampson himself by his admirable power.





Zenacherib, and the stately Kings of Ashur, and Nebuchadnezzar, and the mighty
Monarkes of Babel: the Medes in like manner with the Persians: the Grecians
also and Romans. But all that rule their own mind, are truly noble, and ever
free, and have already the liuerie and seisen of an eternal liberty.





They think to make themselves very glorious by showing themselves so
wrathful, fierce, and furious; and hope to be reputed so much the more
excellent, as they can make their poor neighbors to feel their hands to be
more heavy and violent: but like foolish creatures, in so doing they make many
of their underlings become their superiors, and debase themselves beneath their
meanest inferiors. Their humble, poor, patient, oppressed tenants, servants,
and people, have gotten a pre-eminence above them by the Lords own
appointment: he has deposed the one side (and will in time make it manifest)
for their sinful hearts and cruel behavior: And he has exalted the other
side (and once will declare it) for the meekness of their minds, and their
sober conversation.

Verse 33. The lot is cast into the lap: but the whole disposition thereof is
of the Lord.
THE lot] which was much in use among the people of God, both for division of
lands, as Number. 26. 55. and for other causes, as appears in many places of the
Scriptures, [is cast into the lap] into some secret or close place; and that
which was most ordinary with them, is put for many other, as hats, fists,
pots, boxes, or whatsoever else: [but the whole disposition thereof] the
particular ordering, guiding, and government of it, [is of the Lord] by his
immediate providence, without either chance, art, or labor. And under lot he
comprehends all other accidents which are thought to be merely casual, and
wholly subject to fortune.



The lots that Joshua and Eleazar did cause to be cast for the inheritance of
the Tribes of Israel, did so justly accord with the blessings which Jacob and
Moses had before pronounced concerning diverse of them, that every man may well
perceive that he which spoke by the tongues of the former, did also work by
the hands of the latter. And Samuel engaged the credit both of his truth and
ministry upon the success of 1. Sam. 10.
the lot that was to be cast for the King to be chosen, that it would
undoubtedly fall upon Saul, whom, by the appointment of God, he had anointed.
And that in other cases, things casual in show are wisely governed in deed,
the vision which was showed to Ezekiel does confirm, who beheld a multitude of
the matters of the world in appearance to run upon Ezekiel 1. 18.
wheels, and yet in no sort to be either drawn or driven by blind Fortune;
for he observed the strakes of the wheels to be full of eyes round about:
whereby the intentive providence of God was signified. Examples for this
purpose are plentiful, plain, and pregnant. Who appointed the Ishmaelitish
Merchants Genesis 39. 25.
at that time to travel that way which they went, but the Lord, that they
might carry down Joseph into Egypt? Who appointed Pharaohs daughter at that
time to come to wash her self in that place, but the Lord, that she might
undertake the preservation of Moses? The same appointed King Exodus 2. 5. Hester
6. 1.
Ahashuerosh not to sleep for one night, but to call for the Chronicles to be
read unto him, that he might protect and exalt Mordecai. The same prepared the
whale to be ready Jonah. 117.
where Jonah should be cast into the sea, that he might receive him, as the
text testifies. And as much might be said of the vinegar that they offered
unto Christ at his suffering: and no John 19. 24.
less of the soldiers that divided his garments, and cast lots for his coat
after that he was crucified.







2. To behold the hand of the Lord in all occurrences, that in crosses we may
acknowledge his justice, and humble our selves before him: in blessings we may
confess his mercy, and offer praises unto him: and in every case to depend
upon him, sithence nothing befalls any without him.

Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing? And one of them shall not fall Mat.
10. 29. 30
to the ground without your father. Yea, and all the hairs of your head are
numbered; fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrowes.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER OF THE PROVERBS. CHAPTER XVII.
Verse 1. Better is a morsel of dry bread, and peace therewith, than a house
full of Sacrifices with strife.
BEtter] More comfortable, safe, and wholesome, [is a morsel of dry bread] a
crust (as we use to say) without any other cates or dishes, slender fare, a
small pittance, and that also course and homely, [and peace therewith] if there
be Christian love, quietness, and good agreement, [than an house full of
Sacrifices] great abundance of dainty cheer, as they used to have when they
offered peace offerings, as may appear Chap. 7. verse 14. And to that custom
S. James seems to allude, when he says, You have nourished Iam. 5. 5.
your hearts as in a day of sacrifice or slaughter. See Cha. 15. v. 17.

Verse 2. A discreet servant shall have rule over a leaud son, and he shall
divide the inheritance among the brethren.
A Discreet seruant] A faithful, painful, and wise servant, though a bondsman,
[shall have rule over a leaud sonne] shall be preferred before a rude and
dissolute child, and sometimes be set over him as a governor: [and he shall
divide the inheritance among the brethren] shall be as one of them, and have a
portion among them, and be as it were in the room of the eldest brother,
having the chief hand in making division of the goods and lands between the
other sons and daughters.

This indeed is sometimes verified according to the letter and words of the
sentence, that servants be made Executors to their masters, and guardians to
their masters children: but the drift hereof is to show, that they which are
low may be exalted by virtue, and they which are high, may be brought down by
vice: that wisdom prefers diverse above them that might have been their
betters, and folly depriueth many of those prerogatives which otherwise they
should have enioied.



In the book of Ecclesiastes he extends the comparison further than in this
place, when he says, Better is a poor and wise child, than an old and
foolish King, which will no more be admonished. Eccl. 4. 13. 14.
For out of the prison he comes forth to reign, when as he that is borne in
his Kingdom is made poor. Presidents on both sides, as well for the
advancement of those that be virtuous, as for the deiection of them that fall
to vicious courses, we have in one kindred, the inhabitants of one family, and
sons also of one father, namely Jacobs. Reuben the eldest of all his
children, for the great fault which he committed, was made yoonger brother,
losing his birthright, his dignity, and double portion, even from his
posterity for many hundred years together. And Joseph contrarily, who
exceeded all the rest in piety and goodness, did in like manner surmount them
in authority and honor. He was raised from a servile condition, to an eminent
estate; from the baseness of a prisoner, to the dignity of a Prince: he was
made greater than his elder brethren, than his Lord and master, than the Kings
principal Peers and Nobles, than any in the Land of Egypt, (as being set over
the Land of Egypt) next unto Pharaoh.



the pleasure of a King is in a wise servant. And on Prouer. 14. 35
the other side, pride, idleness, contemptuousnesse and such other evil
vices, do of themselves bring many men's estates into a consumption, and often
draw upon them the displeasure of their superiors, to their utter undoing.

Ismael is more graced at their hands than Isaac, though Abraham preferred a
godly servant before Ismael: yea they set up sinful servants to ouer-crow,
complain of, deride, and vilify their discreet and godly children. But let
them understand, that the Lord will honor those whom they disgrace, and make
them base whom they so much magnify.



Verse 3. The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold: but the Lord
tries the hearts.
THE fining pot for siluer] Goldsmiths have their vessels, wherein they prove
and try the gold and silver from dross and corruption: [but the Lord tries
the hearts] he alone searches them, and knows them; and none but he by grace
can purify them, though man by art can refine metals, and make them more
precious.



He can sound the depth of the sea, and he can find out the altitude of the
planets, and he can dig down into the mines of the earth; but he cannot
reach to the counsels of the mind.

That work the Scripture in many places ascribes to God only, and to none
other besides him. The heart (says he by Jeremy) is deceitful and wicked
above all things: who can know Ier. 17. 9. 10.
it? I the Lord search the heart, and try the reins, even to give to every
man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his works. David was
much deceived in Achitophel, whom he esteemed to be very godly: and so was he
also in Abshalom, whose purpose of going to perform his vow he thought to be
very holy. And did not the Apostles conceive too well of Judas, when they began
to join with him in murmuring at the ointment which was bestowed upon Christ?
For notwithstanding the sweet words of Achitophel, and the fained devotion of
Abshalom, and the counterfeit charity of Judas; Achitophel proved a Traitor,
and Abshalom a Rebel, and Judas a Devil. But it is less marvel though men
be beguiled by the fraud of others, when they are ignorant of that corruption
that is in themselves. We speak not of Saul, who when he put the witches to
death, did little think ever to seek to a witch: nor of Hazael, who
condemning himself 2. King. 8. 13.
to be a dog, if he should deal so cruelly as Elisha said, believed not that
he could become so cruel: but of better men, even of the Disciples of Jesus
Christ, who purposing and promising to stand manfully unto him, did show
themselves very timorous, and every one of them ran away from him. And Peter
especially, which boasted of his courage and resolution, Matthew. 26.
above all the rest, became more cowardly and faint-hearted than any of the
rest.

Solomon in his prayer acknowledges, saying, Thou only know the hearts of
all the children of men. That is an 1. King. 8. 39.
office depending upon his omniscious nature. None is able to execute it, but
he that knows all things.



Scribes and Phariseis were commended of the multitude; and Paul and Jeremy
were condemned of the multitude: and yet God condemned the Scribes and
Phariseis, and he commended Paul and Jeremy. But why did the Lord disallow or
approve contrary to the likings or censures of the people? Our Savior
yields a reason of it, saying to the Phariseis, Ye are they which justify
your selves before men: but God knows your hearts. For that which is highly
esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God.

So then, though all the world should praise thee, thou art yet a contemptible
person, unless thy own conscience be upright: and though every man should
cry out upon thee, thy credit is nothing impaired, if thy soul be sincere and
faithful.

But how shall we know what God himself finds in our hearts? By the
testimony which his spirit gives of our hearts. And how shall we know what the
spirit testifies? By the graces which it works, that makes publication by
the fruits of it, as love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, and temperance.



What then though slanderous mouths inueigh against them, and rail upon them?
What though they charge them to be proud and insolent? What though they censure
them for hypocrisy and dissimulation? Nay what though Satan should attempt to
persuade them, that they were nothing else but hypocrites and dissemblers? The
answer of Job to his accusers will easily wipe away all those kinds of
calumniations: Lo now my witness is in heaven, and my record is on high.

And yet this is not all the comfort that proceeds from Job 16. 19.
this doctrine; for observe, that God does not only prove the heart as with a
touchstone, to examine what metal it is, but fineth it as it were a furnace,
to make it pure metal. In dealing with his elect, he makes that better which
he finds good, and makes that good which he finds stark naught. Man with
his fining pot and furnace can never turn clay and gravel into silver and
gold: but God with his spirit and grace can convert the mire and worst kind of
earth into gold, and gemmes, and most precious matter. They that be nothing
else but a mass of pride, of cruelty, of impiety, and of all illfauoured
corruptions, he easily frames to be humble, merciful, religious, and shining
with all heavenly virtues.

Verse 4. The wicked man gives heed to false lips: and a liar hearkeneth to
the naughty tongue.
THE wicked man] He that is given to work mischief, [giueth heed to false
lips] willingly listeneth to the shrewd words that men, that abuse their lips
to falsehood, do speak: [and a liar listeneth to the naughty tongue] he that
is wont to tell lies, and other ungracious tales, is glad to hear lies, and
other speeches that are malicious and hurtful.



A cursed tongue and a carnal ear are well met together, either of them
gratifying his fellow: the former rubbeth where the latter itcheth; and the
latter is chapman for that which the former utters.

Saul was much affected with music, and had need of music to assuage the
violent fits of that spirit of frenzy that haunted him: and yet no music
was ever so delectable unto him, as informations against David and his friends,
or tidings where David might be met with. He thought that great wrong was done
him by his Courtiers, that would not complain of Jonathan his own son for
favoring of David. And when Doeg related after what manner Ahimelek the high
1. Sam. 22.
Priest entertained David in Gods house, he made a pleasant banquet to the
heart of Saul. And so did the Ziphims, when they advertised him, that David was
hid by them in holds, and they would deliver him into his hands. Blessed be ye
of the 1. Sam. 23. 21.
Lord (says he unto them) for ye have had compassion on me.

And it was no small contentment to the Priests and Council, to hear matter
objected against Steven, though they Act. 6. 13.
knew the informers to be false fellows, that were subborned to bear false
witness against him.





with such wares as they mind to make sale of for their best advantage. They
may be prompted with more plausible lies, and probable obtrectations, by other
men's inventions, than ever their own wits were able to find out or imagine.
And that which they have heard, though never so slanderous, they think they
may declare with warrant: and if a lie has been told them, though never so
palpable, they presume to tell it again with authority.



and uncharitable discourses, that our frowning brows do shut up and silence
their clamorous lips, according to that which is said in another place, As the
North wind drives away the rain, so does an angry countenance the slandering
Prouer. 25. 23
tongue: Which duty will better appear in the explication of that sentence.

Verse 5. He that mocketh the poor, reprocheth him that made him: and he that
reioiceth at his adversity, shall not be innocent.
HE that mocketh] which offers despite to, and vilifieth by word, deed, or
gesture, whether in the way of jest, or bitter disdain, [the poore] not only
them that want wealth, but which are in any affliction, either externally or in
their souls, [reprocheth him that made him] does after a sort scorn and
scoff at God, who created the man, and allotted him that estate; as he that
laugheth at the work, does consequently deride the artificer. [and he that
reioiceth at his adversity, shall not be innocent] not only he that shows
apparent contempt of the man afflicted, but which is glad in his heart for his
misery and affliction, shall severely be punished.



And he that reioiceth, etc.] It is neither lawful nor safe to be glad at
other men's sorrows, especially if they be Gods servants.

The joy of the neighbor Nations was a great grief to the Church of the Jews
in their calamities, when the Babylonians made that woeful spoil of them: but
the insultations of their ill-willers was no less dangerous to themselves,
than grievous to them, and would make their own state as miserable as theirs.
They have heard that I mourn (says the Prophet in the name of the people) but
there is none to comfort me. All mine enemies have heard of my trouble, and
are glad that thou have Lam. 1. 22.
done it. Thou will bring the day that thou have pronounced, and they shall be
like unto me.

fails in it, which in stead of pity is moved with reioicing at the harms
of his brethren; and therefore is far from innocence, and near to some
grievous punishment.





We shall come to a text hereafter that forbids us to take delight in the
fall or stumbling of our enemy, lest the Lord see it, and it displease him,
etc. How then can he but be Pro. 24. 17. 18.
provoked, and how shall we but be endangered, if the troubles of his people,
being also our own faithful friends and wellwillers, affect our hearts with
joy and gladness?

lamentation. There was never any, nor shall be, nor can be, that sucketh
sweetness out of the sorrow of the Saints; but God either has or will make
him taste of gall and wormwood. If anguish and fears bring him not to
repentance, then judgments and plagues will follow him to destruction.

Verse 6. Childrens children are the crown of the elders, and the glory of
the children are their fathers.
CHildrens children] A long race, many nephews, such as we call
grandchildren, and those of many descents, [are the crown of the elders] a
comfort and credit to their parents, grandfathers, great-grandfathers, etc.
[and the glory of the children are their fathers] it is an honor for the
yoonger sort to have descended from worthy progenitors; provided yet in both
these cases, that as well the ancestors as the posterity be virtuous, and well
adorned with graces of their own. Many foolish vicious children can nothing
credit their wise and godly progenitors, as Rehoboam and his son added
nothing to the glory of David and Solomon: neither can sinful ancestors either
yield honor to, or receive honor from their seed that is holy and religious.
That blessed Hezekiah was in no sort dignified by his wicked father Ahaz: nor
was that wicked Ahaz any whit graced by his blessed son Hezekiah. And in case
that both the elders and yoongers, the fathers and children be all naught, as
was cuised Cham and his seed, and cruel Cain and his, no multitude, nor might,
nor means, of whatsort soever, can make either part honorable.

David returned to the Lord for his promise of this rare benefit to be bestowed
upon him, is memorable: Who am I (says he) O Lord God, 2. Sam. 7. 18. 19
and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? And this was yet a
small thing in thy sight. O Lord God; therefore thou have spoken of thy
servants house for a great while. The kindness of God was in this, among many
other mercies, declared to Joseph, that he saw Ephraims children even unto the
third generation, Genesis 50. 23.
and that the sons of Machir, the son of Manasseh, were borne upon his
knees. And it is observed as a principal part of that happiness wherewith the
old age of Job was refreshed, that he saw his sons, and his sons sons, even
four generations.

to him that fears the Lord, and walks in his ways: Thy children shall be
as the Olive plants round about thy table: and thou shall see thy childrens
children, and peace upon Israel.

True it is, that all the godly attain not to this, because God having store
and multiplicitie of good things, does otherwise render recompense to many: but
every good man that does obtain it, has the promise of God performed unto
him.



and vermin upon and in the ground, for all the fishes in the sea and rivers?
And is he so poor, that he cannot, or so sparing, that he will not allow food
for mankind, especially his own subjects, servants, and children? But
faithless men consider not of these things, and therefore as they are
unwilling to be called father or grandfather of many, so is it righteous, that
though they should beget great plenty of children, yet they should gain but
small store of honor and estimation by the same.

Pharez the son of Judah; and it is sure that Er and Onan were sinful and
wicked: and therefore he left a posterity, and such a one as was blessed and
happy; and they both were destroyed childlesse. Their names were abolished, and
his exalted, as it appears by that prayer which was made for Boaz: Thine Ruth
4. 12.
house be made like the house of Pharez (whom Thamar bare unto Judah) of the
seed which the Lord shall give thee of this young woman.



And the glorie] Good parents and progenitors be great ornaments to their
children.

It was of long time accounted an honorable title to be called Abraham's
son: and so it was indeed to them that also walked in his steps, and were
like him in grace. And such a prerogative it was in like manner to descend from
David, and be of his family.

so many of their stock as shall be religious and faithful. This is the
meaning of the Psalmist, when he says, Blessed is the man that fears the
Lord, and delights greatly in his Commandments: Psalm. 112. 1. 2.
His seed shall be mighty upon earth; the generation of the righteous shall be
blessed. And again: He is ever merciful, and lends, and his seed [enioieth]
the blessing. Psalm. 37. 26.


Jacob was living, Joseph knew it would be no blemish, but a gracing to him to
present him to Pharaoh, who should behold his gravity, and hear his wisdom.
And after Jacobs death, all the Egyptians which accompanied him to his burial
did actually yield to Joseph the commendation of so worthy a father, by that
solemn funeral, and doleful lamentation which they made for him.



Verse 7. Excellent speech becomes not a fool; much less lying talk an
ingenuous person.
EXcellent speech] Prayer, thanksgiving, discourse of God, of the Scriptures,
of Religion, of any holy things: the commendation of that which is good, the
reproof and dispraising of that which is evil, [becommeth not a foole] is not
seemly in the mouth of a sinful sot, which neither practices, nor loves,
nor understands the points whereof he speaks: [much less lying talke] any
manner of corrupt communication, whether it be false or filthy, worldly or
bitter, or scoffing, or idle; for one kind is put here for all the rest: [be
seems an ingenuous person] is comely for a godly, wise, and honest man, such
a one as is contrary to the fool formerly mentioned, in profession, heart,
and behavior, to utter.



They lose their luster and grace in the unclean lips of vile persons; and
therefore the Lord does expostulate the matter with those hypocritical
dissemblers which are always prattling and babbling of his Laws, and yet
continually transgressing them: What have thou to do to declare mine
ordinances, Psalm. 50. 16.
that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be
reformed, and have cast my words behind thee?



Secondly, they do much harm by that manner of iangling, according to the
Proverb: As a thorn standing up in Proverb. 26. 9.
the hand of a drunkard, so a parable in the mouth of fools. They grieve the
godly: they put back the weak: they make good conference less regarded: they
harden their own hearts: they puff up themselves with pride: they pass
sentence against their own souls: they cause Religion and the name of God to
be blasphemed.



yet find no testimony of their own election: they reason much of
justification, but are utterly unacquainted with regeneration. They boast of
Christ, and commend the Gospel, but have no communion with Christ, nor fruit
of the Gospel. They sharply censure the faults of other men, and vehemently
exclaim against the corruptions of the time; but they favorably pass by the
faults in themselves, and take no time to purge away their own corruptions.
Such are both taxed and convicted by the Apostle Paul, saying, Thou which
teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that preachest a man should
not steal, do thou steal? Thou that say Romans 2. 21. 22.
a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? etc.

Much less, etc.] Evil speeches are never so indecent, as when they proceed
out of good men's mouths.

That tongue which blesses God, is every way too good to curse men (as S.
James speaks) or any way to be an agent Iam. 3. 9.
for sin or Satan. Muddy water is less offensive in a puddle than in a
clear fountain: and bramble briars become thickets or thorny hedges better
than an orchard. To this purpose tends the exhortation of S. Paul to the
Ephesians: Let fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, not once be
named Ephesians. 5. 3. 4.
among you, as it becomes Saints. Neither filthiness, neither foolish
talking, neither jesting, which are things not comely; but rather giving of
thanks.



Satan plied Job with all his art, might, and malice: by torments of body, and
temptations of mind, to make him, rather than any other in the world, to
break out into distempered and execrable speeches. And Paul declared to King
Agrippa, and those that were with him, that when he was a persecutor, and so
one of Satan's officers, his purpose and Act. 26. 11.
practice had been by cruel punishments to compel the Saints to blaspheme.



offer always to him the Sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit Heb. 13. 15.
of the lips which confess his name. And therefore how unworthy a thing is it
to pollute their lips with lies, or other leaud words, to the reproach of his
name?



Verse 8. A reward is as a precious stone; pleasant in the eyes of him that
has it: it prospers whithersoeuer it turns.
A Reward] A gift or present bestowed upon a Magistrate, or Officer, or any
that may help or hinder a man in his cause, [is as a precious stone, pleasant
in the eyes of him that has it] much regarded of him on whom it is bestowed:
[it prospers whithersoeuer it turneth] it takes effect, and brings good
success, to what end soever it is applied: to escape punishment, to pacify
wrath, to obtain promotion, to get favor in Courts, to cross ones
adversary, or to bring to pass any purpose.



Thereby many procure both access to men of place, and success in their
suits, whether just or unjust. A man's gift enlarges him, and leads him
before great men (says Solomon in Prouer. 18. 16
another Chapter) and every man is friend to him that gives gifts, Proverb.
19. 6
whether he do it in the way of liberality and love, or otherwise to bribe
and corrupt.

Hosea complained, that their Rulers [said] with Hos. 4. 18.
shame, Give ye.

Samuels sons, that (notwithstanding the precepts and practice of their
worthy father, who may be an example of all Judges and Magistrates for
continency from corruptions) they walked not in his ways, but turned aside
after lucre, and took rewards, and perverted the judgment. 1. Sam. 8. 3.
The Lord foresaw what work rewards would make, when he said in his Law, Thou
shall take no gift; for the gift Exodus 23. 8.
blinds the wise, and peruerteth the words of the righteous.

though they seem to be better than diamonds, will not yet prove so good as
flints. The curse of God does commonly accompany them, to the corrupting of
their natural gifts, the endangering of their souls, the impairing of their
honor, and the ruinating of their estate or posterity in the end. Let them
therefore prize Gods favor according to the value of it, and duly esteem of
his reward, wherewith he does recompense them that deal uprightly: and then
that which men do offer to maintain their evil causes, will not be so
forcible with them, but they shall perceive it to be less worth than nothing.
2. To teach them that are ouermatched with power, whose adversaries oppugn
them rather with mighty purses, than with weighty reasons, and bring more
current metal than lawful matter against them, that they make their appeal
to an higher Court, and crave Gods own hearing: and there also offer more
powerful presents, which will be best acceptable unto that Judge: namely,
confidence in him, with prayers and supplications to him, by which means
Hester and Mordecai, with the rest of the godly Jews, ouerturned all the
proceedings of Haman. 3. To all men, not to judge of persons or causes
according to the success of their suits, because many matters be carried by
the demonstration which the hand does make to the eye, and not which the tongue
does make to the ear. The sentence is passed according to the price that is
paid, and not according to the truth that is alleged.

The good use of giving rewards, and how it stands with wisdom for a man to
buy his right, and peace, and safety, we shall see, Chap. 21. verse 24.

Verse 9. He that covers a fault, seeks love: but he that repeateth a
matter, separateth a chief friend.
HE that covers a fault] that passes by an infirmity, that burieth an
offense, as much as may be, in silence, [seeketh loue] by showing love to the
party, preserves concord where kindness was before, and takes the way to
make him his friend who was before but a stranger to him: [but he that
repeateth] which looks too narrowly into every slip, and is raking into men's
frailties, especially so as to blaze them abroad to others, [separateth a
chief friend] does alienate the minds of those that be dearest unto him, and
makes them his enemies. Yet it is not against the rule of love to tell men
lovingly of their faults; for that helps them to repentance and reformation,
and cures their credits, the blemish thereof being wiped away both from the
eyes of God and men, as S. James says: If any of you has erred from the
truth, and some Iam. 5. 19. 20.
man has converted him, let him know that he that has converted the sinner
from going astray out of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide
a multitude of sins. Neither is it unfit, but needful sometimes to acquaint
others with the transgressions of our neighbors, if it belong unto us to be
their Physicians; as Joseph did Jacob with the infamy his brethren ran Genesis
37. 2.
into: and they of the house of Cloe did the Apostle with the 1. Cor. 1. 11.
contentions of the Corinthians. And in some cases some men's sins must needs
be discovered, for the safety of the whole state, both of prince and people,
of Church and Commonweal: for it is a sure rule, that no man's faults are then
to be concealed, when any man may take hurt thereby. See Chap. 10. verse 12.

Verse 10. A reproof enters more into him that has understanding, than an
hundred stripes into a fool.
A Reproofe] A rebuke and admonition only, though short also, one word as it
were, [entreth more into him that has vnderstanding] works more upon his
heart, and takes better effect for reformation of his faults, [than an hundred
stripes into a foole] than many grievous punishments inflicted upon a wicked
person, which wants the sound and saving knowledge of God.

The opposition is specially between desperate sinners, given over unto a
reprobate sense, and a godly man; notwithstanding that Gods own elect may also
be possessed with such obstinacy, till the time of their conversion: and then
their miseries, with the work of Gods holy spirit, will help them to
humiliation and repentance.



We read of two holy Prophets, namely Jeremy and Haggai, that had to deal
with two sorts of people, of contrary disposition, though both of one nation:
and so their ministry and Gods own hand found a contrary success among
them. Jeremy was sent to the Jews before their captivity, and they were
foolish and sinful. And Haggai was sent to the Jews being returned from
captivity, and they were wise and godly: and therefore Jeremy makes this
complaint against those of his time: O Lord, thou have stricken them, but they
have not sorrowed: thou have consumed them, but they have refused to Ier. 5. 3.
receive correction: they have made their faces harder than a stone, and have
refused to return.

And Haggai gives this commendation of those of his time: When Zerubbabel the
son of Shealtiel, and Iehoshua the son of Iehozadak the high Priest, with
all the remnant of the people, Hag. 1. 12.
heard the voice of the Lord their God, and the words of the Prophet Haggai,
rebuking them (as the Lord their God had sent him) then the people did fear
before the Lord. Examples great store might be produced for experience on both
sides; as David being flexible at the speeches of a woman that privately
admonished him: and Achaz that was froward at the threatenings of the Prophets
that preached unto him, and the heavy judgments of God powered down upon him.



will enter further, and be more felt in flesh that has life in it, than a
dagger or sword in stones that are senseless. Josiah his heart that was tender
did melt at the only hearing of the Law: but Pharaohs heart that was obdurate,
was little affected at the notable and imminent plagues that succeeded one
another, upon himself and all his Kingdom.





But though our former carelessness or stubbornness has caused many of us to
be afflicted, as well as reprehended, and brought us to as many troubles as
rebukes, yet we shall free our selves from the reproach of folly, if we can
behold the hand that smites us, and be truly humbled for the sins that cause
us to be smitten.

When our ears be opened, to hearken better unto the voice of God: when our
lips be prepared to make a more free and full confession of our faults: when our
souls be resolved with greater integrity to order our ways, we shall be
reckoned among the number of the wise: for none can be bettered by crosses and
sorrows, but he that has wisdom and understanding. And for this purpose, as
often as we either give correction, or take it, it is expedient to seek the
fruit of the same at Gods hand: neither the frequencie of punishments,
multitude of stripes, nor the sharpness of strokes, without his blessing, will
ever work any good effect in the soul. It is a true saying, and spoken by the
spirit of truth: Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar, among wheat
braied with a Prouer. 27. 22.
pestell, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.

Verse 11. An evil man seeks only rebellion: and a cruel messenger shall
be sent against him.
AN evil man] He that is destitute of Gods holy spirit, and walks after the
flesh, [seeketh only rebellion] sets himself wholly to transgress the
Commandments of God, and delights in nothing so much as in that which is
contrary to his will: [and a cruel messenger shall be sent against him] even
as Kings and other Princes send out some forces (if need so require) to
suppress rebellions, and to apprehend and severely punish the Rebels: so the
Lord armeth sometimes men with wrath and power against his enemies, and
sometimes the Angels, and sometimes the unreasonable creatures, and sometimes
the insensible creatures, to be as it were his officers, appointed to plague
them without mercy, and sometimes his own hand immediately does destroy them.



Not only professed Atheists and Infidels, which openly renounce their Creator,
and the King of the world, are so to be reputed, but sinful dissemblers also,
which impiously provoke Christ Jesus their Redeemer, and the King of the
Church, are of the same number. Of such speaks Jeremy, when he says, They
are all rebellious traitors, walking craftily. And such Ier. 6. 28.
does Hosea complain of, when he says, My people are bent Hos. 11. 7.
to rebellion against me. Neither of these sorts think themselves well, so
long as they are not doing of evil.

In their vocations they are worldly and covetous: in their recreations they
are sensual and voluptuous: in the worship of God they are negligent and
hypocritical: in all their works, in all their words, in all their
cogitations, continually in every place iniquity and sinfulness flows from
them.




Ezechiel, saying, Thou son of man, Ezekiel. 2. 6.
fear them not, neither be afraid of their words, although Rebels and thorns
be with thee, and thou remainest with scorpions: fear not their words, nor be
afraid at their looks, for they are a rebellious house. And the greatest
comfort of all is, when the Lord gives them an heart to fear iniquity, and
not to delight in it; to fly from that which is evil, and not to follow it;
to subject themselves unto him, and to strive against sin, and not seek
rebellion. And what though they have their frailties, their faults, their
corruptions, that they fail of many duties, that they fall into many offenses?
Yet he puts a difference between faithful subjects, which would, and
cannot observe his Laws better; and wilful Rebels, which contemptuously
despise his Laws. He knows that his soldiers are sometimes taken Captives
in fighting for him, and his enemies always take up weapons to fight against
him.



Good men have due cause to abhor their ways: for they rise up in arms
against their heavenly King: and the righteous God has cause to execute
judgments upon them; for they oppose themselves against his holy government.
And therefore when he begins to take them in hand, neither themselves nor
any other shall be able to deliver them out of his hands. Whatsoever creature
shall have the commission to torture and torment them, will be made both
implacable and irresistable, as Iehu to the house of Ahab, who spared not his
own mistress: Ahashuerosh to Haman, who spared not his own minion:
Adramelech and Sharezer to Zanecherib, who spared not their own father. And
what could the Sodomites say or do against the violence of the fire? And what
could Pharao say or do against the rage of the waters? And what could Herod
say or do against the multitude and greediness of the vermin? Al these took
their time (which was all the time of their life) to rebel: And God took his
time at the length (which was a seasonable and fit time) to send out these
cruel messengers against them. How strangely then are they besotted, which
conclude of a future safety by their present security? which fear no danger,
because as yet they feel not destruction? as though a Rebel were free from
all punishment, because he is not arraigned and executed so soon as he
begins the commotion.

Verse 12. Let a Bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, and not a fool in his
folly.
THE she bear, whose young ones have been lately taken from her, exceeds
all other beasts in rage and fierceness. From thence does Hushai take his
similitude concerning David: Thou know (says he to Abshalom) thy father and
his men, that they be strong men, and are chafed in mind, as a Bear robbed of
her whelps in the field. And from thence does 2. Sam. 17. 8.
the Lord draw a comparison to express the grieuousnesse of the plagues
wherewith he purposed to punish the sinful Israelites: I will meet them as a
Bear that is robbed of her whelps, Hos. 13. 8.
and will break the kall of their hearts. And the immanitie of this beast may
be discerned by that which befell the wretched boys which scoffed at Elisha,
and were cursed by him. It is said, that two Bears came out of the Forest, and
tare in pieces two 2. King. 2. 24.
and forty of them. And yet it is not so dangerous to meet with such a Bear
[as with a fool in his follie] as to fall into the hands of a wicked man in
the extremity of his wickedness and fury.



Simeon and Leui were fools in their folly, and worse than Genesis 34.
Bears, when they murdered all the Shechemites, and spoiled the City of
Shechem. Saul was a fool in his folly, and worse than a Bear, when he caused
fourscore and five Priests of the Lord to be slain at one time, and smote Nob
the City of 1. Sam. 22. 18. 19.
the Priests with the the edge of the sword, both man and woman, both child
and suckling, both Ox, and Ass, and Sheep, with the edge of the sword. And
such was the folly of foolish Pharao, Ahab, Iezabel, Herod, and of Paul
himself before his conversion.



Haman remaining at Shusan, had laid a plot for the murdering of all the Jews
in an hundred and seven and twenty Provinces. Where shall a man hide himself
from the paws and teeth of such a Tyrant? And these outrageous beasts in
humane shape, beside personal violence offered to the bodies of men, will
diffame their names, and spoil their states, and subvert their families, and
bring many souls to destruction.

A Lion is without, Prouer. 22. 13.
I shall be slain in the street: but it is a part of wisdom to think,
concerning these mankind beasts, a Bear may be in the way, in the street, in
the house, and at the table: and therefore it is not safe for me to meet with
him: that is, by indiscretion and carelessness to give him advantage against
me. Neither can there be safety sufficient for any, by any circumspection,
unless the Lord be our protector. If he should absent himself from us in
his displeasure, how soon would the wicked swallow us up and devour us, their
malice being so immeasurable? But he standing by us in his favor, though we
walk through a roaring wilderness of wood and wild people, yet are we
preserved from all hurt and peril.

Verse 13. He that rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his
house.
HE that rewards evil for good] that deals injuriously and unkindly with
him that has declared his love in outward courtesies any way for his benefit
and profit, whether by word or deed; or has sought the salvation of his soul,
by helping him against his sins, [euill] plagues and punishments from God,
and many times displeasure from men also, [shall not depart from his house]
from himself especially, and from his wicked posterity.



Iotham charge the Shechemites not only with bloody Iud. 9.
cruelty in massacring and murdering the seventy innocent sons of Gedeon,
but with barbarous inhumanitie, in dealing so unkindly with his house, whose
hand had always been pressed and ready for their liberty, lives, and safety.
David was much moved when he was so doggedly dealt with by Nabal, at whose
hands he had deserved so much good, in preserving of his flocks: and God was
more offended 1. Sam. 25.
with Nabal than David was, and revenged his quarrel upon him, and that with
no less punishment than the stroke of death.

And the same David complains of the same sin in his Psalm. 35. 12. 13.
malicious adversaries, which were as greedy of his ruin, as he was desirous
of their preservation; which put on armor to persecute and take away his life,
though he put on sackecloth to fast and pray for the protection of their lives.

Ioas did never render due praises to the Lord for his preservation and crown,
because he yielded such hard measure to the son of Iehoiada, who had before
been his protector, and brought him to the Kingdom.



good counsel, and sets himself against their sins, even those sins
and lusts which fight against their souls, for their perdition. For such did
Jeremy make prayers at first, and imprecations at last, by the spirit of
prophecy, foretelling their miserable condition, according as our present text
does also declare the same: Shall evil be recompensed for good? Ier. 18. 20.
21.
For they have dug a pit for my soul. Remember that I stood before thee to
speak good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from them. Therefore deliver
up their children to famine, and let them drop away by the force of the sword,
and let their wives be robbed of their children, and be widows: and let their
husbands be put to death, and let their young men be slain by the sword in
the battle.



Verse 14. The beginning of strife is as he that opens the waters: wherefore
before the contention be meddled with, leave off.
THE beginning of strife] the person which is the beginner of strife, he that
gives the onset thereunto, [is as he that opens the waters] that diggeth
down the heads of ponds, or banks of rivers, whereby the waters are held in;
which being by this means let loose, can neither be brought in again, nor
restrained from doing of hurt; but the breach increases, and cannot easily be
stopped: and the stream is violent, and cannot easily be stayed. [wherefore,
before the contention be meddled with, leave off.] if it be possible, let there
be no beginning of strife; but if there be, withstand the proceeding, and give
up before the matter grow to heat, and the suit to charges.



It is not more certain that boisterous winds will raise up raging waves, nor
that breaches in the Sea banks will let out floods into the Land, than that
contentions among men will turn to their detriment and great annoyance.

Yet is not sin to be winked at, but contended against: nor the truth to be
betrayed, but contended for, so that it be done in godly zeal and wisdom,
without fleshly frowardnes and indiscretion. Neither is it unlawful to stand
for a good cause in suit of Law, either as Plaintiff or Defendant, so that it
be upon necessity, when he can neither undergo the wrong without great hurt
to his estate, nor otherwise but by that means enjoy his right: and so that
equity be sought for, and not revenge or victory; nor any course taken in
the prosecution of the matter, but only that which is agreeable to Christian
love.

Abraham quickly perceived the event that would ensue Genesis 13. 7. 8.
upon the iarres between his heardmen and his Nephew Lot, that variance might
in time have been set between themselves also; and therefore forthwith took
order to extinguish them before the flame was grown too great.



S. James testifies, where envying and strife is, there is sedition, and all
manner of evil works. There Iam. 3. 16.
will be dangers of uncharitable surmisings, disclosing of secrets, false
accusations, periuries, quarrels, railings, oppression, and shedding of blood,
beside many other pernicious effects of like nature.



Instruction, to foresee always what is like to be the end of every
controversy, before we step one foot toward the beginning of it. It is a
point of singular wisdom, to follow the counsel, or rather to obey the
commandment that is given in another place: Go not forth hastily to strife,
lest thou know not what to do in the end thereof, when thy neighbor has put
thee to Prou. 15. 8. 9.
shame. Debate thy matter with thy neighbor, and discover not thy secret to
another, lest he that hears it, put thee to shame, and thine infamy do not
cease. An inundation of disgrace and expenses, together with sorrow and
vexation, is sooner brought than removed; and many men ouer-whelme themselves
with such miseries of want and molestations, that they can never get out of
them, until their state be drowned. For prevention whereof, first, be at
peace with God; for he that has obtained forgiveness of sins at his hands,
will rather pardon offenses, than be contentious with offenders, especially for
trespasses against themselves. Secondly, get the spirit into thy heart, and
then shall thou feed of the fruits thereof, which are love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, etc. That will work such heavenly wisdom, as is
pure, peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated. Thirdly, beware of a
makebate, and take heed of pride; for the one without us will tell tales in
our ears, and the other within us will distemper our hearts, and both of them
make us contentious, and unquiet in our behavior.

Verse 15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just,
even they both are abomination to the Lord.
HE that justifies the wicked] which either publicly or privately does either
warrant the unlawful actions of sinful men, or cleereth them of the practice
of that whereof they are guilty, or freeth them from the punishments which
their faults do justly require, [and he that condemns the iust] imputing
those things unto them for faults, which indeed are virtues, or not at all any
offenses, (as they did to the Disciples of Christ, for plucking, rubbing, and
eating the ears of corn on the Sabbath day, which in that case might be done
without sin) or laying those crimes to their charge whereof they are innocent
and faultlesse: [they both are abomination to the Lord] the one as well as the
other is loathed and disliked of him, and neither of them shall escape the
judgments which are to be executed by him.



Among many sorts of sinners which are liable to woes and curses, in the
Prophecy of Isaiah they are numbered and threatened which justify the wicked
for a reward, and take away the Isa. 5. 23.
righteousness of the righteous from him. And in the 24. Chapter of this book
a particular plague is denounced against them, that they shall be made odious
to men, and they shall have them in detestation: He that says to the wicked,
Thou art righteous, Prouer. 2. 24.
him shall the people curse, and the multitude shall abhor him.









the Lord, and make themselves abominable to him. And in sparing of grievous
transgressors which ought to be punished, they make themselves accessarie to
their transgressions, and many times, like Saul and Ahab, bear a part of the
punishment.



And here also are to be reprehended such as have their pens ready to write
in the behalf of any bad person, to procure him release, and as it were to
rescue him from the righteous hand and strokes of the Officer.

Neither are those forward compurgators to be passed by without rebuke, who
are pressed and swift to adventure their word, yea their oath, and so their
souls and salvation, in commendation of any that will entreat them, though
never so leaud and licentious. When they are persuaded, and often when they
know that he swears falsely, and is culpable of the fact whereof he is
accused, yet they say, and swear, and publicly protest to God and men, that
they think him to be honest, and his oath to be true. And what shall we say of
flatterers? Do not they palpably justify the wicked? And do not they, and
every one that magnifieth the ungodly, give cause of suspicion, that they also
little dislike of ungodliness? For it is said, that they which forsake the
Law, praise Prouer. 28. 4.
the wicked: but they that keep the Law, set themselves against them.

He that condemns the righteous] It is not safe for any to lay blame upon
blameless persons.

Our Savior admonishes them that would not come into judgment, to beware of
judging; and them that would not be condemned, to take heed of condemning. It
is not lawful for any to judge or condemn without a calling, nor unrighteously
in a calling.







The cruel man shall cease, and the scornful shall be consumed, and all that
hasted to iniquity shall be cut off: which made a man to sin in his word,
and laid a snare in the gate for them that reproved them, and made the just to
fall without a cause.

will bring it forth as the light, and their judgment as the noone day. And
so has he verified Psalm. 37. 6.
his word by many examples in the Scriptures, whereof Naboths case is one, and
by manifest experience in all ages.

Verse 16. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to buy wisdom,
seeing he has no heart?
WHerefore is there a price in the hand of a foole] Whitherto serves it that a
foolish wicked man has wealth, time, and other means, [to buy wisdome]
procure the knowledge of God, [seeing he has no heart] when he has neither
wit, nor will to use them to that holy end? The meaning is, that a sinful man
is nothing the better for all his riches, or whatsoever else he possesses, if
he have no affection or desire to seek and labor for sound understanding.



The exhortation which Solomon makes, Chap. 4. verse 7. imports so much,
where he says, Wisdom is the beginning: get wisdom therefore, and with all
thy possession get understanding. Thereby many fruitful books are provided,
and thereby many faithful Instructers are maintained, and thereby many other
good helps and opportunities are enioied, as in that place shall be more
largely declared.

Seeing he has no heart] No means can make a man wise, which wants a good
will to learn heavenly wisdom.

Ismael had good education, and Achitophel had quick capacity, and the fool
spoken of in the Gospel had store of riches; and none of all these attained to
any grace. One of them was strong, and another witty, and another wealthy;
but never a one wise and godly.

Judas heard as good a Teacher as Peter, or any other Apostle, and had as good
company, and saw as many miracles; and yet they having good hearts, became
worthy and excellent persons: and he having a false heart, became a cursed
Traitor, and a Devil.

Elihu speaks concerning old age: I said, the days shall speak, and the Job
32. 7.
multitude of years shall teach understanding. Surely there is a spirit in
man, but the inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding. Great men are
not always wise, neither do the aged always understand judgment.

good instructions, sharpness of wit, time and leisure, and many such like.
They choke the word, and harden the heart: they puff up the mind: they draw
all the affections to vanity.



Trust not thine own heart, as it is by nature; for nothing can be more
treacherous than a carnal heart to a natural man. Neither is it enough to be
wealthy, witty, or mighty: for so thou may be, and yet be the more
miserable, wretched, and accursed. Neither satisfy thy self in this, that
thou art taught the ways of God, and live under an holy ministry; for so
do many, to their greater condemnation: but labor for a gracious heart, and
lay up spiritual treasures, and be good ground to receive the good seed of the
Gospel, that thou may yield to God the fruits of obedienee, and God may
yield to thee the recompense of glory, and then shall thou make good markets
with the price in thine hand, and then art thou truly wise unto salvation.

Verse 17. A friend loves at all times, and a brother is borne for adversity.
A Friend] He that is true and trusty, [loueth at all times] is constant in
good will, and ready always to perform every duty of kindness: [and a
brother] a natural and dear friend, and not every natural brother or
kinsman, (for it is said in the next Chapter, verse 24. that a friend is nearer
than a brother: and in the 19. Chapter, verse 7. All the brethren of the poor
do hate him) [is borne for aduersitie] then begins to show himself as if
he were newborn, when a man being in affliction has most need of him.



If his companion be advanced, and rise above him, he is not moved with envy,
but with gladness: if he be depressed, and sink beneath him, he does not
despise, but pity and succor him. It was Ionathans joy to see David far in
the favor of Saul: and it was a great grief unto Jonathan, to see Saul so
far incensed against David. If he could have confirmed his fathers good
opinion of him before he began to malign him, he would have prevented the
breach: if he could have reconciled his mind to him afterward, he would have
done it.

And Ruth was no less loving and dutiful to Naomi at her return to Judah
empty, than when she came unto Moab full. In every place, and in every state,
she was all one, after they two had grown to be one. Whither thou go (says
she) I will Ruth 1. 16. 17
go: and where thou dwell, I will dwell. Thy people shall be my people,
and thy God my God. Where thou die, I will die, and there I will be buried.
The Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death depart thee and me.

It is set as a brand of reproach upon those of Asia, as Phygellus and
Hermogenes by name, that they turned away from Paul when he was in prison: and
as an ensign of honor for Onesephorus, that he often refreshed him, and was not
ashamed of his chain.



therefore that is the time wherein their love and care to minister comfort
unto them will be the more manifested.



Achitophel did bring more anguish to David's heart by his apostasy, than did
the greater part of the other Rebels. And Job did much complain of them that
played the winter-brookes with him, ouerflowing with proffers of courtesy when
he had no need of them, and being empty of compassion, as dry ditches are of
water, when he expected some comfort from them.

power. They can mourn for, but not relieve the distressed state of their best
beloved dearlings: but he is every way all-sufficient: his ability and might
extend as far as his goodness and mercy: his arm is long enough and strong
enough to draw his people speedily out of the bottom of the deepest misery.

Verse 18. A man void of understanding clappeth the hand, taking upon him
suretiship before his friend.
A Man void of vnderstanding] An indiscreet and foolish person [clappeth the
hand] gives his word for another man's debt, and confirms the same by giving
his hand or writing, or other means, such as whereby a promise is ratified:
[taking upon him suretiship before his friend] voluntarily, rashly, and
unadvisedly, being ready to offer himself to this burden before he be
entreated thereunto. See Chap. 11. verse 15.

Verse 19. He that loves strife, loves transgression: and he enlarges his
gate that seeks a breach.
HE that loves strife] which is not upon necessity drawn into contentions,
nor through infirmity sometimes falls thereinto, but takes delight in
brawles and controversies, [loueth transgressions] is surely a wicked man, and
takes pleasure in sin, which is the cause of his unquietness; and likewise
procures many evils to ensue upon debate and variance, which are the effects
of his turbulent humor: [and he inlargeth his gate that seeks a breach] he
that picketh quarrels, and is desirous to fall out with men with whom before he
was at agreement, sets open a wide door to let in many mischiefs. See
verse 14.

Verse 20. He that has a froward heart, shall not find good: and he that is
perverse in his tongue, shall fall into evil.
HE that has a froward heart] which is not only misled by ignorance, or
subject to faults by frailty, or overtaken at some times by passions, but is
given to be wilful and stubborn, his soul is in the power of frowardness:
[shall not find good] shall obtain no favor or blessing from God, but
judgments and curses rather, both for his everlasting state, and for his
present condition, howsoever he may seem to possess many earthly
commodities: [and he that is perverse in his tongue] which abuses his tongue
to swearing, lying, flattering, railing, filthiness, or any other leaud
speaking, [shall fall into euill] shall feel and find in the end some heavy
stroke of God to light upon him. See the danger of frowardness, Chap. 11.
verse 20. where the froward of heart are said to be abomination to the Lord:
and Chap. 12. verse. 8. where he that is froward in heart is threatened to be
despised. And the danger that comes by an evil tongue shall be showed in the
next Chapter, verse 7.

Verse 21. He that begets a fool, begets him to his own sorrow: and the
father of a fool shall have no joy.
HE that begets a foole] The parents of those children which are destitute
of wisdom and grace, [begetteth him to his own sorrow] procure to themselves
matter of grief in the very generation of an ungracious seed: but feel the
bitterness of it when they find the frowardness and rebellion, and (it may
be) the misery and evil end of such sinful sons: [and the father of a fool
shall have no ioy] His meaning is not, that they which have wicked children are
without all comfort: for then the best men, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David,
and other excellent persons, should have been altogether comfortless, having
godless sons as well as godly: but they can have no reioicing in such a
wicked progeny, so long as they continue in their impiety and folly. See
Chap. 10. verse 1.

Verse 22. A ioifull heart causes good health: but a sorrowful mind dries
up the bones.
A Ioifull heart] especially that which is refreshed and made merry with godly
joy, [causeth health] is many times as good as physic and wholesome medicines
for the restoring of health to weak bodies, and keeps the healthie in very
good temper, by a certain vital vigor which it conueieth into them: [but a
sorrowful minde] an heavy spirit, which is cast down without just cause, or
beyond just measure, [drieth up the bones] causes the body to be out of tune,
and greatly diseased, by consuming the radical moisture, and fills the bones
with aches, and wastes the marrow that is in them. See Chap. 13. verse 13.

Verse 23. A wicked man takes a gift out of the bosom to pervert the ways of
justice.
A Wicked man] Both the party that has the bad cause, and stands in it, and
the unjust Judge, or other corrupt Officer, that will be induced to do wrong,
[taketh a gift] which the one has prepared to give, and the other knows to
be brought, [out of the bosome] closely and privily, that others discern it
not [to pervert the ways of iustice] to overthrow the right, and stop the
course of Law, wherein (as in broad and high ways) the Magistrate should walk
without all partiality. The force of gifts and bribes has already been
declared, verse 8.

Verse 24. Wisdom is in the face of him that has understanding: but the eyes
of a fool are in the ends of the earth.
Wisdom is in the face of him that has vnderstanding] the modest, lightsome,
and amiable countenance of a discreet and virtuous person, and especially the
staidness of his eyes, declares and publishes him to be wise: [but the eyes
of a fool are in the ends of the earth] his looks and countenance bewray and
discover the lewdness, folly, and sottishness that is within him, and
namely the inconstancy or wandering of his eyes, rouing hither and thither, as
if he would look from one side of the land to the other.



The sin of the soul does mar the face, and makes them that are fair to
appear ill-fauoured: and the sincerity of the conscience does beautify the
countenance, and cause them that are deformed to look pleasantly. Which
Solomon the Writer of this book, does testify in his other book of
Ecclesiastes: The wisdom of a man does make his face to shine, Eccl. 8. 1
and the strength of the face shall be doubled.

It is noted of Steven, that even when he was in the hands of his adversaries,
and his adversaries were in hand to take away his life, there was a majesty in
his countenance before all the Council that looked steadfastly upon him: they
saw his face, as it Act. 6. 15.
had been the face of an Angel.



Cain.



us, that they may see gravity and moderation, with such gestures, looks, and
behavior, as well beseems the sons of wisdom. Fierceness, frowning,
lowering, lightness, must be as heedfully avoided as complainants, that will
be ready to accuse us of folly to every one that looks in our faces.

Reproof of them that being too bad already, abuse their eyes, and other
members and senses, to make themselves worse; as unclean persons and wantons
do fill their hearts with lust, the covetous with worldly desires, the proud
with selfe-liking, and admiration of their own persons, apparel, or
possessions, and others as they are otherwise affected. These are far from
Jobs spirit, and David's: they make no Job 31 1. Psalm. 119. 3^.
covenant with their eyes to restrain them from evil objects: they pray not
to the Lord to turn them away from regarding vanity.

Verse 25. A foolish son is a vexation to his father, and a bitterness to
her that bare him.
HIs contemptuous and disobedient behavior to his parents, and other leaud
conditions, and (as it often falls out) his unhappy estate, does fill the
hearts both of his father and mother with anger, and with great grief and
sorrow. See Chap. 10. verse 1.

Verse 26. It is not good even to condemn the righteous, nor to strike
ingenuous men for equity.
IT is not good] but evil and hurtful [to condemn the righteous] to speak
against or pass sentence upon harmless men with our lips; or so much as to
censure them in our hearts: [nor to smite ingenuous men] to punish well
disposed and faithful persons, whom the Scripture, in regard of the free
spirit that is in them, whereby they are preserved from the power and bondage
of sin, and in regard of the dignity that grace has advanced them unto,
does call by the name of free men and princes, as the word heerevsed does
signify, [for equitie] either for shunning that which is unlawful and naught,
or doing that which is commendable and good.



The Lord in the Law does admonish the Magistrate to beware of this sin, and
to the prohibition annexeth a commination or threatening, to make him the more
heedfull to avoid it: Thou shall keep thee far from a false matter, and
Exodus 23. 7.
shall not slay the innocent and righteous: for I will not justify a wicked
man: that is, I will find out the guiltiness of such unjust Judges and
Rulers, and I will accordingly plague them for the same. This may be
exemplified by that which befell Pharao, Ahab, Iezabel, and Manasse, though not
to his destruction, yet to his smart; when of a Prince he was made a prisoner,
and bound with chains like a malefactor. And the Lord Jesus told Paul whiles
he was violent against them that believed in his name, he did but unwisely
beat the point of the goad with his heels: He kicked against the prick, as in
the end it was told him. Act. 9. 5.


Minister of God for their wealth, and to Romans 13. 3.
yield encouragement and praise unto them.

Zach. 2. 8.





Rome is wont to do. If it be not good to condemn the just, and smite the
righteous, then it is naught to spoil and undo them, and worse to make
havoc and slaughter of them: and then surely the world cannot long go well
with him and his adherents, Agents, and well-willers, nor with any of them that
walk in his steps, sithence it is their occupation to be butchers and
shedders of blood, even the blood of them that most faithfully and sincerely
give testimony to the truth of the Lord. They are never about their work, but
when they are about some mischief against the people of God, and his services;
which should move every Christian Ruler to be as unlike unto them in
practice, as in profession; and to show as much kindness to those that walk
in the ways of righteousness, as they do cruelty and fierceness.

Verse 27. He that has knowledge, spares his words: and a man of
understanding is of a cool spirit. Verse 28. Even a fool, when he holds
his peace, is counted wise: and he that shuts his lips, prudent.
HE that has knowledge] which is endued with sound wisdom, [spareth his
words] holds in and keeps back unnecessary and fruitless speeches: he
delights not in speaking much, but in speaking well: [and a man of
vnderstanding] being both judicious and godly, [is of a cool spirit] is
moderate, and well stayed in his affections: not easily bursting forth into
anger, but diligently taking heed of the heat of his heart, and thereby is
able to bridle his tongue from multiplying of many and passionate words. [Euen
a fool, when he holds his peace, is counted wise] So excellent a thing it is
to keep silence in time and place, that even a silly person and Idiot holding
his tongue, is deemed wise, and taken for a discreet man, because that by
foolish babbling he bewraieth not his ignorance and folly.



As he is barren and fruitless, that is always mute, and will say nothing, so
he is unadvised and witless, that is ever talking, and will not conceal any
thing. A fool powers out all Prouer. 29. 11.
his mind: but a wise man keeps it in till afterward. And therefore S. James
admonishes every man to be swift to hear, and Iam. 1. 19.
slow to speak.







that is continually striving to show himself witty, by multitude of words.

James persuades men to be slow Iam. 1. 19.
to speak, he does advise them to be slow to wrath also.

FINIS.

