THE HISTORY OF THE ANCIENT and modern Estate of The Principality of Wales,
Duchy of Cornwall, and Earldome of Chester.

Collected out of the Records of the Tower of LONDON, and diverse ancient
Authors.

By Sir JOHN DODRIDGE Knight, late one of his Majesty's ludges in the Kings
Bench.

And by himself Dedicated to King JAMES of ever blessed memory.

LONDON,

Printed by Tho. Harper, for Godfrey Em^ndson, and Thomas Alchorne, M. DC. XXX.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY JAMES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, defender of the faith etc.
My most dread Sovereign and Liegelord,
AMong temporal blessings given from God, and powered upon men, this is not the
least, for a man to behold the fruit of his own body, surculum exradice, an
impe, or graffe, the Olive branches about his table, the hope of his posterity,
the image of himself, and the staff of his old age. The consideration of the
want whereof caused that good Patriake out of the bitterness of his soul to
cry and make his complaint unto his God in these words. Behold I go
childlesse, and the Steward of my house is Eleazer of Damascus; lo to me thou
have given no seed, wherefore a servant of mine house must be mine heir. But
to be furnished with masculine issue, and to have his first borne of that sex,
to whom the Birthright is due, as to the sanctfiied of God, and the preserver
of his name and patrimony, is a double blessing unto all men, much more unto
Kings, the Lords anointed, whereby his horn is established, his subjects in
the midst of the day present, do behold the Sun that shall arise upon them
the day suceeding, and have their hearts settled to say unto their Sovereign,
we and our seed will serve thee and thy seed for ever: This made the
Prophetical King in the day of his departure to bless God, and say, Blessed
be the Lord my God, who has caused mine eyes to see this day that one of mine
own loins shall fit upon my Throne. But contrariwise was Achah accursed, of
whom God said he would not leave him one mingentem ad parietem, threatening (as
it were) by that circumlocution to root out all issue male of Achab that might
succeed him. And hence it is that all Potentates of the world have highly
respected and advanced in the eyes of their subjects, their heir apparent, and
given and conferred upon him very high and eminent titles of honor: Of the
Suetonius. Lampridus. Tacuus.
Romans he was called Caesar and Princeps juventutis, as the principal of all
their hopes in their posterity Of the French he is honored by the name of the
Dolphin of that part of the Country, being his patrimony. And in like manner in
this our Country of England, the Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl
of Chester. He is, next his father, the chief in the Realm, and by course of
the civil Law, is to sit at his right hand in all solemn assemblies of state
and honor: So that not without reason did King Edward the third King of
England, place Richard, his grandchild, and next heir apparent, in his solemn
feast at Christmas, at his table next unto himself, above all his Uncles,
being the sons of that King, and men manifoldly renowned for their prowes and
virtue. And yet has not the Prince any Kingly prerogatives allowed unto him by
the Laws of this Realm, in the life of his progenitors, other then such as
are due unto other Noble men, that he might acknowledge himself to be but a
subject, and whereof he is put in remembrance even by the Poesy that he uses
in the old English or Saxon tongues in this form conceived, Ie dien, I am a
servant. The due consideration whereof has caused me by the encouragement of
an honorable, learned, and worthy Councellor my Lord of Buckhurst, your
Majesty's Lord high Treasurer of England, and my very good Lord, and being
eased therein by the careful pains and industry of a Gentleman Mr. Richard
Connock his servant, in some convenient method after my rude and unlearned
manner, to set down what the ancient and true estate of his excellency the
Lord Prince has been, what it now is, and how impaired, and to what estate
and dignity by your Majesty's high and Princely wisdom, it may again be
reduced: Beseeching your highness of your accustomed clemency, to pardon this
my bold attempt, and to accept my poor travels therein, with that gracious
aspect as you do the manifold gratulations of other your Majesty's loving
subjects.

Your Majesty's loyal and obedient subject I. D.

ABSTRACTS AND ADVERTISEMENTS concerning the Contents of this HISTORY.
THe original and ancient estate of Wales, before, and until the Conquest
thereof by King Edward the First, in the eleventh year of his Reign.

Edward of Carnaruon, (so called because he was born at Carnaruon Castle in
Wales) and son to King Edward the First, constituted Prince of Wales, and
the policy used therein by King Edward the First.

The creation of Edward, surnamed the black Prince, to be Prince of Wales,
and the ancient manner of the inuesture of the Princes of Wales.

The strange limitation of the estate of the Lands of the said Principality,
and the reasons thereof, and the difference between the Principality of
Wales, and the Duchy of Cornwall, for the eldest son and heir apparent of
the King of England, is Duke of Cornwall, as soon as be is borne, or as soon
as his father is King of England. But he is created Prince of Wales by a
special creation, inuesture, and donation of the lands thereunto belonging,
and not by birth.

The yearly value of the revenues of the Principality of Wales, as the same
were in the bands of the Prince, commonly called the black Prince.

Richard surnamed of Bordeaux, son of the said black Prince, was after the
death of his father, created Prince of Wales, at Hauering, at the Bower, in
the County of Essex, by E 3. his Grandfather.

Henry of Munmouth, son to King Henry the Fourth, created Prince of Wales,
he was afterward King, by the name of King Henry the Fifth.

Edward, the son of King Henry the Sixth, created Prince of Wales, and Earl
of Chester, and for that he was then very young, there was ordained by an Act
of Parliament, what allowance should be made unto the said Prince for his
Wardrobe, servants wages, and other necessary expenses, until the said Prince
should be of fourteen years of age.

There was also a Counsel of diverse honorable personages, as Bishops,
Earls, and others for the government and direction of the revenues of the
said Prince, which dispose the same accordingly, with the assent and advice of
the Queen, who was also especially appointed in that behalf.

Edward, the son and heir apparent of King Edward the Fourth, created Prince
of Wales, and a Council of honorable personages allowed to him also for the
government of his revenues, and the Lord Rivers, Uncle by the mothers side of
the Prince, was appointed Governor of the Person of the said Prince.

The creation of Arthure, son and heir apparent to King Henry the Seventh,
to be Prince of Wales, the Copy of the Charter of that creation observed for
the form and manner of penning thereof, and the names of the Counselors that
were assigned unto him.

After the death of Prince Arthure, Henry his brother, who was afterward King
Henry the Eight, was created Prince of Wales, after whose time there are no
Charters found of the creation of any Prince of Wales, although King Edward the
Sixth, in the life of his Father, and Queen Mary carried the name of Prince
general: and the reason why this discourse hitherunto is drawn after an
historical manner.

After the said historical discourse. Three things are further considered of,
viz. First, in what manner and order the said Principality and Marches of
Wales were governed and directed under the Princes of Wales, as well before, as
after the English Conquests thereof: wherein by the way are noted, the Courts
of Justice of the said principality of Wales, the original of the Baronyes
Marchers: and when the first Council was established in the Marches of Wales
unto England, and in what manner the same was done, and the commodities ensuing
thereof; which union or annexation may serve in some respect, as a president in
other cases of like consequence.

The second principal thing proposed, is the consideration of the ancient and
modern Officers of the said principality, serving the Lord Prince, and none
others, and what fees and sallaries were allowed unto them.

The third principal matter is the present revenues of the principality of
Wales, as the same was in charge before the Auditors this last year past, viz.
the forty four year of the late Queen Elizabeth.

The Dukedom of Cornwall.
The Dukedom of Cornwall was the first erected Duchy in England after the
Norman conquest, and made to be a Duchy in the eleventh year of King Edward
the Third, and given to his eldest son, commonly called the black Prince,
who was the first Duke in Cornwall after the Conquest, to him and to his first
begotten sons and heirs apparent of the Kings of England, and the difference
that is between the Principality of Wales and the said Duchy.

At what age of the Duke of Cornwall, Livery may be made unto him of the said
Duchy.

Moreover touching the said Duchy of Cornwall, three things are considered;
First, what revenues were bestowed upon the said Duchy, for the erection
thereof, both annual and casual, and the particulars thereof: the several
natures and differences of them in the construction of the Law, together with
the Stanneryes and coynage of Tynne, and the laws, vsages, and customs of the
said Stanueryes concerning the managing of Tynne.

The diverse kinds of Tynners and Tynne, and the coynage of Tynne is, and for
what cause due and payable, and the privileges that the King and Duke of
Cornwall have in their preemption of Tynne.

The revenues of the Duchy of Cornwall as it is rated by survey taken in the
fifth year of King Edward the Third.

The revenues of the said Duchy of Cornwall, as it was in the fifteenth
year of King Henry the Eight.

The revenues of the said Duchy, as it was in account unto the late Queen
Elizabeth, in the 44. year of her reign, which is the last account, and the
clear yearly value thereof, as it may be drawn to an estimation annual,
appears.

The County Palatine of Chester and Flint.
The third principal revenue belonging to the Prince, as Earl of Chester,
which Earldom is a County Palatine.

Edward surnamed the black Prince, created Earl of Chester, by King Edward
the Third his Father, in the seventh year of the said King Edward the Thirds
reign.

The total revenue of the said County Palatine of Chester and Flint, as it
was in the 44. year of the late Queen Elizabeth.

The ancient revenues of the said Earldom of Chester and Flint, as the same
were in the fifth year of King Edward the Third.

The reasons why in this History diverse an tiquities (not vulgarly known) are
discovered concerning the Principality of Wales, Duchy of Cornwall, and
Earldom of Chester.

Inconueniens erit omissis initijs atque origin non repetita, atqueillotis (vt
ita dixerim) manibus, protinus materiam tractare. Ex lege prima Digestoru^
Iuris Ciuilis, titulo de origin Iuris.
THE ANCIENT REVENEWES OF the Lord PRINCE consist of these three kinds: The
Principality of Wales, Duchy of Cornwall, And Earldome of Chester,
And therefore of every of these in order as follows.
The Principality of Wales.
Wales, what part of the Island of Albion.
THat part of this Island which is called Wales, is thought by some learned, to
be the same which the Romans (having Hum. Lloyd apud Ort^lium in Thesaur
Geographico.
reduced this Island under their government) called Britannia Secunda, of some
others it is supposed to be the same that Et idem Hum. Lloyd in frag*mento
Britanniae descriptioue ^ol. mi^i ^O. Rilsanus Duflius in Dictionario suo
Teutonico-Latino in verbo Walliae.
was called by the Romans Valentia but howsoever the truth thereof be, it was
anciently called by the Britains, Cambria who divided the whole Island of
Albion into these three parts, Loegria, Albania, and Cambria, The Saxons
conquering this Island, called the said Territory, (into the mountains
whereof the remnant of the Britains that remained were fled, and not to be
overcome by them,) Wallia, and the people Welshmen, that is to say, unto them
strangers, And the other part, those Britains or Welshmen do yet in their
language call the English Saissons or Saxons. Saissons or Saxons.


It was also anciently divided into three Provinces or Principalities, the
first and principal called by them Guyneth, or as they have written in Latin
Venedotia viz: that which is called North Wales. The second they have called in
Latin Demetia, and is that we call South Wales. And the third Powisia or
Powisland, and every of these Provinces were again subdivided into Cantreds
and every Cantred into Comots. The Records do divide the same into three parts
also, Westwales, Northwales, and Southwales. The whole Country is now allotted
into Shires which are thirteen in number, and namely these

1 Radnor shire. 2 Brecknock shire. 3 Munmouth shire. 4 Glamorganshire. 5
Carmarthenshire. 6 Pembrookeshire. 7 Cardiganshire. 8 Montgomeryshire. 9
Merionethshire. 10 Ca^rnaruoushire. 11 Denbighshire. 12 Flintshire. 13
Anglesyshire.
Wales anciently no parcel of the Realm of England. 10. b 4. 6. b. 19. b. 6.
12. a. ^2. b. 6. 25. b. 36. b. 6. 33. b. Com. Plow 129. b. and 2 6 b.
This Parcel of the said Island called Wales, thus possessed by the remnant of
those Britains, was no parcel of the dominion of the Realm of England, but
distinguished from the same, as the books of the Laws of this Realm do
testify; and as it were a Realm of it self not governed by the Laws of
England and was by some of the Saxon Kings divided from England, and by a ditch
called of the name of the King which caused the same, King Offa his Ditch. Vid.
Cambd. in com Radnor expolicratico Io^^nis Barisburiensis


10. b. 4. 6 b. Com. Plowd: 126. b. 129. b.
Yet neuertheless was the same Dominion of Wales ever holden in Chief, and in
Fee of the Crown of England. And the Prince thereof being then of their own
Nation compellable upon Summons to come and appear in the Parliaments of
England, and upon their rebellions and disorders the kings of England devised
their Scutagium or Escuage, as it is called in the Laws of England, that is,
to leuy aid and assistance of their tenants in England which held of them Per
Seruitium militare to suppress such disordred Welsh, tanqua^ Rebels and Non
hosts, as Rebels, and not as foreign Enemies. Les ancient tenures fol 116.
Com. Plow. 12^. b.


Edw. 1. took upon him the name of Prince of Wales
And hence it is that King Henry the third upon those often reuolts of the Welsh
endeavored to resume the Territory of Wales as forfeit unto him self, and
conferred the same upon Edward the Longshanckes his heir apparent, yet
nevertheless Record. Tu^^is London 29. H. 3. Polydor Virgil. lib. 16. fol.
mi^i 311. Doctor Powel in the Welsh Chro. fo. 311.
rather in title then in possession or upon any profit obtained thereby. For
the former prince of Wales continued his government, notwithstanding this,
between whom and the said Edward, wars were continued. Whereof when the
said Edward complained to King Henry the third his father, the said King made
this answer as records Matthew Paris a Cosmographer living in that time. Quid
ad me terra tua? est ex dono meo. Exerevires primitiuas, famam excita
iuuenilem, et de caetero timeant inimici etc. Matthew. Paris. a^^o 1257. so. mi^i
914.


Patent. 51. ^. 3 Pa^^prima.
But the Charter of this gift is not now readily to be found among the Records.
For after this time it appears by the Records of the Tower of London that by
the mediation of Oth^bon Deacon, Cardinal of S Andrews, a peace was concluded
between the then Prince of the Welsh blood, and the said Henry the 3. which
nevertheless as it seems continued not long, for sundry battles were fought
between the said Edward (both before and after he was King of England) Lewlyn
the last Prince of the Welsh blood, and David his brother, until Wales su^^^ed
by K. Edw. 1.
both the said Prince, and his said brother were overcome by the said Edward,
after he was King of England, and who thereby made a final and full conquest
of Wales, annexing the same unto the Crown of England, dividing some parts
thereof into Shires, and appointing Laws for the government of that people.
The Shires made by E. 1. were these.
Although the Welsh nation do not willingly acknowledge such conquest, but
referres it rather to composition. The words of the Statute made in Wales at
Ruthlan presently upon the conquest are these: Diuina Prouidentia quae in sui
dispositione non fallitur, inter alia dispensationis munera, quibus nos and
regnum nostrum Angliae decorari dignata est, Terram Waliae cum incolis suis
prius nobis iure fendali subiectam jam sui gratia in proprietatis nostrae
dominium obstaculis quibuscunque non obstantibus totaliter et cum integritate
conuertit et corona Regni pradicti tanquam partem corporis eiusdem annexit et
vniuit. Statum Waliae. 12: Ed. the first.


The Chronicle of Wales compiled par^ly by H. Lloyd, and partly by Doctor Powel
page 376.
This Territory of Wales thus being united, the said King Edward used means to
obtain the peoples good will to strengthen that which he had gotten by
effusion of blood with the benevolence of his Subjects of Wales who promised
their hearty and most humble obedience if it would please the King either to
remain among them him self in person, or else to appoint under him a
governor over them that was of their own nation and country: The King
thereupon purposing a pretty policy sends for the Queen, then being great
with Child, to come unto him into Wales, who being delivered of a son in the
Castle of Carnaruon in Wales, called by reason thereof Edward of Carnarnon, the
King thereupon sent for all the Barons of Wales took their assurance and
submission according to their offers formerly made, if they should have a
governor of their own nation, affirming unto them that he was then ready to
name unto them a Governor borne in their Country and who could not speak any
word of English, whose life and conversation, no man was able to stain, and
required their promise of obedience; whereunto they yielding, the King
thereupon named unto them his said son borne at Carnaruon Castle a few days
before, unto whom the Barons of Wales afterward made their homage, as
appears Anno 29 E 1. at Chester.

Cronica Angliae ^mnia huiu^ temporis.
The said Edward of Carnaruon after the death of his father, was King of England
by the name of King Edward the second, living in a turbulent time between him
and his Barons, was afterward deposed for his ill government, and came to a
violent death in the Castle of Barkeley, and Edward his son by the name of
King Edward the third reigned in his stead. Nevertheless this Edward the
third being called Edward of Windsor in the life of his father was created
Prince of Wales, and Duke of Aquitane, in a Parliamant holden at York.

Edward the black Prince, Prince of Wales Ex chartacreationis in parliament^ a.
15. ^. ^
Edward the third in a Parliament holden at Westminster in the fifteenth year
of his reign created Edward his eldest son, surnamed the black Prince,
Prince of Wales, being then of tender years, and invested him in the said
Principality with these ensigns of honor, and as in the Charter is
contained, Per sertum in capite, et annulum in The manner of the inucsture of
the Prince.
digit^ aureu^, ac virgam argenteam iuxta more^: By a Chaplet of Gould made in
the manner of a Garland, for the word Sertu^ imports, by a gould ring set on
his finger, and by verdge, Rod or Scepter of Silver, how be it in the inuesture
of the succeeding Garter King at arms has the manner and order of this
creation and inuesture painted.
Princes, this Rod or Scepter (as appears by the Charters of their several
creations) was changed into a verge of gould.

Ex charta regia data 4 Mar^^j a. 17. Ed. 3.
The said King for the better maintenance of the said Prince his son in
honorable support according to such his state and dignity, gave unto him by his
Charter dated the twelfth of May, in the seventh year of his reign of England
and in the fourth year of his reign of France, Termino Michaelis, a. 16 E. 3.
Rot 6. exparte remen. ^ratoris Thesaury in curia Scaccari^.
and enrolled in the Exchequer in the Term of S. Hillary in the eighteenth
year of the said King Edward the third. The said Principality and the Manors,
Lordships, Castles and Lands ensuing to appertain to the said Principality.
viz.

All his Lordships and Lands in Northwales, Westwales and Southwales.

1 The Lordship, Castle, town and County of Carnaruon. 2 The Lordship, Castle
and town of Conway. 3 The Lordship, Castle and town of Crucketh. 4 The
Lordship, Castle and town of Bewmarish. 5 The Lordship, Castle and town of
Hardlagh. 6 The Lordship, Castle and towns and Countys of Anglesey and
Merioneth. 7 The Lordship, Castle, town, and County of Caermardin. 8 The
Lordship, Castle, and town of Lampaderuaur. 9 The Lordship and Stewardship of
Cantermawer. 10 The Lordship, Castle, town and County of Cardigan. 11 The
Lordship, Castle, and Town of Emelyn. 12 The Lordship, Castle, and Town of
Buelt. 13 The Lordship, Castle, and Town of Hauerford. 14 The Lordship,
Castle, and Town of Montgomery.
This Rice ap Meredick rebelled against K. Edw. 1. after his Conquest of Wales,
as appears in the Chronicles of that time. Voydance of Bishoprics. Customs
and prices of wines Executions of justice and a Chancery, Forests, Chases,
Parkes, Wariens.
And all the Lands that were of Rice ap Meridick which came to the hands of King
Edward the first, together with all the Lordships, Cities, Castles, Borrowes,
Towns, Manours, Members, Hamlets, Lands, Tenements, Knights fees, Voydances of
Bishoprics, Aduowsons of Churches and of Abbeys, Priories, and of Hospitals,
with Customs and Prisages of wines, The exercise and execution of Justice, and
a Chancery, Forests, Chaces, Parkes, Woods, Warrens, Hundreds, Comots, etc. and
all other Hereditaments, as well unto the said Principality as unto the said
King, in those parts then belonging.

To have and to hold the same unto the said Prince and his heirs Kings of
England. This lymitation of Estate of this Principality unto the Prince and
his heirs Kings of England, may seem strange to our modern Lawyers. For how
is it possible that the Kings of England, can Vid. 4. et 5. P. et M. 159 nu.
34. Vid. Com. 217. a.
inherit the Principality, sithence the Principality being the lesser
dignity is extinguished in the Kingly estate, being the greater: for in
Praesentia maioris cessat, id quod minus est. Forasmuch as the Heir apparent
of the Crown (being Prince) is presently 1. Eliz. 165. a. nu. 1. Dier.
upon the death of his auncester, Eo instante, in himself King, and the
Principality as the lesser not compitable with the Kingdom being the greater.

But when I consider that this age, wherein this Charter was penned, was a
learned age of Judges and Lawyers (by whose advice no doubt in a matter of this
importance this Charter was penned) and this age much commended for exquisit
knowledge of the Laws, by those learned men that lived in the Succeeding times,
I cannot but think reverently of Antiquity, although I cannot yield sufficient
reason of their doings therein. 14. h. 4.
For I am taught by Iulianus that learned Roman Lawyer, Non omnium quae a
maioribus constituta sunt ratio reddi potest. Libre prime digestorum Iuris
Civilis. tituulo de legibus lege 19.
Whereof also Naratius there yields a reason, Etideo rations eorum quae
constituuntur inquiri non oportet alioquin multa ex ijs quae certa sunt
subuertere^tur. Nevertheless forasmuch as all the Charters in the ages following
made to the Prince do hold the same manner of lymitation of estate, I am
persuaded some mystery of good policy to lie hidden therein, which as I
conceive may be this or such like. The Kings of England thought to confer
upon their Prince and Heir apparent an estate of fee simple in the lands that
they bestowed upon him; for a lesser then an Inheritance had not been
answerable to so great a dignity. And yet they were not willing to give him
any larger estate, then such as should extinguish again in the Crown when he
came to be King or dyed; for that he being King should also have the like
power to create the Prince ce of his Heir apparent, and to inuest him into
that dignity as he being the father was invested by his Progenitor. For the
wisdom of the Kings of England was such, as that they would not deprive them
selves of that honor but that every of them might make new Creations and
inuestures of the Principality to their eldest son or next succeeding Heir
apparent; and that those Lands so given unto the Prince, might when he was King
be annexed, knit and united again to the Crown, and out of the Crown to be
of new conferred; which could not so have been, if those Lands had been given
to the Prince and his Heirs generals, for then the Lands so given would have
rested in the natural person of the Princes, after they came to the Kingdom
distinct from the Crown Lands, and might, as the case should happen descend to
others then those which were his Heirs apparent to the Crown. And herein I do
observe a difference between the Principality of Wales given to the Prince,
and the Duchy of Cornwall given unto him. For every Prince needs and so
has had a new Creation and Inuesture. But he is Duke of Cornwall as soon as
he is borne, if his Auncester be then King of England; and if not, he is Duke
of Cornwall, Eo instante, that his father is King of England, as shall be more
evidently proved hereafter, by matter of Record, when I shall come to speak of
the Duchy of Cornwall.

Ex charta regui data 20. Septem. irrotulata in memorandis Scij. a. 36. e. 3.
termino Michaelis Rot. 14.
The said King also by another Charter dated the twentieth of September in the
said seventh year of his reign, granted unto the said Prince all arrerages
of rents, duties, accounts, stocks, stores, goods, and chattels remaining in
all and every the said parties due, or of right belonging unto the King; and
thereupon the Prince accordingly was possessed by virtue of these Charters of
all these aforesaid.

It rests here that we set down the total annual value of the said
Principality of Wales by itself as it appears upon a diligent survey thereof
taken in his fiftieth year of the reign of the said King Edward the Third of
England, and in the seven and thirtieth year of his reign of France.
The Survey of the Principality of Wales is drawn out of a long Record, and to
avoid tediousness, the value of the Revenues of every County or Shire is
here set down, and then the total of the whole, omitting the particulars of
every Manor, Lordship, Town, or other profit in every of the said Counties.
The setting down whereof at large would have been exceeding cumbersome and
intricate.

It is therefore in this manner.

The Province of Northwales.
The sum total of the Princes revenues in the County or Shire of Carnaruon.
-- 1134. l. 16. s. 2. d. ob. q. The sum total of the revenues of the
Province in the County of Anglesey. -- 832. l. 14. s. 6. d. ob. q. The sum
total of the revenues in the County of Merioneth amounts unto -- 748. l.
11. s. 3. d. ob. q. The perquisits and profits of the Sessions of the Justices
of Northwales. The sum total of all the former revenues in Northwales
amounts unto -- 3041: l. 7. s. 6. d. q. Whereof deducted for the yearly fee
of the Justice of Northwales, and so there remained the sum of 3001. l. 7. s.
6. d. q:
The Province of Southwales.
The sum total of the yearly reuenew of the Prince-in the County of
Cardigan. -- 374. l. 11. s. 3. d. q. The sum total of the yearly reuenew of
the Prince arising in the County of Carmarthen. -- 406. l. 1. s. 7. d. The fee
farm of Buelt. -- 113. l. 6. s. 8. d. Montgomery. -- 56. l. 13. s. 4. d.
Perquisits and profits of the Sessions of the Justices of Southwales. -- 738.
l. 6. s. 9. d. ob. Perquisits of the Courts of Hauerford. -- 41. l. 5. s. 3. d.
ob. The sum total of the reuenew in Southwales. 1730. l. 4 s. 11. d. ob. Out
of which deducted for the fee of the Justice of Southwales fifty pounds, there
then remains -- 1680. l. 4. s. 11. d. q. The total of all which the
revenues of the Principality of Wales cast up in one entire sum together. --
4681. l. 12. s. 5. d. q.
This Survey was made upon this occasion, as it seems, after the death of the
Prince called the Black Prince: the Princess his wife was to have her dower to
be allotted unto her out of those Revenues, which could not be without an
extent and survey thereof first had by Commissioners thereunto appointed. And
because the yearly value of the said revenues by reason of the sundry casual
profits thereof were more or less yearly, and not of one certain value, the
Commissioners observed this course, they did make choice of three several
years, viz. 47. and 48. and 49 of E. 3. and did take out of the several
profits of those years, and did cast them all into one sum, which they
again divided into three equal parts, esteeming only of the said three parts
to be the just yearly value of the said revenues, communibus an^i^, that is,
one year with another. And in this account we find no other charges or
reprizes allowed then the Justices fees only.

This survey and account made above 200. years past is here inserted, to the
end it might appear what the reuenew of this Principallity alone was, besides
the Duchy of Cornwall and Earldom of Chester near the first certain
erection thereof in the hands of that worthy Prince commonly called the Black
Prince.
The said Prince of Wales surnamed the Black Prince, being also Duke of
Aquitane, Guies, and Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, after many fortunate
victories achieved by him, having subdued a great part of France, and having
taken John the French King prisoner at Poyteers in France, and after that also
having vanquished Henry at Naue-roit in Spain, and restored Peter King of
Arragon, he died in June being then about the age of forty six years, and in
the fiftieth year of the reign of his father King Edward the Third, leaving
behind him Richard his son and heir, borne at Bordeaux, and thereof
surnamed Richard of Bordeaux. The Cronicks of England of this time.


Rich. of Bordeaux son of the Black Prince created Prince of Wales after the
death of his father.
This Richard surnamed of Bordeaux, son and heir of the said Edward the Black
Prince, after the death of his father was created by his grandfather King
Edward the Third, to be Prince of Wales, at Havoring at the Bower in the
County of Essex the twentieth day of November in the fiftieth year of the
reign of the said King Edward the third, the said Richard then being about the
Charta Regia d^^a 20. Nou. An. 50. Ed. 3.
age of eleven years, and upon Christmas day then next following, the said King
Edward the third caused the said Prince (being his Nephew) to sit at his table
in high estate above all his uncles being the Kings sons, as representing the
personage of the heir apparent to the Crown; and gave to him the two parts of
all the said Principality, Counties, Lordships, Castles, and the most of the
said Lands, which belonging to the said Black Prince, and the reuersion of the
third part thereof; (the possession of the third part thereof, then being to
the mother of the said Prince Richard for her dowry) with a hundred thirteen
pound six shillings eight pence yearly rent, payable by the Earl of March,
as a fee farm for the Lordship and Lands of Beult; and eighty five marks for
the fee Farm of the Castle, Lordship, and Land of Montgomery, with the
vacations of Bishoprics, excepting the fees of the Baron Marches of Wales,
which do always hold of the Crown in Capite: and excepting the auoydance of
the Bishopric of S. David's in Wales, which anciently also belonged to the
Crown, with the like limitation of estate, viz. To the said Prince Richard and
his heirs, Kings of England.

It seems that these Lordships of Beult and Montgomery, being formerly
granted to Edward the black Prince, were before this time, given away in fee
farm, rendering the rents here spoken of.

After the death of the said King Edward the Third, which was in the 51. year
of his reign, the kingdom of England descended unto the said Richard, being
his grandchilde; and he was Crowned King thereof by the name of King Richard
the Second: and in the three and twentieth year of his reign, he resigned his
kingdom (or rather more truly) was deposed against his will, and after by a
violent death, departed this life without issue. Henry of Bullinbrooke, Duke of
Lancaster and Hereford, Earl of Darby, Leicester, and Lincoln, son and
heir to John of Gaunt, fourth son to King Edward the Third, reigning in his
stead.

Ex Rotule Chartarum de deanno 1. regni regis, b. 4. Alta Charta eodem Anno.
Henry of Bullingbrooke, by the name of King Henry the Fourth by his Charter,
dated at Westminster the fifteenth day of October, in the first year of his
reign, created Henry his eldest son, surnamed of Munmouth, Prince of Wales,
and invested him with the said Princely ornaments* viz. the Chaplet, Gold-Ring,
and Rod or Verge of gold, To have and to hold, unto him and his heirs, Kings
of England. And by one other Charter of the same date gave unto him, and to his
heirs, Kings of England, the said Principality, with the Lordships, Castles,
and Lands before mentioned in the Chartermade to the Black Prince, together
with four Comots in the County of Carnaruon, viz. the Comots of Isaph,
Vghaph, Nanconeway, and Grewthyn, not named before, and the reuersion of the
Lordship of Hauerford, with the prices of Wines there, and of the Lordships
Newyn, and Pughby in North Wales, which Thomas Percy Earl of Worcester then
held for term of his life, of the demise of King Richard the Second; together
also with the reuersion of the County and Lordship of Anglesey in North Wales,
and the Castle of Bewmarris, and the Comots, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments belonging thereunto, which Henry Percy, son of the Earl of
Northumberland, then held for term of his life, of the demise of the said King
Henry the Fourth: and by an Act of Parliament made in the first year of King
Henry the Fourth, whereby the Duchy of Lancaster is severed from the Crown
of England. The Style of the said Prince is declared to be this, Prince of
Wales, Duke of Aquitane, of Lancaster, and of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester.
For the said King Henry the Fourth, having been himself Duke of Lancaster,
before his assumption of the Crown; and knowing that the name of Duke being an
inferior dignity, would extinguish and be surrounded in the Crown as in the
Superior desired, (as by that Act of Parliament appears) not only to
separate the said Duchy of Lancaster, and the lands thereof from the Crown,
to the intent he might still hold the said Duchy as his ancient Patrimony, if
he were put from the Crown, being but his new acquired dignity, but also to
preserve the said style, title and name of Duke of Lancaster, in his posterity;
which as the said act affirms, his Ancestors had so worthily borne and
sustained.

Afterward the said Henry the Fourth, died in the fourteenth year of his
reign, and the said Henry of Munmouth, Prince of Wales, succeeded him in the
kingdom, by the name of King Henry the Fifth, who also in the tenth year of
his reign, died, leaving Henry his son behind him, being an Infant of the
age of ten months, who by reason of his tender age, was not (as by any
record extant can be proved) ever created Prince, but was proclaimed King
immediately after the death of his father, by the name of King Henry the Sixth.

Carta Regia 15. Marty. 32. he^. 6. Edward, son and heir apparent of King
Hen. the Sixth, Prince of Wales.
King Henry the Sixth, by the advice and counsel of his Lords spiritual and
temporal given to him in his Parliament holden in the thirty one year of his
reign; did after wards by his Charter, bearing date at Westminster the
fifteenth day of March, in the thirty two year of his reign, created Edward
his son, borne at Westminster, by one and the selfsame patent, to be both
Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester, and invested him therein with the usual
ensigns of that dignity, as had been in former time accustomed, His Creation.
To have and to hold the said dignities to him and his heirs, Kings of
England: which Charter is recited in the Act of Parliament made for the
confirmation thereof by Parliament, holden at Westminster the ninth day of July
in the three and thirtieth year of the reign of the same King. 33. h. 6.


In which act of Parliament, is also recited another Charter, likewise
confirmed by the said Parliament, whereby the said King did give unto the said
Prince, the said Principality of Wales, together with all his Lordships and
Lands, Castles and Tenements, by special names above mentioned, and in the
former Charters granted and conuaied to the former Princes, and the said fee
Farms and Rents of 113. l. 6. s. 8. d. out of the Lordship and town of Buelt,
and the said 56. l. 13. s. 4. d. out of the Lordship, Castle and Town of
Montgomery, likewise mentioned in the Charters of the former Prince. To have
and to hold the same to him and his heirs Kings of England.

The King to have the reucnues, till the Prince accomplish the age of fourteen
years.
By the same act of Parliament also it was enacted (because the said Prince was
then of tender years) there was assigned unto him a certain number of
servants to attend on him according to his estate and dignity, which should
beat diet in the Kings house, until the said Prince should accomplish the age
of fourteen years, and that the King should have all such sums of money as
should clearly remain unto the Prince, due of all manner issues and revenues
which the Prince then had in respect of his said Principality, Duchy, and
Earldom, until the said age of fourteen years, the said Revenues to be
accounted for to the King in his Exchequer: reserving unto the said Prince,
until he should come to be of the age of eight years, a thousand pound
yearly, and from that age, till he come to fourteen years, two thousand
marks yearly for his wardrobes, wages of servants, and other necessary
expenses. But saving always unto the King, the Aduousons of Bishoprics and
spiritual livings, and the gifts of all offices, wards, releefes, and escheats
belonging to the said Prince, until he should accomplish the said age of
fourteen years, saving such estate in certain of the said lands, as the
Queen had to her before the said time, assured unto the said Prince, should be
of the said age of fourteen years, and saving certain particular sums of
money in the said Act of Parliament, mentioned as were formerly appointed out
of the said Lands, as well for expense of the Kings of England for their
household, as otherwise during such particular times as are therein declared:
provided that all offices formerly granted by the King, and needing actual
exercise, and the fees due to the same should not be prejudiced by the said Act.

Ex Charta Regia dot. In Scaccario penes Remem^r. Thesaurar. remanente.
Afterward by another Charter, the said King does release unto the said Prince,
all the said grant of the said yearly sums of money issuing out of the
revenues aforesaid; and all things by the said Act granted and appointed unto
the said King, reserving only for the same unto the said King yearly, five
hundred twenty seven marks, four shillings, seven pence halfepenny, to be
issuing out of the said Principality and Earldom; and feauen hundred sixty
seven marks, eleven shillings seven pence halfepenny; yearly, out of the
said Duchy, until the said Prince should be of eight years of age; then
reserving out of the said Principality and Earldom, yearly unto the King,
two hundred seventy seven marks, four shillings seven pence half penny; and
out of the said Duchy yearly, five hundred and seventeen marks, eleven
shillings, seven pence half penny, until the said age of fourteen years of
the Prince, for the said Duchy, and to be employed toward the charges of the
Kings household, and not otherwise.

And the said King, by his Letters Patents, dated the eighteenth of January, in
the five and thirtieth year of his reign, during the minority of the said
Prince, ordained the then Archbishop of York, the then Bishop of Winchester,
Hereford, Couentry, and Lichfield, and the Lord Keeper of the privy Seal; the
Earls of Shrewesbury, Stafford, In Chartes pat. 35 b 6 pars 2. ^.
and VViltes, the then Viscount Beamont, and also John Sutton, and Thomas
Stanley, Knights, to be of the privy Council unto the said Prince; enioyning
all Officers and Ministers of the said Prince, that they and every of them
should be obedient in the execution of all Commandments and Warrants of the
said Counselors, or at the least, sour of them together, with the assent and
consent of the Queen in all causes and matters concerning the titles, rights,
possessions, and interests of the said Prince; and that the said Commandments
and Warrants should be as available in that behalf, as if the same had been
made or done by the said Prince himself, being of full age: which Commandment
in all Leases of the said Princes inheritance, was pursued accordingly.

In the nine and thirtieth year of the said King Henry the Sixts reign, he
being of the house of Lancaster, (such is the mutability, and so unstable are
all humane things) that the said King being a man (as the times then were
devout and religious) the founder of Schools and Colleges, virtuous, and a
lover of peace, was by the violence of the heirs of the house of York, put
from his kingdom, and committed to prison, and Edward, Earl of March, son
and heir to Richard Duke of York, reigned in his stead, by the name of King
Edward the Fourth.

But yet behold the hand of God, for in the tenth year of the said King Edward
the Fourth, upon coffeehouse, conceived against him by Richard Earl of
Warwick, a man more popular and potent then was fit for a Subject, the said
Richard, with a collected power, so pressed the King, that he was driven to
fly the Realm, and to seek foreign aid, seeing his homebred subjects
proved so unfaithful.

Then King Henry the Sixth, after ten years imprisonment, readepted the
kingdom, and in the said tenth year of King Edward the Fourth, wrote the
forty ninth year of his reign, having endured ten years intermission in
the computation of his time, as appears in the books of Law of that age. But
being thus seated, he was yet unsettled and after much effusion of blood; (for
in a civil war, there is no true victory, in as much as he that prevails
is also a looser:) King Henry the Sixth was compelled again to give place to
his adversary, and after to make that part sure, was deprived of life, having
lost also Edward his son, Prince before spoken of, the hope of all his
posterity, in the battle of Tewkesbury.

11. E. 4 pars 1. membr. 1.
Edward the Fourth, having thus gained the Crown, which had been thus shaken
from his head, did by his Charter dated the 26. of ^une, in the eleventh year
of his reign, create Edward of Westminster, his son, and heir apparent,
Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester. And by another like Charter of the same
year, gave unto him the Lands and revenues of the said Principality and
Earldom, To have and to hold, to him and his heirs, Kings of England. This
Edward the Prince being of tender years, was borne in the Sanctuary of
Westminster, whither the Queen his Mother was fled for her security; and
during the time that the King her husband had avoided the Realm.

Afterward the said King by his letters Patents, bearing date the eight day of
July, in the said eleventh year of his reign; ordained his Queen, the then
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, George Duke of Clarence, Richard Duke of
Gloucester, brothers to the said king. The then Bishops of Bath and Wels, and
Durham; Anthony Earl Rivers, the then Abbot of Westminster, Chancellor to the
Prince, William Hastings knight, Lord Chamberlain to the king, Richard Fynes,
Lord Dacres, Steward of the said Prince, John Fogge, John Scot, knights, Thomas
Vaughan, Chamberlain to the Prince, John Alcocke, and Richard Fowler, to be of
Council unto the said Prince, giving unto them, and every four of them
thereby, with the advice and express consent of the Queen, large power to
advise and counsel the said Prince, and to order and dispose the Lands,
revenues, and possessions of the said Prince, and the nomination of Officers
belonging to the said Prince, when they should happen to become void, or that
the parties were insufficient. The said authority thus given unto the said
Counselors, to continue until the said Prince should accomplish the age of
fourteen years, which was performed by them accordingly in all Leases,
Dispositions, and Grants of the revenues of the said Prince.

pat. 13. E. 4. pars 2.
The said king Edward the Fourth, by one other Charter, composed in English, and
bearing date the tenth of November, in the thirteenth year of his reign,
appointed the said Earl Rivers, being brother unto the Queen, to be the
Governor of the person of the said Prince, and to have the education and the
institution of him in all virtues worthy his birth, and to have the government
and direction of his servants.

King Edward the Fourth having reigned full two and twenty years, in the four
and twentieth year of his reign, left this mortal life, ended his days at
Westminster, and was enterred at Windsor. Edward the Prince his son and
heir then being at Ludlow, necre the Marches of Wales, for the better ordering
of the Welsh under the government of the said Lord Rivers his uncle on the
Mothers side, and upon the death of his father drawing toward London to
prepare for his Coronation, fell into the hands of his uncle by the father,
Richard Duke of Gloucester; and the said Lord Rivers being upon the way toward
London was intercepted, and lost his head at Pomfret, for what cause I know not
other then this, that he was thought to be too great an obstacle between a
thirsty tyrannous desire and the thing that was so thirstily and tyrannously
desired.

Edward King of England the fist of that name (for so he was although he
enjoyed it not long, being thus surprised under the power of his natural
uncle, and yet his mortal enemy) was brought to London with great solemnity
and pomp, and with the great applause of the people, flocking about to behold
his person, as the manner of the English Nation is to do, whose new joys
cannot endure to be ^ettred with any bonds. His said uncle calling himself
Lord Protector of the King and his Realm, but indeed was the woolfe to whom
the Lamb was committed; for having thus surprised the Kings person, he
labored by all means to get into his possession also the younger brother being
Duke of York, knowing that they both being sundred, the safety of the younger
would be a means to preserve the elder, and therefore by all sinister
persuasions and fair pretenses having obtained the younger Duke from his
mother, the King and the Duke both for a time remained in the Tower of London,
and there shortly after both in one bed were in the night smothered to death,
and buried in an obscure and secret place unknown how and where, until one of
the executioners thereof after many years being condemned to die for other his
manifold crimes, confessed also his guilty fact in this pitifully tragedy, and
the circumstance thereof, of which by reason of the secrecy and incertainty,
diverse had before that diversely coniectured. And by this means all the
provision Ed. 4. upon his return into England took an oath at York that he
would not claim the Kingdom, but only the Duchy of York.
for the coronation of innocent Edward served the turn to set the Crown upon
the head of tyrannous Richard: Out of which by the way I cannot but observe how
hateful a bloody hand is, to almighty God the King of Kings, who revenged the
bloodshed of those civil broiles, whereof Edward the father had been the
occasion, and the breach of his oath, upon those his two innocent infants.

This tyrant and stain of the English Story, Richard Duke of Gloucester,
usurped the Kingdom by the name of Richard the third, and became King; yet as
our records of Law witness de facto, sed non de iure. And in the first year
of his reign created Edward his son being a child of ten years of age,
Prince of Wales, Lieutenant of the Realm of Ireland.

But for that the prosperity of the wicked is but as the flourishing of a green
tree, which whiles a man passes by is blasted dead at the roots, and his place
knows it no more. So shortly afterward, God raised up Henry Earl of
Richmond the next heir of the house of Lancaster, to exteute justice upon that
unnatural and bloody usurper and to cast him that had been the rod of Gods
judgments upon others, into the fire also. For in the third year of the
reign of the said Richard, at the battle of Bosworth, whereinto the said
Richard entered in the morning crowned in all Kingly pomp, he was slain, and
his naked carcass with as much despite as could be devised was carried out
thereof at night, and the said Henry Earl of Richmond, the Solomon of England,
father to Margaret your Majesty's great Grandmother reigned in his stead, by
the name of King Henry the seventh.

This King Henry the seventh took to wife Elizabeth the eldest daughter, and
after the death of her brothers, the relict heir of King Edward the fourth, by
which marriage all occasions of further contention-betweene those noble families
of York and Lancaster were taken away, and utterly quenched, and the red rose
conjoined with the white. Inter warra. ad magnum sigillum in Cancellaria.


The said King Henry the seventh by his letters patents dated the first day of
December in the fifth year of his reign created Arthur his eldest son and
heir apparent being then about the age of three years, Prince of Wales.

Ex charta de concess. de ^ryg. etc. 9. h. 7.
Also there was a Charter of the grant of the lands of the said Principality,
Earldome of Chester, and Flint, dated the twenty seventh of February in the
said fifth year of the said King made unto the said Prince.

Inter war. ad magnum sigillum in cancellaria.
The said King Henry the seventh by his Charter bearing date the twentieth day
of March in the eight year of his reign did constitute and appoint the said
Prince Arthur to be his Justice in the County of Salope, Hereford, Gloucester,
and the Marches of Wales, adjoining to the said Shires, to enquire of all
liberties, privileges, and fraunchises, being possessed or claimed, or which
then after, should be possessed or claimed by any person or persons, and which
were to be seized into the Kings hands, and of all escapes and fellons, and
those Inquisitions so from time to time to be taken to certify into the
Chancery. And by the same Charter gave him power to substitute and appoint
others under him for the better execution of the same which after wards by
commission was executed accordingly.

And the said King also by his Charter bearing date the fourteenth of June, in
the eight year of his reign made and constituted the said Arthur Prince of
Wales, and Governor, and Warden of the Marches of England toward Scotland, and
substituted as his Lieutenant and vice-warden under him Thomas Earl of Surrey
for the due execution thereof.

Likewise the said King by his letters patents dated the fifth day of November
in the ninth year of his reign in augmentation of the reuenew of the Prince
did grant unto the said Prince the honor, Castle, and Lordship of Wigmore, and
diverse other Castles, Manors, and Lands, which sometime had been belonging to
the Earldom of March, which came to the Crown by King Edward the fourth, who
was himself Earl of March before he assumed his regal estate, To have and to
hold during the pleasure of the King, yielding yearly the rent of two hundred
pounds.

A Council assigned the said Prince.
This Prince was sent into the Marches of Wales for the government of that
Country, and in the seventeenth year of the reign of the said King his
father, had a Council of very wise and worthy persons assigned unto him, as
namely, Sir Richard Poole chief Chamberlain of the said Prince, Sir Henry
Vernon, Sir Richard Crofts, Sir David Phillips, Sir William V dall, Sir Thomas
Englefield, and Sir Peter Newton, Knights: John Wilson, Henry Marian, Doctor
William Smith President of his Council, and Doctor Charles, where not long
afterward the said Prince died in the Castle of Ludlow, without issue.

After the death of the said Prince Arthur, King Henry the seventh by his
letters patents dated the eighteenth of February in the 19. year of his
reign, Charta creationis Pri^^. Waliae
in Parliament created Henry then his only soune who after was King Henry the
eight, and whom before that in the 11th. he had made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland
by another Charter of the same year, Constable of the Castle of Dover; to be
Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester, being then about the age of twelve
years, to have and to hold, 10. h. 7.
to him and his heirs Kings of England for ever, being the like limitation of
estate and with the like inuesture as in former times had been accustomed.

But whether the said King did grant the lands and revenues belonging to the
said Principality, unto the said Prince Henry or no, as he had done unto
Prince Arthur his brother, does not appear by any Charter that as yet thereof
can be found.

After the death of King Henry the seventh, the said Prince Henry was King of
England by the name of King Henry the eight, he had issue, a son called
Henry, who dyed very young, he likewise had issue, the Lady Mary, afterward
Queen, and the Lady Elizabeth our late Sovereign of most happy memory, and
lastly Prince Edward the youngest in years, who first reigned after the death
of his said father by the name of King Edward the sixth.

But there cannot be found any Charters among the records, whereby it may
appear that any of them were created Princes of Wales, or whereby any of the
revenues of the said Principality were given or conferred unto any of them; so
that it seems they were Princes generally by their birth, and not Princes of
Wales by any creation or investure; for in a record of an account of the Duchy
Com. ministre. ducat. cornw. 30. and 31. b. 8. inter recordeur augment.
of Cornwall in the time of the said Prince Edward, he is called by the name of
the Prince of England, and not by the name of the Prince of Wales.

And thus much touching the succession or rancks of the Princes of Wales which
I have drawn in an historical, although a plain and homely manner, thereby
the better to take away the harshnesse of the particularities of records
intermingled therewith, which of themselves although they afford profitable
knowledge, yet they do carry with them small delight; but also for that the
variety of things in those succeeding ages in the sundry occurences and
accidents thereof do yield good matter of observance and worthy memory,
representing as it were the English State for the time of more then two hundred
years together.

Now therefore do rest nevertheless three things concerning the said
Principality to be further considered of. First, in what manner and order the
said Principality and Marches of Wales were governed and directed under the
said Prince. Secondly, what officers as well domestical as others, the said
Princes had about them, and their fees as far forth as I could come to any
certain knowledge thereof. And thirdly an abstract of the revenues of the
said Principality, as they now stand in charge and be esteemed to your Majesty,
whereby may be perceived what in time past the said revenues have been, and
in what case they now stand.

The manner of the government of the Principality and Marches of Wales.
THe said Principality being under the government of the Princes of the Welsh
blood (whose ancient patrimony yet remained until the Conquest thereof by King
Edward the first, as before has been showed) was guyded, governed, and
directed by their own municipall and homebred Laws, and the Customs of their
Country. Most of which had their commencement from the Constitutions of one of
their ancient Princes called Howell Dah, as their Historians have recorded.
Doctor Pow. in Chronic. Wall.
But being reduced under the yoke by the said King Edward he divided certain
parts of that Territory into Shires (as has been declared) he caused the
Welsh Laws to be perused, some whereof he did allow and approve, some others
he did abrogate and disanull; and in their place appointed new, altogether
according to the English manner of executing Justice. He caused to be devised
ce taine Briefes, Writs, or formulaeturis; Statum Walliae fol. 53.
and he instituted their manner of Process, pleadings, and course of their
Judicial proceedings. All which things do manisestly appear by the act of
Parliament made at Rithlan in Wales, called therefore Statutum Walliae, which
before is remembered, and when they want a writ of form to serve the present
case, then use they the writ of Quod ei deforciat, which supplieth that defect.
2 E. 4 12 a.
And although the Principality of Wales, as has appeared by some of the
records above mentioned, were divided into three Provinces, Northwales,
Southwales, and Westwales; for so in some of the former patents they are
mentioned, yet for the Jurisdiction thereof, it was divided into two parts,
Northwales, and Southwales: for a great part of Westwales was comprehended
within the Shire of Pembrooke, which is a very ancient Shire of Wales, and the
Territory thereof conquered by the English, Geraldus Camb. 23. 24. E. I. Ro^.
51.
in the time of William Rufus. Long time before the general conquest of Wales
by Richard Strangbow, being English, and the Earl thereof, and called also by
some Earl of Strigulia, or Chepstow, was the first that attempted the conquest
of Ireland, in the days of Henry the second, which was above an hundred years
before the conquest of Wales by King Edward the first. This Earldom of
Pembrooke had in ancient time palatine Jurisdiction, and therefore in some
records is called regalis comitatus Pembrochiae. Hill. 7. E. apud (...)r.
Sca(...)rij.


The Chamberlaines accounts.
The Provinces of Northwales and Southwales were governed for Law in this
manner. The Prince had and used to hold a Chancery, and a Court of Exchequer in
the Castle of Carnarvon for Northwales, and had a Judge or Justice which
ministered Justice there to all the Inhabitants of Northwales, and therefore was
called the Justice of Northwales. The like Courts of Chancery and Exchequer he
held in the Castle of Carmarthen for Southwales, where he had a Justice also
called the Justice of Southwales, and the Courts of their Justices 3. E 3. 19.
and i^ le nouel print. 63. a. 7. H 35. b. Chamberlains accounts.
or Judges so held within their several Provinces, were called the great
Sessions of those Provinces, and sometimes these Justices were itinerant, and
sat in every of the several Counties of his Province, in these great Sessions
the causes of greatest moment, real, personal and mixed, and pleas of the
Crown concerning life and members, were heard and determined. In these great
Courts also upon creation of every new Prince, there were granted by the people
of that Province unto the Prince, Ministers accounts 18. H. ^.
nomine recognitionis ad primum adventum principis, certain sums of money as
it were in acknowledgement or relief of the new Prince, which sums of money
are called by them Mises. These Mises or sums of money were granted by the
people unto the Prince for his allowance of their Laws and ancient Customs,
and a general pardon of their offenses fineable or punishable by the Prince,
and that sum of these Mises Ministers accompe^. 16 E. 4
for the Shire of Carmerthen only, amounted unto eight hundred marks, and for
the Shire of Cardigan the total sum of these Mises Chamberlains accounts.
amounted unto six hundred marks, as by sundry records does appear; these
sums of money were paid at certain days by several portions, such as were
appointed, and in the said Sessions agreed upon. Also in ^u^ry Shire of eu^ry
of the said Provinces there were holden certain inferior Courts, called
therefore County Courts, and Shire Courts, and Tournes, after the manner of
England; and which by some were also the petty Sessions. And there were also
Courts inferior in sundry Counties for ending of causes of less moment and
importance; and if any wrong judgment were given in any of these Courts
inferior, the same was redressed by a writ of false judgment in the Court
superior. And if any ^rronious judgment were given in the 19. H. 6. 12. b. 21.
H. 7. 33. a.
great Sessions, which was the supreme Court of Justice, that error was either
redressed by the judgment of penal Justices itinerant, or else in the
Parliament, and not otherwise in any the Courts of Justice now at Westminster.

The Marches of Wales
As touching the government of the Marches of Wales, it appears by diverse
ancient monuments that the Conqueror after he had conquered the English,
placed diverse of his Norman Nobility upon the confines and borders toward
Wales, and erected the Earldome of Chester, being upon the borders of
Northwales, to Palatine, and gave power unto the said persons thus placed upon
those borders, to make such conquests upon the Welsh, as they by their strength
could accomplish, holding* it a very good policy, thereby not only to encourage
them to be more willing to serve him, but also to provide for them at other
men's costs And hereupon further ordained that the lands so conquered, should be
holden of the Crown of England in capite, and upon this and such like
occasions d^uers of the Nobility of England having lands upon the said borders
of Wales made roades and incursions upon the Welsh, whereby diverse parts of
that Country near or toward the said borders were won by the sword from the
Welshmen, and were planted partly with ^nglish Collonies; and and the said
lands so conquered, were holden per Baronia, and were called therefore
Baronyes, Marchers. Another policy
In such manner did Robert Fitzhamo^ acquire unto himself, and such others as
assisted him, the whole Lordship of Glamorgan; vs^^g in some resemblance the
Roman policy, to enlarge Territories by stepping in between two competitors,
and by helping the one he subdued the other, and after ^urning his ^word
against him whom he assisted, and making this the pretense of his quarrel
allege that he whom he had assisted, had denied to make unto him sufficient
recompense for his sustained trauils, and so made himsel^e abso'ute owner of
all, likewise Barnard Newmarch The original of the Baro* ni^s Ma^^^^^^s.
conqu^^ed the Lordship of Brecknock, containing three Cantreds, and
established his conquest by a marriage in the Welsh blood: H^gh Lacy conquered
the lands of Ewyas, called after his name Ewyas Lacy, and others did the like
in other places of the borders, all which were Baronies, Marchers, and were
holden by such the Conquerors thereof in capite of the Crown of England, and
because they and their posterity might the better keep the said Lands so
acquired, and that they might not be withdrawn by suits of Law from the
defense of that which they had thus subdued. The said Lordships and Lands so
conquered, were ordained Baronies Marchers* and ^ad a kind of Palatine
^urisdiction erected in ^u^ry of them, 1^. E 2. Fitz. ^ss^^. 182.
and power to administer Justice unto their Tenants in every of their
Territories; having therein, Courts with diverse privileges, franchises, and
immunities; so that the Writs of ordinary Justice, out of the Kings Courts,
were for the most part not current amongst them. Nevertheless if the whole
Barony had come in question, or that the strife had been two Barons Marchers,
touching their Territories or confines thereof: for want of a Superior, they
had recourse unto the King their supreme Lord; and in these and such like
cases, 13. E. ^. Fitz^a. Jurisdiction 23. 47. E. 3. 5. 67. 6. h. ^* Fitz^a.
^urisdiction 34. 7. ^. 635. 36. ^. 30. ^6. 6. ^.
where their own Jurisdiction failed, Justice was vnministred unto them in the
Superior Courts of this Realm. And this was the state of the government of
the Marches of Wales, both before and after the general Conquest of Wales,
made by king Edward the First, as has been declared, until the seven and
twentieth year of King Henry the Eight.

And as touching the first Council, established in the Marches of Wales, it
is conceived by the best and most probable opinions amongst Antiquaries, that
the same began in or about the seventeenth year of king Edward the Fourth,
when as Prince Edward his son was sent unto the Marches of Wales, under the
tuition of the Lord Ri^ers his Uncle by the Mothers side, as a^ore has
appeared: and at what time also ^ohn, Bishop of Worcester, was appointed Lord
President of Wales. ^ohn, Bishop of Worcester, first President of the Marches
of Wales. Doctor Powell, in C^^on. Walli^ p. 389.


Prince Arthure, the son of King Henry the Seventh, in the seventeenth
year of the reign of the said King, went into Wales; at what time, Doctor
William Smith was then President of the Council of the Marches of Wales, who
was after Bishop of Lincoln, and founder of the College of Br^sen nose, in
the University of Oxford. This man was also President in the time of king Henry
the eight, until the fourth year of the reign of the same king; at what time
^effry Blyth Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, succeeded in the office of
President of the said Council.

The Lady Mary, eldest Daughter of king Henry the Eight, and afterward Queen,
did carry the title of Princes of Wales for a while, although the parent of
her creation be not now to be found: under whom, ^ohn Voysey Doctor of the
laws, and afterward Bishop of Exceter, was President of that Council.

There succeeded him in the office of President of the Council of the Marches
of Wales, Rowland Lee, Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield. And this was the state
and government of the Principality and Marches of Wales, in the seven and
twentieth year of king Henry the Eight.

Stat. 27 h. 8. cap. 26.
The said king by a Statute made in the seven and twentieth year of his
reign, united and annexed the Principality and Dominion of Wales unto the
Realm of England; altering in many parts, the former jurisdiction and
government thereof, bringing the same to the like administration of Justice as
was, and yet is usual in England: appointing that the laws of England should
take place there, and that all Welsh Laws, sinister Customs and Tenures, not
agreeable to the Laws of England, should be thenceforth for ever abrogated and
abolished. Of which union and annexation, first for that there of has ensued
great peace, tranquillity, ciuility, and infinite good to the Inhabitants of
that Country of Wales. Secondly, because in some respect it may serve as a
project and president of some other union and annexation by your Majesty, of as
much, or of more consequence and importance: And thirdly, because the same
union does contain an express image of the politic government of the
Realm of England. I have presumed with convenient breuity upon this good
occasion here in this place to express the same: Statutum de 24. h. 8. cap. 26.
Therefore whereas in former time there had been in Wales anciently eight
several Shires or Counties, besides the County of Munmouth, which was the
ninth, and that some other Territories in Wales were then no shire grounds, by
reason where of the laws of England could have no current passage therein. For
all the ordinary Ministers and executioners of the process of the Laws of
England, or which have Vicountiell jurisdiction, are the Officers of particular
Shires, as the Sheriffs, the Coroners, the Escheators, and such like.
Therefore by the said Act of Parliament, there are erected in Wales, four
other new ordained Shires of the Lands not formerly so divided; namely, the
several Shires of Radnor, Brecknock, Montgomery, and Denbyh; and those also
together with the former ancient shires, are by that Act of Parliament, and by
the Statute of 38. h. 8. subdivided into Cantreds, and all the March grounds
being then neither any part of Wales, although formerly conquered out of Wales,
neither any part of the Shires of England. Stat. 27. h. 8. cap. 26.
The said king by his said Act of Parliament, did annexe and unite, partly unto
the said Shires of England, and partly unto the Shires of Wales, next
adjoining, as was thought then (by reason of vicinity of place, and other
correspondency) most convenient, as by the said Acts of Parliament appears:
which the said king was the rather occasioned to do, for most of the said
Baronies Marchers were then in his own hands. And for that also diverse
murders, rapes, robberies, and enormities had been there committed; and by
reason of the flight of the offenders, from one Barony, as is usual upon the
borders, they had escaped due and condign punishment for their such enormities
and odious offenses. Stat. 27. h. 8. cap. 26.
He ordained also that the County of Mounmouth, formerly being a Shire of
Wales, should be governed from thenceforth in like manner, and by the same
Judges, as other the Shires of England. And for the other twelve Shires, he
ordained a special Jurisdiction and Officers, but yet in substance, agreeable,
and after the manner of the English Laws, although for the circumstance of
time, and place, and persons, in some few things discordant.

Stat. 27. h. 8. cap. 26.
He ordained, that out of every of the said Shires of Wales, there should be one
Knight, and out of every of the shire Towns of Wales, named in the said Act of
Parliament, there should be one Burgess elected, after the English manner:
which Knights and Burgesses so selected, and duly upon summons of every
Parliament in England, returned, should have place and voice in the Parliament
of England, as other the Knights and Burgesses of England used to have.

Circuits. 34. h. 8. cap. 26. Stat.
And for the administration of justice in the said twelve Shires of Wales, there
was by the Act of Parliament of 34. H. 8. ordained sour several Circuits,
Precyncts, or Conuentus Iuridicus, allotting to every of them, three of those
Shires, so that the chief Justice of Chester has under his jurisdiction, the
three several Shires of Denbigh, Flint, and Montgomery; his fee is yearly,
100. l.

Justice
The Shires of Carnarnon, Merioneth, and Anglesey, are under the Justice of
North Wales, whose fee is 50. l.

The Counties of Carmardin, Pembrooke, and Cardigan, have also their Justice,
whose yearly fee is 50. l.

The Counties of Radnor, Brecknocke, and Glamorgan, have also their Justice,
whose fee is yearly 50. l.

Stat. 18. Eliz. cap. 8.
After by an Act of Parliament made 18. Eliz. cap. 8. one other Justice
assistant, was ordained to the former Justices: so that now every of the said
four Circuits, have two Justices, viz. one chief Justice, and a second
Justice assistant.

Their Jurisdiction.
Stat. 34. h. 8. cap. 2. and 4. Stat. 18. Eliz. cap. 8.
THese Justices in every of their Circuits, have almost the same jurisdiction,
that the ancient Justices in Air, or Justices Itinerant had. Criminal Causes.
First, they had power to hear and determine all criminal causes which are
called in the laws of England, The pleas of the Crown: and herein they have
the same absolute jurisdiction, that the Justices have of your Majesty's Bench,
commonly called the Kings Bench.

Civil Causes.
They have also jurisdiction to hear and determine all civil Causes, which are
called in the Laws of England, Common pleas, Common pleas.
and to take the acknowledgement of all Fines, levied of lands or
hereditaments, without suing any dedimus potestatem; and herein they have the
same jurisdiction, that the Justices of the Common place do execute in the
Hall at Westminster. Also they may hear and determine all assizes upon
disseisons of lands or hereditaments, wherein they equal the Jurisdiction of
the Justices of affize.

Justices of af^ise.
They may hear and determine all notable violences and outrages perpetrated or
done within their several Precyncts, and therein they have the power,
authority, and jurisdiction of the Justices of Oyer and Terminer.

Their Chauncery Seal and Writs.
FOrasmuch as no suit can commence between party and party, nor orderly justice
can be done without complaint of the Pursuant, and summons and monition given
unto the defendant: which summons, the policy of England from the beginning of
the first foundation of this Commonwealth has appointed to be performed by
that kind of formulae Iuris, which the common law calls a Writ or Brief: so
called as Bracton says, Breue quia rem quae est et intentione^ petent is
breuiter ^narrat, and which Writ is always conceived in form in the Kings
name, in manner of a Precept royal, and sealed with the Kings great Seal.
Therefore in the appointing of this jurisdiction, there is ordained to every
Circuit or Precynct, a several Seal for the sealing of such Writs and Writs
either Judicial or Original.
Commissions as the case shall require within that Circuit. And forasmuch as
all Writs are either original, such as do begin the Suit, or else Judicial,
such as command and warrant the execution; therefore it is by the said Statute
made in 34. h. 8. ordained that the Seal serving for Original Process in the
several Shires of Denbigh and Montgomery, should be in the custody of the
Chamberlain of Denbigh; and that the Original Seal of Chester, shall be, and
stand for the Original Seal of Flint, and shall be in the custody of the
Chamberlain of Chester. The like Seal serving for the several Shires of
Carnaruon, Merioneth, and Anglesey, to be in the custody of the Chamberlain of
North Wales.

The like Seal concerning the several Shires of Radnor, Brecknock, and
Glamorgan, is committed to the custody of the Steward of Brecknock.

And finally, the like Seal serving the several Shires of Carmarden,
Pembrooke, and Cardigan, is in the usage of the Chamberlain of South Wales.

These Chamberlaines are as Chancellors in this behalf, and have the sealing
of all Original Writs and Commissions, within their several Precyncts, and
these Chamberlaines may also award out several Writs to all vnder-Receiuers of
the revenues and ministers to make their accounts.

The Seal for the sealing of Judicial Writs, is appointed by the said Statute
of 34. h. 8. to be and remain by the Justices of every of the said Circuits
for the more expedite execution of their judgments.

Their Sessions and manner of Sittings.
The great Sessions.
EVery of these Justices in their several Circuits, shall be Itinerant twice
every year, and sit in every of the Shires within their authority, by the
space of six days together, at a place certain by them to be appointed; and
upon proclamation of summons to be made fifteen days before the said sittings,
where all persons requiring Justice, may purchase their Writs, and proceed in
their suits. Adiournements.
And where adiournements of the Causes there depending, shall be de die in diem,
and if the Cause can have no end during the sitting, then from Sessions to
Sessions, as the nature of the business shall require, and according to the
discretion of the said Justices: and these sittings are called the great
Session.

And if there shall be such multitude of pleas personal, as that they cannot
be tried at the same great Sessions, then the issues there in trial, shall and
may be tried at some other Sessions before the Deputy Justice, which is
therefore called the petty Sessions. 34. ^. 8. cap. 26. ^. 33.


And if any erroneous Judgment be given by the said Justices in any real
action, the same shall be reuersed by Writ of error, before the Justices of the
Kings Bench. And if the said erroneous judgment shall be in any action
personal, the same shall be reuersed by Bill before the Lord President of the
Marches and Council there.

Officers, Ministers, Clerks, and Writers for the expediting of the said great
Sessions.
FIrst, there are the Chamberlaines of every of the said Circuits, as has
been said, who are properly and originally the Treasurers of the revenue
within their charge, and by the said Statutes, are also keepers of the Seals
as aforesaid, wherein they do undertake in part the office of a Chauncellor.

And in every of the said Circuits, there is the Attorney or Regius aduocatus
and Solicitor.

Prothonatory.
There is a Prothonotary or chief Register, who draws all the pleadings,
enters and ingrosseth the Records and Judgments in civil causes, and
engrossing Fynes. Clarke of the Crown.
And there is also a Clarke of the Crown, which draws and ingrosseth all
Inditements and Proceedings, Arraignements and Judgments in Criminal causes.
And these two Officers are at your Majesty's appointment. At the Kings
appointment.


The Marshall.
There is a Marshall to attend the persons of the Judges at their common
sitting, and going from the Sessions or Court.

Crier.
There is a Crier, tanquam publicus preco, to call forth such persons, whose
apparances are necessary, and to impose silence to the people. And these two
Officers last remembered, are disposed by the Justices. And thus much touching
the Justices of the great Sessions.

There are also other ordinary officers appointed for every shire in Wales, by
the said Statute of 34. h. 8. such and in like manner as in other the Shires of
England.

There is a Commission under the great Scale of England, to certain Gentlemen,
giving them power to preserve the peace, and to resist and punish all turbulent
persons, whose misdemeanour may tend to the disquiet of the people: and these
are called the Justices of Peace, and every of them may well be termed
Eirenarcha. The chief of them is called Custos Rotulorum, in whose custody all
the Records of their proceedings are resident. Others there are of that number,
called Justices of the Peace, and quorum, because in their Commissions, whereby
they have power to sit and determine Causes, concerning breach of peace and
misbehauiour; the words of their Commission are conceined this quorum, such and
such, vnum vel duos, etc. esse volumus, and without some one or more of them of
the quorum. No Sessions can be holden, and for the avoiding of a superfluous
number of such Justices; for through the ambition of many, it is counted a
credit to be burdened with that authority. The Statute of 34. h. 8. has
expressly prohibited, that there shall be but eight Justices of peace within
every of the Counties and Shires of Wales; which if the number were not
indefinite for the Shires of England, it were the better. These Justices do
hold their Sessions quarterly.

And it is further ordained by the said Statute of 34. h. 8. that two Justices
of peace, where of one to be of the quorum, may hold their Sessions without any
greater number.

The Clarke of the Peace.
In every of the said Shires where the said Commission of the Peace is
established. There is also a Clarke of the Peace for the entering and engrossing
of all proceedings before the said Justices and this Officer is appointed by
the Custos Rotulorum.

The Sheriff. 34. h. 8. cap. 16.
Every of the said Shires has his Sheriff, which word being of the Saxon
English, is as much to say, as a Sbire Reeue, or minister, or Bayliffe of the
County: his Function or Office is two fold, Ministerial or Judicial. As
touching his Ministerial office, he is the Minister and executioner of all the
process and precepts of the Courts of Law, and thereof ought to make return or
certificate. And as touching his Judicial office, he has authority to hold
two several Courts of distinct natures, the one called the Turn, because he
keeps a Turn or Circuit about his shire, holding the same in several
places; wherein he does inquire of all offenses perpetrated against the Common
Law, and not forbidden by any Statute or Act of Parliament. And the
Jurisdiction of this Court, is derived from Justice distributive, and is for
criminal offenses. The other is called the County Court, The County Court
derived from Justice Commutatiue.
where he does determine all petty and small causes. Civil under the value of
forty shillings, arising within the said County; and thereof it is called the
County Court. And the iutisdiction of this Court is drawn from Justice
Commutatiue, and is held every month. The office of the Sheriff is Annual,
and by the Statute of 34. h. 8. it is ordained, that the Lord President,
Council and Justices of Wales, or three of them at the least, where of the
President to be one, shall yearly nominate three fit persons for that office,
of whom the Kings Majesty may elect and chose one, who thereupon shall have
his Patent, and be Sheriff of the said shire.

Escheator. 34. h. 8. cap. 16.
Every of the said Shires has an Officer, called an Escheator, which is an
officer to attend the Kings revenue, and to seize into his Majesty's hands, all
lands, either escheated, goods or lands for seited, and therefore he is called
Escheator, and he is to enquire by good enquest, of the death of the Kings
Tenants, and to whom their lands are descended; and to seize their bodies and
lands for ward, if they be within age, and is accountable for the same. And
this Officer in Wales is named by the Lord Treasurer of England, by the advice
of the Lord President, Council, and Justices, or three of them at the least,
whereof the Lord President to be one. There are also in every of the said
shires, two Officers, called Coroners; Coroners. 34. h. 8. cap. 26.
they are to enquire by inquest, in what manner, and by whom every person dying
of a violent death, came to his death, and to enter the same of Record, which
is matter criminal, and a plea of the Crown, and thereof they are called
Coroners or Crowners, as one has written, because their enquiries ought to be
public, and in corona populi. These Officers Skeene in verborum
significationem Iuris Scotiae. These are in Scotland.
are chosen by the Freeholders of the Shire, by virtue of a Writ out of the
Chauncery de Coronatore eligendo; and of them I need not to speak more,
because these Officers are elsewhere.

Constables of the hundred.
Forasmuch as every shire is divided into hundreds, there are also by the said
Statute of 34. h. 8. cap. 26. ordained that two sufficient Gentlemen or Yeomen
shall be appointed Constables of every hundred.

The Goal.
Also there is in every Shire, one Goal or Prison appointed for the restraint
of liberty of such persons, as for their offenses are thereunto committed,
until they shall be delivered by course of law.

Finally, in every hundred of every of the said shires, the Sheriffs thereof
shall nominate sufficient persons to be Bayliffes of that hundred, and
Vnderministers of the Sheriff, and they are to attend upon the Justices in
every of their Courts, and Sessions.

The Government of the Marches of Wales, after the Statutes of an. 27. and 34.
H. 8.
BY the said Statute of 34. H. 8. ca. 26. it is further ordained that the
President and Council in the said Dominion and Principality of Wales, and the
Marches of the same, with all Officers, Clarks and incidents thereunto, should
continue and remain in manner and form as was then formerly used and
accustomed.

And therefore the said Rowland Lee spoken of before, being Lord President of
the Council of the Marches of Wales at the time of the making of the said
Statute, so continued after the making thereof, until his death, being in the
four and thirtieth year of the said King Henry the eight. After whom
succeeded in the office of the said President Richard Samson, Bishop first of
Chester, and after removed to Couentry and Litchfield, who continued Lord
President until the second year of King Edward the sixth, at what time John
D^dley then Earl of Warwick, and after Duke of Northumberland, was President
of the said Council, who so continued until the fourth year of the said
King. And after him succeeded Sir William Herbert Knight of the noble Order of
the Garter, and after Earl of Pembrooke, who continued President until the
first year of Queen Mary. Next succeeded Nicholas Heath, then Bishop of
Worcester, and after Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellor of England. And
upon the removing of the said Archbishop, the said Sir William Herbert again
succeeded as President of the said Council, until the sixth year of the said
Queen Mary, at what time followed him Gilbert Brown, Bishop of Bath and
Wels, who so continued until the death of the same Queen. In the beginning
of the reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, Sir John Williams, Lord Williams
of Tame, of whom the Lord Norris is descended, was appointed President of the
said Council, and died the same year. And after him succeeded Sir Henry
Sidney, Knight of the noble Order of the Garter, whose love to learning, and
favor to learned men, need not here to be spoken, he continued Lord President
of Wales about four and twenty years and six months, he served in Ireland
eight years and six months, being there three several times Lord Deputy
general in that Country. During some part of the time of the aboade in Ireland
of the said Sir Henry Sidney, there served in Ireland as President or
Vice President, John, Bishop of Worcester, and now Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury. After this succeeded Henry Earl of Pembrooke, son in law to the
said Sir Henry Sidney, and father to the right honorable the Earl of Pembrooke
that now is. And after him Edward Lord Zouch, now present Lord President of
that Council.

The President and Council of the Marches of Wales have power and authority to
hear and determine The Jurisdiction of the Council of the Marches of Wales.
Statum 34. H. ^. ca. 26.
by their wisdoms and discretions, such causes and matters as be or shall be
assigned to them by the Kings Majesty, and in such manner as shall be so
prescribed unto them by instruction signed with his hand.

The Council assisting the Lord Prince, consists of these, the chief
Justice of Chester, together with three other of the said Justices of Wales,
who after their Sessions ended, are for the most part resident at the Council;
and these are ordinary; there are diverse extraordinaries, both Lords and
Knights, and such others as are learned in the Laws, and are to be called to
Council when the Lord President shall think requisite, and every such of the
Council extraordinary learned in the Laws, when they are called, and do
serve there, they are allowed their diet for them and their men, and six
shillings eight pence per dum, during the time of their Attendance.

The Officers there serving to the administration of Justice (as I am informed)
are these: The Clarke of the Counsel, the Clarke of the Signet, the Register:
all which were granted to one man by the late Queen Elizabeth, and are
executed by his deputy, the Examiner, the Remembrancer, the Receiver of the
Fines, the Attorney, the Solicitor, the Porter: to whose custody such
delinquents as deserve to suffer restraint of liberty are committed, etc. Two
Messengers, and a Serieant at Arms.

And thus much, briefly, touching the ancient and modern estate and government
of the Principality of Wales, and of the Marches of the same.

Next follows to be considered (according to the former order proposed) the
ancient and modern officers of the said Principality serving the Lord Prince,
and what fees and sallary were allowed unto them.

The ancient Officers their names and fees collected out of diverse ancient
Accounts, were these following.

In Northwales.
Justice of Northwales.
THe Justice of Northwales whose ancient fee was uncertain, but yet for the most
part yearly his fee was 50. l. howbeit I find that Sir William Stanley Knight,
to whom King Henry the seventh gave the office of Justice of Nothwa^es; for his
life he had the yearly fee of 133. l. 8. s. 8. d. a. ^. H. 7. but this seems
to have been of favor.* 50. l. Chamberlain.
The Chamberlain of Northwales whose ancient fee was yearly -- 20. l. Auditor.
The Auditor of Northwales, viz. Chester and Flint, his ancient fee was 10. l.
yearly, with allowance of 10. s. per diem, while he was in executing this
office, and finishing the account. -- 10. l. Comptroler.
The Comptroller of all pleas, fines, amerciaments, and redemptions, or
ransomes, his yearly fee was -- 12. l. 3. s. 4. d. Attorney.
The Attorney for Northwales, viz. of the Counties of Carnarvon, Merioneth, and
Anglesey, his fee was yearly -- 56. s. 8. d. Surueyor.
The Supervisor or Surueyor of the Castles, Manners, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments of the Prince in Northwales, his yearly fee was -- 10. l.
Constable.
The Constable of the Castle of Carnarvon, his fee was uncertain, sometimes 60.
l. and sometimes but -- 40. l. Captain.
The Captain of the Town of Carnarvon, his fee was yearly 12. l. 3. s. 4. d.
and some times one man had both the offices of Constable of the Castle, and
Captain of the Town having 60. l. yearly for both the offices. -- 12. l. 3.
s. 4. d. Soldiers.
There were allowed sometime unto the said Constable and Captain 24. Soldiers
for the safe custody of the Castle and Town, and every of them was allowed 4.
ds per diem, amounting in the whole unto 146. l. by the year. -- 146. l.
Porter.
The Porter of the Gates of the said Town of Carnarvon, whose fee was yearly --
3. l. 10. d. Constable.
The Constable of the Castle of Conway, his fee was yearly, sometimes 40. l. and
sometimes -- 50. l. Captain.
The Captain of the Town of Conway had for his yearly fee 12. l. 3. s. 4. d.
and most commonly he that was Constable of the Castle, was also Captain of the
Town. -- 12. l. 3. s. 4. d. Soldiers.
There were also allowed to the said Constable and Captain 24 soldiers for the
safe custody of the said Town and Castle, and every of them was allowed 4. d
per diem, amounting yearly to -- 146. l. Porter:
The Keeper and Porter of the Gates of Conway, his fee was -- 4. d. per diem.
Constable
The Constable of the Castle of Hardlaigh in the County of Merioneth his fee
yearly was 26. l. 13. s. 4. d in some accounts he was allowed 50. l. which I
think was for ^oth offices of Constable and Captain. -- 26. l. 13. s. 4. d.
Soldiers.
There were also allowed 24 soldiers for the guard of the said Town and Castle
of Hard^aigh, their wages amounting yearly to -- 146. l. Constable.
The Constable of the Castle of Bewmarisse, his yearly fee was -- 40. l.
Captain.
The Captain of the Town of Bewmarisse, his yearly fee was -- 12. l. 3. s. 4.
d. Soldiers
There were also 24. soldiers allowed for the guard of the said Town and
Castle of Bewmarisse, every of which were allowed 4. d. per diem, amounting to
-- 146. l. Porter.
The Porter or Keeper of the Gate of Bewmarisse had for his fee -- 9. l. 2. s.
6. d. Forrester;
The chief Forrester of the Forest of Snowdon, his fee. -- 11. l. 8. s.
Steward.
The office of the Steward of the Towns of Newborough and Roffaire, his fee was
yearly -- 10. l. Marshall.
The Marshall and Keeper of the Justice house in the Town of Carnarvon, his
yearly fee was -- 26. s. 8. d. The Clarke of the great Sessions I find not.
Exchequer.
There was a Court of Exchequer of the Princes revenues for Northwales holden
in the Castle of Carnarvon, in which Court there were certain fees allowed for
expenses of parchment, paper, bags for money, and for portage of money, and
such other small charges, which were variable according to the occasions and
times
Southwales.
Justice,
THe Justice of Southwales, whose ancient fee was yearly 20. l. at some times --
40. l. Auditor.
The Auditor of Southwales, his ancient fee was yearly 40. l. but sometimes his
fee was but 20. l. and 5. s. per diem, whiles he exercised his office. Attorney.
The Attorney of South wales, who had yearly for his fee -- 8. l. 13. s. 4. d.
Constable.
The Constable and Usher of the Castle of Carmarthen, whose yearly fee was --
20. l. Sheriff.
The Sheriff of the County of Carmarthen, whose yearly fee was -- 50. s. Steward.
The Steward general of the Comets of the County of Carmarthens fee -- 6. l.
13. s. 4. d. Clarke.
The Clarke of the County, Courts, and small Sessions in the County of
Carmarthen, his yearly fee -- 40. s. Crier.
The Crier of the County, Courts, and small Sessions in the said County, whose
fee is yearly -- 6. s. 8. d. Steward.
The Steward of the Welsh Courts in the County of Carmarthen, his fee -- 6. l.
13. s. 4. d. Penkeys.
The office of the Penkeys in the Comets of Widegada and Elvet fee -- 4. s.
Steward.
The Steward of the Welsh Courts of Widegada and Elvet, his yearly fee -- 3. l.
6. s. 8. d. Clarke.
The Clark of the Welsh Courts of Widegada and Elvet, whose yearly fee -- 6. s.
8. d. Bailiffe.
The Bailiffe itinerant for Carmarthen, whose yearly fee was -- 5. l. Baliffe.
The Bailiefe itenerant for Gantree, whose yearly fee was -- 6. l. 13. s. 4. d.
Constable
The Constable of the Castle of Cardigan, whose ancient fee was yearly -- 40. l.
Sheirffe.
The Sheriff of the County of Cardigan, whose yearly fee is -- 5. l. Clarke.
The Clarke of the County, Courts, T^rnes, and small Sessions of the County of
Cardigan, his yearly fee was -- 40. s. Crier.
The Crier of the County, Courts, and small Sessions in the said County, fee --
6. s. 8. d. Clerk.
The Clarke of the Hundreds in Cardigan, his fee was yearly -- 6. s. 8. d.
Steward.
The Steward of the Welsh Courts in the County of Cardigan, his fee was -- 10.
l. Clerk.
The Clarke for writing the rols in the Welsh Courts, his yearly fee was in the
County of Cardigan -- 6. s. 8. d. Clerk.
The Clarke for writing of the rols in the Comets of Isherwen, his yearly fee --
6. s. 8. d. Bayliffe.
The Bailife itinerant of Cardigan, his ancient fee was yearly -- 5. l. Bayliffe.
The Bailife itinerant for Lampaderne, his yearly fee was -- 6. l. 13. s. 4 d.:
Captain.
The Captain of the Town ^f Abeenstowith, his yearly fee was 18. l. 5. s. he
was allowed twelve Archers for the custody of the said Town and Castle.
Escheator.
The Escheator for the two Shires of Carmarthen and Cardigan, his yearly fee --
10. l. Clerk.
The Clarke of the great Sessions for both the Counties of Carmarthen and
Cardigan, his yearly fee was -- 5. l.
Exchequer.
There was a Court of Exchequer likewise for the revenues of the Prince of
Southwales, kept in the Castle of Carmarthen, and yearly allowances for the
expenses thereof, as in the Province of Northwales.

By this it appears that the Province of Southwales chargeable to the Prince,
extended for the most part into the two Counties of Carmarthen and Cardigan,
the rest of Southwales, as Munmoth and Glamorgan, etc. were in the hands of
others, as before has appeared.

The reason of the difference of the officers that were in Southwales from
those that were in Northwales was, for that Northwales was divided in Counties,
and framed into Shires, and ordered according to the English Laws by the
Statute made at Ruthlane, called Statutum Walliae, often before mentioned, made
in the time of King Edward the first, whereas Southwales nevertheless remained
governed in some things according to the Welsh Laws and customs, even until
the said Statute made in an. 27. H. 8.

Thus much concerning the officers of both Provinces of Northwales and
Southwales.
The Province of Wales had also diverse and sundry officers about his person,
and of his household, which were these that follow, as they are collected out
of Records, where mention is made of them.

The Council.
The Council of the Prince, consisting of diverse Honorable, Worshipful and
Learned persons, to council, for the leasing and good disposing of his
revenues.

Governor.
The Governor of the Princes person to whom the education and institution of
the young Prince was committed. Such was the Lord Rivers unto Prince Edward,
I(...) to King Edward the Fourth, wherein also the Queen, Mother unto the
Prince; had a special interest, for few things were done concerning the
Prince, without her priuity and advice.

Chamberlain 21 E. 3 pat. part 2.
The Chamberlain to the Prince, it appears that Richard ^e(...) B(...)e was
Chamberlain to the black Prince, son and heir to King Edward the Third:
And Sir Thomas Poole was chief Chamberlain to Prince Arth^re: so was Thomas
V(...), to Prince Edward, son to King Edward Hollinshead.
the Fourth.

The Attorney. 11 E. 4 ^at. pars 1.
The Attorney general to the Prince* William Ruddall was sometimes Attorney
to the Prince.

The Clarke.
The Clarke of the Princes Council, or Secretary, and the keeper of his
Books, Writings, and Records, his fee was 10. l. per annum, and his die(...)*
one Thomas Tamworth had this office.

The Usher.
The Usher of the Council Chamber of the Prince, his fee was 10. l. per annum,
and his charges for attendance of the Council there; one Thomas (...)
sometimes and this office.

The Usher of the Princes Chamber.
The Gentleman Usher of the Princes privy Chamber, Sir Thomas Wroth had this
office to Prince Edward in the life of King H. 8. and yet was that Prince never
created Prince of Wales.

The keeper of the Princes Wardrobe, who sometimes was one Giles Danies, and
had a Patent there of with a fee of 5. l. 10. s. yearly.

These Officers that follow, are principally necessary, besides many other
Officers inferior left out and ^^ doubt did serve the Princes of this Realm,
although no mention of them of Record.
The Treasurer or Receiver general of the Prince of all his Revenues, which
appears in this, that he had his general Exchequer at Westminster. The
Princes chief Secretary. The Master of the Princes Horses, under whom are his
Equiryes, and those that teach him to ride. The School masters of the Prince,
as namely, those that teach him The Arts and Philosophy. The Tongues, as the
French, Italian, Spanish, etc. The principles of the Laws of the Realm, and
of the civil and Ecclesiastical laws.

A note of the Officers both modern and present of the local Principality of
Wales, which Officers are allowed fees and other charges going out of the said
Principality, as does appear by diverse accounts before the Auditors the last
year, viz. the 44. year of Elizabeth.
Carnaruonshire.
THe Chamberlain of North Wales in the Counties of Carnaruon, Anglesey, and
Merioneth, his yearly fee is -- -- -- 20. l. The Constable of the Castle of
Carnaruon, his yearly fee is -- -- -- -- -- -- 60. l. 10. d. The P(...)
^f(...) of C(...) 3. l. 10. d. The Porter of the Town of Conway -- -- 6. l. 1.
s. 8. d. The Constable of the Town of Conway -- 1^. l. 6. s. 8. d. The said
two Justices are allowed yearly, white they are in Circuit in the time of the
great Sessions. 6. l. The two Justices for the Counties of Carnaruon, Anglesey,
^^d Merioneth* each of them ^a^ing for his yearly fee* ^^. l. amounting in the
whole to the sum of -- 100. l. The Attorney in the three Counties aforesaid,
is allowed for his yearly fee -- 6. l. 6. s. 8. d. The chief Forrester of
Snowdon his fee -- ^1. l. 8. s. 1. d. The (...)er of the Pleas, Fines, and
Redemptions before the Justices of North Wales, his yearly fee was -- 12. l.
3. s. 4. d. The Fee of the Marshall and keeper of the Sh^rehouse in the
Counties of Carnaruon, Anglesey, and Merioneth -- 2. l. 6. s. 8. d. The
Protonotary and Clarke of the great Sessions is allowed for a Reward for his
labor, in engrossing of the estreats of the Sessions holden in the said three
Counties -- 3. l. 6. s. 8. d. The Barons of the Exchequer of Carnaruon -- 13.
l. 6. s. 8. d. For their attendance at Carnaruon yearly -- 40. s. Toward the
expenses allowed the Clarke of the Exchequer attending the great ^^ssio^^ in
the said Counties of Anglesey and Merioneth, for writing of the Original Writs
of every Sessions -- 10. s. For the expenses of Parchment, Paper, Ink, and
other necessaries spent in the office of the Clarke of the Crown -- 26. s. 8.
d. The Crier, whose yearly fee is -- 13. s. 4. d. For expenses of Paper,
Parchment, Ink, and other necessaries spent in the Exquerer at Carnaruon, and
for bags to put money in -- 1. l. 10. s. For expense of Bayliffes Itinerant,
bringing the Writs for collecting of the money by the Receivers. 1^. s. Summa
totalis of Carnaruon is 303. l 19. d* Anglesey-shire.
The Constable of the Castle of Bewmarris, and Captain of the Town, whose
yearly fee was -- 26. l. 13. s. 4. d. The Steward of M^ney, whose fee was
yearly -- 5. l. The Steward of Rossaire, whose fee was yearly -- 20. s. Summa
totalis Anglesey 32. l. 13. s. 4. d Merioneth-shire.
The Constable of the Castle of Hardleigh, whose fee is yearly -- 50. l. The
Auditors, whose yearly fees are -- 61. l. 18. s. 4. d. And for their charges,
they are allowed -- 90. l. The Receiver, whose yearly fee and allowance for
portage of money -- 30. l. 1^. s. 6. d. The Surueyo^, whose-yeerely fee is --
20. l. The Woodward, whose yearly fee is -- 10. l. Summa totalis for Merioneth
262. l. 16. ^. 10. d. The total sum for North Wales 599. l. 8. ^* 5.
South Wales.
Cardigan-shire.
The Protonotary and Clarke of the Crown, in the Counties of Cardigan,
Carmarden, Pembrooke, and the Town of Hauerford-west, whose fee is -- 40. s.
The (...) in the Counties of (...), Cardigan, Pembrooke, Brecknock, and Radnor,
whose yearly ^eeis -- ^. l. 13. s. 4. d. The Stewards of the Welsh Courts,
whose yearly fee is -- 6. l. The Sheriff of Cardigan, whose fee is -- 5. l.
Summa totalis of Cardigan 21. l. 13. s. 4d. Carmarden* shi^e.
The Chamberlain and Chancellor of Carmarden, whose yearly fee is -- 35. l.
11. s. 8. d. The Crier of the great Sessions holden in the Counties of
Carmarden, Cardigan, and Pembrooke, whose fee is -- 6. s. 8. d. The Constable
of the Castle of Carmarden, whose yearly fee is -- 20. l. The Steward of the
Welsh Courts of the County of Carmarden, whose fee is -- 10. l. The Justices
of the Counties of Carmarden and Cardigan, their yearly fee is to each of
them, 50. l. and they are allowed for their diet in the times of their great
Sessions -- 40. l. There is paid yearly to the Protonotary, and Clerks of the
Crown for their travel in making and engrossing the estreats of the great
Sessions -- 5. l. Summa total is Carmarden -- 215. l. 19. s. 8. d.
The present revenue of the Principality of Wales,
as the same was in charge before the Auditors this last year past, viz. 44
Elizabeth.

The County of Carnaruon.
The Farm and yearly rents certain of the Manors, Lands, and Tenements, in
the County of Carnaruon, amounts unto 423. l. 3. s. 4. d. ob. q. The casual
profits thereof, 76. l. 19. s. 9. d. ob. Summa totalis is -- 500. l. 3. s. q.
The County of Anglesey.
The Farm and yearly rents certain of the Manors, Lands, and Tenements in
the County of Anglesey, 398. l. 19. s. 11. d. q. The casual profits thereof,
26. l. 10. s. 10. d. Summa totalis is -- 425. l. 10. s. 9. d. q. The County of
(...).
The Farm and yearly rent certain of the Manners, Lands, and Tenements in the
County of Merioneth 202. l. 9. s. ob. q. The casual profits 60. l. 16. s. 10.
d. Summa totalis is -- 263. l. 5. s. 10. d. ob. q* Summa totalis of North Wales
yearly amounts unto -- 1138. l. 19. s. 8. d. q.
South Wales.
The County of Cardigan.
The Farm and rents certain of the County of Cardigan, amounted to 213. l. 2.
s. 2. d. The casual profits thereof 86. l* 9. s. 2. d. Summa totalis is --
299. l. 11. s. 4. d. The County of Carmarden.
The Farm and rents certain of the County of Carmarden, amounted to 185. l. 6.
s. 3. d. ob. The casual profits 180. l* 11. s. 7. d. Summa totalis is -- 376.
l. 17. s. 10. d. ob* The sum total of South Wales -- 676. l. 9. s. 2. d. ob*
The yearly sum, total being cast up together, amounts unto -- 1865. l. 8.
s. 10 d. ob. q* The charges above specified, and other issuing all manner of
ways out of the same revenues, amount to 530. l. 6. s. 7. d. Which being
deducted out of the former total sum of 1865. l. 8. s. 10 d. ob. q. there
does rest clear, the yearly sum of -- 1335. l. 2. s. 3. d. ob. q. Whereby
may be observed, that the revenue of the Principality of Wales, in the time of
Prince Edward, called the black Prince, almost three hund'ed years ago,
without deductions, amounted to 4681. l. 12. s. 5. d. q. is now worn and
wasted to the sum of 1865. l. 8. s. 10, d. ob. q. and with the ordinary
deductions and Reprizes taken out of it at this present in charges, fees, to
officers, and other reprizers, is brought to the sum of -- 1335: l. 2. s. 3.
d. ob. q. Which small sum also (as the revenue was to Queen Elizabeth) was much
lessened, for that a greater sum in the whole amounting yearly to 1789. l.
3. s. 2. d. which did partly arise by reason of the allowance of the diet of
the Council of the Marches, being yearly 1106. l. 13. s. 4. d. The fees of
the Barons of the Exchequer in Wales, being officers of the Principality of
Wales, the Auditors fees, Woodwards fees, Receivers fees, Surueyors fees; and
for the portage of money, was charged as well upon this revenue of the Prince,
as upon other lands and revenues belonging to the Crown within the several
Counties of Wales.
And so much of the Principality of Wales.
THE SECOND PART CONTAINS THE DVTCHY OF CORNWALL.
The second part of this revenue appertaining to the Prince, is that which
arises unto him out of the Duchy of Cornwall, and belongs unto him as
Duke of Cornwall.

THe uttermost part of this Island toward the West, stretching it self by a
long extent into the Ocean, is called the County of Cornwall; lying over
against the Duchy of Britain in France. The people inhabiting the same, are
called Cornishmen, and are also reputed a remnant of the Britains, the ancient
Inhabitants of this land: they have a particular language, called Cornish,
(although now much worn out of use) differing but little from the Welsh, and
the language of the Britains in France, which argues their original to have
been out of one Nation.

This Territory was anciently reputed a Dukedom, but a little before, and
also after the Norman Conquest, it was an Earldom, and so continued until
the eleventh year of King Edward the Third, at which time it was of new
constituted a Duchy, and the first Duchy that was erected in England after
the said conquest.

Such as were Earls thereof in ancient time, before the erection of the said
Duchy, were for the most part of the blood Royal; amongst whom, many being
memorable, there was as most ancient, Richard Earl of Cornwall, the elect
Emperor, or King of the Romans, brother to King Henry the Third; but his
posterity dying without issue, it came again to the Crown in the days of
King Edward the First; who conferred the said Earldom upon Edward, the Prince
his son, surnamed of Carnaruon; who being King, conferred the same upon his
Minion Pierce de Gaueston; but he being afterward attainted of Treason, and
executed, the same Earldom was bestowed upon John, surnamed of Eltam, because
he was borne there; younger brother to King Edward the Third; who dying
likewise without issue, it was lastly erected into a Duchy (as has been
said) and conferred upon Edward, afterward surnamed, the black Prince, in the
eleventh year of the reign of the said King Edward the third, his father.

Therefore the said King Edward purposing to augment the title, of his said
son, did in the Parliament holden in the eleventh year of his reign, create
not only the said Edward then before made Earl of Chester, to be Duke of
Cornwall, but also to honor that public proceeding the more, did at the same
time create diverse and sundry worthy persons, and well deserving, to sundry
dignities of nobility, as by the records extant thereof, does appear.

The manner of the first creation of the Duke of Cornwall was very special,
for the said dignity was conferred unto the said Edward then Earl of Chester,
and to the first begotten sons and heirs apparent of him, and his heirs
Kings of England for ever. So that it seems that the intention thereof was,
first that none should be Dukes of Cornwall, but such as were eldest sons
and heirs apparent to the Crown; and that when there was any fail of such
person, then the said dignity should remain insuspence, until such son and
heir apparent again were extant. Secondly, that the said son and heir
apparent without any further solemnity or creation, should presently upon his
birth being then heir apparent, to the King, or from the time that he is
heir apparent to the Kingdom, be also Duke of Cornwall, herein much
differing from the order of the Principality of Wales, which requires in every
new succeeding Prince a new creation and inuesture, and gift of that
Principality, as has formerly appeared.

Statut. de a. 33. b. 6.
The truth of this assertion is made most evident by an act of Parliament in
the 33. year of the reign of King Henry the 6. the words whereof are these,
Moreover the King considering that his said best beloved, first begotten son,
at the time of In originale de a. 35. b. 6. rot. 29 ea part Rememor. Thesaur.
in Scaccar.
his birth is Duke of Cornwall, and ought of right to have Livery of the said
Duchy, and of all Honors, Lordships, Signiories, Castles, Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Possessions, and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances to
the said Duchy belonging, or parcel of the same in any wise, by the advice,
assent and authority etc. delivers, and does cause to be delivered to the
said Prince, his first begotten son, the said Duchy of Cornwall, and all
Honors, Lordships, Signiories, Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements, etc. with
all other things, Possessions, and Inheritances, Profits, and commodities, with
their appurtenances, to the said Duchy annexed, united, pertaining, or
belonging, or parcel of the same in any wise.

The same was after many likewise verified by the Charter of King Henry the
seventh, being the Charter of Liuety, made unto Prince Arthur his son,
whereof some part follows in these words, Hemicus deigratta Angliae,
Franciae, Rex, and dominus Hiberniae, etc. Salutem. Sciatis quod nos
considerantes, quod regnum Angliae (cuius regni soli^^ dei gratia portimur)
filij primogeniti in ducatu Cornubiae haereditario in perpetuum dicti regni
nostriiure sunt successuri atque ex speciali superinde Actu promulgato, primo
nativitatis suae die maioris atque perfectae praesumitur aetatis, fic quod
liberationem dicti ducatus eo tum a nobis petere valiant, atque de iure
obtinere debeant, acsi viginti and uninius annorum aetatis plene fuissent,
volentes etiam uti debemus, praecharissimo filio nostro primogenito Arthuro ius
reddere and in nullo eius iure derogare, eundemque ducatum Cornubiae cum
omnibus and singulis suis membris atque iuribus dicto primogenito nostro sicuti
caeterorum Principum temporibns bactenus fieri consuevit, liberare ex certa
scientia and mero motu nostro, ac^de advisamento and assensu Consilij nostri
dedimus, concessimus and liberamus, damusque per praesentes, concedimus and
liberamus pro nobis and haeredibus nostris and bac praesenti charta nostra
confirmavimus eidem filio nostro sub nomine and honor Ducis dictiloci, castra,
manneria, terras, and tenementa and alia subscripta, ut ipse statum and honorem
ducis dicti ducatus decentius generis sui nobilitatem valcat continuare and
onera in hac part incumbentia facilius supportare etc. By which is proved not
only that the son and heir apparent of the Crown, is Duke of Cornwall from
his birth, or when he is known to be son and heir apparent, but that the
King his father is by law to make unto him livery of the said Duchy, Lands,
and the hereditaments thereunto belonging, although though he be within the age
of one and twenty years, as if he were of full and perfect age.

But to return again unto King Edward the third, and to consider the
bestowing of the revenues of the said Duchy and the managing thereof, for
orders sake I shall therein observe these general things.

First, what revenues were bestowed upon the said Duchy.

Secondly, the yearly value of the same, as well of ancient time, as of latter
years.

And lastly, to set down the particular officers of the said Duchy, as well
ancient as modern, by all which the present state of the said Duchy may best
appear.

As concerning the former, namely, the revenues of the said Duchy as it is
observed that the same do consist generally of these two kinds, first the
lands and hereditaments that are annual, and secondly the revenues that are
casual.

The revenues annual are of three kinds, first the lands given by the
Charter made in the eleventh year of King Edward the third, and were sometimes
the ancient of the said Duchy. Secondly certain Knights fees, and other
hereditaments g^uen by other letters patents of the same King Edward the third,
unto the said Duke, which were united and annexed by the said latter letters
patents unto the said Duchy.

Thirdly, and lastly, the lands given by act of Parliament unto the said
Duchy, and annexed thereunto in liew of other lands that by act of Parliament
were afterward taken from the same again at sundry times, as hereafter shall
appear, for in every of these there is difference of estate and quality.

The revenues annual given by the Charter made by King Edward the third, in
the eleventh year of his reign, and established for the Duchy, are situate
and do lie, first, in the County of Cornwall, secondly, in the County of
Devon, thirdly, in other Shires dispersed within this Realm. And first of all
in the County of Cornwall are these following.

County of Cornwall.
1 The Castle, Manor, and Park, and Borough of Launceston with his
appurtenances. 2 The Castle and Manor of Trematon, and the Borough of Saltash,
and the Park there, with the appurtenances. 3 The Castle, Borough, and Manor
of Tyntagell (if histories do not fable) this is supposed to be the place of
birth, and Seat of King Arthur. 4 The Castle and Manor of Restormell, with the
park there. 5 The Manor of Clymesland, and Park of Kerrybollock. 6 The
Manor of Tibesta, with the Bayliwick of Powdershire. 7 The Manor of Tewynton,
with the appurtenances. 8 The Manor and Borough of Helston in Kerier, with the
appurtenances. 9 The Manor of Moresk, with the appurtenances. 10 The Manor of
Trewervaile, also Tywervaile with the appurtenances. 11 The Manor of Penkneth,
with the appurtenances. 12 The Manor of Peulyn, with the Park there. 13 The
Manor of Relaton, also Rillaton with the Beadlery of Eastwyve^shire. 14 The
Manor of Helston in Trigshire, with the appurtenances, and the Park of
Hellesbury: 15 The Manor and Borough of Leskeret, also Liskerd, and the Park
there. 16 The Manor of Kallestock, with the fishing there, and other his
appurtenances. 17 The Manor of Talskydo, with the appurtenances in the said
County of Cornwall. 18 The Borough or Town of Lostwythiell, together with the
Milles.
Devonshire.
19 The fee farm of the City of Exeter, 20. l. per annum. 20 The Manor of
Lydford, with the appurtenances, together with the Chase of Dartmore. 21 The
Manor and Borough of Braduish. 22 The water and River of Dartmouth.
In diverse other Shires dispersedly.
23 The Castle of Wallingford, with the Hamlets and members thereof, and the
yearly farm of the Town of Wallingford, with the honors of Wallingford, and
Saint Valeries in the County of Oxford, and in all other Counties wheresoever
the said honors do lie. 24 The Castle, Manor, and Town of Barkhampsted,
with the Park there, and together with the honor of Barkhampsted in the
Counties of Hertford, Buckingham, and Northampton. 25 The Manor of Byflet,
with the appurtetenances in the County of Surry. 26 The Castle and Manor of
Mere, in the County of Wiltshire. 27 The Castle and Manor of Knaresborugh,
with his Hamlets and members, together with the honor of Knaresbury and York,
and elsewheresoeuer the said honors do lie. 28 The Manor of Isleworth in the
County of Middlesex. 29 The Manors of Kenmigton and Franckshall, Char^a data
4. Septem. 11. E. 3.
together with a meadow in Lambeth, and Newton in the County of Surry. 30 The
Manor of Rising, with the appurtenances in the County of Norfolk, and the
fourth part of the Talbot of Linne, with the appurtenances in the said County.
31 The Manor of Chisiemore, and fourscore and eighteen pounds six shillings
and eight pence rent, with the appurtenances in the City of Coventry, which
were then in lease to the Queens mother for her life.
And thus much concerning the reuenew local and annual of this Duchy of the
first kind, according to the former proposed division, being the first
inheritance given thereunto, and which is so annexed to this Duchy by the
words of the said Charter, as that by the intent thereof, it should in no case
be aliened therefrom.

As concerning the reuenew local and annual of this Duchy of the second
kind, the said King Edward the third for further increase of the said Duchy,
by his Charter bearing date the said 11th. year of his reign, did give unto
the said Duke in such manner as is aforesaid. All his Knights fees which he
then had in the said County of Cornwall, with all wards, Escheates,
forfeitures, profits, and commodities whatsoever thereunto belonging, which
fees he also annexed unto the said Dukedom by the words of the said letters
patents, as that the same should in no wise by the intention of that patent be
severed from the same. Howbeit some difference may be conceived in 1. Mar Diar
94: b. 32.
Law, as touching the value of such annexation made by letters patents only,
and the former annexation by letters patents which were confirmed or
strengthened by act of Parliament, concerning the power and ability of aliening
and disannexing the same from the Duchy.

The last branch of the revenues local and annual belonging to this Duchy,
are such Manors, Lands, and Hereditaments as have been given by act of
Parliament, and annexed unto the said Duchy in liew of other lands that by act
of Parliament were formerly taken from the same.

And therefore whereas (by the former letters patents has appeared) the
Manors of Isleworth in the County of Middlesex, was given and annexed by King
Edward the third unto the said Duchy, King Henry the fifth having afterward
founded the Monastery which he called Syon, near adjoining to the said
Manor, did by an act of Parliament in the ninth year of his reign, sever the
said Manor of Isleworth from the said Duchy and conferred the same unto the
said Monastery, and in liew thereof by the same act of Parliament gave and
annexed to the said Duchy, the Manor of Curry, Mallet, Stoke, Under Hamden,
Milton, Fawconberge, Stratton upon Fosse, Inglesoome, Norton, with Welweyton,
Widcome, Farrent, and Lauerton, and the moyty of the Manor of westharptr^e,
and Sheptonmallet, with their appurtenances, in the County of Somerset: the
Manor of Ryme, with his appurtenances in the County of Dorset; and also the
moyty of the Manors of Maydencot in Parliament. 9. b. 5.
the County of Barkshire, and of Magor in the Marches of Wales, and the fourth
part of the Manor of Sellings, in the County of Kent. All which premises did
exceed the value of the Manor of Isleworth yearly two hundred pounds, which
does appear as well by the said act of Parliament made in the ninth year of
King Henry the fifth, as also by one other act of Parliament made in the three
and thirtieth year of King Henry the fixed, wherein the said former act of
Parliament is mentioned.

Likewise King Henry the eight at his Parliament holden at Westminster the one
and thirtieth year of his reign, and proroged upon diverse prorogations,
until the four and twentieth day of July, in the two and thirtieth year of
his reign, did sever the honor and Castle of Walling ford, and all Lordships,
Manors, Lands, Tenements, and other hereditaments thereto belonging, from the
Duchy of Cornwall, being moved thereunto, for that the said Castle and honor
is near adjoining unto the Manor of Newelme, which was by the said Act of
Parliament, made an honor, and therefore for the commodious situation and
vicinitie thereof, the said King did sever the same from the said Duchy, and
made it parcel of the said honor of Newelme, whereof he was then seized in
the right of his Crown, and in liew thereof, there were given and annexed unto
the said Dukedom, the Manors of VVestanton, Portlow, North-hill, Portpighan,
Laudren, Triloweia, Treganoe, Trelagan, Crosthole, Treuitherne, Courtney,
Landulph, Leighdurant, and Tinton, in the County of Cornwall, and all other
his Lands in the said places, which came to the said King by the attainder of
Treason of Henry Courtney, Marquess of Exceter. Also the Manors of Anstell,
Fentregan, Tremeynalls, Tremageuon, Fowey, Credyowe, and Portheaprior in the
said County of Cornwall, which came to the said Kings hands by the
dissolution of the Priory of Trewardreth in the said County of Cornwall. And
also the Manors of Breadford, Cauerdon, Clymesland, Pryor, Treworgy, Stratton,
Eastway, Bowyton, Bradrissey, Bucklawrue, and Bonyaluey, which came to the said
Kings hands, by the surrender and suppression of the Priory of Lanceston. All
which Manors so newly granted unto the said Duchy, were by the said Act of
Parliament so annexed thereunto, as were the said Castle and honor of
Wallingford, and the members and parcels of the same, before the making of the
same Act of Parliament, any Act, Law, usage, or custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And thus much concerning the revenues local, (and called in the laws,
He^editamenta corporea) and of annual value, which were either originally
given by King Edward the Third, and afterward by Patent conferred, or by Act of
Parliament in liew of other lands, granted unto the said Duchy; which
threefold distinction of the said revenues, is here made, and induced to this
end, that it might be observed that those Castles, Lordships, Manors, and
Lands, which were either first given unto the said Duchy, and established by
Act of Parliament, or lastly given by Act of Parliament, in liew of other the
lands severed from the said Duchy, might appear so to be annexed unto the
said Duchy, by the intent and meaning of the said Acts of Parliament, and so
knit and conjoined thereunto, as that they should not be alienated therefrom,
and are of more validity in that respect then the revenues of the second sort,
which were only conferred by Letters Patents, without help of Parliament, and
therefore not so firmly united unto the said Duchy, as are those two former
kinds mentioned.

Inheritances of casual value belonging to the said Duchy, were these.

1 The Duke has granted unto him and his heirs inheritable, unto the said
Duchy, yearly to elect, choose, create, and make the Sheriff of Cornwall
in such sort as the King himself does elect the Sheriffs of other Counties.

2 The Prises and Customs of all Wines brought Carta dat. 10. July, ^6 E. ^
into these Ports of the said County of Cornwall, and the profits of the
Ports and Havens there; and the Customs of all Wool, Leather, and Woollsels,
shipped to be transported out of the said Duchy, to be collected by Officers
appointed by the said Duke, wrecke of the Sea, and the prerogative of all
Royal Fishes, taken and brought to land within the said County, the Hundred
Courts, and County Courts, and the profits thereof: The prises Carta dat. 17.
Martij. 11. E. 3.
and Customs of Wines of the Port of Sutton, which is now called Plymouth, and
is partly with in the County of Deuon. Also the said Duke has free warren in
all his said landsgranted: Also he has the liberty and returning of all Writs
and Carta dat. 18. Martij, 11. E. 3.
summons directed to the Sheriff of the said County, which shall not be
returned, but by the Officers of the said Duke, for the time being. Also the
goods and chattels of all Felons and Fugitives, being Tenants of the said
Duchy. And the benefit of all Fines imposed for any trespass, or crime
fynable, and all Fynes to be paid for Licenses, to leuye any Fine or Concord of
record: And all Ame cements, Issues, and Forfeitures, and the year, day, and
wast streepe and spoil of the lands of such as are Tenants of the said Duchy,
upon murders, or Felons by them committed, and whereof they shall be
attainted, and likewise the Escuage of all Tenants, holding by Knights service,
which Carta dat. 3. ^^^^. 11 ^ 3.
they are to pay, being assessed in Parliament for their fail of service and
absence not being with the King when he should make any Army or voyage Royal
against his enemies, whereby such escuage does come due.

Also there is annexed unto the said Duchy, the Stannaries and profits of the
Coynage of Tynne within the said Counties of Deuon and Cornwall.

The Coynage of Tynne.
For the better understanding whereof, it is to be observed, that in the said
Counties (being in many parts thereof, mountanous, full of wast grounds and
Moors:) there is found great quantities of Tynne, the purest, best, and most
plentifullest in Europe; by reason whereof, it has ever been accounted one of
the Staple Commodities of this Kingdom, and of good estimation in foreign
regions. These Mines of Tynne in these West parts of the kingdom, were not
unknown to the Romans, as appears by Diodorus Siculus, who lived in the
time of Augustus the Emperor, above 1600. years sithence; and who thus
writes thereof: Britanij qui iuxta Velerium promontorium incolunt mercatorum
vsum qui co Stanneri gratia nauigant humaniores reliquis ergahospites habentur.
Hiexterra Saxosa cuius venas s^quuti effodiunt Stannum ignem eductum, in
quandam Insulam ferunt Britanicum iuxta quam Ictam vocant maris fluxu videntur
insulae cum vero refluit exsicato interiecto littore curribus co Stannum
deferunt, etc. Ex hijs Insulis mercatores emptum Stannum in Galliam portant,
inde diebus fere triginta cum equis ad fontem Eridani fluminis perducunt. That
Promontorie which he calls Velerium, by the judgment of all learned in
Cosmographie, is now called the Lyzard, and is situate in the West part of
Cornwall. The Island that he calls Icta, is the Wight, and that which he
says was an Island, and at the Flood, and at low water, passable from the
main, is a true description of Portland, as it is at this day, being not far
from the I Will of Wight; unto which place out of Cornwall, the Tynne was brought
to be transported into France, from whence it was carried thirty days journey
on horseback, and so over the Alps into Italy, even to the Fountains of
Eredanus, as he says, which is the River now called the Po in Piemont and
Lumbardy. I do allege his authority, the rather for that he in a manner set
out the laborious search for Tynne in those days, even as it is used by the
Spaliard at this day with great industry and pains; Hi ex terra Saxosa venas
sequunti effodiunt Stannum, etc. All the moors and wastes wherein the Tynne is
found, being of ancient time belonging to the Kings, and many of the said
moors at this day being parcel of this Duchy of Cornwall. The Kings of
this land in former times have cast their Princely care to establish a good and
orderly mannaging of the said Commodity, and have endowed the Tynners with
sundry privileges for their good government, thereby the more to encourage
them in the search of Tyn. And thereupon by ancient Charters, the whole Company
and body of Tynners, in every of the said Counties of Deuon and Cornwall, are
cast and divided in four several Stanneryes or Jurisdictions: In every of
which Stanneries, there is a Court to minister justice in all causes personal
arising between Tynner and Tynner, and between Tynner and Forraigner; and
also for and concerning the right and ownership of Tynne Mines, and the
disposition thereof, except in causes of land, life, and member; and if any
false and unjust judgment be given in any of the said Courts, the party
grieved may make his appeal unto the Lord Warden of the Stanneries, who is
their superior Judge, both for law and equity; and from him, unto the body of
the Council of the Lord Prince, Duke of Cornwall, to which Duke the
Stanneryes are given, as by the former charters have appeared, and from them
the appeal lies to the Kings most Royal person.

When matters of moment concerning the state of those Mines or Stanneryes,
shall come to be questioned or debated; there are in every of the said
Counties, by the direction of the Lord Warden, several Parliaments, or
general assemblies of the Tynners summoned, whereunto every Stannery within
that County sends Iurates or Burgesses, by whose advice and consent,
constitutions, orders, and laws, are made and ordained touching Tynne; causes
which being promulged, the same do bind the whole body of Tynners of that
County as firmly, as if the same had been established in the general
Parliaments of the Realm. As touching the persons that deal or entermeddle
with Tynne, and therefore carry the name of Tynners, they are of four kinds.
First, the owners of the soil where Mines are found. Secondly, the aduenturer
for Tynne, which may have by the law of Tynners, power and disposition of a
Mine or Tyn-worke, although he be not owner of the soil. Thirdly, the
merchant, Broker or Regrator of Tynne, which either buyeth to transport out of
the Realm, or else to regrate and sell again within the realm. And fourthly,
the Spadiard or Spaliard so called, because he lives by his Spade, and is the
Myne-worker and labourer for Tynne, who commonly in respect of his poor
estate, is eaten out by the hard and usurious contracts for Tynne, which he is
driven to make with the merchant or regrator. For those poor laborers having
no wages certain, but only shares in the mines, as the quantity thereof shall
arise; and being not able to sustain themselves and their family, until the
Tynne of coynage, and Marts for Tynne shall come, which are half yearly; he
is by necessity compelled for a small sum of money aforehand, to enter into
bond unto the Merchant or Regrator of Tynne, to deliver him at the the time of
the next ensuing coynage, Tynne, in value much more then the money he had
formerly received.

There are also two kinds of Tynne, the one called black Tynne, which is the
Tynne oar broken and washed, but as yet not blown, molten, or founded into
metal; and white Tynne, which is the Tynne after that it is founded and
moulten into metal, and this is also of two sorts, soft Tynne, which is best
merchantable, and hard Tynne, which is least merchantable; It is not lawful by
the law of Tynners, and it is by the ancient Charters of the privileges
granted by the Kings of England unto the Tynners, expressly forbidden under
forseiture of the Tynne, that no Tynne shall be sold within every of the said
Counties, either black or white Tynne, but only at two set times of the
year, at places appointed; in which places, all the vendable Tynne in the said
several Counties is brought, and there by the Officers of the Duke, the same
is weighed by a Beam, and weights thereto appointed, and after the same is
coined with a stamp, it is thereupon allowed to be sold, and not before; for
which weighing and stamp, commonly called the Coynage, there is due to the
Lord Prince, as Duke of Cornwall, the sum of 40. s. for every thousand
weight of Tynne so weighed and coined, which is parcel of the casual revenues
of the said Duchy, and first granted by King Edward the third, unto the Duke
of Cornwall, and annexed unto the said Duchy by the name of Coynage of Tynne.

Moreover, not only the Kings of England in their times, but also the Dukes of
Cornwall in their times, have had the preemption of Tynne, which is a
privilege belonging and reserved unto themselves by their Charters of
liberties granted unto the Tynners, which appertains unto them, as is
conceived by the learned, Ratione proprietatis tanquam summis Dominis, and
proprietarijs quam Casaneus in Catal^go gloriae mundi par. ^. consider. 24.
numero 121.
ratione praerogatiuae suae: not unlike that which other Kings have in
foreign Countries, whereof Casaneus thus makes mention, Praefertur princeps
in emptione metallorum, alleging an imperial constitution of the Coad for
proof thereof; and of which preemption, as by some presidents may be proved,
both the Kings of England, and Dukes of Cornwall have made use, when otherwise
they stood in need of money for the managing of their affairs. And thus much
touching the revenues of the County of Cornwall.

The whole revenues unto Edward the Prince, surnamed the black Prince, son
and heir apparent unto King Edward the Third, as by a notable survey thereof
appears, accounting all profits annual and casual as they happened,
communibus annis, one year with the other, and as rated 50. E. 3. in manner as
ensues.

The revenues of the Duchy of Cornwall, as it was rated by survey taken 50.
E. 3. amounting in the whole without reprises, unto 3415. l. 18. s. 5. d. q.
whereof in particular, viz.

For Cornwall 2219. l. 7. s. 9. d. ob. For Deuon 0273. l. 19. s. 5. ob. q. In
other shires 922. l. 1^. s. 2: d. The sum total of the whole revenue of the
said Duchy, amounts unto -- 3415: l. 18. s. 5. d. q. The revenue of the
said Duchy of Cornwall, as it appears by the accounts of the Receiver
thereof, in the fifteenth year of King Henry the Eight, amounted of clear
yearly value unto -- 10095. l. 11. s. 9. d. q.


In particular as follows.

Cornwall.
The issues of the Manors and Boroughes in the County of Cornwall -- 624. l.
17. s. 2. d. q. The issues of the Hundreds and Hundred-Courts, and of the
office of the Sheriff -- 59. l. 14. s. 2. d. ob: The issues of the Stannery
Courts, in both the Counties of Deuon and Cornwall, accounted for by the
several Bayliffes of the several Stanneries of the Counties -- 54. l. 9. s.
^. d. The profits of the office of the Hauenour in the said County of
Cornwall -- 53. l. 3 d.: The profits of the offices of the Feodarie and
Esche^tor of both the Counties -- 33. l. 16. s. 10. d. ob:
Deuon.
The issues of the Manors and Boroughes in the Ex compoto Iohannis Arundel
militis receptoris generalis Ducatis. Cornubi^ 15 H. 8.
County of Deuon, and of the Chase and Forest of Dertmore in the said County
of Deuon -- 170. l. 14. s. 3 d. ob. q* The issues of the water of Dartmouth --
8. l. The fee Farm of the City of Exon, and of the Castle there -- 21. l. 15
s.: The issues and profits of the Coynage of Tynne in the said Counties of
Deuon and Cornwall, in the said 15. H. 8. -- 2771. l. 3. s. 9. d. q. For white
rent, which is a duty payable yearly by every Tynner in the County of Deuon,
and anciently due, that is, of every Tynner 8. d. which sum in the whole,
collected from 424. Tynners in that County amounted unto the sum of -- 14. l.
2. s. 8. d.
Foreign Counties.
The issues and profits of the foreign Minnors which do lie out of the said
Counties of Deuon and Cornwall, in other the Counties of England -- 958. l. So
that the whole reuenew of the said Duchy of Cornwall without reprizes,
amounted unto -- 10095. l. 11. s. 9. d. q.
But to the intent it may appear what are the Castles, Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments now or lately belonging unto the said Duchy, and
how the present revenues thereof do rise, I will here enter into the
particularity thereof, as they were accounted for to Queen Elizabeth in the
fourth and fortieth year of her reign, which is the last account extant.

Cornwall.
Manors in the County of Cornwall.
1 The Manor of Rylaton of the yearly rent of -- 7. l. 12. s. 4. d. 2 The
Manor of Clymesland of the yearly rent of 60. l. 7. s. 2. d. 3 The Manor of
Helston of the yearly rent of -- 67. l. 3. s. 10. d. 4 The Manor of Liskerd of
the yearly rent of -- 64. l. 6. s. 10. d. 5 The Manor of Tybefta of the yearly
rent of -- 33. l. 2. s. 4. d. q. 6 The Manor of Tywaruaile of the yearly rent
of 22. l. 2. s. 7 The Manor of Tallyskydy of the yearly rent of 5. l. 12. s.
8. d. 8 The Manor of Penninayne of the yearly rent of 7. l. 14. s. 7. d. 9 The
Manor of Calestock of the yearly rent of 60. l. 4. s. 6. d. q. 10 The Manor
of Trematon of the yearly rent of 52. l. 9. s. 5. d. ob: 11 The fee of Trematon
of the yearly rent of -- 2. l. 5. s. 12 The Manor of Refflormell of the yearly
rent of 33. l. 15 s. 1. d. ob. 13 The Manor of Penkneth of the yearly value of
4. l. 18. s. 6. d. ob. 14 The Manor of Peulyn of the rent of -- 6. l. 18. s.
6. d. ob. 15 The Manor of Tewynton of the rent of -- 38. l. 12. s. 7. d. ob.
q. 16 The Manor of Helston in Kerier of the rent of 56. l. 5. s. 6. d. ob. q.
17 The Manor of Tyntagell of the rent of -- 36. l. 6. s. 6. d. 18. The Manor
of Moresk of the rent of -- 32. l. 9. s. 9. d.
The Manors in the County of Cornwall newly annexed by King Henry the eight
unto the said Duchy in liew of the honor of Wallingford, and were in times
past parcel of the possessions of the Priory of Trewardreth in the County of
Cornwall.
19 The Manor of Anstell of the yearly rent of -- 5. l. 3. s. 6. d. 20 The
Manor of Fentrigan of the rent of -- 3. l. 13. s. 4. d. 21 The Manor of
Trewenuen of the rent of -- 9. l. 11. s. 7. d. 22 The Manor of Crediock of the
rent of -- 10. l. 19. s. 6. d. ob. 23 The yearly farm of the Manor of Fowye
-- 39. s. 2. d. 24 The Manor of Porthea Prior of the rent of -- 7. l. 10. s.
10. d. The sum total of these annexed Manors belonging sometimes to the
Priory of Trewardreth -- 38. l. 17. s. 11. d. ob.
The Manors in the County of Cornwall annexed unto the said Duchy in liew of
the honor of Wallingford, which were sometimes parcel of the Priory of
Launceston.
25 The farm of the Manor of Carvidon Prior of the yearly rent of -- 19. l.
15. s. 9. d. 26 The Manor of Clymesland Prior of the yearly rent of -- 7. l.
15. s. 10. d. 27 The Manor of Treworgy of the yearly rent of 8. l. 19. s. 7.
d. 28 The farm of the Manor of Stratton of the yearly rent of -- 7. l. 5. s.
8. d. 29 The farm of the Manor of Bucklawren of the yearly rent of -- 21. l.
14. s. 8. d. 30 The farm of the Manor of Eastway of the yearly rent of -- 7.
l. 5. s. 8. d. 31 The farm of the Manor of Bonialvay of the yearly rent of --
7. l. 15. s. 32 The farm of the Manor of Boyton of the yearly rent of -- 4.
l. 17. s. 2. d. The sum total of these Manors which were sometimes parcel
of the Priory of Trewardreth -- 85. l. 7. s. 10. d. ob. q.
The Manors of the County of Cornwall, which lately were the Lands of the
Marquess of Exceter, and annexed unto the Duchy of Cornwall in liew of the
honor of Wallingford and S. Valeries.
33 The Manor of Crosthole of the rent of -- 28. s. 7. d. 34 The Manor of
Port Pighan of the rent of -- 55. s. ob. q. 35 The fee farm of the Manor of
Portlow of the yearly rent of -- 15. l. 16. s. 10. d. ob. 36 The fee farm of
the Manor of Northill -- 26. s. 3. d. 37 The fee farm of the Manor of
Laudreyn -- 49. s. 10. d. 38 The Manor of Tregameere of the rent -- 4. l. 17.
d. 39 The Manor of Trelugan of the rent of -- 6. l. 17. s. 9. d. 40 The Manor
of Trevarven Courtney -- 19. l. 15. s. 3. d. 41 The Manor of Leighdurrant of
the rent of -- 22. l. 9. s. 7. d. Now aliened away from the said, etc. 42 The
fee farm of the Manor of Tinton -- 63. l. 6. s. 7. d. The Receiver accounted
for -- 13. l. 6. s. 8. d. Summa totalis -- 130. l. 2. s. 5. d. q.
The Boroughs in Cornwall.
1 The Borough of Liskerd of the rent of -- 18. l. 2 The Borough of Grampound
-- 12. l. 11. s. 4. d. 3 The Borough of Helston in Kerier -- 6. l. 13. s. 4. d.
4 The Borough of Bossymy -- 11. l. 16. s. 9. d. q. 5 The Borough of
Lostwythiell of the rent -- 11. l. 19. s. 10. d. ob. 6 The Borough of Camelford
of the rent -- 4. l. 5. s. 4. d. q. 7 The Borough of Saltash of the rent -- 18.
d. 8 The Borough of Launceston of the rent -- 10. l. 8. s. 8. d. 9 The Borough
of Eastlow of the yearly value of 20. s. The sum total of the rent of the
Boroughs in Cornwall. -- 93. l. 15. s. 4. d. ob.
The Hundreds in the County of Cornwall and the profits thereof belonging to
the said Duchy.
1 The Hundred of Kerier the issues were -- 8. l. 5. s. 2 The Hundred of Pewith
the issues -- 3. l. 19. s. 6. d. 3 The Hundred of Powder the issues -- 10. l.
4. s. 5. d. 4 The Hundred of Pyder the isues are -- 9. l. 8. s. ob. 5 The
Hundred of East the issues whereof -- 4. l. 3. s. 4. d. 6 The Hundred of West
the issues were -- 8. l. 5. s. 4. d. 7 The Hundred of Stratton the issues --
58. s. 8. d. ob. 8 The Hundred of Trigshire the issues -- 5. l. 1. s. 4. d. 9
The Hundred of Les^ewith the issues -- 58. s. Summa totalis of the Hundreds
amounts -- 55. l. 3. s. 8. d.
The Profits of the office of the Sheriff which are casual, and uncertain,
and not accounted for upon the last Receivers account.
The profits of the Hauenor, the profits of whose office were this last year
-- 38. l. 5. s. 8. d. The office of the Feodary, the profits whereof were this
last year -- 36. l. 7. s. 5. d. ob. The sum total whereof amounted unto 74.
l. 13. s. 1. d. ob.
The profits of the Stanneries in Cornwall. The issues of the four Stannerie
Courts in the said County of Cornwall, viz.
Of Tywarvaile -- 4. s. 9. d. Of Blackmore -- 4. l. 15. s. 9. d. Of Fowymore --
8. s. Of Pewith in Kerier -- 10. l. 9. s. 4. d. Summa totalis -- 15. l. 17. s.
10. d. The farm of the toll of Tynne in the Lordships of Helston in Kerier,
Tywarvaile, and Tewyngton -- 20. l. 6. s. 8. d. The fines for license given to
the Ti^ners for the coynage of their Tynne after the coynages appointed,
namely, for such Tynne as then was not ready to be coined at the set time of
the coynage, that is, of every hundred weight of Tynne so coined besides the
ancient duty for the coynage, which amounts in the whole to the sum of --
84. l. 15. s. 5. d.
There are also fines imposed for the making and casting up of Tynne
deceiptfully, if any such be found, and there are also forfeitures of Tynne,
being sold before the coynage thereof, wherewith the receiver is charged and
does answer upon his account when any such profit does arise.

The coynage of Tynne in the County of Cornwall at the four Mart Towns, viz.
Truro, Liskerd, Lostwithiell, and Helstow, with the profits thereof did this
last year amount unto -- 2502. l. 10. s. 9. d. Summa totalis for the profit of
the Tynne in Cornwall the last year -- 2623. l. 9. s. 8. d. There was also
paid by the Patentees of the preemption, 2000. l. the last year, which is not
now expressed, because the Patent thereof is repealed and given up. The
Fee-farme of the Islands of Sylley, lying in the Sea by west, the lands end in
Cornwall, is yearly -- 20. l. The whole revenue of the Duke of Cornwall, was
this last year -- 3713. l. 18. s.
Deuon.
The Fee-farme of the City of Exceter, and of the Castle there yearly -- 22.
l. 15 s. * The Manor of Lydford of the yearly rent of Assise -- 9. l. 7. s.
1. d. For the Mayor of Lydford, for the issues of his office yearly -- 1. l.
13. s. 10. d. Of the Manor of the Borough of South Teyng yearly -- 10. l. 19.
s. 7. d. ob. q. The Manor, Borough, and other profits in Breadinch, this last
year amounted to -- 70. l. 9. d. The issues of the Forest of Dartmore -- 46.
l. 19. s. 10. d. ob.
The issues of the Stannery in the County of Deuon as follows.
The issues of the four Stannery Courts, viz. Plympton, T^^^stocke, Aisberton,
and Chagford, amounted this last year unto -- 35. s. 2. d. The White rent,
which is a rent yearly paid by the Tynners of Deuon, viz. 8. d. for every
Tynner, they being fourscore and seauenteene in number, amounts unto -- 44.
s. 8. d. For the Coynage of Deuon, in the several towns of coynage there,
viz. Chagford, Aisberton, Plympton, and Tauestock -- 98. l. 17. s. 11. d. ob.
q. Sum total for coynage of Tynne in the County of Deuon -- 102. l. 17. s.
ob. q. For the issues of the River of Dartmouth, received of the Mayor of
Dartmouth by way of farm yearly 14. l. 14. s. 4. d.
The revenue of the Duchy of Cornwall in foreign shires as follows.
The Manor of, Mere, in the County of Wilts, the yearly rent is -- 89. l.
15. s. 10. d. ob. The Manor of Fordington in the County of Dor^^t yearly --
74. l. 4. s. 1. d. ob. The Manor of Currymallet in the County of Sommerset
yearly -- 15. l. 11. s. 6. d. ob. The Fee-farme of the City of Couentry
yearly -- 50. l. The Manor of Shipton in the County of Berke yearly -- 29.
l. 11. s. 11. d. The Manor of old Shorn in the County of Sussex yearly --
7. l. 5. s. 10. d. The Manor of Kensington in the County of Surrey yearly --
27. l. The Manor of Framsdon and Pethont in the County of Suffolk -- 26. s.
8. d. The issues of the honor of Parkehamsted amounts yearly to -- 59. l.
11. s. 10. d. ob. The Farm of Wood in the Manor of Berkhamsted called
Berkhamsted frith -- 28. l. Of the issues of the Lordship of Kirton in the
County of Lincoln, with the Soke there yearly -- 188. l. 8. s. ob. q. The
sum total of the issues and profits of the Duchy of Cornwall in foreign
shires -- 570. l. 8. s. 6. d. ob. q. The Farm of the Woods of diverse Manors,
parcels of the said Duchy the last year, was -- 6. l. 17. s. 4. d. The
Woodward is to account yearly for wood sales with the said Duchy, which is a
casual profit, and as the same falls out upon wood sales made -- The sum
total of the revenues of the said Duchy of Cornwall in the whole, yearly
was -- 4569. l. 12. s. 2. d. q.
So that it appears by the foresaid accounts and Records, that the said
Duchy of Cornwall, now, or lately did consist of ten several Castles,
which in ancient time both for building, were very stately, and for situation
very strong; but now they are all either utterly ruinated, or declining to
decay and ruin:

Of Parkes, parcel of the said Duchy, there were in ancient time about the
number of nine, and one Chase or Forest, all being of large extent, and
replenished with Dear, but now they are almost all disparked, and the Dear
spoiled and destroyed.

The said Duchy has, or lately had therein, about fifty three Manors, many
of which are of great yearly rent of assize; and of ancient Boroughs and
Towns; there are within the said Duchy to the number of thirteen of
special name and regard.

There belong to the said Duchy, as parcel thereof, nine several Hundreds,
of which premises the said Duchy does consist.

To make an estimate of the yearly value of the said Duchy, concerning all
the revenue thereof, as by the said accounts and records appears, may amount
to above the sum of 4387. l. 3. s. 7. d. ob. but the certain yearly value,
by reason it consists of great casual profits, cannot well be drawn to a
consideration annual.

The charges and reprizes which were paid out of the revenues of the said
Duchy, and wherewith the same this last year was charged, are these which
follow.
The Receiver, whose yearly fee is -- Officers of the Duchy.
41. l. The Constable of the Castle of Lanceston -- 13. l. 6. s. 8. d. The Fee
of the Feodary and Escheator -- 9. l. 2. s. 6. d. The fee of the Controller of
the coynage in the said Counties of Deuon and Cornwall, with the charges of
the Goal of Lostwithiell, is yearly -- ^^. ^. The fee of the Steward of the
said Duchy in the County of Cornwall -- 26. l: 13. s. 4. d. The Steward of
the Borough of Breadinch in the County of Deuon, and of all the Manors of the
said County of Deuon belonging to the said Duchy -- 20. l. The fee of the
Forest of Dartmore is yearly -- 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. The fee of the Steward and
keeper of the Courts of the Manors in the County of Cornwall, which sometimes
were the Marquess of Exceter, and now parcel of the lands annexed unto the
said Duchy -- 46. s. 8. d. The fee of the Bailiffe Itinerant of the said
Duchy of Cornwall -- 3. l. 10. d. The fee of the Woodward of the said
Duchy of Cornwall yearly -- 5. l. The sum total of the fees of the
Officers of the said Duchy of Cornwall -- 138. l. 3. s. 4. d. Money paid
unto the Captain of the Castle of These sums ought n(...)e to be charged
upon the revenue of the Duchy, for that these Castles belong to the Crown.
Saint Mawes -- 118. l. 12. s. 6. d. Money paid to the Captain of the Castle
of Pendynas, both which Castles are for the defense of the Haven of Falmouth --
118. l. 12. s. 6. d. Sum total -- 237. l. 5. s. Paid yearly to the Bishop
of Exceter for the tenth of the coynage of Tynne in Deuon and Cornwall -- 16.
l. 13. s. 4. d. Paid yearly unto the Barons of the Exchequer forth examination
of the accounts belonging to the said Duchy -- 5. l. The sum total of all
the charges and reprizes taken out thereof, amounted unto -- 615. l. 9. s. 6.
d. Which being deducted out of the general sum of the revenues of the said
Duchy, being by estimation, 4569. l. 12. s. 2. d. q. there may remain of
clear revenue, the sum of 3954. l. 2s. 8 d. q. which cannot be cast into a
certain yearly value, by reason of the casual profits, and casual expenses
which may happen yearly.
And thus much of the Duchy of Cornwall.
THE EARLDOM OF CHESTER.
The third revenue, is the Earldom of Chester, whereunto is annexed the
County of Flint, belonging to the Prince, as Earl of Chester.
THe Earldom of Chester is the third revenue before spoken of: this Earldom
bordering upon North Wales for the better defense of that Country, and that the
Inhabitants should not be thence withdrawn in suits of law, was made Palatyne,
and conferred by the Conqueror upon his kinsman, Hugh, surnamed Loupe, or
Lupus, son to the Earl of Awrenches in Normandy, to whom he gave this
Earldom, To have and to hold, to him and his heirs, as the words of the
first donation import, It a libere adgladium sicut ipse Rex tenebat Angliam and
Coronam. This Earldom for the more honor thereof, and for the better
accomplishment of the Palatyne jurisdiction therein* has certain substitute
Baronyes under it, who do acknowledge the Earl Palatyne to be their superior
Lord: as,

1 The Baron of Halton. 2 The Baron of Mountalt. 3 The Baron of Ma^ban^k. 4 The
Baron of Shibrooke. 5 The Baron of Malpas. 6 The Baron of Mascey. 7 The Baron
of Kinderton. 8 The Baron of Stockport.
This Earldom from the said Hugh Lupus, descended in his blood and k^ndred by
sundry descents unto John, surnamed Scot, Earl of Chester, Anguise, Galway,
and Huntingdon; who in the time of King Henry the Third, dying without issue,
the said King Henry the Third, seized the same into his hands, giving the Aunts
and next coheires of the said John, other Lands, by exchange; which thing the
said King was induced to do, as the Record says, netanta haereditas inter
colos diduceretur, not willing that so great a patrimony should be^ parted
amongst disttaffs.

Afterward King Edward the first was by his father, the said King Henry the
third, created Earl of Chester. But the same Earldome being afterward
conferred upon Simon de Monford, by his attainder it came the Crown. After
that Edward the third in the lifetime of his father, and before he took upon
him the Kingdom, had the said Earldom, but afterward he being King, gave
the same to his eldest son Edward, surnamed the Black Prince, by his Charter
bearing date at Pomfret the eighteenth day of March, in the seventh year of
his reign, and enrolled of record in the Exchequer anno 33. of the same King.

By which Charter the said King did grant unto the said Earl of Chester, the
Castles of Chester, Beston, Rothlan, and Flint, and all his lands there. And
also the cantred and lands of Englefield, together with the Knights fees,
aduousons, liberties, franchises, forests, chaces, parks, woods, warrens, and
other the appurtenances thereunto belonging, to have and to hold to him and to
his heirs Kings of England.

And the same King by another Charter bearing date the ninteenth of March, in
the seventh year of his reign, granted unto the said Earl of Chester all his
goods, chattels, stock of cattle then being in or upon the said lands of the
said Earldome formerly granted.

Moreover all the Kings of England succeeding, when they created their sons
and heirs apparent, Princes of Wales, did also create them Earls of Chester,
to have and to hold the same unto him so created, and his heirs Kings of
England, in such manner as the Principality of Wales was given unto him. And
did by their several Charters give unto the said Earl, the said Earldom,
and lands, as namely, the said Castles of Chester, Beston, Rothlan, and Flint,
and the Castle also of Hope, and the Manors of Hope and Hopedall, and of
Foresha^, and the said Cantred and lands of Englefield, and other their lands
in the said Counties of Chester, Flint, and elsewhere belonging unto the said
Earldom. And the Aduouson of the Cathedral Church of Saint Asaph in Wales,
and the auoydance, issues, and profits of the temporalities of the Bishoprics
of Chester, and Saint Asaph aforesaid, together with all aduousons, pentions,
portions, corrodies, offices, prizes, customs, liberties, franchises,
lordships, comots, hundreds, escheats, forfeitures, and hereditaments unto the
said Earldome belonging.

And to the intent that it may the better appear both what the ancient
revenues were of the said Earldom, and also what it is at this present, I
shall according to the order before pursued, set down the ancient reuenew
thereof, as it was in the latter time of King Edward the third, and also how it
now stands in charge to your Majesty.

The ancient reuenews of the Earldome of Chester as it was taken upon the
survey thereof made in the fiftieth of Edward the third.
The County of Chester.
The fee farm of the City of Chester -- 100. l. For other profits out of the
said City -- 4 l The farm of the town of Medwick -- 64. l The Farm of the
Milles upon the River of Dee -- 240 l The Manner of Dracklow in yearly rent --
49. l. 22. d. The farm of the Manor of Dummarsh -- 15. l The Forest of Mara
the issues and profits thereof -- 51. l. 7. s. The rents and profits of Norwich
are -- 66 l The Manor of Shotwick the rents are -- 30. l. 14. s. 1. d. The
Manor of Eordsham in yearly rent -- 56. l. 13. s. 4. d. The profits of the
office of the Sheriff of the said County -- 124. l. 7. s. 4. d. The perquisits
of Courts holden by the Justice of Chester -- 180. l. The profits of the office
of the Escheator -- 100 l The sum total of the reuenew of the said Earldome
of Chester. -- 1082. l. 21. d.
The County of Flint.
The profits of the Manor of Hope and Hopedale -- 63. l. The profits of the
Manor of Ellow and of the Mines of Coals there -- 6. l. The profits of the
office of Constable of Rothlan whereof he was countable -- 8. l. 14. s. The
rent of the town of Flint -- 56. l. The rent of the town of Colshull -- 4. l.
7. s. 10. d. The rent of the town of Carourse -- 22. l. 6. s. 8. d. The rent
of the town of Bagherge -- 14. l. 3. s. 4. d. ob. The town of Veyuoll yearly
-- 13. l. 6. s. 8. d. The town of Rothlan and rent thereof -- 72. l. 9. s. 2.
d. The town of Mosten and rent thereof -- 15. l. 6. s. 8. d. The profits of
the office of Escheator of Englefield -- 56. l. The Bloglot of the County of
Flint, which consists of the profits of the hundred Courts within the said
County -- 72. l. 11. s. 9. d. ob. The perquisits of the Sessions in Flint --
30. l. The profits of the Escheator in the said County -- 8. l. Sum total of
the reuenews of the Earldome rising in the County of Flint -- 442. l. 19. s. 5.
d. The rents of the Borough of Macklefield -- 31. l. The profits of the Hundred
of Macklefield -- 31. l. 14. s. The profits of the Forest of Macklefield --
88. l. The account and profits of the store of Macklefield -- 13. l. 6. s. 8.
d. The herbage and agistments of the Park of Macklefield -- 6. l. Sum total
of the Lordship of Macklefield 170. l. 8. d. The sum total of all the
reuenew of the said Earldome of Chester in the said Counties of Chester and
Flint, and the Lordship* of Macklefield -- 1694. l. 9. s. 8. d.
Out of which total sum there was deducted these sums following.

Pentions in alms of the said Earldom -- 61. l. 6. s. 8. d. To Sir Richard
Stafford the sum of 129. l. paid unto him as due of a rent out of the said
Earldome -- 129. l. The fee of the Justices yearly -- 100. l. Which being
deducted, the whole reuenew of the said Earldome remaining, not allowing any
other fees to officers, amounted unto 1304. l. 15. s. 4. d.
The reuenews of the same Earldome as they now stand in charge to your Majesty
are in this manner.
The County of Chester.
The fee farm of the City of Chester -- 22. l. 2. s. 4 d. ob. The escheated
Lands with the same City -- 7. s. The rents of the Manor of Dracklow and
Rudeheath -- 26. l. 2. s. 6. d. The farm of the town of Medywick -- 21. l. 6.
s. The profits of the office of Mara and Modern -- 34. l. 9. d. The profits of
the Manor and Park of Stotwick -- 23. l. 19. d. The Fulling M(...) upon the
river Dee -- 11. l. The annual profits of the Manor of Fordsham. -- 48. l.
The profits of the Hundred of Macklefield -- 6. l. 20. d. The farm of the
Borough of Macklefield -- 16. l. 13. d. The profits of the Forest of
Macklefield -- 85. l. 12. s. 11. d. ob. q. The profits of the Escheeter of
Chester -- 24. l. 19. s. The profits of the office of the Sheriff of the said
County -- 43. l. 12. s. 3. d. The profits of the Chamberlain of the County of
Chester -- 55. l. 14. s. Samme total of the revenewes in the said Earldome of
Chester in the County of Chester -- 418. l. 14. d. q.
The County of Flint.
The yearly value of Ellow -- 20. l. 8. s. The farm of the town of Flint --
33. l. 19. s. 4 d. The farm of Cayrou^e -- 7. l. 2. s. 4. d. The Castle of
Ruthlan -- 5. l. 12. s. 10. d. The rents and profits of Mosten -- 7. l. The
rents and profits of ^olshill -- 54. s. 16. d. The rents of the town of
Ruthlan -- 44. l. 17. s. 6. d. The Lands in Englefield in yearly value -- 23.
l. 10. d. The profits of Vayuoll -- 5. l. 9. s. The profits of the o(...)ce of
the Esche(...) -- 6. l. 11. s. 9. d. The mines of Cole and Wood within the
Manor of Mosten -- 10. s. The office of the Sheriff in rents and casualties
-- 120. l. The mines and profits of the faires of Northope 3. l. 9. s. 2. d.
The total sum of the said revenue in yearly rent, 244. l. 5. s. 4. d. In
casualties was lastly 37. l. 8. d. The total in the whole -- 281. l. 6. s.
The fees of the Officers of the said Earldom.
The County of Chester.
The fee of the office of the Escheator -- 10. l. 10. s. The fee of the
Justices of Assizes in the Counties of Chester and Flint -- - 100. l. The fee
of the Attorney general. -- 3. l. 6. s. 8. d. The fee of faure Sergeants at
law in the said County 14. l. 6. s. 8. d. The fee of the Chamberlain of
Chester -- 20. l. The fee of the Sheriff of Chester -- 20. l. The fee of the
Constable of the Castle of Chester- 18. l. 5. s. The fee of the Constable of
the Castle of Flint -- 10. l. The fee of the Ranger of the Forest of Mara --
4. l. 11. s. 3. d. The fee of the Porter of the Castle of Flint -- 6. l. 1. s.
8. d. The fee of the Porter of the said Castle, and of the Bailiffe itinerant
there -- 9. l. 2. s 6. d. The fee of the Governor of the Forest of
Macklefield -- 12. l. The fee of two Clerks of the Exchequer at Chester, for
every of them 4. l. 11. s. 3. d. -- 9. l. 2. s. 6. d. The fee of the Surueyor
of the works within the said County Palatine -- 6. l. 20. d. The fee of the
keeper of the Gardens of the Castle of Chester -- 4. l. 11. s. 3. d. The fee of
the Crier of the Exchequer at Chester 3. l. 15. s. The yearly fee of the
Master Carpenter -- 9. l. 12. s. 6. d. The fee of the Controller of the
Counties of Chester and Flint -- 12. l. 3. s. 4. d. The yearly fee of the
Pregnatory -- 3. l. 6. s. 8. d. The fee of the Master Cementer -- 8. l. 12. s.
6. d. The fee of the Chalpaine of the Castle of Chester -- 40. s. The fee paid
unto the Deane and Chapter of Chester -- 19. l. 10. s. To the Master of the
Hospital for his fee -- 4. l. 11. s. The sum of this charge in Chester,
amounts unto -- 310. l. 9. s. 9. d. Which sum of 310. l. 9 s. 9. d. being
deducted out of the former total sum of 699. l. 7 s. 2 d. q. there does
remain 388. l. 17. s. 5 d. q. which is the clear remain of the Earldom of
Chester and Flint -- 388. l. 17. s. 5. d. q.
Hitherto have been expressed the revenues of the Principality of Wales,
Duchy of Cornwall, and Earldom of Chester, and the state of them as well
ancient as modern; which modern estate is much impaired in the revenue of the
land, and so greatly diminished from his former amplitude, that I may fitly say
thereof, Quantum mutatus a^ ^llo; for the reducing whereof to the pristine
dignity, there may be requisite; first, a perfect and special survey of all
the said revenues, after which it may stand with your Majesty's gracious
pleasure, either to supply the same by Act of Parliament, as did King Edward
the Third, or else to direct the same so, as to your Princely wisdom shall be
thought most convenient.

This Treatise I have accomplished with as much perspicuity and breuity, as my
slender ability could afford to give unto it. For as touching perspicuity, this
argument entreated of, is such as it refuses all ornament and good
composition, as a knotty Timber that rejects the plain: And I may say
thereof truly, as in the like case the Poet affirms, Vix est contenta
doceri. Some presidents found of Record concerning the form and disposition of
the said revenues, with sundry other particularities, I have purposely omitted,
fearing lest this Treatise be grown already too tedious, and yet the same are
carefully reserved* nevertheless until time do minister occasion to make
further use of them: Which my travel, with all duty and loyalty, I lay down
at your Majesty's feet, craving pardon for my presumption and manifold
imperfections appearing therein; for omnia habere in memoria, and in nullo
errare diuinum est, potius quam humanum, as writes Bracton, an ancient Judge
of this Realm, who lived three hundred years ago.

The Lord bless your Majesty with all his blessings both spiritual and
temporal, and who has given you this particular blessing, that your Majesty
may truly say with King David; Thou have delivered me from the contentions of
my people, Thou have preserved me to be the head over nations, the people
which I knew not do serve me. And the Lord further grant that you and your
Royal issue may govern us and our posterity in peace and happiness unto the
worlds end.

FINIS.

