A COMPENDIORS DITTIE.
NO wight in this world that welthe can attain,
Onelesse he believe, that all is but vain,
And look how it comes, so leave it to go,
As tides use their times to ebb and to floe.
This mucke on the molde, that men so desire,
Does work them much woe, and moves them to ire.
With grefe it is got, with care it is kept,
With sorrow soon lost that long has been rept.
And woe worth that man, that first dolue the molde,
To find out the mine of silver and gold.
For when it lay hyd, and to us unknown,
Of strife and debate the sede was not sown.
Than lived men well, and held them content,
With meat, drink, and clothe, without any reu^.
Their houses but poor to shroude them selves in:
For castelles and towers were than to begin.
No town had his wall, they feared 'to war,
Nor cunemies host to seek them afar.
So led they their lives in quiet and rest,
Till hourde began hate from east unto wefte.
And gold for to grow a lord of great price,
Which changed the world from virtue to vice,
And turned all thing so far from his kind,
That how it should be, is worn out of mind.
For richesse bears now the fame and the brute,
And only the cause of all our pursuit,
Which makes among us much mischief to reign,
And shall till we seek the right way again,
When marriage was made for virtue and love,
Than was no divorce goddis knotte to remove.
When judges would suffer no brybes in their sight,
Their judgment was than according to right.
When prelates had not possessions nor rent,
They preached the truth, and truly they went.
When men did not flatter for favor nor mede,
Than kings herd the troth, and how the world yede.
And men unto honor thorough virtue did tyse,
But all this is now turned contrary wise.
For money makes all, and rules as a god,
Wiche ought not to be, for Christ it forbod,
And bad, that we should take nothing in hand,
But for the lords love and welthe of the land.
And wylles us full often, that we should refrain
From wrastyng his will to make our own gain.
For covetous folk of every astate,
As hardly shall enter within heaven gate
^
^
^
As though perfect blis^^ should that way arise.
But if they would suffer to synke in their breast,
What trouble of mind, what unquiet rest,
What mischief, what hate this money does bring,
They would not so toil for so vile a thing,
For they that have much, are ever in care,
Which way to wyune, and how for to spare.
Their slepes be unsound for fear of the thief,
The loss of a litell does work them much grief.
In sekyng their lack they want that the have,
And subject to that which should be their slave.
They never do know, whiles richesse does reign,
A friend of effect from him that does feign.
For flatterers seek where fortune does dwell,
And when that she lowreth, they bid them farewell.
The poor does them curse as often as they want.
In having so much to make it so scant.
Their children sometimes do wisshe them in grave,
That they might possess that richesse they have.
And that which they wyn with travail and strife,
Oftentimes (as we see) does cost them their life.
Lo these be the fruits that richesse brings forth,
With many other mo, which be no more worth.
For moneie is cause of murder and theft,
Of battle and bloodshed, which would god were left,
Of rauine, of wrong, of false wytuesse bearyng,
Of treason conspired, and eke of forswearyng.
And for to be short and knyt up the knot,
Fe^^ (...) ^^eues at all that mo^e^e makes not.
(...) it be ill, when it is abused,
(...) used.
As priests should not take promocions in hand,
To live at their ease lylie lords of the land,
But only to feed goddis flock with the truth,
To preach and to teach without any slouthe.
Nor folks should not need great richesse to wynue,
But godly to live, and for to flee sin.
His will for to work that is their souls health,
And than may they think, they live in much welthe.
For in this vayue world that we be now in,
Is nothing but misery, mischief, and syn,
Temptaciou, untruth, contencion, and strife:
Than let us not set by so vile a life,
But lift up our eyes, and look thorough our faith,
Beholding his mercies, that many times faith,
The just men shall live by their good belefe,
And shall have a place where can be no grief,
But gladness and myrthe that none can amend,
Unspeakable joys, which never shall end,
With pleasures that pass all that we have sought,
Fe^^^ters such as can not be thought
^^^^he place the^ shall have that (...)
^

