A PLAIN AND FAMILIAR EXPOSITION OF THE Eleventh and Twelfth Chapters of the
Proverbs of Solomon.

PROVERBS 1. 5. A wise man shall hear and increase in learning, and a man of
understanding shall atteine unto wise counsels.

printer's device of Felix Kingston, featuring two clasped hands emerging from
clouds, holding a caduceus and two cornucopias (McKerrow 274) BY WISDOM PEACE
BY PEACE PLENTY


AT LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Henry Sharp. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL WILLIAM FENYS Esquire, and Sir WILLIAM COPE Knight,
grace, mercy and peace.
THE due regard which we have of you both, for the special gifts wherewith it
has pleased God to grace you; has moved us to present unto you jointly this
testimony of our unfeigned love. We do the rather publish this Treatise under
your names, because we would encourage you, to run forward constantly in that
Christian race which you have already so happily begun, and to answer that
good expectation which is generally and justly conceived of you. We have long
waited and much desired to be employed again as formerly (through Gods mercy)
we have been. But being hitherto disappointed of that hope, and esteeming an
unprofitable life, to be a kind of uncomfortable death; we thought it our
bounden duty to offer our service to the Church, and furtherance to your
faith, in the best manner we can, since we may not use such means as we
would. As you have been attentive hearers whiles we preached, so (we doubt not)
but you will be diligent readers of that which is here written. We shall
esteem it a sufficient gain for our travail, if either your selves, or any
other, may reap fruit by our labors. The God of all mercy increase his
graces in us all, and multiply his blessings upon us, that our life and death
may bring glory to him, and everlasting peace to our own souls.

Your Worships in all Christian duties to be commanded, John Dod, Robert
Cleauer.

TO THE GODLY READER.
CHristian Reader, by means of our promise, we are grown into thy debt, which
if God add ability to our willingness, thou shall find us as ready to
discharge. And for thy better assurance of our faithful meaning herein, we
have communicated unto thee our labors on these two Chapters, in part of
payment, until we can proceed to the rest. Only this we must entreat of
thee, that thou will deal with us, as thou would with just and honest
debtors which duly pay thee money. If our coin be current, carrying truth
and verity, the stamp of Gods holy spirit, reject it not though it be
duskish, without glittering show, or curious workmanship. But if ought by
mistaking has escaped us that wants weight, or proves not good metal,
return it lovingly and in brotherly manner unto us, and we will do our best
endeavor to yield thee better matter for it. The eight first chapters a godly
learned man has travailed in, whose pains we expected before this time to
have inioyed with thee, and that caused us to go forwards, omitting the
beginning, until we come to the end. The method, we confess, would be very
preposterous and defective, were it not that so good a supply would reduce it
into due order. And so we commit the whole work both of our writing, and thy
reading, to the direction and blessing of Gods holy spirit, whom we pray to
give thee understanding to know his will, with a faithful heart to believe and
obey the same, through Jesus Christ, Amen. Drayton this seventh of November.
1606.

Thine in all Christian duties, John Dod, Robert Cleauer.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER OF THE PROVERBS.
CHAPTER. XI.
Verse 1. False balances are an abomination to the Lord: but a perfect weight
pleases him.
Under false balances are comprehended all unjust weights, lines, and measures.
And therewithal is condemned whatsoever kind of guile, and deceit may be
found either in the buyer, or seller. As when that which is sold is defective
either in quantity, or quality, not being fit for the use that it is bought
for, or not correspondent to the price that is paid for it, or not answerable
to the testimony that is given of it. And with these does Amos charge the
wicked wealthy men of his age: They make the Epha, or measure small, and the
shekell, or price great, Amos 8. 5.
and falsify the weights of deceit. That they may buie the poor for silver,
and the needy for shoes, and sell the refuse of their wheat. So on the other
side in the buyer, when he shall fail of all meet proportion between the
price that he pays, and the commodity that he buieth, giving far less
than the worth and value of it. And where it is said, They are abomination to
the Lord, it is not meant that his quarrel is against the insensible creatures,
but he is displeased with the iniquity of the persons, which make, use, keep,
or allow them. Whereby the other clause may be better understood, that the
Lord is pleased with such as do uprightly use them, and with love of equity
exercise it in their traffic and covenants.

Diverse weights, and diverse measures, both these are even an abomination to the
Lord. Diverse weights are abomination to the Lord, and false balances are not
good: Cap. 20. 10. 23.

Thou shall not have Deuteronomy. 25. 15. 16.
in thy bag two manner of weights, a great and a small, neither shall thou
have in thine house diverse measures, a great, and a small; but thou shall have
a just weight: a perfect, and a just measure shall thou have, etc. For all that
do such things, and all that do vnrighteouslie, are abomination to the Lord
thy God. Which is not so to be understood, as though it were absolutely
unlawful to have diverse sorts of weights or measures, as ounces and pounds, as
yards and else, as peckes and bushels, etc. Neither yet to have many of the
same sort: for many may be needful, according as men have manifold occasions
to use them: but to have them unequal each to other, which ought to be of the
same size, as some of larger content to buy with, and others of lesser
quantity to sell with, this is that which is here prohibited.

He would have commerce and traffic to proceed from love, to be exercised in
love, and more to increase love: and this course is altogether contrary to
love, and a means to engender unkindness and hatred. He requires that justice
and equity should moderate these affaites, and that no man should oppress or
1. These. 4. 6.
defraude his brother in any matter: but here is filthy lucre most respected
and followed, and our brethren wronged and beguiled.

He is a Hos. 12. 7. 8.
Merchant; the balances of deceit are in his hand: he loves to oppress. And
Ephraim said, notwithstanding I am rich: I have found me out riches in all my
labors: they shall find no iniquity in me, that were wickedness.

Bring not abomination into thine house, lest thou be Deuteronomy. 7. 26.
accursed like it, but utterly abhor it, and count it most abominable, for it
is accursed. As the gold, and silver, and other costly matter, whereof the
idols were made, and wherewith they were adorned, was execrable in respect of
impiety; so is this trade of getting, and riches so gotten in regard of
iniquity. And therefore both are very offensive to the Lord: both are
pestilent to men's families: both are perilous to their state: both are
pernicious to their souls. For a cursed possession may make the person
accursed, and bring the whole house to desolation. Which should persuade men
not only to make stay of getting goods unjustly, but to make no stay of
ridding their hands justly thereof. For as they sin grieuouslie which
indirectly receive that which is none of their own; so do they also that
retain it, and restore it not to the right owner. And therefore in Micah it is
set as a note of sinners, and such as are obstinately sinful, and which
conceive of God as a patron of their sinfulness, that upon admonition given
unto them from the Lord, would not reform their falsehood. Are yet the
treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and Micah. 6. 10.
the scant measure that is abominable? Shall I justify the wicked balances,
and the deceitful weights?





When the Lord himself is asked what manner of men should dwell in his
tabernacle, and rest in his holy mountain, that is, which should have a good
estate here, and an habitation for evermore in heaven, he describes them by
their innocent, and harmless behavior toward their brethren. He that
walks uprightly, and Psalm. 15. 2.
works righteouslie, and speaks the truth in his heart. He, certenlie,
regards that work which he so largely rewards with such wages: and he is
well pleased with that person in this life, whom he will receive to life
everlasting: and equal it is with him, that they which converse with earthly
people in righteousness, should also continue with heavenly saints in glory.







Ob. But many others gain more money, and thrive faster, and grow greater
then they do. Sol. But they gain more comfort, and thrive better, and grow
happier then all others do. For howsoever it fares with their state for
quantity of earthly possessions, it cannot but go well with their souls, for
plenty of heavenly graces, and though paraduenture they have presently but
little substance in their houses, yet there remains from them an ample
treasure in the heavens: and that which is best for the^, is most firmly
assured to them, which is Gods everlasting love and favor. Albeit therefore thy
vocation be mean and of no great account, and thy stock slender and of no
great value, thy return seldom, and of no great commodity; yet if thou be
faithful in a mean trade, with a small stock, and a slow return, all shall
be acceptable, all shall be profitable, all shall be comfortable. So often as
thou have man's custom to buy or sell with thee, thou have Gods company to
reward and bless thee; and whenever thou dealest well with any, he takes
notice of it, to deal better with thy self.

Verse 2. When pride comes, then comes contempt: but with the lowly is
wisdom.
When pride commeth] that is, when it grows to maturitie, having power to
puff up men's hearts, and showing it self in words, or works, in countenance,
apparel, or gestures, then comes contempt, that is, shame then approaches
and is near at hand, marching in the next rank after this lofty heart, and
insolent behaiuour. As is to be seen in many who having bin first lifted up in
their own hautie minds, were afterward cast down by Gods righteous
judgments, either into phrensies, or gross sins, or ruin of state, or
obloquie for their former hidden faults now published at last to their great
disgrace. The other part of the antithesis, containing the honor that does
accompany humility, is argued by consequent, in this manner: When pride
comes, then comes folly, which ever brings shame: but when humility
comes, then comes wisdom, which is never without glory.

Solomon in this book: Pride goes before destruction, and an high mind
before the fall, Prou. 16. 18. and 18. 12. And it is a select poruerbe often
used by Christ in the new Testament; Whosoever exalts himself shall be
brought low, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted. Luke 14, 11.

We see in buildings that when walls wax thicker by hallownes and swelling,
they will shortly come lower by downfall and ruin; and so stands the case
with all proud persons, their great heart does threaten some great mischief to
be nigh unto them. Which may be exemplified by diverse presidents in the
scriptures, which are proposed as real examples, for every man to take warning
by. When Nebuchadnezzar was bragging of his Babell which he had built for his
glory, he was banished from all habitation, not having so much as a cottage,
and like a beast made to live among the the beasts in the fields, with
ignominy. When Haman thought to ride on horseback and to be waited on like a
King, he was driven to lackie on foot, and to wait attendance like a page:
and purposing to hang Mordecay on high to honor himself, he prepared an high
gallows to be hanged on himself. When Herod thought himself good enough to
take upon him the state and honor of a god, the Lord declared him to be bad
enough to be devoured of contemptible vermin.

he resists them, and they are all an abomination unto him: not only some
arrogant Iam. 4. 6. Prou. 16. 5.
fellows that have proud hearts and beggars purses, but even such also as sit
upon princely thrones, and bear kingly Scepters, and wear imperial Diadems.
And if he see them to be abomination, and does therefore abhor them, they
shall appear abominable, and men will despise them.

like drunkards Hab. 2. 5.
which are overcome with wine. They are sinful fools, more destitute of grace
then of wit. For proud behavior is the foame or froath that proceeds from
much wickedness, and a proud heart is a prison wherein they are withheld from
coming to repentance. And so their own folly, and Gods wisdom; their own
sinful ways, and Gods righteous judgments; their own impenitencie, and Gods
severity will bring them to the possession of their inheritance, and that is
shame and dishonor, how highly soever they have been exalted. Prou. 3. 35.



thereby to promotion and credit, that think it the only way to preferment,
if they can set forth themselves with some ostentation, and lift up their
eyebrows above their brethren. And this is grown almost to an universal
contagion, wherewith the greatest number of states and ages, of sexes, and
persons in all places, are dangerously infected. Some thereby seeking to be
admired, others to be advanced, many to be feared, and al to be better
satisfied in the accomplishment of their desires. But how many loose by
seeking, and sink, by aspiring, and run into reproach by hunting after vain
estimation? whiles they leave their standing, and would rise above the top of
their places, they fail of their footing, and fall down to the bottom.

them find what they want: as they see their graces and virtues, so let them
search into their corruptions, and vices: as they have a good conscience in the
performance of many good duties, so let them consider the innumerable sins
that they have committed, the multitude of services which they have neglected,
the hypocrisy, infidelity, vnchearefulnesse, and other imperfections that have
stained their best words and actions: and these will help to hold down their
hearts in humility, and take away all matter of glorying. For the best in the
world shall have cause to blush and hang down their heads, if they make
comparison between that they are, and that which they ought to be. Though thy
knowledge be great, yet how much art thou ignorant of that thou might have
known, if thou had been as diligent to seek it, as God was to offer it unto
thee? Though thou have faith, and love and repentance, and by virtue thereof
do show forth the fruits of the spirit in holy obedience, yet how small
time have thou spent, how softly have thou travailed, and how little ground
have thou gotten in this way that leads to eternal life? But in the course
of sinfulnes did thou not begin the race soon, and run swiftly, and come
back again slowly? Thirdly, it will much diminish a selfe-liking, and too
great opinion of our own excellency, if we turn our eyes without envy to
the excellent graces of knowledge and discretion of zeal, and moderation, and
of all other amiable gifts of our brethren, wherein they go beyond us. And
this is the receipt which the holy ghost prescribes to the Philippians
against this very malady: Let nothing, says he, be done in contention, or
vain glory, but in meekenes of Phil. 2. 3. 4.
mind, let every one esteem others better then himself. Look not every man
on his own things, but every man also on the things of other men. Lastly,
consider the hand which ministers every good thing that we enjoy, whether it
be gift of nature, or of grace, or of outward possession; whether it concern
the body, or the mind, the state, or the dignity. All is of God, all is from
God, and all is for God, and therefore let all the glory be given to God. What
have thou, says S. Paul, that thou have not received? If thou have received
it, why gloriest thou as though thou had not received it? 1. Cor. 4. 7. It
becomes not a beggar that lives of the alms basket to brag of his meat,
nor insolentlie to compare with him, or his, that relieueth him in his
miserable necessity.

But with the lowlie] Every humble man is also endued with wisdom. Lowly
and wise be so far conuertible as that the one can never be affirmed of any,
without the other: the habit of humility does infer the possession of
wisdom, and the want of either does euict the privation of both.



Them that be meek will he guide in judgment, and teach the humble his way.
He gives grace and guidance with his precepts, for mind, and heart, for
knowledge, and affection, for will, and conscionable practice.

Psalm. 37. 11.
as they continue in this world they are rightful possessours of the earth; as
soon as they depart to an other world, they shall be glorious inhabitants of
heaven. In which respects the spirit of God says, that it is better to be of
an humble mind with the lowly, then to divide the spoils with the proud,
Prou. 16. 19. The meanest and most afflicted underling that is humble and
meek, is in far better case then the might and most puissant conqueror
that is proud and haughty.





Verse 3. The uprightness of the just shall guide them: but the frowardness
of the transgressors shall destroy them.
BY uprightness is not meant an extrauagant well meaning without further rule
or warrant, as though good intents were competent guides of our ways to
salvation: but the sincerity of an heart faithfully, though not perfectly
willing to believe and obey that which it knows, and resolutelie, though not
absolutely, desirous to know that which God shall reueile unto it. Now this is
said to guide righteous men, that is, shall procure good direction from the
Lord, both for his service, and their own happiness, and make them tractable to
follow the same. Contrary to this is the condition of the wicked, who are not
led with uprightness, but carried with perverseness, and therefore misled by
the same to their undoing. For thus stands the opposition: the uprightness
of the just shall guide them in the way, and so preserve them: but the
frowardnes of the wicked will keep them from the way, and so destroy them.

The vprightnesse] Every one that is truly godly has a faithful guide and
counselor in his own breast. A sound heart is the stern of the soul, and a
good conscience is the pilot to govern it, which will lead him through the
whole course of his life, till he come to the haven of safety and blessedness.
So is the uprightness of Job commended, that it directed him to the fear of
God, and caused him to eschew evil. So is the foundnes of Zachary and
Elizabeth notified, that by virtue thereof they walked in all the commandments
and ordinances of the Lord without reproof. And so is the sincerity of all
blessed persons extolled and praised by the same effects in the hundred and
ninteenth Psalm, that they keep the commandments of God, and work no
iniquity. Psalm. 119 2. 3.




when thou walk; it shall watch for thee when thou sleep, and when thou
wakest it shall talk with thee. Prou. 6. 22.
Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, says an other scripture, saying,
this is the way, walk in that, when thou turnest to the right hand or to the
left. Isai. 30. 21.


Thirdly, the spirit of God is always in them that are upright and true
hearted, it moves them to ask, to hear, to pray, to read, and to meditate:
it makes the word effectual to speak to their souls, also flexible to yield
to the word, it works sound judgment in the mind, holy affections in the
heart, alacrity and readiness in the will, faith in the whole soul, and
sincere sanctity in the conversation. Hereof the Apostle speaks to the
Romans: As many as are lead by the spirit of God are the sons of God. And
it is as true on the other side, as many as are the sons of God, are lead by
the spirit of God: for this is ever reciprocal, and conuertible.

Salomons time, and in all former ages was more faithful, and forcible to
preserve them whom it took charge of (as it does all in whom it inhabiteth)
from such inordinate and vicious behavior. To which may be added also another
brood of a wandering and vagrant mind, altogether unsettled in all points of
religion. They hear of multiplicitie of opinions, and the differences of men's
judgments one from another: some are Papists, some are Protestants, some are
Brownists, so that they know not what to believe, nor whom to trust, and
therefore judge it their readiest way to credit none of them all, and not
cleave to any side. But the righteous are not tossed up and down with such
waves of uncertainty and doubtfulnes: sincerity leaves not men to shift for
themselves, that for want of due information in the ways of God, they should
walk in flat Atheism: The Lord promises better things to his people that
faithfully serve him. What man is he that fears the Lord? him will he teach
the way that he shall choose, Psalm 25. 12. Are ye left then without direction?
then ye are found without righteousness. Does not God teach you his way? then
ye are utterly void of his fear.



John does also testify, for the confirmation of such as were in the same
case: These things, says he, have I written unto you concerning them that
deceive you. But the anointing which you received of him dwells in you: and
ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teaches you of
all things, and it is true, and is no lying, and as it taught you, it shall
abide in him.

But the frowardnesse] Wicked sinners are greatest workers of their own woe.
They shall be taken in their own wickedness, says the sixth verse: they shall
fall in their own wickedness, says the fifth: their frowardnes shall destroy
them, says this. Whereby it appears that their misery comes not from
others, as an accidental occasion, but grows from themselves as the proper
cause: neither is it an ordinary evil that is recurable, but a desperate
ruin that is remediless: neither yet is it the subversion of their state, or
killing of their body, which is but temporary, but the perdition both of
body and soul which is everlasting. To this agrees that which is spoken to
the same purpose, in the fifth chapter: His own iniquity shall take the wicked
himself, and he Pro. 5. 22. 23.
shall be holden with the cords of his own sin. He shall die for fault of
instruction, and for going astray through his own folly.

Here is a description of every obstinate and contemptuous sinner, their
wickedness does work destruction by degrees. It first apprehends them as an
officer: it keeps them afterward in stocks, and bolts, as a Iayler. And
lastly, it puts them to death, as an executioner.

through the hardness of their hearts heap to themselves wrath against the day
of vengeance, Romans 2. 4. 5.

they grieve and vex the spirit of God, which offers grace unto them, and
therefore he turns to be their enemy. They Isai. 63. 10.
with their peruersenes do resist him, and he with his power will cast down
them. And so the Prophet testifies in the Psalm: With the pure thou will show
thy self pure, but with the froward thou set thy self to wrestle.

to make them eat the fruit of their own ways, and to fill them with their
own devices; that is, to bring them to a fearful destruction. Prou. 1. 30.
31.

will swear, they say, and stare too, to anger such as admonish them of their
unlawful oaths. Silly creatures and miserable wretches, will they cut their
own throats to grieve others with the sight of their blood? will they strangle
themselves that others might weep for their cursed end? Their boisterous
stubbernesse may bring a short sorrow to others that hate their sins, and love
their souls, but a perpetual shame to themselves, which join with their
sins against their souls.

Verse 4. Riches avail not in the day of wrath: but righteousness delivers
from death.
THese words seem to contain an anticipation, or preventing of an objection,
which might be moved against the latter point of the former verse. What speak
you of destruction to come upon wicked men? I trust you will not extend it to
all: for many of them are substantial wealthy men, of great state, and
ability. Who can destroy them? What shall their power, and riches do the
while? To this it is here answered, that riches avail not in the day of wrath:
their wealth can neither withstand the strokes of God, nor lessen them, nor
make them any whit the more able to bear them, when his anger does execute
judgments, and when his judgments declare his anger. But righteousness is
that which delivers from death, and all other miseries, that the sting
thereof shall never make any man miserable. See the more full handling and
prosecution of these words, in the second verse of the tenth chapter.

Verse. 5. The righteousness of the upright shall direct his way, or make his
way straight, or even: but the wicked shall fall in his own wickedness.
HEre he adds to that which he had begun in the third verse, and shows that
sincetitie, and righteousness do not only lead men to a good way, and tell them
what is their duty, and fit to be performed, but makes the way passable for
them, and them constant and prosperous in it. To the which again is opposed
the way of the wicked, even their own sinful course of life, being crooked
and cragged, and rough, and rugged, and full of manifold perils wherein at the
last they fall and perish.

The ways of the Lord are righteous, and the just shall walk in them: but the
wicked Hos. 14. 10.
shall fall therein.





Luke testifies: Every vallie shall be filled, and every mountain and hill
shall be brought low, and crooked things shall be made straight, and the rough
ways shall be made smooth. Luke 3. 5.

He also measures out a meet state for them, and makes such a mixture or
composition of prosperity and adversity, of blessings and crosses, of
comforts and sorrows, as is most wholesome for their souls, and directs all
the occurrents that befall them to the furtherance of their salvation. And
hereof Isaiah speaks, saying: The way of the righteous is euennes, or
equities, thou will weigh out a just path for the righteous. He will balance
out every thing that concerns them in gold weights, that there shall not be
the least defect, or excess that might turn to their hurt.

Noah being a righteous man could live righteouslie in an age given over wholly
to unrighteousness. The services of God would not be so tedious unto you, as
that by no means you should be brought to exercise them. For to upright men
they are not only possible, but pleasant, their soul longs for them, they
hunger and thirst after them, no thing is so much desired of them.
Voluptuousnes, impiety, pride, and other lusts would not be so sweet unto
you, or so mighty in you, that you should neither be willing to leave them,
nor able to forsake them. For where the spirit of God is, there is liberty.
All good men abhorte these sins, they pray against them, they strive against
them, they prevail against them. Grace overcomes the flesh, and makes them
do that which the word requires, and shun that which the word forbids, and
be that which the word prescribes. Though they perform not good things
perfectly, yet they practice them faithfully: though they cast not off all
evil fully, yet with hatred they resist it truly: though they have so many
infirmities as make them often to sin, yet they have so much holiness, as
makes them always saints.

Verse 6. The righteousness of the upright delivers them: but the
transgressors shall be taken in their own wickedness.
THis verse, as it may appear, is annexed to the former for confirmation of
the point therein contained, that righteousness does direct the way of upright
men, both to holy conversation, and happy state. Against the which a doubt may
rise from the show of the contrary, because that good men are sometimes
plunged in great calamities, and sometimes in great transgressions: and
therefore their way seems as indirect, as if they were wicked, and their
righteousness to do them as little good as if they had none at all. Now this
scruple he remoueth by showing what benefit it brings, that then especially
they have the use of it, when they fall into such distresses. For then the
fruit thereof is most for their comfort when it shall deliver them out of
dangers, out of troubles, out of fears, out of temptations, out of sins, and
from destruction. Yet not by strength of it own, but by the power of God: not
according to their worthiness in way of desert, but according to his goodness in
way of reward: not extended to all men that do good works, but restrained to
upright men whose works are good. And for the clearer illustration of their
blessed estate he brings in for contrary, the miserable condition of the
wicked, opposing transgressors to upright persons: their mischief to the
others justice: their peril to the others protection: the one part enclosed in
the net of troubles is yet assured of safe escape by means of their graces,
the other abroad at the bait of prosperity shall certainly fall into snares
by means of their wickedness.

The doctrine which the former clause might minister, shall be as conveniently
spoken of in the eight verse: and that which is to be raised out of the latter,
has been already handled in the third.

Verse 7. When a wicked man dies his expectation perishes, and the hope of
his power shall perish.
THe meaning is, that every sinful man's affection of hoping, and happiness
hoped for, and strongest means to attain to his hope, shall end with his
life, and die at his death, and vanish away at the time of his destruction. The
substance of the point has been handled in the eight and twentieth verse of the
former chapter, and therefore in this place we will only note the circumstance
of the time.



He never had good by any hope, which has not the fruition of his hope at his
death. Then either it sets a man in possession of his blessedness, or else
casts him off into misery, woe, and perdition for ever. Though a man should
never obtain his desire in any earthly thing during his life, yet if he enjoy
salvation after this life, he has failed of nothing. Though a man should miss
of nothing that his heart could wish for, whiles breath is in his body, yet if
he be damned when the soul goes out of his body, he has never gained any
thing. And this is the scope of Job his speech, when he says, What hope has
the hypocrite though he has Job 27. 8.
heaped up riches, when God takes away his soul? Even now in his deepest
adversity, he would not change state with the most plausible wicked, in their
highest prosperity. For he is sure that the end of his life will finish his
sorrow, and begin his felicity, and therefore is willing to resign up his
spirit into the hands of God: but their hope does depart with their breath, and
their damnation does come with their death, and therefore God must wrest away
their souls from them.

himself, and that which he speaks they must hear, and that which they
hear, they must see, and that which they hear and see, they must also suffer:
for execution will accompany the sentence. Here they would not believe his
testimony, that their case was so bad as his word declared: there they shall
feel it to be worse then they could conceive of. Here when he denounced
plagues against their sins, they proclaimed peace to their souls; there they
shall find the plagues according to their sins, and fail of the peace which
they promised to themselves. Here he spoke unto them in goodness, that upon
their repentance they might obtain everlasting mercy: there he will Psalm.
2. 5.
speak unto them in anger, and for want of repentance will punish them
eternally with justice.

Matthew. 25.
foolish Virgins had found their want of oil before the bridegroom was
coming, they might in time have provided themselves, and be ready to enter
with him to the wedding, before the door was shut. If they which presumed so
much of Christ his acquaintance (because they had eaten and drunk in his
company, and Luke 13. 26, 27.
heard him preach amongst them) had known before hand what small account he
would have made of them, they might have used better means whiles time served,
to grow into his favor.

The wicked, says the Scripture, shall be cast away for his lewdnes: but the
righteous has hope at his death, Prou. 14. 32. For the present it comes to
pass commonly, that bad men are full, and good men are hungry, the one sort
do laugh, and the other wail and weep, as our Savior testifies, Luke 6.
25. and therefore hereafter their conditions shall be changed on both sides:
the pleasure of the one shall be turned into pain, and the sorrows of the
other into endless comforts. As it is said by the Apostle concerning the
godly, that if in this life only they had hope, they were of all most
miserable; so it may be spoken touching the godless, that if in the life to
come also they had hope, they were of all men most happy.



I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities,
nor powers, nor things Romans 8. 38.
present, nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. This will make
our life truly prosperous, and profitable, and our death blessed and
comfortable, and our state in the world to come immortal, and glorious.

are their purposes, and what becomes of their power? Though they were as
mighty as Leuiathan, and as mischievous as dragons, yet when they be dead, as
die they must, what cause has any man to be afraid of them? Achab minded great
matters against Micaiah, at his return in peace from Ramoth Gilead; 1. King.
22.
but God minded to preserve Micaiah by defeating Achab of a peaceable return
from thence. Let Hezechiah, and all his people, says Zanecherib, trust to it,
that I will speed them at my next coming to Jerusalem: but God had appointed
that he should come no more that way, but be drawn by the snowte like a fish,
Isai. 36. 12. and 37. 29.
or led with a bridle like a beast to the shambles, and slaughter at Nineue.
The Egyptians were resolved to pursue Israel until they ouertooke them, and to
put them to the sword when they caught them, and to take the spoil of their
goods, when they had slain them: but the waters were first to pursue
themselves, and death to overtake them, and the sea to have the spoil of their
bodies, and hell to make a pray of their souls.

Verse 8. The just escapes out of trouble, and the wicked shall come in his
steed.
GOds favor and goodness does not free his servants from afflictions, but
delivers them out of afflictions. Whereinto he casts the wicked, though
they be not always of the same kind with those which the godly suffer, but
worse and more durable, and such as are mixed with Gods wrath, and poisoned
with the sting of their own evil conscience.



Before ever God bring his into troubles, he appoints how they shall be
preserved in them, and pass thorough them, and get out of them. He does as
well foresee their arrival as their launching forth, and the end of the
boisterous storms which they must endure, as well as the beginning and entrance
thereof. Many, Psalm. 34. 19.
or great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
all. Neither number, nor grieuousnesse, nor continuance of crosses, nor power
of persecutors, nor any other impediment can hinder his hand from helping his
distressed servants.

Call upon me, says he, in the day of trouble; so will I deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50. 15.





John: Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, for they rest from Revel.
14. 13.
their labors, that is, from all kinds of sorrows and sufferings.

Peter's testimony, 1. Pet. 3. 13, 14
that no man can hurt them, if they follow that which is good, neither be they
affected with his consolation, that blessed are they, if they suffer for
righteousness sake.

Heb. 12. 8.
bastard. If it were not an usual thing for good men to be in afflictions,
the scriptures would not so usually speak of their coming out of afflictions.
Let no man therefore say in prosperity, I shall never be moved: so let no
godly man say in adversity, I Psalm. 30. 6.
shall never be restored. The Lord takes as little pleasure to be evermore
afflicting his people, as a most tenderhearted parent does to be always
beating his children. And as an indulgent father cannot endure to see violence
offered to the shedding of his sons blood in his presence: so neither will our
God permit the wicked to spoil and oppress the godly continually in his sight.

Behold, says he, my servants shall eat, and ye shall be hungry: behold,
Isa. 65. 13. 14.
my servants shall drink, and ye shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall
rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed: behold my servants shall sing for joy of
heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of
mind. It seems to them an incredible paradoxe, and a news by far more
admirable, then acceptable, that there should be such a transmutation of
conditions on both sides, to contraries; but he does know that it will be so,
and can effect that it shall be so, and has decreed that it must be so, and
therefore relates the particulars with such certainty, as if forthwith the
execution thereof should be presented to their senses.

Peter teaches, and from thence be derived to the wicked to 1. Pet. 4. 17.
continue upon them for ever. The medicinable potion, at the brimme of the cup,
he will have his own children to drink for their health and preservation, but
the dregs and poison at the bottom, his enemies must swallow up for their
ruin and destruction.



Haman cast about with all his wits, how he might bring Mordecai to the
gallows, and the Lord appointed in his wisdom that the gallows should catch
up Haman. And so stood the case with Daniels enemies, they were driven with
their own flesh and family to feed the hons which they had appointed to eat
up Daniel. The Edomites were glad to see the Jews drink so bitter a draught
of calamity, as the Babylonians by Gods righteous judgment had mingled for
them; and therefore the Lord would make the Edomites to pledge them in the same
cup, and was more favorable to the Jews for their rejoicing at them. For so
he speaks to them both in the Lamentations: Rejoice, and be glad O daughter
Edome that dwell in the land of Vz, the cup also shall pass through unto
thee: thou shall be drunken and vomit. Thy punishment is accomplished, O
daughter Zion: he will no more carry thee into captivity. Lam. 4. 21.

The doing of mischief to good men, the attempting of it, though they fail of
their purposes, their wishing of it, though they dare not attempt it, and their
rejoicing at it when it is effected by others, all this does assuredly bring
mischief on sinful men's own heads.



Lazarus. Here the rich man received his pleasure and Lazarus pain: but there
is Lazarus in heaven, and the Luke 16.
rich man in hell: Lazarus is in Abraham's bosom, and the rich man in the
flames of fire: Lazarus is comforted, and the rich man tormented. The best man
in his best state here on earth, has not a full enlargement, but only
inioyeth liberty of the prison: and the worst man in his worst state is not
yet come to execution, but only sits in the stocks. But the most perfect
and absolute difference and change will be at the day of the Lord Jesus, when
soul and body of the saints shall be filled with glory and immortality, and
soul and body of sinful creatures shall be overwhelmed with shame, and
perpetual contempt. And herewith the Apostle comfort the poor persecuted
Thessalonians; It is a righteous thing with God, says he, to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you which are troubled rest with
us, when the Lord Jesus Christ shall show himself from heaven with his mighty
Angels. etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.

the wicked shall be a ransom for the just, and the transgressour for the
Prou. 21. 18.
righteous.

Verse 9. A hypocrite with his mouth corrupts his neighbor: but the
righteous shall be delivered by knowledge.
DIssemblers, and such as make a show of godliness, but deny the power thereof,
are commonly most hurtful seducers, corrupting men's hearts with hurtful
speeches, either deprauing that which is good, or justifying that which is
evil, and so they infect their minds with erroneous opinions, and stir up
their hearts to sinful lusts, and pervert their ways with ungodly behavior.
But now to prevent the fears of the good, that they also are like to be drawn
into mischief, because there are so many hypocrites, and to take away the
cloakes and shifts from the wicked, which lay all the blame of their sins on
others which mislead them, he shows the means whereby this hurt may be
avoided, and that is, by getting knowledge, and being righteous.

Paul, Peter, Jude and John are most ample in giving admonitions to beware of
them. Ever since that time there have been springs, streams, floods, and seas
of superstition, idolatry, violence, and all abomination in the kingdom of
Antichrist: and all under pretense of the Churches authority, zeal, devotion,
and good intendment.

Jeremy observed in the wicked deceivers of his age, that they Ierem. 9. 5.
taught their tongues to speak lies, and took great pains to do wickedly.
And that our Savior repooued in the cursed Scribes and Pharisees of his age,
that they compassed sea and land to make one Matthew. 23. 15.
of their profession: and when he was made, they made him twofold more the
child of hell then themselves.

such false Apostles are deceitful workers, and transform themselves into the
2. Cor. 11. 13.
Apostles of Christ. And no marvel: for Satan is transformed into an Angel
of light. Therefore it is no great thing, though his ministers transform
themselves, as though they were the ministers of righteousness.

They are the more venomous, by how much they are less mistrusted for the
opinion that is had of them for piety and goodness does prepare a passage for
their poison to enter into the bowels of men's souls. When they are are reputed
for godly, religious, wise, and judicious, all is received which they set
abroach, all is disliked which they set against. It is an easy matter for a
man to lose his purse, when he follows the robber as guide of his way. It is
an easy matter for a man to lose his life, when he makes a poysoner, and his
enemy to be his Physician.





But the righteous, etc.] Though the tongue of the wicked be a deadly weapon to
do hurt: yet the knowledge of the godly is a defensive armor to preserve him
from it. The medicine which Saint Peter does prescribe, with his caveat to
avoid the delusions of subtle seducers, does after a sort make a promise of
remedy against them, to such as shall carefully receive it. Beware (says he)
least ye he plucked away with the error of the wicked, and fall from your own
stedfastnes. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 3. 17. 18.

such as are simple? Whom does she utter her mind unto, but to Prou. 9. 16.
such as are destitute of understanding? And whom do the lurking
corner-creepers so much pray upon as simple women laden with sins, and lead
with diverse lusts?



When wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge delights thy soul,
then shall counsel preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee, and
deliver thee from the evil way, and from the man that speaks froward things,
and from them that leave the ways of righthousnesse, to walk in the ways of
darkness: which rejoice in doing evil, and delight in the frowardness of
the wicked, Prou. 2. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.



Though there should come never so many bands, and armies of Satanicall and
hellish hypocrites, and every man's mouth were a a musket or cannon to send out
most mortal, and deadly poison, yet if we be armed with these graces, we need
not to fear them. The Antichristian deceiuer cannot illude them that have
received 2. These. 2. 10.
the knowledge and love of the truth. The false Christ's shall Matthew. 24. 24.
not deceive the elect, as being protected by Gods power, and furnished with
holy understanding. The devil himself with all Ephesians. 6.
his fiery darts and temptations, shall be resisted and driven back by those
that have on the breast plate of righteousness, and the other pieces of Gods
complete armor. The Lord Jesus by the sound knowledge of the sacred Scriptures
has already repulsed and turned him to flight, and puts the same weapon
into our hands, with strength and power to pursue him.



Verse 10. In the prosperity of the righteous the city rejoices, and when
the wicked perish there is joy.
IN the prosperity of the righteous] that is, when things go well with the^,
the city rejoices, that is, the honest and well disposed citizens, and
country men be inwardly glad, and outwardly declare their joy, by cheerful
countenance, and speeches, and other means, as opportunity serves to
express the same. And so do they also at the death, and overthrow of
oppressors, and tyrants, and other wicked persons, by whose fall the people
rise, and whose ruin is the repair of the city.

things, but godly men's hearts to be joyful for them. When Mordecai was
advanced the city of Shushan rejoiced, and was Hest. 8. 15.
glad. And when the Lord showed his great mercy on Zachary, and Elizabeth in
giving them a son, their kinsfolk and neighbors Luke 1. 58.
came and rejoiced with them.



If one suffer, all suffer with it: if one member be had in honor, all the
members rejoice with it. 1. Cor. 12. 26.

Mordecai, that when the royal apparel was on his back, and the crown of
gold on his head, that unto the Jews was come light, and joy, and gladness, and
honor. Hest. 8. 16.

Now all this is contrary in the state of harmefull persons, when God declares
his anger by casting them down, the people publish their joy by clapping their
hands at them. At the least Gods servants for Gods glory, their own peace,
and the public safety, take comfort in this mercy that is showed to the
Church, in taking away such enemies. God inclines their hearts to do this, and
the cruelty of the enemy has procured it, as the effects of both did
manifest at the drowning of Pharaoh, and destruction of Sisera.

their desires to wish well unto them: this will put arguments into their
mouths to speak well for them: this will give them encouragement to further
their advancement: this will make their promotion acceptable to them, and then
desirous of the continuance and increase of the same. Now many men desire to be
popular, but few to be righteous: it is easy to affect the greatness of
Mordecai, who was second to the King, and great among his people, and accepted
among the multitude of his brethren: but it is hard Hest. 10. 3.
to follow his goodness in procuring their wealth, and seeking their peace, and
prosperity. Good liking is not gotten by pomp and power, and favor is not
gained with wealth and riches, and love is not commanded by authority, and
dignity: these may be allured with goodness, but never compelled by violence.

Daniels adversaries. But all is in vain: they shall Dan. 6.
be frustrate of their purpose, they shall be foiled in their practice, they
shall be shamed, and cursed, and plagued for their malicious hearts, and
mischievous enterprises. They that hate Zion, shall all be ashamed and turned
backward. They shall be as the grass on the house tops, which withers before
it comes forth. Psalm. 129. 5. 6.

The city rejoices, etc.] Godly men are the chief inhabitants wheresoever
they dwell.

They that rejoice at the prosperity of the righteous, are called the city,
the place has denomination from them: and it is certain that neither all, nor
the most, nor in many places the greatest are so well affected, but contrary
minded. So it is said in the book of Hester that when the decree was gone
forth, whereby all the Jews were proscripted and destinated to death, that the
city of Shushan was in perplexity. Who was this city there, but the poor
condemned Israelites, who from their first coming thither were but strangers
and captives? Ahashuerus, and Haman were not of the number: for they were
merrily drinking of wine; and a great number both in the Court, and City, as it
may appear, were glad of their misery. So says the Apostle to the Romans 1. 8.
Romans, Your faith is published throughout the whole world, meaning thereby
in all the Churches.



The strangers shall stand and feed your sheep, and the sons of strangers
shall be your plow-men, and dressers of your vines: Isai. 61. 5.

John's meaning when he said that Demetrius had a 3. Ioh. verse. 12.
good report of all men. All wicked men would never speak well of him, or if
they should, it had been little for his credit: but forasmuch as the Apostle
testifies of him, and the truth it self also, it must needs be that those
all men were all good men which knew his goodness.

Zanecherib when God told him that Zion despised him, and Isa. 37. 22.
laughed him to scorn, and shook her head at him. But what cared he for that?
Did not he despise her as much? True it is, that he despised her as much, but
not with so much danger to her. His was a vain, foolish, absurd, and
contemptible contempt, like paper shot against a strong bulwark: but hers was
mighty, and effectual carrying force with it, like a Cannon against a weak
cottage which will shake it to pieces in a moment.

Verse 11. By the blessing of the righteous the city is exalted: but it is
subverted by the mouth of the wicked.
THe meaning is, that just men are very beneficial to the societies of men by
their religious, prudent, and profitable speeches: for so the word blessing
signifies in many places: and so it is here meant as the antithesis shows;
and so a poor man in adversity, may as well be an instrument of good to his
country, as a rich man in prosperity, as Solomon testifies, Eccle. 9. 15. On
the other side, the wicked with his mouth and hurtful words, does work
mischief among whom he conuerseth.

By the blessing, etc.] A godly man will always do good to the place where he
dwells, that many shall fare the better for him.

The land of Judah found the truth of this by comfortable experience in the
days of their good Kings, and Prophets, as Iehosaphat, Hezechias, Isaiah and
others, who obtained wonderful deliverances for their people at the hand of
the Lord. The land of Israel found the truth of it in the days of their holy
Prophets Eliah, and Elisha who procured help against drowth, famine, and
enemies, and therefore were called the chariots, and horsemen of Israel. What
should I speak of Joseph, of Moses, and Samuel, and David, of Nehemiah, and
Ezra, of Hester, and Mordecai, and many others, among whom S. Paul must be of
the Quorum, as one of eminent note, specially for that marvelous preservation
of all that sailed in the ship with him, notwithstanding they were very
infidels.

Moses might have continued a favorite, he voluntarily for his commodity
sake incurred the Kings displeasure: when he might have been great in Egypt,
he rather forsook Egypt: when he might have lived in credit, pleasure, and
plenty like a prince, he chose to live obscurely, painefully, and hardly as a
shepherd. When Hester was bid to ask, and have to the half of an ample and
large empire, she set aside all respect of lands and livings, and only craved
the lives of her people.



Laban knew, and acknowledged, that therein he was much beholden to Jacob, not
only for his faithfulness and pains, but for the good effect and success of
them. Joseph's master, and Joseph's keeper, and Pharaohs house, and all the land
of Egypt sped the better for the goodness of God toward Joseph. On the other
side, in the sinful person, every thing is otherwise. His tongue and talk is
hurtful and noisome. He is wholly carried with self love, and private lucre.
All his endeavors be to accomplish his own wicked purposes, and his means
thereunto be unlawful and hurtful. As he by rebellion has provoked the
wrath of God against himself, so is the curse sent out after him, and brings
a judgment many times upon the place where he is, and the people that are
about him, and the country wherein he lives.

that commonly ensues upon such as deal unkindly with those who deal kindly
with them. This caused Jeremy to turn his petitions, and accusations, and his
intercessions into imprecations. Shall evil be recompensed for good? for they
have dug a pit Ierem. 18. 20.
for my soul: Remember that I stood before thee to speak good for them, and
to turn away thy wrath from them. Therefore deliver up their children to
famine, and let them drop away by the force of the sword, etc.

desolation and destruction are Isa. 59. 7.
in their paths: they make havoc of all that comes within their walk, and
lay all waste before them. And here the Jesuits, and Seminaries, and the whole
crew of these unnatural, barbarous, and cruel Papists are to be condemned,
which do as greedily thirst after the blood of their King, and countrymen, and
the subversion of the kingdom and country, as any foreign enemies in their
greatest hostility are possibly able.

Verse 12. He that is destitute of wisdom despises his neighbor: but a man
of understanding will keep silence.
A Foolish man which has a beggarly heart, as the words signify, being void
of sound judgment, and sanctified knowledge of Gods holy will, desires to
vilify others, especially such as fear God, and to make them appear base and
contemptible. And this is done sometimes in bitter anger, by railing, reuiling,
and contumelious reproaches; and sometimes in scurrill mirth, by girding jests,
and laughter; and sometimes in hidden craft, by false reports and slanders.
But they which have more wisdom, will frame themselves to better behavior:
they will not only keep silence from offering that indignity to them that
provoke them not thereunto, but will also forbear to requite them with
reproaches, which have not spared to seek their disgrace. For so does David
testify of himself in this case: I am as a man that hears not, and as a
dumb man that opens not his mouth. Psalm. 38. 13.

They which are the most contemptible persons, are the greatest contemners of
others. As wisdom above all other things does make a man to be excellent, so
needs must the want of it make him to be base: and yet such as come not only
too short of the perfection, but not at all to the beginning thereof, are
ready to sport at them which are most graced with it. When the wicked Prou.
18. 3.
comes, says Solomon, then comes contempt, and with the vile man,
reproach. None scoffed so much at David as the abiects, and Psalm. 35. 15.
the drunkards made songs of him. None mocked Job so much as the vagabonds who
were no better then their fathers, and their fathers not so good as dogs.
They were the children of fools, and the children of villains, which were
more vile then the earth. And yet he was their song, and their talk, they
spared not to spit in his face. Job 30. 1. 8. 9. 10.

Luke 18. 9. 11.
better man.





to convince fools, and to punish them, does marshall these among the great
fools that shall be punished.

Fear ye not, says he, the reproach of men, neither be ye Isai. 51. 7. 8.
afraid of their rebukes. For the moath shall eat them up like a garment, and
the worm shall eat them like wool. If a worm, and a maggot will prove
stronger then they, and get the victory of them, why should their words be
more regarded then worms, and maggots? Idiots, and naturals we care not for
though they should rail upon us, and give reuiling speeches: poor creatures
they are to be pitied, they want wit, they know not what they say: and why then
should these be so much respected, which are to be lamented for want of
wisdom, and say they know not what?

Verse 13. He that goes about as a talebearer, discovers a secret: but he
that is of a faithful heart, concealeth a matter.
IN this place, and in the ninteenth of Leuiticus verse 16. and elsewhere the
holy Ghost compares busi-bodies, and such as delight to deal in other men's
matters, to petie chapmen, and pedlers, which carry wares about, selling in one
place, and buying in another; and two marks of lewdnes he brandeth them with,
as first, that they have false and unfaithful hearts: and then that they have
loose and blabbing tongues that can keep no counsel, but tell all that they
hear. They will draw on men by their news and reports to open their minds and
secrets unto them, which after they will publish to others. From both which
vices he clears all good men, their hearts are faithful, and their tongues
are silent to cover such matters as love requires them to hide, and duty and
conscience do not bind them to lay open.

speaks unto, as whom it speaks against. It trafficketh altogether by
exchange, it will deliver nothing to you, but upon condition to receive
somewhat from you. It will never bear an empty pack, but desires where
ought is uttered, and taken out, there to take somewhat to be put in, yt it may
have choice for other places. This is the cause why the Lord forbids to
chaffer, or to have any dealing at all with such manner of persons, though they
make show of never so great love and kindness toward us. He that goes about
as a slaunderer, discovers secrets: therefore meddle not with him that
flattereth with his lips, Prou. 20. 19.





James means when he says, that the tongue is set on fire on hell, that is
by the devil that hellish spirit, Iam. 3. 6. Now he is a continual false
accuser, and makebate between God and man, and man, and man, and friend and
nearest friend, and therefore look for no favor at his hands.

Micah Micah 7. 5.
calls them, if they carry pricks in their mouths, and guile in their
souls, and sin in their lives, trust them not, put not confidence in them,
keep shut the doors of thy lips from them, though they were friends, though
they were counselors, though they were yoke-fellows. Especially let us not
communicate with them in giving them hearing of their uncharitable
obtrectations, nor trust them in our secrets: for it were just and righteous
that they should be disclosed and brought to light for a recompense of our rash
and unloving credulity.

Verse 14. Where no counsel is, the people fall: but where many counselors
are, there is health.
Where there is no counsell] Where godly and holy instruction for guiding the
heart and behavior, and grave and prudent advice for government of state,
either domestical, or public, do fail, there the people do fall, that is,
the governors themselus, and they that are in subjection to them, do run
into many mischiefs of grievous disorders, and miserable destruction. For what
in that case is to be expected from superiors, but violence and oppression?
And what from inferiors, but falsehoode and disobedience? And what from all
sorts, but impiety and wickedness? And what then from God, but heavy
strokes and punishments? But where many counselors are, which be faithful,
and give wise and wholesome counsel, and that is also embraced and followed,
there is health, that is, religion and justice, peace, plenty, and safety,
with God gracious favor and blessing.

Solomon to make such comparisons, that lowly and submisse words of a poor
wiseman, Eccle. 9. 17. 18
are more to be regarded, then the cry of an unwise ruler, with his fools
about him; and that wisdom is better then strength, and also then weapons of
war.

of a kingdom or state, then for one alone to govern a great ship, without
the help of other Sailers or officers. David professes of himself that he
was wiser then his enemies, then his Psalm. 119. 98. 99.
teachers, then the ancient, and yet he sought out the most prudent men in
all Israel, as Hushai, and Achitophell, etc. to help him with direction. Who
ever, but Christ, since Adams fall, could say that he was as wise as Solomon?
who hops to be so wise? Who can be so wise, until the end of the world? and
yet he made choice of a counsel to consult with, and to confirm himself, and
his people by.



Judah by Isai. 3. 1. 2.
Isaiah, that the Lord of hosts would deprive them of their stay, and strength,
the pillars of their country, and the props of their lives, and those were not
only bread and drink, and Warriors, and Judges, but Prophets also, and the
prudent, and the aged, and the counselors, that so they might be easily cast
down, yea ruinated, and brought to dust of their own accord. And concerning
the other branch, that it should not be taken for an ordinary and gentle
correction to his faithful children, but a rare and severe punishment to his
dissembling enemies, he does aggrieue it in another place, and set it forth in
such manner as might make it most fearful to us. Behold, says he, I will
do a marvelous work in this people, even a marvelous work, and a wonder:
for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their
prudent men shall be hid. Isa. 29. 14.

which are so qualified, may have their employment, and they which are so
employed, may show themselves faithful, and they which are faithful, may also
be prosperous. And so a lay man may be a profitable Church man, and so a
private person may do good service to the King, and all his dominions.

Pharao and Achab they make choice of such as shall illude and deceive them.
For that is very usual and common with many purposely to associat themselves,
and harken to such as will quell in them the fear of all Gods admonitions,
rebukes, and threatenings, and give them encouragement to any idolatry,
superstition, impiety, wantonness, unthriftiness, worldlines, and all such
evils as their hearts are most affected unto. But most of all is their sin
notorious, which do not only refuse counsel themselves, but wish and desire
that there were no counselors to others, especially such as might inform
them in the way of God to bring them to salvation. They complain of the number
of preachers, one is sufficient for a whole country: they exclaim of the
frequencie of preaching, one sermon is enough for half a year. And of this
sort the bloody traitorous Papists are offenders in a high degree. They do
not only wish fewer counselors, and lesser store of preaching, but seek by
violence to effect it, as their practices declare. They would in a moment have
destroyed the King, and all his Clergy, all his privy Counsel, all his
Judges and Counsel learned in the Laws, all the great Counsel of Nobility,
and Commons assembled in Parliament: and afterward all the godly Ministers and
Christians throughout the whole kingdom. Are these the friends of the people?
Do they wish them to be preserved from perishing? do they desire and labor
for the health of their nation?

Verse 15. He that is surety for a stranger shall wholly be broken: but he that
hates those that clap hands, is sure.
HIs purpose here is to give men admonition to beware of suretiship: which he
does infer by two reasons, first, from the hurt and danger which they run
into that be not well advised therein: and secondly, from the peace and safety
which they enjoy that heedefully avoid the peril thereof. Now he does not
absolutely condemn all suretiship (for then would Paul have Philem. ver. 18
never undertaken for Onesimus) but rashness only therein, is that which is
here, and in other places reproved. For it may sometimes be a work of mercy
to become surety, as well as to lend or give. By stranger, is not meant all,
or only unknown persons. For it may fall out to be a duty of Christian love,
that way to help and relieve some such as we were never before acquainted
with, and a near neighbor, a familiar friend, a kinsman, a brother may in
this case be a stranger to us, when it is not safe to undertake for him. As
first, if there be like to grow detriment to the borrower, as taking money, or
any other commodities upon hard conditions, and at unreasonable rates, or for
needelesse expenses, and unthriftiness, or any way to the hurt of his state or
conscience. Secondly, if it tend to the hurt and damage of the lender that he
is in danger to be defeated of his own, and to sustain loss by our means.
If we our selves are to be entangled by it, the sum and value of the debt
being more then we are able either to pay, or well to spare: when ones own
creditours by that occasion, must be defrauded of their due, when our wives,
children, and families which have also an interest in our substance, shall be
robbed of their portion and maintenance, and bereaved of the fruit of their
own labors. Then he shows a remedy against it, to hate such as clappe
hands, that is, to hate and fear to be clappers of hands our selves, for the
ratifying and confirmation of promises in this unadvised suretiship, and so we
shall be safe and sure in this behalf. Provided yet, that we take not other
courses that be cousen-germanes to it, and as dangerous and hurtful as that
is: as negligently without all care and regard to run into debts and arrerages,
or ventrously without due consideration of men's faithfulness, and ability, to
lend forth our money, wares, or cattle, and so to put our state into the
hands of strangers.

Solomon spoken already in the sixth chapter: My son, if thou be Prou. 6. 1.
2.
surety for thy neighbor, and have stricken hand with the stranger, thou art
snared with the words of thy mouth: thou art even taken with the words of thine
own mouth. Before a man does voluntarily ensnare himself, he is like a bird
that has the liberty of the whole air, to fly whether snee will at her
pleasure, but after he has bound himself by promise and covenant, he is like
a bird in a net, and in the fowlers hand, that may be killed, or caged, or
given to children to play with, or otherwise dealt with according to the
fowlers will, and yet the poor bird, is either surprised in her own place, or
allured by hope of food to the bait, not knowing that she is in any petill,
whereas the surety does wilfully cast himself into danger, being forewarned
of the event, that would follow, and has no bait of any gain, or benefit
laid for him.



with expectation of favor, he tells us what is to be looked for, if we
grow too bold and hardy. Be not thou of them that touch the hand, nor among
them that are surety for debts. If thou have nothing to pay, why should he take
thy bed from under thee? Prou. 22. 27. Now this why should, is set down by way
of threatening, according as it is also in some other places of scriptures, as
when Amaziah said to the Prophet, have they made thee the Kings counselor? 2.
Chro. 25. 16.
cease thou: why should they smite thee? And as he gives a caveat for every
one to take heed of entering into suretiship, or else not to think it strange
if they feel the smart of it, so he grants a warrant to creditors, to deal
roundly with rash sureties, and not to be too sparing of them. Take his
garment, says he, that is surety for a stranger and a pledge of him for the
stranger.



so it comes to pass in bayling, that bad prisoners have seldom better
sureties, and men that be greatly offensive, most commonly offer their word for
grievous offenders. And many times they are caught, and brought into the trap,
their dear friends of whom they had so good opinion, do give them the slip,
and leave them in the lurch, and then they clamor, and cry out, yet only
against the unfaithfulness of the man whom they believed so well, but not
against their own unfaithfulness which would not believe God who forewarned
them of the peril. Nay they still clear themselves, though their own folly
convince them, they give commendations of their own course, though friends,
and family, though Gods testimony, and their own woeful experience condemn
them. Their love, they say, and friendship, their good nature, and kind heart
has wrought them all that sorrow. Nay, rather it was cruelty, and
unmercifulness to your own house. It was rashness, a bad nature, and a foolish
heart that brought you into all this misery. Have you desperately thrown your
selves into a quick sand, and will you lay all the blame upon others for your
sticking in the mire?



Verse 16. A gracious woman maintains her honor, as strong men keep riches.
A Gracious woman] Which is endued with the fear of God, and the heavenly
gifts of the holy Ghost, does maintain, that is, does both get and hold a
reverend estimation and credit, as strong men be of ability to obtain wealth,
and riches, and to defend that which they have.



Even women which are of the weaker sex, even poor women which neither have
parentage, nor beauty, nor rich apparel to set them forth, are yet reckoned
among these honorable personages, if they have virtue: for it is affirmed of
every one, without exception of any. S. Peter shows that there is no wife,
nor woman of pure conversation, whose heart is vncorrupt with a meek and quiet
spirit, but she is much set by of God, and become Sarahs daughter. 1. Pet. 3.
2. 4. 6. And if the Lord so well like of all holy women, he does as much take
pleasure in all holy men: if he be more delighted with their piety and
lowlines, then with gold and silver, with pearls, and precious stones, and all
costly apparel; then he will more esteem also of the faith and love, and
other graces of these, then of lands, and livings, and titles, and all manner
of dignities. If they be transplanted into Sarahs kindred, and have her for
their mother; then these are incorporated into Abraham's stock, and have him
for their father.

a spirit of glory, as Saint Peter testifies, 1. Peter 4. 14. As therefore
that can neither be kept away, because Gods hand does bestow it; nor any pluck
it away, because Gods hand does preserve it: no more can any stay them from
receiving praise and commendation, nor wrest it away from them, when they have
it.

consciences will praise them, when their tongues revile them, as the Apostle
says: we approve our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. He
would not appeal to their lips before men, 2. Cor. 4. 2.
but to their souls before the Lord, and then he was sure they would justify
him, though in speech many would condemn him. Now if it be so, a woman's grace
will as well shine to their hearts, as a man's: a poor bodies as well as rich
folks: so long as they remain godly, as well as when they began to be godly,
and more at the last then at the first, because their light grows daily
greater, and brighter.





But besides these, there are other men and women to be reprehended, which are
as unconstant in any good course, as these are obstinate in evil. They have
entered into the way of godliness with good commendation in the beginning, and
leave off the race in the midst, and run to sinfulness with the world in
the later end. They cowardly suffer themselves to be overcome, and rifled,
and robbed of their honor: their crown is taken from them, their glory is
turned into shame and reproach, and causes them to renounce that goodness which
before they seemed to embrace: to forsake the fellowship of Christians with
whom they were wont to converse: to neglect the duties of piety which they
were wont to exercise, to give over the care of their families, which they were
wont to instruct? Even this that they would not be despised and brought to
contempt: they would not be mocked and iested at for precisenes: they would not
lose their credit, and good account. But is honor preferred by casting off
grace? will this be a means to make them glorious, to shake off virtue, and
show themselves vicious? They utterly deceive themselves: for our text says,
that they must be gracious persons which shall be able to maintain and keep
their honor.

Isaiah this is often pressed, Fear thou not, I am with thee, be not afraid,
for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee, and help thee, and will sustain
thee with the right hand of my justice. Behold, all they that provoke thee,
shall be ashamed and confounded: and they that strive with thee shall perish.
Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel: I will help thee, says the
Lord, and thy redeemer, the holy one of Israel. Thou wast precious in my sight,
and thou wast honorable and I loved thee, etc. Isa. 41. 10. 11. 14. and 43. 4.

1. For men that are truly gracious and yet timorous, and full of dread, lest
Satan should take advantage by their imbecility, and want of courage and
learning to draw them to apostasy, and backsliding. Consider that he can
keep back none from obtaining honor, whosoever either man or woman does
soundly endeavor to be godly, does take a sure and infallible way to be well
thought of: none ever failed, or was disappointed of that success. Remember
also that when God has once given it, the devil can never take it away from
any, but it remains to their lives end, and to the worlds end, and world
without end: then be well assured that is unable to deprive us of grace, and
constant faithfulness: for that is the spring from whence the other flows:
that is the body of the light, and the other but the beams which proceed
from the brightness of it.

Verse 17. He that is a merciful man rewards his own soul: but he that is
cruel troubles his own flesh.
BY a merciful man, is meant such a one, as with a tender and pitiful heart
does good both to the bodies and souls of men according to their need, and
his own ability. And freely also remitteth wrongs, and passes by offenses
without reuengement. Where it is said that he rewards his own soul, the
sense is, that he procures to himself both soul and body a reward from God,
and that as certain, as large, and continual, as if the fullness of power
were in his own hand, to bestow upon himself as much happiness for as long
time as his heart could possibly desire.

But he that is cruell] Which either in violence or rigor uses to offer men
hard measure, or shuts up his compassion from them that are in affliction,
that he will no way relieve or seek to comfort, troubles his own flesh, that
is, hurts his own body, and in like manner his soul also.

in time: the Lord will be as severe as they are cruel; and as strict in
justice to them, as they are rigorous in extremity to others. And this shall
not always be reserved to the last day, or to their death, or to the torments
in the world to come, but spoilers be many times spoiled in this life,
oppressors be oppressed, and tyrants be overthrown by tyranny. And therefore
our Savior gives an admonition, that they which would not be judged, should
not judge: they which would not be condemned, should not condemn: they which
would be forgiven, should be ready to forgive: they which would have given
unto them, should give unto others. For with what measure ye mete, says he,
shall men measure to you again; Luke 6. 37. 38. To spare to speak of such
arguments as may be gathered from the estate, and name of merciful men, and
the contrary, because they follow hereafter in this chapter, and we would not
forestall our selves, we will hold our selves to the words as they are literally
fet down in the text, and make it appear that every man's own soul receives
most good by the goodness which he exercises toward others.

Paul had never greater 1. Cor. 8. 1. 2.
effect and comfort of his ministry then in the Macedonian Churches. So do
they pray with feruency and boldness, and good hearts, then with mercy and
favor. David had encouragement Psalm. 86. 2.
to call upon God for the preservation of his soul, when he could truly
plead that he was merciful. Cornelius lost not his labor in praying, but
found a comfortable and blessed success when the Angel could tell him, that
his alms came up together with Acts 10. 4.
his prayers in remembrance before God.

hope so well of us, or deal so well with us, yet out own consciences with
the testimony of Gods spirit would support our souls in greatest extremity,
as Job did find by happy experience. Job 31.


Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom which was prepared for you
from the beginning of the world. But all goes Matthew. 25. 34.
cross with carnal persons. The Lord gives them no grace by his word and
other ordinances, but challenges them for coming into his house with bloody
hands. As he has stopped his Isa. 1
ears at the cry of the poor, so he shall cry himself and not be heard.
Misery will miserably torment him; his house is not a safe Prou. 21. 13.
place for Christians to resort unto; Lions dens seldom fit for Lambs to be
in: when good men be present, what can they say to mitigate his fears, or to
lessen his sorrows? If others be silent, will his own conscience speak for
him? Nay of all, that and the law of God will be most forward and forcible to
accuse and condemn him. And then at his death he comes into the case of the
rich man spoken of in the Gospel, that was tormented with flames: at the
resurrection that sentence shall be Luke 16.
pronounced upon him, which was indicted long ago, Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels, Matthew.
25. 41. All this, unless he repent, is undoubtedly belonging to him, besides
the continual peril of strokes and judgments to light upon his body, which
every moment may justly be feared.

our nature: yet our wages does counteruaile, and ouerpoise all our work and
labor: for we cannot put our bodies to so much toil and trouble in any
service of Christian love, as we shall obtain to our hearts, delightful
pleasures with rest, and peace, and joy and gladness.



Rewards his own soul, troubles his own flesh, etc.] They are the best
husbands which best provide for the good of their own persons. To be carried
with carnal self-love is a vice which is worthy to be condemned: to be lead
with Christian love of ones self, is a virtue which is much to be commended.
The one draws a man to wickedness, the other drives him from it, to
goodness: the one causes him to be hurtful to his neighbors, the other
makes him helpefull unto them: the one serving himself sinfully, does utterly
undo himself, the other applying himself to the service of God faithfully,
does procure his own blessedness for ever. When the Apostle would bring an
argument that should be perswasiue and forcible, and most likely to prevail
with rich men to work mercy and liberality in them, he chooses this, That
they should lay up for themselves a good foundation against 1. Tim. 6. 19.
the time to come, that they might obtain eternal life. It were to no purpose
to lay up only for children, for heirs, executors, or administrators, though
they were sure to have children, and friends, and their children, and friends
were sure to enjoy their possessions: but to enrich themselves, is truly to be
rich; and to have ones wealth personally in himself, and for himself, and not
only about him, is to he rich in deed.

runs this way: the reward of all obedience, and the punishment of all
iniquity tends to this purpose. Blessings upon goods and cattle, upon
grounds, and fruit trees, upon children and family, are but appendances to
the substantial blessings which are conferred upon soul and body,
especially for the eternal state of both. And so when curses fall on the
outward things of wicked men, it is, that they may gather weight by the way to
press the heavier upon their own persons.

What does it profit a man to win the whole world, if he lose his own soul?
Matthew. 16. 26. So, though one have never so great penutie of earthly things,
and abundance of all kind of afflictions, yet if he preserve his quick
stock, that is, himself from being a spoil to sin and Satan, no creature
can hurt him, his misery will drop off from him, his crosses and sorrows
will vanish away, and come to nothing.

If thou be wise, thou shall be wise to thy self, and if thou be a scorner,
thou alone shall suffer. Secondly, the performance of the duties of mercy, is
a gainefull trade for the soul to thrive by: it brings in good store of
comforts for present use, and helps men to a stock of joy and happiness for
an other day. And therefore our Savior does persuade us to use it, and gives
us liberty to make our use of it. Sell that ye have, says he, and give
alms; make to your selves, bags which wax not old, a treasure that can
never fail in heaven, where no thief comes, neither moath corrupts; Luke
12. 33. It is dangerous, and sinful to hoord up much gold, and to keep it too
long; but safe and commendable to heap up good works in abundance, and never
depart with them while the world stands: they shall be sure to take no harm,
and we shall be sure to want no good.



Verse 18. The wicked works a deceitful work: but he that sows
righteousness, shall receive a sure reward.
THe wicked works a deceitful worke] He is continually practicing of some
evil, which will never fail, to make his expectation to fail. But he that
sows righteousness, which constantly, and conscionably is exercised in doing
good, shall have a sure reward, partly in this life, with a competent measure
of comfortable prosperity, and perfectly in the life to come, with glorious
immortality. The sense will be the better discerned, if the opposition be set
down in this manner: The wicked works a deceitful work by sowing of
iniquity, and therefore shall be deceived in his reward: but the godly
works a faithful work by sowing of righteousness, and therefore shall
receive a sure reward.

Paul can say as much to this point, as any man, by the experience he had of
it. Few had nearer acquaintance with it then he at the beginning, and none had
a greater breach with it in the end then he. And then he keeps no counsel,
but tells all that he found (and God auerreth all that he tells) that
sin had deceived him, and Romans 7. 11.
slain him.

Saul cast up to brain David? which all lighted on his own pate. How small a
matter did Haman think it to kill Mordecay? yea to destroy all the Jews?
which fell on his own person, with his family, and other friends. How sure
were traiterous Papists, and undoubtedly affured to blow up the Parliament, and
all estates of the kingdom? and yet of themselves diverse were blown up to the
gallows, and all the rest, unless they repent, are likely to be blown down
to hell.

Abimelech was aspiring to the kingdom, when he was persuading the
Sichemites, when he was murdering his brethren, and making them out of the
way, what did he once think of, but of cap, and knee, of honor, peace, and
safety? He had concluded that there would be no molestation and trouble, no
breach of covenant, and disloyalty, at least no peril of life, especially by
the hand of a woman: that all his authority should be brought to such an
ebb, as only to have power remaining to command his page to run him
through with his sword. The fit and passion of distemper that Ahab fell into
when Naboth denied him his vineyard, declares evidently how happy a man he
made reckoning to be when he should get it. And yet the occurrents which fell
out at his taking of possession ouerturned all his happiness. He intruded
himself thereinto with iolity and mirth, but Elijah sent him out again with
heaviness and grief.

who shall forbid him to reueile and discover them? Adam was away when Caine
slew his brother, and Eve was not there, and Abel was made sure enough for
complaining, and Caine himself was silent enough from boasting of it, and no
body else was in the fields, either to see Caine striking, or to hear Abel
crying, and yet out it came, and known it is, and every man can speak of it.
Gehesi made not all the town of his counsel when he followed Naaman for the
money, he asked not his master leave, to go after him, nor made report of his
dealing, and success afterward; and yet Elisha could tell him, and has
declared to us, and all others whither he went, and how he speed, and what his
intent was in the disposing of his money, namely, to buy olives, and vineyards,
and sheep, and oxen, and men-seruants, and maid-seruants, and to become a
great man. What should we speak of the plotting of Ananiah and Sapphira, and
of David's adultery, and murder, which were so closely contrived as they
imagined, that never any man should have had intelligence of them?

That the Lord will make their plagues wonderful, even great plagues, Deuteronomy.
28. 59.
and of long continuance, and sore diseases of long durance. And if they will
appeal from threatenings to promises, from the Law, to the Gospel, from Moses,
to Christ, let them hear the sentence that Christ passes upon such manner of
persons: They shall go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched.
Where their worm Mark. 9. 44.
dies not, and the fire never goes out.



They may with as good safety drink up strong poison, and prescribe it a
measure how far it shall work: or cast themselves into the raging sea with
limitation how deep they will sink, and how long they will make their stay
there. All the servants of sin and Satan are chained up in prison and not at
liberty to depart at their own wills: for the will it self is kept in hold,
and never released, before the Lord with a forcible hand of grace do deliver
it.



And since the works of iniquity be all so deceitful, let us hearken to the
words of God, and the counsel of godly men, which we shall be sure to find
very faithful. The persuasion of Satan seemed more plausible to Eve, than did
the commandment of the Lord; but she had escaped the venom and poison of
Satan's persuasion, if she would have given heed to the Lords commandment.

The note of wilful unchaste persons in their misery, will be the song of all
other sinners that refuse to receive admonition: How have I hated instruction,
and mine heart despised correction! and have Pro. 5. 12. 13.
not obeyed the voice of them that taught me, nor inclined mine ear to them
that instructed me! Within a little space I am in all evil in the midst of the
congregation and assembly.

have been most plagued by her. Her craftines has so enchanted them, that by
her usage she has gotten their hearts for ever. Their wits, their tongues,
their pens, their practice of life, and all shall be altogether for her
against God and his word, against all godly men, against all civil men,
against their own estimation and state, comfort and salvation.

Azariah knew that he spoke as well to posterity as to those of his own age,
and as truly to Gods people as to King Asa and his people: Be strong, and let
not your hands be faint: for your work shall have a 2. Chro. 15. 17.
reward.





Paul use to incite the Corinthians, and all other godly Christians, to be
very laborious and painful in all good services continually, seeing there will
be a resurrection, and a retribution to every man according to their ways.
Therefore my beloved brethren (says he) be ye steadfast, immovable, abundant
always 1. Cor. 15. 58.
in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in
vain in the Lord.

Let us not be weary of well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we
faint not. Gal. 6. 9.


Verse 19. So righteousness leads to life, and he that follows evil
seeks his own death.
THis verse is inferred upon the former, by way of explication, to show what he
meant by the deceivable work of the wicked, and the sure wages of the
righteous. And first he begins with the latter according to the manner of
the Hebrews, declaring that life, understanding thereby immortality and all
the blessedness annexed unto it, is that sure reward which all godly men may
undoubtedly expect: and destruction both of soul and body eternally, is the
end whereunto the deceitful work will bring wicked men, which do so much
deceive themselves by a greedy desire of satisfying their sinful lusts.

The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is everlasting life through
Jesus Christ. Romans 6. 23.





Peter calls it, and of the nature of the father that begets them, and
therefore they must 1. Pet. 23.
needs receive life, and retain life, and never after be deprived of it.



trouble, but it is as true that all the travels and afflictions of this
present life, are not worthy of the glory, which shall be showed unto us.
Romans 18. 2. Cor. 4. 17.
For our light affliction which is but for a moment causes unto us a far
most excellent, and an eternal weight of glory.

If nothing but bare life were bestowed upon us, even mere deliverance from
the danger of death, it were a benefit not lightly to be esteemed. It was said
of Lot, that he was preserved from destruction of Sodom, the Lord being
merciful unto him; and yet his goods, money, and cattle which he had in
great abundance, Genesis 19. 16.
were all destroyed. And the devil spoke the truth though in craft and malice,
concerning Job: skin for skin, and all that ever a man has will he give
for his life. But when life is full of lively comforts, when it is adorned with
endless glory, when it is enriched with infinite treasures, what crosses, what
poverty, what temptations, what reproaches, what persecutions, and sufferings
should diminish our desire of it, or make us remiss in seeking for it?

time: but it is an execrable impiety so to blaspheme the most bountiful God,
who gives to every one of his, both living and life, and all blessedness for
evermore. But many of them say that they speak by experience, themselves have
been professors, and as forward as the best, and they never got any good by it.
And such Malachy brings in quarrelling against God: Your words, says he,
have been stout against me, yet ye say, what have we spoken against thee?
Ye have said it is in vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have
kept his commandment, and walked humbly before the Lord of hosts? Mal. 3. 13.
14. Who is so busy to complain for want of wages, as they which never
performed any good work? let not the exceptions of murmuring apostataes
prevail in the ears or hearts of any that have understanding. They were never
of the family of God, though they crept into his house: they never did one good
chare in obedience, and for what then should they have their recompense? They
were always proud hypocrites though they boast of humility, and why should
they be used as humble persons? But be it that they plead for others who have
faithfully kept the commandments of God, and truly been humbled in his sight,
and yet labor in a low estate and mean condition. Is there no profit in
serving of the Lord, unless there be present preferment and earthly promotion?
Our principal pay will be in life, whereof we have part in hand by grace in
our souls in this world, and the rest is behind until the pay day in the
world to come. So that a sinner cannot discern of the happiness of a
Christian, nor conceive how God deals with him. For the comfort of the heart
is a thing unknown to him, and the glorious life is hid with Christ in God,
and shall Col. 3. 3. 4.
not fully be seen before we appear with him in glory.

But he that followeth] The more violent wicked men are in their sins, the
more near they draw to destruction. When they course evil as the grayhound
does the Hare, and hunt for it, as the hungry lion, or other wild beast does
after his pray (for thence is the similitude taken) then they will overtake
their death anon, and come speedily to damnation. As the misery of the
Egyptians approached near unto them, so their cruelty increased toward the
Israelites. And they were never more fiercely disposed to kill and to slay,
than when the waters were presently to do execution upon them. War was
concluded without any great consultation; a mighty host was gathered, without
any business of mustering; they were all in a readiness to fight, without any
further training. So stood the case with the Sodomites, they were all set on
mischief and madness immediately before they were destroyed. And so it fared
with Ahab, who took his farewell toward his voyage and death, with contempt of
the word of God, and persecution of his Prophet. And so we might note
Belshazzer, and Haman, and many others for this purpose, whom the Lord cut off
in the very practice of some notable mischief.

to work all Ephesians. 4. 19.
kind of wickedness even with greediness. And this is a forerunner of Gods
judgments.

Jeremy shows: Were they Ierem. 8. 12.
ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay they were not ashamed,
neither could they have any shame: therefore shall they fall among the slain:
when I shall visit them they shall be cast down, says the Lord.



Paul did, I find that when I would do good, evil is present with me. Romans
7. 21.


But much more is it present when we are not so well disposed, though indeed
it be not then so easily destroyed: and therefore since it will intrude it
self upon us against our wills, let not us play the parts of the wicked, to
take Satan's place and become tempters of our selves.



Verse 20. They that are of a froward heart are abomination to the Lord: but
they that are upright in their way, are his delight.
BY froward in heart, he means not only such as are inclined to anger and
bitterness, which are of a crabbed, sour and churlish disposition; but all
that are wilful in any sinful course, though with never so great mirth and
laughter. Yea many times excessive pleasure, and sporting, and merriment, with
good fellowship, as men account it, is the very subject of their frowardnes,
and that which they so obstinately stand in. And though they pretend reason for
their doing, and seem smoothly to defend it, without peruersenes, yet the
heart being settled in resolution of it own purpose, the Lord takes notice of
it, and therefore abhors them for the present, and will make his judgments
to manifest his detestation of them hereafter. But they that are upright in
their way and heart, (as the other are froward in heart and behavior) are
greatly beloved of God now, and shall more fully see, and feel, and enjoy the
comfort and happiness of his favor in time to come.

Asa did, when he cast the Prophet into prison, for reproving his sin: but to
have the habit of it to be froward, is opposed as contrary to being upright.
So were the qualities one set against another in the third verse of this
chapter: The vprightnes of the just shall guide them: but the frowardnes of the
transgressors shall destroy them. So are the persons contrarily dealt with as
contraries by the testimony of David: With the upright man thou will show thy
self upright: with the pure thou will show thy self pure; and with the
froward thou will set thy self to wrestle. Psalm. 18. 25. 26.

David professes of himself: All his laws were before me, and I did not cast
away his commandments from me. So was I upright with him, and have kept me
from my wickedness, Psalm. 18. 22. 23. Whereas the froward person does either
reject the whole law of God, or else retains, yea maintains at least some
one sin wittingly, because he may know, and willingly, because he refuses
to obey, against some one commandment.





justify them whom he condemns? And yet it is a fault, though much against
piety, that carries a great color and gloss of love and charity. He is a
very honest man (say they) but yet given to gaming too much, no man can
dissuade him from it. It is his only fault (says another) that he is a great
swearer, and cannot be brought to leave it. He is a right good man (says a
third) and every way deserves praise, saving that he is no body at Church:
he cannot abide those sermons, and Preachers: say all what they can, he is
still at defiance with them all: and so they, as much as in them is, stand for
them that go about to trauerse their indictment against the Lord and all his
faithful Ministers.

David's meaning when he says, The Lord will try the righteous, but the Psalm.
11. 5.
wicked and him that loves iniquity does his soul hate. The righteous are
his gold, and therefore he will refine them until they be perfectly purged
from al dross: yet he loves them as well in the furnace as in the treasury:
but as for the ungodly, howsoever he seem to spare them, yet he does not like
them: and though the might of his hand be not yet upon them, yet the hatred of
his heart is strongly against them.

Matthew. 3. 17.
him he is well pleased with all his members: and the froward and wicked stand
in their own impure and filthy nature, hearts, words and actions.





God in this behalf: if froward persons be abomination to him, let them not
be in estimation with us: if he loath them, as we do snakes, and toads, and
all kind of serpents, let us not love them as delectable things, wherein men
rejoice and take pleasure: but let vile men be vile in our eyes, and let such
as fear the Lord be regarded of us. Far be it from us that we should grace
and countenance those whom God does proclaim to be odious and abominable: that
we should associat our selves and be found companions with those whose sight
is offensive unto him, that we should receive them into our service which
refuse to enter into Gods: and God rejects the^ as altogether unfit for his
family. But well is it with our souls, when we can truly say with the Prophet,
All my delight is in the Saints, and in them which are excellent. Psalm. 16. 3.
Psalm. 101. 6.
Mine eyes shall be to the faithful in the land, that they may dwell with me:
he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me.

Luke 16. 15.
true. But what is become of al their salutations and titles, and praises now?
has not the Lord sent a blast upon them, and caused their glory to wither
away? is not all their excellency turned into contempt, and their names made a
byword of reproach in all Churches?

Ahashuerosh had but once graced Mordecai, all the city quickly took notice of
it, and he was presently great, notwithstanding he was a captive and a
condemned man, and of a nation that was every where despised: and was there
more force in the favor of a mortal man to make him honorable whom he bare no
great affection unto, than there is in the love of God being so tender and
large to his own children? what then though they should be dealt with, as S.
James speaks, that in respect of gold rings and goodly apparel, which Iam.
2. 3. 5.
rich men present have on, they should be put under the footestoole, or thrust
out at doors? yet let them know yt God has chosen them to be rich in faith,
and heirs of the kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him. What
though they should not only be despised, but maligned of them that be stronger
than themselves? yet let them not be disouraged at their power that are
against them, but comforted in his good providence that is for them. If this be
true that they be Gods delight, then this will be also as true, that God will
be their defense. Ahab was an heavy friend to Micaiah, and professed his
hatred toward him, and threatened mischief to him: and yet Gods favor
prevailed more for his safety, than Ahabs displeasure could do for 2. Chron.
18.
his hurt.

Verse 21. Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished, but
the seed of the righteous shall escape.
THough ungodly men have many friends, and such as be mighty: though they
join all their forces together to aid and defend one another, or all of them
one, yet they shall not be able to minister any help or succor when the Lord
takes them in hand to plague them. On the other side, though righteous men
seem to be in great peril, and have fewer friends, and those also poor and
feeble, yet they shall get out and be delivered, and not only so, but their
children and posterity also shall be preserved: So that whereas many strong
wicked men cannot deliver one, one weak godly man shall deliver many.

Isaiah does deridingly challenge, and after a sort dare the enemies of the
Church to attempt any thing against his people upon their peril: Gather
together on heaps O ye people, and Isai. 8. 9.
ye shall be broken in pieces: gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in
pieces: take counsel together, yet it shall be brought to naught: pronounce a
decree, yet it shall not stand. As if he should have said: Make your selves as
strong as ye can, with multitude, leagues, armor, consultations, authority,
and by what means ye can, and as often as ye will; yet all shall do your selves
no good, and nothing shall do my servants harm. When the Canaanites and other
inhabitants of that land were to be punished, how many Kings with their people
banded themselves together against Joshua and the Israelites? and yet it was to
no purpose: they did but offer themselves to the sword: that stood Joshua in
good steed; for it would have been long before he could have found them out,
and slain them singly man by man.





would be cast into that miserable and desperate torment at the last day. There
was never so great an army, as that will be of reprobate men and angels, and
if any thing would make them to strive, it would be the damnable estate
whereunto they shall be adjudged then presently to enter: but they shall
sensibly see and feel it to be bootlesse, and therefore they will never
attempt any such matter.

Job provide for his impunitie, by preserving his eyes, his heart and Job. 31.
his hands from lust and lewdnes, from violence and cruelty, from Idolatry
and covetousness, and all such misbehauiour, as might provoke Gods wrath
against him. And if that be past, we have done such things already: run not
from God to friends for to save us: let us not seek the help of their hands,
unless it be to be lifted up with ours in prayer, but run to God by faith
and holy humiliation. No other course will secure us from judgments deserved;
neither the multitude of friends, nor the means they can make, nor their
tender affection toward us, will prevail to succor us, if we fall into the
hands of the living God. Haman in all men's judgment was surely backed, and so
were Baals prophets, and yet committing sins of death, they received the
sentence of death, and felt the execution of death in the presence of those 1.
King. 18. 40.
whom they most depended upon.

the others were condemned for, these have now made themselves accessarie unto,
whether it be fellonie or treason or any other grievous offense: and yet it is
a thing little feared of men: they which have neither mercy nor courage to
deal in the cause of a poor oppressed innocent are ready and bold to protect
and maintain those, which are impious and sinful and walk in such lewd and
wicked ways as are offensive and abominable to God and man. How many are kept
from their condign punishment by the countenance of great men's cloth and
service? How many do words and letters prevail for? how many are cleared by
corrupt Jurors, who lay the guiltines of many soul and fearful faults upon
their own consciences?

But the seed of the righteous, etc. The best way for any man to do his
children good, is to be godly himself. He that sets himself to serve God,
and to seek everlasting salvation, is busily occupied in providing for his
posterity: and that which his soul shall find to be most comfortable to him,
his seed shall find to be most profitable to them. The same spirit of truth
which here does affirm this, does in diverse other places confirm it, as in
the twentieth Chapter of this book: He that walks in his vprightnes is Prou.
20. 7.
just, and blessed shall his children be after him. He needed not to say that
he himself is blessed, though he knew it to be so, and so likewise meant it:
for true justice is ever joined with true blessedness: but to prove the fulness
of his own happy estate, he shows that it shall flow over also to his
children. So is it said in the Psalms both concerning himself and his:
Blessed is the man that Psalm. 112. 1. 2.
fears the Lord, and delights greatly in his commandments: his seed
shall be mighty upon the earth: the generation of the righteous shall be
blessed.

Manasse and Ephraim were as dear to Jacob as if he had been their immediate
parent, and so were Ephraims and Manasses children Genesis 48.
to Joseph: though Naomi was but mother in law to Ruth, yet how acceptable was
Obed the son of Ruth unto her? though Moses was but the adopted son of
Pharaohs daughter, though of another nation, though of such a nation whom they
held as bondseruants, though of a people that was an abomination to him and his
people, though such a people as he feared and sought to destroy; yet Pharaoh
loved him and preferred him, and showed all kindness to him for his daughters
sake, when she had taken him to be hers.

Jacob intimate to Joseph for his exceeding great comfort: The blessings of thy
father Genesis 49. 26.
shall be mighty with the blessings of my elders: unto the end of the hills of
the world, they shall be on the head of Joseph. That profane Esau, as wicked as
he was, did assure himself that he should be the better for his father
Isaacks blessing, if he could obtain it, and therefore wept for sorrow when he
went without it.

Peter persuaded them to believe, whose hearts were pricked at his doctrine: To
you is the promise made (says he) and to your children, Act. 2. 39.
and to all that are a far off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.
And by the like reason the servants of the Lord who give themselves to piety
and mercy, are comforted notwithstanding their great afflictions, and the
flourishing state of the wicked: The righteous is ever merciful and lends,
and his seed enjoys the Psalm. 37. 26.
blessing.

to violent oppression and cruelty. They have a good peniworth, as they
think, and buy very cheap, when they can gain worldly wealth by loss of
their heavenly happiness: when they can purchase livings to their posterity,
by passing away the life of their souls. But hearken a little ye silly
wretched creatures: O foolish men when will you begin to learn wisdom? your
thriuing is wastfulnes; your rising is falling; in purchasing you forfeite; in
semblance of love you practice hatred; in seeking to set up your seed by such
unlawful courses, you take the way to pluck them down, and utterly to undo
them for ever. No man but Ieroboa^ could ever have wrought so much mischief to
Ieroboams family: and Ahab and Iezabel were most mortal enemies of their race
and lineage: and Nebuchadnezzar provided woe and misery to his issue that was
yet unborn when he died. And by what means did all these persons bring all
this hurt upon their seed? by relinquishing religion and the true service of
God: by exercising tyranny against the servants of God, and greedy getting of
goods to make themselves and their children great: that which in taunting
manner is charged upon one of them, is every way verified upon every one of
them: Ho, he that coueteth an Hab. 2. 9. 10.
evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on hie, to escape
from the power of evil. Thou have consulted shame to thine own house, by
destroying many people, and have sinned against thine own soul.

Mephibosheth had a father living, yea an everliving father that appointed him
to be well provided for, and maintained, when good Jonathan that begot him was
slain and gone. The godly poor Prophet that left his wife so far in debt,
that neither she was able to satisfy it, nor the creditor willing to be
satisfied, without taking of her sons to be his bondmen; yet had taken order
before his death for the payment of debt, for liberty of sons, for
maintenance of family, namely by possessing the constant favor of God, which
both conveyed him to 2. King. 4.
heaven, and remained with his household here in earth. If they should be
wicked, yet the Lord has grace enough and power enough to make them good. It
is without trouble or charge to himself, or hurt to his creatures, and why
should they not then both earnestly pray for it, and constantly wait for it?
what if it be not wrought at first? yet it may be effected at the last: and so
long as they have a natural life, so long may their friends hope for their
everlasting life. Jacobs sons were not all godly the first year, nor in many
years, and yet not without goodness in their latter years. And so stood the
case with Manasse the son of Ezekiah, and many other holy Christans.



It was a strong and mighty prayer that Jacob made and full of assurance of
hearing, and happy success, when he remembered that the Lord was the God of
his father Abraham, and the God of his father Isaac, and had promised to do
him good, and formerly performed, it and would yet be more merciful to him and
his Genesis 32. 9. 10. 12.
seed after him: it is not a trifle or matter of small consequence to be able
truly to plead before God ones own faith and integrity, and the piety or
godliness of their father or mother, or others of their ancestors.

Verse 22. As a jewel of gold in a swines snout: so is a fair woman that
lacks discretion.
AS a ring of gold, or any other ornament, does not adorn, but misbecome a
swine, no more does beauty, stature, strength, wit, apparel, wealth, or any
other external thing bring true praise, or commendation either to man, or
woman which wants true wisdom, or understanding.

Swines snout, etc. God makes no more reckoning of sinful people without
understanding, then of brute beasts without reason. Though they have humane
nature, and carry the form and shape of men and women with best show, yet if
there be nothing in them but that which is humane, even flesh and blood and
sinfulnes, no beauty, nor bravery, no personal excellency, or artificial
additaments, make the best of them, is more acceptable to him, than is the
basest of all the other creatures. It is a very homely comparison wherewith the
holy Ghost disgraceth wicked men in this book, and yet so true, that he
avouches it again in the new testament: The dog is returned to his own
vomit, and the sow that was washed, to the wallowing in the mire, Prou. 26. 11.
2. Pet. 2. 22. And as in these places for impuritie they are likened to filthy
beasts: so in others, for hurtfulnes they are resembled to fierce and venomous
beasts, as Leopards, Lions, Wolves, Beats, Dragons, Aspes, Adders, Vipers, and
Cockatrices. Isai. 11. 6.


is gone, and nothing is in them but ignorance of Gods holy will, and of the
mysteries of salvation. And therefore Jeremy says, that every man is a beast
by his own knowledge. And Ierem. 10.
Zophar in the book of Job proceeds further and shows what kind of beast
he is most like. Vain men, says he, would be wise, Job 11. 12.
though man borne (that is, in his own estate not regenerate) is like a wild
ass colt.



Like sheep they lie in the grave, Psalm. 49. 14. 20
death deuoureth them. Man is in honor, and understands not: he is like to
beasts that perish. They lie in their graves as the carcases of rotten sheep
in a ditch, and death makes a pray both of their souls and bodies, as crows,
and kites, and ravens, and dogs do feed upon carrions.





Solomon: Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity. Eccl. 1. 2.


And in this sense it is said in the book of Ecclesiastes, that it is the
wisdom of a man that does make his face to shine. Nothing but sound
understanding and holy behavior can possibly make either Eccl. 8. 1.
man or woman to be estimable, and worthy to be looked on. It is as truly to
be affirmed of one sex as another, and no less of one state than of another,
that favor is deceit, and beauty is vanity: but a woman that fears the
Lord she shall be praised. Prou. 31.




Solomon speaks of one: As a thorn standing up in the hand of drunkards: so
is a parable Prou. 26. 9.
in the mouth of fools. A drunken companion with a thorn, or goade in his
hand, does sometimes prick and pierce himself, and sometimes hurt them that
be near about him: and so stands the case with sinners that can speak
wittily, and yet want a sober heart to guide their tongues christianly: they
wound their own souls, and deprave good causes, and set a color upon sin,
and much traduce the names of many blameless persons.

Abshalom, Achitophel, Adonijah, Jeroboam, and Achab, with others of like state
and behavior, if they had been deformed in body, and weak in capacity, and
mean in condition, than to have been so conspicuous, and of such grert note,
and now to be so contemptible, and of such great infamy?

Wisdom, says Solomon, is good with an inheritance, and excellent to them
which see the Eccl. 7. 13.
Sun. His meaning is not that wisdom is good to them only that have
inheritances, but that it is good, yea necessary for them which have
inheritances to get wisdom that will make their possessions good, and that
will help them to the good use of their possessions. And so wisdom is good
with strength, wisdom is good with wit, wisdom is good with gentry,
wisdom is good with dignity, and wisdom is good with beauty. It doubleth
the greatness and value of every good blessing that God bestows. David's
victories and power be renowned by wisdom: Salomons glorious kingdom is
made memorable by wisdom: and so is the prosperity of Job, and Abraham: and
so is the advancement of Joseph and Daniel; and so is the beauty of Hester,
and Sara.



Verse 23. The desire of the righteous is only good, but the hope of the wicked
is indignation.
WE must beware here that we justify not all the wishes and desires to be good,
which righteous men conceive, not condemn all to be unrighteous which conceive
any wishes and desires that be not good: for then should David be excluded out
of the number of the righteous, or else his desire of having Bathsheba, or
wishing to know the number of the people should be allowed. But he
understands the maine stream of their desires, the course and current of
their hearts is to godliness and goodness, though sometimes they corrupt
nature in themselves, and the tempestuous temptations of Satan do violently
drive their thoughts another way; which is wholly contrary in the wicked. For
they desire nothing but mischief and evil, and therefore in the end they
shall receive nothing but misery and punishment, which will be so great and so
grievous, as will make them rave and rage with madness and fury, especially
because they looked for a better state. Thus then stands the opposition: the
desire of the righteous is only good, and therefore their hope shall end in
consolation: but the desire of the wicked is only evil, and therefore their
hope shall end in indignation.

David, that he kept his commandments, and followed 1. King. 14. 8.
him with all his heart, and did only that which was right in his eyes.

And so he testifies of all the godly Israelites in the book of Numbers: He
sees none iniquity in Iaacob, nor any transgression in Numb. 23. 21.
Israel. And so he testifies of all upright hearted people whomsoever in the
Psalms: Surely they work none iniquity, but walk Psalm. 119. 3.
in his ways.



Paul by good warrant, for example to all other good Christians, does once and
again disclaim all that evil from being his, which he was vnwllingly drawn
unto: If I do that which I would not, I consent to the law which is good. Now
then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me, Romans 7. 16. 20.



David was so charged by Saul and his courtiers: Paul was so charged by the
malicious Jews: the godly Jews so charged by Hamon: Christ himself was so
charged by the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees: all good men must look to be
so charged by all sorts of sinners. Well it is for them that their hearts can
witness that their desires are only good, and better that the Lord sees it,
and best of all that they have such a God as will openly publish it. If he knew
as much by us as the wicked say against us, or would refuse to testify that
he knows for us, as every one of us were more righteous, so should he be of
all others most ignominious. For no creature that ever God made (the devil not
excepted) is so much spoken against, as good men are, neither any so bad a name
as they, if the violent tongues of malicious persons may make a good man's name
to be bad. If sentence should pass upon the godly at the last day, according
to the verdict of them that are not friends or parties, we should be all cast,
and condemned, not one man would be acquitted. But here is an help against all
these surmises of purposes within, and accusations of behavior without: let
appeal be made to him that beholds all, and he will clear the righteous
from all these imputations. This brought Job to speak so confidently of his
cause; Oh that I had some to hear me; behold my sign that the Almighty will
witness for Job 31. 35.
me: though mine adversary should write a book against me. This brought
David with such affiance to repose himself upon God: Judge me Lord according
to my righteousness, and according to the Psalm. 7. 8.
innocence that is in me. And this brought Isaiah to use such liberty and
boldness in challenging his quarellous enemies. He is near that justifies me:
who will contend with me? Let us stand together: Isai. 50. 8. 9.
who is mine adversary? Let him come near to me. Behold the Lord will help
me: who is he that can condemn me? And yet this is not all the comfort that a
just man has, though it be great, but is increased by the testimionie which
God gives of their desires, that seeing they are good, they shall easily be
granted, and seeing he takes notice of no more then of those which are good,
their other infirmities shall be no impediment. And therefore if they ask
everlasting life, why should they make question whether they shall have it? If
they seek spiritual graces at his hands, what should hinder the finding of
them? If they crave the good blessings for themselves and theirs, for greater
experience of his favor in things of this life, what should stay them from
coming? When his justice pronounces their desires to be good, will not his
goodness be ready to fulfill them, especially his truth having promised the
performance thereof? Psalm. 14 5. 19.


as much as death. Nothing pleases them so well as to hear of the sins or
sorrows of professors, and nothing grieueth them so much as to hear that
wicked persons are either reclaimed from their dissolute behavior, or punished
for their shameful offenses. Surely these men are not righteous, their desires
are not good, and therefore whatsoever is in them, or comes from them is
evil, and displeasing to God, and dangerous, and damnable to their own
souls. As touching the other clause, for the event of wicked men's hopes, see
the second doctrine of the tenth chapter, and the first doctrine of the
eightenth verse of this chapter.

Verse 24. There is that scatters, and is more increased; but he that
spares more then right, comes surely to poverty.
THey that disperse their goods, this way and that, bestowing them upon such as
are in want and necessity, or otherwise employing them for the public benefit
of many, they that are ready and willing to part with their goods or money for
the relief of such as are in want or necessity, or to any other good uses, are
said to scatter them: and such take the best course to increase them, as sowing
of corn is a means to help a man more and more.

And this he delivers with great wisdom and wariness, saying, that some
are more increased, and not all: for many scatter upon dice, and cards, and
dogs, and whores, and such like, and they may look to be stripped of all the
rest, rather then to add to that which they have. On the other side he that
keeps in that which he ought to lay out, and spares that which duty
requires him to spend, does play the evil husband for the impouerishing of his
own estate.

and in what good thing is it not so to be found? we need not travel far
for proof of our point in hand, but only step over to the next verse
following, and there we shall have a confirmation of the same. There we shall
see that they which feed others shall be fat themselves (for so is the sense)
and they which are as good streams to send out streams, shall have such
supply, as that they shall not be dried up, but be as well able to flow at the
evening, as they were in the morning, and to morrow as much as to day, and the
next year no less than in this.

Honor the Lord, says he, with thy riches, and the chief of all thine
increase. So shall thy barnes be Prou. 3. 9. 10.
filled with abundance, and thy presses shall burst with new wine. And the
Apostle S. Paul gives as large an encouragement to the Corinthians in the new
Testament. He that ministers seed to the sower, will minister likewise bread
for food, and multiply your seed, and 2. Cor. 9. 10.
increase the fruits of your benevolence. No field is more fertile to sow in,
then the poor members of Jesus Christ: no seed is better then mercy, and
Christian liberality: no weather or watering is more seasonabe then Gods
blessing: no crop of corn is so commodious and profitable as is the reward
which God gives both to soul and body.

Paul press in many words to the Corinths, that they might know that their
liberality was not in vain. He will increase the fruits of your benevolence,
that in every sort ye may be made rich to all liberality, which causes,
through us, thanksgiving to God, 2. Cor. 9. 11. He dwells upon the argument,
and urges it in every verse to the end of the chapter.

And for this cause they are promised all sufficiency in all things, that they
may abound in every good work. As it is written, He has sparsed abroad and
given to to the poor: his benevolence remains for ever, 2. Cor. 9. 8. 9. He
shows by the testimony of the Psalm, that their communicating to the poor
did not bring them to poverty, that they should be compelled to give up
giving, but did establish their state, that they might continue their
benevolence as long as they lived: for so much does ever seem to import in
this place.

to cast their bread upon the waters, and after many days they shall find it
again. It is a kind of Eccles. 11. 1. 2.
prouerbiall speech with us, for fruitless charges, to say, I might as well
have thrown my money down the river. But in this case though we seem to throw
our money, or food, into the river, or sea it self, we shall have it restored
with advantage, yea, and when we think all is forgotten. And therefore he
proceeds to encourage men that they should lay about them, and not spare, in
the exercise of liberality. Give (says he) to seven, and also to eight.
Bestow upon many, and when thou have done that, make not an end, but give to
more than thou did before. As if he should have said, bestow as much seed
as thou have land to lay it on: and get as much land as thou have seed to sow
it with. But infidelity can hold no longer in hearing this, but out comes
her worthy question: How shall I live my self hereafter, if I give away all
now? who knows what hard times be coming? Now he stops her mouth with
retortion of her own reason. No man knows what evil days may come, and
therefore wisdom would that we should make provision for our selves before
hand. And nothing is surer laid up, then that which is charitablie laid out;
that will serve for a dear year, and a rainie day, as we are wont to speak
in our proverb.



Verse 25. The liberal soul shall wax fat, and he that gives plentifully
shall power forth.
THese words have affinity with the former part of the verse next before, and
are joined to it partly in way of explication, and partly in way of
illustration. And therefore first he shows who obtain that blessing to
increase by scattring, and that is they whose liberality begins at their
hearts: and then he declares the prosperous success thereof by a similitude
from wel-springs which receive as much water inwardly, as they send forth
outwardly, which, if they should fail of issue, would also fail of fulness,
the waters diuerting their course some other way, where they might have better
passage, or else infusing themselves in the earth, and mould of the adjacent
places round about, and so make a quagmire. The same comparison does Isaiah use
for the same purpose: The Lord shall satisfy thy soul continually in drought,
Isai. 58. 11.
and make fat thy bones: and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a
spring of water, whose waters fail not.

feed the poor with 1. Cor. 13. 3.
all his goods, and have not love, it profits him nothing. Esaias
conditioneth with the^ who would have the Lord to power forth his mercies and
blessings upon them, that they should not only power out their food and
victuals, but their souls also to the hungry. Isa. 58. 10.

A good man is merciful and Psalm. 112. 5.
lends, and will measure his affairs by judgment. And so is a liberal man
described by the Prophet Esaias, That he will devise of Isai. 32. 8.
liberal things. He will meditate where his gifts may best be placed: what is
fittest to be given: how much is meet for him to contribute: in what manner he
should perform it.

Job truly testify of himself, that he used to weep for them that were in
trouble, and his Job 30. 25.
soul was in heaviness for the poor.

As every man wishes in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly, nor of 2.
Cor. 9. 7.
necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver.

and bestow on the worst, frowning on them that are the most honest, and
feeding of them that of all others are the most unworthy. They contribute to
good uses with no less difficulty, than if a distress of a fine or
amercement were to be extorted from them. Commiseration and pity are mere
strangers unto them, their hearts have no acquaintance at all with them.



Verse 26. He that withdraws corn, the people will curse him: but blessing
shall be upon the head of him that sells corn.
IT is not unlawful to keep in corn, as Joseph did in the time of plenty to
be provided against scarcity and dearth: but when we may spare it, and others
need it, then to with hold the selling thereof in hope to raise the price,
this tends to a common hurt, and therefore will cause a common complaint of
the people against us. But on the other side; blessing shall be on his head
that sells corn, he shall not only have the good testimony and prayers of
men beneath, but the blessing of God himself from above descend upon him.
Provided that his heart be upright therein, not so much respecting the price in
self-love, as the profiting of his brother in Christian charity: and that he
use all other due circumstances accordingly. As to sell that which is good at a
reasonable rate, and perform it in due season, and full measure, and such like.

and deem what harm they do by the effects that ensue thereupon. The
exclamation and outcrie, not of one person, or family, but of the multitude of
the people, does intend in this case some grieuance among them. Scarcity of
food is one of the most grievous judgments wherewith the Lord is wont to
plague a nation, and how can we then take them for our friends, which wish so
grievous a punishment? Solomon by prayer made 1. Reg. 8. 38.
a way for the prayers both of the whole people, and the particular friends and
members thereof, to come to God for remouall of such a misery; then what are
they to be accounted that send forth desires, and put forth endeavors to call
for it, and bring it?

Amos, where the selfsame effect is wrought by the selfsame means which we
are now in hand with: Hear this, O ye that swallow up the poor, that Amos 8.
4. 5. 6.
ye may make the needy of the land to fail, saying, When will the new Moon
be gone, that we may sell corn? and the Sabbath, that we may set forth
wheat, and make the Epha small, and the shekell great, and falsify the
weights by deceit? and buy the poor for silver, and the needy for shoes: yea
and sell the refuse of the wheat. They had long kept up the corn for this
purpose to have it grow dear, and now the time served the turn, and it must
be opened in all the haste, they thought the days of the Lords own service
too long, until they were at it. And now woe to the poor, for the plot is
laid to pray upon them. They shall buy the refuse dear, which is little worth,
and sell themselves cheap to pay for it.

way; ask the labourer in the country; ask the tradesmen in the town; ask
the common sort, yea almost any sort of inhabitants in the city, and which of
all these will say, or truly may say, it is no burden to us that things are no
cheaper? A great part of their care is to make provision for household: a great
part of their labor is swallowed up in provision: a great part of time is too
little for their labor. So that their care is more, their labor greater,
their commons shorter, and state much weaker. Many be restrained from doing
further good: many be compelled to lessen former family: many thereby be
brought to manifold inconveniences, more than we express or think of.

James does denounce, as those whose other riches were corrupt: whose garments
were moath-eaten for want of wearing: whose gold and silver was canckred and
rustie for want of usage? But worse are they which not only hoord up their
own corn, that it shall never come forth seasonably to prevent a dearth: but
ingrosse other men's also for the same purpose, that they may make their gain
thereof to the detriment and hurt of many others. But of all others, worst are
they which not only keep back corn from the marker, but from the barn: not
from sale, but from sowing: which refuse to yield tillage and seed to the
ground: which yet further, by force or fraud, extort the ground from other men
that they shall neither till nor sow it. These dry up the springs of the
Market, that the streams of plenty should be restrained from flowing to it:
these bring a curse upon the earth, and make it barren in comparison of the
Isai. 5. 9. 10.
store it was wont to yield. These labor for depopulation of houses, and
towns, and fields, and people.



The people will curse him, etc. It is a grievous plague to be pursued justly
with the cries and clamours of the people. True it is that Jeremy and others of
the most faithful servants of God have been spoken evil of, and cursed by the
multitude. And so it is Iere. 15. 10.
true that as the sparrow by flying, and the swallow by flying escape, so Prou.
26. 2.
the curse that is causeless shall not come. And it is most true, they whom
men revile and persecute, and say alll manner of evil for Christ his sake
falsely, are blessed. But this is also very true, that to be spoken against for
sins sake, truly, is not a matter of blessedness, but misery: the wings of a
man's name and reputation will be clipped so short that it shall not avoid the
stroke and shot of a curse, if it be duly caused. In this same manner are
hurtful men threatened, which flatter, or countenance, or bear out wicked
persons in their sinful courses. He that says to the wicked, thou art
righteous, him shall the people curse, and the multitude shall abhor him.
Pro. 24. 24.



blemish themselves with any kind of misbehauiour.



Verse 27. He that diligently seeks good, shall get favor: but he that
seeks evil, it shall come to him.


He that would be well thought of, must not only wish well but endeavor to do
good to his brethren. To bear good affection to mankind, but especially to
Gods Church and people is a thing pleasing to God, and godly men; but men see
not the affection to be good, further then it is manifested by effects: and God
sees that affection not to be good, which is void of a working vigor and
fruitfulnes. By what steps did Nehemia ascend to that estimation which is had
of him, in the Church in the Scriptures, and in Gods own presence now in
heaven? He inquired of the state of his brethren, he mourned for them, he
fasted for them, he prayed to God for them, he spoke to the King for them, he
undertook a journey for them, he was indaungered, he was reproched, he was
traduced and all for their sakes. And therefore it an was effectual petition
which he offered to God: Remember me O my God in Nehem. 5. 19.
goodness, according to all that I have done for this people. How came
Onesiphorus to be so dear to Paul, and so much beloved of God himself, who
has registered his name in an everlasting record, even in his own holy
scriptures? by showing himself kind, and bold, and bountiful to the Apostle.
He did not only desire that Paul might do well, but took the pains to come
to Rome, and 2. Tim. 1. 16.
there also visited him in the prison, and so provided that by his means, he
might do the better.



Iam. 2. 15.
give him no meat, or to one that is cold, to wish him warmth, and minister to
him neither fire nor clothing.

means: and that is by making themselves popular in practice of some plausible
sins, in yielding liberty for all licentious courses to them that live under
them, in procuring impunity to disordered persons. So that whereas God in his
word here says, he that seeks good shall get favor, they in their deeds
say, he shall get favor that exercises evil.

For the other part of this verse, look the seventeenth verse.

Verse 28. He that trusts in his riches, shall fall: but the righteous shall
flourish as a branch.
HE that so reposeth upon his wealth, as that for love and desire thereof, he
is willing, and in confidence thereof he is bold to sin against God; he
which hops it will keep him from troubles, or rid him out of troubles, or
any way confer happiness to him, this man shall surely be brought down,
and fall into mischief. And so by the same proportion, shall all those which
trust to men, or to wit, or to any other creature. On the other side, just men
are all on the mending hand; they are well planted, they grow in a fruitful
ground by the rivers of water, they have the Lord Jesus Christ for their root,
they have God the Father to dress and keep them, and therefore they shall
flourish as a branch which grows and has green leaves. The drought of
adversity shall not hurt them, the dewes of wholesome prosperity shall not
fail them. They shall have safety for their bodies, graces for their souls,
competencie for their state, and all good furtherances for their everlasting
glory. Thus stands the opposition. The wicked trust in their riches, and
they shall fall like rotten boughs: but the righteous trust in the Lord, and
they shall grow like flourishing branches.



If safety consisted in wealth, and happiness in height, we could not but
yield that diverse sinful persons were grounded in great safety and happiness:
for they have the world at will, and are mounted up to eminent places. And if
peril did always accompany poverty, and misery likewise a mean condition,
who could deny, but that the most of the best men, should ever be found in
the worst case, and of all others the most miserable? for that they are
commonly poor and base in the world? But if God in his just judgments do
lift up his enemies hie, to cast them down the; lower and if his servants take
rooting low, that they may grow up the hier then let the wicked take heed of a
downfall, and then let the righteous not doubt of a rising. The thirty seven
and seventy third Psalms, are treatises wholly upon this argument, besides
many other texts of Scripture. And this comes to pass to both sides. First,
in regard of the different, and David says, If riches increase, set not your
heart Psalm. 62. 10. 11.
thereon God spoke once, twice have I heard it, that power belongs only to
God. There was never any Papist, or heathen man more deceived in dumb Idols,
then worldlings be in the hope of their money and substance. The images have as
much sense to hear, and speak, and deal for them which pray to them, as gold
and silver and other treasures have ability in themselves to help them, that
make them their gods: and many more are illuded by these, then by the others.
And whom do the godly make their refuge? In whom is their hope fixed? in God
omnipotent, eternal, endless in mercy, wisdom, and truth, whose good
providence does never fail them in life: whose gracious favor does not
forsake them at death: And that one word may comprehend all, and that is
infinitely much, and more then heaven and earth can comprehend, he is God every
way for them, all-sufficient.

Cursed be the man Ierem. 17. 5.
that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart
from the Lord. Confidence is a prerogative and royalty, that the Lord never
communicates to any, upon any conditions. He so calls for love to himself,
that men also should be loved for his sake, and feared and rejoiced at, and
the like is in other affections: but to trust in any besides him, is as much as
in us is, to set the imperial diadem of heaven and earth upon their heads. Now
the godly relying altogether upon his fidelity and power yield him homage, and
declare themselves to be his loyal, faithful, and obedient subjects, and
perform a most acceptable service unto him.



their safety, and their pastures, fields, barnes, shops, warehouses, or
coffers, their heaven. Like foolish men, they wait upon lying Jonah 2. 8.
vanities, and forsake their own mercy. It is as easy for a croppe of corn
to thrive upon a waste Heath, or in the midst of a thornie hedge, or thicket
of bushes, as it is for grace to grow in their hearts: and it is as easy for a
cable rope to go through an needles Mark. 10. 24. 25.
eye, as for them to enter into the kingdom of heaven. And yet they think al
to be well, and their state to be happy: yea they presume so far of their
own standing, that upon confidence of their power they doubt not but to give
others the fall: they hope that their withered rotten sticks shall be able to
root up and throw down the strongest Cedars that grow in the Church of God.
Such a one was Doeg, that thought to do great things against David, but David
did after a sort defy him, and bad him do his worst, yea he derided, and told
him that the worst would be his own: Why boastest thou (says he) in thy
wickedness, O man of power? Psalm. 52. 1. 5. 6. etc.
the loving kindness of God endures daily. God shall destroy thee for ever:
he shall take thee and pluck thee out of thy tabernacle, and root thee out of
the land of the living. The righteous also shall see it, and fear, and shall
laugh at him, saying, Behold the man that took not God for his strength, but
trusted to the multitude of his riches. But I shall be like a green Olive tree
in the house of God: for I trusted in the mercy of God for ever and ever.



Verse. 29. He that troubles his own house shall inherit the wind, and the
fool shall be servant to the wise in heart.
HE is said to trouble his house, which does mispend his goods, and misguide
his affairs, and misgouerneth his people that dwell with him. That either does
corrupt them with sinfulnes, or molest them with frowardnes, or afflict them
with misery. When he either makes them patients to bear the burden of his
folly, or agents to commit folly with him. He shall inherit the wind, that
is, shall bring al to nothing. His substance shall fly up like smoke into the
air, and nothing be left to maintain him on earth. And when all his goods are
gone, his liberty must go after. This fool shall be servant to the wise in
heart, that is, to one who is more provident, discreet and careful for his
state and household. They were wont in great wants to sell themselves for
servants, as the Egyptians did in Joseph's time. And Genesis 47. 19.
for great debts to be taken by the creditours, and either made their bondmen,
or else sold to others. And one of these, says he, Matthew. 18. 25.
is like to be the case of this unthrifty trouble-house.







for our present condition; if not to get, yet to save, as to preserve our
goods, so to retain our freedom. For albeit that villenage and bondage be not
now in use among us, yet imprisonment is not altogether out of use. And every
one is so far in servitude, and in the creditours power, as he wants
ability to pay his debts. He may well be said to be another man's servant,
whose state and liberty does stand at another man's courtesy.

destroy the house of Prou. 15. 25.
proud men. Whoredom and incontinencie also work much mischief to families,
and most of all to the heads themselves. The holy Ghost in this book, is very
frequent in this point. As, the stranger shall be filled with thy strength, and
thy labors shall be Prou. 5. 10. Prou. 6. 26.
in the house of a stranger. And, because of the whorish woman a man is brought
to a morsel of bread. And Job says, that if he should that way have defiled
himself, it would have bin a fire devouring Job 31. 12.
to destruction, and which would have rooted out all his increase. Gaming,
riot, and unthriftiness so apparently show themselves in this rank, that it
shall be needless to discourse of them. Only Covetousness we will conclude
with, which seems to be an help to raise up an house, and yet undermines the
very foundations of it. This makes men fierce, and violent, bitter and cruel,
like Bears and Lions among their people. And this the Lord himself has
reckoned for one of these turbulent sins, and so would have us to account of
it. He that is greedy of gain Prou. 15. 27.
troubles his own house: but he that hates gifts, shall live. As if he
should say, If men be not weary of this wretched greedines, it will make them
in all corrupt manner to pursue their commodities, to the annoyance of theirs,
till Gods wrath pursue them to death and undoing.

And whereas many proud persons, and unclean, and covetous, hold up their
heads still, and decay not in state, they come not into other men's dangers, but
have many others fallen into their hands; yet let not men think there is a
possibility of impunitie, because they are not scourged with the least rod,
but reserved to a greater: for poverty is one of the easiest punishments. What
though they come not to inherit the wind here? yet if they inherit damnation in
the world to come, what gain they by the change? what though they be not
brought to be servants to men? yet if they be servants to sin, presently,
and shall receive the wages of sin hereafter, how much is their case the
better?

Verse 30. The fruit of the righteous is as a tree of life, and he that
wins souls is wise.
THe meaning of these words is, that a godly man is very plentiful in bringing
forth fruit, and his fruit exceeding profitable to them that receive it.
Especially his instructions, consolations, prayers, and other spiritual means
that he uses, to convert, or confirm the hearts of his brethren. And he
himself also is not without the fruit of his own fruit, which is intimated
here by pronouncing him wise that wins souls, that is, which with desire,
and endeavor faithfully and discreetly, by Gods own means, according to his
place and calling either does draw men out of their sins and ignorance, or
else fails of success therein, not by his negligence, and want of love, but
rather by their stubbornness and want of will. And herewith the Prophet does
satisfy himself, whatsoever should be the issue of his ministry. Now says
the Lord that formed me from the womb to be his servant, that I may bring
Jacob again to him, though Israel be not gathered, Isai 49. 4.
yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord: and my God shall be my
strength. On the other side we dare not take upon us to justify the hearts
and states of all those which have been occasions of any man's conversion, if it
be not their fruit: nor to extenuate the efficacy of every unregenerate man's
ministry, that his doctrine should win none to salvation. It is granted
without question, or gainesaying, that he may prepare before, and build up
after, and we remember not any such stint or restraint spoken of, but that he
may also convert, especially before his life is stained with any sinful
behavior, that might bring his ministry into contempt. The power of
preaching stands in the ordinance of God, by the work of his spirit, and not
in the person of the messenger, that does publish it.

Psalm. 1. 3.
which is good for nothing. In the second of the Canticles the godly are
resembled to the most beautiful and pleasant lilies Cant. 2. 2.
which yield delight to those that gather them; and the wicked to thorns or
thistles which do annoy those that meddle with them. In other places of
scripture the servants of God are called sheep; which for lamb, and fleece,
and flesh, and every other way, are commodious, insomuch that they make the
very ground the better which they fit upon; and the slaves of sin are called
by the names of Wolves, and Foxes, and such kind of beasts, which are very
hurtful, and be ready to do mischief wheresoever they come. In what respect
the fruit of the righteous is so profitable, it will appear by the proportion
it has with the tree of life whereunto it is compared. Reave. 22. 22.
thereof, and the root sends up the sap, and the sap sends out the fruit.
And so the good which a good man does, arises not from his wit, nor natural
disposition, nor fleshly wisdom, but springs from the word, and spirit of
God in his heart, Gal. 5. 22.

continually bearing without stay, or failing, not once a year, but once in a
month, not in summer only, but in winter also, and every time new kinds of
fruit, and not of one sort alone (as it falls out commonly with other trees,
for in them the same branch never varieth the kind) and that rotteth not, nor
droppeth down Ezech. 47. 12.
with ripeness. In like sort does the spirit of grace make Gods children
constant in well doing, and that also in performance of many duties, according
to the variety of occasions and opportunities offered. They join virtue with
their faith: and with virtue knowledge: and with knowledge temperance: and with
temperance 1. Pet. 1. 5. 6.
patience: and with patience godliness: and with godliness brotherly kindness:
and with brotherly kindness love. If they see the members of Mat. 25. 35. 36
Christ hungry, they give them meat; if thirsty, they give them drink: if
naked, they clothe them: if they be strangers, they lodge them: if they be
sick, they visit them: if they be in prison, they come unto them, etc.

their lips do feed many: their tongues are whole some, their instructions
are as a welspring of life, to Prou. 10. 21.
turn away from the snares of death. Pro. 13. 14.

are benefited by them. And so the Apostle says, they please God in all
things, which are fruitful in all good works. And so does Col. 1. 10.
Christ speak of his Church, and the members thereof in Salomons songs: My
sister, my spouse, is as a garden enclosed. Thy plants Cant. 4. 12. 13. 14.
are as an orchard of Pomegranets, with sweet fruits, as Camphire, Spikenard,
and Saffron, Calamus, and Cinnamon, with all trees of Incense, Myrrh, and
Aloes, with all the chief spices. But if thou be fruitless, thou art void
of righteousness, and so destitute of Gods favor, and thine own safety. For
unfruitful trees has God marked out to be hewn down for fire wood. But worse
are they, Matthew. 3. 10.
by far, and in more dangerous case, that bring forth too much fruit, but
it is of the flesh, and to the flesh, works of pride, works of cruelty, cursed
blasphemy and swearing, notorious riot, and unthriftiness, drunkenness,
filthiness, contempt of Magistrates, contempt of Ministers, contempt of
preaching, and malice against all godly Christians. Their vine is the vine of
Sodom, and of the Deuteronomy. 32. 32. 33.
vincs of Gomorah: their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters be bitter.
Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel gall of aspes.

Jeremy came and offered his fruit to a people that stood in great need to
eat of the tree of life: for they were ready to perish with death. But they
practiced to abolish that fruit which was offered for their preservation, and
to take away his life, which sought to save theirs. For so has the Lord
declared their conspiracy: Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof,
Ierem. 11. 19.
and cut him out of the land of the living, that his name may be no more in
memory. Which almost of all the Prophets sped better? How much more favorably
was Paul dealt with? And especially Christ Jesus, the very tree of life, and
Lord of life, and life it self, whom all the rest did but resemble? His
perfect fruit they trampled on, and labored to dig him up by the root. And so
they dealt still with his messengers and servants, not making use of their
company, but abhorring it: not desiring to be partakers of their knowledge,
and wisdom, and other graces, but to suppress them.

He that wins souls is wise, etc. It is the note of a wise man, to show
mercy to men's souls. Fools cannot easily find out the malady of sin;
fools fail of all experience of good medicines that may cure a sinful heart;
fools feel not the burden of their own iniquities, and therefore cannot be
compassionate toward others for theirs. Only wisdom does show the disease,
and the remedy, and moves men's hearts in pity to help them that are
infected with it. That which Solomon professes to be true of himself, is
also verified of every good man in his measure; The more wise Ecclesiastes was,
the more he taught the people Eccle. 12. 9.
knowledge. And to convert it the other way: the more any man teaches the
people knowledge, the more wise he is.



They that make men wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: and
they that turn many to righteousness, shall shine Dan. 12. 3.
as the stars, for ever and ever.

and favor, and peace at his hands for evermore hereafter? The godly esteem
us to be wise; the holy Scriptures pronounce us to be wise; our reward in time
will show us to be wise: and shall the reproach of foolish men discourage us
from our wisdom?

Terror for them that corrupt men's souls, and labor with all their might to
keep men from coming to God. It is a blessed calling to be a fisher for God,
as Peter was, and to catch men with the net of the word: but of all trades it
is the worst to fish for Satan's turn, and to kill men with the baits of
sin. Therefore is the case of the devil the most miserable of all creatures,
because he has done more mischief this way than all the rest. And that
causes the Lord so grievously to threaten the false Prophets that kept men
from repentance: and the false Apostles that hindered the work of the Gospel;
and Elymas, and any that have sought to pervert men's hearts, or behavior. It
is not safe to deprave the Ministry, to weaken the power of it. It is not
safe to entice men to Popery and superstition. It is not safe to persuade men
to profaneness and neglect of Gods worship. If the natural Serpent being but
a beast was so plagued for being an instrument of Satan vnknowingly, and
without desire to bring the woman into sin; what shall become of them that
apply their wit, and tongue, and heart, and whatsoever they can, to do him
service herein?

Verse 31. Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed on earth: how much more
the wicked and the sinner?
THe matter which he is about to speak of, is both certain and weighty, and
such as concerns every man to look to in regard of his own case; and
therefore he prefixeth this word, Behold, to move all to a serious
consideration of that which is to be said. And that is first touching the
godly, that they must be corrected for their faults, when they offend, even in
such manner and measure as holds some proportion with their offenses, though
not in equality, for then who should be able to abide it? The word recompense
therefore in this place is not taken for reuengement, or punishment proceeding
from Gods indignation, but a loving chastisement, though it be sharper
according to the threatening of parents to their children, whom they be far
from hating, or hurting: I will surely pay you for this. And that it should
appear that nothing is intended against them for the peril of their
everlasting state, there is a limitation annexed, that it is to be only in the
earth. Next he shows the condition of the wicked, that if the righteous escape
not scotfree, they must in no sort be spared, but feel more heavy and
featefull punishments, though not in the earth, yet in the world to come.

Behold, O Lord, how I am troubled: my bowels swell: mine heart is turned
within me, for I am Lam. 1. 18. 20.
full of heaviness: the Lords sword spoyleth abroad, as death does at home.
The Lord is righteous: for I have rebelled against his commandment. How
lamentably do the godly bemone themselves, and the state of the Church, in the
prophecy of Esaiah? Be not angry, O Lord, above measure, neither remember
iniquity for ever: Isai. 64. 9. 10.
lo, we beseech thee behold, we are all thy people. Thine holy cities lie
waste: Zion is a wilderness, and Jerusalem a desert. The house of our
sanctuary, and of our glory, where our fathers praised thee, is burnt up with
fire, and all our pleasant things are wasted. In what patheticall manner does
the Prophet express the burden of his afflictions, in the book of the
Psalms? Thine arrows have light upon Psalm. 38. 2. 3.
me, and thine hand lies upon me. There is nothing sound in my flesh, because
of thine anger: neither is there rest in my bones, because of my sin.

Moses and Jeremy bestirre them, when God showed his anger to the one, and
threatened to destroy the other, for being so backward to undertake their
ministry: Exp. 4. 14. Ier. 1. 17. And the wicked shall see by this, that he
is neither remiss toward all, nor partial to any, when his commandment is
not regarded. This seems to be one cause, why the Prophet that came to
Bethel, and failed to fulfill that which was given him in charge, was so
severely handled. He told Jeroboam, that God had straightly forbidden him
either to eat or to drink in that city, and yet Jeroboam might hear that he
had both eaten and drunken in the house of an other Prophet there, for which
cause the Lord sent a Lion to kill him, that it might be known to Jeroboam and
others, 1. Reg. 13.
how dangerous it was for any to disobey his word.

Secondly, he respects their good, though it might seem to be better for
them if they were wholly freed from all manner of troubles and crosses. How
wanton, how froward, how stubborn would children be? Into what perils would
they cast themselves, if they should be altogether exempted from the rod? They
could never feel the comfort of their parents favor, unless they sometimes
found the smart of their displeasure. And so are the stripes and chastisements
of God as needful every way to all his sons and daughters. They make us the
more careful to beware of evil: they help us to repentance when we have
fallen into evil: they confirm the love of our heavenly father toward us;
they be occasions of his holiness in us: They bring the quiet Heb. 12. 6. 10.
11.
fruit of righteousness unto us. Finally, to knit up all in few words: we are
therefore recompensed with afflictions in the earth, that we should not be
punished with destruction in hell, but rewarded with everlasting glory in
heaven. And this the Apostle shows to be the cause why God scourges us. When
we are judged, says he, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with 1. Cor. 11. 32.
the world.

Ieroboams transgressions were begun long before the fault that he committed;
and yet the struck came upon him for his fault long before the destruction of
Jeroboam and his house. And let no man say, I am safe, because I am sure to be
saved; he may fall into great misery in this life, though he be in state of
happiness for the life to come. Freedom from perdition does not free men from
all manner of punishments. What plague besides destruction can Christians say,
we shall certainly escape, unless they be sure to escape such sins as may
provoke God to plague them? The Magistrate has many punishments for offenders
besides death, as the stocks, the goal, the whip, the pillarie, etc. and God
has more judgments besides damnation, as every man may hear by the
threatenings, and see by the execution, and feel by the burden of them. David
was as safe from being condemned, as Satan is out of all hope to be redeemed;
and yet his calamities made him to groan, and cry, and roar as he says. His
blood was dried up, his moisture was like the drought of summer. His torment
was as great Psalm. 32. 4. and 51. 8.
as if his bones had been broken. And as no man should take encouragement by
ought that is in himself to do that which is displeasing to the Lord; so is
there a care to be had that we be not led by the examples of other men to
do any thing which the word does not allow. Some hereby take liberty for
breach of the Sabbath, some for gaming, some for one thing, some for another.
Good men, say they, use these things, and why then may not we also? But it is
no part of their goodness, say we, and then why should you follow them therein
at all? Their practice leads you to the like facts, but can it preserve you
or themselves from the reward thereof? The question is not therefore who they
be that do it, but with what warrant, and how well they are like to speed for
their doing.



How much more, etc. Every wicked man's state is worse then any godly man's can
be. Take the most prosperous of them all, even such as the Prophet speaks of,
that have not a knot to their death, but the web of their life from the womb
to the grave, has run with even thread both in warpe and woofe without any
breach, and let him be compared with a Christian that never saw merry day
touching outward things, and he shall be found to be a miserable forlorn
caitiffe, in respect of this poor servant of God. And indeed the tribulations
and afflictions of good men do not bring them behind the wicked, but show that
the plagues and punishments of the wicked are yet behind. That reason our
Savior used to the women that lamented him as an unfortunate man, and one
forsaken of God: Weep not for me, says he, but weep for your selves, and
your children. For if these things be done to Luc. 23. 28. 31.
a green tree, what shall be done to the dry? This reason the Prophet Jeremy
used to Gentiles bordering upon Judah, which thought that plagues had only
belonged to the Church. Lo, I begin to plague the city, where my name is
called upon, and should you Ierem. 25. 29.
go free? ye shall not go quite, for I will call for a sword upon all the
inhabitants of the earth, says the Lord of hosts.

And this reason S. Peter uses against all impious and sinful persons: The
time is that judgment must begin at the house of God. If it first begin at us,
what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? And if the
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall Pet. 4. 17.
the ungodly and the sinner appear?

wrath and vengeance does pursue the other, and that for their greatest hurt
and misery.







Fret not thy self because of the malicious, neither be envious at the
wicked. For Pro. 23. 19. 20.
there shall be none end of plagues to the evil man: the light of the wicked
shall be put out.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE TWELFTH CHAPTER OF THE PROVERBS. CHAPTER XII.
Verse 1. He that loves correction, loves knowledge: but he that hates
correction, is brutish.
HE that loves instruction,] Which does apply himself to seek it, by those
means which are ordained of God for his people to be instructed by, and
accepts and makes use of it, when it is offered to him, he loves knowledge,
that is, has it in due estimation, and truly desires it, and therefore shall
also accordingly obtain it. But he that hates correction, which refuses all
instruction, but especially will not endure to be reproved, or corrected, he is
brutish, a beast in a man's shape, a fool in a high degree of folly, both for
an ignorant mind, and rude behavior, and wretched condition.

Isaiah, that they shall say: Come, let us Isai. 2. 3.
go up to the mountain of the house of the Lord, that he may teach us his
ways, and we may walk in his paths. And so the godly speak to the Lord in
another place of Isaiah: The desire of our soul is to Isai. 26. 8. 9.
thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. With my soul have I desired thee in
the night, and with my spirit within me will I seek thee in the morning.









laboring for the bread of life. They feel not, they say, the love of the
word of God, the desire of faith and care of repentance, etc. But from whence
proceeds that? is it not hence, that they are greedy and covetous of getting
abundance of love and desire, and therefore they think that which they have to
be nothing, in comparison of that which they would have. But these men must be
well confuted: their troubles, their attention, their meditations, their
pains, their reading, their questions, their conference, their joy in
Christian company, their diligence in all good exercises with willingness, does
manifestly show the error of their doubts and fears. But may not an hypocrite
do all these things, and yet have no touch in him? But may an hypocrite do all
these things in good earnest with resistance of hypocrisy? May an hypocrite
continue an hypocrite, and yet bewail his want of sincerity in the presence
of God alone, with promise, and purpose to perform every service more
sincerely, if possibly by any means he may be able? It was an argument
wherewith David confirmed his own heart in assurance that he truly loved the
Lord, and unfeignedly sought his own salvation, because he loved the law of the
Lord, meditated in his word and kept his precepts. And Job takes it for a sure
effect of his vprightnes, that he had not departed from the commandments of
Gods lips, but esteemed the words of his mouth more than his appointed food.

Is brutish, etc. They that will not be schooled of God to learn Christian
knowledge, are no better than if they had no manner of knowledge. They are not
all children that hate this kind of correction: they are not all naturals:
they are not all idiots, but they are all stark fools. Then many have been
fools, and yet learned Philosophers: and many have been fools, and yet deep
Politicians: and many have bin fools, and yet every way worldly wise men. This
does God charge upon the multitude, the greater number of a whole people: They
are a nation void of Deuteronomy. 32. 28. 29.
counsel, neither is there any understanding in them. Oh that they were wise,
then they would understand this, they would consider their latter end. Yea the
wittiest of them are so reputed in the prophecy of Jeremy: My people is
foolish, they have not known me: Ierem. 4. 22.
they are foolish children, and have none understanding: they are wise to do
evil, but to do well they have no knowledge.

The wise men are ashamed, they are afraid and taken: lo, they have rejected
the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Ierem. 8. 9.




The Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels in
flaming fire, rendering 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
vengeance to them that know not God, and which obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Now lay all these things together, and see wherein any man
is bettered by any knowledge or wisdom which is joined with contempt of
grace. Does he think to please God the better? the more is he offended. Does
he hope to win credit by it? it will bring him to shame. Would he have it to
keep him from troubles? it will draw him into them. His death is made the more
uncomfortable and bitter, and his destruction following much more horrible and
fearful.

say, that they are wise which hearken to the rebukes of Gods holy word: and
fools as bad as beasts that despise them. Ob. But men will laugh at our
simplicity, if we sit down by such indignities. Resp. But God will laugh at
our miseries if we quarrel with admonitions and counsels when he vouchsafes
them unto Prou. 1. 26.
us.

Verse 2. A good man gets favor of the Lord: but a man of wicked
imaginations will he condemn.
A Good man, which sets his heart to devise of goodness, and performs the
same in practice, gets favor of the Lord, that is, inioyeth the assurance
and comfort of his loving kindness in his soul, and the good effects thereof
both in soul and body, and every other way. But a man of wicked
imaginations, etc. It is the description of a wicked man by a periphrasis, that
he is as it were made of sinful thoughts, and purposes, and is in the midst of
them.

A good man may sometimes have evil imaginations, as David had to destroy the
whole house of Nabal, but it was the imagination of the man, and he was not a
man of such imaginations. He will condemn, etc, The displeasure of God
against him is declared by the effect, he will convince him, and find him
guilty, that is, pass sentence upon him, and cause execution to be done
accordingly. Thus then stands the opposition: A good man of godly meditations
gets favor of the Lord, who therefore will save him: but an evil man of
wicked imaginations, incurreth the displeasure of the Lord, who therefore will
condemn him.



What account David and others made of the favor of God, is showed in diverse
places of the Psalms, as when they break out so earnestly into prayer, and
redouble their petition, Turn us again O Lord God of hosts: cause thy face to
shine upon us, and we shall be saved. That is, help us out of our captivity:
restore us to Psalm. 80. 19.
the place and means of thy worship: let us feel the testimonies of thy love,
and our state will be blessed and happy. So where the same is acknowledged
with thankfulness: Thy loving kindness is better then life: therefore my lips
shall praise thee. Neither is this Psalm. 63. 3.
only David's testimony, or feeling, or estimation of Gods love toward him,
but many others have made such precious account thereof, as that they endured
the loss of all their substance, and liberty, and life it self, and that
with bitter pains and torment, rather then they would do any thing that might
move the Lord Heb. 11. 36. 37
to be angry with them.



David felt by woeful experience, when he had committed that grievous sin of
murder and adultery) but lost it cannot be, nor long concealed: for it will
work in them the grace of humiliation, that they may behold it to their joy
and comfort.



Defense from enemies, and safety from dangers every creature seeks after,
and this does Gods goodness bring to every one that is godly. Thou Lord (says
David) wilt bless the righteous, Psalm. 5. 12.
and with favor wilt compass him, as with a shield.

Gladness of heart and comfort is that which every man much affects, and
this the love and favor of God does minister to all those that be partakers of
it. And this does David also profess himself to have experience of, and
therefore prefers the loving countenance of the Lord before all the
commodities and pleasures which worldly men so much long after. Many say, who
will show us any good, but Lord lift up the light of thy countenance Psalm. 4.
6. 7.
upon us. Thou have given me more joy of heart, then they have had, when their
wheat and their wine did abound. It is needelesse to reckon up other things,
sithence the sufficiency of al good things is inferred by these, otherwise
there were not so much safety, neither would there be so great joy and
gladness.

Psalm. 16. 11.
ever more.

Paul himself to labor that both in life and death he might be acceptable
to 2. Cor. 5. 9.
him, as knowing that most fearful is their state whom he shall then be
displeased with: and thrice happy beyond all that mortal man's thought can
comprehend, to whom he then shall declare his kindness. But in the mean time,
say some, they be maligned and molested more then any, and none have so many
enemies as they. But who knows whether Gods favor may not make men
favorable to the^? It is said that when the ways of a man please the Lord, he
will make also his enemies at peace with him, Prou. 16. 7. Or if they be
implacable, and mighty also, yet this is the comfort of the faithful that God
himself will ouerliue them, and his might will ouermatch them, and his loving
kindness will be exercised daily, as David told that bragging Doeg; Psalm. 52.
1.

The man of wicked imaginations, etc. The Lord does not only proceed against
the wicked for their ungodly actions, but for sinful thoughts and purposes.
But the prosecution of this point we reserve for the six and twentieth verse of
the fifteenth chapter, where it is said that the thoughts of the wicked are
abomination to the Lord.

Verse 3. A man cannot be established by wickedness: but the root of the
righteous cannot be moved.
Sinfulness may seem to serve a man's turn, but in the end it shall appear
it never did him good. For howsoever it is an occasion of lifting many men up
on hie in prosperity, yet it gives them no sure footing in their state, but
down they fall, and then it had been better for them to have stood still on
the ground. Wicked men ofter grow greater, and faster then others, but their
settling is not so fast and firm, as the other part shows. The righteous
though they be not so tall and spreading upwards, yet they take root the
stronger downwards: and though their boughs be shaken above, yet that will
not loosen his hold beneath. This is the opposition, The ungodly shall not be
established by wickedness, but his root shall be plucked up; but the righteous
shall be established by godliness, and his root shall not be moved.

every one of us to a course directly contrary to this in the book of Job: If
iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let Job 11. 14.
no wickedness dwell in thy tabernacle. Then truly shall thou lift up thy face
without spot, and shall be stable, and shall not fear. And he does indent with
them whom he will deliver from death and misery, that they shall confess
that their wickedness could stand them in no steed: If one say, I have sinned,
and perverted righteousness, and it did not profit me, he will deliver his soul
from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light, Job 33. 27. 28.

Saul dealt very foolishly in undermining the foundation of his house by
disobedience, and the seeking to hold it up by persecuting of David: And
Jeroboam dealt not wisely, who (when 1. Reg. 11. 38.
the Lord promised to build him a sure house, as he built to David, if he would
keep his statutes and commandments, as David did) devised another trick to
confirm the kingdom to himself and his posterity, and that was by setting
up the idolatrous Calves at Dan and Bethel.

Hosea does ground his exhortation: O Israel return unto the Lord thy God: for
thou have fallen by thine iniquity, Hos. 14. 2. As if he should have said, Let
experience make you wise: never trust to sin any more, but seek unto God: for
look what success you find by your evil ways now, the same be sure of
ever: no man can speed by such a bad means.



their beneficial friend, whose souls are most perverted by him.

If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up, and thou shall put
iniquity far from thy tabernacle. The Almighty shall be thy defense, and
thou shall have plenty of silver. When others are cast down, thou shall say,
I am lifted up: and God shall save the humble person: Job. 22. 23. 25. 29.

Verse 4. A virtuous woman is the crown of her husband: but she that makes
him ashamed is a rottennes in his bones.
A Virtuous woman, which fears God, and loves her husband, and is faithful
in her calling, is a crown to her husband, she is for his honor and credit,
and consequently for his profit and comfort. But she that makes him ashamed,
which either by her lewdnes, and rudenes does bring him into contempt, or at
least makes him to hold down his head, or by negligence, pride, and
wastfulnes does weaken his estate, and brings him to want, she is a rottennes
in his bones, that is, a torment and corrasiue to his heart, as grievous as the
ach of the bones, or corruption of the marrow, which is more painful and
incurable than an ulcer in the flesh. The antithesis is thus: A virtuous woman
is the crown of her husband, and so a great joy and gladness to his heart: but
a vicious woman is a shame to her husband, and as a rottennes in his bones.

that her price is far above Carbuncles. Prou. 31. 10.


Who shall find a virtuous woman? There are incompatably Prou. 31. 10.
more wives than God will praise for good wives, and more maids and widows
than he will commend to good men to match with. As therefore those that are
gracious are rare, so are they also the more remarkable, and so they more
adorn their husbands. If crowns were as commonly worn as hats, men would
esteem of hats as much as of crowns.

Prou. 18. 22.
the more to be regarded. He more immediately declares his love in this, than
in bestowing lands and livings, or any other goods or substance. So says this
Scripture: House and riches are the inheritance of the fathers: but a prudent
wife comes of the Lord: Prou. 19. 14.



indignities. Oh the calamity of them that are put to harbor their enemies
harlots in their own beds, and bosoms! And what a misery is it for a man to
commit the greatest part of his substance to her that is a privy thief,
whereby she has all before her, to choose what she will to rob him of! And
hard is their case whose wives are mere spies to know, and discover, and
publish abroad their secrets, and faults, and infirmities to their great
reproach. And what shall we speak of such as are swinish with drunkenness?
and of gadders, and busy bodies abroad? which in all contentions are always
parties, and wheresoever they come, they raise contentions? What comfort do
these women minister to their husbands that love peace, and sobriety? As for
such as are turbulent in their own houses, and froward, and rebellious against
their head, the spirit of God tells us, what profitable, pleasant, and
amiable companions they be. In the ninteenth chapter of this book it is said,
that the contentions of a wife Prou 19. 13.
are like a continual dropping. Consider what vexation it is for a man to have
rain falling fast upon his head, and body, especially if there be no
intermission that he may dry himself again: and most of all if it be through
the roof of his house to rot his timber, and spoil his stuff, and take away
the comfort of his meat and rest: when at bed and board, and every where, he
shall be as it were under a running spout. And elsewhere he affirms, that it
is better to dwell in a corner of the house top, (that is on a pinnacle Prou.
21. 9.
upon the top of the house without) then with a contentious woman in a wide
house. And yet more in the same chapter, that it is better to dwell in the
wilderness among wild beasts, then with a contentious verse. 19.
and angry woman.

praise, and take the comfort to themselves, whether they be rich or poor,
and use all good usage and encouragement to such good yokefellowes. A just
testimony and commendations of them, and sometimes unto them, sufficient
allowance both of liberty Pro. 31. 29. 31.
and maintenance, according to their husbands ability, is due unto them, in
equity and justice. But whatsoever their ability is, they are able to show
kindness, and good countenance to them, and that must not be wanting. Saint
Paul would have husbands to love their wives therefore, because they are wives,
and to Col. 3. 19.
be bitter to none, much less to be fierce, and churlish, and boisterous to
them that are good. But if they be yoked with those of the other sort, their
misery is a good motive to send them to God to seek his help, and more to
labor to please him themselves, that he may make their wives to be better unto
them. For if it be in his hand before marriage to make them godly, and to
prepare them for his servants, it is as much also in his power to convert them
afterward: which if he do not, yet they shall have more strength to bear the
burden with greater ease.

and stubbernesse, and whorishnesse of their wives, which have so poisoned
their souls, and drawn them to such lewd and sinful behavior?

Verse 5. The thoughts of the just are right: but the counsels of the wicked
are deceit.
GOdly men are not altogether void of thoughts, that are not right and
allowable: sometimes Satan casts in matter to turn them out of the right
course: sometimes their own flesh will play it part, and stir up desires of
commodity and praise, and pleasures and such like in them; but these are as
the muddines that may be for a time in a good fountain that is troubled: these
they allow not: these they resist, and judge themselves for, and therefore God
takes notice only of those that are good, tending to his service, and glory,
their own salvation, and the benefit of their brethren. On the other side,
the counsels of the wicked, that is, their devises, plots, and purposes in
themselves (for they are here rather the work of the mind, then of the tongue,
and opposed to the thoughts of the godly) are deceit, tending either to the
circumvention, and wronging of others, or to the cloaking and hiding of their
own sinfulness.

Paul to urge the Ephesians with so earnest an asseueration and attestation,
that hereby they should clear their regeneration vnfalliblie, and put it out
of all doubt and question. This I say, and Ephesians. 4. 17.
testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk in
vanity of their mind, having their cogitations darkened, etc. And Isaiah
comes to speak of some specials, and shows what a contrariety there is
between their thoughts and meditations. The heart, says he, of the niggard
will work iniquity, he deuiseth evil counsels to undo the poor with lying
words: but the liberal man will devise of liberal things, and will continue
his liberality, Isa. 32. 6. 7. 8.









Ye are they which justify your selves before men: but God Luke 16. 15.
knows your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed among men, is
abomination in the sight of God.

and think it safe to satisfy themselves in filthy lusts, in proud
imaginations, in bitter grudgings, and in diverse idle, vain, and foolish
conceits. It is accounted by many for a part of man's liberty that thought is
free: but they that take that liberty are brought into the most grievous
servitude, to become slaves and bondmen to those free thoughts. Now if
deceitful counsels convince men to be evil, as the Scripture says they do,
what can the Papists say for themselves, why they should be reputed good? Did
ever any kind of people lay their plots for greater mischiefs? Did ever any
seek to act their purposes with greater falsehood and treachery? What
fidelity is to be found in their words, in their protestations, in their
solemn oaths? They say many things, which the purpose of not doing them is
the cause why they say them. Then they pretend the most obedience, when they
intend the greatest disobedience: and look for some notable disloialtie from
them, when they are ready to swear to be loyal.

Verse 6. The talking of the wicked is to lie in wait for blood: but the mouth
of the righteous will deliver them.
THese words are not to be understood to mean all sorts of wicked men, but
such as are malicious; and their speeches too, of such as they malign, do
principally tend to the insnaring and catching of them, and that to their
destruction, so far as they can effect it: if not by violence upon their
bodies to the taking away of their lives, yet by oppression otherwise to the
ruin of their estate. Now the contrary is to be found in the godly, who use
their lips, as much as in them is, to succor such as the wicked lie in wait
for; either as Paul's nephew did, by discovering the practices against them, or
being suitors for them, or clearing their innocence. And this is spoken of
their endeavor, and not of the event, for that is many times otherwise.

Lie in wait, etc. It is the property of violent men to mix their cruelty
with craftiness.

Their tongues work as well as their hands, and their hearts and heads give
direction to their tongues: and hands, and tongues, and hearts, and heads do
all conspire and combine themselves against poor innocents. Such the Prophet
complains of in the Psalms: He lies in wait secretly, even as a lion in
Psalm. 10. 9. 10.
his den: he lies in wait to spoil the poor: he does spoil the poor,
when he draws him into his net. He croucheth and boweth: and therefore heaps
of the poor do fall by his might.

Many devices deceitful tongues have, to bring their purposes to pass.
Sometimes by flattery, or otherwise to draw advantages from him whom they
practice against, according as our Savior was sundry times dealt with.
Sometimes by incensing, or Luke 22. 21.
persuading others, whose displeasure and power may work that which themselves
could never effect, as Haman did, and Amaziah, and Daniels adversaries also,
though in another manner: Dan. 6. Sometimes by taking opportunity of the time,
when it Amos 7. 10.
serves them, as Doeg did against the Priests, when Saul himself was offended
with Jonathan, for favoring David. Who can reckon all when there are so many,
and every day new inventions of more?







But the mouth etc. It is a note of a good man to have his good word ready to
help them that are oppressed.

There be many that refrain from traducing, accusing, and intrapping their
neighbors, which yet go not far enough to show themselves merciful and
righteous: there are many that will speak in the praise of godly men, free
from troubles and molestations, and yet declare not sufficient love to God and
his people: but here is love, here is courage, here is faithfulness, herein they
make it appear that they are not accepters of persons, when they apply their
wits, and tongues, and countenance in their places, for the defense of
harmless men that are helpless. In this sense does the Holy Ghost call upon
men in the four and twentieth chapter: Deliver them that are drawn to death:
and wilt Prou. 24. 11.
not thou preserve them that are led to be slain?

Jonathan) but chiefly for himself? Who would not do his best to show the
equity of his own cause? Who would not entreat hard to save his own head,
or hand, or foot, or any other part of him? So do all good men that deal in
the behalf of any just and righteous person, the case is their own.







Salomons mother bestowed upon him: Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause
of all the children of destruction. Prou. 31. 8. 9.
Open thy mouth: judge righteously, and judge the afflicted, and the poor. Art
thou a private man, yet thou may give advice, or testify the truth, or
solicit friends, or at least thou may call upon God for them that be
pursued by oppressors.

Job or other will deliver them, though they be poor and fatherless, and have
Job 29. 12.
none to help them. Or if there be none that favor them at the bench, yet
there be that will obtain favor for them from heaven. The prayers of Gods
people ascend up. to Gods presence for his help: and those mouths prevail
mightily that seek for redress of wrongs at his hands. Herod thought that it
would be too late for all the friends which Peter had to minister help unto
him when he had clapped him up in so sure a prison. But he remembered not how
swift the godly be to prayer: and how soon a prayer can come to God: and in
what readiness God has his Angels: and what speed an Angel can make to
succor them that are in danger. Yet this is not the greatest comfort of Gods
afflicted servants, but this that the Lord Jesus Christ is infinitely more
righteous and merciful than any man, or all men possibly can be, and he will
undertake their cause, and either minister help to their state, or grace to
their souls, to bear their troubles, till the fittest time of freedom from
them. He will preserve them from sin and Satan which lie in wait for their
eternal destruction. The spirit of God is large in one of the Psalms in
setting forth the tender care which he has of his people: He shall deliver
the poor when he cries: the needy also, and him that has no help. He shall
be merciful to the poor and needy, and shall preserve the souls of the
poor. He shall redeem their souls from deceit and violence, and dear shall
their blood be in his sight: Psalm. 72. 12. 13. 14.

Verse 7. God overthrows the wicked, and they are not: but the house of the
righteous shall stand.
When the state of the ungodly which are not Gods chosen, changes from
prosperity to adversity; it seldom staieth, till they be utterly destroyed,
both themselves, and their houses; This word, are not, signifies a slaughter
and killing, as it is spoken of the murdering of the infants by Herod, Mat. 2.
18. Ier. 31. 15. But here is more understood, than the loss of natural life,
and that is, the perdition of soul and body. And yet not the extinction of
either: for the soul shall never vanish away, nor the body for ever: they
shall not find so much mercy at Gods hands. Their being shall not cease, but
their comfortable and well being. They shall be everlasting, everlastingly to
bear the burden of Gods wrath, and to suffer the insufferable torment of death
and damnation. But the house of the righteous, that is, he, and those things
which appertain unto him shall be preserved from being overthrown to ruin.



They may rise, but not stand: for, unless they fall to repentance, they shall
be made to fall to destruction. They may grow great, but for a small time, for
they will soon be brought to nothing.

The prophet thought too well of their state at ye first, as though they had
bin in better case then any other men: but he conceived as hardly of it at the
last, when he had seen their end in the sanctuary, and deemed them of all to
be most miserable. Surely, says he to the Lord, thou have set them in
slipperie places, and castest Psalm. 73. 18. 19
them down into desolation. How suddenly are they destroyed perished, and
horribly consumed! The Scriptures flow with testimonies and similies to
declare both the certainty, and suddenness, and grieuousnesse of their decay;
as the withering of plants, the putting out of lights, the vanity of dreams,
the vanishing of smoke, and many others to the like purpose.

every threatening sends forth many curses: and every curse brings many
plagues.



Psalm. 37. 38.
there remain punishments for them, and their end is to be cut off.

Philip, and well followed of Nathaniel, when he persuaded him to come, Ioh.
1. 46.
and see whether Jesus were not the Christ. And it was an indulgence of Christ
to Thomas, to help his faith in his resurrection, Ioh. 20. 27.
by the senses of sight and feeling: but for matters of punishment, and
damnation, it is good to go from them, and not to come at them: to hear Gods
testimony, and not to see it fulfilled upon themselves: to believe the truth
of that which is spoken, and not to feel it by their own experience.

low, their tops aloft, and branches broad, and thereby ouerdroppe all that
is under them: then must their tops come down, and roots rise up, and all
their branches wither. Now they are vessels that are full of power, and
wealth, and malice: but then must be there a transposition: the bottom must
be upward, and the brimmes must be downward, and all their fullness be shed
on the ground like water. The ground of this comfort is neither vain, nor
weak: for God himself does urge it as a forcible reason to confirm the
hearts of his people. Fear thou not (says he) for I am with thee: be not
affraide, for I am thy God. Behold, all they that provoke thee shall be
ashamed and confounded; they shall be as nothing, and they that strive with
thee shall perish. Thou shall seek them, and shall not find them: to wit, the
men of thy strife, for they shall be as nothing, and the men that war against
thee, as a thing of naught: Isai. 41. 11. 12.

For the firmenes of the righteous man, and of his house, see chapter the
tenth, verse. 2. 25.

Verse 8. A man shall be commended according to his wisdom: but the froward
in heart shall be despised.
AS every one is more wise and godly, so shall he have more true praise and
honor: Sometimes, and very often the wicked shall commend him, commonly the
righteous, and always the Lord himself, but most of all at the last day,
before all men, and Angels, as our Savior tells us in the five and twentieth
of Matthew. Contrariewise the froward in heart, such whose hearts reject all
good instructions, and graces, shall be despised, and brought to contempt
among men in this life, or their faults break out after they are dead, or be
manifested before all the world at the day of the Lord. This is the opposition:
He that is upright of heart shall be commended for his wisdom: but he that
is froward of heart, shall be despised for his folly.



Though some be blind that they cannot discern of their understanding and
graces, yet others have their eie-sight, and behold them. Though some be dumb,
and will not speak of their virtues, yet others have their lips opened to
commend them. Though some be malicious to carpe at, and deprave them, yet
others be faithful to give them their due testimony. Neither is it a thing
incident to some few, as though it belonged only to principal men and great
personages, but to all of every place that are therewith qualified, both hie
and low, both puissant potentates, and mean bondmen and servants. There is no
exception, or limitation of degrees, when it is said, that the wisdom of a
man does make his face to shine. And servants could not adorn the Eccl. 8. 1.
doctrine of God, if grace and godliness did not also adorn and beautify
them. Tit. 2. 10.




Balaam to speak for his people, and bless them, when he came of purpose to
cast out imprecations against them. He compelled Saul with his lips to clear
David, and to pronounce him just and innocent, when he had his weapons in a
readiness to punish him as a rebel.

This wisdom that is from above, this heavenly wisdom which the spirit of
God works, is first pure, then peaceable, Iam. 3. 17.
gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
judging, and without hypocrisy. The sight of these graces, the very report of
them does win men's hearts, and draw their affections to those that exercise
them, and much more when they feel the fruit and benefit thereof to
themselves.

Now where wisdom is wanting, and folly is flowing; where meekness is a
stranger, and frowardness a commander, what is to be looked for, but reproach
and contempt? Are the poorest servants and handmaides commended on the other
side? then the wealthiest Lords and Masters are despised on this side. Does the
Lord praise all such as be godly wise? then does he disgrace all those that be
sinfully foolish. Does he derive men's testimonies and favors to those? then
will he draine and draw them away from these. Is soft, and gentle, and
merciful behavior a means to procure the good will of men? then sour, and
churlish, and cruel demeanor, will provoke their offense and displeasure.
Generally, that which God spoke concerning Elies house, holds true to all of
both sorts: Them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall
be despised. 1. Sam. 2. 30.




Tertullus against them, yet they should nothing prevail: the praise that God
puts on, they cannot pluck off: they may as well stay the stars and
planets from shining, as take away the brightness of grace and wisdom.

Verse 9. He that is despised, and is his own servant, is better than he that
boasts himself, and lacks bread.
HE that is despised, that is of mean estate, for which the foolish proud
worldlings commonly have men in contempt, and is his own servant, that is,
industrious and diligent by labor to provide himself of things that be
needful, (and so ever they may truly be called their own servants, that are
faithful in another man's service) is better than he that boasts himself,
that is, which stands upon his reputation, and yet lacks bread, has little
or nothing to maintain himself withal: for bread is put here for all manner
of necessary provision.



It is the property of fools either to rage at poverty when it comes upon
them, or to brag against it, or to fall down under it: whereas wise men will
bear it with patience, and stoop to it in humility, and yet resist it with
great diligence. It was a grace that the Scripture commends in Jacob, that
notwithstanding the honor and worthiness of his father Isaac, and
grandfather Abraham, yet when he could no longer be in safety from his
brother Esau, in his fathers house, he betook himself to be an hireling to
his uncle Laban in another country. It was a virtue very eminent in Moses,
that being trained up in his youth like a Prince in the Court of a great King,
he could debase himself in his middle age to be a shepherd to a stranger of
far inferior place and degree. And it was the praise of Naomi that when she
was a rich wife and full, she could thankfully use her wealth and fulness: but
when she was grown to be a poor widow and empty, she would take state no
longer upon her, but laid down all titles, to her very name whereby she was
called. Ruth 1. 20. 21.








Jacobs example and daily experience shows, and is promised as a reward in
the 24. of this Chapter. But those of an high mind which deny a low port, and
all painful means of maintenance, too mean for men of their worth; are
declining and ebbing, and likely to decay more and more, till they come to the
bottom of want and penury.

There is that makes himself rich, and has nothing: and that makes Prou.
13. 1.
himself poor, having great riches. Secondly, of such as being sunken in
necessity, and all men see them sticking fast in misery, do yet face out the
matter and take as much upon them as if they were of great place and ability,
some in regard of parentage; some of former substance, now wasted and consumed;
some of offices that they have borne in time of their prosperity; some of
personages that they have served, or to whom they presently belong: and some of
trim apparel only, and that is also yet unpaid for.

mistake when he himself assigns to men their places, and teaches us whom
to set before as the better, and whom to put after as the inferior. Now
sithence he does prefer the poor, despised, industrious, laborious, and
gives his voice for their precedencie; why should we give titles to ruffians,
and roysters, and idle companions, that have nothing in them of grace and
goodness, of knowledge or learning, of art or skilfulnes, of wealth or
substance, nor the most of birth or parentage, why should we make these
superiors to the others? why should we make our selves guilty of their pride,
by feeding their vain humors, and accessarie to their presumption, in
consenting to their arrogant aspirings? Is it well done to defraud those of
their right whom God approves of and commends, and so to discourage them in
their good ways, and to yield more than right to them whom he reprooueth and
vilifieth, and so to animate them in their evil?

Verse 10. A righteous man regards the life of his beast: but the mercies of
the wicked are cruel.
THE purpose and drift of these words tends to this, that every godly and
righteous man is also merciful: and that no wicked person can possibly have
any true pity or compassion in him. A righteous man, every one that fears
God and is faithful, regards the life of his beast, his love and kindness
and good dealing is so plentiful to men, and especially those which depend
upon him, and be of his charge, and at his finding, that it sloweth over also
to the cattle, and creatures which he owes or uses, or is put in trust to
look to, or has opportunity offered to preserve from hurt or perishing. But
the mercies of the wicked, those actions and ways of theirs which carry the
fairest show and color of mercy, are cruel, have cruelty mixed therewith,
either in purpose, or manner or event ensuing thereupon.

he have them to feel by sense, though they cannot discern it by reason, that
there is also care for them and compassion in his children. Why did he forbid
to kill the damme when they had taken away her young ones, but that he would
have it known, that he allows not cruelty and wrong to be offered so much
as to the filliest birds? The restraint that was of eating of blood, when the
beasts were dead, declared that he would not have tyranny exercised Leuit. 17.
10.
on them whiles they are alive.

Thou, Lord, do save both man and beast. Psalm. 36. 6.
And therefore we shall both show our selves unlike to him, and hurtful to
his, if we offer abuse and wrong unto them.





of faithful regard of his beast, is to be found in the servant of Abraham, in
his journey to Nahors city, in Aram Naharaim, who when he was come to the
place, whither he was sent, took order first that the Camels should be
vnsadled, and meated, and have litter put unto them, and then dealt in the
business wherein Genesis 24. 32.
he was employed, and after these things took his own refection.

Adam brought such calamities upon them, and shall we add unto them by
cruelty in our own persons? Have our corruptions been a cause of that
fierceness that is in many of them one against another, and shall we solace
our selves in seeing them execute it? God forbid. If we do, it may justly
return upon our selves, their teeth, or horns, or paws assaulting us, or
else Gods own hand by some other means, revenging their wrongs.

But the mercies, etc. All the favors that sinful men show, do commonly tend
to some hurt.

The Lord does often use the wicked as instruments of good unto his children;
but though they do the work, yet he shows the mercy: their hands and
tongues are not so much directed by their own love and kindness, as by his
purpose and providence. Jacob was not ignorant of this point, when he refused
the courteous offer of Esau, who would either himself have been a companion to
him in his way, or left some of his servants behind Genesis 33. 12. 13. 15.
to guard him. When Saul pretended most readiness to bring David to preferment by
matching him with his daughter, his meaning was to bring him to destruction by
putting him into the 1. Sam. 18. 17.
hands of the Philistines.



Secondly in special, they usually transuert their favor and justice, showing
mercy where they should exercise severity, and practicing cruelty where they
should show mercy. Saul was so pitiful that he would spare Agag, though God
commanded to slay him; but David should have died if he could have caught him:
And he made no scruple in killing fourscore and five Priests of 1. Sam. 22.
18. 19.
the Lord in one hour; it was a small matter in his eyes, to smite a whole
city of innocent people with the edge of the sword, both man and woman, both
child and suckling, besides all their cattle. And so Ahab gave Benhadad King
of Aram to know, that he would use him like a brother, and grant him his life,
whom God appointed to be handled like an enemy, and put to death: but he dealt
with the Prophets of Israel in an other manner, and slew as many of them as he
could come by. Even the very sparing of notable wicked persons, is a decree of
cruelty against the righteous, as they be injurious to the lives of the sheep
and lambs, that permit the wolves and foxes to live and breed among them.



that they will be favorable to us; if their meekness, if their mildnes, if
their mercy be cruelly, how immeasurably cruel will their malice, and
wrath, and rage and fury be?

Job, not to eat their morsels alone, but the poor shall ever have part with
them: but the choice of their almsmen is altogether unlike to Jobs; for he
relieved the fatherless, and widows, and poor impotent persons; and they
bestow upon a filthy generation of idle vagabonds, whom Job chased from the
very presence and company of people. Job 30. 5.


Others will declare how pitiful they are, by helping men that are in
destresses, and therefore if they might have their wills, there should not be
so many punished. But whose impunitie do they seek for? whom would they have
to escape either whip, or goal, or gallows? not such as be unjustly accused:
not such as be overtaken with small infirmities: not such as show themselves
most penitent for their faults; but those that are ordinary, obstinate, and
impudent malefactors, and most pernicious and grievous offenders. These are as
full of compassion as the Jews were of mercy, when they cried to Pilate,
Barrabas, Barrabas, let Barrabas live and be delivered.

Verse 11. He that tilleth his land, shall be satisfied with bread: but he
that follows the idle, is destitute of understanding.
HE that tilleth his land, which is industrious and faithful to do good in
any honest vocation, shall be satisfied with bread, shall have competencie of
all things that are needful for him: but he that follows the idle, vain
fellows, which give themselves to no good trade or occupation, and is idle as
they are, is destitute of understanding, plays the fool, and shall feel the
smart and pain of it.

The opposition is, he that tilleth his land is wise, and shall be satisfied
with bread: but he that follows the idle, or is idle (for that is the
meaning) is destitute of understanding, and shall be filled with poverty. So
is the supply made: Chap. 28. 19.

Prepare thy work in the field, Proverbs 24. 27. Many reproves and
threatenings tend to it, as, The slothful will not plow because of winter, and
therefore he shall beg in summer, Chap. 20. 4. Many promises of blessings are
to that purpose, as, Thy barn shall be filled with abundance: Chap. 3. 10.

Adam, and Adam made choice of it for his eldest son.

Where none oxen are the crib is empty, but much increase comes by the
strength of the ox, chap. 14. 4. And in that respect there is a promise made
unto them, that they shall have a part in man's plenty, and fare the better by
man's welfare. The oxen and the young asses that till the Isai. 30. 24.
ground, shall eat clean prouender, which is winowed with the shouell and the
fan.

The abundance of the earth is for all: and the King consists Eccle. 5. 8.
by the field that is tilled.

Some can live without flesh, and many without fruits, and more without fish,
but none without bread. The Egyptians were not without fruits and fish, in the
years of scarsitie, as it is probable, nor Jacob without cattle, as it is
certain, and yet through want of corn they were all in danger to perish.

better esteemed among men. The Merchants, and Goldsmiths, and Iewellers, and
others of such places are not so often mentioned in the Scriptures as they be,
nor animated with so many consolations as they are: the grand promises for
blessing on their labors, is made to them in special, and the rest must
deduct their comforts from thence by proportion.



But he that follows the idle, etc. They that dispose themselves to idleness,
shall neither want example nor company in it.

They shall have al inticements and allurements to draw them to it, and hold
them in it, so soon as they have any inclination that way. They shall not be
the first inuentors of that trade, but others have used it before them, and
diverse will practice it with them. They shall find the ice broken to them, and
a path beaten out for them, and all inducements to bring them into the snare.



sundry places they do still, in that detestable course of wandering and
rogishnesse? It may seem to have been no delightful habitation to live in
want and penury and disgrace in a solitary wilderness, and yet that was
haunted by them, according as Job testifies: They were chased forth from
among men: they shouted at Job 30. 5. 7.
them, as at a thief. They roared among the bushes, and under the thistles
they gathered themselves.





Is destitute, etc. Every idle person is foolish. Though some of them have
knowledge, and that more than the greater part of them that be laborious and
diligent, yet God will not vouchsafe it the name of understanding, nor
themselves the credit to be called wise men. The same that he affirms here,
he does stand to, and justify in another place, repeating again the self
same words: I passed by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the
Prou. 24. 30.
man destitute of understanding. And the consequence does also argue as much,
when he sends him to school to such a simple Mistrisse to be taught, saying,
Go to the Pismire, O sluggard: behold Prou 6. 6.
her ways, and be wise.

the word of God teaches every man to labor with his hands, (or otherwise)
the thing that is good, Ephesians. 4. 28.



The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, than seven men that can render a
reason, Prou. 26. 16. And then ye know how the case stands with him: See
thou a man that is wise in his own eyes? there is more hope of a fool than of
him, Prou. 26. 12.



Verse 12. The wicked desires the defense of them that be evil: but the root
of the righteous gives it.
When the ungodly do come into perils, and afflictions and troubles do come
upon them, all their hope of help rests wholly in men, and those not the
godly which might direct them, or pray for them, but sinful persons as bad as
themselves, whose favor and power they trust unto, but in vain, for they are
deceived by them: but the righteous are not or need not to be driven to such
shifts, the Lord Jesus Christ their root undertakes their preservation, and
does not only make a show thereof, but effectually performs it.

Isaiah complains, and threatens them for it, saying, Woe unto them that go
down into Isaiah 31. 1.
Egypt for help, and stay upon horses, and trust in chariots, because they
are many, and in horsemen, because they are very strong: but they look not
unto the holy one of Israel nor seek unto the Lord. Sometimes their confidence
was Asshur as Hosea lays to their charge: When Ephraim saw his sickness, and
Judah his wound, then went Ephraim Hosea 5. 13.
unto Asshur, and sent unto King Iareb: yet could he not heal you, nor cure
you of your wound.



Saul consulted with the witch, because the Lord answered 1. Sam. 28. 6.
him not, neither by dreams, nor by Vrim, nor yet by Prophets.

verse. 21. that though hand join in hand the wicked shall not be unpunished.
And this makes them liable to the curse that Jeremy denounces, Cursed be the
man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart
from the Lord. Jeremy 17. 5.



1. Reg. 20 30.
thousand that were slain in the field. And it will appear in the end, that
all wicked men, when confidence is reposed in them, are nothing else but
swelling walls, and old rotten castles that are tumbling down.

But the root, etc. There is no danger to them that grow by faith in Jesus
Christ. The tallest cedars, and strongest oaks are not so fast settled and
firmly rooted, as is the lowest Saint and weakest Christian. In those kind of
trees, the root cannot defend the branches, nor body: the wind may break
off the boughs and arms, and the axe may cut down the whole stock without
resistance: but our root does minister as much safety as sap to the whole
Church, and every sprigge of the same. No storms and tempests, no force nor
weapons shall separate the least of his from him, nor any way make spoil of
them.

dangers, and that is sin; the guiltiness of it is taken away by remission,
and the punishment by his suffering, and the power by his grace, and what then
is the peril that we should stand in fear of?



Isaiah, Sing, says he, of the vineyard of red wine. I the Lord do keep it:
I will water it every moment: lest any assail it, I Isai. 27. 2. 3.
will keep it night and day.



Adam is a branch of a tree, either growing naturally, as he was borne in the
old stock, and so he is subject to Gods displeasure and judgments; or else is
ingrafted into Christ as being newborn, and so has his part in Gods favor
and mercies. If we would therefore have our hearts at liberty, without dread of
calamities and misery, we must draw all our safety from whence we derive our
salvation, and that is from the Lord Jesus our Savior, and our being in him,
and growing in him, and communion with him. External means will not suffice
to secure us from hurts, without this inward medicine, and deliverance from
plagues by God own hand will not comfort us, without the respect of this cause.

Romans 8. 1.
here, that there is no danger to them: there is assurance that nothing shall
keep them from heaven and everlasting life, and here is a warrant that nothing
shall hurt them in earth, and in this life. That godly gloriation which is used
there, against the enemies of our souls, may fitly also be used here against
the enemies of our bodies: If God be on our side, who can be against us? Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, Romans
8. 31. 35.
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Though Satan and
sinners would, yet they can do nothing against us that shall be for our hurt;
and though God himself can, yet he will do nothing to us, that shall not
turn to our good.

Verse 13. The evil man is snared by the wickedness of his lips, but the wise
shall come out of adversity.
AS wicked men do maliciously abuse their tongues to the hurt of others, so
also many times they ouershoote themselves so far as that advantage is taken
of their words to their own peril and hurt; as on the other side the godly
do often times help themselves out of troubles by the wisdom of their
speeches.



But the righteous shall come out, etc. He is never destitute of a good helper
in his troubles that has a good tongue to deal for him.

He does not here, only set down the assurance that such as fear God have
to escape from their afflictions, but the means whereby they obtain their
deliverance. God has ordained troubles for his people to be tried with: and he
has appointed the issue out, as well as the entrance in: and their enemies
malicious words do commonly work their molestation: and their own Christian
speeches do usually procure their peace and liberty.

A Prince is pacified by staying of anger, and a soft answer breaks the
bones: Prou. 25. 15.



Hereof we have an example in the prophecy of Jeremy: The Priests and the
Prophets accused him to the Princes and people, as a man deserving to be put to
death for his doctrine. He has liberty to speak for himself; he proves
his innocence, by showing the author of all that he preached, and that was God
giving him a commandment to publish it: and the end that they should repent
and amend their ways, and so escape the judgments threatened. The Princes, and
all the people presently were on his side, they spoke for him, they cleared him
of that crime which was charged upon him, they justified his faithfulness in
his ministry. This man is not worthy to die (say they) for he has Ierem.
26. 16.
spoken to us in the name of the Lord.

Jacob, and therefore Genesis 32. 28.
no adversity can prevail against them. For this, and the uses thereof see
the eight verse of the former chapter, where are almost the very words of this
present text.

Verse 14. A man shall be satiat with good things by the fruit of his mouth,
and the recompense of a man's hands shall God give unto him.
A Man shall be satiate with good things, etc. That is, shall be recompensed
by the Lord with great blessings, for the good usage of his tongue, when he
speaks to Gods glory, and the edification of his brethren, or for justice
and equity in the behalf of them that are wronged, and injuriously dealt
with. He will stir up men to love him, and show kindness unto him, yea those
sometimes which be of great place and able to do him much good, as it is said,
he that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the King shall be
his friend: Prou. 22. 11. But especially he himself will bestow upon him all
good things for this life, and graces for everlasting life, and glory for life
everlasting. And the recompense, etc. And so shall every man's good works be
also rewarded with mercy and favor, though there be nothing in them of
desert and merit.

He that sows righteousness, shall receive a sure reward.

Verse 15. The way of a fool is right in his own eyes; but he that hears
counsel is wise.
THe way of a foole] The wicked course and behavior of a sinful person, whom
God reputeth a fool: (for it is not understood of an idiot, as may appear by
the comparison between them, cap. 26. 12. See thou a man wise in his own
conceit, there is more hope of a fool than of him) is right in his own eyes;
he likes of it, and allows himself in it, as safe and good for him to
walk in, and consequently rejects all good advice, and admonitions: But he
that hears counsel, which suspecteth his own judgment, and receives
direction from them that are wise, and godly, and obeys it, he is wise,
shows the wisdom, that he had before, and learneth more, and finds the
fruit of it by good effect.

in rebellion against God, of al others, for the most part, are slowest to
repentance. These are they which are spoken of when it is said, there is a
generation that are pure in their own conceit, and yet are Prou. 30. 12.
not washed from their filthiness. Observe it in all sorts of sinners, and it
will be found that the greatest offenders are furthest from all remorse for
their offenses: Papists and Idolaters do think they merit at Gods hand, and
deserve heaven for their idolatry and superstition. Persecutors and tyrants,
as our Savior says, Ioh. 16. 2.
will think they do God service, when they kill Christians, and Ministers,
and Apostles. If men of smaller infirmities be admonished of things amiss in
them, it is not very hard to bring many of them to a sight of their offenses,
insomuch as they will acknowledge themselves to be faulty, and thank him that
reproves them; but when notorious adulterers, or drunkards, or blasphemers be
rebuked, what distemper, what rage, what fury do they break out into? as
though a most grievous indignity were offered unto them; as though most
innocent men were unjustly defamed.

2. Cor. 4. 4.
understanding is taken away from them. And S. Paul testifies, that when he
was in the worst case, he knew nothing but that he had been in the best:
before he knew the meaning of the law, he made noe doubt but that he had been
alive: but when he saw the sense and justice of the commandment, he found
sin to be alive, and himself to be dead: Romans 7. 9. 10.



with them: and then they take to proceed from envy, whatsoever is spoken
against them.

Isaiah, Woe to them that are wise in their own Isa. 5. 21.
eyes, and prudent in their own sight; They make themselves odious to God,
they fly from repentance, they shun reformation, they run into destruction.

Paul in as good case before his conversion as afterward? Men of corrupt
minds, and destitute of the truth, think that gain is godliness, 1. Tim. 6. 5.
why should not many courtious men then enter into the kingdom of heaven? A
traveler in his journey may wander out of his way, notwithstanding his meaning
to go right, if he will make no inquiry for it. And no trade or science is
attained unto, by the willingness of having, but of learning of it.

esteems them for wise and men of understanding. And so will he prove them,
and so shall they find, and so by event in the end shall others well perceive.

Verse 16. A fools wrath is made known the same day: but a prudent man
covers shame.
THe meaning of the holy Ghost is not to condemn all kind of anger: for it is
one of the powers of the soul, which God created as an ornament in man: and
godly anger is a part of Gods Image in him, and a grace commended in Moses,
Elias, Elisha, and our Savior himself, and he that is always altogether
destitute of this does provoke God to be angry with him, for want of zeal
and hatred of sin. But it is a passionate anger that is here reproved, which
is not a power of the soul but an impotencie. He that conceiueth the other is
an agent, and does a service to God: but he that is moved with this, is a mere
patient, and sin has in that case prevailed against him. Now it is said that
a fool will be known the same day, that is, suddenly and speedily, as soon
as he is provoked, he will show it by outcries, reuilings, or threatenings, or
other such like signs of choler: But a wise man, so far as his wisdom
works, and his natural corruption and infirmities break not out, will hide
shame, that is, will suppress his anger, and pass by the injuries offered to
him, and not disgrace himself by returning reprochful speeches to him that has
done him the wrong.



God did see it before within, but now men shall also discern it without: that
which formerlie did lurk in the soul will break out by this into sight. It
will show it self in their countenance, in their gestures, in their words, in
their actions. And therefore it is said that the discretion of a man deferreth
his anger: and his glory Prou. 11. 11.
is to pass by an offense.

Col. 3. 8. That holy anger against sin and Gods dishonor does not come so
easily, nor is so ready at hand; that must be labored for, and obtained by
prayer and other godly exercises; and when there is cause of it, our flesh is
very unwilling to entertain it.

Secondly more specially, pride and a hie mind that disdaineth to bear any
indignities does kindle it, and cause the flame thereof to break out so
violently.

Thirdly for the manner thereof, it is inconsiderate and without all judgment,
taking those to be enemies that are friends, and those to be offenses that are
kindnesses, and those offenses to be the greatest that are the least, and that
to deserve much blame and punishment which is to be passed by with silence.

Fourthly the effects of it are dangerous, as S. James says, that the wrath
of man works not the righteousness of God, Iam. 1. 20. And this scripture,
that he that is hasty to anger commits folly, yea exalts folly, Prou.
14. 17. 29. as shall be showed more particularly in that place: And our
Savior, that he that is angry with his brother unadvisedly shall be
culpable of judgment. And he that shall rail with all and call his brother
fool, shall be punished with hell fire, Mat. 5. 22.

It is a man's glory to pass by an offense: it is his honor to cease from
strife, Pro. 19. 11. and 20. 3. Consider how amiable and lovely a grace this
mildnes, this meekness, this long sufferance and forbearance is: it declares
wisdom, it wins credit, it draws love, it pearceth their hearts, if any
thing can, that are so spared, it brings comfort to our own souls for the
assurance of Gods mercy in pardoning of our sins.

and every action that is done against them. And so to avoid the name of
fools, they will do the works of fools, and to have the reputation of wise
men, they will practice that which is contrary to wisdom: they will shame
themselves in desire of honor, and bring contempt upon their own heads, in
hope to be much regarded. When they show themselves much displeased, it seems
to them that they are much feared, and indeed they are much despised: great
heat with offer of revenge, they think will be imputed to great courage and
magnanimity, but God and wise men ascribe it to folly and debilitie. It is a
certain rule of truth, that he is most valiant, that is most patient: and so
gets Romans 12. 21.
the victory that overcomes evil with goodness: And no conqueror is so
mighty as he that subdueth his own passions and distempered affections. For
so does the Lord himself who is the fittest vmpiere in this and all other
causes, set down his award: He that is slow to anger is better then the
mighty man: and he that Prou. 16. 32.
rules his own mind, is better then he that wins a city.

Verse 17. He that speaks truth, will show righteousness: but a false
witness uses deceit.
HE that speaks, ordinarily in his common speech that which is true, will
show righteousness, that is, will carry himself justly, and further
righteousness with his testimony, when he shall be publicly called
thereunto. But a false witness, a false man becoming a false witness, will
use deceit, will make a show of truth, and peradventure utter some part
thereof, but with such craft and cunning, as shall be contrary to
righteousness, and hurtful to any good cause.

He that speaks the truth, etc. They that use not their tongues to the
truth in private, can hardly be brought to deal truly in public.

There must be as well a trayning of that to make it fit for equity and
justice, as of the hands, and other parts of the body to make them skillful in
handling a weapon, and bearing of arms, and doing of other feats that belong
to a soldier. As no man is meet to be made a public person, and to be called
to eminent place either of magistracy or ministry, that has not before
declared his worthiness by showing forth those virtues, and excellent
qualities which the holy Ghost prescribes in the scriptures: so likewise is
not any competent for any work that is public, unless his former
conversation upright and honest, commend him unto it, but least of all if the
contrary be found common and ordinary with him. The rule which our Savior
gives in another case, will hold as firmly in this. He that is faithful in
the Luke 16. 10.
least, he is also faithful in much: and he that is unjust in the least, is
also unjust in much.





falsehoode in presence of many: that they hate all lying among the meanest,
and thereby avoid it among the greatest. 2. To judges, and magistrates, and
all ministers of justice, that they be very circumspect, so far as in them
is, what manner of persons they admit for Jurors, and Quest-men to deliver up
verdicts: or to be accusers, or witnesses for giving in of evidence: and well
to sift the testimony of the^ that are wont to fail of fidedelitie, lest as
they use to fill men's ears with untruths, so they also defile the place of
judgment with perjury, and injustice. How many righteous men may a few such
deceivers turn out of the right way? what wrong may they offer, what hurt may
they do, what mischief may they work both in oppressing them that are
innocent, and clearing of the wicked?

Will show righteousness, uses deceit, etc. The speaking of true words is no
note of a faithful man, unless it be in due manner, and plain meaning.

False witnesses do not always utter flat lies, and palpable untruths: for
then they would be soon espied, and quickly convinced, and easily confuted:
they would be censured of every man, and credited of no man: but their fraud
is covered with a fair show of verity, as slips of copper appear to be good
coin, when they are gilded over. The promise of everlasting life is not given
to all that speak the truth, but only to them that speak Psalm. 15. 2.
the truth in their hearts, that is, in sincerity and uprightness. The
devil himself did speak that which was true, and even the words of holy
truth to Jesus Christ, when he said that God had given a charge to his Angels
to hold his people in their hands, Matthew. 4. 6.
that they should not dash their foot against a stone: but it was guilefully
delivered, a material part being suppressed, and the rest perverted to draw
him to sinful presumption. It was a true information that was given to Saul by
Doeg, that Ahimelech the 1. Sam. 22. 10. and 23. 19.
Priest had ministered both food, and weapon to David: and by the Ziphims that
David hid himself in the wood by them: It was a true informatio^ that was
given to Nebuchadnezzar by the Chaldeans, that Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego
would not serve his Gods, Dan. 3. 12.
nor worship the image that he had set up: and it was a true information that
was given to Darius by his princes, that Daniel regarded not the decree that he
had sealed, but made his petition three times a day: but all these true
informations were made by false men, of Dan. 6. 13.
deceitful lipes and malicious hearts for wicked purposes.



Thou shall swear, says the Prophet, the Lord lives, Ierem. 4. 2.
in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness; that is, thou shall truly,
rightly, and righteouslie profess him, and take an oath by him, when thou have
a cause, and calling to swear, and accordingly dispose of all the rest of thy
speeches.



deceivers (as he has already dealt with diverse aequiuocant sophisters) to
shame and contempt.

Verse 18. There is that speaks words like the pricking of a sword: but the
tongue of wise men is health.
THere is, a brood and company of sinful fools, which speak words like the
prickings of a sword, that is, dangerous, and pernicious, which pierce deeper
to the hurt of men's names and states, then the edge and point of a sword does
to ones body. But the tongue of the wise is health, their speeches are
wholesome, and helpefull both to themselves and others.

that their words are more gentle then oil, and yet they are swords: Psalm. 55.
21. It is said of false accusers, such as Doeg was, that their tongues are
sharp rasors that cut deceitfully, Psalm. 52. 2. It is said of false witness
bearers, that they are like hammers, and swords, and sharp arrows: Prou. 25.
18. It is said of all sorts, and of every one of them, that their throat is an
open sepulcher: they have used their tongues to deceit, the poison of aspes is
under their lips, Romans 3. 13.

Ahimelech and his brethren the Priests, were killed by the tongue. Naboth and
his sons were killed with the tongue. Our Savior Christ himself was killed
by the tongue, as Peter charge upon the^ that procured his death: Him have ye
taken by the hands of the wicked, and have crucified and slain: you desired a
murderer to be given you, and killed the Lord of life, Act. 2. 23. and 3. 15.

Doeg with one breath destroyed the whole city of Nob, both man and woman,
both child and suckling, and yet was not present at it. 1. Sam. 22. 19.
What a slaughter would Haman have made throughout the whole Persian Monarchy,
if the Lord had not wonderfully prevented it?







Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man: preserve me from the Psalm. 140. 1. 3.
cruel man: which sharpen their tongues like a serpent: adders poison is under
their lips. And withal let us put on innocence: for that will repel their
strokes, and ward them off, that they shall never hurt us deadly. True it is
that none are so much laid at, as they which are most blameless, the greatest
accusations, and threatenings, and scoffs are against them: but yet they escape
best of all others, because they are least liable to all those kind of cursed
speakings.

But the tongue of wise men, etc. It is the property of good men to use their
lips to do good with them. This point has been in some part, already
handled in the second clause of the sixth verse, and we purpose, if it please
God, to stand more largely upon it in the fifteenth chapter verse 4. where is
said that a wholesome tongue is a tree of life.

Verse 19. The lip of truth shall be stable for ever, and a lying tongue but
for a moment.
THe meaning is, that such as speak the truth in uprightness will not vary
in their talk, but tell the same tale again, and be like to themselves in
that which they shall say, whereas liars be in and out, affirming and denying,
and speaking contradictions in the same matter.



They go not from that which they have well spoken, as they will not stand to
that which they have failed in, as Job professed of himself, saying, I will
lay mine hand upon my mouth. Once have Job. 39. 37. 38
I spoken, but I will answer no more, yea twice, but I will proceed no
further. This caused the Apostle S. Paul so seriously to clear himself of
all lightness and inconstancy, that the Corinthians should have no suspicion
that with him should be yea, yea, and 2. Cor. 1. 18.
nay, nay, but that his promises, and preaching, and purposes were stable, and
firm, and unchangeable.



Paul assigns for a cause of his unvariable constancy, that he minded not
those things which he did mind according to the flesh, whereby there should be
with him, yea, yea, and nay, nay. 2. Cor. 1. 17. Now liers do want all these
helps: they had need to have good memories, to remember what they said
before, lest they tell a contrary tale: for the thing related cannot put them
in mind of it. For they use not to frame their words to the verity of the
matter which they speak of, and to the serving of their own turns, and
effecting of their purposes, as he speaks of the unconscionable chapman: It
is naught, it is naught, says the buyer: but when he is Prou. 20. 14.
gone apart he boasts. A notable example of a wandering, unregenerate, and
unstable tongue speaking contrarieties almost with the same breath, is to be
seen in that blasphemous railing Rabshakeh whom the King of Ashur sent against
Jerusalem in the time of Hezekiah. In the entrance of his speech he seemed to
be all for the Lord: he taxes Hezechiah for taking down his hie places and
altars, he pretends obedience unto him, as though he came thither by his
commandment, saying, The Lord said, Go up against this land, and destroy it.
But before he had made an Isai. 36. 7. 10. 19. 20.
end, the Lord God of Israel, and the Idols of the Gentiles were all one with
him. And therefore he matcheth him with the conquered Gods of Hamath, and of
Arpad, and of Sepharuaijm etc. that seeing they could not deliver their
countries out of his hands, the Lord was not able to deliver Jerusalem from
him. The lying miscreants in the Psalms are bragging of the liberty and Psalm.
12. 4.
freedom of their tongues, being altogether slaves and drudges to Satan,
lust, and lewdness. Though it be never so much against their knowledge,
though it lie never so heavy upon their conscience, though it turn to their
perpetual shame and disgrace, yet if the devil, and the corruption of their
hearts, will have them to speak, they must affirm it, if to deny, they must
gainesay it, and eat their words, how unjustly and impudentlie soever.

David to swear so peremptorily that he would kill Nabal, his family, and
every mothers child of them. It was his stabilitie in goodness to break off
such a purpose, and neither to say it again, nor do it at all. And it was the
rashness of Peter to be so resolute in promising that which was not in his power
to perform. It was to be imputed to his conceitednesse, and not constancy,
that he stood so stiffely in denial of that which Christ told him would come
to pass, and gave no place therein to our Savior, but had the last word of
him. It is wisdom then to foresee the events that are like to follow: If we
affirm ought let us know our warrant and ground, that we are able to prove
it: if we deny any thing, let the case be clear that it be not proved
against us: if we undertake any thing, let us be fully assured that it is
lawful, and meet, and possible for us to do it. And yet this suffices not
unless there be soundness and sincerity without carnal respects in our
sayings. If the end be not good which is aimed at in speaking, if the heart
be not faithful of him that speaks, there can never be any firmness or
certeintie in the speeches. There is no constancy, says David Psalm. 8. 9.
concerning the wicked, in their mouths, within they are very corruption. For
other uses that might have been made of this point, look in the tenth chapter,
and twentieth verse.

Verse 20. Deceit comes to the heart of them that practice mischief, and joy
to the counselors of peace.
DEceit comes to the heart, etc, that is, sorrow and grief comes to the
hearts of them that plot mischief against others by advise, or attempt, when
they shall find themselves deceived in their devises. But such as use their
thoughts and words to move men to be at peace with God and their neighbors,
and to walk in the way of peace and good propseritie, shall not fail of the
comfort of their faithful and wholesome counsel.



When their hearts take pleasure in inuenting of evil, they must be put to the
pain to bear the burden of their evil inventions. Vexation and mourning are
not so meet for any, as for them that study how they may vex their brethren,
and bring them to mourn. As we have already showed that wicked works deceive
them that do them, so for the same causes it will appear Chap. 11. 18.
that the warping of sinful courses will turn to their hurt that imagine them.

Do they not err that imagine evil? Where the question is Prou. 14. 22.
not proposed in way of doubting, but of certeintie, as of a thing that is
clear and manifest, and in no wise to be gainesaied. Never any man of an
hurtful heart had his will satisfied, and his desire fulfilled to his
contentment, and consequently according to his hope. Women commonly have pain
in breeding of child, and pangs in travel, and comfort when they are
delivered: but malicious men conceive joy all the time that they go great with
their purposes, and most when they are bringing forth, and nothing but anger,
and sorrow, and shame, when they see nothing but a misshapen monster, to be
borne unto them.

Hamans, and Achabs, and all be ouerturned in the end, and themselves be
overwhelmed therewith, as the case of Haman and Daniels adversaries testifies.





Eliphaz, and warranted by the spirit of God in the book of Job. He scatters
the devises of the crafty: so that their hands cannot accomplish that which
they do enterprise. He takes the wise Job 5. 12. 13.
in their craftiness, and the counsel of the wicked is made foolish. They
meet with darkness in the day time, and grope at noone day as in the night.
But he saves the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from the hand of
the violent man.

But to the counsellers] Wholesome counsel is comfortable to them that give it,
as well as profitable to them that take it.

If the tongue persuade to that which is right, and the heart agree with the
persuasion of the tongue, whatsoever success his words do find in others, he
is sure to find joy and gladness in his own soul. The same blessing which
David pronounced upon Abigail, for procuring of peace by her counsel, the Lord
does promise and pronounce, and will perfome to every one whose affection and
behavior is like to Abigails. Blessed, says he, be 1. Sam. 25 33.
thy counsel, and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from coming to
shed blood. And our Savior extends it generally to all that labor
uprightly, and in due manner to make peace, saying, Blessed are the peace
makers, for they shall be called the children of God, Mat. 5. 9.

The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, etc. And in another place; The
kingdom of God is not Gal. 5. 22. Romans 14. 17.
meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

David to Abigail, and Naaman to Elisha, and the Iaylor and Lydia to Paul: Act.
16. 17. 33. 34.

Isaiah says, their reward is with the Lord, and they shall be glorious in
his Isa 49. 4. 5.
eyes. And their faithful dealing will bring them both comfort and praise, as
Jonathan found in seeking to pacify his fathers displeasure unjustly kindled
against David.

though there be oppositions against us, as all faithful peacemakers shall
meet froward persons that will be unpeaceable, yet if the God of peace be at
peace with us, and protector of us, what cause have we to stand in any fear?
he would not promise us joy, unless he were resolved to perform it: and he
would not encourage us to be joyful, unless our state were safe and happy.
And why then are we so timorous to speak when we see dissension among equals,
contempt of superiors, oppression of inferiors, sinning against men's own
souls, and war against the Lord himself? Is it because we would not give
offense? It is an offense to be silent at the offenses committed against God,
and the hurt that men do to themselves and their neighbors. Is it because we
would avoid trouble and displeasure, and keep our selves from grief and
sorrow? The way to do that is to please God, who can make them whose anger we
fear, to favor us, and be means of our peace and consolation. But in
counselling of peace we must look to these things, first, that we be justly
called to deal in that particular case, lest meddling with the strife that
Preu. 26. 17.
belongs not unto us, we be as one that takes a dog by the ears. Secondly,
that we make no atonement between wicked men in their wickedness, as Hester
would not make Haman and Ashuerus friends when they were fallen out: for how
much concord had been between Haman and the King, so much discord would have
bin between the King and the Church. So that in setting agreement between man
and man, it is good to set variance between a man and his sin, and to leave
sinful men at variance, whose reconciliation does tend to the dishonor of
God, and the hurt of his people.

Without wood the fire is quenched, and without a talebearer strife cease,
Chap. 26. 20. In the mean time let them be admonished that incense great men,
as Landlords, and Magistrates, and Masters against their poor, weak
inferiors that live under them. The Lord will hear their cries and groans,
not only against the mighty ones that lay too heavy burdens upon them, but
also against all those that have been means and causers of it. And be this
remembered withal on both sides, as well on their part that be so easily
persuaded to rigor and cruelty, as of theirs that move them to it, or
encourage them in it, that this advise does not only imbitter them against
their underlings, who seem to be altogether in their power, but also
imboldeneth them against their maker, who only has all power and
soueraignetie over them.

Verse. 21. The punishment of iniquite shall not befall the just: but the
wicked are full of evil.
AFflictions and corrections may come upon the righteous, but no revenging
curse tending to destruction, as if they were abiects. But the wicked are full
of evil both of guiltines, and continual practice, according to the
corruption of their hearts, which the righteous are purged from, and therefore
also of those punishments which the righteous escape.



He comes as a father in mercy and mildnes to the one, and deals as a
Judge, or rather an enemy, in wrath and severity with the other. He comes
with his pruning knife to cut off the superfluous sprigges and branches of the
one, and with a keen axe in his hand to hew down by the roots the stocks
and bodies of the other. And this difference is spoken of in the foureteenth
chapter of this book, verse. 32. The wicked shall be cast away for his
naughtines: but the righteous has hope in his death. And this difference is
spoken of in the seven and twentieth of Isaiah, verse 7. Has he smitten him, as
he smote those that smote him? or is he slain according to the slaughter of
them that were slain by him? That is, has the Lord plagued Israel his Church
and people in such a grievous manner as he has destroyed their enemies? it is
manifest he has not. And this difference is spoken of in the eight chapter to
the Romans, verse 1. that there is no damnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus that walk after the spirit, as there is to them that walk after the
flesh.

The four reasons wherewith the last doctrine of the former Chap. 11. 31.
chapter was proved, do evidently confirm this point: and therefore to avoid
prolixitie, and unnecessary repetitions, we refer the reader to that place.





Verse 22. The lying lips are abomination to the Lord: but they that deal
truly are his delight.
THe sense is plain enough of it self, if the supply be made of that which
is understood in both the clauses. The Lord abhors lying lips, that is,
those persons that abuse their lips to lying, which will also be false in
their deeds: and he is well pleased with them that deal faithfully, which
will likewise be true in their words.

These six things does the Lord hate: Prou. 6. 17:
yea his soul abhors seven: the hautie eyes, and a lying tongue, and the
hands that shed innocent blood, etc. Ye may know by their companions among
whom they are marshalled, what account he makes of them. And so in the
revelation of S. John, he declares his detestation of them by reckoning up
their fellows, and describing their grievous punishment. The fearful and
unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, Revel. 21. 8.
and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars shall have their part in the lake,
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do.
He abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in John 8. 44.
him. When he speaks a lie, then he speaks of his own: for he is a lier,
and the father thereof. It is his mother tongue, and native language to lie;
when he utters any true sentence it is but borrowed, and that also he cannot
truly deliver, without gross deceit and dissimulation.

Col. 3. 9.
unto it, are unregenerate, and as yet the children of wrath and subject to
damnation.



And therefore the Apostle exhorts all that are effectually regenerate, to
cast off lying, and to speak every man truth unto his neighbor, because we
are members one of another. Ephesians 4. 25.


Job knew that his words were displeasing to the Lord, though they were few,
and only rash and unadvised, Job 42. 6.
and he himself by error was deceived in them, he abhorred himself, and
repented in dust and ashes: how much more then ought we to do it, which have
more provoked God with innumerable false speeches, and that knowingly and with
purpose of deceiving, and he does profess that they have been, and are
abominable to him? And what though we have sometimes kept our selves from
blame by telling of lies? What though we have delighted others, and obtained
favor to our selves thereby? What though we have made our gain and commodity
of it? Will all this, if this were the winning of all the world, be able to
counteruaile the high displeasure of God, and the loss of his favor, together
with the forfaiting of our own salvation? And hereby shall we know that we be
soundly purged from lying, if we do not only forbear to lie, but be
utterly unwilling that any other should tell a lie for us. For that is the note
of a righteous man that he hates lying words, as well as Prou. 13. 3.
forbeareth to speak them. And they shall be shut out of the kingdom of
heaven together, which love, and which make lies, Revel. 22. 15.



But they that deal truly, etc. That truth which is acceptable to God
consists both in speaking, and doing.

Nothing can please him but the image of that which is in him, and the streams
which flow from him, as does this real and operative truth, and not that
which is verbal and in word only.

This is testified of the Lord Jesus Christ the dearly beloved son of God,
who is proposed to us for a perfect example to imitate, that he did no
wickedness, as no deceit was found in his Isa. 53. 9.
mouth.



If any man sin not in word, he is a perfect man and able to bridle all the
body. His meaning is not that some be absolute without sin in word, and
perfect, without infirmity in goodness: but that many be gracious without
sinfulness, though they have their slips, in speeches: and sincere, without
wickedness, though they have their frailties, in behavior.

Cast off lying, and let him that stole, steal no more, Ephesians. 4. 25. 28.

Lord, says David, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? who shall rest in thy
holy Psalm. 15. 1. 2.
mountain? He, says God, that walks uprightly, and works righteousness,
and speaks the truth in his heart.





Verse 23. A prudent man concealeth knowledge: but the heart of fools
publishes foolishness.
A Prudent man, he that is of good discretion, and has learned to be wary and
circumspect, concealeth knowledge, not that he shuts it up altogether,
without any use or benefit of it to others: for that were contrary to the
profession which the Prophet makes of that wherein every godly man ought to
follow him; I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, but I but I have
declared thy truth and thy salvation; I have not concealed thy mercy and thy
truth from the great congregation. Psalm. 40. 10. And that were contrary to
the testimony which is given of wise men, chap. 15. 7. The lips of the wise
do spread abroad knowledge. But he will observe all good circumstances of
speaking, that it be in time and place, when good opportunity does require it,
and good effect is like to be wrought by it. And contrariewise the heart of a
fool which leads his tongue (for guide it does not) does set the tongue on
work either to utter bad matter, or that which is good in bad manner, that
every man may see the folly which is in it.

the tongue of the wise uses knowledge aright; Chap. 15. 2. And that a fool
powers out all his mind: but a wise man keeps in till afterward; Chap. 29.
11.

hearts, then all the standers by shall hear their lipes deliver.



How good is a word in due season? says the Scripture. And a word spoken in
his Prou. 15. 23. Prou. 25. 11.
place is as apples of gold upon pictures of silver. The ointment that is close
kept in a box will yield a sweter savor when it is powered out, then that which
is continually open. And wine fresh from the vessel has a better relish, then
that which was drawn long before there was need of it, or any to drink it.

Elihu, he preferred his elders, though not his betters, before himself. He
would not open his mouth before his turn came, and that he saw Job, and his
three friends to Job. 34. 4. 5. etc.
swerue out of the way on both hands.

Paul, who preached not himself, but the Lord Jesus Christ. Their chief
labor is not to win glory to God, and men to salvation: but credit to
themselves, and men to the admiration of their gifts and learning. This they
principally aim at, that all may be affected with their elocution; that al
may see the fruit of their wits; that al may discern of their skill in the
tongues: that al may witness their pains in reading: that all may wonder at
their depth of judgment. If those be things that their hearts do chiefly
desire, we must conclude of them that their hearts do publish foolishnes.

Verse 24. The hand of the diligent shall bear rule: but the deceitful shall
be under tribute.
THe hand of the diligent, that is, diligent men who use their hands, or other
members of their bodies, or else their minds to some honest and profitable
travel according to their calling, shall bear rule, and attain to some good
place of estimation. But idle persons whom want and other occasions draw to
deceitful courses to shift for themselves, as we have showed in the fourth
verse of the tenth chapter, shall be made underlings, and brought into
subjection and seruilitie.



True it is that diverse attain not to such greatness as others do, and yet
be no less diligent then others are, but the Lord makes their inferioritie a
step toward their heavenly advancement: and they are not without estimation in
that low estate: and God sees their fruit to be better, and their comfort to
be more there, than if they were raised up to higher preferment. Otherwise,
they that serve God in what place soever, are sure to grow greater. The
Scripture proposes examples hereof, and shows how the point has been
verified in former ages. Jacob at the first set himself to service, and was at
the commandment of an other man, but at the last, being painful and true, he
was able to keep servants himself, and other men were at his commandment.
Joseph when he came into Egypt was bought and sold as a poor bondsman, but
being faithful in every place that he came into, he was promoted in every
place that he came into. When he was a servant, when he was a prisoner, and
especially when he was Prince. David had once the charge of a flock of
sheep, and thereof was not a little heedefull: but afterward he had the
leading of an army of men, and lastly, was exalted to the throne of a
glorious kingdom.

down, according to his own will. And therefore when he has fitted men to
authority, by humbling them with labor, he assigns their places wherein
they shall stand, and by his providence prefers them to the same: some to
be Magistrates, some to be Captains, some to be Ministers, some to be
Masters, some to be Stewards, some to have one office, and some another.



Thou see that a diligent man in his business stands before Kings, and
stands not before the base sort; Prou. 22. 29.

depart with that inheritance and patrimony which their parents have left
them? Are they not compelled to borrow and shift, and to sincke deeply into
debt? And it is a true proverb; that the borrower is servant to the man that
lends. For further use of this Prou. 22. 7.
point, see the fourth verse of the tenth chapter, in the application of the
second doctrine.

Verse. 25. Heaviness in the heart of a man does bring it down: but a good word
rejoices it.
Heaviness of heart, that is, such sorrows or fears, as are not godly, and
effects of faith, but proceeding from infidelity, or carnal respects,
especially being excessive, does bring down the heart, not humbling it kindly,
so as pride may be taken away, but either filling it with discouragement, or
distemper, against which the Prophet wrestled with sundry conflicts: Why art
thou cast down my soul, and art unquiet, or tumultuous within me? Psalm. 42. 5.
Now withal he prescribes the remedy whereby this disease of hurtful sorrow
and pensiuenes may be cured, and that is with good words. For the comfortable
speech of a friend, but especially the wholesome word of God, declaring the
remission of sins, and the favor of God, expels the heaviness of the
heart, and refreshes it with joy and comfort.

Prou. 15. 13.
heavy. When Joshua was inclining to too much fear and discomfort, for the
loss of his men at their going up against Ai, and the evil consequents that
were likely to follow, the Lord would not suffer him to give place thereunto,
saying, Get thee up: wherefore Josh. 7. 10.
lie thou thus upon thy face? He took notice, and gave a censure of this
inward affection of his heart, somewhat exceeding measure, by the gesture of
his body.

and the life it self is many times shortened by that means. A joyful heart
causes good health, but a sorrowful mind dries the bones, Prou. 17. 22. It
pearceth to that which is within, and brings weakness upon the strongest
parts.

Moses brought to the Israelites in Egypt, when the Lord told them, that he
would deliver them from the burdens and bondage of the Egyptians, and would
take them for his people, and be their God, etc. but it is said they harkened
not to him for anguish of spirit, and cruel bondage, Exo. 6. 9.







holy counsel which God, that can make it effectual, does offer here in this
place unto us, and that is to have a recourse to faithful comforters. He
sends us to them, he incourageth us to go, he assures us of success, he
has always performed, that never any was left vnholpen, that sought help at
his hand according to this his direction. Elihu speaks of this to Job, that
when a man is stricken with sorrow upon his bed, and grief of his bones is
sore, so that his life causes him to abhor bread and his soul dainty
meat, that his flesh is consumed, and his bones chatter, and his soul draws
to the grave, and his life to the buriers, yet a faithful Job. 33. 19. etc.
messenger of God, one of a thousand delivering his message faithfully from
God, will heal all this in them that give credit to him, and set them in as
good case as ever they were before. For God which can do all things and formed
all things, has undertaken to give such a blessing to the words of his
servants, and chiefly them by whose ministry he speaks to his own people. I
create (says he) the fruit of the lips to be peace, peace, that is, (true,
perpetual, and most constant comfort) unto them that are far Isai. 57. 19.
off, and to them that are near: for I will heal him. Hereof the keeper of
the prison, whom Paul and Silas converted, had happy experience, Act. 16. 28.
and thereby was preserved from destroying himself. Hereof three thousand at
once, whom Peter converted, had happy Act. 2. 37.
experience, being delivered both from their fears, and sinfulness.



Verse 26. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor: but the way of
the wicked will deceive them.
THe righteous, that is, every godly man who has attained to vprightnes,
though not to perfection of righteousness, is better then his neighbor, is
better beloved, and graced of God, and more esteemed of godly wise men, and
has that in him which makes him more commendable then any other that is
unrighteous and sinful; and so his way is answerable to his hope. But the
wicked desiring, and seeking, and expecting a more excellency above others,
are notwithstanding contemptible, and grow in time to be contemned, and so
their way deceives them.

My goods, says he, extend not to thee, but to the Saints that are in earth,
even to the excellent: all my Psalm. 16. 3.
delight is in them. And Isaiah speaking of the same sort of people, though
never so mean and poor, says, that upon all the Isa. 4. 5.
glory shall be a defense.



Secondly, in respect of their state that shall be in the life to come, which
by no comparison can be sufficiently expressed. They shall have perfect
happiness, and be made like unto Jesus Christ, more excellent and puissant,
then the most glorious Angels. When all the wicked shall be brought to the
fulness of contempt: when shame shall cover them: when they shall be trodden
down as the mire in the streets. Micah. 7. 10.




Paul's saying) as the filth of the world, and the ofscourings 1. Cor. 4. 13.
of all things. Which make less reckoning of them that are truly religious,
then of the dust which they sweep out of their houses, and cast to the
dunghill. They had rather have their children and friends to be Beare-wards,
or chimnie-sweepers, then mortified and faithful Christians. How different is
their estimation from the testimony of the holy Ghost? And therefore how
little grace of the holy Ghost is wrought in their hearts?

S. James condemns it for a heinous offense to have a base Iam. 2. 3.
opinion of the godly, and to put them behind wicked rich men for their
poverty: how grievous then is their sin which contemn and loath them and
put the vilest before them, for their piety? But one thing let them know, and
that they shall in time to come both see and feel, unless in due time before,
they see their fault, and feel godly grief for the same, that they shall
never inherit glory with the righteous in heaven, that be despisers of them in
earth. Nay not so only, but God does condition with them that would have an
habitation above with him, that vile persons must be contemned in their eyes,
and they must honor them that fear the Lord. Psalm. 15. 4.


The other clause of this verse is the same in sense, and almost in words with
the eighteenth verse of the former chapter, where it is said, that The wicked
works a deceitful work; and therefore we refer the reader to that place
for the doctrine of it.

Verse 27. The deceitful man rosteth not that which he took in hunting; but
the riches of the diligent man are precious.
THe deceitful, etc. That is a prouerbiall kind of speech, signifying that
they shall not enjoy nor have the benefit of that which they get by craft and
falsehood. If the whole similitude be fully set down, the meaning will the
better appear. Even as hunters many times when they take a pray, yet taste not
of it, nor fare the better for it: (for dogs may eat it up, or some other
occurrent may fall out to deprive them of it, as many lets come between the
mouth and the morsel) so unjust and deceitful men, though they attain to
wealth and riches, may be assured that they shall never have any sound profit
or comfort by them. Where by the way, may be seen the different end of the
hunting that was used in those days, and of this which is practiced of many in
our times. They made it an exercise for profit, and thereby, as it may appear,
provided food for themselves, and the families wherein they lived, as is to be
seen in the example of Esau himself, who used to bring home venison to his
father. But it is ordinary now with diverse to bestow a great part of their
time to hunt merely for pleasure, without any commodity. They voluntarily
defraud themselves of the pray which they take, their households have not the
better cheer by their hunting, but the worse. They consume themselves, and
wast their goods, and impouerish their wives and children, by following their
sports, and neglecting their estate: by feeding so many dogs, as that thereby
they fail both of care and abilititie to provide for their people. But the
riches of the diligent are precious, that is, those things which they that are
both faithful and industrious do gain and get by lawful means, shall do
them good, and serve for their comfort.



Riches may come according to their desire, but either not to tarry with them,
or not to do them service, so that they will turn to a vexation at their
departure, or to clog and burden them whiles they remain. As the Partridge
lays eggs, which she hatcheth not: Ierem. 17. 11.
so, says Jeremy, he that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them
in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool. All deceitefull
persons fall into that absurdity, which by our common proverb is derided;
they count their chickens before they be hatched, so soon as they have eggs
in their nest, they conclude of a brood of comfort and happiness, which God
has concluded that they shall never obtain. Achan hunted after the
consecrated Josh. 7. 15.
gold, and silver, and execrable garment; but albeit he caught them he roasted
them not, but was burnt himself, with all his, and whatsoever he had before.

The Amalakites which sacked Ziglag, and took the spoil of the city, with
David's wives and substance, were prosperous hunters in show at the first, yet
they roasted not their pray, but provided it for David's use, and David dealt
with them, as with beasts that are hunted into the net.





And so much does the holy Ghost expresselie testify: Surely to a man that is
good in his sight, God gives wisdom and knowledge, and joy: but to the
sinner he gives pain to gather, and to heap up to give to him that is good
before God; Eccles. 2. 26.

Job speaks to the same purpose, saying, Though he should heap up silver as
the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay, he may prepare it, but the just
shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver; Job 27. 16. 17.



But the riches, etc. Wealth well gotten by good men, is great in value,
whatsoever it be in quantity.

As the bread of deceit is sweetest, so the riches of iniquity seem best to
unrighteous persons: and sluggards like nothing so well, as that which comes
with least travel, and without much pains taking. Better, say they, is an
handful with ease, then Eccles. 4. 6.
two handfuls with labor and vexation of spirit. And every thing is a vexation
of their spirit which puts them to any pains of body. But the Lord
testifies the contrary and teaches his people both by word and effect, that
that only is of worth and estimation which his servants obtain by lawful
means, and his blessing upon them. And because this point is most true, and the
world believes not that any truth is in it, he confirms the same in diverse
places: as Chap. 15. 16. Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then
great treasure and trouble therewith. That is, with fear, care, sorrow, or the
check of an evil conscience. So in the Psalm. 37. 16. A small thing unto the
righteous, is better then great riches to the wicked and mighty.







Prou. 15. 6.
one, but holds true for every one that fears God, that the house of the
righteous has much treasure. Things that are costly and of great price, are
not to be rated by comparison with the measure of baser matters, nor according
to the room which they fill up. A little gold ouerualueth much lead or iron,
many great pebbles are not matchable in worth with one pearl which is far
less then they are, a box full of rich diamonds, is better then a house full
of wood, and straw, or other stuff that is course or common. And so stands
the case with good men's possessions; the blessing of God with his mercy and
favor does convert them into jewels for their use and benefit, and works
such comfortable effects by them, as all the treasures of the wicked can never
yield unto them.

Verse 28. Life is in the way of righteousness, and in that path way there is no
death.
LIfe, etc. The meaning is, that they which are righteous men justified by the
merits of Christ, and sanctified by his spirit, and obedient to his will in
working that which is agreeable to his word, are in state of life everlasting.
The life of grace they have possession of already; the life of glory is
assured to them by the life of grace: whosoever has the one, can never fail
of the other. And therefore it is said that there is no death in that path.
They are delivered from the first death, which has power over all sinful men,
in this world: and they shall never come into the second, which is the portion
of reprobates in the world to come. And this is confirmed by the testimony of
Christ himself, saying; Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my
word and believes John 5. 24.
in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but has passed from death to life. The doctrine which the words
would minister, has been declared, and prosecuted in the nineteenth verse of
the former chapter, where it is said that righteousness leads to life, and
therefore it is needelesse to handle it again in this place. Only let thus
much be spoken, that the holy Ghost does not in vain so often promise life to
them that seek, and serve him. He does repeat it more then twenty times in
this one book, besides the mention that the other parts of scripture do make
of it, almost every where. It is therefore a point of certentie to them that
lay hold on it: It is a point of difficulty, and not easily believed:
sithence God to help our hearts does again, and again redouble it: and it is
a point of great importance, requiring a serious and constant meditation,
without which men grow barren, and careless in doing all good duties: and by
which they are made rich and plentiful in all holy services. The consideration
of life, and of such a life will encourage the heart, and open the mouth, and
strengthen the hands, and make the feet nimble to run in the ways of
righteousness: all that they can do in obedience, they will account too little,
and nothing that they suffer for well-doing, they will think to much.

FINIS.
The Author to the Reader.
THou art to be advertised, good Reader, that sundry faults have escaped in
this Treatise, most by oversight of him that copied it out and made it ready
for the Press; and some few were committed in the printing: the greatest part,
and I think all, are here collected for thee in brief; I pray thee take notice
of them, and reform them in their places according to this direction.

Page 13. lin. 2. read, and their souls also flexible. page 30. l. 10. r.
their persuasions. p. 36. l 29. for commodity read brethrens. page 38 l. 3.
r. into accusations. p. 39. l. 30. r. offer of it to others. p. 41. l. 31. put
out own. page 42. l. 23 r. aggrauate. page 43. l. 20 r bond. p 46. l. 35. r
often. p. 50. l. 14. r. fast. ibid. 34. r. what causes. p. 51. l. 5. r.
preserves. ibid. 12. r. meannes. p. 53. l. 27. r. God hears them with mercy
and favor. p. 57. l. 9. r. fence. p. 66. l. 36. r. descried. p. 69 l. 14. r.
greatly. page 78. l. 26. r. deprauation. p 86. l. 6. r. good springs. p. 91. l.
34. r. as. page 94. l. 5. r. spoken. p. 95. l. 11. r. was an. p. 108. l. 1. r.
sharp. p. 139. l. 16. r. deem. p. 143 l. 29. r. degree. p. 144. l. 2. r.
cruelty. page 156. l 28. r. covetous. p. 160. lin. 37. r. deposed. p. 166. l.
14. r. but to the. p. 196. l. 26. r. fears. p. 280. l. 22. r. moves.


