Bathshebaes INSTRVCTIONS to her Son LEMVEL: Containing a fruitful and
plain Exposition of the last Chapter of the PROVERBS.

Describing the duties of a Great-man, AND The virtues of a Gracious Woman.

Penned by a godly and learned man, now with God.

Perused, and published for the use of Gods Church, By John Dod, AND William
Hind.

Printed at London by John Beale, for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his
shop near the great Cunduit in Fleet-streete. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, WILLIAM Lord SAY, and SEAL, together with the
religious Lady ELIZABETH his wife, Grace and peace in Christ Jesus.
MY GOOD LORD:
I Present you here with a divine Jewel, which as it was found by a rich
Merchant in his field, so was it polished by the cunning skill of his own most
curious hand. Jf you behold the quantity, it may seem but as a Mite: but if
you consider the quality and virtue thereof, it is far to be preferred above
much refined gold. For among others, it has this hidden virtue: that whosoever
contemplates the luster thereof with a chaste eye, it will reflect a sanctified
illumination into his very heart. And seeing that by Gods providence it came to
my hands, when as by the death of the Author it was like to have been lost: I
thought my self bound in conscience to communicate it with the Church of God
for the public good, rather then to keep it still in my closet for my own
private benefit.

And howsoever the splendour of this Jewel will glad the heart of every eye
that sees it, yet being well considered, you shall find it belongs by a
more peculier right, to such among the sons and daughters of men, who are
eminent for their birth, and honorable for their place and condition. And
because the worth of the Jewel required a Patron of no meaner rank then one of
the sons of Nobles: Eccles. 10, 17
I thought good to recommend this Jewel unto your Lordships Patronage and
protection: and the rather, that it might be some testimony of the favors
which I have received from: and of that duty wherein I acknowledge my self to
be indebted unto your Lordship. It is now your own: oh let the light and
luster of every beam therein, shine in your Person, and appear in your
practice: that to the glory of God, the joy of your friends, and solace of
your own conscience, Grace and Honor, Godliness and greatness, knowledge
and sanctification, may be seen in you amiably to embrace, and beuatifully to
adorn one another. For when after a long account you shall at the last come to
cast up your Summa totalis, you shall find, that Godliness will prove the
greatest gain, Grace the richest treasure, and Gods favor the highest honor.
The Lord with his favorable countenance bless you and your virtuous Lady, and
every branch of your vine; Psalm. 92.13, 14
that as the Lords planting you may so flourish in Gods courts, that branches
be never wanting to your stock, nor fruit unto your branches, that men may
see that verified of your honorable vine, which the heathen man said of his
golden tree; Primo avulso non deficit alter
Aureus, and simili frondescit virga metallo.


Bunbury in Cheshire. July 13. 1614. Your Honors in all christian duty, to be
commanded: WILLIAM HIND.

AN EXPOSITION upon the last Chapter of the PROVERBS. (*)
PROVERBS Chap. 31. Verse 1. The words of King Lemuel, the collection wherein
his mother instructed him.

Verse 2. What my son? and what a son of my womb? and a son of my vows?


THE scope and drift of the first verse is set forth unto us, that it is the
duty of Parents to teach and instruct their children, and that it is the
Childrens duty, firmly to retain in memory the instruction, and precepts of
their Parents.

The drift, and scope, of the second verse is to show, that children ought to
be persuaded of the love of their Parents, to the end that they be the better
confirmed and strengthened in the doctrine which they teach them.

IN this Chapter, two things are to be observed: First the Title: Secondly, An
Exhortation, and admonition of Called also Bathshua. 1. Chron. 3.5
Bathsheba the mother unto Solomon her son.

The title is described by a double efficient cause: First by Bathsheba the
author, which is noted by her relative; to wit, the mother of Solomon: And
Secondly, by Solomon the reporter, who also is declared by another relative; to
wit, the title of King. It is further also described by the final cause, which
is, that the mother should instruct her son Solomon.

Afterward is declared the duty of children, which is faithfully to retain the
wholesome precepts, and admonitions of their parents, and rather then they
should be forgotten, to commit them to writing, to the end, that they may in
their practice of life, by their deeds express them, for the obedience of
children, does not so much consist in bowing the knees to their Parents, in
giving them outvvarde honor and reverence, and in asking their blessing etc.
as in observing the lessons, and instructions, which are delivered to them by
their Parents.

And as Solomon kept, and preserved those precepts, not for his own use only;
but also for the profit of the posterity of the Church: So it behooves
children, after they have applied them first to their own use, to have care to
teach them to their children begotten by them.

In Bathsheba the other efficient cause is to be noted, the duty of Parents
in general, and in special of mothers; which is, Ephesians. 6, 4
to bring up and instruct their Children, even their sons in the fear of
God, 1. Chron 28.9 Exo. 12, 26, 27
and to endewe them with lessons and precepts, which may be of use unto them,
not only whilst they are under their nurturing, government, and oversight:
but also may be necessary and profitable unto them for the framing and
governing the whole course of their life: 2. Tim. 1, 5
and that even from their Tim. 3.15 Pro. 4.3
cradles; which appears by her loving manner of speech toward him, calling
him Lemuel, a thing observed by mothers to their children, whilst they are in
their tender years.

Then it is also to be noted in what things chiefly is seen the love of
parents, which is lawful, to wit, that by how much the more they love their
children, by so much the more plentifully and abundantly they should inform
them in the fear of God. For whereas Bethsheba held her son Solomon most
dear unto her, as does very manifestly appear by the fourth chapter of the
Proverbs, verse 31 and by the second verse of this chapter, she did witness
and testify this her love, by a most diligent, and religious education of him,
contrary to that which parents and mothers (especially in these days) do;
which do express their love to their children in clothing them in gay
apparel, feeding them with delicate meats, allowing them greater liberty, and
license of life, and by over much cockering of them. Which care as it is to be
used toward all children, 1. Chro. 28.9.10.20.
so more especially toward those of whom there is greater hope and
expectation, that they shall one day live in the public sight of men, Genesis
49.1.2.
and as it were in the face of the common wealth, and of the Church. For, that
it was known to Bathsheba, that Solomon her son should succeed in the
Kingdom, it appears 1. Kings 1.13.17. and that David had three other sons
borne to him by Bathsheba, it is manifest, 1. Chron. 3.5. And hitherto of the
former part of this Chapter.

There follows the speech or admonition of Bathsheba the Mother, Verse 2.
to her son Solomon, which consists in two things. First in an insinuating
into favor, or a foregarding of that which she has to speak, verse 2.
Secondly, in the preceps she gives to him, verse 3. And in the whole chapter
following.

In the former, Bathsheba does it, that Solomon might understand that he was
only, and most dearly loved of her: and therefore that this her charge unto
him, poceeded from a most entire and fervent love toward him.

Hitherto belongs her affectionate speech; whereby she gives him to
understand, that her love toward him was the greater, and that by the fervent,
and loving affection of her mind, she would teach him more things, then by
her words he could attain unto.

From whence it is to be understood, that in every instruction or admonition,
public, or private, from equals, or unequals, diligent heed is to be taken,
not only that it do proceed from love, but also that it may be made known
unto those to whom such admonition is given, that they are beloved of them, who
in regard of their office and calling, do take upon them to admonish and
instruct them. As also by how much the greater, and harder things are given in
charge, it is meet that there be so much the more plentiful, and more
abundant testimony declared of their love toward them that are admonished: But
above all things it is most commendable to leave testimony of this love, Josh.
7.19.
whereas more sharp medicines both of words and punishments are applied.

Which thing to any man that will apply his mind unto it, may easily appear
to have been observed of the Apostle, both in the Epistle to the Galathians:
Gal. 4.14.19.
as also in the second of the Corinthians: 2. Cor. 11.11. 2. Cor. 12.15.
for as the Chyrurgions before they minister more sharp and biting remedies,
do use certain lenitiues and molitiues: so in sharp correction, a more
plentiful testimony of love (as it were a mollitiue) ought to be set before.

Whereas she calls him the son of her vows, it appears that she not
only dealt with Solomon for his godly education, but also commended this matter
to God, without whom all her pains taken to inform, and instruct him would be
but lost and in vain.

But whereas she used not prayers only but vows, and that not one, but many,
she did therein declare both her singular love toward Solomon, and her piety
toward God. Furthermore it ought to give comfort and courage unto parents,
that there is such plentiful fruit of the mothers instruction, prayers and
vows, as they by that means may through Gods blessing have a son excelling
both in piety, wisdom, and glory. And hitherto of the first part of her speech.

It follows that we speak of the instructions, which are of two sorts. First
of things to be eschewed, and avoided; and secondly, of things to be pursued
and followed.

Verse 3. Give not thy strength to women, nor thy ways to those that destroy
Kings.


THe scope and drift of this Proverb, is, by propounding a grievous loss and
punishment to terrify Solomon from filthiness, a disswasion, or dehortation
from filthy lusts, and the reason of this disswasion. Although I cannot
according to my vow endow thee with lessons and instructions, yet will I
endeavor to do what I can therein.

Besides, the aptness and pronenes of youth to fall into this sin, a Kingly
state, and condition does many times kindle flames of lust, Ezekiel. 16. ^8.49.
and does minister helps unto them: as first a bountiful table furnished with
variety of delicates; then his servants, and those which are conversant with
him, who because of their number being of sundry dispositions there will not
want among them such as will be very forward and ready to stir up, and
satisfy the lusts of Kings, as appears. Genesis 12.15. and 20.2. and 2. Sam.
11.3. and 2. Sam. 13.4.5.

But above all things, the greatest spur and entisement to this sin, is the
hope of impunity, that there will be none that will punish them according to
their desert, nor that will so much as dare to mutter against them, or to say,
Sir why have you done this? which if it were worthily weighed and considered,
ought to be a bridle unto Kings, to keep them back, and restrain them from
that vice.

Forasmuch as in neglecting this duty of admonishing them their estate should
be very dangerous, considering that even David himself, after the adultery he
had committed, did not by repentance turn unto God, before he was by the
reprehension of the Prophet Nathan drawn out of that sink of filthiness,
whereinto he was fallen.

The reason of this exhortation is drawn from the inconvenience ensuing, to
wit, that by this vice, Kings, and Kingdoms are destroyed. Job 31.3.9.10.11.12.

And as in private men, by this vice their strength is infeebled, and made
weak, Pro. 7.22.23. Hos. 4.11. Pro. 7.
the powers, and faculties of the mind, are taken away, and their whole estate
is consumed; so especially in Kings, who do more grievously offend, to the
utter overthrow of their Kingdoms, and the truth of this (as in a most clear
glass) is to be seen. Judge. 20.46. Iud 21.3.
First in the Beniamites, who for the rauishing of one woman, were almost
rooted out, then in David who lacked little, 2. Sam. 12.10.11.
but that he had lost the Kingdom, both from himself and his posterity.
Lastly, in Solomon, 1. King 11.11.
who notwithstanding he was the richest man that ever was, or will be, yet by
his monstrous and beastly lusts, was brought to that state, Neh. 13.26.
it requiring and exacting great tributes, 1. King 4.7 and 7, 4
and subsidies of his subjects, he gave occasion that ten tribes fell from his
son.

True it is, indeed, that these men did all of them escape utter destruction,
because they repented. But if God so severely and sharply punished two whole
tribes, and two Kings, so notable and famous for their piety: Where shall that
man be found, whose sins he will spare.

Verse 4. Be it far from Kings, o Lemuel; be it far from Kings to drink
wine, or Rulers the desire of strong drink.

Verse 5. Least he drink and forget the ordinance, and so change the right of
the children of affliction.

Verse 6. Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine to
those that are grieved in mind.

Verse 7. Let him drink that he may forget his poverty, and may remember his
grief no more.


THe scope and drift of these verses is, to instruct and inform Kings, and
such as are in authority, and rich men, concerning the lawful and moderate use
of wine.

In the Law, many kinds of meats were forbidden unto all men, and
consequently unto Kings; but we do not read of any kinds of drinks that were
thereby restrained, but only from certain particular persons. Numbers 6.
Wherefore, at the first appearance it seems somewhat strange, and differing
from the law which is here commanded, and the rather for that the drinking
of wine is here forbidden to Princes, to whom of all others as in meats, so
also in drinks, delicacy is most justly allowed, as well for that they are
well furnished with means to procure them, as also for that dainties of meats
and drinks are most fit for them, to maintain their royal port and dignity.

Whither also may be added, that they being pressed and ouercharged with most
weighty affairs, it seems they should chiefly be recreated, and refreshed
with such comforts of this life. But he which shall more thoroughly search into
these words, shall easily perceive that the use of wine is not here forbidden,
but the immoderate and excessive drinking of it; which as it is by the Apostle
condemned in all men Ephesians. 5.18. So in Kings it is most offensive, as those
who both by their example do most hurt, and also for that their wits
confounded, and robbed with excess of wine, must needs cause corrupt and
false judgment; for both it is an hinderance to the finding out of justice in
suites, and actions; and also must needs draw them into error in giving
sentence, and judgment.

Hereof it is that Solomon says: Eccles. 10 16. Eccl. 10, 16, 17
Woe unto thee o land whose King is a child, and whose Princes eat in the
morning: and blessed art thou o land, whose King is the son of Nobles, and
whose Princes eat in time for strength, and not for drunkenness.

Hitherto, also, may be referred that which is in the tenth of Leuiticus; Leu.
10, 1, 9
that by the only fault of the sons of Aaron bringing strange fire unto the
alter there was a law given of God, that the Priests (so long as they were in
the Tabernacle, and Temple, and did minister the holy things) should not once
taste wine; so that that there is a more sparing and strict use of it, in the
Ministry, than in the civil Magistracy: To whom of all men the drinking of
wine was never denied, as unto the Ministers under the law at certain times,
which severity of the Law, seems to be mitigated in the Ministers under
the Gospel 1. Tim. 5.23.

But the excess is described by the cause, viz. the desire of wine, and
strong drink; for as of money the use of it is not forbidden, but the coveting
and love of it; so also of wine, not the use, but the desiring, and lusting
after it; by which immoderate use men fall to riot.

It is also worthy the observing, that she describes the discommoditie of the
immoderate use of wine, by forgetting judgment, and that which is by the law
prescribed, and thereby she teaches, that by the excessive use of strong
drink even the skilfullest and most learned in the law, do swarne from
equity and justice, to the end, that no man trusting to his own skill, and
readiness of his wit, should allow himself the more liberty in drinking: for,
although wine does not, presently, take away the knowledge of the law; yet
entering into the brain, it does (for a time) cause a forgetfulness of equity
and judgment, both in those which, according to the law do purpose to give
sentence, and also much more in those which do not incline to justice.

Ose 4.11
Notwithstanding the continual use of it, or abuse rather, does altogether
weaken the mind, and understanding: It is also of no small force to diswade
Judges from overmuch drinking of wine, least they change the judgment of
those, which bring their causes before them; whom here she does call the
children of affliction, by which manner of speech she seems to mean all
those, which do bring just causes in suite against others, for although they be
placed in a diverse degree of affliction, and some more then others are
oppressed and ouercharged with grief; yet there is none which brings a good
cause before a Judge, but that he is affected with grief for some injury that
is offered him; but now with new affliction to ouercharge him, which was
already grieved and troubled with the suite it self, is both unjust, and
cruel, and as in every judgment, a most sparing use of wine is to be
observed, so especially in capital matters, and matters of life and death.

It is also the duty of Kings, and princes to provide that those which are
great men in the common weal, and do sit as Judges, be not given to wine, and
good Bathsheba in this her exhortation to her son, with Kings does join
other Princes.

In the 6. and 7. verses she proves by the contrary, that wine is not to be
given to Kings, and Princes, because it is to be given to those that are ready
to perish, and to such as are heavy in mind, to those that are employed in
judgment rather then to Judges, rather to the afflicted then to such as live
in all plenty, and abundance.

Hereof was that laudable custom among the people of God, that a man dying,
his friends should be by others invited to a banquet, and that there should be
given them a cup of consolation Ier. 16. far otherwise then now is used
amongst us, whereas the widows that are ouercharged with grief for the death
of their husbands, do make a banquet to their neighbors, and kinsfolk,
hereof also (it may be) came that custom, of making those drink, which are
going to execution, both among us, and among the people of God, as may be
gathered by the story of the sufferings of Christ: where it may be demanded,
why Christ refused to drink wine, Mar. 15.23.
when it was offered, contrary to that, which the holy ghost does here command
by Bathsheba. The answer is, that for the same ca^se Christ refused to drink
wine, for the which it is here commanded; least forgetting the torments and
pains which he suffered for us, he should not pay the just prize of our
sins. Wherefore that he might remember us, he would forget himself, neither
would he give himself liberty to drink wine, before the punishment due unto
our sins, was quite taken away and satisfied, which ought to teach us, that
we ought for the good of our neighbor, to abstain from wine, 1. Cor. 8.13.
Romans 14.23.

But whereas it is not lawful for those that are ready to perish, and such as
are afflicted in mind, to drown themselves in drink, to make themselves
senseless and blockish, and yet a more liberal use of wine is granted unto
them, then to those that sit in judgments seat, thereof it follows that
Kings must drink more sparingly, and Judges, especially going to sit in
judgment.

Hitherto of those things which are forbidden, and of the negative precepts
there follow such things as are commanded, which do either concern the
common weal, or a private family, whereof the first is handled in the two next
verses, the other in the chapter following.

Verse 8. Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of all the children of
destruction.

Verse 9. Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and judge the cause of the poor
and needy.


THe scope and drift of these verses, is to declare, that we ought to take
upon us the defense, as of all men, so especially those that are destitute of
help.

It is the duty of a just and an upright Judge, Isa. 22, 23, 24.
to take care for all men, and to be as it were a nail in a wall, whereupon
may be hanged all vessels, as well cups as other implements and vtensils: but
there ought to be a more special, and chief care had of those, who for their
impotency, cannot, or dare not follow their just cause, of which sort are
widows, Isa 1, 23. Ier. 5, 28.
orphans, or pupils, and strangers.

And for that cause ye ought to imitate God the most just Judge, who
professes himself to be the God of the widow, Exo. 22, 21, 22. Zach. 7, 10.
of the orphant and stranger; that by how much the nearer such a one is to
ruin, and overthrow; so much the rather should he feel experience of the
Judges help, for the maintenance of his cause. Iam. 1, 27.


Hereof it is which Job says, that he purchased the blessing of him that was
ready to perish, to come upon him, and that he caused the heart of the widow
to sing for joy, that he delivered the afflicted fatherless, and him that had
no helper. Job. 29.12.13.15. That he was eyes to the blind, feet to the lame,
the which Bathsheba does here command, when she bids to open the mouth for
the dumb.

Verse 9.
Yet shall he not so favor the poor in his cause, that he give sentence on
his side in a wrongful matter: Exodus 23, 3. Leuit. 19, 15.
for so it is in the law prescribed, that the poor man is not to be
acknowledged in law, in a wrongful matter; as on the contrary part, if his
cause be good, the judge shall not only give sentence on his side, but shall
also take his cause in hand, and plead for him.

In the former part of the chapter, have been handled things belonging to
policy and public government, there follow such things as belong to a
private family. Wherein first is to be observed the manner of the speech, not
only that is to say in the original or heb^ew.
poetical, as the rest of the book: but moreover also framed with greater
skill and labor, every verse beginning in order that is to say in the
original or heb^ew.
Alphabetically, and that for no other purpose: but that every verse being
diligently and carefully weighed and considered, may be the more faithfully
retained in memory: for it is requisite that the holy ghost sharpening his
style, we should the more apply our wits and minds unto it: that he is it were
polishing and refining his speech, we ought to have our ears the more
attentive unto it: finally, that he as it were setting an edge upon his words,
we ought so much the rather to labor that no part of them do escape us.

Furthermore, we are by this speech and charge taught, that every one as he is
set in higher place in the Commonwealth, and in the Church, by so much more
carefully he is to endeavor, that in the choice of his wife he take great heed,
that he match himself with one most fit for him. For, hence it is the holy
Ghost does here set before us, Leu. 2, 13, 14
what manner of woman a Princes wife ought to be. Hence also it was, that
heretofore the law did set down, Ezekiel 44, 22
what manner of wife the high Priest ought to have, and did limit her in more
straight bounds.

And finally, hence it is that the Apostle does namely and expressly set forth,
with what virtues it is necessary the wives of Bishops, 1. Tim, 3, 2, 11
and Deacons, should be endued and adorned; which I do not remember to have
been performed by the holy Ghost, in any other sort of men. Whereby, what is
the drift of this speech, it may easily appear: to wit, that Bathsheba had
respect to this, to teach and inform her son Solomon, what manner of woman
he ought to beg of God in his prayers for his wife, and himself ought
carefully and diligently to seek after: and especially, for that the first and
principal thing which Kings are wont to look into is, the beauty and
nobility of their wives. And moreover also, that every woman, maid, or wife
should use this as a glass, whereby she may examine the beauty and deformity of
her mind, that for her good gifts she may be thankful to God; and
contrariwise, may bewail and correct her deformities.

Verse 10. Who shall find a woman of strength, for her price is far above
the Carbuncles, or Rubies.

Verse 11. The heart of her husband trusts in her, and he shall not have
need of spoils.

Verse 12. She does him good, not evil, all the days of his life.


THe scope and drift of these verses is, as also of those that follow unto the
28. to set forth unto us the virtues of a good wife.

And these virtues are, first of all, briefly comprehended in the 10. and 11.
verses: afterward they are more largely expressed. And in the 10. verse she is
expounded to be described by a general property: then are reckoned up the
virtues, which are more proper to the mother of the family, which are divided
into two parts, her duty toward the person of her husband, and toward the
wole family, to the 25. verse.

Afterward are rehearsed, the virtues which are common both to godly men, and
godly women, from the 25. to the 28. verse. So as in this verse, composed with
such skill, there are two things contained; first the excellent virtue of a
woman to the 28. verse: afterward, the reward of the same to the end of the
book. And her commendation is first set forth by her rareness, which is
concluded by the difficulty and hardness to find her: which difficulty is
declared by a question; Who shall find her? By which question she does plainly
declare, that such a woman as here is described, the King ought diligently to
seek after, both by himself, and his friends searching into every corner of
his kingdom. For if faithful servants are to be sought for from the utmost
parts of the kingdom: Psalm. 101, 2, 6
much more wives, which are joined in a more straight and inviolable band: for
which cause, Genesis 24 3, 4
we see that Abraham sent his servant unto another country, to take a wife for
his son Isaac. And if Assuerus for the beauty of a woman, Est. 2, 3
did cause all his kingdom to be sought and surueyed: How much more ought
Christian Princes to seek her for her virtue. And if we shall well examine
the matter, this is one and a chief cause of this rareness; because there are
so few men which do seek after such women. For if they were oftentimes, and
of many men sought for, no doubt but there would be greater plenty of such
women. But now, when women do consider in themselves, that virtue and piety is
not regarded, but beauty, nobility and riches; and that if only they have
them, they please their wooers: Therefore are they so careful for them, and do
set their rest upon them. Whereof also it is, that the chief care of Parents
is, to make them most beautiful, and most rich; altogether neglecting piety and
good huswiferie. Howbeit, in their words, there is so great vanity, in their
countenance so deep dissembling, and in their manners, (for the time) so much
counterfaiting and hypocrisy, that no man (although of the sharpest wit) is
able to judge soundly, and perfectly of them. Wherefore they which do take
this in hand, trusting unto their own wit, are most grossly deceived, unless
the help of God (first craved by prayer) do prosper and give good success
unto their labors. Wherefore Solomon in another place says, Pro. 19.14 and
18.22.
that Inheritance is left unto children by their Parents, but a prudent wife is
the gift of God: And in Ecclesiastes making mention of the great mischief of a
wicked woman, he says, that he which is good in the sight of the Lord, Eccles.
7.26.
is delivered from her, but that the sinner is snared by her. She is further
described by another adiunct of her price, which is often wont to arise from
the former rareness, for those things which are rare are good, and that which
is rare is dear. But her price or worth is set forth by a comparison of the
lesser, to wit, of carbuncles, not one, but many: which also is amplified by a
comparison of the greater, for he does not only say, that her value is a above
carbuncles, but that it is far above them. So as it should seem an unjust
thing to bring them in comparison together, and as it were so weigh them
together in balance.

That wife therefore may be sufficiently endowed, which is well nurture; and
that not only because virtue of it self is a certain treasure, but because
God does most commonly follow such a woman, with the blessing of riches. But
the judgment of men is far otherwise: for except a woman be endowed either
with a great stock, or large rents, she is no more esteemed for her piety,
then a flint, or any other contemptible stone which lies abroad in the
streets and high-vvaies. But what things are here spoken of a woman of
strength, the same may also by a little turning of the word, be fitly carried
and applied unto such a man.

After that he has generally described this excellent woman, he deuideth her
duty into two parts, whereof the former is concerning her duty toward her
husband, the other toward the whole family. Both which being briefly
comprehended in this verse, are afterward more largely unfolded. And that
which concerns the former, does seem rather to belong to the praise of the
husband, then of the wife. For it is the commendation of the husband to trust
his wife, not to be over jealous toward her, neither to suspect her
faithfulness toward him: which many men do, who undeservedly do suspect
their wives. But he which shall more thoroughly enter into this matter, shall
find it rather to be referred to the praise of the wife: For he teaches,
that so great and so absolutely perfect is her faithfulne^, both in words and
behavior, alone, and in company, that her husband may surely rest upon her:
For it is otherwise with this woman, Pro. 7.10.18, 19.20.
then with that which is spoken of otherwhere. Whereof also that does appear,
that it is not sufficient that women do keep themselves chaste, and untouched
of vicious men, unless also they be of that integrity and uprightness, that
they minister not so much as the least occasion of suspicion. For you may see
many women, which although sometimes they be far from the crime of adultery,
not only in act, but also in consent; notwithstanding by reason of their
gesture and behavior, they are not free from all marks and notes of
immodestie. Wherein the sincerity of elder times may condemn the looseness of
this age: Genesis 26, 8, 9.10
whereas by the sporting only of Isaac with Rebecca, their marriage (contrary
to that which they pretented) was coniectured: which is so much the more worthy
the noting, in as much as it was not lawful for the brother to sport with his
own sister. For whereas Rebecca by the advice of her husband, Genesis 26.7.
had carried her self as Isaacs sister, and Isaac had carried himself as
Rebeccaes brother, the counterfeiting of them both, was by this sporting
discovered. Amongst profane heathen in times past, such great honesty of
manners was observed, that it was accounted an dishonest thing, Alex. Genesis lib.
4. c. 20. p. 243.
for Parents with their children, and Fathers in law with their sons in law,
to be bathed together in one bath.

But how much good and quietness there is in this faithfulness and chastity
of the wife, whereby the husband is free from all suspicion of dishonesty, may
be easily discerned by the contrary torment of such men, as are vexed with the
spirit of jealousy. And this by a little turning of the words, may be drawn
to the duty of the man toward his wife. The other duty is providing for her
family, and it is declared by the effect of a woman of strength, to wit,
procuring of plenty; especially of household furniture, which is set forth by
likning her to those, which having obtained the victory, and slain their
enemies: do bring the spoils home to their houses. By which metaphor he
shows that she does by her labor and industry help very much, for the
maintaining of their estate. But hereof more shall be spoken in the rest of the
Chapter.

Verse 12.
He afterward returns to the description of her duty toward her husband,
which first is propounded by the effect, that is, that she will do good unto
her husband; which is amplified by denying of the contrary. By which manner of
speech he declares that she will do nothing, but that which shall be good
and commodious unto him, for she is given him of God for a helper. Genesis 2, 18.
He teaches therefore that it is the part of a good wife, to please her
husband in all things, so far as it may agree with the duty of a good and
godly woman: for if for his good she does sometimes that which may displease
him, she does not against her duty. Hitherto therefore she ought to bend her
endeavor, that she may be praised without all exception. But there are to be
found many women, of whom it is said, she is a faithful and chaste woman, but
yet a froward piece, she is a good wife, but cursed, and somewhat too
talkatiue, and hasty to answer. But of this woman it is generally said, that
she is loiall, gentle, and perfect in every just and good duty.

Afterward this duty is amplified by the adiunct of the length of time; that
is to say, all the days of his life. It is grown to a common Proverb amongst
us, to call the first month after marriage, the honey moon: Whereby, men will show
that the beginnings of marriage are pleasant, but that there follow after many
bitter years. By another similitude also, they do compare the joy of a widow
desiring marriage, to a fire of thorns, which after a short blaze is presently
put out and quenched. But this duty of a godly woman is not comprehended in
less then the whole life of time. For she will not only do good to her
husband whilst he is young, but when he is old also, not only in health, but
also in sickness, not only in prosperity but also in adversity. And these
duties are also to be performed of the husband toward his wife, and so much the
more grievously does he offend, if he swarne from his duty, in as much as
God has made him more strong, and furnished him with greater gifts.

Verse 13. She seeks wool and flax, and works it according to the
willingness of her hands.

Verse 14. She is like the ships of the Merchant: She fetches her food from
far.

Verse 15. And rising while it is yet night, she gives the portion to her
house, and the ordinary to her maids.

Verse 16. She thinks of a field, which she takes, of the fruits of her
hand she planteth a Vineyard.


THis care for providing of wool and flax, seems little to agree with the
wife of Solomon, so magnificent a King; for whom it should seem to be more
fit, to be careful to deck and trim her self by the glass, that her
beauty might be the more gracious, and pleasing unto the King: but especially,
it seems to differ much from the royal dignity, and Princely majesty, that
she should with her own hands handle the distaffe; and as it follows after
in the 19. verse, that she should put her hands to the wheel, and her hands
hold the spindle. For it seems she should sufficiently discharge the duty of
a mother of a family, if she do cause her maidens and servants to do this. But
howsoever things may seem to us and our carnal judgment, judging of duty
according to the present show; notwithstanding the wisdom of God has
thought this to agree with the Majesty of the greatest Princes, that they
should exercise themselves both in these, and other duties belonging to women.

We read of Sara, Genesis 18, 6, 7
who being a great Princess, yet she kneaded dough, Genesis 27, 9, 17
and dressed meat. Of Rebecca we read, how by her cunning in cookery, she was
able to counterfeit meats, to cause that to appear to be venison, which
indeed was not. 2. Sam. 13, 5, 6, 9
Of Thamar the Kings daughter, how she was so well practiced in cookery that
she was able to make dainty and pleasant meats for her brother, faining
himself sick. In this our age, if any woman be of more noble birth, or have
riches above others, their manner is to be so proud and disdainefull, that
they think nothing may beseem their greatness; but what is joined with
notable idleness, and ceasing from all honest business, they may handle
nothing which may make their hands hard, do nothing which may impair their
beauty. Genesis 20, 1
It appears by holy Scriptures, that Sara and Rebecca, even in their old age
kept the traces and features of their beauty they had in their youth: and
therefore no doubt but they had a care to continue their beauty, that they might
be most gracious and pleasing to their husbands: but that through this care of
their beauty, they did cease from all honest labor and business; it neither
can agree with their duty, nor with those excellent virtues wherewith they were
endued. But if to Princesses and honorable women, it be not allowed to be idle,
and to cease from honest business (whereas they notwithstanding, in regard of
the weakness of their sex, both are and ought to be favored above others)
can it be lawful for men to take unto them this license to live at their
pleasure, without any employment. Wherein the men of our age do more
grievously offend then the women. For what man is there that has rents and
possessions above the common sort, which by this bountifulness of God toward
him, does not think himself freed and discharged from all honest employment:
so as he thinks he is in good state, if abstaining from doing wrong to
others, he do in the mean time give himself to all loosenes of mind,
spending his time both in hunting, hauking, and other pleasures of this life.
Furthermore whereas she does her self seek wool and flax, not staying till
they should be provided by her husband: hereby is set forth her readiness to
labor, which is proved by the words following; for whereas he says, that she
does these things according to the willingness of her hands, he does thereby
teach, that she does readily and cheerfully go about her work, wherein
above all things her strength is declared. For such things as are laid upon us
by reason of our calling, ought to be done merrily and with a cherefull mind,
for like as the sun like a giant does gird it self, that it may in 24.
hours run his whole circuit about the world; so likewise ought we to stir
and raise up our selves to that work, which is laid upon us. Men therefore
(which have a mind of more courage, and are of greater strength of body) may
be ashamed to lie down under the burden of such labors, as are enjoined them.
And this cherefulnesse is therefore propounded, that he may show that thereby
the work is the more easily and speedily dispatched.

Verse 14.
It is though that the wife has sufficiently performed her duty, if she do
safely preserve and keep those things which her husband has brought in. But
the holy Ghost teaches us, that it is the wives duty to provide those things
wherewith the family is fed; and not such things only as are near at hand,
but which also are brought from far countries: from whence he shows, that
she fetches them in merchants ships; because she brings her food from
far. Wherein seems some doubt, how a woman being by nature and calling,
limited to keep home, should fetch her food from far. Whereto I answer,
that she fetches her food from far, not by traveling into foreign
Countries, or passing the seas, but by sending the works of her hands into
strange Countries, from whence she may receive either Corn or other
merchandise in exchange; and those things which at home are not to be had, she
may fetch from other places commodiouslie. But those things, when they are
spoken of the Queen, what woman is there, which ought in regard either of her
own, or her husbands honor, to be freed from the duty of procuring those
things which may be of use, not only for her self, but for the nourishing
also of her whole family. So as not the least part of the pomp and
magnificence of the King, may seem to depend on the providence and labor of
his wife and Princess: by which means also comes great freedom unto the
subjects, from tributes, taxes, subsidies, and other exactions. We read that
amongst some profane heathen people, the revenues of a whole province has
been allowed to the Kings and Emperors wives, to buy them pins and trifles.

And in this our age, women of noble parentage and degree are so prodigally
sumptuous, that for the maintenance of their pomp, their apparel, their
attendance, and their delicates, they are forced to make havoc of their
inheritance, as if they were borne and made for the wasting and consuming of
the fruits of the earth. Hereof comes the pilling and spoiling of their
Citizens, enhaunsing of rents and fines of their tenants and Husbandmen, which
till the ground. Verse 15.


She is further described, by an adiunct of her watchfulness, and taking
little sleep: For, her mind being busied about her household affairs, does not
suffer her to ouersleepe her self; but like a watch, does awake her betimes.

Many women there are, which although they give themselves much sleep, being
notwithstanding once wakened and raised, they do with great readiness and
diligence dispatch business of the house, and in that respect they are
praiseworthy. But this woman here described by the holy Ghost, does not only
merrily and cheerfully buckle her self to dispatch her matters, but does also
betimes, and early set her hand to her work. Heathen people and strangers from
God could see, that the Governor of the Commonwealth and the Councellor, ought
not to sleep the whole night: But the holy Ghost requires this even in the
mother of a family, that she should rise before the night be spent. True it is
indeed, that it is said in the 104. Psalm, that man goes forth to his labor
at the sunrising: but this is no let at all, but that those things which are
to be done in the house, as well of men, as women, may be begun before day. For
they cannot by the help of a lantern do those things which are to be done
abroad, and in the field: whereas notwithstanding the things at home may be
dispatched by the candlelight. But if it do not well beseem a woman of
strength to sleep till day light; how ill may it beseem a lusty man, which
has the strength of his limbs. And what things are in the sixth Chapter, Pro.
6.6
and in sundry other places laid to the sloathfull man's charge, the same no
doubt, in like manner, may fitly be objected to sloathfull and idle women.

This vigilancie or watchfulness he describes by a double end, whereof the
first is, that she gives to her whole family their food, and that according
to the sex and degree of those which are of the family: for, it has been
before said in the 27. Chap. and 26.27. verses, that there is one kind of diet
for the men servants, another for the maids, one diet also for slaves, another
for freemen, one for those that are strong, another for such as are weak, one
for the whole, another for the sick. The other end is that she sets her
maids and waiting servants their task: where is to be noted, that she is
careful for food for the whole family, but not that she does therefore
appoint the men seruanes their work (which belongs to her husband) but only
to her maidens.

Then it is further to be noted, that she gives food, and that she appoints
the works, and prescribes both the portion and the task. For there are women
to be found which do appoint work enough, and more then enough, but do allow
but a small portion. Others there are which do allow plenty of food, but
have small care of the performance of their work: neither of these is to
approved, neither of them is free from danger; for the one bewraieth a
baseness and vileness of the mind, the other brings pride and arrogancy.
Verse. 16.
Her diligence and watchfulness is further declared by the effect, to wit,
that she considers a field, which she purchases and planteth with vines. For
so far is she from diminishing the Kings rents, as she does rather enlarge
them. Pro. 14.1
Proverb. 14. It is said of a woman of strength, that she builds her house:
which is amplified by the contrary. And this is a very orderly thing, that to
the end she may build a house, she do first set her mind to buy a field.
For the rule is good of them, which say there is less profit in a house
without a field, then a field without a house. Whereto also belongs the
counsel of Solomon, Prepare thy work without: Pro. 24 27
and make ready that which thou have in the field, that afterward thou may
build a house.

Moreover, here is to be observed, that she does not first provide her self of
pleasant and delightful things, but those things wherewith these are maintained.

Verse 17. She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengthens her arms.

Verse 18. She feels that her Merchandise is good: her light is not put out
by night.

Verse 19. She puts her hands to the wheel, and her hands hold the spindle.

Verse 20. She stretches forth her hand to the poor, and puts forth her
hands to the needy.

Verse 21. She fears not her family for the snow: for her whole householde
is clothed with double raiment.


HEre first of all, is propounded to be considered, her continual and
incessant labor to procure riches unto the 20 verse: then does he add, for
what use she gets wealth unto the 24. v. In the former part are contained
two effects of a woman of strength, and a cause of the effects. The effects are
comprehended in the 17.19. and latter part of the 18. verse. And the cause of
these effects is declared in the former part of the 18 verse. First of all
therefore a man may here ask how this manner of speech which is here
attributed to a woman, that she grideth her self with strength, and
strengthens her arms, may stand with the glory of God, forasmuch as that
which is proper to God alone is carried to a woman. For even Kings themselves
are altogether without strength, Psa. 18, 33, 34 35 Iam. 1.
saving that God does gird them with might, whereof being deprived, presently
the become weak and feeble. Sure it is that the strength of the body, (even as
every good gift) comes from God above, in whom we live, do move, and have
our being: yet so notwithstanding, as God does not exclude our endeavor, no
not so much as in the work of sanctification: Acts 17.28 1. Tim, 8, 16 Ia. 4,
5, 8, 9, 10.
much less in the work of this life, for the performance whereof, there
remains not so great strength after the blot of sin. And first of all she
may well be said to gird her loins and her arms with strength, for that she
excerciseth her self and her body with labor: for as by idleness and
slothfulnes the strength is enfeebled in some sort, as iron unused is eaten
with rust, so by moderate exercise the strength is increased and augmented.
Hereof is it that husbandmen and laborors having their health, the slothful
and sluggish are oppressed with sundry diseases.

Furthermore in another respect she may well be said to strengthen her
loins, and her arms, for that she conceiueth great hope to perfect these
things which she takes in hand. For there are many which of a
faint-hartednesse and base despair of their mind, dare not enterprise any
excellent thing; or having begun it, out of an opinion of difficulty to
finish that which they have imagined to themselves, do cast it out of their
hands unexpected. So comes it to pass, that through a vile and base fear, and
distrust, they do as it were lay bands upon themselves, and being fettered
hand and foot, they become unfit and unable for any notable work, wherein
there appears any show of difficulty. Hereof the Israelites setting before
themselves the height of the walls of the land of Canaan, and the taulnes of the
men, rejecting alll hope of vanquishing that Country began to think of
returning into Egypt. Numb. 13.32. Deuteronomy. 1.


This cowardnesse and baseness of mind in those, that belong unto the
Kingdom of Heaven is greater, for although there are some, which have found
the way and life very easy; yet many also are so discouraged with the
difficulty thereof, that they will not once enter into this course. Which thing
is manifestly declared in the words of Moses, Deuteronomy. 30.11.12.13.14.15. Also 1.
John 5.3. and Math. 11.30.

Here the cause (as often else where) is inserted as well of this which has
gone before, as of other effects which do follow: to wit, that she finds
the fruit of her labor to be good, and to have good speed in those things
which she has labored. And this he amplifieth by a comparison of the like:
For as he which tastes good and delicate meats never proved before: with the
sweetness thereof, is entised and egged on to procure the same again,
although it be with some hard and sharp labor; so this woman being taught by
the experience of the fruit of her labor and industry, does the more
cheerfully follow the same.

Those therefore which are sloathfull and idle, for as much as they reap no
fruit of their idleness, are not stirred up with any desire to labor. Such
also as with labor wearying both themselves and theirs, do notwithstanding
receive none at all, or very small fruit of their pains (because God not
being called upon by them refuses to give his blessing) these men also must
needs faint under the burden of their labors. Psalm. 127, 1, 2 Hag. 1, 6, ^
As on the contrary this woman (whose labors God by his blessing does prosper)
making wonderful gain, is encouraged to undergo her pains. And no doubt but
the Israelites when they had once tasted of the fruits of the land of Canaan,
did the more courageously join battle with the inhabitants thereof. Even as
also we see that good senting hounds, with the only sent of the beast, which
they do course, do mend their pace, and with greater swiftness do chase
their pray. On the contrary it comes to pass in many, who when as through the
blessing of God upon their honest labors, they are groan to some wealth, do
give themselves to idleness, and to their pleasures, till they have wasted
that which they had gotten with pain.

This in matters belonging to the life to come, is more evidently perceived;
for that so many hearers of the Gospel, do so coldly frequent the assemblies
of the Church, in the preaching of the Gospel, administration of the
Sacraments, and other ordinary service of God: it proceeds from no other cause,
but this, that they have not tasted the fruit of the forgiveness of their
sins, even the peace of conscience. Whereas, if so be they had but tasted
only how good the Lord is, it cannot be uttered with what feruentnesse and
zeal they would run unto the meetings of the Church, and would thirst after
them, Psalm. 42.1. Iam. 2.1.2 3.
as the Heart chased by the dogs thirsts after the waters.

There follows another effect of the efficient cause before declared: which
is, that her light is not put out by night. It was said before that she
preuenteth the day: Now he adds that she so abides to her work, that she
makes not an end of her work with the day, but draws it forth and
continues it a great part of the night: Neither does she (as some do) labor
by fits, but persisteth and perseuereth constantly in her works.

Hereof may be gathered that she breaks her sweet sleep, For rising so
early and going to bed so late; especially when she has been painful in her
work; the sounder sleep must needs fall upon her, so as she (but with some
violence) does not awake. Which thing is to be observed of all, both men and
women. For as it is not lawful to eat unto a fulness: so likewise it is not
lawful to sleep so long, till we have satisfied our lust. It has bin said
before, how this woman of strength appointed maids their task: he now adds
further, that she does her self set her hands to work. Hitherto also
pertains she busieth her self in the same kind of work; with her maids,
handling the whele and the distaffe, one after another. Although it be not
unlikely that she did spinne finer and costlier woole and flax, yet it is
certain that it was laboursome, and painful, both the wheel and the
spindle, whereto she was to put her strength, and use her might.

For to what end is it, that it was said before that she girdeth her self
with strength but that she should have need of strength to do her work: Whereto
also pertains that, which is spoken in this verse that she puts both her
hands to the spindle. For, it is a thing laid upon all the posterity of Adam,
not only to labor, but to labor hardly and with pain: For, notwithstanding
that God has appointed unto women, such works as have less wearisomnes in
them, in regard of the weakness of their sex, and of their pains of
childe-bearing: yet are they not freed from those duties, which are joined with
some pain and tediousness.

Furthermore, it is to be noted that by this her working, she is not only her
self exercised, but she does also take away all color of idleness from her
maids: for it were a shame for the maids to pluck their hands from such work
as their mistress her self does not disdain to do. For here is that Proverb
true, which is sanctified by the holy mouth of Christ; that it is well with the
servant if he be in the same condition with his master, it is well with the
hand-maide, if she be in no worse case then her mistress. But this example of
pains taking, which she gives to her maids, is of more force to work in
their minds, then many admonitions or chastiseme^ts which are used without
example.

This point also is to be observed, to confirm and strengthen us in the common
duties of this life, as things acceptable unto God; considering that the
Anabaptists do esteem of those things as too vile for Christians to exercise
themselves in: But the Papists although they condemn not these things, yet
they make the hands of godly women more slack, whilst they do so highly
extol the counterfeit works of their Nuns, no ways approved by the holy
Ghost.

He has already spoken of the industry and diligence which she uses in the
dispatch of her work, and of the happy event and success thereof.

There follows, both the variety and number of the works, wherein she is
occupied: and also, the end whereunto they are referred, which does crown all
her former works; and without the which it skilleth not much, whether the
mothers of families be sloathful or diligent in their work. For, if she should
only lay up in a chest these her riches gotten with pain, should heap up
treasures, or bestow them in trifles and toies, there were no cause why this
praise should be given her. But now when as both in getting them her industry
is declared, and in disposing them her piety and wisdom appears; no
sufficient commendation can easily be given unto her. For to some God has
plentifully and abundantly given discretion to bestow them to their just and
due uses.

In the verses following he describes the ends, Verse 20.
whereto she refers her riches gotten with such diligence and continual
labor: whereof the first is, that she may succor the poor, and such as are
oppressed with want. This is confirmed by the testimony of the Apostle.
Ephesians. 4.28. and Prouer. 3.26.27.

Whereby appears, how few there are which are endued with true piety; for how
few men shall be found, which do know this end of getting riches: And of those
which propound unto themselves this end, the number is far less.

Furthermore, whereas she stretches forth and extends her hand, it teaches
how readily and cherefully, how bountifully also and liberally she does it:
for, God loves a cheerful giver: Psalm. 112, 9 Eccles. 11.1
He sows his seed in a fat and fruitful soil, from whence he looks for
a hundred fold.

This manner of speech also declares, that she is none of those delicate and
tender women, which cannot endure to behold those that are in misery and
affliction.

It is also to be considered, that the first fruits of her labors are given
to the poor: For whereas that which is distributed to the poor is said to be
consecrated to the Lord; and there is none so ignorant which knows not, that
the first fruits are to be dedicated to God: Pro. 3, 9, 10
it is manifest that there is a principal regard to be had to the poor. 1.
King. ^7.17 1^


Her next care is for her family, Deuteronomy 26.13 14 Verse 21.
that it be well and sufficiently clothed, that there be none in all her
householde, which should be in any sort hurt by the weather; either cold, heat,
wind or rain etc. so far are they from going with torn and ragged
clothes. In the 1. King 10. It appears, that the Queen of Saba gave her
judgment of the wisdom of Solomon, by the apparel of his servants. For as
of the food, so also of the clothing of the household, the Governors must be
careful, whereas diverse in many households, are not only not wholsomely
apparelled, but not so much as honestly and seemly covered: which as it is
hurtful to those of the family, so it is also an inconuenince to the Governors
themselves, in as much as their necessary business, by these means is hindered
for want of health.

Moreover, where it is said that she fears not her family for the snow,
therein is some difficulty: for it seems not to swarne from the duty of a
wife, and godly woman to fear the incommodities of her self and hers: for
fear is a spur unto us, to avoid those things whereof we are afraid, for a
wiseman, fears the evil and eschevveth it.

Contrariwise, we may see many women which having little care of the diet and
clothing of their family, do leave them destitute of things necessary. I
answer, that it is want of fear, which proceeds from hence, that being
inconsiderate and unadvised, they do not foresee the things which are
profitable for the family in the time to come; especially long time after. But
this want of fear is utterly to be condemned: Howbeit that a woman, which in
a due consideration of the inconveniences which may happen, does stand in fear
of them, and fearing does stir up her self to all care and regard to provide
such things, which do belong unto the maintenance of life, she truly is not
to be blamed.

And that woman which in a timely foresight of those things, whereby her
household may be sufficiently maintained, does so address her self to all
honest skill, and means to defend the same, as she may safely and securely
cast away all carfulness, and fear of her family, she indeed worthily
deserves praise. Job. 5.21
By this means comes it to pass, that by diligent labor and continual
painfulnesse, men do rid themselves of many cares and griefs (wherewith,
others are pained) when as they do handle their matters, according to the
prescript of Gods Word.

Verse 22. She provides her tents: fine linen and purple is her clothing.

Verse 23. Her Husband is known in in the gates when he sits with the
Elders of the land.

Verse 24. She makes fine linen which she sells, and delivers a girdle
to the Merchaunt.


HEr next care is for the furniture of her house, provided and beautified with
those ornaments which may most set forth the fairenes of the house, and the
honor of the governor. For, it is not the least commendation of a Matrone, to
provide that the house be thoroughly furnished, of bedding, hangings, tapestry,
and other such like necessaries, both for the necessity of life, and also for
honest delight: For a man may see many women very sumptuously attired, whose
houses notwithstanding lie empty and unfurnished.

Neither truly does the praise of this woman consist in this, that she buieth
these ornaments with her money, but because she makes and weaueth them at her
own house. Which is to be understood both of those things which have been
spoken of before in the 20. and 22. verses, and also of those which follow unto
the 25: verse.

Unto this carfulness, to provide household furniture does succeed, care of
trimming her own body, and that with things far more precious, as fine
linen and purple. The which, although it seem scarce to agree with the
turning of the wheel, and handling of the spindle and distaffe: yet the holy
Ghost has thought them very agreeable. And here no doubt he brings in this
woman so delicately apparelled, that he might thereby commend these womanly
works and exercises unto all posterity, as those which are worthy, and fit for
such as are clothed in very delicate apparel, so as their estate and degree
will afford it. Which is not to be understood of all women, but according as
every ones estate will stretch; for this woman's husband was among the chief,
as appears in the 23. verse. But here some man may ask, whether it be fit
that he should first provide for her own self.

To whom I answer, that it is meet that she prepare necessary covering for
those of her household, before she set her mind upon delicacy, and finenesse
of apparel for her self: even as also she ought to seek for necessary food
for her family, before she take thought for dainty meats for her self.

Whereupon it follows, 1. Tim. 2 9. 1. Peter 3 3.
that those testimonies against costly attire, which the Apostle speaks of,
are not simply to be understood, but by comparison of godliness, more
carefully to be sought for then the finenes of apparel. Neither is she puffed
up with these so precious vestiments, considering that she is continually in
labor: a means that God uses to school men to humility, for the women which
by delicacy of their apparel, and soft array of their bodies, Esaias 3.
are lifted up in the pride of their hearts, do thereby turn their purple
into sackcloath.

Another effect or end of her continual labor, consists in making
ornaments, Verse. 23.
whereby as by certain marks and signs her husband may be known, and
discerned from other men, which is amplified by an adiunct of the time, when he
goes and fitteth in the assembly of the Eelder, where specially it beseems
him to be most comely apparelled.

But here some man may move a doubt, how it may stand with the duty of a loving
wife, that first she provides ornaments for her self, and afterward for her
husband. Whereto I answer, that the outward ornaments of the body, are more
fit for women then men, and that there comes credit and praise to the man by
the comely apparel of his wife, even as it would be to his discredit, if he
himself being gaily apparelled, his wife should be without ornaments. Sheee
does therefore trim her self not so much for her own, as for her husbands
both credit and delight.

From all which things it appears that there is nothing so great or so small
in the household, that there is none from the highest to the lowest, from the
head of the family even unto the foot, whom her care does not reach unto. For
even as in the common wealth those that are so careful for one part, as they
neglect another, they do grievously offend: and contrariwise they do safely
govern the same, which do extend their care over all. So likewise in a
family, she which is so careful for her husband and children, that she
neglects her servants and maids, does very dangerously offend.

Some man will think that she is maruelously diligent in undergoing her
labors, Verse 24.
which has supplied so many and so great things, both for the necessities and
ornaments of her family. But this woman is of such an invincible mind, that
these so great labors being endured, she does not rest there, but sets
upon other works also, which being finished, she delivers to the merchants.

But all her other things in general are costly: and such whereof otherwise by
reason of the long and doubtful carriage, the mercha^t should never make
perfect. For it is such linen as is, weaued of very fine and slender threads.
The value whereof may easily be gathered, in as much as the body of Christ (of
whose honorable sepulture the scripture witnesses) was wrapped in the same.
And of the prize of the girdles, wherewith men and women are girt, the
scripture is not without testimonies. 2. Sam. 18.11. Ierm. 2.32. Esaias 3, 24.

Whereas by this manner of speech these lessons do belong even unto the Kings
wife; it teaches us that it is no discredit for a Princess to deliver unto
the merchants such works as by her own skill she has made. It is known that
in the ancient Roman common wealth, those of the chiefest nobility, did sell
the fruit of their orchards and gardens for money: and there remain yet in
Germany (a sheard of the Roman common wealth) some signs of that custom.
But amongst us men are grown to that pride that they are accounted for base
people, which should imitate that manner.

Verse 25. Strength and honor is her clothing, and she laugheth.

Verse. 26. She opens her mouth in wisdom, and doctrine is upon her tongue.

Verse 27. She prieth into the ways of her househould, and eats not the
bread of idleness.


HItherto has been spoken of the virtues, which are more proper unto the
mother of the household there follow such virtues, as are common to all godly
people both men and women. In the, 22. verse it has been said, that she is
clothed and apparelled in fine linen and purple: but in this place he
brings in mention of further a kind of raiment.

This manner of clothing is of the mind, as the former was of the body. Tim.
2, 9 Pet. 3.34
This is the same which the Apostles does principally commend unto women, and
does prefer before all other ornaments, though never so precious and without
the which, even she which is most neately and daintely clothed is but naked
and bare before God, the Angels, and holy men.

But of this inward clothing there are two parts set down, strength, and
honor and comelines: whereof in the one is noted the confidence of her mind,
whereby being without fear she enjoys rest and quietness: by the other
those virtues, which beside that they come from a mind well affected do
procure a singular bewty, worthy of all men to be looked upon.

And truly what things have been spoken hitherto, as they do belong to the
duty of a good Matron, so may they sometimes be found in women, which are
void of all true piety, in Jews, in Papists, in Turks. But those things
which do follow, are of that kind which as they do only fall unto godly
Matrons, so do they add great glory unto the former gifts, and do as it were
crown them. And first for the strength of the mind it is proved by the effect,
that she fears not the inconuenie^ces of the time following, which in men
either quite destitute, or lightly endued with this trust in God, does breed
continual unquietness. This is that which the Prophet says in the. 112.
Psalm. verse. 7. That the righteous man is not afraid of evil titidings. And
the same which Solomon has Pro. 28.1. That the righteous is bold as a young
lion. The cause whereof is assigned by the Prophet in the Psalm before
resited, because his mind is strengthened. The cause also of which strengthening
he does there set down because his soul trusts in God: what is this else,
but that which the Apostle teaches, that through peace of conscience, which
true faith works in the godly, they do even rejoice in tribulation: and so
far are they from being discouraged in mind for fear of them, that not then
truly when they are ouercharged with them, do they faint, much less sink
under them. This singular tranquillity of mind he declares by an adiunct of
laughing, because we do use to laugh at those, against whom we do assure and
promise unto our selves certain easy victory.

The blessed and happy estate of the godly is here in this place notably
described, and their undoubted assurance of eternal life, whereby they are as
certain and sure of the life to come, as they are either of their present
life, or their life past: which they know cannot either be weakened or taken
away by strength or craft, either of things above, or things beneath, Romans 8.
that neither prosperity, nor adversity, neither famine, nor the sword, nor
death, nor the banding and fronting of all mischiefs opposed against us, is
able to drive us from the fruition of life everlasting. The contrary whereof
the Papists teach, which do torment men's consciences with the continual
torture of doubting and perplexity. But this ought so much the more to
confirm us against all fearful terrors, for that women by nature are
fearful and timorous. Luke 16 12.
Whereof it is that this is called our goods, even as other commodities of this
life, are by our Savior called others men's and not ours. Which ought to give
us courage to seek after those things, which no casualty may take from us,
being things which last for ever. In the goods of this life we do covet after
those things, which are less subject to change, as immovable, rather then
moveable. In merchandise those that are most staple are esteemed, which will
continue longest without corrupting. And rents, and yearly revenues of
inheritance are preferred before money: why should we not then use the same
wisdom in these things which do never fail.

And thus much of the inward strength, there follows the honor or
comeliness; that is, those virtues which have a comely sight in the judgment
of the Angels, and all godly men: where in the first place comes, that she
does not use speech, but wisely, and warily, which is very fitly applied unto
this woman. For it is commonly known and grown to a Proverb, that women by
nature are more talkatiue, so as greater care is to be had, and straighter
watch to be kept least at any time the locks and bars of wisdom and modesty
being broken, the tongue before being silent, do wander and stray abroad here
and there. Whereunto it is a great help, that a woman be constant and
continuing in her labor; for even as the Apostle does define idleness, 1. Tim.
5.
and sloathfulnesse to be the seed of much talk in younger widows, so
continuance in labor, is a singular remedy against rashness, and forwardness
of the tongue.

The praise of her speech seems to consist not so much in the common speech
of the things belonging unto this life, which may be in infidels, as in another
subject of speech, it is a conference of holy matters. For he says that the
doctrine of benignity and kindness is in her tongue. By which manner of speech
he seems to declare both couenaunts of works and of grace; whereof in the
one the bounty of God toward us does stand; and in the other our love both
toward God, and toward our neighbor for Gods cause is required. For she is
not only a hearer and reader of the word of God, but also she conferreth
thereof with her children, with her maids, and with her husband, instructing
her children and maidens, as we read of Hester, (for except her maids had
first been instructed to celebrate the Fast, they had been altogether unfit)
and asking of her husband those things whereof she stands in doubt. 1. Cor.
5.
Whether is to be referred, that in the book of the Kings the name of mother
is added, as a furtherer either of piety, or impiety of the children. Whereby
the Jesuits are confuted, which do so straightly tie the women to the wheel
and spindle, as they do cut them off, and bar them from all conference
touching the word of God, as absurd and far unbeseeming their sex. See the
examples of Anna: 1. Sam. 2. And of the wife of Manoah, 14. of Judges. And of
Mary, Luke 1. And of Priscilla, which both instructed and forwarded Apollo in
the way of the Lord. Whereby appears how careful godly women have been for
true knowledge out of the word of God: Whereas he says that doctrine etc.
rests in her tongue, he does thereby plainly declare, how often she used
speech, and how plentifully it dwelt in her house.

Col. 3.16.
Whereby notwithstanding is not excluded, that which is the principal thing in
this point, that she has the doctrine of benignity and kindness written in
her mind; yea her often talking of the word God, is an undoubted argument of
the same written in her heart. For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks. Math. 12.


Another effect of this matrone is; that she searches and prieth into the
whole carriage of her household, for it is not enough to appoint them what they
shall do, unless she do as it were call them to account and reckoning, and
find out whether they have well performed their task: which is to be
understood not so much of matters belonging to the house (which are even
performed of infidels) sometimes as of holiness which consists either in
piety, and godliness toward God, and righteousness toward men. For
notwithstanding that the chastising and punishing of the men servants, slaves,
and of the sons that are of age, is to be reserved to the husband, yet it is
her part to inquire into the ways of the whole family; which is also required
of the father of the family.

Furthermore, the metaphor of (prying) seems to declare, that she does
sometimes search into the manners and faults of her servants and household, even
when they are not aware and think nothing of it: even as a spy or a scout,
lies in wait to look forth whether the enemy approaches unto the City and
tents.

The conclusion of all which is, that she eats not the bread of idleness.
For when she gets wool and flax, when as rising in the morning before day,
and sitting up a great part of the night, she appoints her family their
portion, and her maids their task, when as she sets her own hands to the
wheel and spindle, when as she provides for her household clothing, for her
house furniture, for her self, costly apparel; and for her husband ornaments,
when she instructs her family: And finally, inquireth into the ways of her
whole household, it easily appears that she eats not the bread of idleness.

But those are said to eat the bread of idleness, which do receive their
meat, when as no honest labor has gone before, and which is not gotten by
labor: Whereby is confirmed that which is commanded of the Apostle, 2. These.
3.10
that those that will not labor should not eat. But if it be therefore
concluded, that she eats not the bread of idleness, because she is so
busied as we have said: it is evident that those are utterly to be condemned
of sloathfulnesse, not only which labor not at all, but even those also which
in doing their work are more slack and negligent.

Verse 28. Her children shall rise and pronounce her blessed, and her husband,
which shall praise her.

Verse 29. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou have excelled above
all.

Verse 30. Favor is deceit, and beauty is vanity: but a woman fearing the Lord
she getteh to her praise.

Verse 31. Give unto her the fruit of her hands, and let her works praise her
in the gates.


THe scope and drift hereof is, having propounded a reward to stir up women
to higher virtues; it is a true speech that Honor nourishes arts; and that
all men are kindled with a desire of praise, and that those things are despised
and contemned which are misliked of every one. Which may be applied unto the
desire of virtue and godliness: for although to just and uncorrupted Judges,
the fruit of their duty is the duty it self, and it belongs unto the godly
to seek after virtue, for virtues sake, and a conscience toward God; yet God
pitying our infirmity and slownesse to good works, does set before us a
reward, as it were a crown to be enjoyed both in this life, and in the life
to come; to the end he may correct our sluggishnesse, and drowsinesse in well
doing. Which being a thing necessary for men to whet them on to the desire of
virtue, it is manifest that it is more expedient for women, as those which are
weaker. Whereof it is that the holy Ghost does make this garland of praise
which he may set upon the head of such a industrious woman, as he has
described that as by her virtue and piety, so also by the reward of condign
praise, she may be discerned from other women.

Verse 28.
The chief good of all is, that she thinking and feeling her self happy,
stands not in fear of any danger which may befall her. But it is to be
accounted in some degree of happiness, if in regard of her good works she be
worthily co^me^ded of good men: especially, when as by this commendation of her
excellent facts is sealed up the aprobatio^ of her good works by God himself.
But that her own children, are here brought in by the H. ghost for spreaders of
her praises, it may seem somewhat strange. For, whereas (according to the
testemony of the Prophet, (as we have heard before) A man's own praise in his
own mouth has no grace; It must needs be that the commendation of those of
her own family; especially, such as are more nearly joined unto her, is but
of small force to set her forth, as that which may seem to proceed, either of
self-love, or flattery, that they may gain somewhat of her. I answer, that
besides the proper sense, here is a figurative speech, wherein by children is
understood, the diet and apparel of her children, the honesty of the
childrens manners; but chiefly their piety and fear of God, wherewith by her
careful education; she has endued them, which are as it were so many mouths
and tongues, whereby the praises of a woman of strength are published.

Not unlike unto this is that which is said in the 127. Psalm. Where he is
pronounced blessed which has a quiver furnished with children, who shall not
be ashamed when he contendeth with his enemies in the gates. Hereof also
proceeded that exclamation of the woman Luke 11.27. although she were therein
deceived, if she thought that Christ took any part of his wisdom, or
goodness of his mother, when as he was taught of himself.

He mentions this praise of the children toward their mother, because her
children, through her godly and wise education do live in that light and
honor, which redoundeth unto the commendation of their mother; whereas he
says that they shall rise, that they may praise her, he seems to set forth
their ripe age, when as (by marriage or public charge) they come abroad,
whereas those which were of unripe years, seemed to lie at home in silence.
For being come to years, they are then either an honor, or dishonor to their
Parents: as in the 127 Psalm, children are then like arrows wherewith their
parents enemies are either slain or wounded when they are of age.

Hence do Parents learn, which do neglect the godly and honest bringing up
of their children that they nourish in their bosom, which may afterward bite
them, when they grow to ripeness of age; who whereas if they have used
diligence and endeavor in well bringing up their children, they have wherewith
to comfort themselves, against their excess and wickedness whatsoever. As on
the contrary, in the godliness and honesty of the children, they have a
joyful rest and comfort, wherewith to strengthen themselves and the manifold
griefs and inconveniences of old age, being as it were their winter.

To omit that there have been some, who going to the gallows for their
lewdness, have cursed their mothers, because of their foolish cockering, they
have been left unto themselves, and their own lusts: as on the contrary,
children being well nurtured, will bless their mother, because she has
instructed them, chastened them, and kept them within the bounds of their duty.

Which testimony of children, like as also that of the husband, which
follows, although it be lessened in regard, that in blood they are very
nearly knit unto her; yet is it of the greater credit: because they are
eyewitnesses of her actions, and whole conversation. But children ought so much
the rather to stir up themselves unto a desire of virtue and piety, as that
by their praise or dispraise, credit, or discredit, their Parents are either
honored, or dishonored, as those which have part with their children, as well
in the one as in the other.

The honor therefore which by the commandment is due to Parents by their
children, is not shut up within their fathers house, but continues throughout
the whole course of their life, even then truly, when being departed forth of
their Parents house, they are spread abroad in the common wealth, neither is
the obedience due to their parents, then only violated, when they do
trangresse their commandments, but also when they do defile themselves with
any lewdness, and wickedness in any kind whatsoever; whereof also it is that
Solomon said before, that the foolish son brings sorrow to his father.

Her husband shall praise her: This commendation also of her Husband seems to
be of small force to set forth her praise, by reason of that near conjunction,
which is between them, which will diminish the authority and force of the
praise, besides the danger of being solicited to break her fidelity by his
praising of her to others. The commendation therefore which her husband gives
her, is first of all in private and at home, which brings no inconvenience,
and whereby the virtue and industry of the wife is increased.

Furthermore (as before in the children) so here there is a figurative speech;
for the vigorous and good bearing of his age, his good disposition of body, and
the ornaments of his apparel (whereof we have spoken before) but especially
for that she whetteth him on to piety, even then, when he holds his peace,
does aboundanly speak of the praise of his wife.

For as the holiness of the wife commends the piety of her husband, 1. Cor.
11.
because she is as it were the image of the man: so the excellent piety and
godliness of the man does set forth a religious woman: which godliness, it is
no doubt, but his virtuous wife has in some measure wrought in him. Thus did
Priscilla help Aquila in godliness, in which regard she is by the holy Ghost
set before her husband, although a faithful man: as in the 14. of Judges,
Sampsons mother is set before her husband Manoath. After the commendation of
the children, and of the husband, there follows also the praise of the holy
Ghost, speaking by the pen of Solomon: who does by a comparison of the lesser
amplify her praise. But she is compared not with a careless, and sloathfull
woman, but with a woman of strength, and not with one alone, but with many to
whom she is not equalled, but far preferred, and placed as it were in a
higher estate; but if it be asked, what women of strength these are, to whom
this woman is preferred. I answer, they are those, which being void of faith
toward God, do notwithstanding embrace chastity, love their husbands dearly,
provide plentifully for the diet and clothing of their family, seek woll and
flax, set their hands to the wheel and spindle, rise before day, go to bed
late, are careful for furniture for their house, of all sorts, do deck both
themselves and their husbands, do think of a field which they buy, and plant
it with vines: but in the mean time being void of faith, are fearfully
terrified with the evils to come: yea, even with shadows of evils, as before
has been declared out of the 25. 26 and 27. verses. And truly in this kind
there are found not only Popish women, Jews, and Turks, but also some
professors of the Gospel, but in show only: before all which (though in
number infinite) one of these is far to be preferred, not only in these
virtues, which are proper and perculiar to her; but in those also which do
fall into both kinds of women. For although the same things be performed of
them both, notwithstanding seeing the one does them of conscience toward God,
the other of a certain instinct of nature, or to get praise and commendation
amongst men, it appears that there is as much difference between them, as is
between heaven and earth. Hereby appears, how precious a thing faith is,
wherewith all our works are, as it were, perfumed, to be acceptable unto God,
and without which, the most glorious works stinck, and in their greatest
glittering are not withstanding sins.

In this verse he does by another argument, from a comparison, set forth her
praise, where he prefers her before a woman, that is exceeding fair and
well favored: where also there seems to be a meeting with a secret and privy
objection; the objection is drawn from an apparent charge of the Prophet, as
if he were not wise and skillful enough in describing and setting forth this
woman, never sufficiently praised: as he, which in the reckoning up of her
virtues, had forgotten two ornaments, her beauty and comeliness, unto which
the Prophet answers, by an adiunct of the deceit of favor, and vanity of
beauty. But vanity and deceit are not of one sort. For first of all they are
deceitful and vain; because the beauty and good favor is vanished and
painted, whereby the fowlest women have appearance, and go for fair, which
upon the feeling of the fire, or any other heat melt away. Furthermore because
that beauty and favor, which pleases to day, displeases to morrow, and that
which is now esteemed to be a trace of beauty in the eyes of the lovers, is by
and by accounted a wart or a wenne. As appears by the example of Amon, who
being inflamed with the love of his sister Thamar, because of her beauty: was
as it were in a turning of a hand, in a deadly hatred of her.

Moreover, it is very truly called desceitfull and vain, because as it were a
flower, it perishes, with the least blast of the wind of the judgment of
God, indeed favor and beauty is the gift of God, wherefore it is before
compared by Salomo^ unto a ring of gold yet has the holy ghost thought it
unworthy to be reckoned among the former virtues.

But by this former Judgment of the holy Ghost, God would note the folly of
men, who in choosing their wives, do principally inquire after that, whether
she be fair and well favored, so as if she have those, although she be
endued with none of the former virtues, yet she is accounted fit for them. And
contrariwise she which is endued with the former virtues, unless she have
also favor and beauty, is scorned and despised of all men: wherein the
madness of men do notably bewray it self, that they do carry themselves so
carelessly and dissolutely in a matter of great weight, and wherein consists
the quietness of this whole life, and no small help to the life to come. If a
man buy a horse, is he so mad that he will rest only in the color and shape
of his body never looking whether he be lame or broken winded. Or if a man buy
a gold ringe, does he think himself satisfied that in show only it
glistereth like gold? or does he not rather bring it to the touchstone, to try
whether it be pure gold or gilt only.

The estimation of favor and beauty, is yet diminished by the unfit praise,
which is not meet for a woman endued with them; which is amplified by a
comparison of the dislike: because a woman fearing God is worthy of praise: for
notwithstanding that favor and bewty (in regard that they are the gifts of
God) do deserve commendation, yet she which has them, seems not to deserve
praise, seeing they are gotten by no skill or labor of hers, no, not so much as
by her will: for except it were given her of God even from the cradle, she
should labor in vain to get it: but the fear of God, notwithstanding it be
the gift of God, yet is it not given at the first, but to such, as do will and
desire it (God inclining their will and affection) and being once begun it
receives increase through our desire care and industry.

So as notwithstanding, a fair and beautiful woman for her beauty may be
praised; yet in comparison of that notable and singular commendation which is
rightfully done unto the woman that fears God, she is not to be thought
praiseworthy. And then by a comparison of the greater is lessened the praise
of beauty, and comeliness is beaten down: and this denial and lessening of
the praise of good favor and beauty, is more strongly declared, by this word,
(she does get praise unto her self) as if the beautiful and well favored
woman did not so.

Hereby is refuted not only the vanity of men, but also their ingratitude
toward God, which do employ the whole power of their wit and learning, for the
praise of beauty and favor, not only generally in the whole body, but
particularly in every part of it, from the head to the heel, using thereunto
all the flowers and colors of their eloquence, wherewith they garnish and set
them forth, who in the mean time in the commendation of virtue, are either
dumb, or cold.

He goes lawful and honest delights of this life, and should grant them unto
her bountifully and plentifully for her use. He exhorts her children and
servants, that they do use all singular reverence and obedience toward her:
neither does he exhort only those of her family, but also all others; yea
even the Magistrates themselves, so often as occasion is offered (as when women
are brought in judgment before them, for some slip in their manners, it is not
unseasonable to set before their eyes the laudable conversation of this
virtuous woman) that they do employ themselves to set forth her praise: For
notwithstanding that this woman, together with her notable works be shut up
and limited within the walls of her own house, yet her praise passing forth,
and climbing up the top of the house comes and appears at the holy seat of
Justice.

Whom therefore God commends and thinks worthy to be praised, in the
extolling of them, we ought to employ, not only our tongues, and pens; but
even also as it were our shoulder, wherewith being borne up, and underpropped,
they may be, as it were, lifted up into an open place, from whence their
virtue may be seen of all.

The which ought to confirm us in the study of virtue; especially when we know
that the hearts and tongues of all men are in the hands of God, so as he is
able to bend them even in those that are void of all piety, to publish the
praises of the godly, as appears by the examples of Joseph and Moses abiding
in Egypt. But if men in this behalf be dumb and unthankful: yet it ought to
strengthen and retain us in our duty, that God by his heavenly voice does
vouchsafe to praise us: and moreover in time to come, in the greatest assembly
of the whole world, he will, as it were in the highest court commend us, which
ought most plentifully to satisfy us, both then, when men are not only silent
in our commendations, but further also when they do undeservedly speak evil
of us.

FINIS.

