The doctrynalle of death.



This treatise is called the doctrynale of death and is to be read before a man
or a woman when it seems that they be in the article of death.
Read this as it follows before the seek person ye shall understand that none
shall have the kingdom of heaven but such as fyghteth for it / and specially
against their body the time of temptacyon and sekenes. The soul and the body
are of contrary na ture and of contrary condycion / and betwyxt them is
contynuel bathayl. If your soul take pacyently the bodily sekenes / and as
hertly as it can thank god thereof / for ye have diserued this pains and much
more in punysshement of syn^e / than your soul preuayles against your flesh
and gettest the vyctorye / and in reward thereof ye shall have the crown of
glory. Rmembre how oftentimes your flesh has drawn your soul after it to
sin by delectacion / therefore now our lord has sent you a time for to
recompense for those many offenses Wherefore now late the soul draw the
flesh to it and offer it to god as a sacrefyce brennynge with paynful sekenes
in satisfaccyon of that inordinat pleasure that it has had in the flesh from
the time that it was Joined thereto / pacyently and thankefully take the pain
and than the pain is prouffytable to you / and more sweet in th acceptaco^n of
god then ever flesshly pleasyre was accept unto you from the time ye ware
borne / then ye shall have thereby the love of god / remyssyon and foryeuenes
of sin. Increace of grace / and the great help of our lord at the hour of
death / and ye shall have per petuell Joye for that ye have so pacyently taken
this temporell pain for the love of him. Now learn ones to have a pacyent
heart / learn mekely to here the yocke of god / do one prycypall act for the
love of him that bare the cross of most bytterest pain for your love.
Remember he assayed your burden / he feled it / he is ready to reward you for
it / he has laid it on your back / than think that ye will bear it / show
you his obedyent servant / and if ye bear it of love ye shall find it the
more lyghter / and ye shall feel that his mercy shall lessen your burden and
Inwardly refresshe you by his grace with Joyfulnes of spyryte as he says
himself. All ye that have labored and have borne great burden for me come to
me and I shall refresshe you / show your self now a true child and dyscyple
of our lord which says yt who will be my dyscyple he must forsake his
flesshly desire and take upon him the cross of trybulatyon. Now the cross is
on your back now bear it myghtely after your saueyour your flesh desires
health an rest / ye must forsake this desires and conferme your will to the will
of god which knows what things is most to your avail / and by this short
pain has ordained if ye apply you obedyently to take it that ye shall be
delivered thereby from many a sin which ye have long time continued in / and
a little pain in this life avoided great pain after this life / and a short
pain here recompensed for a long pain there / and by the pain that ye
suffer in this life ye shall not only have for yeuenes of sin but ye shall have
great Joye after this life. And the pain whi he he suffered after this life it
deserved only forgyuenes of sin but no more Joye they shall have therefore.
Wherefore understanding that ye must have pain for sin acordynge to the
ryghtwysnes of god / be glad that ye have the less pain which is more
proyffytable to you than that great and long pain should be. This ye think is
a great pain but in regard of that pain which is a uoyded by this
graciously taking it is in manner no pain. The dear beloved souls of our
lord they had great pain before they departed out of this life and they desired
so to have for they knew the profit and fruit which they should have thereby
which they have now and are put in full surte that they never shall have
suffrau^ce of pain after this. Remember this blessed felawshyp which has
gone before you / and be glad that ye may be felawshyp with them / trust it
verily ye shall have great comfort of them against your gostely enmye if ye
Joy fully follow them. I wot well your flesh grugeth with pain but that shall
not lose your merit / for it is natural to the flesh so to do / the merit
is in your soul that ye think ye have deserved it and have a will to suffer
it as long as it pleased god ye shall have it and say in your soul / lord I
than ke the for this ryghtwys pain which I suffer blessed be thou that sendes
me reason and techynge to take it pacyently / thy name be blessed euerlastyngly
and with all the force yt ye may apply your body to suffer pain like as our
savior applied his body to the cross for you. And when ye feel that ye draw
to sekenes have will to say gramercy my lord like if ye received a precious
gift of him / and if your pain be so great that ye think not upon thankynges
at that time / soon after when ye feel the pain assuaged than hertly thank
him that he will make you partener with him in passion For as saint Poule says
/ like as we are parteners with him in passion / so we shall be parteners with
him in Joye and consolacyon. Remember also the great reward that ye shall have
for pacyently taking of this pain. For as saint Poule says / all the pains
yt we may suffer are not able to have that Joye which we shall have for pain
/ but only by ye grace of god which has ordained that a little pain well
taken here shall have Inestima ble Jope there. Ye shall have god himself for
the good labor of your suffraunce and the same glory that he has. That is to
say / ye shall clerly se the same godhede and blessed dyuynite that he sees /
and have everlasting glorious fruycyon with most sweet and brennynge love of
the same / and be in felawshyp with his blessed mother and all the angels and
saints of heaven in mirth and Joye with endless bliss so great that never eere
did here / never eye did see / never heart did think the leest part of
that Joye. O what pain will the dampened souls which are now in hell suffer
so that they might avoid that outrage and horrible pain that they have and
euerlastyngly shall have / if they might avoid yt perpetuell pain by any
temporel pain that they might suffer / if they had license to torn again to
this life al erthly pain should be sweet to them / and all pain of this world
should be in manner as no pain to them / all that pain they should have
avoided if thy had gracyously taken pain in this life before yt they departed /
and they that been in heaven have so great Joye for the pain that they suffered
in this life blessydly yt they thyn he if that they were here again they would
suffer an hundred time more pain than ever they did therefore now apply you
to suffer thankfully this pain that ye may have there the great inestymable
Joye which grows of good suffrau^ce. Now give good example to those yt are
about you that they may see by your meke taking of pain that ye are ye
faithful child of god / and that they may learn of you like wise to do in
time coming / and than your reward shall be doubled / for ye shall not only
than for your self he rewarded / but also for them which are byttred by you.
Have also in ye sight of your soul your savior Lryste Jesu and see the great
effusyon and sheddynge of his blood and most paynful death that he suffered for
you which never did sin / but suffered for your sin yt ye should never be
dampened if ye will ask mercy and be confessyd of your sin / and he
purchassed grace by the sacrament of baptysme that if ye had deyed than when ye
were first crystened ye should never have had pain after this life / but for
those sins that ye have done from that time ye must suffer pain in this life
or in that other life ba^t if ye sin be done away by the sacrament of
confession / therefore follow now the example of your savior in so much he
suffered for your sin ye most grievous pain apply you to suffer that ye may
/ for all yt ye may suffer is no thing comparable to yt he suffered for you /
and than trust verily ye shall be hertly welcome to him for ye have well followed
hy^ / these pains pacyently taken shall deliver you from ye most outrage
pain of hell / and ye may so blessydly take them with geuynge thankynges to
our lord for them yt ye shall never have pain in purgatory / but these pains
with the virtue of the sacraments of the church shall be to you perfyte
purgacyon. Our lord of his Infynyte mercy grant you habu^dau^ce of his grace
so to take your sekenes as may be most prouffytable to your salvation. Amen.

AFter that ye have showed to the seek person how they shall pacyently take the
sekenes to the plesyre of god and their great merit / if ye se that of
lykelyhode it is a dedly sekenes and that they be like to depart out of this
world / than first of al counsel them to receive the holy sacraments of the
church which they are bond to receive when they are like to deye / which
are the sacrament of confession / the sacrmente of the body of our lord / and
after this counsel them to receive the sacrament of anelynge / and say to
them this Ye shall understand that all sekenes and pain comes of syn^e / for
if there had never ben syn^e there should never have been no pain / and the
remedy against sin is grace which our lord has ordained to be received by
the sacraments of the church / therefore the souerayn medecyne both for soul
and body are the sacraments of the church / wherefore if it pleased god that
ye shall have your health again ye shall have it ye sooner and the better / for
without the specyal help of god there is no medycyne that may help nature /
and if it please his grace that ye shall not deye at this time ye shall have
the more gracious contynuance of life that ye holyly dyspose you to deye. And
if it please god to take you out of this life ye shall go surely armed with his
grace and have specyali help of our lord and depart like a true christian man
Also I counsel you that ye neither desire to go out of this world ne abide in
it but that ye offer you holy to yt will of our lord as the obedyent child of
him which was obedyent to the will of his fader when he suffered death for you /
and of both rather orther yourselfe to deye then to live / then ye shall
not be deceived for it is ye most surest way / many a man is deceived the
time of their death by hope yt they have to continue in this life / for as
long as they trust verily to live they never dispose them perfytly to deye /
and so death takes them vndisposyd to the damage and hurt of their soul.
Also say I counsel you as much as ye may to enforce yourself to have sorrow
and dyspleasure for the manyfolde offeuces in diverse sins whereby ye have
dyspleased god / or have a will to be sorry therefore with perfyte will to amend
your life and serve god the better as long as they shall live if it please
god that ye shall return to your health again. And ye shall not have sorrow ne
will to sorrow for fere of death ne for fere of pain / but ye shall will to be
sorry for that ye have be so vokynde and so grievously has offended so gentle
and loving a lord which has made you and given you all that ever ye had in
goodness from the time ye came in to this life / and which would suffer death for
the great love he had for your salvation and has ordained everlasting Joye
for you be sorry that ye have offended his grace / and because ye would not be
disceyued from him. If ye see that ye seek person is like to continue a good
space or it come to death / than it is expedyent to read before them some holy
matter of the love of our lord / or of his great mercy / or the command
mentes of god / or some co^fessyonall / that is to say some book which teched
a man how he should confess him / for that shall bring many matters to their
mind which peradventure they were never confessed thereof in their life / or
some holy prayers to styre them to the more devotion. Also see that there be
plente of holy water and that it be oftymes cassed about the house of the seek
person. Also set in the sight of ye seek a crucyfyx and also an image of our
lady if ye can have it other n piicture or in carved work. and oftentyme
bids them remember the passion of our savior whereby they shall have
remyssyon of sin / and special defense from their gostely enmye / and bydde
them hertly beseke oftentimes that blessed mother of mercy / to pray for them
and that she will be with them at the hour of death. And also if he be lettred
say with him the seven psalms and the letanye and the psalms of the passion
/ or holy aniemes and responses and hymns of the trynyte or of our lady or of
other festes. Also see that the holy candell be brennynge specially when ye see
he draws nyghe to death / and bliss him oftentimes with it and if ye have any
holy relukes lay them upon him. And when ye se that he gyued up the spirit
cry and bydde those which are about you cry the fader the sone and the holy
ghost help your servant. Jesu Jesu Jesu by the virtue of thy passion help thy
servant / blessed virgyn Marye and mother of mercy help thy servant. Jesu
have mercy of thy soul / all the court of heaven we beseke you in the charity
of our lord pray for his soul / the grace of the holy ghost and the merytes
of Crystys passion be with the Amen

ALso if ye think the time will serve thereto it is expedient to show to the
seek person the temptacyons with which commonly ye devil assailed yt soul at
yt hour of death yt it may be more stronger to resyste his malice at that time
for than he is most ^erse to tempte them / he woie well if he get them not
than he shall never have them / wherefore with all his deceyte and sutelnes he
labored to dysceyue the soul and bring it in dysperacyon if he may / and
specially he will tempte them in their faith and make them to believe that it is
false / and therefore say to them / see that ye he fast in the faith of Christ
/ for the denyll will tempte you therein and make you to believe if he can ye yt
faith that ye have byleued on is false / and that ye have been dysceyued all
your life thereby / for he knows that the faith is the ground of al virtue
and that no man is saved without the faith / for this cause say to them / see
yt ye be fast in the faith of Christ for your gostely enmye will now do that he
may to make you to forsake your faith / he will say that ye have been disceyued
all your days in ye faith / for it may not be that three persons should be
one god. Also he will say that Christ was not very god and man and that he was
not borne of a virgin and that he is not verily in the sacrament of the auter /
wherefore I exorte you in good understanding that ye may not be saved without
faith that ye keep fast the faith that ye have taken at the foute stone and
defye the devil with all his falsehode and say in your heart ye will dye in
the faith of Christ which god has declared with so many and great miracles
propre to him self that he has showed it true like as himself is true /
therefore think that ye would suffer all ye martyrdomes and pains that the
body of man might suffer rather than ye would forsake the faith which god has
ordained to your salvation / wherefore put your hole confidence in god whose
power is able to defend you again all the malice of the devil and will not
fail his faithful child / and trust verily that your mighty faith shall
affraye the fend / and with ye power of god and special assystence and help
of that faith full virgyn which by the merit of her faith did co^ceyue the
sone of god without knowledge of man And with the help of saint mychell and
your good angel with his fellows ye shall make the fend a ferde of you. It
passes the power of the fend to compelle any soul wylfully to err in the
faith and what so ever temptacyon comed in your mine de contrary to your faith
/ have will to believe as the church of god byleueth and as our savior Jesu
Christ teched the church to believe / and all the false suggestyons of the
devil and thoughts contrary to the faith shall no thing hurt you / for
there is never sin in the mind dampnable except it come of the will nor in
none other power of the soul. Believe fayhtfully such techynge and prechynge
as ye have had by the church / and what so ever comes contrary to that in
your mind / think it is false and comes of the devil fader of all
falsehode. Werfore I exorte you that like as ye have begone your life in the
perfyte faith of the church / so end it in perfyte faith and obedyence / for
all the well of your life now hyngeth of the end. If they be learned say the
creed before them in latin. If they understand no latin say it in English
after this form. I believe in god fader almighty the maker of heaven and earth
/ and in Ihesu Christ the sone of him our oonly lord which by the work of
the holy ghost was conceived and borne of the vyrgyn Marye / and suffered
passion under Pylate and was crucefyed / deed / and beryed / the third day he
rose from death to life and ascended to heaven and there he sytteth at ye right
hand of the fader almighty / and from thens he shall descend to Juge quycke
and deed. I believe also in the holy ghost and in holy church and in all ye
sacrament thereof / also I believe in foryeuenes of sin and that every man shall
rise from death to life and that the good people shall have everlasting life and
Joy Amen. And speak this with an hye voice that it may be well herd / and if
ye think ye time shall be suffycient before the death rehearse the creed diverse
times that the seek may be made strong in ye faith and to confonde ye devil
which loved not to here ye creed and fleed from ye sonde of the voice
specially when it is said to the entente y^ it should confunde the devil. Also
say to the seek / remember ye great faith of ye Patriarchs Abraham Ysaac and
Jacob which they had in god our savior Christ of whom they prophesied / and
for their faith they were specially byloued of our lord and preserved from
great peril / and after the passion of our savior they were brought out of ye
prison called lymbo in to ye kingdom of heaven. Also remember ye faith of ye
apostles Peter Poule saint James saint Johan with all their fellows. Also
remember what pains Innumerable martyrs did suffer because they would not
forsake their faith / and in their martyrdoms our lord showed so many great
miracles yt yt enmyes of yt faith were turned to ye faith. Also remember ye
inumerable men and wyme^ which have keped this faith truly in their life and
deyed therein for whom god daily showed miracles al those did plese god by faith
/ and without faith no soul may please him. Remember the profit of y^ faith it
opteyned al thing of god proufytable to the soul as he says himself all
thing are possible to a faithful soul.

The second temptacyon is against ye virtue of hope by disperacyon.
When ye soul at the article of death is troubled sore with great sekenes / tha^
ye devil will put in their ymaginacion al ye great sins that it has done /
and so in their great trouble bodily and ghostely he purposed that they shall no
thing consydre but pain and sin whereby they should fall in disperacion
seeing the great abhomynacyon of their life. And specially he will labor to
confunde them in such sins as they were never co^fessyd of which for
negligence they did forgete Wherefore ye shall say to the seek / see that ye
put your full hope in ye mercy of god / for of all sins ye should specially
offend god if ye had not a full bylyue and hope of his mercy. And trust ye
verily that ye have foryeuenes not only of those sins of which ye be
confessyd but also of all those of ye which ye would have be confessyd of if
they had comen in your mind / know ye verily yt the mercy of god is Infinite
it passed your mind to think how great it is / wherefore I waren you trust
verily in the full mercy of god / and if ye had never done good deed in all your
days but as many sins as there are drops of water in the sea / or corns
of sonde in the world / and if there come but two of them to your mind the
time of confession under vnderstondy^ge ye would be co^fessyd of them al if ye
might have them all together in mind and have will for to be sorry for them ye
shall have foryeuenes of them al / and if your speech fail you yet if ye ask
mercy in your mind and have will to be confessyd if ye might ye shall never be
dampened for them. wherefore see that ye have dyspleasure in your heart that ever
ye did break the command mentes of god and sinned dedly / and have very
purpose if ye might live a thousand year that ye will no more break his
commandment and that ye wol de rather suffer all the torment of the world
than ye would sin dedly and deserve to lose the glory of our lord god and
the kingdom of heaven / thus meke your heart and ye shall have grace. Our lord
saytn in the sauter that he never despised a contry te and a meke heart. And
the prophet Ezechyel says that in what hour a sinner takes sorrow for his
sin he shall be saved. And saint Bernard says that the pity of god passes
without all mesure the wretchydnes of man / for he is ever ready to forgive the
sin if we have will to be sorry therefore and ask mercy with confession. One
of the gretest sy^nes is to believe yt god is not merciful / for in that a
sinner does all that is in him to spoil god of one of his most gretest
virtues which is called mercy / and as long as your soul is in your body ye
shall have mercy if ye ask it / therefore see that oftymes ye lift up your heart
to god and ask hy^ mercy And when the person which is in the artykell of
death may not speak / bydde them hold up ye finger or styre it in token that
they asken mercy with heart. And if they have sight to look upon the crucefyxe
/ say thus to them. Behold how you lord god bowed his neck to kiss you /
his arms casted abroad to halse you / his hands are open to reward you / his
heart also is opened to love you / all his blessed body is offered to the fader
in sacrefyce for you yhat ye shall by the virtue of this oblacyon have
remyssyon of sin / and if ye hertly ask mercy ye shall have foryeuenes by ye
virtue and merytes of his passion though ye never have done good deed whereby ye
deserve to have foryeuenes / for this cause he suffers passion that al sinners
should have help thereby which will ask mercy. And every man as long as ye
soul is in the body is in the state yt he may have grace. Remember how that
saint Peter denied Christ and asked grace and had it. Also saint Poule did
persewe yt, christian people for to kill them / and afterward he asked mercy and
was made the chosen vessel and ye lover of god. Also saint Mathewe and zache
were synfully occupied / and yet afterward by a repentance of heart they came
to great grace. Also Marye Mawdeleyne by asking mercy and repentance of
heart is now above many virgyns in heaven / notwithstondy^ge she was a common
woman in this life Also Marye Egypcyen a common woman and now by mercy is an holy
saint. Also the thief which hynge on the right side of our lord asked mercy
and had it and was that same day put in possessyon in the glory of god. Adam.
Dauyd. ysachy / and Manasses, with many moo / thus by co^trycyon and asking of
mercy had foryeuenes of their sins / wherefore sythen that ye have thus many
witnesses of the mercy of our lord I require you in god that ye put full
confydence in the me rytes of Crystys passion and ask mercy and ye shall have
it.

The third temptacyon is to angrenes and Ire against the virtue of pacyence
without which virtue pain is not profitable.
Say to the seek person thus. Your goostly enmye ye fend will tempte you to
grutche with your sekenes and to think that your pain is to great and for to
grutche against god because he suffered you to continue in so great and so long
pain / for the fend konweth well yt by grutchynge against god the soul lesed
the great virtue of pacyence which shall be most necessary to them when
they shall be brought before ye great Judge for to res^eyue the sentence of
salvation or of damynacyon. Wherefore against this te^ptacyon see that ye
remembrewell that all the pain that ye suffer comes of the ryghtwysnes of god
/ and that almighty god is the pryncypall werker of all the pain that ye feel
/ like as ye have wrought sin so he werked now pain / for of right sin
must have pain. Now remember how oftentimes ye have been dysobedyent to god
and done agay^st his law and commandments / and with all your heart appiye
you now to make amends by pacyent and Joyful sufferynge of pain before ye
depart out of this world for a little pain thankefully taken satysfyed for
great sy^ne / and much more your great pain shall deliver you from many and
great sins. Now show your self ye very obedyent child of god / and thank
him hertly of his gracyous vysytacyon / and beseke him that ye may have grace
to suffer pacyently with obedyent heart a little while for his love which
suffered the great pain and passy on for you with most bytterest death on the
cross. Our lord says we shall keep our soul with pacyence / and there is
understanding yt we may lose it by Inpacyence. The kingdom of heaven says
saint Gregory is not opened to such as grutched with ye works of god /
alcontryte heart is ready to suffer all pains and sekenes Joyfylly / and if
offered himself to pain to satisfye for syn^e / wherefore trust verily yt if ye
take mekely this pain it shall stand you for great part of your purgatory /
and it may be so Joyfully taken with intent to please god and satisfye for syn^e
that this shall be your hole purgatory / and ye shall never come in purgatory
after this / by ye ryghtwysnes of god great sin deserved great pain / and
long sin long pain / but ye pacyent taking of pain through the merey of
god makes great pain ly tell pain / and long pain short pain. Wherefore
say to our lord / a mercyful lord I beseech the punysshe me here and spare
me euerlastyngly that I never come in the endless pain but suffer me good lord
to crepe under the wynge of mercy.

The fourth temptacion is to vain glory against perfyte mekenes.
THe fend when he can not overcome ye soul by none of these temptacions than
he will tempte the soul to vain glory and say. O how strong thou art in thy
faith / and how stable thou art in hope / and how perfyte thou art in
pacye^ce thou shall find but few such as y^ art / all those which are
about the may be glad to see the great virtue which is showed in the. O how
many good deeds thou have done in thy days / thou shall be remembered many a
day / therefore if any such thoughts come in your mind say ye ayene / al my
Joy is in god / for all virtue comed of him / and if ever I did good deed of
all my days it came of him wherefore only to him be loving and Joy / he be
blessed which has given me grace any thing to do which is to his pleasyre.
If ye feel your self tempte to vain glory / call ye to mind how many
evil dedys ye have done sythen ye were borne and myspended much time in
vain. Remember how the devil said to saint Anthony / thou ouercomest me said
he / for when I would exalte the by pride thou lowest thyself by mekenes / and
when I would low the by disperacyon / thou exaltest thyselfe / by full hope of
mercy.

The fyfte temptacyon in the artykel of death is to have ye mind occupied with
worldly things more than with ye goostly prouffyte of the soul.
Such temporal things as a man has most loved in this life / he shall be
most tempted with to have his mind most upon it in his departing / as
riches / flesshely pleasyre / honor / wife and chyldern with other such as he
has greatly loved in this life / and the fend shall tempte him to be more
occupied therewith Inwardly in his mind than with the gostely well of his
soul. wherefore it is expedyent that every wise man to god and to his soul
have his testament made in ye time of his health that he be not let in
ordeynynge of ye temporal chynges from the most perfyte ordenaunce of his
soul to have the more blessed ending yt they may have a quyete time to give
attendaunce to their goostly physycyan. And again this time it is expedyent yt
a man provided specially for a goostly physycyan / that is to say a man which
is learned well in the law of god / and can blessydly help to order the soul
against the departing from the body / for all the well of the life hanged of
that ending. If it has been never so wretched a soul if the end be good it
shall be saved / for than in their departing they should have none Inquietacion
by making or by executynge of their will / wherefore when the will is made and
the worldly things ordered / than bydde them torn their mind to god as much
as it may / bydde them cry for help In wardly in their heart and also with
mouth if it can or may unto god and to his blessed mother and other saints the
which they have had devotion to and also for mercy and grace / and specially
se that they beseech the mother of mercy and advocate for man's soul to pray
for them and to be with them and help them in the departing from the body.
Also bydde them cry for help to saint mychell and other holy angels which
have had labor with keeping of them sythen the time yt it was create and made
of almighty god. Also if the seek may co^petently well speak it is a spetyall
prayer at yt time to say the. vij. psalms and letanyes / or some other the
which they have devotion unto. and if they may not well speak it is good to say
than before them after ye ordenau^ce of ye church / specyal to exorte them yt
they have special remembrance of Jesu and his passion for salvation and help
is specially promised to us in yt name. Also say to them o how glad may ye be
yt ye shall now go from all myserye of pain and of sin and come to the
Joyful felycyte of god where ye shall never have pain nor sorynes / and
remember that ye shall go to your own most loving and pytefull fader which
made you and redeemed you / and has ordained ye kingdom of heaven full Joy and
bliss for to receive you / thus speak to it of the Joys of heaven of the great
mercy of god how gentle he has be to sinners / also speak to them of the
proufyte of pacyence in pain of martyrdomes of saints and great pains which
the good souls had taken upon them in this world for the love of god and
their great reward in heaven / and provide that there be no great styrynge
nenoyse about it to withdraw the soul from such meditacyon and desire as
should be to the great defense of it against the fend and procure special
help of god.

Here folowe^ certain questyons proufytable to such as apyreth to be in the
artykell of death.
AFter that ye have made the soul strong a gaynst the common temptacyons
which comes in the artykell of death / than it is expedyent to questyon with
it / for in answeryng to the questyons ye shall feel where it has need of
reformacion and there ye may reform it. First ask are ye not glad that ye
shall deye in true faith of Christ and with full faith of all the sacraments
of the church. Are ye not sorry that ye have broken the commandments of god
many times sythen ye were horn / have ye not will now thatiyf ye might live in
this life many years that ye would better keep ye commandments of god than
ever ye did. Are ye not sorry yt ye have not lived so well as ye might have
done / ye believe that ye shall be saved by the merytes of Crystys passion and
by the virtue of his sacrament / and yt he has suffered death for you in his
body which was very god and man. Ye thank your saueour Christ Jesu which
would suffer ye most bytterest pain of death to redeem and save you from
dampnacion. Ye thank him hertly and as long as ye live ye will put your full
hope of salvation in ye merytes of his passion. See that ye ask help of Jesu
Inwardly in your soul / see that ye oftentyme command the devil in ye virtue
of Jesu to go from you / in whose name heaven and earth and hell does obedyence
/ believe not ye in the law of god and in all the artycles of the faith /
despise not ye all heresies and errors witchecraftes with all vain believe
contrary to the doctrine of the church. Are not ye sorry that ye have done many
good deeds more for dayne glory of the world and for dread of pain than for
the love of god. Ask not ye god mercy for that ye have offended him and him
beseke faderly to receive your soul and to have pity of ye freyll conuersacyon
yt ye have been of in this life. Also would not ye rather suffer death than ye
would ones more sin dedely if ye should live longer / ye pray god that he
will co^tynue this same will in you as long as ye shall live. Also forgive not
ye every man and wnman which has offended you sythen that if were borne in
word or in deed. Also ask ye not foryeuenes of all people and specially of
your neighbors and such as ye have dwelled with in onehous to whom ye most
offended. Also are ye not wylly that restytucyon be made to every man of whom
that ye have had any good wrongfully according to your power. Had ye not
lever spend in restitucyon al your goods than that ye would wrongfully keep
any man's good contrary unto the pleasyre of god and the loss of your
salvation Also are not ye glad that ye shall depart from this wretched
sinful life full of myserye and of pain / and myserye of sin to your own
fader and lord god which loved you so specially that he would make you like
to his own image / and suffer the most bytterest death for you to bring you
to his glory. Also are not ye glad to go to your own country there ye shall
see god in his glory his blessed mother and all the angels of heaven / and all
your friends the which ben departed out of this life in the state of grace
where ye shall never syn^e ne never feell sorrow ne pain but ever persevere in
perfyte Joye and gladness and ever a like fresshe. Beseke not ye the blessed
mother of god saint Mychaell and all the saints in heaven / and specially all
those the which ye have served in this life by fasting their euyns or
prayenge that they will be with you now at your departing. Ye cry mercy of god
and of all ye world that ye have offended / ye ask help of god and of all
his saints to defend you from the fend now at the hour of your departing.
Who so answered to this questyons faithfully it is a token as man may have
euydente that they depart blessydly and are of the chosen chylderen of god.
After this bid the seek person say three times. In manus tuas domine co^mendo
spiritum meum. redemisti me domine deus veritatis. And if he can not say it
than bydde him say it after you / and if he may not speak than say ye ye
same verse in the place of him / and thus with the mercy of god he shall deye
blessydly and be delivered for ever from the everlasting death Amen.

AFter this if ye seek may here so bydde him that he pray in his mind after
you. Also desire of those which are present to pray in mind or with mouth
after you / and that they desyren of our lord to grant the petycyons which
are made in this prayers / and pray such as can say the psalms of the
passion to say them to the entente that this soul may have a blessed passing

Here folowen certain prayers.
Here follows a prayer to the trynyte.
EAder sone and holy ghost glorious trynyte one god almighty have mercy of this
sinner and by the virtue of thy most holy diuinyte and honor of thy name
forgyne him that he has offended the by Ignorance malice or freylte of
conuersacyon in this synful life. I commend lord his soul to the / which of
naught did make it to thine image. O most pyteful fader of mercy for the
virtue of thyn Infynyte goodness she we mercy and forgyuenes to this poor soul
/ and in this great necessyte help this feeble and Inpotent soul which now
has most need of thine help. O most pytefull fader suffer it not to be
devoured with the hou^des of heil / but take it to thy possessyon for it is
thine / good lord thou made it therefore late never thy handewerke peryshe in
defaute of thy help. We al beseke the in the merytes of our savior and his
blessed mother and all the merytes of thy church to be mercyful fader and lord
to it and bring it to thy glore Amen.

A prayer to the sone.
O most sweet savior and merciful lord Ihu^ christ the sone of the almighty
fader for the merytes of thy most blessed passion and honor of thy diuinyte
command this soul to be resceyued a monge thy chosen children. O sweet
savior and redemer we thy servants grounded in the believe of the / co^menden
this soul to thy most blessed proteccyon / good lord forsake it not but make
it pertyner of thy glory and co^solacyon like as thou would wouchesauf in this
life for our saluaco^n to be partyner with us in passion. All we good lord
asken in thy name thy heavenly paradyse for him / not in his merytes ne in our
which are but ashes and powder and wretched sinners but in the virtue and
goodness of thy passion we ask it whereby thou did redeem him and for the price
of thy most precyons blood whereby thou did open paradyse for sinners which
puten full hope in the of help and saluacyo^n from everlasting dampnaco^n and
enmyte. And if the seek man may say this verse following late him / say it.
Disrupisti dn^e vincula mea tibi sacrificabo hostia^ laudis. Late him say it.
iij. times else say / it for him / it is of great virtue. Than say o lord
Ihu^ Christ for the great bytternes of pain and passion yt thou suffrest on
the cross / and most specially in that hour when thy holy soul departed
from thy body have mercy of this soul now when it shall depart from the body
that it may gracyously be received of the amen.

A prayer to the holy ghost.
O Most holy spyryte of the fader and of the sone which by heavenly
Inspiracyon of thy gra ce makes, holy souls and purged them from sin have
mercy of this sinner and foryeue him that he has offended against thy grace /
keep in it good lord perfyte use of reason as long as ye soul there shall
abide in the body that it may merytoryously by thy grace perfytly resyste ye
temptacions of the fend and avoid all his malice / make this soul lord god
fast in faith hope and charity that it may euerlastyngly love the and bliss
the Amen.

A prayer to our lady.
O Queen of heaven and mother of mercy under god most special help to all
sinners why the faithfully called for help to the / good lady reconsell this
soul to thy sone by the merytes of thy great faith charity mekenes and
chastyte / and with thy most acceptable prayer purchase blessed lady foryeuenes
and fredom from the doubt of sin that for thy love specially most benygne
lady he will foryeue it the manyfolde offenses that it has done against him and
make it possessyoner of his glory. O glorious lady which never failed thy
lovers in their great need / now help blessed vyrgyn in this most necessyte
that ever this soul had sythen that it was create / for now hastily it shall
for the deeds done of his life receive sentence of dampnacyon or of salvation.
I beseech the most pytefull mother the true advocate for man's soul be
medyatryce for this soul at this tyme-to the great Juge our lord god. We thy
servants and lovers commenden it to thy blessed keeping / now forthy moderly
pity and tender heart keep it and protecte it we beseech the to the honor of
god and ye and to the salvation of it Amen.

A prayer to the angels.
O Blessed angels of heaven. We beseech you of your great charity and also for
the great love that ye ought to almighty god Christ Jesu your maker / and also
for the great love that ye have to the salvation of man's soul that ye now
help this soul passing out of this wretchyd world / and myghtely deliver it
from all the great dangers and perils which are before it and take it to
your fela wshyppe. Saint Mychaell whose office is for to help and to lead the
souls in their departing now help this soul we beseech the and all the holy
angels which has been the keeper thereof we beseech the now help and show the
office of thy keeping and assemble angels of thy holy felawshyp for to repress
the wicked spyrytes of derkenesse / and to all the. ix. ordres we make
suplycacyon for this soul. Also all Patriarchs prophets martyrs confessors
virgins wedowes matrons we beseech you help new this soul / and in special
ye whom it has most served and had devotion to in this life / the pease of
our lord Jesu Chyste / ye virtue of his passion / ye sing and token of his
holy cross / the clean virginyte of his blessed mother / the blessing of all
saints / ye proteccyon and defense of all the holy angels / the prayers and
suffrages of all the chosen people of god be bytwyxt this soul and all the
enmyes thereof in this hour of death Amen.

It is prouffytable to say this prayers when ye soul is departed if there be
none oportunite to say them before with this hymns. Memento salutis auctor.
and Rerum deus tenax vigor etc.
Here ends the Doctrynale of death Enprynted at westmynster In Castons house.
By me wynkyn de word.




