A COMPLETE PARSON: OR, A DESCRIPTION OF ADVOWSONS, or Church-liuing.

WHEREIN Is set forth, the intrests of the Parson, Patron, and Ordinary, etc.

WITH Many other things concerning the same matter, as they were delivered at
several Readings at New-Jnne,

By I. DODERIDGE, Anno, 1602, 1603.

And now Published for a Common good, by W. J.

LONDON. Printed by B. A. and T. F. for John Grove and are to be sold at his
Shop at Furniuals Jnne gate. 1630.

To the Reader.
Books that are not able to protect themselves, may require large Preface and
Dedication, this needs none, it teaches the Law, and therefore cannot fear
any Informer; errors of the print may here and there offer themselves, but for
any other, the honorable Name of him (to whom Posterity shall thankfully
acknowledge a debt for his Work) in the very Title page is able to vindicate.
If thou be a Caviel, yet be not too quick at censure, satisfy thy
ambition for the present with a Readers place; thou may in time come to be
a judge, which every man is not borne too.

Farewell.

THE CONTENTS OF the Lectures ensuing.
LECT. 1.
THe Name, Nature, Divisions, Consequents, causes and incidents of Advowsons or
Patronages. Fol. 1 2 The Right that both the Patron and Ordinary has jointly
to intermeddle with the Church. fol. 10 3 The several Intrests of the Patron
and Ordinary, and what it is. fol 16 4 What manner of Inheritance an Advowson
is. fol. 19 5 The word Right, and the word Advowson explained, and to what
Inheritance an Advowson may be appendant originally. fol. 24 6 To what things
an Advowson may be appendant secondarily. fol 30 7 In what manner Advowsons
are appendant to a Manor. fol. 35 8 If an Advowson appendant, that consists of
Demesnes and Services, shall be appendant in respect of the Demesnes only, or
in respect of the Demesnes and Services. fol. 42 9 How an Advowson may be
severed from the principal, and by what means it may be reconnexed thereunto
again. fol. 47 10 Of Advowsons in Gross. fol 54 11 Of Advowsons pattly
appendant, partly in Gross. fol. 58 12 What Presentation is and what is the
effect and fruit thereof, and in what manner Presentation and Nomination
differ. fol 62 13 The things incident to Presentation prosecuted, who may
present, what Parsons may be presented, to whom the Presentation must be made,
and the manner thereof. fol. 70 14 The two first particular causes of Avoydance
of Churches, v. z. Is either Temporal, as Death; or Spiritual, as
Deprivation; the one of it self being manifest, and the other a discharge of
the Dignity or Ministry. fol. 73 15 The third particular cause of Avoydance,
being Spiritual, is Resignation. fol. 78 16 The last special means in
Avoydance of Spiritual promotions Presentatiue, is Creation. fol. 86
A COMPLETE PARSON: OR, A DESCRIPTION OF ADVOVVSONS.
LECT. 1.
The name, nature, Divisions, Consequents, causes and incidents of Advowsons or
Patronages.
FOrasmuch as we are said to know, cum Causas cognoscimus, and seeing he
labors in vain, that seeks to apprehend the knowledge of the accident,
which is ignorant of the substance: and seeing nothing sets out the nature
of the thing, but the Description and Definition, and that Omnis quae a ratione
suscipitur, de re aliqua, Tull: Offi^. lib. 1.
institutio, debet a definitione proficisci, vt intelligatur quid sit id de quo
disputatur: I will begin as good order requires, with the Description of an
Advowson, that the nature thereof being known, we may the better observe, the
coherence and congruence of this kind of Learning.

An Advowson therefore generally considered, Quid.
is a right that a man has, to prefer his friend, or any fit person, to
promotion Presentatiue, or Donatiue.

This Definition is general, and may be attributed to all persons, whereof a
man may have a Quare Imp: if he be Disturbed; for, the Writs mentioned in the
Statute, lies not only of Dignities Presentatiue by the course of the Common
Law, but also of promotions Donatiue by this Statute: As Chaunteries Donatiue,
* Free chapels, etc. Also it lies, of a Fitzh. N. Br. 30. Ibid. 33. a. 31. E.
Ib. 34. 9. E.
Subdeaconship, or Hermitage, which also may be Donatiue, and this is grounded
upon the words of the Statute, De cetero concedantur brevia de Cappillis,
Prebendis, Vicarijs, Hospitalibus, 14. H. 3. Fetzh. quare Imp. 183.
Abbatis quae prius concedi non consueuerunt; Yet nevertheless, I read that a
Quare Imp: was maintained of a Chapel, by the Common Law, but such a Chapel
(perchance) was Presentatiue, and not Donatiue. Promotions presentatiue
(whereof the Writs are mentioned in the Statute) were maintained at the Common
Law; as Churches, Chaunteries, and Chapels Presentatiue, and such like.

And therefore as the afore-specified Definition, or Description is general,
and appliable to both: So are those subsequent, more properly to be applied to
Churches Advowsons, in which are Cures of Souls.

An Advowson, or as the term, Ius Patronatus Summa ho^stensis d^ jure patrono.
Su^ma Anglse eod. tit. Su^ma Siluestrinae tit. Patronatus.
est potestas presentandi aliquem instituendu^ ad beneficium Ecclesiae simplex
and vacans: and of other respects, the causes and incidents of Advowsons, is
Described more amply in such manner, Ius patronatus, est ius honorificum,
onerosum, and vtile.

In effect this: A Patronage, or an Advowson, is a right to present to the
Bishops or Ordinary a fit person, by him to be admitted and Instituted into a
Spiritual Benefice when it becomes void: And he that has such right to
present, is called Patron: who is thus described, Patronus est defensor
Ecclesiae, qui habet ius presentandi Episcopo aliquem vel aliquos in aliqua
Ecclesia and in ea ab eo instituatur. And he is so called, De patrocinio, of
defense: For that, that he should defend the Church, or a similitudine Patris,
quia sicut pater filium, sic patronus Ecclesiam, de non esse, deducit ad esse.

He is called of Old Glanvile, Advocatus; as that he should say, an Advocate
of the causes of the Church, and therefore the inheritance is called Advocatio,
or Advowson, or is devised De vocando: for that, that the Patron has power,
for the presentment of a fit person, by the name of his presentation. And here
by the way, let no man think, that I thrust my self in messem alienam, and to
borrow of the Cannonists, as well now the Description and Etimologie before
showed, and after also, to fetch from them more high matter. But let such
curious Carpers, (if any be) remember the Speech of Asliton, * who affirms,
that every Advowson, and 34. H. 6. 40 v. Asliton.
right of Patronage, depends upon two Laws, that is to say; The Law of holy
Church, and our Laws, so that the true determination of such learning, is as
he says; Per ius mixtum, by both Laws; that is, Ecclesiastical, and
Temporal: And therefore, when we purpose to seek the right intelligence, or
true understanding of any things in this kind of learning, we must of
necessity be beholden to them.

But to return where we digressed.

The material causes and subjects, in which this learning depends, are the
things before mentioned. As Churches, Chaunteries, and Chapels presentatiue,
and such like.

Churches are of three sorts
Cathedral, Collegiall, and Patrochiall.
A Cathedral Church, is the seat or Church of a Bishop, and therefore he
only may be said Incumbent thereof.

Collegiall or Conuentuall Churches, are such, as in times past, have been in
Priories; Abbeys, or such like, and are still in Colleges.

Patrochial Churches, are well known, and Johan. Bellonius de et imologijs.
are those, Ad quem plebs convenit ad percipienda Sacramenta Baptismatis and
Corporis Christi vnde pabulum ad animas sustentandas libere suscipiunt, for the
Incumbent thereof, is only charged with the cure of Souls. And it is commonly
called by the name of Rectorie, which is into two sorts divided, being either a
Parsonage, or a Vicarage. And so much 34. E. 3. Fitzh. Qu. Imp. 187.
briefly, for the name, matter, and substance of Advowsons.

The former cause or manner of this Inheritance, yields forth the usual and
ordinary distinctions of Advowsons, to be either appendant, or in gross, or
part appendant, part in gross, either for a certain time, or in respect of
certain persons.

The efficient Causes of a Parsonage, are
1. Ratione Dotationis. 2. Ratione Fundationis. 3. Ratione Fundi.
Ratione Dotationis, is, when he, or those from whom he deriues his interest,
endowed the same Church.

Ratione Fundationis, is, when he or his Ancestors, or those from whom he
claims his interest, were founders of the same Church.

Ratione Fundi, is, when the Church was built upon his or their Land, from whom
he deriues his interest; or all three together, as appears by the verse, used
amongst the Cannonists.

Patronum faciunt dos, edificatio, fundus. The usual cause or causes, why
Patronages ^^^ma hostieus. ti^. ius Patronas.
of Churches are given by the Law, and bestowed upon Laymen; is, and were, Vt
inducantur laici ad fundationem, constructionem, and Desetionem Ecclesia.

The fruit and effect of a Parsonage, consists in those three things
Honos. Onus, and Vtilitas.
Honor attributed to a Patron, consists I. Honos
in his right of presentment. In the discourse whereof, I shall afterward
consider, what is required, before the same can be attempted: then what the
nature of presentation is; and lastly, what is required for the making of a
full and perfect Incumbent.

Before the presentation can be lawfully made, it is meet that the Church
become void, and of avoidance, our Law takes notice, the same being triable
thereby.

The manner and means how an Avoydance grows, is either Temporal, or
Spiritual.





As touching presentation, we are to see; first, what it is, then who shall
present, afterward what person may be presented, and last of all in what
manner the same must be done.

Those things, that are required to make a perfect Incumbent, after the
presentation had, depends upon the Duty of the Ordinary; As first,
Admission, which requires examination of the Clarke, whereupon sometime
ensues a refusal, and thereupon, either notice, or no notice (as the case
requires) is to be given to the patron.

If the Clarke be admitted, then, he must be instituted, we are then to see,
what Institution is, and what is the effect thereof, upon which ought to ensue
Induction thereinto, likewise we must see, what it is, by whom it is to be
performed, and what it does import.

If the Patron be remiss, and does not present within the time limited, then
incurreth the lapps of the Patron, to the Bishop, and from the Bishop, to the
Metropolitan, and from him to the Crown, where it rests, but if the Bishop
take his time, then is his presentation a Collation, and in the right of the
patron himself.

2 The second effect of a personage, (which is Onus.
Onus,) rests only in the defense of the Churches possessions, to which the
Patron and Ordinary by aid prayer, are to be called by the Incumbent, for
the defense of the same, to avoid such charges and encumbrances, as are unduly
laid thereupon.

3 As touching the third, which is Utility, we Vtilitas.
have not any thing to do with it, in our law, but we must leave the
Consideration thereof, to the Cannon law, for this Utility is employed for the
sustentation of the patron; for if he or his posterity being patrons do fall
to decay, then the incumbent of the fruits of the Church by compulsarie
Censure, of the Ordinary, according to that law, is to be enforced to make
Contribution to them.

All writs concerning this kind of Inheritance Breuia.
are either given to the patron, or Incumbent.

Writs given to the Patron are of two sorts, for either he demands his
inheritance, or presentation, against the possessor, of the patronage, or he
attempts suit against the Ordinary, for either not doing, or doing his Duty
unduly.

In every action brought against him that pretends possession, it is to be
intended, that either he is lawfully or unlawfully possessed.

The unlawful possessor, is the usurper, against whom only lies three Writs,
which the Statute speaks of, namely; One of the right, as the writ of right
of Advowson, and the other two of the possession, as a Quare Imp: and Darraigne
presentment.

Against the lawful possessor, lies the writ 33. H. 6. 34 b. and 35 a. act.
of Dower, for the wife of him that Dyed seized of such estate as she might ^e
endowed of, and a Cessavit of the land against the Tenant.

But no Formedon lies for the issue in tail 13. E. 3. 15. b. 33. H. 6. 33. a.
5. H. 7. 36. b. 37. a. Fitz^. 1^ br. 217. b.
in Discender, nor for any in the remainder, nor for the Donor in the re^^rter;
for that, that if the Advowson be in gross it cannot properly be discontinued,
and being appendant it is to be recontinued by the same means, that the land
to which it is appendant, is to be recovered.

The Incumbent as touching his right for his Rectorie, has the only Writ of
Iuris vtrun^, and for his possession, any other possessarie action. For if
another happen (during his presentation) to be presented by the same Patron, or
do come into the same Church, by course of the Law, so that the patronage
comes into Debate, their lies a spoliation, it being a suite in the
Spiritual Court,

LECT. 2.
The Right that both the Patron and Ordinary has jointly to intermeddle with
the Church.
IN the former Lecture or Reading, having delivered in the project, a Discourse
of Advowsons, briefly discovering their Name, nature, Divisions, consequents,
causes, effects and Incidents of the Patronage: Now it remains in like manner
to prosecute every of those parts, then but pointed at, with a more large and
ample explication.

First therefore, it is to be considered, that in every Benefice three persons
have intrest. That is to say, the Parson has a Spiritual possession. 12. H.
8. 7. b. per Pollyard.
The Ordinary to see the Cure served; And the Patron has Ius presentandi.

Hence it is that I have said, that a Patronage is a right of presentation;
therefore it is called, Ius Patronatus; not a power, nor an authority only,
but a right, intrest, or an Inheritance: The word Ius or Right, is diversely
intended, Com. 284. a
sometimes strictly, to signify what is left a man, when that, that was once
his own is wrongfully Com. 487. b
taken from him, as by Disseisin or such like.

In which sense, the word Droit and Tort, are Bracton Jus.
private opposita, and is thus divided; to be either right of Action, or right
of Entry; sometimes, in a more ample signification, as Ius habendi, ius
possessendi, ius disponendi, by which occasion I purpose at this time to
discuss, whether the Patron and Ordinary have right in the Rectorie or
Benefice, and what manner of right it is that they have; their right is called
Collateral, as we read, and not Habendi, nor possessendi, nor retinendi; for
none of them, can have, retain, or possess the Church or Rectorie, but their
right is, Ius Disponendi, wherein every of them has a particular Charge to the
possessions of the Church, so free as that he may maintain such a one as is
thereinto to be presented.

That they have a kind of Disposition in them, it 2. H. 7. 36. Ratio 1.
is proved by many reasons: 1. No charge can be founded to be laid upon the
Church in perpetuity, to bind their successors, but the Patron and Ordinary
must be made parties thereunto as all our books agree, and Litleton gives a
notable reason for it. VVch is, that if the Charge be perpetual, the consent of
all 3. ought to concur, of which ensues thus much, that if a writ of Anuitie
be brought against the parson, and he prays in aid of the Patron and
Ordinary and the Patron makes default, and the Ordinary appears, and
confesses the action; or if the Ordinary 12. H. 8. 7. b
make default, and the Patron appear, and confesses the action, that this
Anuitie shall not bind the successor: but if they both appear and one of them
confess the action, and the other faith not any thing, it shall bind the
Rectorie in perpetuity. For Qui tacet consentire videtur. But if the Parson
only with the consent of the Ordinary for Tithes or other consideration
executorie, charge the Church in perpetuity, it shall be good, without the
consent of the Patron, as well as if the consideration executorie had remained.

Advowson for years, and the Parson by the consent of such Patron and
Ordinary, grant rent charge in fee, if the Parson dye within the term, and
the termor of the Advowson presents another, and the term expireth, Quere if
then the Anuity shall be delivered, but it seems by some that it shall be
delivered; for that, that this Incumbent was not the party, that made the
grant, and therefore he should not hold it charged any longer, then during the
intrest of the Patron.

And therefore if two joyntenants in common, or parceners be of an Advowson,
who agrees to present by turn, if the person join in grant of a rent charge
in fee, with one of them, the Parson shall be charged and also his successors
( alterius vicibus) for ever; because, those successors (that comes in) by
him that made the Charge, shall be subject to it only, and those that comes
in by the presentation of the Patron, that neither joined nor confirmed, the
same shall hold their land discharged for ever.

Also, such Anuitie with which the Rectorie is charged, does not properly
charge the Land but the Parson; for, if the grantee enter into any part of the
Gleebe, he shall not suspend the rent or anuitie.

And if the Parson, Patron, and Ordinary, join in a grant of an Anuitie to
S. H. and his heirs, except they speak of the successors of the parson, and
that the same be granted for the parson and his successors, this cannot be good
longer then forth time, that the parson that granted the same, continues
Parson; for an Anuitie is nothing but a parsonall Duty, and no otherwise. And
if such an Anuitie be 21. H. 7. 4. ae
granted over, it is not needful to have Atturnment; all which proves, that
the same charge not the Land, but the Parson; yet nevertheless, the parson
is charge, for if the Grantor assign or be removed by any means whatsoever,
the charge follows not his parson, but rests upon his Successors, and the
Jury may be taken of the Town where the Church is, which proves that such
grant charge the parson in respect of the Land.

Moreover, when the Patron and Ordinary, confirms the grant of the Parson,
it is requisite that the Confirmation be made, during such time, as he is
Incumbent that made the Charge; for if he Die, be removed, resigue, or
otherwise be deptiued before the confirmation, such Confirmation is void
notwithstanding.

If an Incumbent grant rent charge, to begin after his Death out of his
Rectorie, and the Patron and Ordinary confirms the same, this is good for so
long time as it is granted.

The second principal Reason, to prove the Ratio, 2.
intrest they have to the Church or Rectorie, is, 31, ^. 3. Grant 90, Anuitie
53.
that all three may charge the Church in perpetuity, so may the Patron and
Ordinary do only in time of vacation, which charge shall bind the Successor
for ever. Because none has intermedling with the Rectorie, but the Grauntors
aforesaid.

The third principal reason; is this, that as the Ratio, 3.
Patron and Ordinary in time of vacation, may Fitzh. Release, 57. ^ur ven. 6.
33. aid ^^ Roie, 103.
charge the Church in perpotuitie, so they may make a release, by which any
Anuitie that charge the Church or Rectorie shall be extinguished, even in the
time of vacation.

Also, if a man has an Anuitie out of the 7. H. 6. 38. b 8. H. 6. 24.
Church of S. and afterward this Church is united to the Church of D. and after
the united Church becomes void, if the Grantee release in 21. H. 7. 44
time of vacation to the Patron, that was patron of the other Church; that is
to say, of D. and to the Ordinary, such release shall not discharge the
Incumbent, because, it was not made to the Patron of the Church that was first
Charged, for although both the Churches are united and become one, yet are
their patronages distinct and several; moreover, that Intrest, that the Patron
and Ordinary has in the Rectory, is but Collateral and ius disponendi, and no
otherwise, as has been formerly said.

For if an Advowson descend to an Infant, and the Incumbent be impleaded in a
writ of Anuitie, and prays aid of the Patron and Ordinary, and for that,
that the patron is within age, likewise prays that the Parol may demurre
undiscussed during his nonage, this shall not be granted; but the In^ant in
such case shall be ousted of his age, because the charge lies upon the
parson, and not upon the patron, or Ordinary, who are not at any time to enjoy
the 7. H. 4. 16. ^
Rectory themselves, but only are to have the disposition thereof.

Finally, to prove that it is merely Collateral: If the patron and Ordinary
do nothing but give license to the person to charge his Rectory with an
Anuitie, this shall be a good grant to Charge the Church in perpetuity. For
that, that it is not to any other free tenants a Charge, but to the parson;
because neither the patron, nor 11. H. 5. ^. 8* b. 14. H. 8. 31. ^.
the Ordinary can have the Church themselves, but only to dispose and bestow
the same, upon some other; nevertheless, such assent ought to be by writing.

LECT. 3.
The several Intrests of the Patron and Ordinary, and what it is.
IN the Lecture next before, I have ^et forth to you the right that both the
Patron and Ordinary has jointly to intermeddle in the Church; Now it remains,
likewise that I declare their several Interests: Therefore at this present, I
intend to deliver something touching the Collateral Intrest of the Patron sole,
and after to examine, what manner of Inheritance an Advowson is, and so to
refetre the Intrest of the Ordinary sole to a more convenient place when as we
shall come to speak of Admission and Institution.

What Collateral Intrest alone, the Patron has in the Church, may in brie^e
thus be decyphered; first, by the Common Law, (before the Statute of
Westminster second,) as he ought* by the opinion of some men, to bring his
writ of Advowson, of the fifth part or any less part of the Tyth^s and
oblations of the Church in any suite of Iudicauit, attempted against the
Presentee, or Fitzh. 30. b
Incumbent, that has sued in the Spiritual Court for the Recovery of the
same, and has caused the Patronage in this respect, to come into question, or
as some men think he might have had his Writ of Here Is, as a Precipe quod
reddat 38* ^. 6, 20 a. Per Por^escue.
advocationem quinque acrarum terrae, or one acre of Land and such like; For
which cause the Statute was made, to be a restraint for bringing the same writ,
of any less part then of the fourth part of their Tithes; so that the Statute
in this behalf, was but a restraint of the Common Law: Which argues, that the
comparing of the Rectorie, tends Collaterally to be an impeachment and
prejudice to the Patron himself, and so imports a Collateral Intrest that
the Patron has to the Church. Again, by the grant of the Church the Advowson
passes; wherefore Herle said in the first part of Ed. 3. That it was not long
since, when men knew not Com. 157. ^
what an Advowson was nor meant, but by the Grant of the Church, they thought
the Advowson to be sufficiently conveyed in the Law; For, said he, when they
purposed to assure an Advowson, their Charter specified it in the gui^^ of the
Church.

Moreover, the King being Patron, has often ratified and confirmed the estate
of the Incumbent 45. E. 3. 19. b
in a Rectorie, that an usurper had presented; 32. H. 6. 3^ a. 7. H. ^. 13, b.
by means whereof, he cannot remove the same Incumbent, unless for some
cause he repeal his Charter of confirmation.

Notwithstanding, if the King recover by a Quare Imp: and after confirms the
estate of the Incumbent, that the usurper presented, by Fitzh. fol. 34. f. 9.
E. 3
means whereof, he cannot be removed; at the next Avoidance the King shall
present, for the Judgment given for him was not at any time executed, which
also proves the Collateral Intrest, that the Patron has to the Church; for
no parsons can lawfully confirm, but such as have right to the thing confirmed.

Ancient Books have held, and that not without 43. E. 3. 16. 20. E. 4. 15. b
5. H. 7. 17. b 6. H. 7. 3. a. 12. H. 7. 16. a 26. H. 8. 2. a
reason; That an Advowson has such an affinity with the Church it self, to
which it is granted, and to which it is a Collateral Intrest (as has been
said) that it should pass by Liuerie of seism, made at the Ring of the Door
of the Church; and although by such means it pass not at this day, being
merely a thing that lies in Grant; yet the same proves the Collateral
Intrest of the Patron to the Church; for this opinion holden in the Books, is
granted for the like reasons.

In a Writ of right of Advowson, the Parson 33. H. 6. 34. b.
shall be summoned in the Church, or at the door of the Church; And if a
villeine purchase an Advowson in gross, ( Littleton says) full of an
Incumbent, the Lord of the same villein may come to the same Church and their
claim, and the Advowson shall be in him; All which things added to the former,
sufficiently proves the Collateral Intrest that the Patron has to the Church.

LECT. 4.
What manner of Inheritance an Advowson is.
Advowson is; wherefore, let us consider, that every Inheritance, is either:

Hereditas
Corporata, or Incorporata.
Hereditas corporata, is a Meadow, Message, Com. 176. v
Land, pasture, Rents, etc. that has substance in themselves, and may continue
for ever.

Hereditas incorporata is, Advowsons, Villeins, Ways, Commons, Courts,
Piscaries, etc. which are and may be appendant or appurtenant to Inheritances
Corporate.

An Advowson therefore is Incorporate, of which a man may be Seisied, though
not of Demesne, yet as of Fee, and as of right.

And although great Disputation have been 21. E. 3. 5. a 40. E. 3. 44. b. 42.
E. 3. 7. b. 1. H. 4. 16. a. 33. H. 6. 34. b. 5. H. 7. 37. 14. H. 7. 26. a. 15.
H. 7. 8. 43. E. 3* 15. b 33. H. 6. 35. 5. H. 7. 33. b.
in our books, whether an Advowson may be holden or lie in tenure, yet the
most authorities concurreth and are, that any Advowson either in gross or
appendant, lies in tenure, as well of a Common person, as of the King. For a
Cessauit lies thereof, and some have holden that the Lord of whom it was
holden may distreine (either in the Church yard, or in the Gleebe) the beasts
of the Patron only. if they happen to 33, H 6. 35 b. 5. H. 7. 37, b. 15. H 8.
a.
be there found, 33. H. 6. Godred contrary: but though the law be, that there
cannot be taken any distress, yet the same makes not any impeachment of the
tenure, and being parcel of a Manor or appendant to it; it may be holden as
some books are, pro particula illa.

Therefore it is holden and said, that an Advowson is a tenement, and therefore
whereas the King has given license to an Abbot to amortise lands and tenements
to such a value, by force whereof he purchases an Advowson, and this was
holden good, sufficiently pursuing this license, and therefore in the book an
issue was taken, if the same Advowson were holden in 5. H. 7, 37. On. 38, b.
Capitie; and therefore, if a man grant a Ward, or Omniaterra and tenementa,
that he has by reason of his Ward, if there be an Advowson holden of the Lord,
being guardian the same passes to the grantee, by the words of Omniaterras and
tenementa.

Of an Advowson a precipe quod reddat. lies very well, and a writ of Dower
shall be maintained 20. E. 4. 15, b
of the same, by the wives of such as have such inheritance therein as gives a
dower, as before has been said, and so the husband of 5. H. 7, 38. 15. H. 7.
8 a. 7 E, 4 6. Fitzh. 29 3, 1 49. d 3. H 7. 5, a.
her that has the'nheritance in it shall be tenant by the Courtesy, although
there never were had any presentation by the wise to it.

But yet there shall not be any descent thereof, from the Brother to the
Sister, of the entyre blood, by the maxim of possessio fratris, etc. But the
same shall descend to the brother of the half blood; unless, the first have
presented to it in his life time, but if he have presented in his lifetime,
19. E. 2. Fitzh. Qu. Imp. 177.
then it shall descend to the next heir of the entire blood.

In Advowson is an inheritance and cannot be divided into parts or parcels, for
in a writ of right of Advouson; if the tenant say, that the demaundant is
seized of the sixth part of the Advowson, this shall abate the whole writ, and
yet part thereof may be in some sort considered, for there is an usual
difference taken, between Advocatio medietatis Ecclesiae, and medietas
Advotionis Ecclesiae.

For Advocatio medietatis Ecclesiae, is where two Patrons be, and every of them
having right to present a several Incumbent to the Bishop, to be Admitted into
one and the same Church, for diverse may be several parsons, and have care of
Souls in one Parish, and such Advowson is Fitzh. 3. b. 32. H. 6. 11 b. 14 H,
6. 15, b. Fitzh. 30. v.
a like in every of those Patrons, but every of their presentiments is to the
moitie of the same Church; and therefore it is called Advocatio medietatis
Ecclesiae, or as the cause salleth out, aduocatio tertiae partis Ecclesiae, and
the like.

But Medietas aduocationis Ecclesiae, is after pertition 7, E. 3. 30, b Fitzh,
31. b. 14, H. 6, 15, b. 33, H 6, 11, b. 5, H, 7, 7, b.
between perceners, for although the Advowson be entire, amongst them, yet
any of them being disturbed to present at his turn shall have the writ of
Medietate, or of Tertia, or of Quarta part Advocationis Ecclesiae, as the case
lies.

Also, if two Patrons of several Churches make 14* H. 6 15 b, Fitzh, 11 br, 39.
union; or confederation, of their Churches by the assent of all those whose
consent is requisite, the patronage of every of them shall not be but medietas
Advocationis Ecclesiae; because, but one Incumbent is only in this case to be
presented, and not Advocatio medietatis Ecclesiae.

And this Difference is only taken and observed in the writ of Right, which is
altogether grounded upon the right of Patronage. But in the Quare Impedit,
which is only to recover Damages, no such diversity is considered, but the
writ is general, Presentare ad Ecclesiam.

Lastly, it is to be considered, what temporal profits, value or Commodity,
this kind of Inheritance is reputed to be of: It is not by the Law of God, to
be bestowed upon any Incumbent 29, E, 3, 5. b. 9, H, 6. 57, a, 32, H, 6, 22* a.
for any need or price; but only reserved for such as are worthy thereof. And
therefore it is said; * That Guardian in Socage of an Infant, shall not present
to any Aduowson; because 5* H 7, 36. a* 37, b, 12. H* 8, a.
such presentation, is not to be bestowed for price; for that, that such
Guardian cannot account for the same, yet nevertheless, because the Patron
thereby may advance his friend, it has been often esteemed for Assets in
Formedon.

And as the value thereof may come in question, 8, E, 3. Fitzh, recovery in
value 11, and 9.
as in a writ of right of Advowson, where the tenant avouche^h, and the vouchee
loses, the tenant shall recover in value against the vouchee, for every Mark
that the Church is worth per Annum, xij. d. So that the thing which of it self
is not valuable, is by a secondarie means made and esteemed valuable; because
that otherwise, this mischief should ensue thereof, which should be a loss
without recompense.

1. By this it appears, that it is an Inheritance Incorporate. 2. That it
lies in Tenure. 3. That it passes by the name of Tenement. 4. That a precipi
quod reddat lies thereof. 5. That both tenant in Dower, and tenant by the
courtesy, and in some case a Possessio ^ratris, may be thereof. 6. That it is
entire by nature, though by accidental means otherwise, and in some respect
deuisable. 7. Though it be bestowed gratis, yet it is valuable, for which it is
a benefit to advance a friend, and for being injured therein we shall recover
damages.
LECT. 5.
The word Right, and the word Advowson explained, and to what Inheritance an
Advowson may be appeudant originally.
IT rests at this present, for the more ample explication of this word Right,
(whereas in defining an Advowson, we say it ^^keth a R^g^^) to set forth the
d^^^sions of Advowsons, and to prosecute every part divided with a ^ull
Discourse; that thereby, what manner of right and inheritance an Advowson is,
may be the better perceived.

Advowsons therefore, are either appendant or in gross, or part appendant part
in gross.

An Advowson appendant, is a right of Patronage, appertaining to some corporal
Inheritance; so that, he that has the same Inheritance, is thereby also
entitled to have the other as annexed to the same; For an Advowson 33 H, 6. 4.
Lit. 20, E.
passes always with the Inheritance, to which it is appendant; unless, there
be express nomination 4. 15, a. 8, H. 7* 4* b.
only by these words ( Vna cum pertinentijs,) except it be in case of the
King, where the Statute De prerogatiua Regis, cap. 15. provides express words
to make the same to pass.

The original of Advowsons appendant at the beginning must be in this manner,
sythenc^ Patronages were won and gotten as before has been declared; and
that either ratione fundati^nis Com. 161* ^
dotationis or fundi, were (as it seems by all conformity of reason) the
original foundations of Advowsons appendant; for when Manors were created,
either the land upon which the Church was built was land parcel of the Manor,
or honor to which it is appendant, and he that was Donor thereof, gave the same
to build the Church upon, and that the Advowson of the same Church so built,
should be appendant to the same Manor, which is ratione 5. H. 7. 6.
fundi.

Or he that was owner of the same Manor or of any such corporal Inheritance,
endowed the same Church with parcel of the land of the same Manor, honor, or
such like corporal Inheritance, and gave the same to the Gleebe, of such Chuch
upon which the Advowson by ordinance of the Ordinary, and by the consent and
agreement of all others, whose consents were requisite in this behalf, was at
the beginning appointed to be appendant to such Manor, Honor, or other
corporal Inheritance, in recompense of such lively hood, and dotation bestowed
upon the Church.

And hereof it ensues, that if at any time the 5. ^. 7* 37. a. 13. a* 11* E.
4. 11. v. 2^ E. 4. 15* b.
Church be desolued, the Gleebe and land upon which the Church was built,
shall return and escheate to him or them from whom it was derived and deduced.

As in like case, upon the dissolution of an Abbey, Fitzh, 33. k
the same shall not return to the sounder of common right, unless some other
ordinance be made to encounter the same.

1. Therefore to avoid confusion in the consideration of Advowsons appendant;
let us first see, to what sort of Inheritance Advowsons may be properly
appendant. 2 Secondly, in what manner it is appendant, (that is) if it be part
or parcel of the Inheritance to which it is appendant, or if as accident or
necessary thereunto. 3 How it may be severed from his principal; and again,
by what means it may be thereunto recontinued again.
^.
and originally, to things that are only Inheritances corporal, that are
compound; As to an Honor, Earldom, or such like; likewise, to a 10. H. 7. 19
Castle, more usually to a Manor; all which principal things, that is to say,
the Earldom, Honor, Castle and Manor, etc. are Inheritances compound, made
and combined of diverse things, and in nature different, being those which the
Logicians call Tota Intigratia.

be appendant to another, of which we shall take occasion to speak in the
Lectures following.

But at this present, let us see in what sort it may be appendant to a Manor.

Advowson that lies in one County, may be 33. H. 6* 4. b. lib. vlt.
appendant to a Manor that lies in another Count^e; And how two or more
Advowsons 34. ^. 3. Quare ^^p. Fitzh, 10.
may be appendant to one Manor, may be manifested thus.

If he that in Ancient time was seisied of a Manor, that extended so large as
it was divided into diverse Parishes, the Lord of the same Manor, either gave
out of the same Manor land to build, or to endow every of the Churches, and so
every of them might be appendant to the same Manor.

How one Advowson may be appendant to two Manors, may likewise thus appear.

Suppose that A. be Seisied of an Advowson of the Church of Dale, as appendant
to the Manor of Sale, and that both those Churches by the Ordinary, and by
the consent of both 9. E. 6. 5. 9. b. 20. Dyer.
the Patrons be united, and called the Church of Dale, and ordained that the
Patrons shall present by turn for ever; these Churches by this union and
confederation are made one, and so the Advowson entire, and no moities as is
between Coperceners, joyntenants, and tenants in common; and therefore it is
appendant to both Manors, for the Patrons severally presenting* shall present
to the same Church as appendant to both Manors, (that is to say) the one shall
present severally to the Church as to his Manor of Dale, and the other also
shall present thereto when his turn comes, as appendant to the Manor of
Sale.

Yet some are of opinion, and some authorities there are, that each of the same
Patrons after 14 H. 6. 25 b. Fitzh. 39
the same union, is seisied De medietate Advocationis Ecclesiae.

And in what manner soever the same Advowson be entire, yet is the Parsons
intrest several; For if such Incumbent, which is presented after such union
made, grant a rent charge out of the Gleebe, and one of the Patrons only
confirm, no Distress (after the Death of the Incumbent that granted the rent)
can be taken upon the Gleebe, that belongs to the Gleebe of the other
Patron, to make the same subject to the charge in perpetuity; for that, that
he confirmed not.

But if the Manor of Dale, be holden of the ^2. H. 6. 64. b.
Manor of Sale, and to the Manor of Dale is an Advowson appendant, and that
the Manor of Dale has Escheated to the Manor of Sale, so that the Demeanes
of the one is become parcel of the Demeanes of the other; yet the Advowson
shall be still said appendant to the Manor of Dale, as it was at the first;
And the Manor of Dale shall continue still in reputation ^ Manor, in respect
of such things as are appendant thereunto.

The moitie of an Advowson may be appendant 33. H. 6. 11 12. a.
to a Manor, or parcel of a Manor.

Also, in the pleading of a case in Ed. 6. by 6, ^. 6. 74. b 44. Dyer.
Dyer, it appears that one fourth part of an Advowson was alleged to be
appendant to the one moitie of a Manor, and another fourth part of the same
Advowson was appendant to the other moitie of the same Manor, and the other
two parts were in gross: yet nevertheless an Advowson (in every such or the
like cases) cannot be said to be divided properly, for that, that it is entyre,
if you respect the presentation and not the right of Patronage. For if a man
has an Advowson and gives one part thereof to A. and the other part to B. and
one third part to C. yet the Advowson remains entyre amongst them, and if any
of them disturb his companions they are without remedy, for that they ought to
join in a Quare Impedit, because the presentation is a parsonall thing, and
entyre, wherein they ought to agree, but seek how they can sever in these
causes in a writ of Advowson.

Moreover, as touching the right of Patronage, if one bring a writ of right of
Advowson, and the tenant pleads that the demandant is seisied of one sixth
part, or of some one part of the Advowson, the entyre writ shall abate,
notwithstanding if it be in bar but for parcel, because cause the Advowson
is entyre, and not several, by reason whereof the demandant cannot abridge his
demand.

And as in the ^ases aforesaid it has appeared, 18, E. 3, ^5.
that ^^ Advowson of a Church may be ap(...) ^o a M^nnor, in like manner may
the (...)wson of a Priorie be appendant to a (...)*

LECT. 6.
To what things an Advowson may be appendant secondarily.
IN the Lectures aforesaid, was showed, to what sort of Inheritances an
Advowson may be appendant originally; Now it remains ^o show to what things
it may be appendant secondarily.

An Advowson therefore cannot be appendant 41, H. 4. Fitzh. 88. 33. H. 6. 5.
a. fine.
to one Acre of land, or two acres, but only to such parcels of land as have
been parcel of a Manor, or parcel of any Earldome, Castle, or such like
Inheritance, to which an Advowson may be appendant originally; But in what
order the same may be appendant to one Acre, 5. H. 7. 10. a Fitzh. feofments
and feof. 115.
let us consider; some be of opinion, that if a man be seisied of a Manor to
which an Advowson is appendant, gives certain acres of the same Manor, vna
cum Advocatione to another, in such case the Advowson shall not pass, to the
grantee, unless the same be by Deed, and so the same shallbe appendant to the
same Acres.

So likewise, some hold opinion, that if a man 17. E. 3. 45 18, 19, 21, 22. E.
3. 6. b 7. a. Thorpe.
be seisied of a Manor, to which an Advowson is appendant in right of his wife
or Jointly with his wife, and makes a seofement in fee of certain acres
parcel of the demeanes of the same Manor vna cum Advocatione, and dies; that
the wife notwithstanding this, may present to the Advowson, before she
recontinue the same acres, by Cui in vita; because (as they think) the same
Advowson is not appendant to the same Acres, and such alienation is not but
during the life of the Husband.

Nevertheless, I do not perceive any great Fitzh. 32* ^
reason, why the Law should be so in such a case; for if a tenant in tail of a
Manor, to which an Advowson is appendant aliene some of the same Acres parcel
of the Manor, together with the Advowson, although it be without Deed,
notwithstanding it is appendant to the Acres, and cannot be recontinued but by
Formedon to be 43* E. 3. 26. b or. v. Thorp.
brought for the same Acres, which case in reason, being like to the Formedon
of the Acres and Advowson aliened by the husband, I know not any difference of
Law that should be between them; And therefore, if a man be seisied of a
Manor to which an Advowson is appendant and make a lease for life of the same
Manor, vna cum advocatione, if the lessor enter into 17. E. 5. a. Mombray
the same Acre of land for forfeiture, he has recontinued the Advowson, as
appendant to the same Acre.

An Advowson cannot Originally be appendant Com. 170. b. 16, H. 7, 13 b* and.
9, b.
to a Message, but Secondarily it may; therefore if an Advowson be appendant
to a parcel of land, which was sometimes part of the demesnes of a Manor and
suchlike, if a Message be built upon the same parcel of land, the Advowson
shall be appendant to the same Message, and if the same Message fall or be
pulled down, the same Advowson shall be again appendant to the Soil, as it
was before.

So likewise, an Advowson may by a secondary 17, E, 3, 51* ^ 20. E. 4. 6. b.
11, H 6. 32. b
means be appendant to a Rectory, for Vicaridges being not first erected (in
as much as the Substitute cannot be before the principal) but 5. E. ^. Qu.
Imp. 165. and 178. 7. E. 3 12, a. 51. a. 16. E. 3. w, d^ faits, 11, 6, 5. E. 3.
26 b. 11, H. 6. 18 b. 31. H. 6, 14. a. Fitzh. 33. v. t. 34 and 35. f.
all at the beginning were Parsonages, of the which Vicaridges were derived,
and that for the most part, by the reason of many Impropriations of benefices,
to the houses of Religion, and Spiritual corporations, which were not of
themselves in all points fit for the function and cure of souls.

The reason is, because that the Advowson of a Vicaridge should be always
appendant to the Rectory of a Parsonage, so that he that is Parson, or Persona
impersona, (as they call him) of this Church, is of common right Patron of the
Vicaridge, of the same Church; except, some other several ordinance at the
beginning of the endowment of the same Vicaridge were made to the contrary.

And therefore, by the grant of a Parsonage 2. E. 3. Grants, 89. and 56, Dyer
35, 7, E. 4. 61. a, 75, a:
with all the hereditaments thereto belonging, the Advowson of a Vicaridge
passes to the Grantee.

In the same manner it should be, if the Vicaridge were endowed, so there be a
Pa^son 11. H, 6, 18 a. and 32. b. 17. E. 3. 51. ^
and a Vicar both presented into one Church, as by the Law there may well be;
but if the Vicaridge become void, and he that is Parson having the Advowson of
the Vicaridge (as of common right he ought) present one to the same Vicaridge
by the name of Parson, who is admitted and Instituted* accordingly, 11. H, 6.
18 and 32. b. ^
by such presentation has the same Vicaridge lost the aforesaid name, and is
becommed a Parsonage, tamen querae if the first Parsonage remain, and if one
of those parsonages (if they both continue) be appendant to the other; but 11*
H. 6. 18 and 22.
it seems by the Book of 11. H. 6. that there should be but one Parsonage,
and the Vicaridge extinct.

An Advowson of a Church or Chapel, 8, H. 7, 16. Com. 169, b
cannot originally be appendant to another Church or Chapel; for that, that
things of one nature cannot be originally appendant each to other. But
notwithstanding, secondarily the Advowson of a Church or Chapel may be
appendant to another Church or Chapel.

As if the Advowson of a Church or Chapel 43, E, 3. 30 a. Fitzh. Qu. I(...)
p. 13
be appendant to one Acre of land, that was sometimes parcel of a Manor, or
such like; and after a Church or Chapel be built upon it, the last new
erected Church shall be appendant to the aforesaid Church.

An Advowson may be amortified to a Church 33. E. 3. Fitzh. aid le Roy, 103.
or Chapel, and if it be recovered and lost by Default, the parson thereof
may have a Writ of right.

And an Advowson may be parcel and part of Ibid. Fitzh. 103.
a Dean^rie, and if the same be in any free-Chappell of the King, if the Deane
be impleaded, he may of this have aid of the King. And thus much concerning
Inheritances, to which an Advowson may be appendant.

LECT. 7.
In what manner Advowsons are appendant to a Manor.
Advowsons are appendant. And first of all, if the Advowson be part or parcel
of the Inheritance, to which it is appendant, and whether it be only accident
or incident thereunto.

Advowson be appendant to a Manor, that consists of Demeanes and services,
in respect both of the demeanes and services, or if it shall be said appendant
to a Manor in respect only of the Demesnes, in as much as the Demesnes are
one corporal Inheritance, and such part of the Manor as only lies in
manuell occupation.

1 As concerning the first, the Authorities of our Books are diueisly divided,
some tending to one effect and some to another, our best course therefore is to
consider the Arguments, and to give censure with that which seems most
agreeable with Law. Some hold that an Advowson appendant to a Manor and the
like, is either part or parcel of a Manor, Honor, etc. or other Inheritance
to which it is appendant. And they ground themselves upon the authorities of 43
R. 3. 22. a. b. where it was adjudged that the grant that King H. the 3. made
to Thenel Ratio. 1.
Marshall of a Manor, to which an Advowson was appendant, without thesewords (
cum pertinentijs) and without any mention of the Advowson; yet notwithstanding,
the Advowson passed in case of the King before the st(...)ce of Praerogativa
Regis, Cap. 15. And so likewise it is in the case of a common parson at this
day, although in the 8 H. 7. 4* and the opinion of some others, in the 5 H. 7.
38 b. be against it, upon which they infer; that an Advowson is parcel 22. H
6 33 lib. fund leg. 70.
of a Manor, for so expressly is the opinion of others in the same book of
5. H. 7. 38. b.

Secondly, in the 9 H. 6. 28. b. and in the 38. 2. Ratio. 2.
H. 6, 33 a. in the Abbeyes of Scyons case, the difference is agreed for Law,
that if the King be seisied of a Manor to which an Advowson is appendant, and
grants the same Manor, and in the grant the words of the Pattent are dedimus
9. H 6. ^8 or 8. b.
and concessimus, the Manor of D. expressing not the Advowson in the clause of
the grant, if afterward in the habendum there be, habendum cum aduocatione of
the Church of D. the Advowson passes by such grant, although it be not
comprehended 38. H. 6, 33 a, 39. b.
in the clause of the grant; but if the King grant the Manor of D. to which no
Advowson is appendant habendum cum aduacatione Ecclesiae de S. this Advowson
passes not; for that, that it is mentione^ after the grant, the reason of
which difference they think to be, because in the first case, the aforesaid
Advowson appendant is parcel of the Manor, which is not so in the last case
in the 8. H. 7. 3. b. and likewise in the 10. H. 7. 19. a. it is said, that an
Advowson appendant is a compound thing, to the composition whereof, diverse
things are requisite, al^ which things commixt, make the Manor and every of
them is parcel thereof, for as Rent cannot be Land, so Land cannot be an
Advowson nec econuerso, yet every of these 10. H. 7. 19 a, Keeble.
things of diverse natures, make the Manor, and are parcel of the Manor,
says Keeble.

And if a man demand a Manor by his Writ Ratio. 3.
and an Advowson is appendant thereunto, he ought to make an exception of the
Advowson, which seems to prove that an Advowson is parcel of a Manor, upon
the other part those which affirm that an Advowson is not parcel, but only
appendant to the Manor, denies that an Advowson lies in Tenure; for that,
that only the principal thing is holden, and not the thing appendant to such
principal; As 5 H. 7. 36, a and 38, a
Leates, Co^^ts, Estreates, Way^es, and the like, for (said they) if an
Advowson appendant be by grant severed from the Manor, it is holden by such
and the same services as it was holden by before, for that, that if the
Advowson be severed it should be holden pro perticula, the^ the Services should
be increased, and so double Services should be due for one thing, for so he
should have the entyre services for the Manor, and also Service for the
Advowson being severed* which is repugnant to reason.

In this variety of opinions; I think it were most conformable to reason, to
say that an Advowson is not part nor parcel of a Manor, but rather appendent
to a Manor, for the better entendment whereof, the Law of England calls
those sorts of Inheritances which are annexed to others, and what the Logicians
call 4. E, 4, 36. b
Aduncta, by these names, that is to say; Incidents, appurtenants, appendants,
and regardants, of which terms of Law ( Regardant) is properly of Villeines,
and the word ( Appendant) of a Common or an Advowson; of which two an Advowson
is separable, but a ^it. 184.
common appendant is not in any case separable, for none can have common
appendant, but he only that has the Land to which the common 9. E. 4, 39. b
5* H. 7.
appendant is appendant. The other two words Incidents and Appurtenances, may
generally be affirmed of all those sorts of Inheritances that may in any
manner be annexed to other things, for so a Manor with his appurtenances, 5.
H, 7. 4. b
may be intended of Advowsons, Commons, Villeines, Waifes, Estrayes, and the
like, which are said to be Appurtenances to a Manor, likewise the word
Appurtenant may be applied to a Court, Message, or Gardein, that are said to
be appurtenant to the Message, the word incident 21 E. 4. 32. b 19. Ass 10
properly signifies those things annexed which are not known by the precedent
names of appurtenants or appendants, and yet are notwithstanding 8. H. 7. 6. 1.
E. 4 10. a. 18 H. 7 12, b 11, H. 6. 81 21. Ass. 53.
annexed to other Inheritances, and in such sort a Court*baron is incident to a
Manor, a Court of Pipowders to a fair, fealty to Homage, homage to Escuage;
so likewise a Corrody is incident to a Foundership; and again, Br. incid. 34
of those some are seuerable, as the Corrodie from the Foundership, some are
inseuerable* as the Court-barron from the Manor, except only in case of the
King, who has power to sever them. But that is called a part or parcel, 12.
E. 288.
which is a portion, and required to some composition of entyre and compound
things, as the Demeanes and services are part of a Manor, the Gleebe and the
Tithes are part of the Rectory, so that these are not to be called Incidents,
Appendants, Appurtenants, but parts and portions of these compound things, of
which they are said to be part, parcel, or portions, and are required
necessarily, to the framing of such entyre thing, of which they are parts and
portions, and hereof it follows that an Advowson appendant is not any part,
parcel or portion of a Manor, no more then a common is part of that thing to
which it is appendant, so that the word it self of an Advowson appendant is
sufficient to set forth and declare the same, to be no part but appendant
only, as the words imports, Wherf^re the first reason of the adverse part 1.
Reason Answered.
may thus be answered. The books before mentioned namely, 43. E. 3. 22. a* 45.
E. 3. 1^, b. 22. H. 6 33. a* which are to this effect, that an Advowson
appendant may pass by the grant of a Manor without saying ( cum pertinentijs)
in the case of a Common parson, and so likewise in the case of the King before
the Statute of prerogatiua Regis, proves not that an Advowson is part or
parcel ^f a Manor, for this being a thing appendant may as well pass with the
words ( cum pertinentijs) as the things that are parts or portions of the same
entyre thing passes.

For if a man grant common of Estouers to Fitzh. 181.
be burnt in such a Manor, of the grantee by the grant of the Manor this
common passes, without the words cum pertinentijs for by the feofment made of
the Manor without deed, all appurtenances pasle by Finchdens opinion, 44 E* 3,
bre, 581,
as Fitzh. abridgeth it, although it be not in the report at large, and for the
argument of those in the time of Hen. the 7. before remembered, we 5. H, 7, 37,
b.
say for that, that an Advowson appendant passes by the grant of the Manor it
is no good consequence, for the reason aforesaid.

The second reason answers the difference 9, H, 6, 28, b, ^3. H. 6. 39.
in H. 6. where the Advowson is granted before the habendum and where not, that
it is not any proof that the Advowson appendant is parcel of the Manor, for
Prysot says, that things in 38. H. 6. 38. a.
gross or several being named after the habendum, cannot pass with the first
things specified in the clause of the Grant, but things appendant or
appurtenant to the premises of the Grant may very well pass; although the
appurtenants be specified after the habendum.

As concerning the exception of an Advowson 3. Reason Answered.
appendant to be made in the Demand of a Manor, the same is not any proof,
that the Advowson is part of the Manor, for the opinion of Stone is, that by
the Demesnes of a Manor, 19. E. 3. Fitzh. br. 884. Regist. 228. br. incid. 38.
or by the Demesnes of the moitie of a Manor, (as the case is there) without
the words ( cum pertinentijs) the Advowson appendant cannot be recovered.

LECT. 8.
If an Advowson appendant that consists of Demesnes and Services, shall be
appendant in respect of the Demesnes only, or in respect of the Demesnes and
Services.
AT this present it remains, to determine if an Advowson appendant to a
Manor is appendant, in respect that it consiseth of Demesnes and Services; or
if it shall be appendant to a Manor, in respect of the Demesnes only, in as
much as the Demesnes are one corporal Inheritance, and such part of the
Manor, as only lies in manuell occupation.

This question was of late time largely disputed, and at the last, upon graund
deliberation learnedly determined, in the Common Pleas, in a Quare Impedit,
between Gyles Long Pla^^^ffe, and one Hening Pa^^on, the Bishop of Gloucester
as Ordinary, and Hadler as Clarke, and the same is there among the Rolls of
Pasche 31. El. Rot. P. 39. 39. Eliz. Rot. 2024. Longs case, in Com. bank:
2024. which I have set here necessarily in brief, and being thus:

A Feofement in Fee was made of the Manor of Frembillet, and the Advowson
thereto belonging, and Livery of Seisin was made in the Demesnes, in anno, 7.
El. and after in anno 17. of her Reign the Advowson was granted to one Ranger,
and after in the 25. El. one Boyter being ^enant of the same Manor attorned to
the Feoffee, then the Church became void, and if the Feoffee or the Grantee
should present was the question, for the better entendment whereof, we will
first see what can be said upon both pa^^s.

That it is appendant only in respect of the Demesnes, tho^^ ^r the like
authorities or reasons may be produced.

It is said, that an Advowson appendant to a 5. E. 6. 70. Pl. 41. Dyer
Manor, cannot be appendant to a Rent, or Service of the same Manor, but
only to the Demesnes, whereof only if a man has a Manor to which an
Aduowson is appendant, and grants the Demesnes cum pertinentijs, the Advowson
pass appendant thereunto; so likewise, if he grant the Demesnes, excepting the
Advowson, the Advowson is now becommed in gross.

If a man should have a Manor, and black acre that was holden of the same
Manor Escheateth, so that the same Acre is become now parcel of the Demesnes,
of the same Manor, if he that is so seisied of the same Manor, grant all the
Demesnes, excepting black Acre, and the same Advowson, the Advowson is become
in gross, and yet it is a Manor notwithstanding, for now black acre is only
the Demesnes which together with the other services cause the Manor to
continue, nevertheless the Advowson is become in gross, for that, that it was
appendant only to the Demesnes of the Manor, which were aliened, and cannot
now be appendant to black Acre: because it was never before appendant to the
same, in as much as appendancie is only granted upon continuance and
prescription, and not upon the same reason.

If he that is seisie of a Manor, whereof black acre is holden, and the same
Escheateth, and he grants the same black acre, ( vna cum Advocatione) the
Advowson passes not appendant to the acre, but in gross, as aforesaid; but if
in the two aforesaid cases, a man were seisie to a Manor before the Statute of
Westminster the third, De quia emptores terrarum, with an Advowson thereto
belonging, and give certaino acres parcel of the Demesnes of the same Manor
to diverse persons, to be holden of the same Manor, if afterward such acres
Escheate, and the Lord grants the residue of the Demesnes excepting the acres
so escheated, and the Advowson; the Advowson is still appendant to the same
Manor: because it was appendant to the same Acres, before they were given to
be holden of the Manor.

If a man were seisied of a Manor to which an Advowson is appendant, and
before the Statute of Westminster the third were likewise so seisied of other
acres of land in gross, and not parcel of the same Manor, if he had given
the same acres of Land to diverse persons to be holden of the same Manor, (as
he might then have done) and after the same acres of Land escheated, now are
they parcel of the Demesnes of the same Manor, although they never were so
before, and after the Lord of the Manor granted all the ancient and former
Demesnes of the same Manor unless one acre, this acre and the other acres
Escheated makes now the Demesnes of the same Manor, and the Advowson
appendant, is still appendant to the whole Manor, but yet it was so appendant
in respect of the one acre, that was parcel of the ancient Demesnes of the
same Manor, and if the Lord intend at any time to sever this, from the Manor,
and still to keep it appendant to no acre, but only to that which was parcel
of the Demesnes of the Manor, all which reasons prove that the Advowson is
appendant more in respect of the Demesnes then otherwise.

Of the other part, those cases prove that an Advowson appendant to a Manor is
not appenpant to any part of the Manor, but to the en^yretie, for it is an
intyre thing; and therefore if a man has a Manor to which an Advowson is
appendant, i^ he Enfeoffe I. S. of the same Manor, and (...) L^uerie of the
Demesnes and before the (...)t of the Tenants, the Church becomes void, the
Feoffee shall not present; because he has not the Manor to which the Advowson
was appendant: but if the tenants afterw^^^ ^tto^ne within six months, after
the auoydance he may very well present thereunto.

So likewise in the former case, if the Feoffor o^ the estranger present before
the Attornment of the Tenants, yet if afterward attornment be had within the
six Months after the avoidance, the Feoff^e may bring and maintain his Quare
Impedit, and so re^uer his presentation, which proves that the Advowson is
appendant to the whole Manor, as it is entyre, and not by reason of the
Demesnes only, for the determination of the Law in this; It is true that the
Advowson in such case is appendant to the entyre Manor, and not to any part
thereof, during such temps, as it remains a Manor without alteration, or
disjoyning the Advowson from it; nevertheless, if you will diss^lue the Manor
and sever the Advowson from it, and yet desire to have the same appendant, then
it cannot be appendant to any part of the Manor, but only to such Lands as
were of the ancient Demesnes of the same Manor; wherefore in the first case,
Judgment was given, Judgment.
that after the Attornment had, the Advowson passed to the Feoffee of the
Manor, as appendant to the entyre Manor, and that the Grant made in the
meand time between the liuerie of the Demesnes, and the attornement of the
Tenants, was void, and that the Advowson p^ssed not thereby to the same Grantee
of the Advowson, but is (by the Attornment, by which the services passed) made
appendant to the entiretie in the hands of the Feoffee.

LECT. 9.
How an Advowson may be severed from the principal, and by what means it may
be reconnexed thereunto again.
IN the two last former Lectures has been declared at large; First, to what
kind of Inheritance an Advowson may be properly appendant, and then in what
manner, it may be appendant: Now remains the third thing th^n treated of,
that is to say, how it may be sundred from the principal; and again, by what
means it may be thereto annexed by Entry or without entry into its
principal.

It may be sundred either rightfully or by a rightful conueyance, of which
we shall speak more at large when we declare the nature of an Advowson in
gross, and of that which is partly in gross partly appendant, whether it may
be sundred in a wrongful manner, as by a tortious act, that is to say, by
Disseisin of the Manor, to which it is appendant, or by a wrongful assurance
as by discontinuance, or other wrongful disposition thereof. As for usurpation
we shall speak thereof in a place more convenient afterward at large, if
therefore a man be disseised of a Manor to which an Advowson is appendant, and
the Advowson becomes void the Manor still remaining in the hands of the
Disseisor, this was ancient Law as Bracton says, that Bracton. lib. ^. ^^. 55.
C. 23.
he should not have presented to the Advowson until he had recontinued or made
his entry into the Manor, because says he, Quod sesinam habere non poterit
quis de pertinentijs, antiquam acquiseret principale. But at this day the Law
is contrary, so that if a man be seisie of a Manor, and the entry of the
Diseissee being lawful the Advowson becomes void, the Disseissee may
present to the Church, before his entry into his Manor, but if the Disseisor
be seisie of a Manor by disseisin, to which an Advowson is appendant, and the
Church becomes void, so that the disseisor presents, whereupon the Clarke is
admitted Instituted and Inducted, it seems that the disseisee in this case
shall not have his Quare Impedit, to recover his presentation, unless he first
enter into the Manor to which the Advowson was appendant, and though he
enter; yet he shall be driven to his action.

Yet if a man be seisie of a Manor, to which an Advowson is appendant and be
disseisied of the same Manor and the Church becomes void, and the Disseisor
presents one that is admitted, Instituted, and Inducted, and so continues
parson sometime after, if afterward the Advowson become void, now is not the
Advowson so gained by such usurpation, but if that I that was deseisied enter
into the Manor I may again present to the Advowson, because the former
usurpation was a mean between the disseisin and the reentrie, by which
reentrie the Disseisors estate as well in the Advowson as in the Manor, is
clearly defeated. But it is otherwise of an Advowson in gross, in which case
the Patron shall be driven to his Writ of right, so likewise if I be seisie of
a Manor, to which an Advowson is appendant, and afterward the Church becomes
void, and I present and be disturbed, and after I be deseisied of the Manor,
here I shall bring my Quare Impedit and recover my presentation, before I enter
into the same Manor.

And so much is said, where the entry of him that has right is lawful in the
principal, but where the entry is not lawful there he shall not present to
the Advowson, unless recontinuing the principal; and therefore if a man be
seisied of a Manor to which an Advowson is appendant, and be disseisied, if
the Disseisor dye seisied, and the Church become void, the dissiessee shall not
present to the Church, unless he first recover the Manor.

If Tenant in tail be seisied of a Manor, to which an Advowson is appendant
and makes discontinuance of the same Manor, and after dies, if the Church
become void the issue in tail shall not present thereunto, until he has
recovered the Manor by Formedon to which the Advowson was appendant.

Likewise if a man be seisied of a Manor in right of his wife, etc. and both
discontinueth the Manor with the Advowson, and the Husband dies, if afterward
the Church become void, the wife shall not present until she has
recontinued the Manor by Cui in vita, but forasmuch as the Statute of the 30.
H. 8. 28. gives in such case power to the wife, or her heirs, to enter into
the Land so aliened.

The Law at this present day, must of necessity be taken, that the Wife or her
heirs in the former case may present, without recontinuance of the Manor, for
that, that the same Statute ordained then, that such alienation etc. Feoffement
act or acts, made or done by the Husband, shall not be nor make in any manner
any discontinuance thereof, or be prejudicial to her or her heirs.

The former rule has an exception in this manner, yet notwithstanding the
entry being not lawful in the principal; yet if the Advowson be severed, and
in any manner cannot be recovered, then may the party wronged notwithstanding
present without recontinuance of the principal; As if a man before the Statute
of the 32. H. 8. 28. be seisied of a Manor in right of his Wife, to which an
Advowson is appendant, and gives to an Estranger the same Manor or parcel
thereof with the Advowson in ^e^, and dies afterward, the Church becomes
void, and the Estranger presents and then Alleneth the Land to another in
see, saving the Advowson, and now the Church becomes void, the wife in such
case may present to the Church without any recontinuance of the Land
discontinued to which the Advowson was appendant.

Quare therefore in the 5. H. 7. 36 where it is holden that if there be tenant
in tail of a Manor to which there is an Advowson appendant and he alieneth
the Manor, with the Advowson in ^ee, and the Discontinued grants the
Advowson to another in Fe^, severing it from the Manor; the issue in tail
shall not present until such time as he has recontinued the Manor,
nevertheless if a remitter be of the principal, he that is so remitted may
present to the Advowson the next time that it becomes void, notwithstanding
any usurpation thereof before had: For if Tenant in tail be of a Manor to
which an Advowson is appendant and discontinueth the same, and the Discontinuee
grants the Advowson to another in fee, and afterward reenfeofeth the tenant
in tail of the Manor, who dies seysied of the Manor, now his heir shall
present to the Advowson when it becomes void; and if he be disturbed he
shall have a Quare Impedit, because he is remitted to the Manor, and has not
any remedy otherwise to come to the Advowson.

But upon the other part if tenant in tail be seisie of a Manor to which an
Advowson is appendant and discontinueth the same, and afterward the Church
becomes void, and the tenant in tail presents to the Church by usurpation,
it seems by the better opinion, of the 5. H. 7. 36. 38. that he is not
remitted to the Advowson, for that, that his ancient right thereunto was as to
an Advowson appendant, but now it is in gross; But if the tenant in tail had
aliened the same to an Estranger in fee, and after dies; notwithstanding that,
he take the rents and services, that afterward discendeth to the Issue, yet is
the issue thereunto remitted; because such rents and services are parcel of
the Manor and not appendant.

And so it was likewise before the said Statute of 3a. H. 8. if a man be
seisie of a Manor which is an Advowson appendant in right of his wife, and
discontinueth the same Manor, and after the Church becomes void, and he
presents to the Church by usurpation, and dies; having issue by the wife,
and the wife also dies, the issue in this case is not remitted to the
Advowson, for the reasons before showed; hereof it en^ueth likewise, as before
partly has appeared, that in all cases where there is a Manor, to which an
Advowson is appendant, and the Manor with the Advowson is aliened with
wrongful conueyance, and the entrye of him that has right is not taken away,
there may he present to the Church without recontinuance of the Manor, to
which the Advowson is appendant; and therefore if a man make a lease for life
of a Manor to which an Advowson is appendant, if the lessee for life make a
Feofment in fee, of the Manor and Advowson; and after the Church becomes
void, the lessor may present to the Church, without any entry made into the
Manor, because his entry was lawful into the Manor. But if it be a
rightful purchase that requires some other act to be done, for the execution
and perfection of the same, then cannot the perfection thereof be accomplished
in the accessarie, that is to say, in the Advowson before the same be
performed in the principal; wherefore it is holden by the better opinion in
the 9. E. 3. 43. 839. that where a certain Chamber was exchanged for certain
Acres of land, with an Advowson appendant to the same acres of Land: to perfect
this exchange, he that had the acres and Advowson in exchange, could not
present to the Advowson until he had made his entry into the acres. And thus
much has been said* how an Advowson appendant may be severed from the
principal, and again recontinued with re-entrie, or without entry into the
same.

LECT. 10.
Of Advowsons in Gross.
AS concerning our first purposed Division, to be either appendant or in
gross, or partly appendant, or partly in gross; I have before prosecuted the
first part, that is to say; The natures of Advowsons appendant, now therefore
it rests to speak somewhat of Advowsons in Gross.

The originals of Advowsons in gross, seems to be grounded upon two
occasions; The first is, that Advowsons in gross at the beginning begun
originally by one of the before-specified three manner of ways; which is,
Ratione fundationis, for when they were agreed, that he that founded the
Church, and was at the cost of the building thereof, should be Patron thereof;
he cannot be Patron of this by reason of any Land or D^^ation, by which his
patronage might be appendant, but only by reason of the building, which being
a Patronage without Land, must of necessity be the original cause of
Advowsons in gross.

The second occasion of Advowsons in gross, was the sundering and seuerance of
them from the principal to which they were first appendant, and so by Grant
or other Conueyance they became in gross, which before were appendant;
wherefore how they may be fundred by Grant, now let us consider, and see what
questions in our Books have been moved hereupon. In the 33. H. 8. 44. 48. 112.
Pyer of the Opinion that Shelly is, That if a man be seisied of a Manor, to
which an Advowson is appendant and alien one Acre parcel of the Manor, and by
the same Deed, after grants the Advowson, that the Advowson shall pass in
gross; otherwise, he thought the Law to be as if the Feofment were made of
the entyre Manor; yet this Difference agrees not with the opinion of Hill,
who thinks that in both cases, the Advowson passes appendant.

Yet I think, If a man be seisied of a Manner to which an Advowson is
appendant, and after grants by his Deed one Acre parcel of the Manor, and
by another Deed the Advowson, and delivers both those Deeds at one time to
the Grantee, although in construction of Law, both those Deeds are but one
Deed; yet the Advowson passes in gross clearly, and not appendant to the
Acre.

If a man be seisied of a Manor with an Advowson thereto appendant, and
grants the Manor to I. and S. excepting one acre, the Advowson not being
specially spoken of, in the Grant, it still remains to this Acre excepted;
Fo(...) says Bracton* Si partem fundi dederit quis quamvis cum omnibus
pertinentijs suis, and partem retinuerit, non propter hoc transfertur advocatio
sed cum donatore, remanebit licet minimam partem fundi retinuerit non enim
transfertur cum aliqua part fundinisi special^tur transfertur.

If he which harh a Manor to which an Advowson is appendant gives one part
of the Manor, with one part of the Advowson to A. and the second part of the
Manor with the second part of the Advowson to B. and the third part of the
Manor with the third part of the Advowson to C. in fee, yet notwithstanding
this Division, the Advowson remains in common, appendant.

If a Manor to which an Advowson appendant is belonging, descend to an heir,
and if he grant the moitie or third part of the Manor cum pertinentijs, no
part of the Advowson passes; but if he assign Dower to his Mother, of the
third part of the Manor, cum pertinentijs, she is hereby endowed of the third
part of the Advowson and may have the third presentment.

It a man be seisied of a Manor or one acre of Land to which an Advowson is
appendant, and makes a lease of the Manor or acre, for term of life,
excepting the Advowson, the Advowson is in gross and cannot be appendant to
the reuersion of the Manor or acre.

But if I lease the Advowson for term of life, reserving the Manor in my
hands, yet the reuersion of the Advowson remains always appendant to the
Manor, or to the acre of Land.

For if a grant be made by me of a Manor or acre, with the appurtenances, the
reuersion of the Advowson passes, for the reuersion of an Advowson may be
appendant to a Manor or acre in possession, but the Advowson in possession
cannot be appendant to the reuersion of an acre or of a Manor.

Also, if a man has a Manor to which an Advowson is appendant and alieneth
the same Manor, and excepteth the Advowson, the Advowson is become in gross,
and although he purchase the Manor, yet is the Advowson still in gross; and
cannot be appendant.

But in all these cases some are of opinion^ that although the Advowson be
excepted out of the grant of the Manor, yet nevertheless, it is requisite to
have a Deed of such grant containing such exception, otherwise the Advowson
will pass with the Manor.

LECT. 11.
Of Advowsons partly appendant, partly in Gross.
Having formerly spoken of Advowsons appendant and in gross, now remains the
last member of the former division to be mentioned, which is Advowsons partly
appendant, partly in gross.

Such Advowsons as are partly appendant and partly in gross, are so deemed
either in respect of the time or in respect of the persons.

In respect of the time in this manner, some Advowsons there are, that are at
one time appendant and at another time in gross, and so again may be
appendant as occasion serves. As if a man be seisied of a Manor or of an
acre of land, to which an Advowson is appendant, and leaseth the same Manor or
acre, excepting the Advowson, the Advowson is now become in gross, and yet
after the lease is ended, shall be again appendant as before.

In respect of the parson it may so happen, that an Advowson may be appendant
in regard of a proprietor thereof, and that in many cases.

One case to begin with, is this, that if a man be seisied of a Manor to which
an Advewson is appendant and an Estranger leauieth a fine of the same Advewson
to him that is now seisied of the Manor and Advowson, upon which sine the said
coun^ee: (being still owner of the Manor and Advowson) grants to the Counsor
that he shall present to the Advowson every second auoydance, by this sine the
Advowson remains in respect of him that has the Manor, still appendant to
the Manor as before, but in respect of the Counsor that never had interest
before, at every second auoydance it is become in gross, and he shall present
thereunto as to his Advowson in gross.

But if (as he in the former case) he that was seisied of the Manor had
leauyed the fine, (and the Estranger so being counsee) and made such grant to
the counsee to present at every second turn, the Advowson had been totally in
gross; for by the counsance it had been wholly in gross, and scuered from
the Manor.

If three be seisied of a Manor that has an Advowson appendant thereto
belonging, and two of them releaseth all their right of the Advowson to the
third, the third is seisied of two parts of the Advowson as in gross, and of
the third part as appendant, for that, that the third part, was never severed
from the Manor, but if the third dye, all the entyre Advowson descends in
gross to his Heir, for nothing was in Ioynture but the Mannot that suruiued
to the other two, that released, their right in the Advowson, and no part of
the Advowson can come to them; for that, the same was not in Ioyn^ure, at the
time of the death of the third Ioyntenaue, and also because they released their
right before.

If two Ioyntenants be seisied of a Manor to which an Advowson is appendant,
and the one grants all his right of the Advowson unto another in Fee, this
Advowson is both^ in gross and appendant, and if he that has the Manor, and
ought to present every second turn; bring his Quare Impedit, he shall not say
that he is seisied of the Manor with the Advowson appendant at every second
turn (namely, when there is partition between them) to present by turn, but
shall say that he was seisied of the Manor with the moytie of the Advowson
appendant.

If a Manor with an Advowson appendant thereunto, descend to two coperceners,
and they make such partition of the Manor, and composition to present,
although the composition be otherwise then of right is due, yet is the first
presentation to belong to the eldest, and the second to the second copercener,
etc. and the Advowson remains still appendant notwithstanding such
composition, to present by turn.

But if three Manors descend to three Coperceners, and an Advowson is
appendant to one of them, and they make such partition, that every Copartner
has a Manor allotted to him, and composition to present by turn to the
Advowson, now is the Advowson in such case severed and in gross, in respect of
the Coperceners.

If a man be seisied of four Manors, and to one of them an Advowson is
appendant and dies, having four Daughters, who makes partition of the
Manors, so that every of them has a Manor, out of which partition the
Advowson is excepted, this Advowson is in gross by reason of the exception;
yet it seems if all the other Sisters should dye, except she to whom the
Manor was allotted to which the Advowson was apdendant, that the Advowson
should be again appendant to the Manor.

If two Churches be, and the Advowson of the one is appendant to a Manor, and
the other is in gross, and the two Churches hap to be united, and upon the
union it is ordained, that the Patrons shall present by turn, now in respect
of him that has the Manor, the Advowson shall be appendant, and he shall
present thereunto as to an Advowson appendant, but as to the other, he shall
present as to Advowson in gross.

LECT 12.
What Presentation is, and what is the effect and fruit thereof, and in what
manner Presentation and Nomination differ.
IN the aforesaid Lecture or reading has been declared such matters as was
requisite for the explanation of the word Right, set forth in ^^^ Description
of an Advowson, which word being there put in steed of that which the Logicians
call Genus, the rest of the words subsequent there likewise expressed, are the
Proprieties effects, and qualities incident to an Advowson, thereby to
distinguish this Right from other rights so that by such Description, the
nature of an Advowson may be fully Deciphered.

An Advowson as is said, is Ius presentandi, and the power to present is the
very fruit effect, and entire profit of an Advowson, which is by the means of
presentation to prefer and advance our Friend, and Presentation is thus
described.

A Presentation is the Nomination of a Clarke to the Ordinary to be admitted,
and Instituted by him to the Benefice void, and the same being in writing, is
nothing but a Letter missiue to the Bishop or Ordinary, to exhibit to him a
Clarke to have the Benefice voided, the formal force hereof rests in these
words chiefly, Presento vobis Clericum meum, 13. H. 8. 14. b. Therefore in our
Books of Law, an Advowson is called nothing but a Nomination or Presentation,
a power to prefer and enable another to have the Benefice, which not with
standing the Patron cannot enjoy.

Wherefore if the Nomination of an Advowson be granted habendum the Advowson,
the habendum is sufficiently pursuant; for although it vary in name, yet it is
all one in nature, so that the Grant of the nomination of an Advowson, is in
substance the Grant of the Advowson. For the profit and commodity of an
Advowson rests in the Nomination or Disposition of the same: hereof i^
ensues, that if a man grant to me an Advowson excepting the Presentation
during his li^e, such exception is void and repugnant 38. H 6. 38 b. 38. a.
to the Grant. So that the opinion of Thompton in the second Commentary of
Plowden in the Arguments of Smith and Stapletons case, cannot be Law; who
thinks that if Tenant in tail be of an Advowson, and be grants to one by
Fine the nomination of the Clarke to the same Advowson when it become meth void,
that this Fine shall not bind the Issues, by the Statuto of the 32. H. 8. 36.
Because such Fine is leuyed of a thing intayled, as he thought; whereby above
it has appeared, that the Presentation and the Nomination is one thing, and
the fruit and full profit of the Patronage; and therefore such fine is of full
effect and force to bind the issue in tail, for the Advowsons, and yet if the
case aforesaid be so understood, that tenant in tail of an Advowson granted
by fine the Nomination of the Clarke to one, and his Heirs, so that when the
Church become void, the grantee and his Heirs should nominate a Clarke to the
tenant in tail and his Heirs, and that he or they should present: the Clarke
(so nominated) to the Ordinary, and the tenant in tail dies, such fin^ shall
not bind the issues in tail; therefore the fine is not of things intailed, for
there is the nomination and presentation distinguished.

The presentation may be distinguished from the nomination, so, that one may
have the Presentation, and another the Nomination, and so they may be diverse
distinct inheritances. As if I being seified of an Advowson in see, grants to
I. S. and his heirs, that he and his heirs every time the Church becomes
void; shall nominate to me a person to be presented to the same Church,
which person so nominated, I or my heirs shall present to the Ordinary of the
place to be admitted accordingly, into the Church. ^4. E. 3. 69 a. b. 14. H. 4
11. a. 1. H. 5 16. ^. and. 4. 123. a. 21. H. 6. 17.
And a question has been moved here upon who shall be said Patron of the same
Church, some think that he that has the nomination shall be Patron only,
and that he that ought to present, shall be as servant to him that has the
nominatio^.

Therefore in the 14. E. 4. 26. the Justices distinguished, that if one be
seisied of an Advowson and grants to I: S. and his heirs to nominate at
every auoydance to him and his heirs a Parson to be presented to the same
Church, which Parson so nominated, shall be by him or hisheires presented to
the Ordinary, that he to whom the nomination is so granted shall be Patron.

But if I grant to I. S. that at every auoydance he shall nominate to me two
Clerks, of which I shall present one to the Bishop, now I remain Patron, not
with standing this, because the Election is in me which of the parties named
shall be presented and have the benefice.

If a man have the Nomination to a Benefice, and an other the Presentation, and
he that has the Presentation grants an Anuitie to a Clarke until he be
advanced to a Benefice by the Grantor, if afterward the Church become void, and
the Grantee be Nominated, to the Grantor to be presented over, who does so
accordingly, and upon this be admitted, Instituted and Inducted, yet the
Anuitie shall not cease, for that, that the Grante^ was not the^ unto pref^^^ed
by the G^a^tor, ^lthough he p^^se^te (...). Of ^^e other p^r^ there is an
au^ho^ity, that (...) ^ Spiri^^all man have the Presentation, and a Lay man the
Nomination, if the Lay man nominate to the Espirituall man a Clarke to be
presen^ed over, who does s^ accordingly, if before his admission the Lay man
nomina^e another to be likewi^e pr^sented, which the Spiritual man refus^^h
to do; for that, that he has presented one already by his nomination, the
Lay man shall not maintain any Quare Impedit against the Presentor for such
re^^sall; because, the Spiritual man is Patron, and being a Spiritual man,
he cannot change his presentation already made; Also it should s^eme in such
case, that the presentation should be made only in his Name, that has the
Presentation, and not in his name that has the Nomination; therefore, if the
Ordinary should refuse the Clarke for disabilitie, notice shall be given only
by him, to him that has the Presentation, and not to him that has the
nomination; for the better reconciliation of of those and the like authorities,
distinguendum est sic, that in resp^ct it must be had o^ such an Estranger, as
shall usurp upon the Bishop or upon the Patron in regard of each other, and in
respect of all strangers that usurp; He that has the nomination is only
Patron, and shall have a Quare Impedit or a writ of Right, as h^s case
requires: In which his writ of Quare Impedit, shall be this; Quam permittit
ipsum presentare: but his declaration shall be especial, that the Plaintiff
ought to nominate one, and that be ought to present him over to the Bishop, and
that B. has diurstbed him of his nomination, and the writ to the Bishop shall
be a recoverie to the Plaint^ffe, Quod Ey^scopus admittat Clericum ad
denominationem, etc. in resp^ct of the Bishop that has the presentation, he
shall be said Patron; for if he that has the Presentation cannot vary from
his presentation, the other shall not; yet if he that has the presentation,
and he that has the nomination be both Laymen, then he that has the
nomination may vary in his presentation, and change the same as often as he
will, until Institution be had: wherefore in the former case it ensues, that
if he that has the presentation be a Spiritual man, and present him that is
nominated to him, being not fit, he ought not to have notice given him of the
refusal of the Ordinary, for this cause, he that has the nomination shall
not have any notice likewise.

For I think the Law to be thus; If one has the nomination and another the
presentation, and the Church becomes void, if the Laps incur, and he tha^
has the P^esentation only presents to the Bishop, before the Bishop take
benefit of the Laps, without any nomination of the other, the Bishop in this
case ought and is bound to admit his Clarke that he so presents, as the
Clarke of the Patron himself. If respect be had each of other, then are they
both Patrons after a manner, and by injury offered by every of them to the
other, one of them may punish the other. As if he that has the nomination will
present immediately to the Ordinary, he that has the presentation may bring a
Quare Impedit or a writ of right of Advo^son, against him as his case
requires, so if he that has the presentation refuse to present the Clarke
nominated to him, or present one himself without nomination, the other shall
bring a Quare Impedit or a writ of right against him, and his writ Fit^b. 33. b
14. H. 4. 11. a. 21. H. 6. ^7. a.
shall be Quod permat. ipsum presentare, etc. But in his declaration he shall
declare the especial matter.

In every of which suites and recoveries, and in the writ to the Bishop shall
be so; if he that has the nomination present to him that has the
presentation, he that has the presentation may disturb him in two manners;
either by refusing the parson nominated, or by presenting some other 24. E. 3.
69 b.
himself that is not nominated. If he refuse to present him that is nominated
to him; and suite be commenced without any actual presentation made by
himself, then the writ to the Bishop of him that has the nomination shall
be, that he shall recover his nomination, and that the Bishop shall admit
such as the other has nominated to the presentor, according to his grant of
nomination: But if the disturbance upon which the suite is granted be because
the presentor that should present the parson nominated, has presented some
other himself, without nomination, then the nominator shall have his writ to
the Bishop to present his Clarke immediately without any nomination at all, to
be made to the other, that has the presentation and to remove the other
Incumbent.

Finally, if one has the nomination, and another the presentation, if such
right of presentation acrew to the King, this shall prejudice, the inheritance
of him that has the nomination but he shall nominate to the Chancellor still,
who in the name of the King shall present to the Ordinary. And if the King
present without any such nomination, the nominator shall bring his Quare
Impedit, against the Incumbent only, because the King cannot be termed as a
Usurper.

LECT. 13.
The things incident to Presentation prosecuted, who may present, what Parsons
may be presented, to whom the Presentation must be made, and the manner
thereof.
BEfore has been showed what a Presentation is, and what is the effect and
fruit of the Patronage; and finally, in what case the Presentation and
Nomination differs.

At this time it rests, how to prosecute the things incident to Presentation,
and to make show who may present, what parsons may be presented, to whom the
Presentation must be made, and in what manner; But because no presentation can
be made unless to a Church or Dignity, something shall be showed, when they
shall be void, and upon what occasion.

An avoydance is in two sorts, actual in Deed, destitute in Law, which is an
avoydance de Facto, and auoydance de Iure.

Actual, is when the Church is actual in deed destitute of his Incumbent in
Law, when the Church being full of an Incumbent, is notwithstanding frustrate
of his right and lawful Incumbent by reason of incapacitie or crime in the
parson of him that occupies in steed of the rightful and lawful Incumbent,
and therefore amongst the Canonists, Ecclesia Dr. viduam tuam sponsumque habet
invtilem, there is therefore a great difference between voydance in Law, and
voydance in deed; the first of which two, the Espirituall Court has to
determine, and therefore the supreme head may so dispense there, that such
anoydance in Law shall never come to be auoydance in deed, and of auoydance in
Law no title acreweth to the Patron, unless something be thereupon
accomplished, by the Espirituall Court, as a declaratorie sentence or such
like; but, upon avoydance in deed, presentment acreweth to the Patron, yet in
such and the like cases, Distinguendum est, for if the dignity be temporal,
as a Master of an Hospital or such like, and that there be found defect in him
by visitors, it is an actual avoydance, and the Patron may upon this make a
new collation, without solemn sentence of deprivation; but if the dignity be
Espirituall, it is requisite upon such defect that sentence of Deprivation be
given, before auoydance can be, and that such sentence be notified to the
Patron, otherwise Laps shall not incur against him,

Auoidance and Plenartie, are primati^a contraria, which if they come to be
tryable by issue between the parties, they are tried by two distinct Laws.
Plenartie, which is, if the Church be full of an Incumbent or not, shall be
tried by the Common Law, which is by the certificate of the Ordinary; but
Avoydance, which is, if the Church be void or not, shall be tried by the
Country impanuelled in a Jury, notwithstanding if the issue be upon any
special sort, or manner of avoydance, the same shall be taxed by the
certificate of the Bishop, so that such special cause shall be Spiritual.

The efficient causes of avoydance, are either temporal as Death, or
spiritual as Deptiuation, resignation, creation session, and entry into
Religion, whereof more shall be said afterward.

LECT. 14.
The two first particular causes of Avoydance of Churches, viz. Is either
Temporal, as Death; or Spiritual, as Deprivation; the one of it self being
manifest, and the other a discharge of the* Dignity or Ministry.
IN the last Lecture or reading before, was showed something of auoydances of
Churches in general, now it remains to pursue the particular means; that is
to say, Death, Deprination, Resignation, Creation, or Cession, and entry into
Religion, of every of which, we will speak something, as the cause requires.

1 And first of all, concerning Death, Quae omnia solui^, the matter of it
self is manifest, and needs no further declaration.

2 As concerning Deprivation, it is a discharge of the Incumbent of his
Dignity or Ministry, upon sufficient cause against him conceived and
prooved; for by this, he loses the name of his first dignity, and herein
two manner of ways; either by a particular sentence in the Spiritual Court,
or by a general sentence by some* positive or Statute Law, of this Realm.

1 Deprivation, is in the Spiritual Court for that, that it is grounded upon
some defect in the party deprived, although it be by act of Law, yet it is
deemed as the act of the party himself. The causes of Deprivation, by Censure
in the Spiritual Court are to be referred to the Common Law, therefore let us
remember such of them, upon which questions have been moved in the Books of
our Law, all which causes mentioned severally, may be reduced to three
principle points; first, want of Capacity; secondly, Contempt; thirdly, Crime.
As concerning the first, although by the Common Law, a Lay person be
presented, and Instituted, and Inducted, to an especial Benefice, which Curate
is altogether incapable of the same, yet the Church is not therefore to be
said void, as if no presentation had been, but it is still full of an
Incumbent, de Facto licet non de Iure, until by sentence Declaratorie for his
want of Capacity, the Church be adjudged void, and upon this no Laps shall
incur against the Lay Patron, without notice (of such incapacity, and
sentence of deprivation thereupon) to him given, King H. 4. presented one that
was incapable of his presentation, and the Presentee was thereby admitted,
instituted and inducted, and afterward the Pope enabled the presentee by his
Bill, yet the King had a scire fac. and thereby recovered his presentation
again, because the Incumbent was not capable when he was presented. If the
Patron present one that is merely a Lay* man, within the age of 25. and. he
upon this be Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted, and afterward a Qua. Imp. be
brought against the Patron and the same Incumbent, whereof Judgment is given by
the default of the Incumbent, where indeed the Incumbent was never at any time
duly sommoned according to the Law, by reason of which Judgment, the same
Incumbent is removed, if upon this afterward, the said Incumbent by sentence
declaratory be deprived in the Spiritual Court, for want of Capacity in suite
there, for the cause of his incapacity exhibited against him, such sentence is
good, and availeable in the Common Law, although the said Incumbent were before
removed from his Beneside by the Judgment given against him in the Qu. Imp.
for though such declaratory sentence given against him by the Spiritual Law,
cannot remove him that is removed already, yet it shall make this Incumbent
answerable to the next Incumbent, for all the mean profits received by him,
that was the first Incumbent, from the time of his Induction. Yet if the first
Incumbent so deprived, will afterward bring a writ of deceit upon the
Judgment given against him in the Quare Impedit by default; for that, that he
was not sommoned as aforesaid, he shall have Judgment herein, and the same
Deprivation had in the mean season in the Spiritual Court, no Impediment
thereunto; for that, that in the said suite of Deceit the Incumban^i^ shall
not be in question, but only the disturbance of the Plaintiff, in the Quare
Impedit, and so for Incapacitie.

Contempt, may likewise be a cause of Deprination, as if the parson or other
Incumbent be Excommunicate, and he so remains in his obstinacy for the
space of forty days, he is for this depriuable of his Benefice, and yet the
Church is not void in Deed, without sentence in Deprivation given against him,
and if before such Deprivation, the King as supreme Ordinary and the head of
the Church would have a Dispensation to the Incumbent, who for all the sentence
of Deprivation for his contempt had, he shall hold his Benefice; such
Dispensation were void, and should restrain the Patron from his presentation
acrewed to him, by means of such Deprivation after ensuing.

The third cause, is Crime, within which may be comprehended Delappidation, or
spoil of the Church Benefice, once, in our Books, worthy of Deprivation,
likewise Sohisme or Heresy; for the which, or if for some other causes the
Incumbent were deprived in ancient time in the Court of Rome, upon such
Deprivation coming in question in our Law, the issue should be upon the
avoydance, and it should be tried where the Church or dignity is; but because,
Crime is Hidra, with many heads, and an evil Tree, whereof is bred Ingens
prouentus much fruit, for all fruit of offenses which may be comprehended under
this name; therefore let us surcease further to deal with it, only in
general, noting those three things as the incidents, and consequents of
Deprivations.

First, that our Law adiudgeth not the Church actually void, without a
sentence of Deprivation, as has been before proved.

Secondly, that though such sentence of Deprivation be merely wrongful; yet
the Dignity is void, and the sentence remains in his force, until it be
released.

Thirdly and lastly, if the party deprived within time require by this Law an
appeal (upon such sentence of Deprivation given against him at the Court of
the high Jurisdiction) such is the nature of an Appeal, that it holds (the
sentence upon which it was first brought) in suspense; because, in the Common
Law it is said, to have effectum suspensum prioris pronuntiati; and therefore,
if it be brought upon Deprivation, it voydeth the vigor thereof, and reuiueth
the former dignity, for such Church shall not be void, until the first
sentence of deprivation chance to be affirmed in the appeal, and thus much of
Deprivations in the Spiritual Court, shall suffice at this time.

Concerning Deprivation by Censure of Statutes and Positive Laws, see these
Books; that is tosay, 13. El. Cap. 12. 26, H. 8. Cap. 3. reviued by the 1. El.
Cap. 31. or 3.

LECT. 15.
The third particular cause of Avoydance, being Spiritual, is Resignation.
THe precedent Lecture before going, has showed the particular causes of
Auoydance of Churches, whereof the two first, Death and Deprivation, has been
at large disciphered; the next is Resignation, of which I will also at this
time something speak.

Resignation, or as the Canonists terms it Remytation, Est Iuris proprij
Spontanea refutatio, or whereas Resignation is the voluntary yielding up of
the Incumbent (into the hands of the Ordinary) his intrest and right which he
has in the Spiritual Benefice, to which he was promoted. Of which the matter
or subject is the Spiritual benefice, as promotion Ecclesiastical.

The form is the manner how, and with what words and due Circumstances it is
or should be accomplished.

The final Causes or effects hereof, is either thereby to make the Spiritual
Benefice void and destitute of its Incumbent, or utterly to anient and totally
to extinguish such Spiritual promotion.

The efficient Causes are the persons that resign* and the persons to whom it
is or ought to be resigned.

As concerning the matter; this only may suffice to be observed, that all
Spiritual Dignities presentatiue may properly be resigned, although they be
Abbeys, Priories, Prebends, Parsonages, or Vicaridges, yet such Dignities as
are certain may also be resigned, or to speak more properly relinquished, as
were some of the Abbeys in the time of King Hen. the 8. and so may Bishop.
pricks at this day be resigned, etc. into the hands of the King as supreme
Ordinary of the Church and rightful Patron of the same Bishoprics.

As concerning the form of Resignation, and protestation which must be when
the party will resign, they are set out in the Register, fol. 302. in the
folioes of the Book following, as Fitzh. notes in his Not Br. fol. 273. F. or
S. The words of chief effect in such instrument of Resignatine, are
Remantiare, Edere, and Dimittere, for Resignation is not any proper term of
the Common Law.

Yet the Law of this Realm, more respecting matter then formalitie of words,
has adjudged a Grant made by a Prebenda^ie to the King, to be an effectual
Resignation in the form of these words following, that is to say:

Noverint me A. etc. exanimo Deliberatiuo, certa scientia and mero motu, and ex
quibusda^ causis justice and rationalibus me specialiter m^uent. vltro and
sponte dedisse serenissimo Domino ^^stro Ed. 6. Angliae, etc. supremo Capiti
totor^^ Prebendarum suorum ac omnia maneria terras, tenement a possessiones and
hereditament a quecunque, tam spiritualia quam temporalia, ac omnem plenam and
liberam facultat. dispositionem authoritat. and potestat. dictae prebendae
pertinen. spectan. appenden, etc. habendum and tenendum eidem Rege Hereditor.
and Successoribus suis, ad eius vel little proprium vsum, etc.

As touching the efficient causes of Resignation; as first, the person that
resign, if he be not but only Admitted and Instituted, although as
concerning the Spiritual Function he be a Parson before Induction, yet because
no Com. 526.
part of the Freehold of the Spiritual Benefice is transferred to him, but by
the Induction, he cannot until after the Induction, if the King be Patron,
make any good and effectual resignation; ^1. E. 3. ^. ^
as therefore, Renuntiatio respi^it plerumque ius quesitum, ac repudiamco
pertinet adius nondum acquisitum. As also for that, that by this submission and
Institution, the Church is not full in respect that the King being patron, such
Incumbent before Induction is full subject to have his Presentation and
Institution revoked.

But if a Subject be Patron, and his presentee be admitted, such presentee (if
he be willing to leave his Charge) may before Induction resign the Church,
for the espirituall Dignity was full of an Incumbent in respect of his Patron,
and because also there is no other means to clear the Church of him but by
such renunciation.

As concerning the person to whom Resignation must be made* Distinguendum est;
for if he be only purposed to avoid the Church, and to cause the Patron to
present again, then it ought to be done to the Ordinary to whom of right the
Admission and Institution belongs, and to whom the Patron is bound to
present; for it is a Rule amongst the Canonists, Apud enim debet fieri
renuntiatio apud quem pertinere, dignoscitur confirmatio, and Reason will, it
shall be so; because the King as supreme Ordinary, if such Resignation should
be made to him, he is not compelable to give notice to the Patron of such
Resignation, nor can he or any other Ordinary collate upon the patron such
notice.

Notwithstanding, if the purpose be utterly to extinguish such Dignity
spiritual, the same Resignation may be made to the King, as to the supreme
head of the Church, as in ancient time it might have been made to the Pope.

For such Authority and Jurisdiction as the Pope used in this Realm, was
contradicted by an Act of Parliament made in the 25 H. 8. and other Statutes to
be in H. 8. and his Successors; which Judgment and opinion I hold to be firm
Law, especially where the King himself is Patron, or where the Patronage is to
some Spiritual man for ever, upon Spiritual parsons the Pope (before the
Statute of the 25. E. 3.) by his provisions and other means used more
Jurisdictions then at any time Lay persons could be permitted to do. The
final effect which consists in the end, wherefore Resignation was ordained,
we have heard to be two fold, the 1. 2.
one to adnihilate the Spiritual promotion, the other to make it void and fit
for no Incumbent* of the first, we have sufficiently spoken before, and the use
of the other is manifest by those authorities subsequent.

A Prebend makes a Lease for years rendering rent, and after resigneth it, it
is holden clearly, that by this his Resignation, this Prebend is discharged of
the rent, and therefore such charge shall not be any burden to his successor;
likewise if a parson resign after he has made a Lease for years, the Lease
is avoided.

Likewise, if a Parson permute or Change his Benefice, which indeed cannot be
accomplished without Resignation, the Charge or Grant made by such Incumbent
for years, is utterly void.

If a Parson grant an Anuitie out of the parsonage, and after resign, if after
all this the Patron and Ordinary will confirm such Grant, the Confirmation,
and the Grant which was void before Confirmation cannot be availeable.

With which agrees Pollyard, who says; 14. H. 8. 8. a
that if a parson charge a Gleebe, and after resigneth or dies, the charge is
avoided.

A Recoverie was had against a Parson in an action of Debt, and in a fierifac.
thereupon the Sheriff returned, that the defendant was Clericus Beneficiatus
and non, etc. in this case, if the Defendant resign, the plaintiff is
destitute of his recovery, for by such Resignation the Church is discharged;
because, the Ordinary cannot sequester the Spiritual Benefice upon any
process awarded to him.

But if the Incumbent that so charge, be such as has by the law absolute
power to deal with the lands of his Spiritual Dignity, without the
Confirmation of any other, and may by the Law discontinue as Abbot or pryor or
such like, then such charge by him shall not be void, by such Resignation, but
shall continue against his successors until it be avoided by some other
means.

Thus much concerning the final cause of Resignation, to which suffer us to
annexe the causes allowed by the Common Law, to move a Bishop or any other
bene^iced parson to relinquish and surrender their function, Conscientia
criminis, debilitas corporis, defectus scientia, malitiae plebis, grave
scandolum, and irregularitas persona.

Lastly, let us consider, that Resignation is deemed in the Law totally to be
the act of the party, and therefore if any Incument being plaintiff in any
action resign his Dignity or promotion, his writ brought by him as Incumbent
shall abate.

But if such Incumbent take out a writ concerning his R^ctory, and afterward
resign, and again be promoted to the same Dignity, before the return of the
Writ aforesaid, it is good and available.

Upon the part of the De^endant upon the same reason, is the Law; that if any
action be brought against any Incumbent, that may charge him in respect of his
several promotions, his resignation (having the same suite; for that, that it
is his act) shall not abate such writ or action.

It is to be noted, that there are two sorts of Resignations, the one is
absolute, when the Incumbent intends so to make void the Church, and to
surrender his right therein to the Ordinary, whereupon the Patron may present
whosoever it shall please him to the Church, as if the said had been voyded by
Death, or other means of Avoydance, as by precedent authorities has appeared.

The other cause of Resignation, is causa permutationis, of which in the
Register, fol. 306. b. appears a precedent.

Whereupon also ensues the form of Presentation in this manner.

In Dei nomine, Ego H. W. nunc Rector Ecclesiae de P. London. Diocefies and
prius Rector Ecclesiae de L. ^. Dictae P. Diocesies protestor dico and allego
in hijs scriptis quod si contingit quod huiusmodi Ecclesia me^, de P. absque
dolo and culpa meis in hac part a me aliqualiter evincatur volo and intendo ad
Dictam Ecclesiam de N. absque aliqua difficultat. libere and licite redire, and
eam rehabere iuxta Canonicas sanctiones and protestor insuper quod non intendo
nec volo ab huiusmodi protestatione seu affectu eiusdem recedere aliqualiter in
futurum sed eidem protestitationi and contentis in eadem volo and intendo in
futuris temporibus sirmiter adhaerere, iuris benesicio in omnibus semper soluo,
etc.

But to what purpose Protestation should seem in our Law, I cannot perceive;
for that, that it appears by the Book in the 45* H. 3. and Fitzh. exchange
it.

LECT. 16.
The next special means, in Avoydance of Spiritual promotions Presentatiue,
is Creation.
NOw Creation is, where the Incumbent is not only Elected, but consecrated
Bishop, or Atchbishop. By the former Dignities of such Consecrated, the
Benefices becomes void, and the Churches or places several (where their former
Sanctuary was to be executed) and utterly discharged of their Incumbent, and
this immediately upon Consecration without solemn sentence Declaratorie in the
Spiritual Court.

The reason whereof, is not only for Inconvenience of Pluralities; but also,
because it should be likewise inconvenient for one and the same parson to be a
Subject and a Sovereign, which in the course of our manner of Jurisdiction
cannot be, but is reserved in the Superior.

Nevertheless, such auoyuance is not before Consecration or Creation, nor
before Consecration is he that is promoted, deemed or called Bishop, or
Archbishop: as appears by those authorities of 5. E. 2. Fitzh. br. 250. vide
9. E. 3. f. 1. trial. 571. 7. E. 3. 40. a. b. vide 21. E. 3. 40. a. b. 41. E.
3. 56. b. 46. E. 3. 32. 11. H. 4. 37. 59. 76. and 22. H. 6. 27. ^.

For the better understanding of this kind of Auoydance, it is to be noted,
that as four things are required to concur for the full perfecting of any
Parson or Parsons preferred to any Dignity Ecclesiastical, presentatiue or
Collatiue, as (to wit,) first of all Presentation, or as the case requires
Collation; secondly, Admission; thirdly, Institution, and fourthly and lastly,
Induction.

So in the promoting of a Bishop or Archbishop, by the Spiritual laws, were
required (before the statute of the 25. H. 8. cap. 20.) also four things,
answerable in many respects to the four former before recited. As first
Election, secondly Confirmation, thirdly Consecration, Creation, or Investure;
and fourthly, Installation, or Inthronation.

The Election was made by the Deane and Chapter, or by the Pryor and Co^ent,
where they being as Deane and Chapter, as in every of the seas Cathedral of
Canterbury, Worcester, and Norwich, in which Churches the Pryor and Covent was
till the dissolution of Monasteries, at which time the same Pryories were
dissolved, and in steed of them in every of the same Cathedral Churches, a
Deane and Chapter has been by private Acts of Parliament erected. But in some
other Cathedral Churches, the Election has been both by Deane and Chapter,
as of Wells; and by the Pryor and Covent at Bathe; and in the Sea of Coventry
and Lichsield. And in some other Cathedral Seas, the Election of the Bishop
have been by two several Deanes and Chapters, as in the Archbyshopricke of
Dublin in Ireland, where both the Deane and the Chapter of Christ's Church, and
the Deane and Chapter of Saint Patricks joined in Election, and both of them
used to confirm the grants of the Bishop, although Christ's Church was known
to be the more ancient Church to that Sea.

As concerning therefore the Election of Archbyshops and bishops, the Kings of
this Realm of their prerogative royal, and being immediate Patrons of the
same Cathedral Church, in ancient time gave and bestowed of their imperial
Inrisdiction, Archbyshopricks and Byshopricks, to such worthy parsons as they
thought fit, without any Election of the Chapter as appears, in the 17. E. 3.
46. Stower, and this inuesture was by a ring and a little staff, by the
Delivery of the King, and Ensigns of the Bishop; but afterward in the time of
King John, in as much, as the Popes had made constitution, that no man should
enter into the Church by a secular person, totally, and that the Bishop of Rome
coueted to erect the Popery above the Throne of Kings. A great Controversy was
now amongst the Monks of Canterbury, upon the death of Hubbert their
Archbishop, concerning the Election of a new one, and although the youngest
sect of the Monks having license of the King, and also appointment of the King
to choose John Gray, one of the Bishops in this Realm for their Archbishop, yet
the quarrel grew to such fervencie, that it could not be quenched unless from
Rome, where the Pope taking opportunity of such discention, would not receive
any of the Elected, but forced the Monks to choose for their Archbishop Stephen
Langhton, then Cardinal of Saint Chrisogon, whereof ensued the great discord
between the King, and the Pope; of which, such was the tyranny of Antichrist,
that not only the whole Land was interdicted, and so remained five years. But
the King was accursed, and the Subjects were discharged of their obedience, and
oath of their allegiance to their natural Prince; and Lewis the French Kings
son provoked to make war, against King John, until he were constrained to
seek peace at the hands of the Pope, to yield his Crown to the Legate, and
after five days to take it again at the Legates hands, and become feodary
tenant to the Pope for the same, paying an annual sum of money to the Church of
Rome, for ever; but also to content his Clergy, he gave to them always free
Election of Spiritual Dignities, which memorable antiquity of the Kings
praerogatiue and the loss thereof, is briefly touched in the 2. H. 4. 686. and
more at large by the Hystories of those times, and although hereby free
Elections were given to the Clergy, yet sued they forth the Kings license to
proceed to Election.

The Election of a Bishop thus made, did not bear the name of a Bishop but was
to be called Lord elect of the place or Bishopric, to which he was elected.

The second is Confirmation, which was usually made by the Bishop of Rome and
not any other, who (before such confirmation) used to examine the party, and
upon cause of nonabilitie to refuse him.

The third is Consecration, which was performer by the Bishop and two other
Bishops at the least of the same province where the Bishopric then was, being
thereunto appointed with the use of certain Ceremonies, as beatitudes, holding
of the Bible over the head of the Parson to be Consecrated, laying on of their
hands upon his head, anointing, and other rites, thereunto 38. ^. 3. 30 b.
requisite; And yet it is said, that the Pope reserved the consecration of the
Bishop to himself after election and confirmation, and before creation 5. ^.
2. Fitzh. 800, 2, E, 3* Fitzh* bre. 250, 21, ^. ^. 5. 6.
and Consecration: he that was so elected and consecrated, might still retain
the name of his former dignity, and if he would refuse the imposed charge of
the Bishopric.

And yet after Confirmation and before consecration, of the parson confirmed,
he might exercise so much of his Spiritual function as concerned the
Jurisdiction, but no matters concerning Ordination might he meddle with, for
the full understanding whereof it is to be known, that all things belonging
to the Episcopal function or Ministry, are to be reduced to three points; for
they belong to him, either Ratione Iurisdictionis, as the hearing of spiritual
causes, Censures, and Corrections ecclesiastical, as Excommunications upon
offenders and such like which may be performed by him after confirmation.

Or, Ratione Ordinationis, as giving of Orders, consecrating or allowing of
Churches, or such like, which he cannot do before consecration.

Or, Lege Diocesiana, as the execution of Ecclesiastical payments and pensions
due to him, as dioclesian of the Clargie rated upon the bishoppricks of his
Diocese, called therefore by the common Law census Cathedraticus.

Notwithstanding, the King may restore to him his Temporalties after
confirmation and 41, E, 3, 56 46, ^, 3. 32 ^.
before consecration if so it please his highness, but this is De gracia and
non deiure.

But after Consecration, he was holden in all respects a perfect Bishop, and
all his former dignities thereby were avoided, for although by Confirmation
spirituale coniugium contrahetur, yet by consecration consumatur.

The last thing is, Installation or inthronation, by which he is fully enabled,
to pursue his Temporalties out of the hands of the King, and actually to enjoy
the benefit thereof, but if after consecration and before he sue for the
temporalties out of the hands of the King, the freehold be in him, or not is
diue^sly taken in the 38. E. 3. ^0. ^, 5.

Notwithstanding, the Metropolitan ought to certify the day and time of the
consecration of every Bishop, within his Diocese, for according thereunto he
shall be restored to his Temporalties, and this I think to be reason.

Thus you see, that in some respect the Election of a Bishop resembles the
Presentation of a parson, the Confirmation, resembles the Admission, of a
parson, the Creation resembles the Institution of a parson, and the
Installation or the inthronation the Induction of a parson, yet in many other
respects they differ.

And although after the abrograting of the Popes authority out of this Realm,
it be ordained by the 25. H. 8. cap. 20. that the election of Bishops and
Archbishops, should be altered and the King restored to his ancient prerogative
therein, which prerogative King John and his ancient progenitors long since
enjoyed, and although likewise the Ceremonies, form, and manner of
consecration of Bishops by the Authority of parliaments, in the time of King
Ed. the sixth, were now appointed and published, all acts of parliament being
repealed by the first and second of Philip and Mary, are now reviued and in
force, by Eliz. yet our former position holds now firm Law, that no Church nor
Spiritual Dignity at this day, becomes void, by king the Incumbent thereof
Bishop, until his Consecration, as well by rigor of ancient time, as by
Statute.

And therefore at the Common Law, if the King upon defect, or otherwise, give
by virtue of the 25. H. 8. 20* by his Letters pattents to any fit parson, any
Byshopricke or Archbyshopricke within this Realm, without Election, and
thereupon before Consecration restore to him his Temporalties, or if the Pope
had given a Byshopricke to any fit person by reservation, which amounts in
Law to an Election and Confirmation, if the King had restored to him his
Temporalties, yet in both cases until Consecration, he is no perfect Bishop,
nor his former Dignities by such Grant and restitution of Temporalties become
void until Consecration as aforesaid.

If before the 25. of H. 8. 10. the Incumbent of a Benefice had been Elected
Bishop and confirmed, and before consecration had, obtained of the Bishop of
Rome, a dispensation still to enjoy his former benefice, notwithstanding his
Creation or Consecration, had ensued accordingly; yet by such Creation, the
Church should not have been void, but the party still enabled to retain the
same Benefice against the patron by virtue of such Dispensation.

So at this day, if an Incumbent of a Spiritual Benefice, be elected and
confirmed, and before he be consecrated, obtain license or dispensation of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, to detain the Benefice incommendam; yet he
shall be promoted to the same Byshopricke, although his license never be
enrolled in the Chancerie, according to the 25. H. 8. but only enrolled by the
Register of the Archbishop, although the Consecration be before this license or
dispensation appointed to take effect, yet by virtue of such Dispensation, the
former Dignity or Benefice becomes not void, by the same Consecration. Yet
if the I^eumbent of any Spiritual benefice be elected, consecrated, and
confirmed Bishop, and after his Consecration procures a Dispensation of the
Pope in papacy, or of the Metropolitan since the Stat. of the 25. H. 8. c. 20.
such Dispensation shall not be available; because, by the Consecration, the
former Dignity or Benefice was actually, and in Deed void; and then, neither
the Dispensation of the Pope, could at any time, nor of the Metropolita^ at
this time, take from the Patron, the right of his presentation of such avoided
Dignity, by the Consecration acrewed to him; because, after the first Dignity
is once void by the Consecration, the Dispensation comes too late.

Yet the King, Ex summa authoritate sua Regia Ecclesiastica qua fungitur, may
grant (to the Bishop that is consecrated) power to take and receive by
presentation, Institution and Induction, any Spiritual Benefice, and to hold
the same in Commendam, notwithstanding his estate of being Bishop, for so the
Pope used to do, and the same Authority is recognized by the Statute of the
25. H. 8. to be in the King or Queen of this Land, which was within this
Realm by the Pope.

Finally, this is to be noted, that whereas before it has bin said, that
Deprivation is the act of the Law, yet grounded upon the act of the party; So
is Creation of the Bishop, the act of the Law, wherefore if a man bring an
action and pendant his writ, be created Bishop, the writ shall not abate;
because, it is only the act of the Law, but yet Resignation is merely the act
of the party, thus much for Creation.

FINIS.

