A REMEDY AGAINST PRIVATE CONTENTIONS.

A GODLY AND FRVITFVLL Sermon on James, 4. 1. etc.

WHEREIN IS AT LARGE Discovered the hatefulnes, and perniciousnesse of private
Iars and Contentions, with manifold remedies against the same.

By Mr. JOHN DOD.

2. Cor. 10. 3 The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God to cast down holds.

woodcut of masks and flowers

AT LONDON Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for Thomas Man, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Talbot in Pater noster row. 1614.

The points of Doctrine handled in the Sermon following.
Doctrine 1. It is a most horrible sin and shame for Christians to live in
strife and contention. Doctrine 2 Our own distempered affections are the cause
of contention with others. Doctrine 3 Whosoever is led by his lusts, never
makes a thriuing or a saving bargain of it. Doctrine 4 Earthly minded men are
still subject to be vexed with envy. Doctrine 5 Prayer is the best means to
be provided of all needful things. Doctrine 6 It is most just, that God
should deny and reject their prayers, who ask of him earthly things for
worldly respects. Doctrine 7 It is a dangerous and damnable kind of adultery
to set our minds on earthly things. Doctrine 8 All men are esteemed of God as
they are affected.
A REMEDY AGAINST Private Contentions.
James 4. 1. etc. 1 From whence are wars and contentions among you? are they
not hence, even of your lusts, that fight in your members?

2 Ye lust and have not: ye envy and have indignation, and cannot obtain: ye
fight and war and get nothing, because ye ask not.

3 Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye might consume it
on your lusts.

4 Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not that the amity of the world
is the enmity of God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend to the world,
makes himself the enemy of God.


IN the former Chapter the Apostle had sharply reproved them for that bitter
envying and strife and contention that was among them, persuading them unto
peace and loving agreement: but because they would be ready to answer, that
they liked well enough of peace and unity, all the fault was in others that
provoked them hereunto.

From whence are wars and contentions among you? are they not hence, even of
your lusts? As if he should have said, will you now lay the fault of your
iarring and contending upon others? If you do so, you little know your own
hearts: for all your distempers proceed from no other cause, but from your own
lusts, that is, your ouereager desire of earthly things, viz. of profit,
pleasure, or credit: and these strong vvorldly affections must needs bring
forth such effects, because they fight in your members, that is, in the powers
of your soul especially: yet so, as also they break forth and show themselves
in the parts of the body. They trouble your minds and memories, and disquiet
your wills and affections, causing you one while to think well of such a thing
or such a person, and by and by to dislike the same: one while to wish for this
or that: presently after, not to care for it, nay many times to abhor it: hence
arises a civil war (as it were) within your selves, and thence it is that
you contend with others: for he will accord with none that cannot agree with
himself.

Next, he sets before them the effect of these wordly desires, verse 2. Ye lust
and have not, as who should say, what do you get by giving place to your
lusts? The more you lust, the less you have.



Ye fight and war and get nothing. Then belike (might some say) we are not
Gods children, if things be thus far amiss on our parts, and God also deal
so severely with us. Answ. Nay, the Apostle does not conclude any such matter,
but says thus much in effect, you may be Christians (many of you) though very
carnal Christians* and children you may be, though ill children: neither is
the Lord to be charged with ouerseuere dealing: no, it is not the hardnsse of
the father, that will not grant, but the badnesse of the children that will
not ask: that is the cause why you get nothing: so that it was not the want of
friends, nor the want of means that caused them to be in necessity, but the
want of prayer, and so consequently of a faithful heart, and fitted to receive
the things they prayed for.

Ye ask, and yet ye receive not: and why? Because ye ask amiss. As if he
had said, if ye speed not in prayer, it is certain all is not well in your
prayers: for that is a key to open Gods treasury; neither is his ear ^uer
shut against the faithful supplications of his servants: and hereby does it
appear that you ask amiss, in that ye ask, That ye might consume it upon
your lusts. They would not be so absurd, as to say so to God, Lord give me
this, that I may bestow it upon my lusts: but that was their purpose and
intent; which is evident by this, that the scope and drift of their petitions
was for earthly things: if they were sick, oh how earnest would they be for
wealth! if in debt, what importunity would they use to get out it of? and so
for other the like matters: but why did they ask these worldly things? Even
for worldly respects: not to serve God better, but to serve themselves: they
desired health, that they might pursue their commodities, or follow their
pleasures and delights: they asked wealth, to the intent they might hold up
their heads with the best, that they might have larger maintenance, that they
might better their apparel, and their diet, etc.

Ye adulterers and adulteresses, etc. As if he should have said, you wretched
and sinful men and women; do you imagine that God does bestow these things
upon you that you should abuse them to his dishonor, and to the satisfying of
your own carnal desires? Your health to idleness and wantonness, your
wealth to pride and excess: this is far from the Lords meaning. And the
haynousnesse of this sin will appear evidently by the similitude here used:
Put case a wife should be always whining for money and larger allowance, and
would never let her husband be at peace, but night and day be at him for the
granting of her request; and her husband should demand of her what she would
do with it? if she should answer, I have an affection to such an adulterer,
and I have maintained him thus long, and would feign have him to be in his
bravery still; would this suit please her husband? Nay would he not abhor
both her and her request? yet this is the case of all earthly minded men: they
would feign have these outward things, and what would they do with them? even
spend them upon their own lusts, and that is to commit spiritual fornication
against the Lord: in which regard he is so round with them in this place; Ye
adulterers, and adulteresses, know ye not that the love of the world is the
enmity of God? It is not only spiritual adultery, but enmity against God:
in so much that he concludes in the words immediately following: Whosoever
therefore will be a friend of the world: that is, live as worldly men do, for
his diet, for his apparel, for his carriage, for his drifts and purposes, etc.
such an one makes himself the enemy of God: he is so indeed, whatsoever he
conceive of Gods love toward him, and therefore will God show himself an
enemy toward him.

The drift (we see) of these words is to draw the people of God from those
miserable contentions and vexations which were among them: which he does by
rebuking them, and that for special faults.

1. Some inward, to wit, 1. Their lusting after, and immoderate desiring of
earthly things. 2. Their envy that others should speed better then themselves.
2. Some outward, viz. brawling and strife, about which he spends many words,
because almost all their life was spent therein. From both which he terrifies
them by the ill effects. First, that they got nothing. Secondly, that they
endangered their own souls in making themselves adulterers and adulteresses,
and so enemies to God, and God to them. And thus much for the meaning and order
of the words.
Verse. 1. From whence are wars and contentions among you? namely that are
professors. In that he does so sharply take them up for their mutual discord
and dissension, the general doctrine is, that

Strife a great sin.
It is a most horrible sin and shame for Christians to live in strife and
contention, and to break out into brawling and passion.

Whereas there is among you envying and strife, and divisions, are ye not
carnal, and walk as men? 1 Cor. 3. 3
as if he should have said, when you are male content, and passionate, and ever
falling out one with another, do you think that this is from faith, and not
from the flesh? yes surely it is even from the flesh: for where there is bitter
strife and envying in the heart, all the wisdom that such are led by, is
earthly, sensual and devilish: and this may be Iam. 3. 14. 15
James 3
their wisdom is devilish: now if it be a foul shame to be led by sense as a
beast, what is it to be led by Satan as his vassal?

Solomon, where he says, Prou. 13. 10.
Only through pride man makes contention. So much hautinesse as there is in
the heart, so much coffeehouse are men subject unto: if others wrong them
indeed, they cannot bear it: if it be but in their conceit, all is one, they
will chafe and fret at it: and all this proceeds hence, that they think better
of themselves then either God, or men do, or then in truth there is any just
cause why any should do.

Iam. 3. 16.
for where there is envying and strife, there is sedition, and all manner of
evil works. In what heart, or in what house soever those vices reign, the
Lord sees, and men may evidently perceive, that there are evil thoughts, evil
words, evil practices of all kinds: for there the devil and sin bear sway,
and fill the places with all manner of pollutions.

1. Tim. 2. 8
must be slow to wrath, and receive the word with meekness. Iam. 1. 19.
As for the Lords supper, they cannot be meet partakers of it, because it is a
Sacrament of love, and if we would be forgiven, we must forgive: in a word,
they are unfit for every good work: for the wrath of man accomplisheth not the
righteousness Iam. 1. 20.
of God.

house divided against it self cannot stand: Nay Luke 11. 17.
a kingdom (be it never so mighty) divided against it self, shall be
desolate. And if this be a sure thing, that where brethren dwell together in
unity, God has appointed his Psalm. 133. 1. 3.
blessing and life for evermore, then it is as certain on the other side that
where men live in continual strife, there God has appointed his curse, and
death for evermore.

that when they fall to open brawles, go by the worse, because they are
ouer-matched, and therefore they will sit and mope in a corner: but unto such
James speaks, saying, Sigh not one against another. So that there are sighers
Iam. 5. 9
as well as chiders, and both condemned by the word. Sigh one for another we
may (as if a friend or a child of ours have sinned, it is an happy thing if we
can weep in secret for them) but we must not sigh one against another, no
more then we may chafe one against another. We must not when we are alone
muse of the unkindness of such and such, and so grow to bitter thoughts
against them: that is a woeful thing, and will be a hard reckoning for us at
length: for (as James adds) the Judge is at the door: and the Assizes will
be fearful for all such persons.

If thy cause be good, and thy conscience good, God is at hand to right all thy
wrongs: but when men give themselves to fretting and bitter coffeehouse, it
is as much in effect, as if they should say, that God is no equal Judge, and
therefore they cannot rest satisfied with his government: yet are they ready
enough in their distempered fits to profane the name of God, by calling him to
be judge in their causes: as Sarah did, when her maid despised her. God be
judge between me and thee (says she to her husband) but if the Lord had come,
she would have been the loser. Genesis 16. 5
For God being a most righteous Judge, would have examined both parties, and
then who would have been found in the greater fault? Abraham took Hagar, but
who was the cause of it? was not Sarah? the greatest complainers and
exclaimers, are usually most faulty themselves: and therefore let christians be
ashamed to be so clamorous and contentious upon every occasion: for to be so
unpeaceable amongst men, shows that there is little acquaintance with the God
of peace; therefore let us rather go from our own right, and yield a little,
then be still falling out with our neighbors: better it is to lose some of our
outward commodities, then to lose our inward and outward peace.

him? Ephe. 4. 26. 27
therefore is that falling out which is amongst professors: though there be
many things amiss in a family, yet if there be mutual love and compassion,
and tender heartednes, crosses are made much easier, and burdens much lighter
then else they would be: whereas if there be brawles in the family, every
light affliction is made heavy: what a disgrace therefore is it for the
subjects of the Prince of peace to be at such variance among themselves? It is
for dogs and swine to be barking and biting one at another: but to see Sheep
or Lambs tearing one another, all the world would wonder at it: If then we
profess that Christ is our shepherd, and we his sheep, how can we with any
comfort look him in the face, when we so far differ from the nature and
properties of his sheep, in eating up our own hearts with griefs, and
ministering continual vexation unto others, and biting and devouring one
another?

But here will some objections be made, for as every one is more guilty, so
will he have more colors to hide his corruptions from the view of the world.
Some will grant that they are often discontented indeed, but they have reason
so to be. Let us hear their reasons then.



1. Cor. 13. 5
of self love that causes you to be so passionate.





First, do you hate your own sins, and have they caused you as often to
break your sleep, as the injuries of Anger against sin how discerned.
others? Nay, that way they must needs confess they are more sparing: that
then is nothing else but plain dissimulation, to pretend grief for another
sin, when you have little or none for your own.

Secondly, such as grieve for the faults of any, and are desirous to reform
them, will use a good and discreet order in dealing with the parties, observing
all circumstances for that end. As namely, first the circumsta^ce of time,
that they will not presently upon the committing of the offense fly in their
faces in the view of all the standers by, seeking to disgrace them to the
uttermost, but will wait the fittest opportunity, when with most benefit and
least blemish to the party, they may help him against corruption. Secondly, as
every sin is greater, so they will be more incensed against it: and herein does
the hypocrisy of many appear, that they will be more moved at soome small
offense. wherein they themselves are touched, then at a far greater matter,
that nothing concerns their credit or commodity, though it do never so much
concern Gods glory. Such may go masked under the vail of hypocrisy, but God
will discover their false pretenses in the end, neither let them ever look for
comfort in the time of sickness or of death from such kind of zeal against
sin.

Indeed there is a corruption in all, and we are too sensible of injuries: but
the godly do condemn it in themselves, and are never content till they can be
more troubled at sins, whereby God is dishonored, then at infirmities, and
injuries, whereby they themselves are wronged.

Thirdly, if any be displeased at sin, he will use all good remedies for the
healing thereof: he will reprove and admonish, and exhort, and all from a
loving and merciful heart, yea, he will join unto these hearty prayer for a
blessing upon his endeavors. This we see in Moses: he was very angry
against the sin of the Israelites in making the golden calfe, and showed his
just anger in executing judgment upon the ring leaders in that heinous
offense: but withal we must note that he was never more fervent in prayer for
them, then at that time. Those therefore that Exodus 32. 11
are so far moved, that they cannot speak unto the offenders in giving them
good and loving advice, nor speak for them unto God in putting up hearty and
earnest requests, such (I say) may be assured that their anger is not the zeal
of the spirit, but the heat of the flesh, which they can have no comfort in,
but must be humbled for it, and leave it.

Mat. 5. 44*
speak evil of us? let us speak the best of them and to them: for that is
Christ his counsel; and hereby shall men know, that we are his Disciples, if
we love one another: John 13. 35. whereas otherwise they may suspect us to be
hypocrites, if we hate one another.

And further, hereby shall we assure our hearts before God, that we are of the
truth, and that we do pertain to his family: and this every Christian that
has any acquaintance with 1. John 3. 19
his own heart, will confess, that when he is most merciful and most ready
to put up injuries and indignities, then he has most comfortable assurance of
his own salvation, and can most cheerfully look up unto God in Christ, as one
that has interest in him.





Remedies against anger. Tit. 3. 2. 3*
1 Often to examine your own heart: the Apostle wills men to show all
meekness toward all men.

others, especially against God, and that will abate the pride of your heart.
Have not you been unwise, disobedient, and living in malitiousnesse, and
envy, hateful, and hating others? In which regard, the wise man's counsel is,
that a man Eccl. 7. 23. 24
should not take notice of every fault of his servant, but pass by many: and
why? because every man's soul can tell him though men cannot charge him, that
he has committed the like, or greater faults against God or men; which if we
could well consider, men's unkindness would seem nothing in our eyes: for
when our own sins lie heavy, others wrongs lie light: and when we feel
not the weight of sin in any good measure, every trifling offense of men
seems an heinous crime unto us.

A second help against wrathful passions is, to be assured of the remission
of our sins. Be ye courteous one to another (says the Apostle) and tender
hearted. So I will (will some say) so long as they use me well: but if they
deal otherwise, and begin to do me wrong, they shall hear of it, whosoever
they be. Oh deal not so (says Paul) But forgive one another, even as God for
Christ his sake Ephe. 4. vlt.
forgave you. Seeing the Lord has sent his son, and the son has given his
blood, and the holy Ghost has sprinkled the same upon your hearts, for the
washing away of all your iniquities, stand not with men for small petty
injuries, but forgive and forget them: and assuredly whosoever has the
comfortable feeling of the pardon of his sins, cannot but do so. When Steven
saw Christ sitting at the right hand of God in heaven, and was assured that he
had saved him from his sins, and that he should forthwith go unto him, he
could kneel down, and with all meekness pray for his most bitter enemies,
that were then stoning of him, neither weere they so mad against him to do him
hurt, as he was earnest with God for them to procure their good.

for their spiteful and malicious dealing, their answer is, had I not cause,
had I not reason to do as I have done? no, none at all: for what sound reason
can there be against Gods reason, who says, Revenge not, etc. for vengeance
is mine, I will requite it, says the Lord. It is his office which he has
appropriated unto himself, and they are intruders, yea traitors, that will go
about to thrust God out of his judgment seat. And therefore let not the devil
delude us with this conceit, that we have reason for our brawling and
quarrelling: for the best that can be said for it, is this; that it is beastly
and fleshly reason, such as the Lord esteems folly and frenzy, and enmity
against his majesty, Romans 8. which will bring with it death and destruction of
body and soul, if we yield unto it, and be led by it.

Are they not hence, even of your lusts? Here he shows the fountain of all
their discontentments: namely, their own untamed affections: whatsoever
occasions there may be, that is the true cause: as the reason why a Lion rages
and roreth, is not that any creature disquieteth him, and raises him up, (for
then a sheep being stirred should roar too) but that his natural inclination
draws him thereunto.

Lust in the heart, the cause of contention.
The Doctrine hence to be gathered is this, that, Our own distempered lusts
are the cause of all our strife and contention with others. They make us
unquiet in our selves, and so cause us to disquiet them that are about us.
Therefore it is said, that fleshly lusts do fight against our 1. Pet. 2. 11
souls: they cause a continual war within a man, which inward combat with
ones self, shows it self oftentimes in outward iarring with men. Christ
Jesus had as great wrongs as ever man in this world had, yet was he never in
any passion, or distemper: and why? because he was quite void of carnal
affections. Before his conversion Paul was very boistrous and full of rage, but
after that he had spent the heat of his anger upon his own great sins, he
that had been very froward became very meek, and was able with patience to
undergo imprisonment, whipping, stoning, reuiling, with any the like
indignities: we never hear this from him: what? shall I bear this? a man of
my education, of my learning, of my gifts? shall I endure to live in the
stocks, hungry and cold, and full of pains, etc. No, no, these thoughts were
far from Paul: he was content to suffer any thing, yea, to lay down his life
for the name of the Lord Jesus, and that because his lusts were subdued, and
the venom thereof removed.

Let every Christian look back unto his disposition before his calling; and
who is there but shall find, that he was full of envy, hasty and testie, and
ready to be provoked? but since his conversion he may say to the glory of
God, that he can bear that which he could not before, and get out of that
passion in a few hours, that was wont to hang upon him many months: and as he
grows more in grace, so shall it be better with him still.



pair of silk stockings, or my chamber hanged with velvet, I should feel no
pain: every man would think such a one out of his wits, because his pain is
within his body, which those outward things cannot remove: so it is with every
strong affection, and vnmastred desire, they are corrupt humors cleaving unto
the soul; and therefore let the parties be shifted hither and thither, and
have their estate mended, and their reputation bettered, yet if they be not
healed within, they are never the nearer to any sound contentment.

How to master strong affections.
But how should we attain to the mastering of these boisterous affections?

Romans 8.
the spirit, when we bring spiritual reasons against the lusts thereof, and
seek to quench the flame thereof, by pouring water upon it, and taking away
the fuel that might maintain it. A man may have persuasions from his friends,
but those will not kill his carnal desires: but the persuasions of the spirit
will; and therefore we should use the arguments of Gods word for the
crucifying of our flesh.

But many take a contrary course, when they feel themselves stirred, they
aggrauate all the evils that are upon them, and all the wrongs that are (in
their conceit) offered unto them, their memory will forget no circumstance of
them. Neither will their tongues fail to amplify them at the full; and hereby
they imagine to ease themselves: but alas this is to add lust to lust, and to
heap more dry wood on the fire, that burns too vehemently already: and
therefore let them use Gods means, or never look to live quiet and peaceable
days.

A second means to bring our boisterous affections into subjection, is, to
live and labor diligently in a calling: for labor is appointed to humble the
sons of men, and whosoever does not use this medicine, may quickly make work
enough for a whole town: for idle persons are always passionate: and when
they have nothing else to do, they fall to conceits, and surmises, and
suspicions, and iealousies, and when the least occasion is offered, out comes
all the filthy matter that has been breeding within them.



viz. that fleshly lusts do fight against our 1 Pet. 2. 1
souls. Those that are in thraldom unto them, think it good husbandry to
yield unto them, and hope to better their estate thereby: but do they know what
God says in this matter?

He tells them that they make war against their souls: they blindfold
their minds that they cannot see into spiritual things: they make their hearts
fat and senseless, that neither threatenings nor promises, judgments nor
mercies will any whit at all move them.

Now when we find in our selves these hurtful affections and dangerous lusts,
and we do not only feel them, but others also far much the worse thereby,
were it not great madness to nourish them still within us? Therefore let us
rather use these and all other good means to suppress them, then any means
at all to cherish and strengthen the same.

Verse. 2. Ye lust and have not.] In these words he sets out the absurdity
of other lusts by the ill effects: they have along and tedious seeds time, but
all their labor and toil comes to nothing, they are altogether disappointed
of their expected harvest: whence the Doctrine is, that

Nothing is gotten by yielding to lust.
Whosoever yields unto his lusts, never makes a thriuing, nor a saving
bargain thereby: but the more he lusts, the more he lackes: and the more eager
his desires are, the more and greater his wants are likely to be.

1. John. 2. 15 Iere. 17
goes a whooring after the world; the setting of our affections upon the
creature, makes us to be estranged from the Creator.

Pro.
and he that is greedy of gain troubles his own house: and that which is
said of the excessive desire of gain, holds as true in all other sinful
lusts, that he that is greedy of pleasure, or credit, or any the like, is
still a troubler and disquieter of those with whom he lives: because first his
own heart is poisoned, and being distempered within, he must needs show his
distemper without.

Therefore the more God loves us, the more he will cross us, so long as we set
our hearts on lying vanities: for he knows, that if we had them in that
manner and measure as we desire, they would turn to our own and others
exceeding great hurt and disadvantage. For the more we desire any earthly
thing, the more we shall abuse it, as the more we desire any heavenly thing,
the better we shall use it.

Therefore is it righteous with God to cross us in our Genesis 30. 1
affections, as he did Rahel: she must needs have children in all the haste, or
else she would die in a passion. Alas she was in hard case to die, and in ill
case to have children: for at that time she would have made Gods of her
children, and an Idol of God. But afterward when she had prayed and humbled
her self, God gave her children, because then she was fit to receive them.
And that is the reason why God delays long, and puts off his servants from
year to year, even because they are unfit to be partakers of his blessings
sooner; he could afford them present payment, but he well considers, that the
things which the flesh much affects, it would much abuse.

Isaac prayed for a son twenty years, at length when Genesis 25. 20. 26
he had gotten the victory of himself, and was content to wait, as long as
God would have him, the Lord forthwith granted his request: and so deals he
yet still with his dearest children.



Therefore let us never complain of others, the world is hard, and men's hearts
are hard: but let us complain of our selves, I want good affections: I want
good preparation for Gods blessings: I am a ground that have many rank weeds
in me, and all that while God has somewhat else to do, then to sow the seed
of comfort on me. The next way to have the world, is to deny the world: would a
man be rich? let him be content to be poor: would a man enjoy his health and
strength? let him so use the means of recovering his health, as withal to be
content to remain sickly and weak, if it so seem best to his heavenly
father, etc. But if we desire temporal riches more then spiritual, and the
health of the body, more then the health of the soul, it is just we should
have penury, and not plenty, diseased and not healthful bodies.

Whereas if we can bring our wills to be subject unto Gods, it shall not be
said to us, Ye lust and have not; but, the Lord will fulfill the desires of
those that fear him. Otherwise, Psalm* 45*
though our desires were granted, our souls would be as sick, or more sick
then they were before.



Let us also desire to be in their company, who will deal most plainly and
roundly against our corruptions: and not wish to converse with such as will
tell us, indeed you are hardly used, they deal very injuriously with you, in
that they do not more respect you, in regard of your place and of your parts,
and of your education, etc.

Alas what is this but to cast oil upon the fire, and to make those lusts a
great deal stronger, which weere too too violent before? such comforters may
please us for the present, but they will bring us smart in stead of ease, and
trouble in stead of peace in the end: But as for those that will set themselves
with all their might against our lusts and apply sharp corrasiues where they
perceive much festered and dead flesh, of all other they are to be esteemed the
best and truest and most faithful friends.

Ye envy and have indignation, and cannot obtain. Whereas they might deny,
that they had such lusts in them, he proves it by this, that they did envy
one another: as if he should have said, that which I affirmed in words, I
will make good by your deeds: you envy that another should be looked after,
that another should have more gay apparel, a better name, a better estate then
your selves: does not this clearly show that your hearts are full of lust, when
they are so full of envy? for envy is the very froth of lust.

Wordlings are still vexed with envy.
The doctrine hence to be gathered is this, that those that set their
affections upon earthly things, are not only subject to this misery, that
they shall be always in want, but they shall withal be evermore vexed at
the prosperity of others: they shall be still in torture at home and abroad, and
wheresoever they are; for such as set their minds on the things of this world,
cannot choose but repine when any thing goes from them unto others; they think
all lost that they themselves cannot enjoy: for whereas the property of
Christian love is, not to seek it own things, it is the very nature of
self-love only and wholly to seek it 1. Cor. 13
own things, and if it miss of them, it will cause the parties to grudge and
repine.

This may be observed in Saul: when once David was in credit above him, he had
few quiet days after, but was still troubling of himself and the whole land
about David. The like may be seen in the Pharisees, they could not live if
Christ lived: and why? Christ carried away the credit from them; and therefore
they never ceased persecuting him, until they had deprived him of his very
life. So the Philistims being covetous, envied Isaac, and grew so mad against
him, because they saw him thrive beyond themselves, that they would hurt the
whole country and themselves also rather then he should prosper too fast, and
therefore they dammed up the wells that his servants had Genesis 26. 15
dug, which in those hot countries were of exceeding great use. So Rahel
being possessed with an immoderate desire of children, envied her sister Leah,
because she was Genesis 30. 3
fruitful: her own barrenness did not so much discontent her, as her sisters
fruitfulness: and therefore rather then Leah should go beyond her, she would
have her husband to defile himself with her maid. Many such Rahels there are
in the world, who are not so much discontented and grieved at their own
meandness, as at others highness; at their own baseness in apparel, as at
the new fashions of others, etc.

to take notice that there is in us a marvelous love of earthly things. Many
men and women, if they should be asked the question, whether they lusted after
earthly things or not, would answer, nay, they hope they have not heard so
many Sermons, nor made so many prayers, to so little purpose, that now at
length they should be overtaken with the love of such trifles: but how say you
to envy? does not that work upon you sometimes? does not others health,
others estimation, others advancement make you as it were sick now and then?
indeed that they cannot well deny: then you must needs confess, that you are
infected with lust. If Rahel had not been led with an eager desire of
children, she would never have envied her sister for bearing of children: and
therefore those have a sure testimony of a sound and pure heart, that can be
content with their own corn, and wine and oil: and that resolve with
themselves: So I may have peace with God and with mine own conscience, I will
never trouble my self much, what others have: Let God keep me from sin
while I live, and from hell when I die, and I shall do well enough, and have
great cause to rejoice in God, and to be thankful for my portion.





Ye fight and war, and get nothing, because ye ask not They might think,
does not God carry a hard hand against us, since we desire so much, and have so
little? no (says the Apostle) you rather carry an ill heart toward him: for
you use all means of procuring your own misery, but no means at all of
obtaining Gods mercy; and therefore Ye get nothing because ye ask not. Which
is one principal means of pulling down Gods blessings upon his servants.
Prayer is the best means of promotion.
Doctrine, Prayer is the best means to be provided of all things needful
for this life, and the life to come. God is a good householder, and if his
children would receive good things from him, they must not fall together by the
ears, nor grow to brawling and contending one with another (for that is the
next way to make their Father scourge them all:) But they must betake
themselves to prayer, and become humble and earnest suitors unto their Father,
which is both the easiest and the surest course; God if we ask we shall
obtain: Mat. 7. 7.



if you that are evil, can give good things unto your children, how much more
shall your heavenly Luke 11. 10. 12. 12. 13
Father, etc. Though you see faults in your children, and there be the like in
your selves, yet you can be liberal toward them: how much more will God
show himself gracious to his children, being goodness it self, and able to
make his children as good as he would have them to be? The prodigal son may
be a pattern of Gods favorable dealing in this behalf: For when he had lost
his wealth, his peace, his credit and all, having drowned himself, in vile and
abominable lusts, what had he wherewith to help himself? even the unfeigned
requests of an humble and penitent heart, which never can want happy success,
when they are presented to a merciful and gracious father: what his success
was, we may read at large, Luke 15. Hence comes that exhortation of the
Apostle, In nothing be careful, but in all things let your requests be Phil.
4. 6
made known unto God, etc.



peace of God which passes all understanding (such as a natural man cannot
conceive, nor a regenerate man till he have felt it) shall keep your hearts
and minds in Christ Jesus, that is, in a blessed communion with him: that look
what Christ has, you shall be sur^ ^o have: have you no power in your self?
you shall have it in Christ. Have you no wealth in your house? Christ has
enough for you in his hand: but all our woe comes from this, that we lose our
communion with him, for want of faithful and fervent prayer.



John. 16. 24
to that of our Savior, Ask that your joy may be full.

though there be never so many storms of sorrow, they shall be sufficiently
sheltred in the midst of all.

It is a gross conceit for men to think, Alas my case is hard, I have no
friends, no money, no ability to labor in my vocation, etc. But have you the
spirit of prayer? If you have, you are in an happy estate: for if we would
consider of things aright, who is in hard case, but he that has an hard
heart? And who is in good case, but he that has a good conscience, and a
heart full of good meditations, which he is ever and anon ready to pour out
in Gods presence? They that set not their friends nor themselves on work, so
much as they set their faith aworke, they are the blessed people: they may
assure themselves that God will not fail them, nor forsake them.

Indeed we must use the means to serve Gods providence: but, for the success
of things, we must wholly put God in trust with the same, and he will
assuredly do that which shall be good for us.

Verse. 3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss. Here he
preuenteth an objection that they might make, namely this, but ye receive not,
because ye ask amiss, asking such things as you may abuse to Gods dishonor,
and that you purpose so to abuse: for you will spend them upon your lusts: And
this is the cause why God rejects your prayers:

It is most just and equal that our prayers should be rejected, when we are
more earnest in asking earthly things which may be abused, then heavenly and
saving graces which cannot be abused: and aim at serving our own turns in
the requests that we make, rather then at the glorifying of Gods holy name.

They have not (says he) cried unto me with their hearts, when they houled on
their beds: they assemble themselves for corn and wine, and they rebel
against me.

These Jews marvelled that God did not help them when they cried unto him:
but God reckons and calls these their cryings howlings and not prayers,
because they were only grieved for their afflictions, but nothing touched for
their sins, which brought the hand of God upon them. And they were much more
desirous of corn and wine, then of the favor of God and the graces of his
spirit.





purifieth the heart: repentance Act. 15.
cannot be bestowed upon our lusts, because that kills our lusts: and so may
we say for every other grace of God, every one of which is absolutely good
in it self, and makes those good that are possessers of them. Whereas all
earthly things are either good or evil, according to the mind and affection of
him that receives and uses them.

If they meet with a strong and inordinate desire, they corrupt and poison it
further; if with an heart well ordered and disposed, they better it, and further
it in grace, and godliness.

But now further concerning spiritual things we must understand, that they
are not to be asked in words alone, but we must bring before God the fervent
desires of our souls, and entreat them as things that will indeed most
content us.

Truth it is, that ease and pleasure and credit would best please our nature:
but we must cross out flesh, lest our petitions be found carnal, and so be
rejected by the Lord: and farther we must strive to have this witness both
from God and from our own souls, that if we might obtain what we would, the
desires of our souls are, to have the favor of God and the chief fruits
thereof, even Love and Joy, and Peace, Temperance, Patience, and the rest of
the graces of Gods spirit. Which if we can in any good measure find in our
selves, we may be comforted in assurance of the performance of the promise,
That seeking first Mat. 6. 33
the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, all other things shall
be ministered unto us.

Verse 4. Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not, etc.

Ye Adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not, that the love of the world is
the enmity of God? As if he had said, Have ye heard so many Sermons, been
at so many Conferences, read and heard so much of the Scritures, and do you
not know thus much, that the love of the world is enmity with God? Do you
think that he will deal with you as an husband, when you are filthy
Harlots? Do you imagine that he will give you that, that may maintain and
uphold you in your pride and ambition, and earthly affections? No surely, he
that in such sort follows the world is a friend unto the world, and therefore
an enemy to God, and God will show himself no friend unto him. The love of
the world is spiritual adultery.
The doctrine hence to be learned is, that, It is a most dangerous and damnable
adultery to set our minds on earthly things.

There is a reason hereof in the Text. It brings us out of favor with God,
and makes us enemies unto him: and is it not a dangerous thing for the
creature to stand in opposition against his Creator? This spiritual adultery
is worse then that against the seventh commandment: for this is against the
first Table: that against the second. Besides, when David lived in that sin
of adultery, he could not be said to be the enemy of God: but whosoever lives
in this spiritual whoredom, is proclaimed to be the Lords foe. For such do
withdraw their hearts from God, and so bring the curse and vengeance of God
upon themselves Ier. 17
without timely repentance. Therefore it is said, Thou have destroyed all them
that go a whoring from thee: whether Psalm. 73. 27
it be after pleasures, or commodities, or preferments, about the which almost
all the world is set aworke, and being so inclined, all that can be devised is
little enough, nay too little to please them: they think nothing sufficient
that is done for them, and that all should do service to them, and they to
none: being as gowtie legs that must have all the anointing and binding and
looking to, they being able to do nothing again in way of requital.

For instruction, that we should be exceedingly humbled, as for other great
corruptions before our callings, so for this that we have been guilty of
spiritual adultery.

away their vain pleasures, you take away their life? And do not these things
argue in them a love of this world? It cannot be denied; and what then will
follow, but that they are dishonest men and women, adulterers and adulteresses,
as here the holy Ghost terms them? And hence comes it to pass of
tentimes, that because they are tainted with spiritual adultery, they are by
the just revenging hand of God, given up to corporal adultery, at least they
go under the reproach thereof amongst men, that so they might be drawn from
that which is more dangerous in the sight of God.

Further, this is to be considered, that if men do follow after but one of
their lusts, they come under this censure: as if a woman do run after one
adulterer only, she is to be condemned as an adulteress: so if a man be not
ambitious, if yet he be covetous: or on the contrary, if he be not covetous,
yet if he be ambitious; or if neither of those vices carry him away, yet if
he be voluptuous, that is enough to bring him under the blame and shame of a
spiritual adulterer, and so to make him liable to Gods vengeance.



When the Lord (I say) perceives this disposition in them, he keeps them
low, and curbeth their desires, which we should account a very great and sweet
favor of God: for little do we know what we should otherwise come unto. If
a man be inclining to strong drink, and have a weak head, so that he will
quickly be overtaken, it is a benefit for him to be restrained therefrom: now
the Lord is wise, and sees the inclination of his children unto great
prosperity, but he knows withal, that they have but weak brains to bear
it; and therefore in stead of wealth and ease, and credit, he sends wantes
and pains and disgraces which are far better for them.

Thou that would feign have more, do thou use that well that thou have
already? If not, better creep on the earth with safety, then climb on high
to take a greater fall: the Lord knows thy need and thy strength better then
thy self: resign up thy will unto him and it shall go well with thee.

Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world. The word in the original
implies such a willingness, as is joined with deliberation and consultation:
so that the meaning is, that he that advisedly sets himself to be like
the world, he is an enemy of God.

In that is is said, He that will be; We are esteemed as we are affected.
the doctrine is, that, God esteems of every man and woman, according to their
will and affection.

Abraham is highly commended and rewarded of God, for sacrificing his son,
though he did not the work, because Genesis 22. 16
he showed his readiness and willingness to do it.

In that excellent prayer which was made at the dedication of the temple,
Solomon (directed by the holy ghost) 2. Chro. 6. 30
offreth up this suplication in the behalf of all the church, that God would
reward every one as he knew their hearts. And David his father, guided by the
same holy spirit, gave as large allowance to the 200 weary and faint
soldiers, that staid at the river Besor, as to the rest that ventured their
lives in the battle and got the prey and victory. And also made this law and
ordinance for ever in Israel, 1. Sam. 30. 23. 24. 25. Now if David had that
care to reward the desire as much as the deed, where he had made no promise,
and was entreated to the contrary by the greatest part of his soldiers, and
could not perform this work without some loss to him self and them who had
helped him in the battle, then how much more will God accept the desire for the
deed, having promised so to do, 2. Cor. 8. 12. and being able to perform it
without any charge to him self, or hindrance to any other?





Abraham, who would not suffer his servants to be present in the place where he
purposed to sacrifice his son, lest they should have sought to have staid him
therefrom. And though he traveled three days journey; yet because he would
preuentall lets and hindrances, he carried fire, dry wood, and a knife with
him. So then an unfeigned heart rests not only in wishes, but shows it
self in constant endeavors, which God beholds and rewards, as well as if
the work were brought to perfection.



Secondly, this is a comfort unto Gods Saints: it is said, He that will be a
friend to the world, makes himself an enemy to God: but as for those that
would not be so, but are willing to forsake their worldly lusts, and mourn for
them, and desire to keep their hearts in the love and fear of God; they make
themselves friends to God, and he will show himself favorable and merciful
to them for evermore. So for other sins, if we find much unbelief, but would
have faith; if we find a disposition to pride and envy, but would be humble,
and rejoice at the prosperity of others etc. the Lord will accept of us, as of
faithful, humble and charitable persons.

So when we take our selves apart to mourn for our sins, if we find not
that remorse for our iniquities, nor that measure of humiliation, nor that
assurance of reconciliation that should be in us, but rather much deadness and
distraction, yet if our desire in setting upon that work, were good, the Lord
will take it in good worth: If we do Romans 7. See Mr. Dods Sermon on Isa. 1.
19. etc. If ye consent to obey. etc.
the evil that we would not, and cannot do the good that we would: it is not
we but sin that dwells in us. Which God will never lay unto our charge: but
rather comfort our souls as Christ did his Disciples, Your spirit is willing,
but your flesh is weak.

FINIS.

