A SERMON PREACHED at S. Mary's Church in Oxford, the 12. of July. 1612. Being
the Act Sunday.

BY THOMAS ANYAN, Fellow of Corpus Christi College.



LONDON: Printed for H. F. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lady Alice, Countess Dowager of DARBY, the
virtuous Wife of the right Honorable, THOMAS, Lord Ellesmere, L. high
Chancellor of England, and Chancellor of the University of Oxford, my singular
and especial good Lord.
Right Honorable:
THose many encouragements which beyond the measure of my deserts it has
pleased your gracious favor, from the ouerture of your love, to show toward
me, may justly claim at my hands some thankful acknowledgement thereof.
Sapientis est Lib. de been.
(said Seneca) been debere beneficium, and been soluere, interdum autem solutio
est ipsa confessio, So falls it out with me (right Honorable) who having
received more then I can deserve, and wanting power to requite, Nam tibi quod
soluat non habet arca Jouis: my heartiest prayers must be your best payment,
and no other requital, then a thankful acknowledgement, which if I should
forget, I were worthy (as Alexander once served one) to be branded in Plutar.
the forehead with Ingratus hospes.

Accept therefore, I beseech you, of the offer of these my slender and
worthless endeauours, sheltred under the patronage of your worthy name; which
if you will please to grace with the viewing and reading over, you shall add
life to these dead lines, deprived of the breath of a lively voice, wherewith
sometime they spoke, and put now blood and spirit into the veins of this dead
carcass, and animate it a new with the breath of your Honorable favor,
wherewith you have animated me in all my proceedings, and given life to my
languishing, and faint hopes, which otherwise would not have been, or been
expired. The remembrance of which your honorable favors shall draw life from
my last breath, and shall be a motive daily to stir me up to sacrifice to
you, and for you, the calves of my lips, and hourly to send up the incense of
my prayers to almighty God to send down upon your dear Lord (my R. and H.
Master) your self, and both your happily-ioyned Issues, what prosperity in
this life can be desired, and what happiness in the other can be conceived.

Your Honors ever at command in all duty, THO. ANYAN.
Yorkehouse. Aug. 29.
A SERMON Preached at St. Mary's, in Oxford.
PSALM. 1. 3. He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of waters, that
brings forth his fruit in his season.
THat which Westmonasteriensis.
Stories report of a strange child, united in heart and breast, but divided in
the upper parts; having one face always laughing, and the other always
weeping, may serve as a fit emblem and lively image of this sacred hymn:
which being united together in the whole, but divided in the parts, seems as
it were to have two faces; whereof the one is always lightsome with the rays
of gladness, the other always clouded with sorrow and everlasting horror. And
as there are only two places and ends of our journey, whereunto we must all
repair, after our long pilgrimage here upon this bale of earth, heaven and
hell, so likewise are there only two sorts and kinds of people which must
travail in the same, the reprobate and regenerate; the habits and condition of
both which are here described: of the one, in the three first; of the other, in
the two latter; and of both together, in the last verse of this Psalm.

An Epitome of which two sorts of people was heretofore represented unto us, in
Abel and Caine, Sarah and Hagar, Isaac and Ismael, Jacob and Esau; and are Lib.
2. de Ciuit. c. 18.
by great S. Austen compared unto two Cities, which two loves built, the
extreme love of God, and the extreme love of our selves: The love of our
selves, even to the contempt of God, built the earthly and reprobate city: the
love of God, even to the contempt of our selves, built the heavenly city: the
one ascribes all glory unto God, the other challenges all Gods glory unto her
self. The one (says the same Father) is truly gloriosa, the other is only
gloriatrix: of the one it is said, O how glorious are the titles, which are
said of thee thou city of God! But of the other it may be said; O how glorious
are the titles which thou say of thy self, O city of the world!

But hearken, I beseech you, with reverence, what the holy Prophet says of
them both in this Psalm: the one (says he) is as chafe which the wind
drives away, but the other is blessed, and shall be like a tree planted by the
rivers of waters, which shall bring forth his fruit in due season. In which
description of the prosperity of the godly, there are two parts: (...), and
(...), a narration, and an exornation; the narration in the two former verses,
the exornation in the third which I now have read unto you. Where, me thinks,
not only the person here described, in my Text, but my Text it self, may
fitly be resembled unto a Tree: the branches of my Text are like the branches
of trees at this time of the year, full laden with fair and goodly fruit.

The chief material of which the body and branches of this tree are
compounded, is a Proposition, which contains in it a Description, and a
Comparison, or rather, a comparatiue description of the life of a regenerate
man, unto the life of a flourishing and fruitful tree.

The parts of this proposition are in number four: first the Subject;
secondly, the Copula; thirdly, the Attribute; and fourthly, the Adjuncts of
this attribute. The subject of this Proposition, and of all these attributes
here in my text, is the Pronoune of the third person, he, by which may be
understood and implied three persons; viz. Christ, the Church, and the
righteous man. The Copula is the Verb substantive, erit: for so read the
seventy, Arius Montanus, Vatablus, and the Latin vulgar, only Iunius, est,
the matter being of no consequence* the Hebritians using these two tenses
promiscuously one for the other. The attribute is a similitude or resemblance,
like a tree. The adjuncts of this attribute are these, planted, by the rivers
of water, which shall bring forth his fruit in due season. All which, being
jointly annexed unto the principal attribute, like a tree, do make it
perfect, and absolute, and are together with their principal attribute, to be
referred to the subject ( he,) who as he is a man, is likened to a tree; as he
is a man regenerate, is likened to a tree planted; as he is a man regenerate
by the waters of Baptism, and the fountain of Gods graces, is likened to a
tree planted by the rivers of waters: his actions are compared to the effects
of trees; his working, to bringing forth; his works to the fruit; the time of
his working and labor in his vocation, to the due season of the year.

He shall be like, etc.] Mark, I beseech you, the apparent Climax, or
gradation in this text, of every attribute one above another, each adding a
grace, or degree of perfection to the other. He, the righteous man may be like
unto a tree, and yet not like unto a tree planted: planted he may be, and yet
not by the rivers of waters: by the rivers of waters he may be planted, and yet
not bring forth: bring forth he may with the Fig Tree in the Gospel, leafes,
and yet not bring forth fruit: fruit he may bring forth, and yet not in season,
much less in due season. But the righteous man shall be like unto a tree, and
not only to a tree, but to a tree planted, and planted by rivers of water,
which shall bring forth not only leafes and blossoms, but fruit, and that
fructum suum, his fruit; and that not immaturely, but tempore suo, in due
season. Here then you see (Right Honorable, reverend, and to me all-beloued)
what amplitude, and variety of matter each branch of this tree affords: I
cannot speak of any part (being bounded within the limit of an hour) as I
would; therefore I will speak a little of all, taking the words in order as
they lie.

He, that is, the just man, whose whole life is nothing else but a continual
meditation of the law of God: he, who always speaks as he thinks, does as he
speaks, speaks, thinks, and does as God commands: whose person if I should
exactly describe and delineate, I must raise out of this one hiue, a whole
swarm of persons, and take a general view and survey of all the persons in
the world, and describe what it is to be excellent and admirable in all kind
of virtues: for so this person he is in my text.

He, that is, the just and righteous man, and qui iustum dixerit, omnia
dixerit: he that says a man is just, has said all that may be said to the
glory and praise of a righteous man. The paucitie of which persons is so great,
and the raritie so singular, as that it will not make a plural; the number of
the unjust, or wicked, is indefinite, or rather, like chafe, infinite; but he,
the just man in my text, is singled out alone. The city of Sodom, though rich
and populous, had but one Lot: all the region of Huz, but one Job: Abram had
many children by Cethura, but one by Sarah: the offspring of Ishmael was more
fruitful then the progeny of Israel: there were many Athenians, but few
Phocians: many Thebanes, but few Epaminondaes: many Romans, but few Reguli:
Catilinam (says the Poet) Iuuenal.


Quocunque in populo videas, quocunque sub are,
At nec Brutus erit, Bruti nec auunculus vnus.
Foelix (says Austen) enim tanquam Phoenix, vix sexcentessimo anno nascitur;
the just man is as rare, and as hard to be found here on earth, as the Phoenix
bird. But contrary the wicked are so many in number, that among the Latins,
malum and multum, and among the Nonius.
Greeks, (...) and (...), were used as Synonimaes.

Shall be.] Man through the ouer-weening appetite of his greedy will, desirous
to pick of the Apples of Eden, and to eat of the forbidden fruit, has been
so grievously wounded in the best part of his understanding soul, by Gods
iustly-reuenging hand, that with the crow in the Poet, of whom it was said, she
could not say, she was well; but slightly said, she shall be well;

Est been non potuit dicere, dixit erit. Martial.
So neither can man in this life say, he is well, or that he is as a tree
planted by the rivers of water, but his hope is, and all that he can say, is;

Est been non potuit dicere, dicit erit. The just person has no permanent or
abiding city in this life, but expects one that shall be, and shall come. In
this life he shall find troubles, but in the other peace; in this life
sorrow, but in the other joy; in this life shame and rebuke, in the other
endless glory with renown. What a garland does Saint Paul plat of his own
crosses and tribulations, 2 Cor. 11? In stripes above measure, in prison more
plenteously, in peril of death, in perils by land, in peril by waters: these
were the rivers of waters, by which he was planted. There is no one page of
Scripture almost, not breathing out sighs of the Church, groaning under the
heavy burden of her afflictions: no one leaf almost not blurred with the
tears of the Saints, mourning in the anguish of their soul, and pouring forth
their groans in these and the like doleful Elegies. We are as men appointed
to death, we are a gazing stock, and spectacle of misery to the world. 2 Cor.
4. 9. For thy sake we are killed all the day long, and are accounted as sheep
to the slaughter. Romans 8. 36. The child of God therefore, and his church, is
not always visibly in the eye of the world, like a green Olive tree, a
flourishing vine, or a tree planted by the rivers of water, but rather like a
Lilly among thorns, like a Dove, whose habitation is in the rock, as a woman
in travail with a Dragon pursuing her. Reu. 12. Or as the bush wherein God
appeared unto Moses, which always burns with the flames of persecution, but
is never consumed. Wherefore erroneous is that doctrine of the Divines of Rome,
who crown the righteous and Church militant here on earth, with a garland of
temporal felicity, making worldly pomp to be the true note and badge how to
discern the godly from the wicked; true Christians from erroneous haeretikes,
the Church of Christ from the Synagogue of Satan. And as the Painter of Thebes
painted Venus, a Goddess, after the likeness of Phryne, a Roman Curtezan, so
does Bellarmine effigiate and Lib. 4. c. 18. de Eccl. milit.
paint out the Church of Christ, after the image and likeness of the Whore of
Babylon, describing her to Apoc. 17. 4.
be always arrayed in Purple and Scarlet, adorned with gold and precious
stones of temporal bliss.

But who so shall look back upon the records of former times, shall find the
Church of Christ, from her first infancy, to have been clothed in
sackcloth, and the garments of adversity, when the professed enemies thereof
were clad in purple, and did freely enjoy the choysest pleasure of this worlds
delight. In Noah's time we may see her floating in the waterie world; after
that, groaning under the Egyptians tyranny; then, a pilgrim in the Desert;
and in Canaan never free from his malicious and insest enemies; the Philistim,
the Amonite, the Madianite; and last of all, captiued by the Persian and
Babylonian. Since Christ's time, we may see her lie sweltring in her own blood,
and for long three hundred years cruelly oppressed by bloody Tyrants.

But to omit former times, and to come to this present age; how many thousands
of Christians have sacrificed their dearest blood in their Saviors cause,
against that proud Mahumetan Rabshecai, who being possessed of the Eastern parts,
spits defiance to the Christian world, pouring forth blasphemous threats
against all the professors of the Name of Christ? If worldly felicity be a
note of the Church, then there it is, and they all false professors who have
been subdued by his conquering sword. But the Spouse of Christ is in this
life, like a pilgrim, divorced from her beloved, her weapons are (...), not
(...), not carnal, but spiritual; she is like a ship continually tossed at
sea, though never ouer-whelmed; she is like an house built upon a rock by the
sea shore, which is obnoxious to many a tempestuous flaw. In this life she is
militant, in the other triumphant; here she has praelium, there praemium; here
her labor, there her reward; here her seed-time, there her harvest; and
therefore this just person in my text, is not said that he is, but he shall be
like a tree.

Like a tree.] Man is compared to a tree, each part of him having some
correspondencie and resemblance with the parts of a tree. The beauty of his
youth is likened to the blossoms of trees, which either in a short time of
themselves, or with the Suns heat, dry up and wither away. His hair which
covers his head, and adornes his body, is resembled to the leafes, which
cover the tops and upper parts of the trees. His breath to the sweet odor which
trees of themselves send forth in the spring. His radical moisture, oil and
balsamum (whereon the natural heat feeds and is maintained) may be likened
to the oil and sap of trees, which they of themselves sweat forth. His
disciplination and nurture, to the plantation and grafture of trees. His blood
which disperseth it self by the veins, as branches, through all the body, may
be compared to those rivers of waters, which being carried by brooks over all
the earth, and through the pores of the earth, do secretly incorporate
themselves into the roots of those trees, and by their moisture feed and
maintain the flourishing estate of every tree. Plato in general says that
every man is a tree turned topse-turuy, making his head as it were, the root,
his members the branches; to which I will add, that his words are the leafes,
his works the fruit, Gods graces the rivers of water, by which every tree is,
or ought to be, planted. From this resemblance of man unto a Tree, many notions
do offer themselves to our consideration, each of them attended with his
several instruction.

1 As a Tree which brings forth no good fruit, so a man which brings forth
no good works in the branches of his faith, is good for nothing, but to be
hewn down, and cast into the fire.

2 As a tree, if it be not well planted, the fruit thereof grows sour, wild,
and distasteful; so a man, if he be not well nurtured and disciplind.

3 As a tree in the Spring, so a man in the spring of his youth abounds with
many luxuriant stems, which by careful education, may easily be pruned and
lopt off.

4 As a tree, though his first offspring be from the earth, and his root in
the earth, erecteth his body and branches upward toward heaven; so man, though
his root and offspring be from the earth, dust, and ashes, yet ought he to
erect the branches of his soul and affection toward heaven and heavenly
things, in a divine contemplation of his creator.

But although man in many things be like unto a tree, yet in this one thing
must he be most unlike. Trees ordinarily bring forth fruit but once in the
year, but the whole life of man must be nothing else but a continual harvest,
bearing fruit at all times, as well in the Winter of his adversity, as in the
Summer of his prosperity; as well in the Spring of his youth, as in the
Autumn of his age; he must be (...), he must still have leafes, and these
leafes must not wither nor fade, but with them he must heal the nations of
the earth; the outward bark and rine of his conversation must serve as a rule
to direct others: and as they report of the fig tree, so the fruit of this
tree, must ripen as fast as it is gathered:

Vno auulso non deficit alter Virg. Aeneid. 6.

Aureus and simili frondescit virga metallo.
That golden tree in Virgil enamoled round about, and beset with all the
richest pearls of the Poets refined wit and invention, Aureus and folijs and
lento vimine ramus. Ibidem.
was but Brass and Lead in comparison of this tree, planted like the tree of
life, in the midst of the Garden of my Text. I have not been learned in the
language of the eloquent, nor has my tongue been dipped in the ouer-flowing
waters of abundant passion, yet were it so with me, Eloquence her self might
here be silent: for, what ornament of wit? what dowry of tongue with all the
riches of his language, can sufficiently adorn and set forth the glorious and
flourishing beauty of this tree? whose outward bark and rine surpasses the
Diamond in beauty; his buds, the Emerods; his blossoms, Pearls; his gum,
the Ruby and Crystal; his fruit, the golden Apples of Hesperides; his leaf,
true leafe-gold, which neither withers nor fades. This is that Tree whereon
grows those rich Onyx-stones, which carry in them the names of the children
of Israel, engraven and embost in gold. This is that Tree, which S. John saw,
Revel. 22. planted by the water of life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of
the Throne of GOD, and from the Lamb, which brought forth her fruit in due
season, and bare twelve manner of fruits, and gave fruit every month; yea, as
good fruit as the golden Apples of the tree of life. But least this just man
should deem that this fruit of his good works is by nature, not by grace; by
merit, not by mercy; from his proper generation, and not from his spiritual
regeneration in Christ; by virtue of the sap and moisture which naturally is in
the root, and not by the rivers of waters, which supernaturally water the
garden of his soul, it is added in my Text, that the just shall be as a Tree
planted.

Planted.] Planted by that heavenly husbandman; by whom whatsoever is not
planted shall be rooted out and cast into the fire. This word planted, which
the seauentie render, (...), is by Aquila rendered transplanted; which does
agree either to the person of Christ, transplanted from heaven to earth, or to
every just and righteous person, who is translated, and as a tree transplanted
from the works of the old man, to the works of the new; from the servitude of
the Law, to the liberty of grace; from a land whose rivers stream with blood,
to a land that flows with milk and honey. That tree which was unhappily
sprung in Adam, shall be as happily grafted and transplanted in Christ: that
tree which was fruitless in his own nature, shall become fruitful by grace:
that tree which would have rotted for want of natural moisture, shall flourish
again, and receive juice into his veins from the waters of life, by which he
is planted. We know that the whole tree of our nature, root and branches,
fruit and leafes, were all blasted by the breath of Gods first malediction, and
the ground whereon we grew; nay the ground of man's heart was cursed to bring
forth of it self, nothing but briars and thorns; his wisdom was
foolishness, his strength weakness, (...), his best thoughts were defiled, 1
Cor. 2.
his understanding was darkened; nay, it was darkness in abstracto, Ephesians. 5.
So that with Glaucoma in the Poet, Ne id quidem intelligit quod intelligit, vel
quod Plautus in milite glorioso.
non intelligit, he neither understands what he understands, nor understands
not, that he understands not. O miseras animas quae pereunt et nesciunt se
perire, Austen de ciuitate Dei.
and ideo pereunt quia nesciunt se nescire: like the blind woman in Seneca,
who because she never saw any thing, could not be persuaded that she was
blind, but that the house was dark. This was the estate of man in his
corrupted grouth; but since his new plantation by grace, since his root in
Adam has been taken up and transplanted in Christ, God has promised that the
ground shall be changed by the rain of righteousness, and dew of grace
watering his root, and that at the coming of the Messiah, Es. 55. 3.
pro Virgultis assurget Abies, for Thorns shall grow Firre-trees, and for
nettles, that is, (as I construe it) our stinging affections, shall grow
Mirrhe-trees, sweating forth the soft and sweet oil of grace and love.

Unfruitful plants, and unsavory trees are suffered and let alone to grow in
those places where first they sprang; but sweet roses, fruitful vines, and
good trees are taken up and transplanted.

Almighty God, who in the Gospel is compared to a husbandman, has
transplanted us from the kingdom of Satan, to the kingdom of the Son of
God; from wild Olives to be fruitful Vines in Christ Jesus. And as the
Prophet Eliah restored the child of 1 King. 17.
the widow from death to life; so our blessed Savior recovered and revived
mankind like a tree dead in the root, and rotten in all the branches thereof.
The Prophet entering into the chamber where the child lay dead, gat upon the
bed, stretched his body all over the childs body, put his mouth to its mouth,
his hands to its hands, his feet to its feet; so Christ, Elias-like,
stretched himself upon the Cross, as a green tree upon the dead tree of our
nature, and laid as it were his root to our root, his branches to our
branches, his leafes to our leafes, his fruit to our fruit, and by this new
plantation of us into himself, he has infused his spirit into us, revived us,
and made us of dead trees, trees of life, partakers of his divine nature,
members of his glorious body, and heirs of his immortal glory.

For us men, and for our plantation, the Son of God descended from the
highest heavens, and suffered his Godhead to be clad with the corruptible
roabes of humane frailty, and in our nature endured the wrath of God, did
merit by it eternal redemption, infused into it his spiritual graces, and
advanced it above the highest ranks of the Angels in heaven.

At the first, man was set as a Rose in the Garden of Gods Paradise, that he
might prove a sweet odor of life unto life: but when he turned from a Rose to
be a Thistle, and began to prick his Maker, then was he transplanted from a
small Garden, to a large manor, and with an happy exchange of estate, was
brought from his first freedom of nature of posse non peccare, to a better
liberty of Grace non posse peccare, not to sin at all; for, whosoever is
borne of God, and grafted into Christ, sins not, nor can he sin, 1 John
3. 9. For although the best of men, through the infirmity of their corrupted
nature, do oftentimes commit those things which in the sight of the world are
foul, and worthily enormous, yet because the inward man does sooner or latter
check and comptrole them, they are not properly said to commit them, because
they do not wholly and fully assent unto them. That celestial sap which every
branch does receive from his root, Christ, does so quicken and revive the
regenerate man, that although in outward appearance, and in his own conceit
to, he seem to wither and be decayed, yet the spirit of Adoption, which
ingendreth Faith, does so inhabit and possess his soul, that either totally
or finally he cannot perish, but remains toward GOD, like the Philosophers
demonstrator, (...), firm and immovable. Parraeus in 7. ca. ad Romans


And although he has ofttimes many straggling motions, inordinate desires,
despairing cogitations, maintain diverse errors in Religion, commit foul
sins, such as Noah, David, Solomon, and Peter did; nay, such sins as leave
no place for salvation, without an actual and especial repentance, yet from
infidelity, extreme despair, obduration in sin, and the like, God will
preserve the righteous as the apple of his eye. He may suffer him to fall, but
not to fall away, he may (...) not (...), he may cadere not deficere, Zanchius.
he may peccare not peccatum facere, he may sin, but not work iniquity:
labi potest, prolabi non potest: iustus enim si ceciderit non collidetur, the
righteous Psalm. 37. 23.
man, though he fall, he shall not be cast off; the reason is given in the
words following, quia manum suppoint Dominus, because the Lord supports him
with his hand. The wicked like the Raven, they go out of the Arc and return
no more; but the righteous, though they fall, and seem to go out of the
Church, yet they return again with an Olive branch of true repentance in
their mouths: the reprobate fall like old Ely, who fell down and broke his
neck; but the regenerate, though they fall with the young man Eutychus Acts 20.
from the third loft, yet being taken up, are by Gods holy spirit revived
again.

This Spirit Romans 8. is termed our life; and he that 1 Io. 5. 12.
has the Son (says S. John) has life, and he that has not the Son, has
not life. Whence (me thinks) may be inferred, that if he which once is
planted in Christ has the Son, may afterward cease to have the Son,
though it be but for a moment, he cease for that moment to have life. But the
life of them who have the Son of God, is everlasting, and in the world to
come, 1 John 5. 13. And as Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more,
death has no more power over him, so the justified man, being planted by Faith
in Christ, does as necessarily from R. Hooker.
that time forward always live, as Christ by whom he has life lives always.
For if Christ which is the foundation of our spiritual life, may leave that
mansion which once he possessed, and flit away, what shall become of his promise,
I am with you to the worlds end? And if the seed of God which contains Christ,
may be first conceived, and then abortiue-like cast out, how does S. Peter
term it (...), the immortal 1 Pet. 1. 23.
seed? how does S. John affirm that it abides? 1 Io. 3. 9.
If the spirit which is given to cherish and preserve the seed of life in
tender plants, may be given and taken away, how is it by S. Paul termed (...),
Ephesians. 1. 14.
the earnest penny of our redemption? how does it continue with us for ever? If
therefore the man who is once just by Faith shall live by Faith, and live for
ever; it follows that he which is once planted and inserted a living branch
of that true Vine Christ, shall never again from his body be disserted.

Man (I confess) is apt and ready to revolt from God, but God is not so ready
to forsake man: our minds are changeable, but Gods decree is immutable: whom
God has justified Christ assures them it is his Fathers pleasure to give them
a Kingdom. Notwithstanding Col. 1. 2. 3.
it shall be no otherwise given them, then if they continue grounded and
established in the Faith, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel.
Christ therefore when he spoke of his sheep effectually called, and truly
gathered into his fold, said; I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never Io. 10. 28.
perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hands. In promising to save
them, he promised, no doubt, to preserve them in that without which there can
be no salvation, as also from that whereby it is irrecouerably lost. For
without his especial grace, which must restrain us from the one, and retain
us in the other, we are no more able of our selves to stand, then the carcass
of that noble captain, which when a Lacedaemonian had often set up in vain,
the carcass Plut.
still falling down, he afterward confessed, that it was not the body and legs
of a man which made a man to stand, but there was somewhat unseen in the body,
which made all these excellent motions and varieties, and therefore said,
Aliquid intus esse oportet: His grace it is within which like the fiery
Chariot of Elias must draw both us and our thoughts to heaven: For, we are by
nature like warm water, which unless it be still heated, will cool of it
self; or like vapors, which rise no longer then the heat of the Sun draws
them, which Sun of righteousness if he substract his beams, yea, but a
little, we are soon frozen in the dregs of our impiety. God therefore
unwilling to see his trees wither for want of moisture, his dearest children to
pine away for want of the food of their souls, he has planted every tree
which is in the Paradise of the Church, by him who is the fountain of Gardens,
the spring of Lebanon, by rivers of Cant. 4.
water.

By rivers of waters.] Observe I beseech you once more, the attributes of this
tree: he is a tree, not a bramble or thorn; planted by regeneration, not
suffered in his natural generation; and planted by rivers, not suffered to
remain in the quagmire and filth of his own inventions; and planted not in
any mountanous region, or eminent place, but in the humble valley, not by the
dangerous shoares of the swelling Ocean, but secus decursus aquarum, by the
banke-side of rivers of water.

The bodies of men are the Temples of the holy Ghost, their soul the sanctum
sanctorum; the Graces of God the rivers which run through this Sanctuary;
they are as it were, the Lauer before the Temple, to wash them, whose fountain
is God himself, who shall cleanse them from all their sins: and then how can
they be without water, who are planted by those rivers which spring from the
fountain of life? how can they be without light, whose light is the Sun of
righteousness? how can they be without plenty of all things, in whom dwells
he that is the fullness of all things? though the tempest shake, the wind
blow, the heat scorch, yet shall they not wither, because they are planted by
the rivers of Gods spiritual graces. By these rivers of waters was Noah
planted, when he was preserved from the deluge of waters: by these rivers was
Lot planted, when he was preserved from the flames of fire* by these rivers
was Moses planted, when he was preserved in the river from that great massacre
of infants.

Aristotle and Pliny both report, that tender vines, and other fruitful trees
prosper not being planted Plin. l. 21. and Arist. (...).
nigh the sea or any salt water: this world is a sea swelling with the surges
of pride, blew and wan with the color of envy, salt and fretting with the
sharp humor of malice; if then we desire to be tender Vines in Gods
Vineyard, trees of life in his Paradise, we must be planted far off and
remote from the salt sea of this world, and be planted as trees by the water,
which spread out their roots by the rivers, and shall not feel when the heat
comes, but her leaf shall be green, and shall not care for the year of
drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit. Ier. 17. 8.

That which Stories have auerred of the root of Plin. l. 32. and Ovid. in Meta.
the Coral, which so long as it is under the water is soft, and flexible, but
so soon as it is taken out of the water is as hard as any stone; may truly be
verified of the root of every tree in the Eden of Gods Church; which so long
as it is planted by the rivers of water which flow from the Sanctuary of God,
is mild and gentle, the fruit mellow and pleasant to the taste, but when it is
taken up, and separate from these rivers of water, it is hardened as hard as
Adamant, and the fruit thereof is sour and distasteful. Jacob was like unto
this tree here in my text, who was planted by the rivers of water, and
therefore Balaam Number. 24. 5.
cries out; Numb. 24. How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy habitations,
O Israel! as the valleys are they stretched forth, as Gardens by the river
side, as Aloe trees, which the Lord has planted, and the Cedars besides the
rivers of waters.

These rivers of waters are as a well of comfort for forlorn Hagar, and all
other pilgrims to refresh their wearied and fainting souls: for although the
just and godly do many times in the bitterness of their soul, cry out with
David, abissus abissum inuocat, fluctus tui Psalm. 42. 7.
supra me transierunt; one deep (of sorrow) calls another deep, by the
noise of the water spouts, thy waves and floods are gone over me; though the
waters of affliction in this life rage, and be impetuous, so that the very
mountains of their faith shake at the surges of the same, yet shall they at
length be planted as flourishing trees by those rivers of water, whose
crystal streams make glad the city of God. From these waters I will fetch
some, and every Christian may more, water of comfort, to refresh his afflicted
soul, with this or the like meditation. That although in this life he be like
a vine spoiled, bleeding with compunction of grief, and as a tree planted by
rivers of salt waters, even rivers of tears; yet these rivers of brinish
tears shall be as the morning dew distilling from heaven, which shall nourish
the fruit of our works, moysten the root of our Faith, and make our souls
bring forth fruit in due season.

Which brings forth fruit.] When man was first endowed with a sovereign
command over all the creatures here on earth, it was enioynd him by his maker,
not only to fill the earth with men, but (as Origin writes) replete carnem
vestram quae terra est bonis operibus, bring forth fruit in the earth of your
flesh.

Which fruit is twofold, internal and external: the first is infused, the
other acquisite: the first are the virtuous habits of the mind, the other good
works, flowing and proceeding from these habits. The first S. Paul calls (...),
the fruit of the spirit, Gal. 5. 22.
Gal. 5. as love, joy, faith, long-suffering, and the like: the second he calls
(...), the fruit of righteousness, Phil. 1. 11. so that he who is righteous,
Phil. 1. 11.
must bring forth the fruit of his righteousness; who is just, the fruit of
his justice; liberal, the fruit of his liberality, lest he be hewn down
and cast into the fire.

Neither must we only bring forth fruit, but every man must bring forth his
fruit: he that is planted as a Cedar in the Paradise of this world, must bring
forth the fruit of Cedars; an Olive, the fruit of Olives, every tree his own
fruit: and not only so, but we must not curiously entermeddle with the fruit
and affairs of other men: spartam suam quam nactus est, vnusquisque ornet,
every man must strive and endeavor in the ground of his own vocation wherein
God has planted him to bring forth his fruit, that is, such fruit as is proper
and peculiar to his vocation, and not to the vocation of others; least seeking
to be what others are, thou loose thy self; in seeking to be every body, thou
prove to be no body; in seeking to excel in all things, thou prove a fool in
every thing. Vzza must not touch the Arc, nor meddle with the Priests office:
ne suitor vltracrepidam, let not the Shoemaker go beyond his Last, the Peddler
beyond his pack, the Painter beyond his pensell, but let every man keep
himself within the sphaere of his own profession.

It is reported, as a pleasant Fable, by Leo Africanus, of a little bird, which
is of so strange a condition, that she can live very well both in the water,
and in the air, and sometimes lives in the one, sometimes in the other: of
this bird when the king of birds demands tribute, she flies presently into
the water, saying she is a fish, and no bird: afterward when the king of
fishes demands tribute of her, she flies into the air, saying she is a
bird and no fish: even so these dissecta animalia, these parti-colored trees;
semivirique boues, semibouesque viri, these branches which bring forth now
Almonds, now Acornes; now Figs, now Thistles; now the fruit of this man, now
the fruit of that man's vocation, indeed bring forth none, much less mature
fruit, and in due season.

A good word (says Solomon) spoken in his due place, and I add also a good
work, or any good fruit brought forth in due season, is like apples of gold
with pictures of silver, Prou. 25. 11. There is one fruit of our youth, Prou.
25. 11.
another of our middle age, and a third of our old age: as there is one flower
and beauty of the Spring, another of the Summer, and a third of the Autumn,
and these all are to be brought forth at their diverse seasons.

The fruit which we should bring forth before we come to old age, is the
fruit of a good life; the fruit which we must bring forth in the season of our
old age, is the fruit of a good death: according to that of Seneca, ante
senectutem studebam vt been viuerem, in senectute vt been moriar. There is no
season of our age unfit to bring forth some fruit of righteousness; but the
season of the time wherein we ought most to stretch the sinews of our
industry to bring forth these fruits, are especially in the season when we
are tempted to do evil, or in the season when occasion is offered to do good.

The fruits of a Christian, they are ripe at all times, his harvest to gather
them is at all times of the year. When he is tempted to Lust, then is his
harvest of Chastity: to Gluttony, then of Abstinence: to Anger and revenge,
then is his harvest of Mildness and moderation. When thou see thy brother
imprisoned, then is thy season to visit him: naked, then to clothe him:
hungry, then to feed him: wrongfully oppressed, then to relieve him: in want and
extremity, then to succout him. Thou must not concredit the disposing of thy
alms to the too-often-carelesse performance of succeeding heirs, but thou
must be thy own Almoner, and so shall thou be fure to have thy Will kept, and
to bring forth thy fruit in due season.

Such as shall defer all their good works till the end of their days, and
leave their goods by others to be distributed, are like a man that carries a
candle behind him in the dark, which may benefit those that follow after him,
but not himself. Such as all their life time by extortion and greedy
oppression wrong the poor, and upon their deathbeds bequeath some petty
Legacy to clad a few in Frize, and stop the mouths of Orphans with loafes of
bread, who otherwise would cry for vengeance for their oppression, from the GOD
of Heaven, do not bring forth their fruit in due season, nor are not like
trees, but rather like that Lion which Sampson killed, which although it was
ravenous in his life time and mankind, yet being dead, had some little honey
in his mouth.

Such as are called to be lights in the Church, and shine not in their
profession; such as are called to the sacred function of the Ministry in the
Spring of their youth, and strength of years, and bring forth no buds nor
blossoms thereof, no not so much as in the Autumn of their age, do these, or
can they ever be hoped to bring forth their fruit in due season?

I fear of this number there are too many here present, who as if they had
received all their learning sub sigillo confessionis, in secret confession,
dare not impart any of it, nor bring forth any fruits thereof themselves, but
get some of their neighbor trees to bring forth fruit for them, even at that
time, when this place should expect theirs. And as the Beast Tarando, in Pliny,
turns himself into the Lib. 8. c. 34.
fashion of other beasts, because his own shape is so like the shape of an
Ass, so these perform all duties and exercises of their vocation in their
place, and elsewhere, in the persons of others, because (I think) their own
are so rude and deformed.

Your parts it is (Reverend and Learned Fathers) whom just desert has worthily
advanced to eminency of place in this our Athens, to prune and lop off these
unfruitful branches, which bring forth no fruit in their own boughs, but
draw juice and sap from other fruitful branches, and not to confer your
choysest favors upon such as are by profession non-proficients, whose end and
scope is the carrying of a bag and a bunch of keys, least in short time,
those places which by the beneficency of worthy founders, were erected to be
Nurseries of hopeful wits, turn to be Golgothaes, places of dead men's bones,
and living empty sculs, or at the best, but old shrines, and smokie Images,
for nothing venerable, but senioritie. Howbeit I stand not here to patronize
those Lapwings which fly away from hence with part of the shell upon their
heads, and thrust themselves before their due time into the Lords harvest,
expecting (I think) some Apostolic Enthusiasme to be inspired in illa hora:
their haste is greater then their speed, Nimis propere, and minus prospere, as
says Bernard. Ser. de S. Been.
Such are Conduits, that convey water to others, before they can contain any
for themselves: qui loqui nesciant (says Hierome) tacere non possunt: such
turn ravening Wolves as soon as they get the Lambesskinne Dr. Boys.
over their shoulders. These men like the Gibeonites, take their bread hot the
day they departed to come, and therefore it is so soon dried up and moldy,
and their bottles because they are new are rent. Josh. 9. 13. Josh. 9. 13.


Such men should have made a longer residence in this garden of pleasure, this
seat of happiness, from whence flows that of Pindarus, (...), the Rivers of
Helicon, and waters of Parnassus. I know how fitly I might resemble this whole
University to a tree: Theology to the root of the tree, Law to the juice and
radical moisture, which maintains the life and union of the body together:
Physic to those leafes which heal the nations of the earth: the Liberal
Sciences to the branches of this tree: the Garlands of degrees to the blossoms
and fruits of the tree. For as Theophrastus reports of a tree in Persia, which
at the same time does bud, blossom, and bear fruit, so may we truly auerre
of this tree, that now at this one season it brings forth some Doctors, some
Masters, some fruit that is fully ripe, some drawing to ripeness, some in the
flower, and some in the bud. I now marvel not that the Poets fained the Muses
to dwell in woods, and amongst trees: here grows the Juniper tree, which
might teach every man to have a sweet conversation with all men: here grows
the Palm tree, which teaches us a conquest of our selves: here the Laurel,
which crowns us with the peace of a good Conscience. Amidst these Arbors, and
in the barks of these trees, let us (as the ancient Shepherds were wont to
do) engraue our names with the Sonets of love, and imprint the characters of
our dearest affections; and with earnest devotion desire the heavenly Apollo to
water this tree with the dew of his grace, distilled into the roots thereof,
that it may spread it self forth into branches, and the branches may bud, and
the buds may blossom, and the blossoms may bring forth fruit; such fruit as
shall never be corrupted, such flowers as shall never be withered, such buds as
shall never be blasted, such branches as shall never be dismembered, but
flourish and spread abroad their arms to defend the Church from all Haeresie,
Schism, and perverse doctrines, to the advancement of true Religion, and the
glory of thy great Name, through Christ our Lord: To whom with the Father, and
the holy Ghost, be ascribed all glory, honor and praise, both now and for
evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

