A Discourse Upon a Question of the Estate of this time.

Faithfully translated out of French by E. A.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop over against the
great South door of Paul's. 1591.

A question of this time. Why does not the King become a Catholic? If he would
become a Catholic, his realm would soon be at peace: all his subjects would
obey him, and without any difficulty acknowledge him.
This is the daily speech of diverse: but let us consider whether it be not of
persons as far different in humors, as they differ in intents.
WHen the leaguers began to doubt of the good success of their affairs, to
mistrust their own forces, and to imagine, that in the and, the King might
become master, they gave out, that it was requisite he should become a
Catholic, alleging, that afterward on such assurance as they might gather,
that he meant good earnest, they would acknowledge him to be their King,
supposing, that if they must needs grow to that pass, that of necessity they
must obey him, they would at the least persuade and make the simple people
(whom they had abused) to believe that their first stirring up of these
commotions and troubles of war, tended only to the preservation of the Cathol.
Apostol. Romish religion, and the Kings conversion. But these speeches would
much better have beseemed the mouths of other Catholics that did continue in
their duties, then theirs: for they are for to remember, that the late
deceased King was as great a catholic as any of his predecessors, and yet was
it he whom the Leaguers did first set upon, against him directed they their
first exclamations, injuries, and reproaches, in his life time began they their
conspiracies, rebellions, and disobedience: against his person and estate did
they so far attempt, as with the advice of the most apparent professors of
Romish religion among them, to deliberate, consult of, and conclude his death,
whom finally most barbarously and horribly they stroke and slew through a
Iacobine Friar, who was by them induced and brought thereto.

The same Leaguers are also to remember, that by their writings and diffamatory
Libelles printed and published at such time as they thought the K. that now is
to be ouerthrown and past hope of ever attaining to the succession of this
Crown, they proclaimd him a relaps, aduowing, that albeit he would return
into the bosom of the catholic Church, yet he was no longer receiuable to the
succession of the Crown, and so consequently his subjects were dispensed with
for acknowledging him or yielding him any obedience: yea this they caused to
be preached abroad by the hired tongues of their preachers. Many other such
speeches and writings of the same Authors could I here allege to reprove
and convince them of contradiction, and so to show them to be nothing less
then led with so holy a desire of the kings conversion, were it the Argument
of this Discourse: but being content with this little, which in respect of them,
I have but touched by the way, I will endeavor to answer and satisfy others
that do use the same speech, albeit with other affection and meaning then they.

Among sundry that give themselves out to be the Kings servants, we daily hear
no other speeches but these: Would to God the King would become a Catholic:
That he would vouchsafe so much content to the Catholics, as to go to mass:
so should the Leaguers no longer have any cloak for their rebellion, the
Towns that they hold should yield him obedience: and to be brief, we should
obtain peace, that is so necessary to this realm.

My masters, since you are the Kings servants, or at the least, that you do so
term your selves, and that it seems, besides your own sayings, that you would
have us believe you so to be: I dare presume that you will hearken to my
reasons, and accept of them with a mild and upright mind: for how free soever
I be in my words, yet do I mean to say nothing that may be offensive unto you.

I pray you, my masters, these wishes and desires, together with such zealous
sighs as seem to proceed from your stomaks, do they simply grow of a holy
affection to the wealth and peace of Gods Church and this realm, and the
salvation of the King, or rather of some affected show, then of any true
essence of good will? I am content to take them in the first sense, which is
the best, and to believe that sincerely you are of opinion, that if the King
would speedely, without tarrying until a Council has determined the
controversies that at this day reign throughout christendom about the
diversities of opinions, concerning the Cath. Apost. and Romish religion,
yield himself to be instructed in the Catholic religion, his realm would
inmediatly grow to peace, and all factions and partialities amongst us cease.

I would to God that that were the only let, and in so holy a desire will I
never give place to any. Besides, I am assured, that the King is so ready to
learn, that he will easily be content to be instructed and brought to the
Cath. Apost. Romish religion, in case any man can show and prove him to be in
any error: yet, may I tell you, that this remedy is not sufficient to cure our
diseases. Do you believe, that the Leaguers do in heart desire that the King
would be brought to the Cath. Apost. Romish religion? If you do so think, you
are deceived. They see me to desire it, but they would be very sorry it should
be so, yea, albeit the King had done it, yet would they yield him no more
obedience then they now do, but rather they would use his return to the Cath.
Church as a mean to sever the Germans, Switzers, and other protestant nations
from the Kings friendship, and so bring him to loose al credit and reputation
both within and without the realm: a matter which great princes do continue
according as they are thought of, and are in effect constant, courageous and
steadfast in their good purposes. Mark therefore this one only matter among
many other of like policy, which now I think meet to show you, for so may
you discover the truth of these their speeches.

The chief of the League, and among others the D. of Lorraine, perceiving one
of the kings chiefest humane forces to consist in the succor that he expects
from the Germans, fearing nothing so much as the descent of an army of that
nation, have by their agents and factors given to understand to the princes
Electors, and other lords and potentates of Germany, that the King was become,
or at the least had sworn and promised the officers of the crown and French
nobility, that he would become a Catholic: That already both about his person,
and in his principal and most important affairs within the realm and
without, he used almost none but Catholics. Which to be so, said they, mark
what they be whom he has sent to be dealers in the leauy of such Soldiers as
he desires of you: be they not all Catholics? Yea, even the same Ministers
and Ambassadors whom the late King used? What occasion therefore have your
Lordships to grant your succor to the king of Navarre (for they do not
otherwise entitle the King) rather then unto the house of Lorraine and Guise,
or to the King of Spain their king and confederate? With this slight and
subtilty have they troubled the Kings affairs in Germany, and slacked the
leauy of his men of war. What then would they do if indeed the king were
become a Catholic, considering that upon a simple appearance only they have so
shaken the amity which the princes of Germany do bear to the king? Hereupon
therefore ye may conclude, that all the instance that the leaguers make, to
cause the K. to return to the Catholic religion, tends only to withdraw from
him the love of foreign protestant Princes, so to weaken his forces of so much.
Also that albeit he were become a Cath. yet the King of Spain, with the houses
of Lorraine and Guise, and other his ennemies, would nevertheless prosecute
the war against him, and that with more power and strength then yet they
have: for undoubtedly they would use the power of Germany and other the
protestants that now do assist the king in the defense of his successine and
lawful right to this crown, which they endeavor to wrest from him, and al
other the princes of his blood and family.

This is the cause that the King (being well informed of the drifts and
practices aforesaid, has dispatched the L. Vicount of Turenne to the Queen
of England, and thence into Germany, to assure the protestant Princes of the
contrary of that that his enemies have bruited among them to his hindrance,
and to show them that it was no news that he used the service of catholics,
considering he had the like before he came to this crown. Also, that he
intended equally to favor and use all his obedient servants and subjects
without acception or difference of religion: with assurance likewise to the
said Lady the Queen of England and protestant princes of Germany, that at
what time soever he shall cause himself to be instructed in the catholic
religion, he will withal procure to al christendom the benefit of reunion in
one sole faith and religion, thereby at once to cease all divisions, wars and
partialities arising upon the diversity of opinions in religion. Let us
therefore, I pray you, a little examine what may bring to all christendom in
general, and particularly to this realm, the accomplishment of your desires.

It were somewhat if the king were instructed and brought to the cath. Apost.
and Romish religion, and with all my heart my self do wish it as earnestly as
any of you, yet must you with me confess, that albeit we might reap the
contentment of the fight hereof, yet his subjects that are endued with the
like opinion, would not nevertheless be so soon reclaimed: witness Cassiodorus
who in the person of Theodorike king of the Goths does say: Religion
depends not upon our commandment, for no man is forced to believe against
his will: witness also S. Bernard, who in another place says: Faith must be
persuaded, not forced, whereby these two great personages do freely confess,
that kings have no power over the consciences: besides that, nothing should be
so voluntary as religion, wherein, if the spirit be forced, it may well be said,
that religion is taken away, and there is none at all left. And indeed we have
found that our kings how zealous catholics soever, could not in threescore
years space neither by their examples of earnest Catho. Apost. and Romish
religion, neither by fires, tortures or temporal weapons tame or force the
consciences of their subjects. To what purpose then were it for the king to be
a catholic, unless his protestant subjects would so become also? I do already
seem to hear some cry out saying: we would persuade, yea, even force the king
to denounce war against them, unless they would conform themselves. Alas, so
should yereturne into that whereout out ye seek to depart. You say, The king
becoming a catholic, we shall be at peace: yet in your other discourse you
see, that creeping out of one war, we shall fall into another as dangerous, or
rather worse then the former. Let us then cry alarm as much as we list, for
that is no cure for our calamities: weapons provoke weapons, and our minds only
are sick, which we must seek to cure by documents and reasons only. Thus
much for the particularity of this realm.

Shall the general state of christendom be any whit the better? Is the king
more able to reduce foreign protestant Nations to the cath. apost. Romish
religion? There will be no want of firebrands of war to tell me with their usual
discourses: That the king who is a great warrior, may with the assistance of
the coin and forces of our holy father the Pope, and the King of Spain, in
few years reduce the foreign people and Nations into the bosom of the
Romish church. Such discourses are much amiss, as experience of that which is
past teaches us: for so should we reenter into such a laborinth, as without
other more mild and lawful means, and Gods great help, we shall not easily
get out again: yea, so should we fall to turning of an infinite wheel, able
to lead us and all christendom to a final destruction.

Moreover, ye are to think, that it were very unseemly to the inviolable
faith of the king, to his constancy, invincible magnanimity, honor and
reputation, so slightly and suddenly to alter his religion, whether in hope
of a more peaceable reign, or in intent to force and rack consciences, and in
all extremity to leauy war against those that have assisted him in all his
adversities, and against whom we are to imagine, that he bears no bad mind,
since himself being in the like case has felt, that even in his soul, he
thought it good. Which also is the cause, that he judging others affection to
religion by his own, will not force the cousciences of us catholics, and
would you then that he should force the protestants? Judge ye whether it were
any reason. Do we mean to play with the K. and make him in his actions (which
ought to be kept in measure and compass) walk after our fantasies? Let us at
this time be content with his declarations published both before and since his
coming to this crown, which have relation hereto, and do open to us his
resolution.

I have peradventure more briefly then I should, or then the matter deserves,
touched such inconveniences as are to be feared, or may come to pass, in case
the king should reclaim himself to the cathol. religion as readily as some
do desire: but because by this little that I have said, others may easily
supply such considerations as may be contained in this behalf, which I leave
to the discretion of those that list more deeply to penetrate thereinto, I will
proceed to entreat of the profit and commodity that may redound to al
christendom, so long as the king stands fast in the declarations which he
has published both before and since his coming to the crown, for matter of
conscience and religion, wherein he always submitted him self to the
determination of a general or national council.

The king is not alone in this realm of his religion, there are but over many
instructed therein, that do profess the same. Neither in this realm alone are
there many withdrawn from the Romish Church, but also in England, Scotland,
Denmark, Sweden Poleland, Germany, Switzerland, and other places, being more
then half christendom. What way therefore do ye think to be best to reclaim
al these nations to the obedience of the cath. apost. Romish church, whether
war, or a free general council? Inquisitions, fires, gibbets, murders,
wars, battles, fiege of towns, leagues, conuenticles, slaughters, assaults,
poysonings: in brief, all other means and subtilities in the world, that
these 30. years could be practiced to the great desolation and detriment of al
christendom, but especially of this realm, have as yet nothing prevailed.
Only they have made a number of Atheists, Libertines and Epicures, contemners
of God, his word, and church: we have found these medicines to be no fitter to
the cure of the sickness of the mind, then is a strong, clean, and fuming wine
to the frantike or burning ague: but rather to resemble oil to quench a
flaming fire: or as when a man has pain in his arm, for the curing thereof to
cut off his leg, or other member. My masters, the Apostles and ancient fathers
of the Church never used any such tools for the rooting out of those errors
and heresies which from time to time were sown and planted therein. Mark in
the Acts of the Apostles what they did in the beginning, in the cutting off of
meats, and abolishing of Iudaisme which some through the circumcision went
about to continue in the church, after grace given by Jesus Christ. Consider
what the Emperor Constantine the great did for the suppression and condemning
of the heresy of Arrius. See also what other Emperors did in like cases, what
course thy took to abolish the heresies of the Nestorians, Pelagians,
Anabaptists, and others, as the Counselles called for the same do testify. Why
then shall not we do the like in these days, where the question concerns not
a handful of people retired from the Romish church, but even half
christendom?

But now here comes some angry fellow that will tell me, that the heresies
of these days are already condemned by the council of Trent: and therefore, if
that a process already judged even by decree, where all parties have answered
reciprocally, is not to be reduced to the file, what shall then become of a
process judged by default, and contumacie, where the parties have neither
appeared nor answered? But omitting al other causes of nullitie aleadged
against the said Council, as by sundry books expressly written does appear:
the Protestants and Huguenots do say and complain that they are not heard in
the said council of Trent. That albeit they were thereto summoned and called,
yet they durst not appear, as doubting of the safety of their persons, by
reason of a certain principle both then, and yet holden by some of our
divines, importing, That faith is not to be kept with heretics: and fearing
the like success as happened to those, who contrary to the public faith, and
the Emperor Signismundes safeconduct, were put to death at the council of
Constance. If we were once sufficiently grounded to condemn this opinion and
error, may we not be so again? It is not the first time that there have been
diverse councels holden for the rooting out of one self heresy. Since there
have been two Councels holden in Italy, and one Sinode in France, for the
determining of the opinion of a mean Deacon of Saint Maurice of Angiers, is it
not greater reason to call a general free council for so many peoples and
nations of Christendom, as at this day are of diverse opinions? Let us then
show that we fear not the touchstone: yea, let them know that equity and
truth are on our side, which can never be reuersed in the presence of God, who
by his holy spirit always assisteth a free council lawfully assembled and
holden.

I could be content here to make a digression and exclamation against our holy
fathers the Popes, who are or should be the common fathers of all faithful and
Catholic people, for suffering so much christian blood to be shead about these
arguments and controversies in religion: also, for that they have rather
favored, allowed, and consented to the leuying of such wars hereabout, then
used the spiritual sword, the which is Gods word, for the cutting off of the
course of heresy: but in respect of the reverence of their memory: the place
that they have holden, the honor that I owe to that holy sea, and eschewing of
offense, I will hold my peace.

I say therefore, that as this sickness of diversity of opinions in religion
is spiritual, so it is requisite thereto to apply spiritual remedies and
medicines. To say with some, that the king is to be instructed, we may say as
much of al other that hold the same opinions as he does, and so when shall we
have done teaching of every one particularly? Again, think you so to win the
consent of the inhabitants of England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, Germany, and
other countries that have free exercise of their religion without controlement?
Ween you that the doctors of Sorbonne, and other such divines shall be
welcome to them in particular, when they come to minister unto them this food
and instruction? Ye are deceived: it is a mere mockery, neither can that be
the necessary remedy to this disease. Nothing but a general council can cure
so general a sickness. For the honor of God therefore, my Masters, you that
are servants to God and the king, as well Clergy men as others, never
withstand this course. And you of the League, let reason rule you, as well your
affairs are but in bad case: I say and affirm, that unto such as in lieu of
employing themselves about the calling of a general council, shall withstand
and hinder the same, we may justly attribute the causes of whatsoever damage
may ensue to the catho. apostol. and Romish religion, aduowing that they be
guilty and answerable before god for all the robberies, murders, fires, spoils,
ransoms, violations, ruins, calamities, and other outrages, and excess of the
wars. I know well enough, my masters, that many of you do wish that the king
would become a catholic, to the end ye might have peace, and ye desire peace
to the end to return to your houses, there to enjoy your woonted commodities
and pleasures. But if ye obtain not this wish at Gods hand, ye may be well
assured, that (as in a certain place it is said) it is because ye ask
amiss. God knows your hearts, and can answer you as Christ answered the
sons of Zebede, Ye wot not what ye ask: Let us first therefore ask and
seek after the kingdom of God and his righteousness, so shall all things be
added thereto. For I do certainly believe that the first point requisite
hereto, were to change and reform our manners, our pride, vanity, covetousness,
ambition and pleasures, with other our sins and bad demeanors, and to embrace
charity with the love of God and our neighbor, which at this day are not only
cooled, but even almost quite quenched in us. But since I am no divine, without
grounding my self any deeper upon divinity, I will end this discourse in the
same simple style wherein I began.

A hundred and a hundred times, considering the spoils and desolations
proceeding of the tragedies stirred up throughout Christendom, but especially
in this realm, under the pretense of diversity of opinions in matter of
religion, I have studied how they might be appeased, yet still my mind has
given me, and I have thought it good (under Gods good pleasure, who only is
able to free us from these miseries) for some mighty christian prince, touched
with the spirit of God, a lover of his own salvation, together with the peace
and union of the universal Church, whose word and faith had never been called
in question, to labor to the pope, emperor, and other christian kings and
princes, to summon an assembly in manner of a council, or general conference,
whereto it might be lawful for all christian nations to send their ambassadors,
deputies, doctors and divines, men of mild and tractable humors, such as
especially respected the glory of God, the salvation of themselves and their
neighbors, and the peace of all christendom, to the end, by the testimony
and authority of the holy scriptures, the ancient councels, the doctors and
fathers of the church, such as have always been received and allowed, to
agree and conclude upon a public and general confession of faith, that may
touch whatsoever is in controversy, or diversely interpreted concerning the
catholic apostolic and Romish doctrine and religion, as also that every the
said ambassadors and deputies should be authorized with epseciall power and
proxy sufficient to grant, promise and swear in the behalf of those that
might have chosen, and sent them, to observe and keep, and religiously and
inuiolably to cause to be observed and kept, whatsoever shall be decided,
concluded and decreed in the said assembly. And withal reuoluing in my mind
who were the fittest prince in christendom, whom god might use as an
instrument in so great a work, my heart gave me above 8. years since, that
the king now reigning temporally over us, was most meet: yea, and ever since
have I bin persuaded, that god still preserved him to that end. In which
persuasion I am greatly confirmed, when privately I call to mind Gods wonderful
works, in the calling and bringing him to this crown. For it has bin
marvelous yea, I would gladly say even miraculous, had not every one seen it,
or had not many particularities been noted in sundry former writings: either
if I wist, that among the kings servants (for to them specially do I direct my
speech) there were any yet so dull, as not to have considered, and diverse times
meditated upon the course of things passed, I could gladly stay upon a brief
rehearsal of the same in this place: but studying for brenitie, least I should
be tedious, I will only say thus much: that since so extraordinarily, contrary
to the opinion and expectation of a great part, and against the wills of many
French men, and some mighty foreign ennemies, GOD has raised up, and placed in
the seat royal, him whom they rejected and proclaimed vnwearthy, I am fully
and steadfastly resolved, that he has called and chosen him, not only to reign
over this realm, but also to be the mean of peace and union throughout the
catho. apostolic and Romish church, and to root out all schisms, divisions
and abuses, that may have bin crept in or norished through the corruption of
the time. Which foundation once laid, I will with Saint Paul add thus much,
that such as do resist the kings dominion over this realm, do resist the
ordinance of God, and so purchase to themselves eternal damnation: and
therefore to the end to appease Gods wrath, all the subjects of this crown
ought to unite themselves in one will, to acknowledge and obey the king, that
so we may attain to a peace, whereby things decayed may be redressed, small
ones increased, justice flourish, and order, which by wars is subverted and
corrupted, be restored in all estates and sunctions, and finally the king, at
the humble suite of his good and faithful subjects may deal with the said
Pope, Emperor, and other Kings and Princes christian, for the assembling and
gathering of a general free council, wherein to abolish and end all
controversies, and to reform whatsoever is any where corrupted or amiss in
matter of religion.

Me thinks that already I hear a common consent of al nations christian, to
hearken to this so necessary a motion: yea, that I even hear them say, that
since the king is the dealer, and that the general council shall be assembled
under his faith and word, they will not henceforth fear to send their
ambassadors and deputies, as being assured that every one may come safely: that
with all liberty they shall be received unto a free debating of their reasons
and declarations, and to lay open whatsoever the imaginations of their minds
in matter of religion, without any fear of molestation in their lives and
persons. For what Prince was there ever more careful of his faith then the
King? Since his euemies have and daily do rely thereupon, shall not his friends
do the like? But withal it is meet that the said nations together with their
ambassadors and deputies, consieering that it is the honor and glory of God,
the quiet and salvation of their souls, and the peace and union of the
universal Church that is to be dealt in, should be admonished, laying aside
all affections and particular passions, all covetousness, ambition, bitterness
and obstinacy, to come and bring to the said assembly mild and tractable
minds, easy to be illuminated and guided by the light of Gods word, together
with the authority of the doctrine of the ancient councels and fathers of the
Church, and to the same effect, before they enter into matter and conference,
they are to meet and agree upon such authors and books as they will accept to
be the arbitrators and judges of their controversies.

Who doubts any longer of taking this course? What spirit of strife will not
lend his consent hereto? Who is so great an enemy to himself, and to the
whole name of Christianity, as to choose war and temporal weapons rather
then spiritual? The controversy is spiritual, let it be decided with
spiritual weapons; I am content to believe that we al do agree herein, reason
so requires, necessity forces. And I hope that God who with his holy grace
and providence guides al things, will favor the vows and hearty supplications
which daily for the same we do and still will pour forth unto him.

I have already showed that the peace of this realm must proceed of the
holding of this said general council, as also it will be impossible to attain
to the one without the other: it shall not be amiss therefore in few words to
say, that through peace, matter of religion must be stayed by prouiso until the
resolution of what soever shall be agreed, decided and concluded in the said
general council. It is an usual course to knitte again a threede in the
same place where it was broken: and when an Instrument of Music is out of
tune, men use not for to break the rest of the strings, but by wresting and
slacking of them, to reduce them to a consent and harmony as well as they may.
Even so may peace be knit again, and the harmony of this estate be restored in
the place where it was broken. And this may be compassed by reestablishing
things into the same state wherein they were when the Leaguers through their
manifest conspiracies, commotions, and practices, forced the late king to
revoke the Edict that had preserved and maintained us seven years on a row
in happy peace, concord, and tranquillity throughout the realm.

To conclude therefore, in so much as the Leaguers intent in seeming to wish
the king would become a catholic, is wicked and captious, as we have already
showed, also that the intents of others that term themselves the kings
servants, and make the like wish, are not so well grounded, but that they may be
reuersed by other as strong resons, as may appear by such as already have been
debated, let us hereafter cease this importunate and common proposition and
principle, and henceforth inspect all such as shall use it, accompting them for
such, as under a fair and large appearance and pretense do wear I wot not
what ambitious and pernicious web, to the disadvantage of the wealth and
service of the king, and the peace of his estate. And contrariwise, taking the
king at his word, that he will be instructed, and conform himself to
whatsoever shall be decided and determined in a general council, let us stand
upon this latter advise, whereby procuring the kings instruction and
conversion, by the said general council we may reunite the church of God
into one self religion and confession of faith, which is the greatest benefit
that we can at this present crave of our Lord, who will grant our request, in
case our own commodities and particular interestes forgotten and omitted, we
seek only his honor and glary, together with the peace and union of all
christendom.

FINIS.

