A PLAIN AND FAMILIAR Exposition of the Ninth and Tenth Chapters of the
Proverbs of Solomon.

MATTHEW. 13. 35. I will open my mouth in Parables, and will utter the things
which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world. printer's or
publisher's device

LONDON Printed by T. E. for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster-Row at the
sign of the Talbot.

1606.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Anthony Cope, Knight, grace, mercy, and peace
be multiplied.
SIr, your loving acceptance of our former treatise, together with the good
entertainment which it has found with many christian readers, has much
encouraged us to dedicate this also to your favorable patronage. We are now
more willing to make some work for the press, because we have no employment in
the pulpit. And who knows but that others (whom God has graced with far
greater sufficiency) may be stirred up hereby, to publish some of their
godly meditations: that as their faithful labors were formerly like pure
fountains, which did only refresh their particular congregations: so now, by
means of printing, they may be made like great and comfortable rivers, to
water the whole land.

And whereas we and our families have plentifully tasted of your goodness and
mercy, we thought it our bounden duties to manifest our unfeigned
thankfulness for the same: that other Patrons may be moved by your example,
to show the like compassion to their distressed Ministers, that you have done
to us and ours, if our success fall out according to our hope, we purpose (by
Gods assistance) to proceed further in this book of the Proverbs, in the same
method which is here already begun, if otherwise: yet this is our comfort,
that it has been, and is our continual care, and hearts desire, to keep a
good conscience, and to recompense our present silence with the best service
that we are able to perform unto the Church. The God of all mercy and
comfort, multiply his gracious blessings upon you more and more, and grant
all peace and prosperity to all those that faithfully love and seek, the
peace of the Church, and the prosperity of the Gospel.

Your worships in all Christian* duties to be commanded, John Dod, Robert
Cleauer.


To the Christian Reader.
THe wisdom of God, who best knows every man's affections, does testify,
that such as are full do loath an honey Prou. 27. 7.
comb: but to them that are hungry even bitter things beecome sweet. That
which is very good, yea precious, and desired of the best, is distasted of such
as regard not instruction: but that which is good at all, though mean, and
despised of the most, is sauoury to such as soundly seek salvation. The
persuasion whereof has encouraged us to bring forth our provision, and to set
before thee such food as God has enabled us to prepare. We rest assured of
thy Christian love toward us, and providence for thine own soul, that thou will be more affected with the matter of this treatise, being, as we hope,
sound, and without corruption, then offended with the manner thereof, being
homely, and without elegancie. As in expounding this Scripture to our own
flocks, we respected the capacity of our unlearned hearers, so in publishing
the same to others, we tender the profit of the simplest readers. And as for
them that are judicious, and Godly learned, we presume that their own
knowledge, and the reading of more excellent discourses, will minister wisdom,
to make their use of this slender work, as this work will give them occasion
to esteem the better of more excellent discourses. We have thought good to
choose these two Chapters to begin with, though almost in the midst of the
book, that we might propose to thee a pattern of the exposition of both sorts
of parables, as well of such as are set down in form of a treatise, and
continued discourse, as of those which are for the most part single sentences.
If thou shall judge, that there may be any fruit of these travels, we are
minded, if God will, to explicate the rest; but by parts, and at several
times, and not all entirely together. Now in reading of this, observe that the
reasons and uses of the points, are not inferred upon the allegations, or
amplifications, immediately going before, but depend upon the propositions
which are the doctrines raised out of the several verses: And into them are we
compelled to enter abruptly without any precedent introduction to lead us,
least we should either weary our selves in seeking variety of preambles, or
weary thee with innumerable tautologies and repetitions. In the printing, the
pointing in sundry places is misplaced, which in reading thou shall easily
find, and we hope wilt easily redress.

The God of mercy grant thee that grace which we can but wish thee, and by the
efficacy of his spirit work in thine heart the virtue and power of this his
holy word, which we can only by tongue and pen declare unto thee. Amen.

ERRATA:
FOllo 4. line 2. read profess. fol. 6. l. 34. read nouriture. fol. 22. l. 16.
read describing. fol. 23. l. 23. read discourse. fol. 98. l. 9. read heart.
fol. 111. put out, does, the first word of the line. Other faults, friendly
Reader, if thou find any, I pray thee favorably bear with.

A Learned and Fruitful Exposition upon the ninth Chapter of the Proverbs of
Solomon.
Proverbs Cap 9 Ver. 1.
THis Chapter does contain a brief recapitulation or summarie almost of all
the former eight Chapters: containing. First the holy instructions of Wisdom,
in the person of a Princess or great Lady making a banquet. Secondly, the
deceivable and entising slatteries of Sinfulness and Folly, in the person of
a smoth and guilefull harlot.

Wisdom has built her house, etc. (Wisdom or Wisdoms) viz. the most
absolute and sovereign Wisdom, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the perfect
wisdom of his father, (has built her house) that is the Church, which is so
called. 1. Tim. 3. 15. (and hewn out her seven pillars) that is, has most
firmly founded, and perpetually supporteth it with his own hand, which is
more powerful for it, than many pillars and buttresses are to sustain a
material building, whereby also is intended that the Churches safety is
accompanied with beauty, as having pillars hewn out and pollished, and not
made of rough stones without garnishing.

Wisdom, etc. All true wisdom is contained in the holy All true wisdom is
in Gods word.
though these be also there in fullness, but wisdom in this case takes the
first place, and shines out in greatest brightness: In regard whereof, the
Apostle with a kind of insultation, does expostulate with worldly wise men,
where is the wise? where is 1. Cor. 1.
the Scribe? has not God made the wisdom of this world foolishness? that
is, whatsoever policy or reason does compare with the wisdom of the spirit,
or is repugnant to it, or not sanctified by it, that the Lord in word
reproves, and in deed confounds.

First, it ouermatcheth and overthrows all the craft of

Secondly, it is the fountain, from whence is derived all Chap. 1. 4. 5.
and adds to the knowledge of the most judicious and learned.

Reprofe of them that condemn Gods holy ordinances of

Instruction, to renounce and put off our own carnal reason,

Consolation against the crafty heads of subtle foxes, which go about to
circumuent poor simple and harmless christians: David did, their purposes
and counsels shall be turned into folly, as Achitophels was.

Built her house. etc. It belongs only to Christ, both to David though he
Christ only is the builder and beautifier of the Church. Psalm. 51. 18.
was king, and seemed to have the whole disposing of the matter in his own
hand, yet to entreat the Lord to show mercy to Zion and to build up the walls
of Jerusalem: that is, to provide for the safety, increase and good estate of
the godly. If no man, no not Solomon be able by his industry to build an
earthly Psalm 127. 1.
family, much less can any erect a Church which is Gods spiritual
habitation, and to this purpose tends all that is here ascribed to Wisdom,
her house, her pillars, her vittailes, her wine, her table, her maids: that is
Christ his spiritual house, protection, feast, and messengers, for
notwithstanding the ministers be men and not spirits, yet their function is
spiritual, and not humane.

First, he alone has the disposing of the word, vouchsafing God gives his
word where he will.
will. Psalm. 147. 19. 20. Secondly, no man, nor means can be sufficient to
make sufficient ministers, unless he both furnish Romans 10 25. Thirdly, his
spirit conuerteth men's souls, and begets them to everlasting life, and so
Cor. 10. 4. 5.

So far as we wish well to the Church, let us by prayers to Daniell, Psalm.
122. 6.
Nehemiah, and others, notwithstanding the great account they were in with
their Princes.

Reproof of Papists and others that resist God in his work, Elimas, so may
they look for the like success with him. Act. 13. 10.

Consolation, that the case of the Church were not desperate, though it should
come to pass, that men either durst not, or would not, or could not promote
religion, or protect such as proves it: for Christ will not fail of his
faithfulness, Isa. 59. 16.
as he is no way disappointed of his help, for his sufficiency is in
himself, and the work belongs to himself, and he will never desist from
it, until it be accomplished.

Seven pillars. The best way for good safety is to become a Psalm. 125.
Christians only are in safety.
They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed,
wicked men be like to chasse or dust that has no stabilitie, but is easily
driven by the wind into puddles and Psalm. 4.
all other filthy places, without any resistance: but it is as easy to
ouerturne a great mountain, as to overthrow the hope and good estate of the
godly.

First his tender care is continually watchful for their safety, Psalm. 91. 4.
and nearer are they to him, than the chickens to their damme, as being members
of his own body, and the very apple of his eye. Zach. 2. 8.

Secondly, his power is always exercised for their preservation, Iachin, that
is, the Lord will establish, and 1. Kings. 21.
the other Boaz, that is, in him is strength: both these conjoined do make the
safety of his servants complete, if he had power, and not applied it for our
help, our case were nothing the better, if he should set himself to uphold us
and fail of power, we could not stand, and therefore they were assured by
these signs both of the one and the other.

Thirdly, it concerns him in equity, to stand for his own people, that have
cast themselves upon him, and labor in Psalm. 91. 4.

Object. But they are wronged and spoiled and sometimes also killed.

Answer. Gods providence does not free us from troubles, but preserve us in
them, for then it is most seasonable. Wisdom did foresee that there would be
assaults, else why did she make her castle so strong? But this is the happy
estate of Christians, that though they be persecuted, yet they be not
forsaken: and though they be slain, yet not overcome; because the love of
God remains with them, and a blessed reward is prepared for them.

Reproof of fearful persons which have no courage for

Secondly, terror for persecutors and such as oppose themselves Zach. 2. 5.

Thirdly, consolation, though the enemies of the Church be Mat. 16. 18.
Devils shall not prevail against it. And such is the safety of every
particular Christian, both for soul and body, for if one stone could be cast
down, the whole building might be demolished.

She has killed her vitailes, mingled her wine, etc.
Mention was made before of Wisdoms house, and the strength of it; and here
of her hospitality and house keeping in it; where heavenly things are
represented by earthly, and the bounty and magnificence of the Lord, by the
plentiful provision of a liberal feast-maker. For the graces of his spirit by
the ministry of the word, are compared to dainty meats and delicious wines,
either spiced, or mingled with choice kinds of cool waters, whereby in those
hot countries they were much refreshed. Whereunto is added the circumstances of
readiness; that there needs no tariance, or long waiting, but all things are
in order and commodiously prepared for the present refection of the guests.

Killed her vitailes, etc. The best cheer is that which is The souls food is
the best fare.
circumstances in the Parable of the great feast. Mat. 22. 2. 3. As that it was
made by a King; and therefore not common, but costly according to his royal
state and greatness: and was also a wedding feast; which is usually great and
full of solemnity: and made at the marriage of his own son; which
consequently would cause it to be much more sumptuous and magnificent, then if
it had been for a servant or kinsman, or ordinary person. By all which is
meant the Gospel, wherein every faithful man is feasted, and made Gods son,
and married to Christ himself.

One reason to prove this doctrine is, the resemblance and

Another reason is, the differences that are between them, only for the
belly, and help against nothing but the present hunger and thirst; this
brings with it safety, wealth, dignity, and all happiness. Sixthly and
lastly, here is open house kept continually for all comers, nations, ages,
and states, without any disparagement to the greatest, or contempt of the
meanest: none is excluded that is willing to be admitted: none is vpbrayded
for coming too often, the more they frequent the house, the more they shall be
made of, and the better welcome.

Confutation of such as stand upon the merit of man for salvation: Wisdoms
royal feast; and that is frank and free, and from his own goodness. Great
personages, especially Princes use not to take a shot when they have given
entertainment.

Instruction, that we come to the word and Sacraments Isa. 55. 1.
and a certain expectation to be satisfied.

Consolation for poor Christians that find such plenty of Psalm. 63. 1. and 5.

Mingled her wine, etc. It is not the wit of man but the I create the fruit of
the lips to be peace. It is Isa. 57 19.
as proper to him to give peace by the preaching of the word, Gods wisdom,
not m^ns wit, makes the word comfortable.
as to give being and form to a creature; or to take away the corruption and
punishment of sin. Else what need had David to call upon him to make him
hear of joy and gladness? if it had been in man's power, he might have
commanded it at his subjects hands; and the Priests and Prophets would Psalm.
51. 8.
have thought it a preferment to be admitted to that service: but he knew it
was no more possible for the best qualified of them to remove his sorrow
without Gods blessing, then for a surgeon to cure a wound with his white hand
without a plaster.

First, joy is a fruit of the spirit. Gal. 5. 22. Secondly, to give Isa. 40. 1.
True it is that men may be the instruments of both these, but the author of
neither.

Thirdly, it is seen by wonted experience, that they which have the finest
wits, the greatest art, and sweetest tongues Ier. 23. 31.

Reproof of such ministers as judge it a base thing to content

Terror to them that distaste all kind of sincere teaching,

Prepared her table. Gods savor and grace is always ready They that
^aithfully seek ^ods savor, ^oe surely ^nde it.
take him ta^dy in desiring that at the present which he cannot give till
hereafter, or in being before hand to demand that which his ability is
behind hand to perform. The messengers say not in the gospel, be there at
such a time, and in the mean while things shall be prepared, or go with me
now, and dinner will be ready anon, but come, for all things are now ready.
^uke. 14. 17.


The first cause is in respect of God himself, whose provident his Church and
children, whose state does as much require continual grace, as the light of a
lamp has need of oil to maintain it.

Confutation of their impious error, that think the word Chapter 3 28.
till to morrow, when we have wherewith to relieve him to day, and certain it
is, that the Lord does not require more justice and compassion of his
creatures, then himself will show his own children. But those men find the
case to be so: they speak by experience, they never got any good by coming to
such exercises, it is like to be true, but why? they came not as friends, but
as spies, and spies will be espied out and turned away empty. The comforts of
the word and spirit be prepared for them that love God. 1. Cor. 2. 9.

Instruction, that if we at any time fail of good success in

Consolation, that if we feel want of any grace, or of power Mat. 25. 34.

She has sent forth her Maids. etc.
In the former words was showed what preparation wisdom made for her feast at
home, and in these what course she takes to inuit the guests abroad, her
maids are sent forth as messengers into the streets, and gates, and market
place, which commonly are frequented with greatest multitude and concourse of
people, to call as many as they can meet with: not that maids or matrons or
any women are allowed to be ministers, but he prosecuteth the allegory every
part of it correspondent and suitable to other, as Christ himself understood by
wisdom is compared to a Lady, so his Prophets, Apostles, pastors, and
teachers are resembled to maids, which in regard of sex are most meet to
wait upon women.

God in his wisdom has appointed that they that will The ministry of the
word the means of salvation by Gods ordinance. 2. Cor. 5 18.
his messengers, so the Apostle teaches, that all things are of God, which
has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us (says
he) the ministry of reconciliation: the father of his own goodness has
vouchsafed to be at one with us: he has appointed his son to make the
peace, and his word to declare the performance of it by the son, and his
ministers to publish it by warrant of his word.

First, Chirst has substituted them to be his deputies, and Cor. 5. 19.

Secondly, our necessity is such as does require the help of

Thirdly, the Lord does so highly esteem of their service, by them shall never
attain unto it without them. Luke. 14. 24.

Instruction to be teachable and tractable to their persuasions Isa. 50. 20.

Reprofe of such as account them unnecessary and unprofitable, Mat. 22 6.

Consolation for such as have them in singular love for their works sake,
dealing kindly with the ministers and taking the

Christ Jesus has appointed the preaching of the gospel to Christ would have
the gospel openly taught that all might be instructed.
the Apostle to be so industrious in his function, and desirous every where to
preach, both to the Jews and Gentiles. It was his bounden duty so to do: he
did owe them that service: the Lord bequeathed unto them the ministry of
salvation, and made him an executor of his will, and therefore he Romans 1. 13.
14.
was in their bebt, until he had discharged it.

First, all the doctrine of God is perfectly true and will

Secondly, his goodness is such that he would have no Peter. 3. 9.

Thirdly, he has ordained it to be necessary and effectual Titus. 2. 11.

Fourthly, it is expedient for the rebuke of sinful men. Isa. Isa. 40 9. and
the edification of all men. Romans 16. 26.

Reproof of Jesuits, Seminaries, and Brownists, which delight ministers which
never dwelt in wisdoms family, nor received any message from her, and
therefore are utterly unable to declare her mind.

Who so is simple etc.
Here is a description of the guests that be meet for this feast, which in
show seem most unmeet, as being most unlike the Mistress of the feast: and
these are simple persons, destitute of spiritual understanding, yet so as they
feel the want of knowledge, and the weight of their ignorance, and lean no
longer on worldly wisdom.

Who so. Ignorance is not a cause that should stay men from The more ignorant
we are, the more need we have of instruction.


First, their necessity does require it: for who has more need of eie-salue,
then they whose eyes are sore? And who have more need of guides, then they who
have lost their sight and are bee-come blind? And especially when the way is
difficult and full of danger.

The virtue and efficacy that is in the word should allure them unto it: for
it is sufficient to illuminate, and give light to all that seek it. Psalm. 19.
7. 8. etc.

Instruction for the ministers of Christ so to deliver the doctrine Cor. 14.
19. 24.

Reproof of such as affect obscurity, that the vulgar sort

Consolation for poor unlearned men when they come to Mat. 11. 52.

Fourthly, for the confutation, first, of the Popish service in a strange
language, wherein the simple people be so far that they understand not the
very words that are spoken, and therefore God never ordained it for the use of
his Church. Whereupon also follows, that those priests be none of wisdoms
attendants, being neither fit to be messengers abroad to call the guests, nor
to be officers at home to give them entertainment. Secondly, of such as make
ignorance their appologie for persistance in ignorance. It is, say they, for
scholars, and men of judgment to hear sermons, and not for the unlearned.
Here is that excuse taken away, and so has this text hitherto met with many
other shifts and euasions which men have devised to exempt their necks from
Christ his yoke. First say they, this preaching and other exercises of religion
be foolish and rediculus: but wisdom is the author thereof. Secondly, they
be dangerous to deal with: but she has hewn out seven pillars. Thirdly,
they be tedious and unpleasant: but she has made a banquet. Fourthlie, we
can learn as much by reading good books, as the best Preacher can teach us:
but she has sent forth her maids. Fifthly, sermons are hard to come by, where
should we have them? She cries upon the hye places. Sixthly, we are simple
men and want understanding: but she says: Who so is simple let him come
hither, and he that is destitute of understanding etc.

Come and eat, etc.
The exhortation which wisdom uttered by her maids is again repeated, to
express the serious desire and true meaning of the messengers and masters in
calling of the guests, and to let them know also, that as they are bidden by
way of inuitation, so they are commanded by way of summons, and therefore to
address themselves thereunto with all expedition. And because it is not their
presence only that is required, but a profitable vse-making of the undeserved
favor that is showed unto them, therefore they are before hand informed to
what end they are sent for, to eat and drink of the delicates prepared, which
is to receive the merits and graces of Christ, with the promises of God, and to
make them their own by faith, and particular application.

It concerns us duly to embrace the mercies of God when When God offers
instruction we ought to receive it.
should enjoy them: otherwise they should never have been provided. So by the
Prophet he proclaims Isa. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to
the waters, and ye that have no silver, come, buy, and eat: etc. There is no
vitailer so desirous of guests for his own gain, as Christ is of our company
for our salvation, he would have utterance of his heavenly food that it stand
not upon his hand, and therefore calls upon all that feel themselves in
want, to come take their part with him. And because they be needy and unable to
discharge the reckoning, he is content to be paid with a good stomach to fall
to, he would have them work it out at eating and drinking, that is, he does
bestow it upon them of his own free favor without all desert of their part.

First, God never offers any thing unto us, which is not Luke 14. Isa. 7 13.
Thirdly, not to receive the gifts which the Lord does proffer Ca. 1. 24. 25.
Act. 13. 41. Fourthly, benefits not accepted, draw judgments after them Cap. 1
27.

Admonition to make use of the ministry of the word, not Ioh. 6. 53.

Reproof of Recusants and Brownists, that will not repair with the
congregation of Gods people to the place whether the meat, and the dishes set
before others.

Consolation to them whose hearts do feel the comfort of

Forsake the foolish. etc.
Now she gives rules of direction to them that were called, the better to
fit them for her family: as first for their company, that since they are to
have society with the saints in the church, they are to separate themselves
from the sinners of the world. Whereunto she persuades them by the good
effect ensueing, that the gain of everlasting life will counteruaile and
ouerpoise the loss of all worldly and fleshly friends.

The other is for conversation, that for as much as they are to dwell with
wisdom (for all the guestes are domestical and of the household) that
therefore all their ways and behavior, be holy and agreeable to wisdom.

When we begin to cleave to God and good men, we must If we will be good men,
we must forsake ill company.
the first points of counsel that Peter gave to the three thousand whom he
then presently converted, and that which with many words he did exhort them
unto, that they would save themselves from that froward generation. If they
would have God to save them from damnation, they must save themselves from the
fellowship of damnable men. Act. 2. 40.

First, in regard of the case wherein they stand, as appears leave them, and
live. Secondly, in respect of behavior, as the Forsake the foolish and so
walk in the way of wisdom; for sooner they cannot, being corrupted with
examples, company; counsels, and all pestilent and contagious courses: and
therefore says the Prophet. Away from me ye Psalm. 119 115.
wicked, for I will keep the commandments of my God.

Thirdly, it brings them that use such haunts, into suspicion

A defense of them that show their obedience therein, ceassing

Instruction to such as desire good men to be sociable with 2. Cor. 6. 16.
light and darkness, righteousness and unrighteousness, God in the one, and
Beliall in the other.

Reproof of them that can indifferently brook all companies,

The other two clauses of this verse are reserved to be handled in sit place.

He that rebukes, etc.
Hitherto has been showed how the message of salvation was sent by Christ,
and brought by his ministers: now here is declared how it is received of the
people. And first, he brings in such as be incapable of it, namely,
desperate wicked men, being altogether incurable, whom the Scripture terms
skorners. And these will attempt to blemish and shame all those that shall
admonish them: As charging them sometimes with arrogancy, malice,
indiscretion and hypocrisy: sometimes with scisme, sedition, covetousness and
other misdemeanors: and if these imputations can take no hold on them, as
grounded on no probability, then they fall upon their mean estate, and
parentage, and education: for so they dealt with the Lord Jesus Christ
himself. Mat. 13. 55.

The most faithful Ministers be commonly exposed to The best men most defamed
men will not spare to deprave them unjustly. And for this purpose whatsoever
comes to hand will serve their turn: If they can prove no evil by them, it
is enough to traduce them for too much goodness. So was John accused to be a
devilish wretch, for being, as they made it, too precise and pure in
mortification: and Christ on the other side condemned Mat. 11. 18. 19.
of intemperancie, for inioying a more free liberty in the holy use of the
creatures.

First, hereby they use a policy to shift for themselves,

Secondly, they seek to revenge themselves in this, by Amos. 7. 10. Isa. 29.
21.

Instruction not to deal like scorners, in seeking to blemish

Secondly, that ministers and such as are to admonish, be not

Thirdly, not to be credulous to the clamorous reports of

Rebuke not a scorner, lest he hate thee: etc.
In the former verse was showed how scorners use to deal with them that rebuke
them: and here the holy Ghost teaches how we must deal with scorners.
Namely, since we shall needelessely stir up hatred against our selves, and
perform no good to them, that therefore we desist from them, and let them
alone. Wheerein notwithstanding good discretion is to be used, that none which
may be corrigible be rejected for a scorner, but such as upon sufficient
trial have declared themselves by a continued obstinacy to be so. And in
this case also, though private reproves are to be spared, yet must they
publicly be pursued by the ministry, and censured by the Church, and
punished by the magistrate.

The benefit of Christian counsel is no to be offered to Obstinate persons
are unworthy a reproof.
place of this book. Cap. 23. 9. Speak not in the ears of a fool, for he
will despise the wisdom of thy words. He would not have the gracious speeches
of godly Christians to be powered into his ears which is well known not to
suffer them to sink into his heart to work grace there, but sets heart, and
lips and life contemptuously to despise them.

First, it is a certain loss of labor to deal with them, and

Secondly, it is a loss of those precious admonitions: the Mat. 7. 6.

Thirdly, it cannot be without peril to our selves which

Instruction to be very circumspect what persons we deal

But rebuke a wise man, etc.
Now he comes on the contrary side to commend the competent hearers of
Wisdom, upon whom good lessons are well beestowed. And they are described,
first by their willing receiving of instruction, that they love them the better
that shall deal plainly with them: Secondly, by the good use they make of it,
increasing both in knowledge and practice of understanding, and therefore are
called, wise and righteous.

Rebuke. Men of best knowledge and pie^^^ ^ust sometimes David, so was The best
may mend.
Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Peter, and many other. Rich garments require brushing,
and fine linen has need of washing, and the most pleasant and delightful
gardens must oftentimes be weeded.

First, original corruption does cleave unto their nature and

Secondly, God has ordained it as a medecin for humility

Thirdly, it is a bond whereby one Christian is knit to an

Instruction, First, that the good gifts of Gods children cause Iac. 5. 20. And
by this means God shall be served, and his Scripture obayed on both sides:
whiles the one part does brotherly admonish according to the precept that here
is given, and the other part does kindly accept it according to the reason
anexed.

Confutation of them that too far justify the ways of good

It is a note of a man that is truly religious to increase in He is truly
gracious, that grows in grace.
meat, and have good digestion of it, when they grow in stature, strength, and
stomach. So was it said in the first Chapter: A wise man shall hear and
increase in learning. The bare hearing does not necessarily argue a wise man.
For fools do often bring their ears to the word, but to hear, and learn,
and to learn with increase, that does testify an holy wisdom.

Gods blessing does accompany such as have sincerity in Luke. 8. 18.

Secondly, sound understanding does discover the defect of

Thirdly, they know the wants of these heavenly Iuels, that

Fourthly, the former tasting and feeding on this celestial food

Instruction to approve our wisdom and righteousness in These. 4. 1. So shall
we be enriched with more full holiness. 2. Cor. 7. 1. So shall we be
established more firmly, and kept from all apostacy and backesliding. 2 Pet.
3. 17. 18.

Reproof of Nonproficients, which are taught much and Apoc. 3. 17.
said they were rich and increased with goods, and wanted nothing, then they
were wretched, and miserable, and poor, and had nothing. He that has as much
grace as ever he did desire, did never truly desire to have any. And he that
does purpose never to be better, will presently grow to be worse, and last of
all prove to be stark naught.

Consolation for such as be of the mending hand, though

The beginning of Wisdom is the fear of the Lord, and
Having so much commended Wisdom and so earnestly persuaded men unto it, he
shows now wherein it does consist, that men might not be deceived by the
counterfeit color of it, discriding it.

First, by the matter, that is, true piety and religion, called commonly in
the word the fear of God, because it is an essential part thereof: and this
is not a case contingent, as though wisdom and piety might sometimes
concur in one person and sometimes be disseuered: but necessary and
perpetual, the one being always the beginning of the other.

Secondly, by the manner, that it is not the knowledge of natural things that
is in Philosophers: nor the knowledge of civil affairs that is in
Politicians: nor the historical and artificial knowledge of points of
Religion that is in hypocrites: but the mystical knowledge of the mysteries of
salvation, which the spirit of God does reveal to the hearts of Christians. 1.
Cor. 2. 10. 11.

No man can be truly wise before he be unfeignedly religious, Solomon had
experience both of heavenly wisdom and Religious men only are wise.
humane wisdom, of the show of the one, and soundness of the other, and thus
does he declare his judgment: Let us Eccle. 12. 13.
fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole man, nothing but
this can make a man to be a man, without which he is in worse state then a
beast: his glory and excellency consists in it, and all his profit and
comfort proceeds from it.

First, God himself does usually in his word call all unregenerate Deuteronomy. 32.
28. 29. now he sees all things as they be, and not as they seem to be: and
foreseeth all events that shall fall out hereafter, and therefore his
testimony is to be received.

Secondly, Wisdom is a stream that flows only from Lo they have rejected
the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is there in them. Ier. 8. 9.

Many infallible fruits of the spirit be enclosed in it and issue Iam. 3. 17.

The miserable condition of all irreligious people, whereas

Instruction, that if we would have the estimation, comfort, Deuteronomy. 4. 6.

Confutation of them that esteem all to be wise that go Achitophell more
witty then any? and did he not ^^t play the fool more then all? has not
Satan more subtilty and cunning then all the men in the world? and yet the
most foolish creature to work his own woe that ever God made in the world.
The Scripture calls him a principallitie and a power and speaks of his
craft, but no where gives him the testimony of wisdom. And to them that
know how to feather their nests and increase their state. The rich man in the
gospel may be a president: he could get, and save, and keep, and thrive as
long as he lived, and yet God Luke. 12. 20. 22
called him fool when he died: and so (says he) is every one that gathers
riches to himself and is not rich in God.

Consolation against the reproaches, that are cast upon men

And the knowledge. Sound and sanctified knowledge is the No true devotion
without true knowledge.
be no sincere piety: so says God himself in the first Chapter, ver. 29.
They hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. Which Job
reproues in the wicked worldlings of his time: they say to God, depart from us,
we desire not the knowledge of thy Job. 21. 14. 15.
ways, who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit shall
we have if we should pray to him? wherein they declare that they hate his
presence, and reject the knowledge of his will, and cast off all care of his
worship, and so there is an irreligious heart, an ignorant mind, and an
impious behavior.

First, faith does never go without it: for faith is a persuasion,

Secondly, the understanding is the eye of the soul to give

Thirdly, there can be no exercise of godliness (which is the very breath of
all religion) where the commandment and

Fourthly, the devil has the dominion of them that live ^he. 6. 12.
he takes, and holds, and leads them according to his will: and he will
never be willing that either God should be served, 2. Tim. 2. 26.
or any man should be saved.

Instruction to use all industry and diligence to get knowledge: especially
that which has the stamp of grace upon it, and is proper to the people of
God. Send to heaven for it by prayer to the Lord: search in the word for it
with all good endeavors: by hearing and reading, by meditation and conference,
by observation and experience, and all other good exercises.

Confutation of such as be altogether careless of understanding, without
knowledge the mind is not good. Prou. 19. 2. yet they hope in another world to
speed as well as the best: and yet the Apostle teaches that Christ shall come
in flaming fire, rendering vengeance to them that do not know God: do they
speed so well that be condemned? 2. These. 1. 8.

Secondly, of them that have gotten some knowledge, but are void of all
sincerity and obedience: it is not a virtue for their good, but a sin for
their hurt: and though for a time they make it serve their turn for a show,
yet it will turn to their sorrow in the end, for they increase the hardness of
their heart, and the guiltiness of their conscience, and the number of their
stripes, according to the measure of their fruitles knowledge. Luke. 12. 47.

For thy days shall be multiplied by me, and the years of
After the description of wisdom, whereby it may be rightly discerned is
here proposed the profit and reward of it, whereby we are persuaded to embrace
it: and that is.

First, in a particular, namely, long life: which is not so to be understood
as though it were perpetual and so of absolute necessity: for then good men
must grow to be old men, and all which dye young, should dye wicked and damned:
but that God has the keeping of their lives in such good safety as they shall
never be taken away before due season: they shall not die so soon as that it
would be better for them to live longer: nor live so long as that it might be
hurtful that they died not sooner. This point does Eliphas truly expound to
Job, and all other righteous persons Job. 5. 26. Thou shall go to thy Job. 5.
26.
grave in a full age as a crop of corn comes in due season into the barn.
Now all grain is not of equal proportion of grouth: some is sown before
others, and yet is cut down after them: some is sown after others, and
comes to maturitie before them: so that good husbands dispose not of their
harvest by measure of time, but by the ripeness of their corn: and two
extremities they prouidently avoid: neither too has^y to inn the fruits of
their fields or trees, for so they would wither away: neither to defer the
gathering of them after they be ripe, for so they would drop off, and shed,
and grow to rottenness. Afterward he declares the recompense of wisdom
ingenerall: that the possession and practice thereof is not only a service to
God, nor alone for his sake so often required: but redoundeth also to the
profit of them that be owners and performers of it. And to this is opposed the
contrary state of those perverse and wilful scorners, that howsoever their
desire and purpose is to do mischief to others, yet all their malice
returns on their own heads.

Thy days shall be multiplied, etc. Wisdom and grace do Grace gives
maintenance for this life as well as for eternal life.
good and sufficient continuance in earth. So is she said to come like a
liberal and bountiful Lady. Chap. 3. 16. which brought her hands full to
bestow upon her friends: length of days being in her right hand, and in her
left hand riches and glory: because life it self is more precious then wealth
and advancement which depend upon it, and are but ornaments of it, therefore
she brings the continuance of that in her right hand, as a gift of greater
value: and the other in the left as inferior to it, but all very excellent
coming out of those glorious hands.

First, that providence and power of God does protect us

Secondly, his angels have a charge to keep us, by whose Psalm. 91. 10. 11.

Thirdly, the fear of God does make the heart good, and

Fourthly, a good man will seek to God by prayers, in the Ezekias did in a
case extraordinary, always resigning themselves to his will.

Fifthly, a godly man will be trusty to himself in the keeping

Confutation, of them that think the services of wisdom

Instruction to take this holy receipt, which is a medicine

Consolation, to them that have a good conscience that hands. That is true of
every faithful servant of God, that Abigail did speak concerning David: that
their soul is 1. Sam. 25. 29.
bound in the bundell of life with God, it lies not loose, and scattered for
enemies to find, and take up, or tread upon at their pleasure: but it is in
Gods own custody, and bound up, that it shall neither drop down, nor be
wrested from him. He will defend them in war, and feed them in dearth, and
preserve them in pestilence, and death shall never come before they may
comfortablie bid it welcome. Job. 5. 19. 20.

If thou be wise, etc. Of all men Christians be most provident Only
Christians are good husband.
is given of them by the Lord himself. Chapter 3. 13. 14. Blessed is the man
that finds Wisdom, and the man that gets Understanding. For the
merchandise thereof is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof is better than gold. They that obtain not only the knowledge of
wisdom but the sound and sure possession thereof, which is meant by finding,
are all in a blessed state, not destitute of any happiness. The merchants
which traffic with the Indians for gold, and pearls, and precious stones,
make not their commodity, in any proportion comparable to theirs that deal
with the god of heaven for the graces of his spirit.

First, in respect of outward state they are in good case, the Psalm. 128. 2.
blesses their substance that thereby they are nourished by them: God blesses
their nourishment, that there-withall they have joy and comfort: and if at any
time they fall into afflictions they have supportation in them, deliverance
from them, and benefit by them. All sickness shall be wholesome to them, all
disgraces for their honor: all losses for their gain: all danger for their
safeticall: troubles for their peace and quietness.

Secondly, in respect of the state of their souls, the blessedness such a
benefit which as the Apostle does truly testify, does far surpass the
capacity of all sense and humane reason, which will appear, first, if we
consider, the misery out of which they have escaped: they were the enemies of
God, and are reconciled to him: they were most deeply in debt, and are
discharged of it: they were bond men, and are made free: they were condemned,
and are pardoned: they were dead in sins and trespasses, and are quickened to
everlasting life. Secondly, if we respect the gifts that God vouchsafes them:
their nature is healed, their souls are sanctified, they have a free access
to God, the holy Ghost is in them, Jesus Christ is bestowed upon them: all his
merits, and all his graces, and all his prerogatives are communicated unto
them. Thirdly, the fruit of their wisdom is apparent at their death: for
then does their faith, and faithful behavior stand to them, and visit their
hearts, and animats them with hope against the temptations of Satan, and fear
of hell, and damnation, and all kinds of desperation, if it be true that a
good conscience is a continual Prou. 15. 15.
feast, then especially is it most forcible and comfortable at that time.
Fourthly, the full and perfect reward of it shall be rendered unto them in the
life to come, and chiefly at the last day, in the presence of God, and men,
and Angels, elect and reprobate, and every particular of every sort, who shall
hear their praises, and see their glorious advancement.

Confutation of them, that esteem mortified Christians of Psalm. 2. 3. Let us
break their bonds, and cast their cords from us. As who would say, it is an
imprisonment, and grievous restraint, to be under Christ and his ministry.
Whereas instruction is for his use that does receive it, and not for his will,
that does deliver it: It is not a pack or burden laid upon his shoulders to
carry for others: but as money put into his purse to use for himself.

Instruction to take greatest pains in husbanding the heart,

Consolation against the manifold discouragements which

If thou be a scorner, etc. The wicked be most their own foes, The wicked man
has no foe like himself.
Chapter ver. 35. He that sins against me hurts his own soul, and all
that hate me love death. In all the attempts, and proceedings against good
men, wisdom it self is smitten at, for their quarrel is against the
servants for the mistrisse sake: but they only sin against it, but can do
no hurt unto it: for that redoundeth wholly upon themselves. And though they be
all for themselves, and carried strongly with self love in affection, yet they
do the work of mortal hatred, and become their own deadly foes in effect.

The reasons which were alleged for the former point, will whatsoever
happiness the other attained unto for body, soul, state, or name, in life, at
death, departed, here, and at the resurrection, these shall be deprived of
them.

Terror for sinful men which seem to be in safety and

A foolish woman is always babbling, she is ignorant,
Thus much has been spoken of Wisdoms wholesome banquet, which the lover to
that end proposed, that we might be allured unto it. Now follows the feast
of Folly, which she makes to that end that she may poison her guests, and
God discovers for this purpose that we might avoid it. And here, as also
in that which follows, she is described by her qualities and behavior,
carrying the right stamp, and print of an harlot. One thing is that she is
given to much talk to make an noise, which was the note of the whorish woman.
Chap. 7. 11. The meaning here is, that sinfulness and Satan by the mouths
of sinful persons, do pretend many reasons to justify any wicked cause, and
use cunning persuasions to draw men thereunto, as the unchaste woman does slow
with intising speeches. And though she have a lavish tongue, yet we knowledge,
according as we use to say, that none is so bold, as blind Bayard. The drift
is that the factors for Folly such as labor to promote sin, be utterly
destitute of saving understanding, which was called before the knowledge of
holy men.

She is babbling, etc. It is no sure note of a good cause to Hananiah
maintained his Many words make not a matter good.
cause more stiffly than Jeremy, for he after a sort gave place to the others
confident asseuerations: but Jeremy maintained his cause more truly than
Hananiah, for God and experience confirmed his testimony. Ier. 28. Zidkijah
and his companions the false Prophets were more violent in giving encouragement
to Ahab for his voyage to Ramoth Gili^d: but Michaiay was more faithful in
diswading him from it. 1. Reg. 22.

First, wickedness has many tongues to speak by, all unregenerate

Secondly, Satan does sharpen men's wits, and fine their

Thirdly, all ungodly men by their own disposition are

Fourthly, all the arguments, that are brought for any bad

Fifthly, success does much animate folly, and her adherents men every where
will give him allowance.

Admonition that we never conclude the equity of a cause Moses came to take
up the matter between the two Israelites, he that was most lewd, was most
loud, the offendour that did the wrong, was most ready to complain of wrong
offered. What will thou kill me, as thou did the Egyptian? Act. 7. 27. 27.

Confutation of them that justify Popery, and the corruptions Diaua, were a
glorious goddess, so highly magnified, by the general applause of the
Ephesians. Act. 19. 28. Secondly, of such as take it for an invincible
testimony against the Gospel, and the sincere professors of it, that they be
so much blamed, and so many profess their dislike of them So they dealt with
Jeremy, though he neither bought, nor sold with them, nor offered any color
of injury to them, yet every man spoke evil of him. Ier. 1^. 10. So
Christianity in Paul's time was counted a sect, and every where spoken
against. And so our Savior himself had the sentence of death enforced upon
him by the violent cry of the people.

Ignorant, etc. So far as any man gives himself to be an Follies friends
are most fools
deceivers and evil men are first deceived. 2. Tim. 3. 13. The Devil first
catches one, and makes him a bait to take an other, as it fell out in the
overthrow of our first parents.

First, many of them have their minds darkened with want of knowledge that
they cannot discern betwixt light, and darkness, truth, and falsehood.

Secondly, all the rest have their hearts blindfolded with Deuteronomy. 29. 19.

Reproof of their folly that seek to gather the praise of If any man teach
otherwise, and consents not to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to the doctrine which is according to godliness, he is puffed up and knows
nothing. 1. Tim. 6. 3. Their skill, and readiness in this case to cross the
truth, proves not a spiritual growth, but a fleshly grosenesse, they are not
filled with grace, but swollen with carnal conceitednesse.

She sits at the door of her house on a seat in the hie
He continues still the allegory, resembling wickedness to an harlot, whose
property is to be abroad in the streets to meet with companions, and to
intise man to folly by her looks and beehauiour, which sin does also by her
subtilties to seduce men's souls. And yet she goes not as an ordinary
strumpet, or vagabond, but takes state upon her like a courtizan. She sits
on a seat in the street, which was wont to be a sign of honor. Job. 29. 7.
And the word signifies a throne, or chair of estate, which were for Princes
or principal persons.

On a seat, etc. Great men without grace be as much subject Great men
ungracious may be as sinful as any.
this when it compares such kind of persons to viler creatures. Psalm. 49. 20.
Man in honor which understands not is like to beasts that perish. He
dispraiseth not all men of honor: for when wisdom and dignity meet
together, the one is an ornament to the other: but those that be destitute of
understanding, he matcheth not with common men or vilest people, but makes
equal to the basest kind of brutish beasts.

First, they have the same root, and fountain of corruption

Secondly, they have more allurements to induce them unto

Thirdly, Satan does in a special manner seek to make a Rehoboam the son
of Nebat, that he made Israel to sin.

Instruction to such as be in eminent places, and are great for their places
to pray often, to hear the word and exercise all other services of religion;
unless it be an honorable thing to be a slave to Satan, and fit for their
degree to perish.

Confutation of their opinions, which so admire the state of Eccles. 10. 7.
That folly is set in great excellency, and servants be riding on horses,
when servile men whose hearts be in bondage to sinful lusts, attain to
greatness.

In the high places, etc. Assemblies and meetings of men be seldom without the
company of sinfulness, and Satan. For Sin and Satan frequent great
assemblies.
he will be one in the congregation of God, where they come together to pray
against him, where the Lord strikes at him, and wounds him with his words
and therefore will more boldly come to other assemblies, which be only for
civil affairs, and chiefly when they be for sinful exercises, as may
appear by the effect of Baal-Peors wake. Number. 29.

First, there be many to work upon, and therefore greater

Secondly, there is utterance and vent for many sins which

Thirdly, he has more helps with him there, than when he deals with one
alone in secret. For they that be perverted David, if every one had been singly
solicited, before there was any assembly.

Instruction not to walk streets, or haunt much company stragle abroad without
any warrant. And that was the cause of Dinahs woe, which would needs go forth
to see fashions. Genesis 34. 1.

When our occasions do justly call us to such places, that we

To call them that pass by the way, that go right on
This is the end, and purpose of her being in the streets to do mischief
there: not only to confirm, and harden such as be already entered into lewd
courses, but to pervert and draw away those that be inclined to any goodness.

So soon as any man begins to set himself to seek God, The devil an utter
adversary to all good endeauours.
of the way. So stood the case with the Corinthians, Galathians, and some
other of the Churches, as soon as ever they embraced the doctrine of the
Apostles, presently the false Apostles attempted to corrupt them. Gal. 1. 7.
and 3. 1. And so was Paulus the proconsull dealt with: Act. 13. 8. Whiles Paul
was preaching to him, Elimas was perverting of him: whiles the one built, the
other battered, and pluct down: whiles the one labored to make him a
Christian, the other indeauored to keep him an insidell, and unbeliever.

First, they be enemies to the feast of wisdom, maligning

Secondly, they be enemies to the messengers of wisdom, Galat. 4. 17.

Thirdly, they be enemies to mankind, as touching the soul, repining that
any man should be in a better state then themselves (though themselves refuse
to be in a good state) according to the disposition of their old father, who
for the same cause so soon supplanted our first parents Adam and Eve.

Fourthly, they feel some prejudice to themselves, by the

Instruction, how to carry our selves toward such as be

Secondly, to lay a good foundation, and to set on surely, Mat. 7. 24. etc. For
certain it is, that the devil by temptations, and our adversaries by
oppositions will make manifest what firmness, and soundness is in every one.
Either they will Satanically assault us with carnal persuasions, or else we
shall be terrified with comminations, and threatenings, or else we shall be
derided with scoffs, and reproaches, or we shall be traduced with false
imputations: or we shall be disquieted with wrongefull molestations.

Thirdly, that we should be as industrious to lead men in the Dan. 12. 3.

Who so is simple, let him come hither, and whosoever is
Who so is simple, etc. That is, which being ignorant discerns not his
blindness, but has conceit of wisdom, and knowledge.

Let him come hither, etc. To the company, counsel, and practice of Folly. And
to him that is destitute of understanding she speaks, viz. that have no
knowledge of their own, nor be willing to go to wisdoms house to get any.

Ignorant persons that regard not knowledge are the sit Ephe. 4. 14. The
Apostle in the Epistle to They are easily misled that love not to learn.
the Ephesians persuading them to knowledge, shows the great need thereof;
That we henceforth be no more children, wavering, and carried about with
every wind of doctrine, by the deceit, or dice of men. Wherein he declares
the dangerous case of such as want understanding by two similitudes: one
comparing them to little children, and the false teachers to crafty gamsters,
that use to cogge at dice, who can easily beguile a young boy, and strippe him
of all that he plays for, though his whole inheritance lie upon the game.
The other comparing them to ships, that neither have anchor to hold them, nor
stern, and pilote to guide them, and therefore the tides, and tempests do
drive them every way without resistance.

First, they are already taken by the devil, and be in his Tim. 2. 26.

Secondly, they are altogether destitute of all judgment,

Thirdly, their hearts and affections be corrupted, and Ephesians. 4. 18.

Confutation of them that diswade men from seeking of to deceive. It is
dangerous dealing with scriptures (say they) we know not well whom to trust,
the world is so full of dissemblers, and therefore we will neither hear, nor
believe any Preacher of them all. But they will hear and believe Jesuits, and
seminaries, and popish persons that entice them to Idolatry and disloyalty:
they will hear and believe gamesters, and filthy fellows that will lead
them to lust, lewdenesse, riot, and unthriftiness: they will hear and
beeleeue such as will fill their ears with false report, and poison their
hearts with malice, covetousness, craft, and cruelty. As though there were no
infectious people but ministers; no peril of contagion, but at sermons; none
subject to be miseled, but such as use the best means to know the right way.
But consider the force of their reason whereby they would induce men to persist
in their blindness: there be many slips, and much counterfeit metal, and
therefore no use of a touchstone: there is poison prepared for us, and
therefore beware of preservatives: our enemies come armed against us, and
therefore let us cast away our weapons: their purpose is to surprise us in the
dark, and therefore put out at any hand all the light What is it but wisdom
that does enable us to try all things, and to hold that which is good? what is
it but knowledge that does discrie the venom of all pestiferous, and pestilent
opinions? what is it but understanding that does discover the dangerous
occurrents that will ensue upon pernicious counsel? For other uses of this
point, see verse 10. Doct. 2.

Stolen waters are sweet, and hid bread is pleasant.
This verse contains an event that follows their yielding to follies
allurements, that at the first they find delight and pleasure, and great
contentation in their intertainement.

He alludeth, as it seems, to the disorders that are wont to be in harlots
houses, wherein at the meeting of companions they use to have a feast, and all
the provision is of stolen stuff. Either servants filtch from their masters,
or otherwise they steal from their neighbors, hens, and geese, and duckes,
and connies, and venison, and such things as they can come by: which is called
hid food, because as they cannot justify it, so they dare not let it be seen,
but dress it covertly, and eat it secretly in the midst of the night, in
the most inward and closest rome of the whole house. And whatsoever is so
gotten, and there made ready is very delicious unto them, though it were but
bread and water.

Those things that be most unlawful do best satisfy the Things the more
unlawful, the better liked of bad men.
of meats that be dainty and wholesome, and prepare spiced cups, with wine
that is sweet and delicate, yet she has few guests that will visit her
table: but let folly provide only bread and water (which they must also eat in
a corner, and hide their heads like malefactors) and she shall have great
store that will flock to her house, and accept of their cheer with very good
liking, in this sense it is said Chap. 20. 17. that the bread of deceit is
sweet to a man. The unrighteous trade and course of getting is to many a kind
of sauce to procure a relish to their possessions. They esteem every thing to
be so much the more worth, if a crafty head, a violent hand, a guilefull
tongue, or any fraudulent means has brought it unto them. The same proportion
holds in all other cases. How many be carried with brutish lusts and
affections to strange flesh, that have nothing in them of beauty, and in the
mean time loath their own wives which be well favored, personable, and
comely: and who almost takes delight in any recreation which is neither
unseasonable in respect of the time, nor yet unwarrantable in regard of the
manner, yet it is altogether too fresh and unsavory for their taste, unless
the Devil powder it with some enormious abuses.

And hence it proceeds, for that all which is fleshly and most contrary to
the spirit of God, is always acceptable to Romans 8. 5. They that are after the
flesh, savor of the things of the flesh. And it falls out in this case, as
it does in the infirmities of the body, every malady does desire that which
will feed and maintain it, as it is to be seen in choleric persons, and
such as be inclining to the dropsy; the one sort best liking meat that
increases choler, the other thirsting still after drink whereby the dropsy
is nourished.

Confutation of Popery, that has dishes for every carnal

Instruction that the spiritual delights of the word, do repel

Thirdly, Consolation to them that distrust these fleshly

But he knows not that the dead are there, and that her
Here follows another event ensuing upon the former, that as they had
pleasure at the first, so they must have pain at the last: as their
intertainment was with delight, so shall their reckoning be with destruction.
It is said, he knows not: that is, every one of them that be tractable to
her call have the peril of their state hid from their eyes.

That the dead are there, etc. That all that give themselves to such courses
are strangers from the life of God, and in the power of the first death; and in
the depth of hell, that is, are as certain to be damned in the world to come
(unless God give them repentance) as if they were already in hell fire.

According as every sin is more delightful, so is it more Sin the more
pleasing the more pernicious.
will have the sour sauce of wretchedness and misery. Sinnefulnesse will be the
bane of transgressors, as the harlot is commonly of adulterers. It is the holy
Proverb of God, that when the bread of deceit is sweet to the taste, it turns
to grit, and gravel, to the torment of the teeth. Chap. 20. 17.

First, as it appears here, men be willingly ignorant of Mat. 14. 39.
to profit, and pleasure: as feasting, and marying, and planting, and building,
and traffaquing: they knew nothing till the flood came, though Noah had
foretold them above an hundred years together.

Secondly, when they be possessed with the delights of sin, Zophar shows.
Job. 20. 12. etc. that when wickedness is sweet in their mouths, they will
favor it, and not forsake it till it turn to a poison in their bowels.

Thirdly, in respect of the present condition of voluptuous Tim. 5. 6. They are
sensible carkeses, and breathing carrions. For though they have a reasonable
soul which makes them to be men, yet they want the spirit of grace which
makes them to be Christians.

Fourthly, in regard of their future misery, for which Saint James wishes them
to weep, and howl, and make all kind in hell that have risen up to the top
of pleasures, and cursed prosperity on earth.

Instruction, First, to foresee that which will follow, when

Secondly, that no example prevail so far as to draw us into

Thirdly, that we illude not our own hearts by hoping to shift for one: for
never any one could avoid the punishment

A Plain Exposition upon the tenth Chapter of the Proverbs of Solomon.
CHAPTER. X. The Parables of Solomon: A wise son makes a glad Father, but a
foolish son is a he auinesse to his mother.
PARABLES. That is, wise and grave sentences written by Solomon, but inspired
by the spirit of God, for the imformation of the mind, and the institution of
the life, according to the rules of Wisdom, Justice, and Piety The other
nine Chapters being presixed as a preface to these, contained a continued
discourse, wherein the commendation of Wisdom, and the exhortations to many
good duties were prosecuted with variety of arguments: whereas in these that
follow, for the most part, are set down brief sayings, every verse almost
comprehending a whole point in it self, not growing upon dependence of that
which went before, nor ministering the occasion of that which comes after. Yet
sometimes it falls out otherwise, and diverse verses together have dependence
one with another, as will appear in some place of this present Chapter. A wise
son, that is, a virtuous and towardly son or daughter, makes a joyful
father, or mother: and a foolish son, that is, a sinful and ungracious
child, is an heaviness, and grief to his mother or father: yet it is not
without cause that the mother is rather put in the latter clause, than the
father: for that sex is the weaker, and more impatient of such a cross: and
usually contemptuous children be bolder to contemn the mother then the father,
as Chap. 15. 20. A foolish man despises his mother, as Rebeccah was more
troubled with Esau then Isaac was: and very often the mothers by too much
indulgence and fondness, are means of their childrens vices, and so it is
said, A child set at liberty makes his mother ashamed. Chap. 29. 15.

The comfort or sorrow of parents stands much in the behavior A good son
makes a glad father.
Jacobs sons: whereof Joseph a gracious child, was never but a refreshing to
him: but Simeon, and Reuben, and Leny, and most of the rest, by their sinful
actions did fill him with grief and afflictions: and so had David experience
both ways, being peirced with sorrow on the one side, by the villainous
practices and miserable ends of Absolon and Ammon: and abounding with joy on
the other side for the singular wisdom of Solomon.

First, these affections do proceed from the love that godly Abraham, will
think it a benefit to have his servants to be the servants of the Lord: and
every Christian will gladly hear of Godly men, in another family, in another
town, in another country, in another kingdom, and therefore much more will
religious parents be ravished with joy to see with their own eyes the fear of
God in their own houses, in their own children by the blessing of God upon
their own government, and prayers: but they cannot but conceive as great
grief by the sinfulness of impious children, which wholly cast off the yoke of
all holy obedience: that dispite him whom they honor, and blaspheme that name
which they sanctify, and reject that word which their souls do live by. The
Prophets eyes gushed out with rivers of waters because strangers, and aliants,
and even his very enemies observed not the commandments of God: and therefore
much Psalm. 119. 136.
more would he have mourned when his own sons rebelled against them.

Secondly, love to the people of God will work gladness,

Thirdly, the happy condition of gracious and godly children

Fourthly, wise children yield matter of comfort to their parents men may be
defended. Psalm. 127. 4. And as they are pressed and ready to perform every
duty that is required of them, so will they also carefully regard their
parents dealings toward them: the father gives counsel, and the son is
directed by it: the father gives rebuke and the son trembles at it: the
father gives correction, and the son does humbly submit himself unto it.
Now at the hands of a foolish child, what is to be expected, but folly:
contempt of commandments and counsel: murmuring against admonition and
reproves: resistance against correction and chastisements? if their parents
be in wants, they are ashamed of them, and think it an intolerable burden
to be charged with them: and so shorten their days by opprobtious and hard
usage: if they have wealth, they seek to make a spoil of them: if they be
like to leave them patrimony or inheritance, no enemy does so much desire
their death: if they be simple and want understanding, they either use
contemptuously to check and s^^b them, or else to mock and deride them. If
they declare their wisdom and true piety, they show then bitterness against
their godly zeal and sincere profession.

Instruction, First, to children to take it as a motive to stir How a man may
be a joyful father.
do this, must lay the foundation of being a comfortable father, before he
be a father, and take the way to have good children, before he have
children: and that is by a due care that himself do marry in the Lord: that
he propose such an end, and use such proceeding, and match with such a wife,
as will bring the blessing of God upon his house and posterity. Secondly, if
he be desirous that his children should yield him the crop of comfort, he must
bestow upon them the seed of instruction, and the tillage of good education.
Thirdly, great care is to be had for the wise and orderly disposing of them in
marriage, that all the former hopes be not cut off through the neglect of this
duty: For diverse times good people in this regard are like to corn that
prospers well in the blade, but afterward is either blasted or withered in
the ear. Many ingenious and towardly young men and maidens have been utterly
overthrown by coupling themselves to profane yokefellowes, and being ingrafted
into sinful families.

Reproof of those that take least care to get wisdom for

Consolation to them that be enriched with this treasure of as a blessing that
makes a man to be happy. Psalm. 127. 3. 4.

The treasures of wickedness profit nothing, but righteousness
The treasures of wickedness, that is, the greatest abundance of wealth, which
is evil gotten, and evil used, or possessed by an evil owner, profit
nothing, do him no good at any time, but least of all at his death, or in time
of misery, for so it is intended by the Antithests and expressed, Chap. 11. 4.
But righteousness, that is, uprightness of heart, and holiness of behavior,
delivers from death, that is, from destruction, and all other hurtful
dangers. Yet not by any merit of man, but by the mercy of God through Jesus
Christ.

The riches of iniquity. No wicked worldling is any thing David had Wicked
men's wealth do them no good
well considered of, and therefore confidently affirms. Psalm. 39. 6.
doubtless (says he) Man walks by a vain image, he heapeth up riches, and
cannot tell who shall gather them. He speaks not of a particular, as though
some one man were fallen into that error, but of the whole body of mankind, in
that case as they are descended from Adam. Every man that has nothing but the
nature of man, does take a show for a substance, the image in the glass for
the face represented by it: the picture of happiness which is painted on
riches, for true and solid felicity: and therefore they miss of that which
they make most account of, for they have gathered together goods, and others
shall gather the good comfort and fruit of them: and whether they have
provided for their own, or for aliants, for friends, or for foes, they are
altogether uncertain.

But if it be said, that thus far it profits them to be wealthy, that they
eat and drink and live thereby: our Savior answeareth that no man's life
consists in the abundance of his riches: do not poor men live also? are not
sheep, and Luke. 12. 15.
kine, and all other cattle nourished?

Object. But they fare better then others, and in that respect they have a
commodity in their wealth above others?

Answer. But better fare does not make their state better: it helps not
their health, it sweetneth not their sleep, it refreshes Eccles. 5. 11.
not their hearts, it furthereth them to no good service. That meat does a man
good which inciteth him to prayer, and thanckfulnesse, which moves him to
compassion and mercy, and which makes him able and ready to exercise every
good duty in his calling.

First, the store and plenty of riches and possessions does Isay. 61. 5. They
plow other men's grounds, and plant Isa. 61. 5.
other men's orchards, and keep other men's cattle, and beecome other men's
diudges. And for this cause the Prophet Habbakuk does cry out shame upon their
folly, when they think themselves to be very wise and prudent; Ho, he that
Hab. 2. 6.
increases that which is not his, and he that hides himself with thick
clay. They make themselves packhorses, or at least servile porters which bow
their backs to other men's burdens, and shall be recompensed only with
feeling the weight of the same. Or let the best be made of it, and be it their
own, yet their own is nothing but a load of heavy mortar. And this were well
if this were all; but the worst remains to be spoken of: namely their
burdens of wicked treasures be as it were bags or purses obtained by stealth,
or robbery, which will therefore bring their lives into peril.

Secondly, the abundance of outward things cannot succor Neither their silver
nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath
Zeph. 1. 18. If their danger grew from the heat of men's wrath there might be
hope that wealth would help them: for either a sum of money would quench the
flame of the adversaries displeasure, or kindle courage in some others to
defend them. But now that God is provoked against them, it is in vain to offer
gold or silver to pacify him or to ransom themselves; for he stands in no
Psalm. 49. 7.
need of them, he admireth them not as men do, and they be his already, and
at his own will, to be disposed of. Then to oppose them against him, in way of
resistance, it were absurd: for there is no power in them to do us good
without him: and much less therefore to maintain any man against him. Nay
they be so far from ayding sinful men against the Psalm. 62. 10 11.
hand of God, as that they be many times weapons in their hand; to plague them
with strokes of judgment. It has never been heard that the purse has
preserved the man from the sword of the robber, or the chest from the assault
of the thief: but the contrary falls out often, that men be made a spoil
for their money, and brought to ruin, as a tree that has great bows and a
little root is ouerturned in a mighty tempest. But there especially does
wealth bring woe to wicked men, when God awaketh their consciences, ^o behold
their own cruelty and falsehood, and the heavy punishment now ready to be
inflicted upon them for the same. This was Judas his case and such the Prophet
speaks of Ezekiel. 7. 19 They shall cast their silver into the streets, and
their gold shall be cast a far off: That which was dearest to their hearts
before, and brought them to sin, they remove furthest from them now: when
they feel the sorrow of it. And beesides this although riches had some greater
virtue, and power in themselves, yet they could stand ungodly men in no stead,
because they cease when misery begins, when death comes to men, and they
come before the judgment seat of Christ, the wicked have horrible sorrows
and terrors upon them, and all their wealth Reave. 6. 15.
and substance is fled from them.

Instruction that we never corrupt our hearts or pervert our apparel though
they were made of silk or satin, or stuffes that were dearest. And shall we
be more provident for the body then for the soul? Nay for body singly, more
then for body and soul together? Nay for meat body more then for body, and
soul, and state, and name, and seed and posterity? For iniquity will bring
a curse upon all these, and goods preserve not one of them.

Terror to the wicked that thrive by injustice, as usury, oppression, Job did
say in the like case: Let the counsel Job. 21. 16.
of the wicked be far from me: their candell will be put out, and destruction
will come upon them, unless they break off their injustice. All their
commodity is to them as the ba^t unto the fish, with the hook: as the corn
that is scattered for the birds under the net: and as the sweet sops that are
set for the rats with poison.

But righteousness, etc. The goodness of a Christian will A Christian man's
happiness consists in his grace not in his goods. Hab. 2. 4.
procure. This was the message that Habba. was to deliver to the people of God,
to confirm them against the dangerous invasion of the Babylonians, that the
righteous should live by his faith. It is opposed to the proud conceits of the
wicked on both sides. The high minded Chaldeans intended to destroy all, and
the stubbern hearted Jews presumed to escape all destruction. Now the Lord
showed that neither side of them should have their wills. For the faithful
should be delivered from death, or the evil of it, nowithstanding all the
power and weapons of the Babilonians. And only the faithful had assurance of
happy deliverance notwithstanding all the armor and riches of the Israelites.

First, the efficacy of the spirit, and the merit of Christ does Ephesians. 2. 1.

Secondly, the providence and power of God, does sheeld Haman was stored with
riches, and advanced to dignity, and backed with great friends: and yet on a
sudden with the turning of an hand his life, and power, and whole estate was
ouerturned. And Mardocay was a poor man, a captive, maligned, and condemned,
and came so near to the chawes of death, that after a sort it breathed upon
him: yet being a righteous man, and crying to the Lord, he obtained a glorious
deliverance. Iehosophat seemed to be in as great peril as Ahab, and Ahab was
of as great wealth as Iehosophat, yet God gave direction to the hand of one
archer, unwittingly to shoot, and to the arrow to light upon him, and to find
a chincke in his armor, and to hit him in such a place, as through which it
pierced to his life. And contrariwise he persuaded the hearts of many others
who pressed upon Iehosophat to withdraw their hands, and to let him alone in
safety.

Thirdly, the death of Jesus Christ has plucked out the

Fourthly, the Resurrection of Jesus Christ shall at the last

Instruction to every one to get a sure possession of sound Phil. 3. 9. 10.
Secondly, that he make a narrow search to find out all his sins, and that
with godly sorrow and repentance for the same: obtaining also pardon and
remission for them, through the blood of Jesus Christ. Thirdly, that he make a
conscience, constantly, and totally to walk in the commandments of God,
endeavoring to please him in all things. For he that leaves off well doing in
the end, shall loose all the comfort of his beginning. And he that is content to
serve God but in a part, may be suppected to serve him soundly in no part.

Consolation to them that have attained to this righteousness,

The Lord will not famish the soul of the righteous, but
These words be inferred upon the former, as an answer to a secret objection,
that might be made against them: why should it be thought that men get no
good by gathering riches in what manner soever? They stand them in stead in
time of dearth and scarcety* when others that want them, though never so just,
are like to perish. Now here he shows the case to be otherwise, good men
are not unprovided of food because they are unfurnished with wealth: and
sinful men have no assurance of prouission though they have riches: for the
Lord will not famish the souls of the righteous, that is, will not suffer the
men themselves to starve, though they have never so little. But will cast away
the substance of the wicked, that is, he will deprive them of the possession or
use, or virtue of it when they are in greatest need.

The Lord will not, etc. Poor Christians be in better estate A poor Christian
better then a rich worldling.
and maintenance. Such a comparison is made Psalm. 34. 10. that lions, that is,
mighty, strong, and boisterous men suffer hunger, and sustain want (as was
notably seen in the case of Nabucadnezzer, who in the midst of his greatest
power, his ample dominions, and large possessions, was yet turned a grasing
like a beast, amongst the beasts) But they that seek the Lord shall want
nothing that is good. They may sometimes be without that which they wish for,
because they may wish for that which will not well agree with their safety.
But whatsoever is good, and there need requires it, that shall undoubtedly be
ministered unto them.

Object. But may not a godly man dye of hunger? shall we condemn all that are
afamished.

Answ. There is no doubt but many men: even faithful servants of god in
sieges, and extreme dearthes etc. be brought to their ends, through penury and
want of food, but then it is good for them so to come to their end. The Lord
does call them home to heaven by such a messenger. In the like sense it is said
in the former Psalm. 34. 20. that not one of their bones is broken, that is, to
their hurt, or through neglect of gods provident care over them. But one may
have his bones broken, and be hewed or sawed asunder, in great mercy. Heb. 11.
37. So there is a promise to Gods people to preserve them from the pestilence,
Psalm. 91. 7. and yet many blessed saints be taken away by it to everlasting
glory. Else David would not have given them that testimony who so dyed at that
time calling them poor harmless sheep: or have offered himself to that kind
of death to preserve them alive. The meaning is then that religious men shall
never be plagued with the venom and sting of scarcetie and famine, having it
executed as a curse upon them as it falls out with sinners.

First, they have the good providence of God continually Heb. 13. 5.

Secondly the wealthy misers of the world have the hand to scatter that which
they have gathered together, and to cast away that, as a cursed thing, which
they have laid up as a precious treasure. They trust not in him, but make that
their hope, and therefore he will make that to deceive them when they have
greatest need of help. They doubt not but it shall go well with them, when
others be in extremity, and therefore they shall be brought into straits,
when it shall go well with others. And so much the rather because they do
not only glory in their wealth, and lift up themselves above poor Christians,
but arm themselves therewith and make it a weapon of oppression.

Consolation to good men that have inward store of grace, Psalm. 23. 1. And how
can he possibly then be forlorn, that has him to his father? Even wicked
men will be tender of their children, and the Bears and Dragons will be
careful of their young ones. Lam. 4. 3. and shall the God of all goodness
withdraw his hand to help his sons and daughters? especially since he
teaches it out to minister food to every living creature, and amongst them to
his very enemies? And from his own kindness he can bow men's affections to be
kind, and make their very enemies, friends, and friendly unto them. And let
that fall out that the times should be heard, and the prices of victuals high,
yet Gods store is not diminished, nor his plenty abated, but he can afford his
family sufficient allowance as well in the dearest years, as when things be
at the cheapest. And then indeed his providence is most seen, and his
goodness most felt, and the truth of his word most clearly manifested. For so
he promises. Psalm. 37. 19. They shall not be confounded in the perillons
times, and in the days of famine they shall have enough. Whereof Jacob had
experience in a special manner, he never fa^ed better then in the years of
dearth, when all others wanted, he abounded: when the Egiptians themselves that
lowed the corn were ready to perish for want of corn: he with his household
was plenteously provided for amongst them, and that for nothing.

Terror for them whose whole happiness does hang on Mary sing by the spirit of
God in her song of rejoicing. Luke 1. 53. He has filled the hungry with good
things, and the rich he has sent empty away. And so did Hanna also praise
the Lord for the same. 1. Sam. 2. 5. They that were full, are hired forth for
bread, and the hungry are no more hired. A great alteration was made in their
states on both sides. The poor which labored in other men's work for wages
were sufficiently provided for at home, and the rich and wealthy which were
masters over many, were compelled by need to frame themselves to be other
men's servants.

A deceitful hand makes poor: but the hand of the diligent
This verse also contains an answer to an other objection, which might rise
out of the words immediately going before: if food and maintenance be the gift
of God, and they that have little shall be kept from want, and they that have
great store shall be stripped of all, to what end should men travel and take
pains? the wisest way is to give over all labor. Now this he refuteth by
showing the means whereby righteous men use to receive this food and provision
from Gods hand, and that is by sedulitie and diligence in their vocations. And
therefore he demonstrateth the contrary effects of contrary men, namely, of
slothful persons, and such as be industrious, and painful. Slothful
persons fall into two evils, the one is the practice of deceitfulness, called
here a deceitful hand, the other is the burden of poverty, which is a
punishment inflicted upon them, both for fraud and idleness. They that be
diligent have their reward yielded unto them, that they thrive, and prosper by
the labor of their hands: and though their wealth be not so great in
quantity, yet the smalnesse thereof is recompensed in quality, and good use
of it, and therefore is called precious riches. Chap. 12. 27. And so they have
neither need nor disposition to give themselves to deceitful shifts, as
sluggards.

A deceitful hand, etc. False dealing is no profitable trade Guiles bring no
gain.
Tending to this purpose are many Parables in this book, as Chap. 13. 11. The
riches of vanity shall be diminished, they may be gotten, but not long kept,
and though they perish not, nor be taken away all at once, yet they will
consume and be wasted by degrees. And as this event is here declared to come
upon evil gotten goods, so in an other place he tells the misery that
shall overtake the men themselves, that so fish for them. Chap. 19. 15. A
deceitful person shall be affamished. As wealth will forsake them, so friends
will fail them, and God will curse them, and poverty will oppress them.

First, the Lord does hate, and curse both deceit, and deceivers,

Secondly, consider from whence very often this deceitfulness

Thirdly, it is a righteous thing with God so to requite

Instruction, if we be visited with beggerie or needinesse

Secondly, we be yet spared from the stroke of God, that he

Reproof of their folly which hope to enrich themselves by deceit and
wrongful dealing, trusting to rise by that which

Object. But it appears that their success is correspondent to their
expectation, the event proves that they make a gain of it. The Prophet
testifies, that as a cage is full of Birds, so their houses are full of
deceit, and thereby they are Ierem. 5. 27.
become great, and waxen rich.

Answer, They may get things into their hands, and yet be prevented of the
fruition of them. They may have them for a time, and lose them at the last, as
the same Prophet also teaches: as the Partridge gathers, or lays eggs,
and hatcheth Ier. 17. 11.
not, so he that gets riches, and not by right shall leave them in the
midst of his days, and in the end dye like a fool. They have not a brood
of comforts, so soon as they sit upon their nest of riches, they may be
trodden upon, or addle, or eaten up. Evil may befall them before they can do
them any good, or if their goods remain, themselves may soon be removed from
their goods: and in the mean time have the cross of God on soul, and body,
which is much more grievous, then to be smitten in outward estate.

But the hand of the diligent, etc. They greatly help their A man faithful in
his calling betters his estate.
Among many testimonies whereby this point is confirmed, that is to be noted
which is in the 13. Chapter of this book. The soul of the diligent shall have
plenty, or be made fat, as the Proverb. 13. 4.
word signifies. Where though by soul he understands the whole man, yet
that part is not named in vain. Their body, and outward man shall have
enough, and the soul and inward man shall be content and satisfied with
enough, and much refreshed by it.

First, it is appointed to man by the decree of God, not only Genesis 3. 19.
Psalm. 128. 2.

Secondly, diligence, and painfulness, is a service to God,

Thirdly, their pains and labors are for the common good,

Fourthly, faithful employment, and pains taking is a medicine Eccles. 1. 13.
therefore makes ready the way for all good prosperity.

Fifthly, by this means they are kept from vicious companions, and sinful
exercises, and all kind of such unthrifty courses, as whereby the states of
many men come to utter ruin and overthrow.

Instruction to all degrees from the highest that sits on Col. 3. 24.

He that gathers in summer is a son of understanding,
The drift of these words is to teach men to redeem the time and make the
best advantage of the seasons, comparing opportunity to summer or harvest, when
the fruits of the earth are ripe, and ready to be gathered; and the persons to
whom it is offered, to husbandmen that have commodities growing in the fields.
And therefore we judge him prudent which so stirs himself, and hasteneth
his people to cut down his corn, and to inn it when it is ripe, and the
weather is seasonable: so God here calls him a son of understanding, that
is, a wise man which takes time while time serves, for any good purpose and
occasion. And as the world cries, fie on him that sleeps in harvest, that
is, does no more labor or look to his affairs, then if he were in a dead
sleep, and so sustaineth the loss of all his croppe, by means whereof he
overthrows the state of all his family: so the Lord terms him a son of
confusion, or which brings confusion, that is to say, misery, and shame upon
himself, and his friends, which strives not to take his part of Gods blessing
in due season.

It is a matter of great importance to make our use of a good Opportunity not
to be omitted.
end proposed. Chap. 30. 25. That we might learn of the unreasonable creatures,
and those which are also of no account and reckoning. They are led only by
sense, and instinct of nature, we have reason that may persuade to it: they
have none to give them admonition, or to call upon them: we have guides to
direct us and the word of God seriously instructing us in the duty. And that
is there commended in them, which incomparably will be more effectual in
Christians: namely, that wisdom supplyeth the defect of strength and
providence effects that which other things cannot bring to pass by their
power.

Examples hereof we have in Joseph, who in the time of great plenty, provided
against the years of scarcity: and in the Church of Antiochia, who being
foretold of the famine to come, made provision before hand for the Saints of
Jerusalem.

First, it is a thing pleasing to God to accept of his gifts when

Secondly, the events that fall out on both sides do make God opens his to
give, they that are prepared to accept with thankfulness, as he is ready to
bestow in mercy, such shall have the blessings of God confirmed unto them with
newblessings; and to them will he communicate much and often, and that which is
excellent, which use speedy intertainment to his graces. But on the other side
when men hold him off with delays, and grow nice, and coye, and turn his
benefits back upon him, they shall be soon rid of them, and stripped of all his
mercies: they shall call and cry at another time and have no answer, they
shall search and seek, and find no success, they shall feel their wants,
and fail of supply to relieve them.

Reproof of them that be evil husbands for themselves, in Job speaks of,
that every man will be ready to prefer his dogs before them (as in equirie it
is fit for the master to take the better hand of the servant) and to let his
very dunghill have pre-eminence above them. Their wretched and cursed courses
in mispending their time do work them the fullness of woe and misery, and make
them odious and hateful to God and godly men, and to civil men, and
burthenous and loathsome to ungodly and sinful men. Secondly, of them that be
unthrifty for their souls, which never apply themselves to prepare for
another life, before they be departing out of this. They do not once think of
seeking heaven and everlasting salvation, until they be sinking into hell,
and perpetual perdicion They imagine that earthly things will require long
labor to compass them, but piety, and grace, repentance, and faith, may be
gotten in a moment: they be ready at their will, and their will will be flexible
to their wish, and neither ability, nor will, nor wish will be wanting at the
time of their deaths. Oh miserable men, how long will their eyes be blinded?
How long will their hearts be hardened? do they not perceive that sin and
Satan have power over their affections and desires, and purposes, and will,
and all the faculties of their whole souls? Even this makes it clear that it
is so, because they do not perceive it to be so. And if their souls be in
such bondage and subjection, and held at the will of the devil, that now in
their fresh age and health (their senses being more capable of instruction, and
the ministry of the word ready to yield instruction) that they cannot
attain to sound and godly sorrow, and conversion: let them not deceive
themselves, as though in sickness, and pain, and dotage, and sencelesenesse,
and affected blindness of mind, they can by their own disposition return
sincerely to the Lord.

Blessings are upon the head of the righteous: but iniquity
Blessings, That is, all kind of happiness, every good gift of God that is
fit for them, as peace, plenty, grace, and health, etc All shall be upon the
head of the righteous, meaning upon the whole soul and body of every
faithful holy man. And they are said to be on the head, because they come
down from above, and light as it were upon the head, and so descend to the
other parts. But iniquity, the vengeance of God executed for violence and
sin, shall cover the mouth of the wicked, shall take away all excuses, and
defenses from him. Now here is somewhat understood in the former clause, and
expressed in the latter: and somewhat expressed in the latter, and to be
supplied in the former. Blessings are upon the head of the righteous, and
therefore do open his mouth, viz, to praise God, and maintain his own
innocence, and judgments (called here violence or iniquity, by a metonymie
of the cause) they are upon the head of the wicked, and so close up their mouth.

Blessings, etc. The greatest reward that God does give to Blessedness is the
greatest gift of God to his servants.
with the Prophets in the Psalms, and other places of Scripture in wishing
well to the Church, to pray for this, and in gratulations to commend it, and in
thankfulness to God to acknowledge it. As in the sift Psalm, ver. 12.
desiring the comfort and joy of faithful men, and praying the Lord to work it
in them, he shows what just cause, they had to be so affected: For thou Lord
(says he) wilt bless the righteous, and with favor wilt compass him as
with a shield.

First, such blessings as are here spoken of, be sure testimonies

Secondly, they be prerogatives peculiarly appropriated to Salvation belongs
to the Lord, and thy blessing is upon thy people. It is always accompanied
with salvation, none are blessed but such as are saved, and none are either
blessed or saved, but such as are the people of God.

Thirdly, they have all good things infolded in them which Deuteronomy. 28.

Fourthly, Gods blessings do season all prosperity, and the

Instruction that whereas we desire to have the Lord pour

Consolation to all true hearted Christians that have this exceeds all
estimation: his inheritance is endless, and without all bounds and limits.
Though we should be as much molested with malicious men, as David, and Paul
were, and as much assaulted by Satan and tried by Gods own hand, with losses,
or bodily infirmities, as Job was; yet if we be blessed of God as they were,
what cause can there be of fear, or grief, or coffeehouse? The blessing
brings strength for supportance in them: the blessing brings issue and
deliverance out of them, the blessing works the right use of them: the
blessing yields a plentiful reward, of comfort and good prosperity in this
life, and of glory and everlasting happiness in the life to come.

When God enters into judgment with wicked men, he Wicked men's sin shall
bring them to shame
not be able to deny them. Though hipocrites can make the greatest show, and
usually be most forward to speak for themselves: yet when God found out the
dissembler in the Gospel, and called him to a reckoning for intruding himself
to his feast without a wedding garment, he was stricken dumme Mat. 22. 12.
and speechless, he could plead nothing for himself. Haman standing only
before the minister of Gods vengeance, having been before that time his
greatest friend, yet when Hester accused Hest. 7. 6.
him of his false and cruel practices: he stood mute, and could not reply. He
that attempted to stop the mouth of Mordocai, had his own mouth stopped with
his violence. And therefore when God himself comes to indite men, and to set
their sins in order before them, all mouths shall be stopped, Psalm. 50. 21.
and all the world shall be culpable before him. No sinful Romans 3. 19.
and unregenerate person which has no right to plead Christ's merits, can
possibly speak any thing to justify himself.

First, that the Lord may have his words verfied to be all Psalm. 51. 4. And for
this cause howsoever sinful men have their mouths shut up at his judgments
that they can say nothing for themselves, yet he does sometimes open their
mouths, to draw out a confession against themselves, as in the case of Judas,
and Pharao and Adonibezek. Mat. 27. 4. Exodus 9. 27. Judges. 1. 7.

Secondly, in regard of the elect sinners, that seeing the sin Joseph's brethren
frighted, and brought to make this confession: what shall we speak? and how
shall we justify our selves? God has found out the wickedness of thy
servants. Genesis 44. 16.

Thirdly, it makes the torments of the reprobate to be exceeding

Fourthly, it is for admonition to others to take heed by Zachary. Chap. 1. 4.
5. 6. etc. Be not like your fathers that would not hear the former Prophets.
Where are your fathers? Did not my words take hold of them? and they returned
and said, as the Lord has determined to do unto us, according to our own
ways, and works, so has he done.

Fifthly, for the joy and comfort of Gods people, seeing the

Admonition, not to adventure to commit such sins as Job. Chap. 39. 37.
Behold, I am vile: what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth.
Once have I spoken, but I will answer no more, yea twice, but I will proceed
no further. And that grace does God promise to his people by the Prophet
Ezechiell. I will establish my Ezechi. 16. 62. 63.
covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord, that thou may
remember, and be ashamed, and never open thy mouth any more: because of thy
shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou have done, says the
Lord God.

The memorial of the just shall be blessed: but the name
This is one particular of the blessings mentioned in the former verse, that
that which is dearest to a man, as his mane, shall be in estimation, and good
account. The remembrance and mention of him being absent alive, and when he is
dead, shall be acceptable, and with his praise and commendation: But the name
of the wicked is cursed, and therefore had in hatred, and detestation, even as
much loathed as the stink of his carcass, that lies rotting in the grave.

The credit and honor of good men will grow to be better, Good men grow in
credit but sinners glory ends in shame.
Only godly men have good names, and it is one difference that God puts
between them and the wicked, that they be blessed herein peculiarly, and all
others excluded from the benefit of it. Such a threatening does Isaias denounce
against the wicked: You shall leave your name as a curse to my chosen: for the
Lord God shall slay you and call his servants by a new name. Though sinful men
be magnified of sinners, yet they shall be made abominable to Saints, and
that is the greatest reproach: and though good men be despised of the world,
yet God will give them glory, and increase it, and vouchsafe the titles, not
only of his servants, but even of his own children.

First, they all, and none but they, are in credit with God

Secondly, the graces of sound hearted Christians, will more and more appear,
and shine out, and the secret sins of hipocrites, and other evil men will
be discovered, and brought to light, and both sorts shall have estimation in
time, according to their behavior. 1. Tim. 5. 24. 25.

Thirdly, glory is an inseparable companion of goodness:

Confutation of their error, that hope to be-come honorable, Psalm. 49. 11. 12.
generation, to generation, and call the lands by their names, yet they shall
not continue in honor, but perish like beasts that dye of the murraine. Who in
all the world prevailed like to Nabucadnezzar, in Nabucadnezzars time, and yet
howsoever he was applauded and admired at the first, he was derided and
exploded at the last, and made a proverb, and parable of reproach? Some by
fine wit and policy, and dexterity in speaking But let Achitophel, and Herod
be examples to these, the one in counsel was wonderful deep, and his
speeches were as oracles, and yet we repute him not to be a man of famous
memory, but behold in him the very image and figure of infamy. The other for
his eloquent oration, was deified of the people, and with a concordant
acclamation extolled for a god; but yet as God laid a present stroke upon his
body, and delivered his life into the power of base vermin, to gnaw out his
bowels: so he laid a continual curse upon his name, which will cleave unto it
for ever. Some others by hypocrisy, and pretense of mercy and pity: and yet
with out all conscience or love of either. But praise so purchased, is subject
to stains and loss of color. The Pharisees had obtained the opinion of
goodness; godliness, righteousness, and of all virtue. They were almost of
all men, thought to be the most holy men: and can there now be a greater
indignity offered to a man then to call him a Pharisee? for that name carries
in it the perfect pattern of pride, hypocrisy, and palpable dissimulation.

Consolation to righteous men that God undertakes the Psalm. 112. 6. The
Prophets, and Apostles, and Christ himself, and good men in their times were
evil spoken of, and now have a most blessed memorial. And so of latter
years, it was a great dignity to be a Wolsey, or a Gardener, or others that
weere of great place, and cruel disposition, but now we reverence the names
of Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Bradford, and the meanest of them that
suffered for the Gospel of Christ, though they were then condemned for
heretics. The Apostle Peter incourageth us to be bold and cheerful though we
should be railed upon for Christ his sake: for the spirit of God is a spirit of
glory, and that is given to us and rests upon us, and who shall remove it
from us? Nabothei name was in great hazard to be blemished, when he was
convicted, and executed for treason, and blasphemy, and no means leaft in
appearance, to clear his innocence: yet God knowing it, has made us to know
it, and the short shame that he bare for a time, is turned to a durable honor
through all generations.

The wise in heart will receive commandments: but the
The wise in heart, etc. That is, such as have saving knowledge, and
conscience, will receive commandments, will hear and obey the word of God
without replies, and cauils, against it: but the foolish in talk, he that
abuses his lips to murmuring and friuolus objections: shall be beaten, that
is, shall be plagued for his contempt.

The sense will be plain, if the supply be made in both clauses of the
opposition, in this manner: The wise in heart will readily receive
commandments, and therefore shall be rewarded: but the foolish in heart will
be foolish in talk to reject commandments, therefore shall be punished.

We ought to be tractable to the will of God, without resisting James does
admonish Men most obey where God commands. James. 1. 19.
us saying: Let every man be swift to hear, and slow to speak: his meaning is
not to persuade men to come suddenly, and rashly to the word without
preparation: but to hearken desirously, with reverence and attention when they
are prepared, and not to pick quarrels against that which is delivered,
unadvisedly and out of a distempered affection, but upon mature deliberation
with a mind willing to be resolved, to propose their doubts.

First, the Lord has absolute authority over us, and therefore

Secondly, his whole will, and all his ways are perfectly

Thirdly, they are altogether full of wisdom, and therefore

Instruction to cast off, and remove away the sinful lusts of James. 1. 21. 1.
Pet. 2. 1. Ier. 44. 16. 17.

Reproof of them that are willing to receive the promises Jeremiah, ntreating
him to Ier. 42. 20.
declare unto them, all that the Lord should say, and they would do it, and
they would have been as good as their word, if he had encouraged them to take
their voyage into Egypt, whither they were bent to go: but when he diswaded
them from it, by express prohibition and threatenings, they grew to another
point, that it was not God which spoke that, but Jeremy, and Jeremy did not
speak truly, but falsely, and it was not of himself, but from Baruch, and
Baruch had no good meaning in it, but to deliver them into the hands of the
Chaldeans to be slain, or carried away captives. Ier. 43. 2. 3.

Consolation for them that submit themselves to learn and young man attained
not to this, nor Herod went so far though he did many things by John's
persuasion, yet he would not wholly conform himself as to the will of God, to
do every thing, or to leave every thing according as he required. Mat. 19. 22.
Mar. 6. 17. 18. 20

Terror for the brave gallants of our age which exercise their ripe heads, and
fresh wits in wrestling with the truth of Sampsons then to try their manhood
with one point, or article of Gods holy doctrine. But their case is worst of
all, which obstinately, peruersely, and of wilful malice do reject all that
is taught them out of the word. It is in vain to admonish them, as the Prophet
says, Hos. 4. 4. Thy people are as they that rebuke the Priest: that is,
presumptuous persons, sinning with an high hand, in refusing to hear, or be
directed by the Priest, then of the law. Deuteronomy. 17. 12. or to give ear to the
ministers of the Gospel now: but contentiously disobey the truth, and so bring
upon their own souls indignation, and wrath, tribulation, and anguish. Romans
2. 9.

He that walks uprightly, walks bouldly: but he that
He that walks uprightly, that is, does carefully look to his ways, with an
honest heart, walks surely, having both the affection, and ground, and
effects of Christian boldness: but he that peruerteth his ways, that is,
does allow himself in any course, though never so secretly, shall be known,
his sins shall be detected.

The sense of the whole verse may be thus expressed: He that walks
uprightly, walks surely, because his faithfulness shall be known to his
praise; And he that peruerteth his ways, walks dangerously, because his
lewdenesse shall be known to his shame.

All sound safety, and boldness proceeds from sincerity He lives safely,
that lives sincerely.
the Lord, has this promise Psalm. 112. 7. 8. That no evil tidings shall make
him afraid, because he believes in the Lord: if all the world would tell him
of peril, when God himself does warrant him safety, he will give most credit
to him that has most truth, and most power also to dispose of all events. And
his heart is not as a pole that is pitched up, or a stake that is sticked up,
which every hand may pluck away, or every blast of wind may blow down, nor
like a dry wall without a quoine or buttresse, or any other binding to fortify
it: but it is fixed and established as a tree that is well rooted, and grows
strongly, or a building that has a sure foundation, and stands fast, and so
is freed from fear and all slavish terror.

First, his heart has Gods own eye to behold it, and his spirit Job. 31. 31.
whereas the hearts of hypocrites being searched by him, are found most
fraudulent and deceitful.

Secondly, the course of their actions is such as will endure Isa. 50. 7. 8.
And though their enemies for a time do falsely slander them, yet the Lord in
due season will make their righteousness as clear as the noone day. Psalm. 37.
6.

Thirdly, their bodies and state are in Gods custody, and he Psalm. 91. whereas
the wicked are out of Gods protection, and go perpetually in peril.

Fourthly, their souls are prepared for death and the judgment Heb. 2. 15.

Instruction to get apparent and evident testimonies of uprightness, which
will make our lives comfortable, and keep off many miserable vexations, and
horrors, that come upon the wicked. And this we shall do, if we labor to
know all that God would have us to learn, and to endeavor to practice all that
we know, and to confess to God all that we fail to practice: for so far as
we are willingly ignorant of any duty, or careless to perform it, or secure
when we neglect it, and conceal Psalm. 32. 2. 3.
our sins, not acknowledging them that the Lord may remit them: so far we
come short of a good conscience.

Consolation, for all that be upright, that whether they walk

Terror for sinful men, whose consciences be at all times Saul for example,
have through desperate fear, laid violent hands upon their own bodies. And
let power and courage concur to gether, yet both will be insufficient to
strengthen a heart that Gods judgment, and their own guiltiness do weaken.
As Balshazzar being bold to defy Cyrus, and to bid battle to the Lord
himself, profaning his holy vessels in despite of him: yet now in the
midst of iolitie, amongst his friends, in his own house, in a strong city,
guarded with an host of armed soldiers, he was so frighted, and terrified,
that his countenance was changed, his heart was resolved into dastardlinesse,
the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against an
other. And what was it that so danted him? the sight of an hand, writing upon
the wall. There were neither more enemies, nor fewer friends, nor any other
alteration then before, but God wakened his conscience, and his conscience
showed him his guiltiness, and altogether threatened his destruction, and
hereby his great courage was so quickly killed. And this also may serve to
take away the vain confidence of foolish men that be bold to commit iniquity,
and yet look to escape the reproach of it: hoping never to be found out. But
they forget that the Apostle says that men's sins come to light in diverse
manners, some presently upon the fact, some long after: some in their life time,
some after they be dead, some reserved to the last day: but so that all shall
certainly be manifested one day. Caine had as fair possibility 1. Tim. 5.
24. 25
and likelihood to cover his cruelty, as ever any sinner had, or possibly can
have to conceal his offenses, no man but himself knowing of it, no
circumstances being to sift it out by, if he would keep his own counsel;
and yet what fact almost is more notoriously known, and published, and that
with detestation, then his murdering of Abel? And it is not to be imputed to
his own silliness, or carelessness of his name and credit, as though
negligently he had discovered it himself; for he would have hid it from the
Lord, and consequently from all men, if he could have so carried the matter.

He that winketh with the eye works sorrow: and he that is foolish in talk
shall be beaten.
This confirms the latter clause of the former verse, that they that pervert
their ways shall be known, though they do it never so secretly: which is
meant by the winking of the eye. Yet by this it shall appear that it is
known, because it shall be punished. For as they practice mischief against
others, and many times work them sorrow: so they certainly bring mischief on
their own heads, and procure sorrow to their own souls. And yet all winking
is not condemned: but that which tends to hurt: when men wink wiles. The
Apostle bekned or winked at John that he should ask who Ioh. 13 24.
it was that should betray Christ, and yet this was well done of him; for he
showed a reverend regard of Christ, that he would not be loud and audacious in
his presence. If they pervert their ways openly by being foolish in speech,
open judgment shall be executed upon them for their open sins, and thereby
their mouths shall be stopped.

It is not safe to use any member of the body, or any gesture Sin must ^^ue
no alowance.
Beliall, unthrifty persons, are so described by their behavior, and
threatened to be punished. Chap. 6. 12. 13. 14. 15. He walks with a froward
mouth, he makes a sign with his eyes, he signifies with his feet, he
instructs with his fingers, etc. Therefore shall his destruction come
speedely: he shall be destroyed suddenly without recovery.

They are marks and messengers of a sinful heart within, ver. 14. Lewd
things are in his heart, he imagines evil at all times.

Secondly, great hurt is done by such gestures and speeches,

Thirdly, the members of our bodies, as eyes, and tongue, Romans 6. 19.

To look well to every one of them, that none of them be Isay. 58. 4. 9. 13.

Terror for them that have the members of their bodies as

Consolation to the servants of God, that the Lord beholds

The mouth of a righteous man is a welspring of life: but
In Israel, and in the countries bordering upon it, it was a great benefit to
have wels of water, both for the use of men and of the cattle, and therefore
things of great account be many times compared to them in the Scriptures, and
here the mouth of a righteous man is so called in a double respect, both for
the constancy of good conference (according to the similitude, for such
springs as were continual, and would hold out as well in Summer as in Winter,
were said to be wells of living water. Genesis 26. 19.) as also, and especially
for the good effect, that they be instruments sometimes to beeget, and usually
to confirm and refresh the life of the soul. The latter part of the verse
has been expounded in the sixth verse.

The exposition stands thus: The mouth of a righteous man does slow always
with wholesome words, and therefore shall be continued open with blessings:
But the mouth of a wicked man does slow always with hurtful words; and
therefore shall be stopped with violence.

The mouth of the righteous, etc. A good man is never barren Good men have ever
good words.
to the Collossians. 4. 6. that their speech should be always gracious and
poudred with salt, that is, holy and wholesome for the matter, and discreet
and seasonable for the manner, which is not only a commandment delivered by
God, as a thing that ought to be: but a duty in exercise and practice with
all godly Christians.

First, the law of the Lord is in their heart, and therefore Psalm. 37. 30. 31.

Secondly, their love to God and the conscience of their duty

Thirdly, they use it as a means to refresh their own hearts,

Fourthly, their love to their brother and desire to have men

Confutation of them who ascribe the ability of conference Zack. 12. 10. I
will pour upon the house of David, and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem the
spirit of grace and prayer, he says not, they shall attain unto the art and
methood of prayer which carnal men may get by carnal means, in the earth,
but it is a blessing poured down from above, as a gift from heaven, which
only his own children have descending upon them, and all his people be
replenished with it. It was not promised only to the Priests, and Levites, and
Prophets, but to the house of David, as in former times it had been on David's
own person: and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, as well as to the house of
David. He that says expressly that he cannot pray, says also by consequence
that he is not righteous, nor yet in case to be saved. And he that wants
will and ability to talk Christianly, does proclaim by silence, that he has
not the spirit of faith. 2. Cor. 4. 13. More shall be spoken of this point in
the 13. Chap. 14. verse.

Hatred stirs up contentions: but love covers all
Hatred, and all uncharitable affections, as envy and wrath, Stirs up
strife, works all kind of revenge and mischief, as backbiting, obbrayding
with former faults, and very often procures iniust criminations. But love
covers all trespasses, by forgiving them and reproving them in friendly
manner, and by concealing them from all those, to whom the knowledge of them
has not come, or does not appertain. The opposition is thus framed: Hatred
stirs up contentions, and blazeth abroad men's infirmities, but love seeks
peace and covers all trespasses.

Hatred. The actions and speeches of men are not so much An ill heart raises
contention.
Diverse times it falls out that the wrong doer, is not so much faulty as he
that should better bear it: and no injuries could work a quarrelous contention,
unless there were a defect of love on both sides. It is said, Chap. 18. 6.
That a fools lips come with strife. It is not the occasion given, so much as
the lips that make the breach: and the lips could not do it, unless the man
set them on work, and the man would not so set them on work, unless folly
and sin ouerruled both him and his lips, So Chap. 15. 18. Angry men are brought
in for the authors of strife, but he that is slow to wrath has this
testimony given him, that he will appease it. What was the reason why Joseph's
brethren had such a quarrel at him? Because they saw their father love him
more then all the rest, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably to him.
Genesis 37. 4. What moved Ahab to be always so bitter against Elijah and Micaiah?
He tells the cause himself, he hated them, and reputed them to be his
enemies. 1. Kings. 21. 20. and 22. 8.

First, wheresoever hatred is, and one man maligneth another,

Secondly, if strife did not more proceed from the inward Moises, and David
and Jeremy, and Paul, and Jesus Christ himself of all other should have been
most unquiet and clamorous. But these had never any equal unto them for
peaceable and gentle behavior. Numb. 12. 2. 3. Math. 12. 19. 1. Pet. 4. 23.

Confutation of them that lay the blame of their frowardness breaches and
divisions that are in the Church. They publish the Gospel of grace which
teaches peace, and makes peace between God and man, and between man and
man, yea a man and his own conscience. But would there be so great
oppositions, say they, and themselves and their doctrine so much crossed and
resisted, unless the cause were in them? They be troublesome men and busy
bodies, given to faction, and no man can live in peace by them. The Devil
cannot live in quiet by them, and therefore he makes a tempest in their
hearts whom he possesses, and so their waves dash against the ministers and
all other good Christians Our Savior knew that such would be the success of
his Gospel, that wicked men would be in as great a hurly bu^lie at it as if
he had come with fire and sword against them. Jeremy clears Math. 10. 34.
Ier. 11. 60.
himself of all private occasions of coffeehouse amongst the people, he
neither borrowed on usury, nor lent on usury, nor had any traffic or
dealing with them; yet all contended against him, and every man cursed him. But
what moved them to such passion and distemper? the Devil and their own
sinful hearts, which the Prophet so mightily warred against.

Instruction, if our hearts rise against our brethren, and begin James does
them that would not James. 4. 1.
examine themselves, from whence are these wars and contentions? are they not
from lusts that fight in the members.

Not to trust envious persons, for they have not the government of themselves,
though they speak fair, and offer reconciliation. Saul did against David.

But love covers, etc. Christian love does cause men to be Love is the least
fault sinder.
Saint Peter teaches, alleging almost the very same words of this scripture.
Above all things have fervent love amongst you, for love covers a multitude
of sins. It hides them all, though there be never so many.

None have this love, but such as have felt Gods love to themselves, remitting
and covering their own sins: and that makes them merciful to others. Col.
3. 13.

Secondly, they esteem their brethren as their own flesh,

Thirdly, they propose a coppie or pattern to themselves, Mat. 7. 12.
Prophets.

Instruction to perform this duty with faithfulness and Ephe 5. 12. Prou 20
3.
we must herein declare our selves to be in imitating of him: and it is a
man's honor to pass by an offense. Thirdly, if there be an offense committed
sit to be reproved, let us use all holy lenity, if it may prevail, or
severity in compassion to draw them out of their sins, for that is the best
covering to bring them to repentance, that their iniquities may be covered
from Gods eyes, and washed away for ever. So did Nathan Job. 23. 17.
help to cover David's sins, and was the best instrument of his clearing, by
his free and faithful discovery of them. Fourthly, Ia 5. 20.
if it belong not to our place to give them admonition, or they receive it not
at our hands, then let us show their diseases to more skillful Physicians, and
their wounds to better surgeons, as Joseph told his father of his brethrens
infamy. Genesis 37. 2. Gen 37. 2.
1. Cor. 1. 11. and the house of Cloe showed Paul of the dissentions 1. Cor. 1.
11,
of the Corinthians.

Reproof of them that take it for their own honor to bring others unto
disgrace, they think that the blackenesse of their brethren will make them
white, when they have no goodness in themselves to help their credit, they
go about to dig it out of the dunghill of their neighbors corruptions.

Consolation to the servants of God, that if the weak love

In the lips of him that has understanding wisdom is
These words need no further explanation, then the supply of that which is to
be understood in both the clauses. For this seems to be the sense of them:
In the lips or speech of him that has understanding wisdom is found, which
keeps judgments and punishments from him: but in the lips of him that
wants understanding folly is found, which brings judgments and punishment
upon him. The first hemistich, or former part of the verse, is the same simply
set down, and without allegory, or metaphore, as was comparatively uttered in
the eleventh verse, by the similitude of a well spring.

The latter part is the same in sense, that was in the eight, and tenth verses,
for there it is said that the foolish in talk shall be beaten.

Wise men lay up knowledge: but the mouth of the fool is
Here is declared by what means wise men attain to that ability, and
sufficiency of fruitful speeches, by due attention to that which is spoken to
them, or which they read: or by diligent observation of things which they
behold. Those they lay up, as a man would his treasure, in a safe place. As
therefore a provident thriftie husband which has gathered together a stock,
will be ready upon short warning to make a purchase, or upon any good occasion
to disburse a sum of money: so he that is faithful in seeking knowledge, and
applies both heart and memory to hold it fast, and keep it, shall readily in
convenient time draw out the good things which he has learned, either for his
own use, or the benefit and profit of others. Which is contrary in careless
and heedlesse persons: for they will be as forward to speak as any others, but
that which is within the heart, will quickly be at hand to come out at the
lips, and that is poison, and venom, and pestilent matter, which will
certainly hurt themselves, and be dangerous to others. So then thus stands
the opposition: wise men lay up knowledge, and therefore their mouths are a
present preservation: but foolish men reject knowledge and therefore their
mouths are a present destruction.

Wise men, etc. It is not enough to bring the ear to hear holy What good the
^^^e lays in, that the heart must lay up.
The necessity of this duty appears by the serious exhortation which he
gives to that purpose in the beginning of the seventh Chapter. My Son keep
my words, and hide my commandments with thee: keep my commandments, and
thou shall live, and mine instruction as the apple of thine eyes. He gives
this counsel as a friend, to a near friend, as a father to his own son,
for the matter of it is not of small importance, but of the greatest weight and
moment, it behooves men not only to lay sure hold of holy doctrines in regard
of state, but of their very lives. And therefore not to look to the safe
keeping thereof as we are chary of our money, but to be as provident that we be
not spoiled of them, as we are watchful to preserve the members, yea the
dearest members of our bodies from violence.

First, the excellency of wisdom and saving knowledge

Secondly, it concerns our salvation, and everlasting happiness, Heb. 2. 1.
3.

Thirdly, the store of grace that is congested does minister Psalm. 49. 3. 4.

Fourthly, by this means men are in their whole lives, both Psalm. 119. 11.
Prou. 2. 10. 11. And in this point the good ground in the Gospel, has the
pre-eminence above all the others, it receives the word, and gives
entertainment unto it by attention, and so it goes beyond the high way.
Secondly it has a root in it self, whereby it makes a bold profession in
the time of persecution, and so it goes beyond the stony ground. Thirdly, it
keeps a constant course of obedience, and brings the fruit of the seed to
ripnesse, and so it goes beyond the thornie ground.

Reproof of them which through the greedy desires of together, and store up
abundance of durable riches, which can never perish, nor be taken from them,
and they take pains to heap up snow, and such like matter, that will melt
away and vanish in a moment.

Terror to them that suffer Satan to rob them of all good Hag. 16*
that put the sacred instructions of the blessed word of God into a bottomless
heart, that can hold nothing, but that which will pervert and hurt them? The
Apostle gives an earnest caveat to the Hebrews, admonishing them strictly to
give Heb. 2. 1.
heed to the things which they heard, least they should let them slip, and as
the word signifies, should leake or run out. For it were better to have
wounds in our bodies that all our blood should gush out, then to be rifted
vessels, having chinkes in our souls, that the doctrine of life should soake
away, and oaze out from us.

Consolation to them that have covetous desires after spiritual Luke. 12 to
multiply worldly wealth, but these have the Lord to commend their wisdom, and
it may as truly be affirmed of them, as of such as be merciful (because they
be the same persons, though the respects differ) that they lay up store for
themselves, a good foundation against the time to come, that they may obtain
eternal life.

But the mouth of the wicked, etc. The tongues of ungodly men are always
pernicious and hurtful. Of them Saint James An ill man's mouth works much woe.
speaks largely, comparing them to fire breaking out in an house, or whole
town, especially when it comes by the hostility of the enemy, making
assault to it, by means whereof men are stayed from extinguishing of it, and
have not only their goods, but their life also in great peril. And this flame
of the tongue is so much more dangerous then material fire, because it is
kindled of hell, that is, the devil himself has set Zac. 3. 5. 7.
it on work. And so in the same place he resembles them to poison, and that
not of the common sort, but to strong poison, which is deadly, and fails not
to work the bane of them that drink it.

First, they are hurtful, and bring great annoyance, and mischief Ier. 9. 8.
Psalm. 52. 2. And yet such similitudes are not able fully to express, and set
out the evil that comes by venomous mouths, and virulent speeches. First,
the tongue most commonly causes weapons to be drawn, all wars, all
rebellions, all massacres, all quarrels, all manner of strifes are first
breathed out of men's mouths, on some part. Secondly, the hand may be held that
handles the weapon, the strokes may be warded, armor may preserve from the
violence of them, or there may be refuge and covert to hide them that are
pursued: but who can stay an unruly tongue? What defense is against it? whither
shall a man fly from a false accuser? what distance of place will prevent
malicious calumniations? Thirdly, they which fall into the hands of most fierce
and cruel enemies, which are pierced, and wounded with keenest and sharpest
edge tools, have all the hurt upon their bodies, the extreamitie of it
reaches but to take away their natural life, but a slanderous tongue does
smite at the name, which an ingenious man would forgo his breath, to preserve:
and a pestiferous seducing tongue does pervert the soul, and by the poison
thereof are many thousands brought to everlasting perdition.

Secondly, they bring destruction upon themselves, and draw mischief upon
their own heads, as the Scripture testifies: The words of a wise man have
grace, but the lips of a fool devour ^ccl. 10. 12. 13.
himself. The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness, and the
latter end of his mouth is wicked madness. The truth of this shall be spoken
of more at large in the eightenth Chapter, and seventh verse, upon these
words: A fools mouth is his own destruction, and his lips are a snare for
his soul.

Instruction to be very well advised in all our speeches, since He Prou. 13
3.
that keeps his mouth keeps his life: but he that opens his lips
destruction shall be to him. It concerns therefore every man to be as
provident, yea more careful to look to that which goes out of his lips, then
to that which comes in, to be more afraid to utter blasphemous, reuiling,
slanderous and infectious speeches, in regard of the soul; then to eat, and
devour unwholesome meats in regard of the body. And by this we are admonished
to commit our mouths to a better keeper then our own wit, or reason, or
civil disposition, least lust and Satan do over rule us, to let in what they
will, and to let out sinful words, when, and whither, and as often as they will.
And this moved the Prophet to pray to the Lord to set a watch before his
mouth, and to keep the door of his lips.

Confutation of them that think it nothing dangerous to speak whatsoever:
words, they say, are but wind, when a man has spoken he has done, and so
there is an end of that matter. Nay when a sinful man has spoken sinfully,
much hurt is done, and so there is but the beginning of a bad matter: for all
the mischief follows after. So it may be said of a cup of poison, it is but
a draught, and when a man has swallowed it, he has done with it, and so there
is an end: but has it done with him? will there be no further working of it?
^^ will continue his pain and torment until it have made an end of his life.

The rich man's goods are his strong city: and the fear of
The rich man's goods are his strong city, etc. That is, wealthy worldlings
do trust to their possessions when they have great store. For he speaks not
of any safety that they have by their goods, but which they seem to
themselves to have, as is plainly expressed Chap. 18. 11. And it is sometimes
the faults of good men in their infirmities, to repose too much confidence in
outward things, when they abound with them. Psalm. 39. 6. 5. On the other side,
the want of earthly substance does fill the hearts of unregenerate poor men,
with fears of famine, and misery. And Gods own people, are not always free
from the assaults thereof, by reason of the imperfection of their faith.

The extreamitie of every state is dangerous, and no condition Ag^r a sensible
apprehension, The mean estate is safest.
when he put up that petition to the Lord, that he would neither give him
poverty nor riches: but food convenient for him: that is, a moderate estate,
without excess on either hand. Prou. 30. 8.

First, both of them, be ^^^ses from God upon wicked persons. Psalm. 69. 22.
Deuteronomy. 28. 48. Job. 30. 3.

Secondly, both of them draw their hearts from all good

Thirdly, both of them be occasions of unjust behavior, Psalm 62. 10. Prou.
30. 9.

Instruction to labor for the spirit which will protect us when we have eaten
Deuteronomy. 8. 10.
and filled our selves, to bless the Lord our God for the good plenty, which
he has given us. He will effectually admonish us, that we be not hie minded,
and trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, which gives us
abundantly all things to enjoy: that we do good, and be rich in good works,
and ready 1. Tim. 6. 17. 18
to distribute and communicate, laying up for our selves store against the time
to come. Are we in need, and necessities, abridged of that fullness, which
diverse others do, as it were, swim in? This holy spirit will sustain our
hearts, and persuade us of our heavenly fathers all sufficiency of goodness,
and ability of providence and provision for us. That will teach and enable us,
in whatsoever state we are, therewith to be content: to be full and to be
hungry, to abound and to have want, to do all things through the help of
Christ which strengthens us. Phil. 4. 12. 13.

Reproof, first of them that too greedily labor to be rich, which makes the
defect of outward things easy unto them. But when men will draw poverty upon
themselves as a punishment, the mercies and commiserations of men are
restrained from them. Psalm. 109. 12. and their hearts being overcome, are more
ready to pursue them, with fear, and grief, and coffeehouse, then all
their necessities.

The labor of the righteous tends to life: but the revenues
The labor of the righteous tends to life, etc. That is, the goods which
good men usually get by travel, (though many times they are descended to them
by inheritance, or bestowed upon them by gift, or by some other lawful means
brought to their hands) tends to life, viz. both of soul, and body, in this
world, and for the world to come: whereas the riches of ungodly men are always
abused by them, and made the occasions, and means of unrighteousness. The
opposition is this: the riches of the righteous do tend to goodness, and so to
their life: but the wealth of the wicked does tend to sin, and so to their
death.

Riches are either profitable or hurtful according to the Abraham, Job, Wealth
is good, or bad, as it is used.
and other holy men is commended in the word of God, for the great good that
they did, and received thereby: and the Prophets, and other holy writings do
as much condemn the opulencie, and wealth of the enemies of God, as making them
to be most mischievous and miserable. Job. 21. 16. Iac. ^. 1. 2. 3. 4. etc.

First, the one sort do honor the Lord with their substance,

Secondly, the one sort give bread to the hungry, and drink to the thirsty,
and clothing to the naked, and are every way ready to relieve the necessity
of their poor distressed brethren: the other abuse their power and riches to
tirannie and cruelty, oppressing them that are already in affliction, or
contemning them that are their inferiors, or withholding the goods from the
needy, whom God has made the right owners of them. Prou. 3. 27. or else
feeding gluttons, and dronkards, and otherwise sinful and unthrifty persons.

Thirdly, the one have for themselves the prayers of poor

Fourthly, the one sort receive the blessings of God with Tim. 4. 4. 5. The
other devour, and swallow up the good creatures, like brute beasts, led
altogether by sensuality.

Fifthly, and lastly, the one sort have laid up a treasure in heaven,

Instruction, to every man that he do not only survey his Job had consisted
in having much he could not but have felt much misery, when so much wealth
was consumed to nothing: but now he could recount with comfort, how wealthy
and mighty he had formerly been, because he could truly relate also, how
righteous, and merciful he had been.

He that regards instruction is in the way of life: but
He that regards instruction. That is, which yields reverence, attention,
and obedience to the ministry of Gods holy word, is in the way of life, he
takes the right course to obtain everlasting salvation: but he that refuses
correction, which will not endure to hear his sins rebuked, goes out of the
way, both depriueth himself of eternal life, and walks toward destruction.

The doctrine of this is fit to be handled in the first Chapter, where it is
more largely set down by the holy Ghost.

He that hides hatred, is a man of deceitful lips: and
Having in the former words declared the peril of them that refuse admonition,
he describes here the persons that use to do it, and they are of two sorts:
some are hipocrites, that pretend, and make a show of favor, and good liking,
and yet nourish deadly hatred in their hearts: others are professed contemners
of that which is taught, but yet picking a quarrel against the man that
delivers it, as though the fault were wholly in him, and just occasion were
given to reject all that he teaches. But the Lord which knows the ground
and root of their calumniations, and cauils, imputes them to their proper
cause, and that is the sinfulness, and folly of those malicious despisers.

The Lord has hipocriticall dissemblers in detestation. The David makes
mention of such, Psalm. 28. 3. 4. Draw A plain heart pleases God.
me not away with the workers of iniquity, which speak friendly to their
neighbors, when malice is in their hearts. Reward them according to their
deeds, and according to the wickedness of their inventions. His earnest
prayer to God is to escape their hands; for they were very subtle, and ready
to take him; and very cruel and violent if he should come into their
clouches. Their trade and occupation was to work iniquity, and therefore also
their wages, and hire shall be destruction. By all which circumstances it
manifestly appears, that there is enmity beweene God and them.

First, they are exceeding dangerous, because they treacherously David to cry
out upon the execrable fact of Achitophell in conspiring against him. Psalm. 55.
12. And so does he find himself much grieved with them that had smooth
tongues, as soft as oil, and butter, and yet were as sharp and hurtful as
any swords.

Secondly, the judgments of God will declare his hatred hatred may be covered
by deceit: but the malice thereof shall be discovered in the congregation.
Prou. 26. 26. Though Saul made a fair show to David, cloking his secret
mischievous purpose to have him killed, by giving his daughter to be his wife:
yet now it is notisied, and made known to all nations, 2. Sam 18. 17.
and posterities.

Instruction, first to avoid this cursed sin, that brings the He that
bateth will counterfeit with his lips, but in heart he lays up deceit.
Though he speak favorably beeleeue him not: for there are seven
abominations in his heart. Prou. 26. 24. 25.

And he that utters slander, etc. It is a note of a sinful fool, Raylers
are fools.
reckons this amongst many other foul sins, proceeding from a corrupt
heart, whereby wicked men are defiled: Out of the heart, says he, come evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, theftes, false testimonies, and
slanders. Mat. 15. 19.

First, they grievously wrong the party whose name they Prou. 22. 1. then a
greater injury is offered by them which deprave him in that, then by those that
shall rob him of his goods, and spoil him in his estate. Nay many times the
violence that is offered to ones person is less hurtful then to be reproched
in his name; and therefore they that show that indignity are compared to
hammers, and swords, and sharp arrows. Prou. 15. 18.

Secondly, they take the way to poison the hearts of all that

Thirdly, they are most injurious to their own souls, excluding Psalm. 15. 3.

Instruction, if we desire the credit of wisdom, let us use better means, to
obtain it, then obtrectations, and artificial It is the property of the
wicked to give heed to false lips, and liars hearken to naughty tongues.
Prou. 17. 4.

Consolation, for them that are molested, and vexed unjustly, for the Gospels
sake by clamorous and false accusers: let them consider what account God makes
of their malicious adversaries: he calls them fools, and derideth their
practices: and therefore in the end it shall be seen, that when they have spat
all their venom, they have but shot a fools bolt, and procured shame and
sorrow to themselves.

The sin cease not by the multitude of words: but he that refraineth his
lips is wise.
He seems still to proceed in the prosecution of the matter spoken of in the
seauententh verse: that men take an evil way for themselves, which refuse to
be reproved. The words immediately going before these, declare how some reject
it, by inward hatred and bitterness of heart, and yet outwardly make semblance
of great love, and friendship: others break out into open profession of their
discontentiment, and malice, by reproching those that would help them out of
their sins: and here comes a third sort, which would shift off all
rebukes, by denying, defending, cloaking, or coloring their faults, by
excusing, and extenuating matters that are charged upon them. But all is in
vain, the sin will not be blown away with breath: and therefore he
shows that it is a point of wisdom to give place by silence, and to take
the blame upon them.

The sin cease not, etc. The multiplying of words does make a bad cause
rather worse then better. So Jeremy tells the impenitent people, that were
very forward to clear themselves Thou say, A fault excused is often times
inrcesed. Ier. 2. 35.
because I am guiltless, surely his wrath shall turn from me: behold I will
enter with thee into judgment, because thou say I have not sinned: Their
excuses were accusations, their denials, were conuictions, their seeking
impunitie without repentance, did hasten and augment their punishment.

First, when they defend, or make things small trifles, which are unlawful to
be done, they contradict the word of God, and his truth, which no wit, nor art,
nor eloquence shall be able to prevail against.

Secondly, when they hide their facts by denial, or labor Saul failed of
obedience, to the will of God, yet he arrogated the praise of fulfilling it:
though Samuel by demonstration declared his sin, yet he sought to make an
Apology for himself and to lay all the offense upon the people: but that
course took none effect; it did him no good for body or soul; it nothing
preserved his honor, or state: he was convicted, and censured, and sentenced,
and utterly cast off, notwithstanding all his excuses.

Thirdly, their own consciences apprehend every action, and word, and intent
of the heart, and the mouer of their whole

Fourthly, it is a sin of it self to be given to over much talk, as having
self liking and rashness for the roots thereof: and therefore it cannot
possibly be a medecin to cure other

Instruction, to leave off speaking to men for the mitigation Prou. 28. 13.

Consolation, to them that humbly yield to a rebuke without

The tongue of the just man is as fined silver: but the heart
He sets forth the excellency of the speech of Godly men by comparison,
resembling it to silver that is purged, and fined from the dross that was in
it. Because a good man will be careful of his tongue, not only that there be
no mixture of filthiness, and lewdenesse in his words, but also to avoid all
superstuous, and idle babbling, and so to open his mouth with holy wisdom.
Which is contrary in the wicked, because there is a contrary fountain in him
of sinfulness and corruption, and no matter of virtue and grace, which are the
springs of all wholesome speeches. Thus therefore stands the Antithesis: the
tongue of the just man is as fined silver, because his hurt is precious: but
the tongue of the wicked is as dross, because his heart is nothing worth.

The tongue of the just man, etc. The best wealth of a Christian Good men's
wealth is in their heart, and is uttered with the lips. Math. 12. 25.
that is the meaning of our Savior, when he says, that a good man out of the
good treasure of his heart brings forth good things. An evil man may have
coin, and plate, and iuels in his treasury, and yet have no treasure: and may
draw money out of his purse, and yet have no good, and yet have no good
therewithal: but to have grace in the soul, and to utter gracious words with
the tongue is proper to a good man, and the exercise good, and the fruit of it
good to himself and others. And albeit here seem to be a comparison of
equal, as though the tongue were just of the same value, and worth, that fined
silver is, yet it is to be understood that at least it is so pure and
precious, but in deed far beyond it in excellency.

First, this is one of the good and perfect gifts, which is from James. 1. 17.
silver is a tertestiall matter, even earth it self dug out of the earth,
and never did but grow in the ground.

Secondly, this is current in heaven, and acceptable to God

Thirdly, such things are obtained by it, which no money Prou. 2. 3. 5.
soul and body. Ezekias, and Iehosophat, with other good kings, could not have
preserved themselves by their purses, and treasures, as they did by their
prayers, and holy exercises, of their tongues. Jonah could not have been
comforted, nor helped by the greatest quantity of money, in the whales belly,
where his prayer was very effectual. Peter could not have given so good an
alms to the poor creeple, if he had been stored with silver, Act 3. 6. 7.
and gold, as he did by the efficacy of his words through the name of Jesus
Christ.

Instruction, to show our selves righteous by putting away that neither
silthinesse, or covetousness, be once named amongst us, nor foolish talking,
nor seurrill bitter, or uncomely jesting, or any kind of rotten communication,
as the Apostle calls it, but only that which is for the use of edifying,
that it may minister grace to the hearers, Ephe. 5. 4. and 4. 29.

And especially let us beware of the dross of dissimulation, untruth, and
falsehoode, which bee-seeme not righteous persons. Make no report for
certainiie of any thing that is uncertain, never make a promise without a
settled purpose, and resolution of performance. The faithfulness of Boas in
this case was so proved, and made manifest, that when he had once given his
word to Ruth, Naomy bids her to bind upon it, and not further to trouble
her self: for says she, the man will not be in rest, until he have
finished the matter this same day. Ruth. 3. 18.

Consolation, if good men, notwithstanding their great infirmities, Psalm. 12.
6. If he should fail of his word, he should forget his truth, and in
forgetting his truth, should forgo his nature, and consequently should
forfeite his deity, which were an execrable thing so much as to conceive.

But the heart of the wicked, etc. Though sinful persons A wicked man has his
worst side inward.
within them worth any thing. To that purpose tend the words of the Apostle
collected out of the Psalms: the Lord knows the thoughts of the wise to be
but vain. If the point had stood upon man's opinion, there might easily have
been an error in it, but he brings the testimony of god upon sure and
infallible knowledge to confirm it. And whereas the Prophet names man
indefinitely, that is, every man unregenerate Psalm. 94. 11. He singleth out
the chief, and choysest of all the sort of them, whose purposes seem to be
of greatest price, and most likely to prevail, and says that the thoughts of
the wise men best qualified with art, and natural parts, are not only vain,
but very vanity, as the Psalmist has it.

First, they are altogether destitute of the spirit of grace.

Secondly, the heart of man, without the spirit, is foul, and filthy, and an
unclean sink of all abominations.

Thirdly, the streams that issue from thence declare what the fountain is,
when all their words, and actions, and recreations, and imaginations are only
sinful and wicked. Hag. 2. 15. Tit. 1. 15. Genesis 6. 5.

Fourthly, Gods proceeding against them in his displeasure makes manifest how
base they are: for he knows how all things are to be priced. Since
therefore he rejects and casts them away, it evidently appears that
there is no goodness in them. So says Jeremy, They shall call them reprobate
silver, because the Lord has rejected them. Ier. 6. 30.

Instruction, not to much to magnify and admire them, nor too far to depend
upon them. For better things are not certainly to be expected from them, than
are in them. And therefore many times they make golden promises, and leaden
performances, because they have but drossie affections.

Consolation, to poor Christians in regard of their portion, contrary wise
though the Saints have but small store of external riches, yet they be of
great possessions in their hearts, and flow with plenty in their inward parts.

The lips of the righteous do feed many: but fools die
Before was declared the excellency of a good tongue, and well seasoned
speech, and here are the effects of it commended, namely the good that is
wrought by it, the souls of many being edified therewith, and receiving grace,
and grows for salvation, and comfort, as the body does obtain strength, and
nouriture, and refreshing, by their means that minister wholesome food unto
it. And this is illustrated by the contrary effect of wicked, and ignorant
persons, that they are so far from feeding others with knowledge and
wisdom, that they suffer themselves to be starued to death, and destruction
through the want of it.

The lips of the righteous, etc. It is the note of a faithful He is the
best man that does others most good.
of his brethren. In this sense the Apostle says that though he were poor,
yet he made many rich. 2. Cor. 6. 10. His mean estate would not permit him, to
bestow money, or such kind of gifts as wealthy men use to distribute, because
he had no great plenty himself: but that which he had most of, and others
had most need of, that he most liberally communicated to all that would
receive it, wheresoever he came.

First, godly men do provide themselves of these celestial Isa. 50. 4.
they be covetous of spiritual gifts, and therefore also liberal of them:
they are great eaters, and as we may say, have an appetite to devour all, and
therefore would have every man to take part with them. In earthly commodities,
men are of a contrary disposition: for as they are the more greedy of getting
to themselves, so are they more niggardly in witholding from others: and as any
one does swallow up more, the less is left for the rest of the company: but
in heavenly things it comes to pass that none be so frank and free, as they
whose desires be most greedy of having, and none do save, and leave so much
for the use of their brethren, as they that take their full meal, and eat as
much as possibly they can. To take the fruition of the graces of God, is the
way to make provision of them for our neighbors: and to bestow upon others is
the means to retain and augment them to our selves.

Secondly, they have an understanding heart, and holy discretion

Thirdly, their lips will send a message to heaven, and deal Psalm. 67. 5. 6.
Joel, 2. 17. 19. And by this means Eliah did feed all Israel, by procuring
rain, for want whereof they were like to perish. All Achabs wealth, and the
riches and power of the whole kingdom, were insufficient for such a work.

Reproof, of them that never ministered any thing, but infection

Secondly, Instruction to make choice of habitation, and society with just
men: for much commodity is to be had in their company, by the benefit of
their fruitful tongue.

The blessing of the Lord, it does make rich, and he adds
The purpose and drift of these words is, to show the pre-eminence that Gods
people have, above the men of the world: that whereas the wicked have nothing
but their own hands, and carnal means to trust unto for their estate; such
as be Godly, have God to provide for them, and his goodness only does make
rich, and they only are enriched by him. But because his enemies have usually
more store of goods then his children, and thereby it may seem, that either
men, may be rich without his blessing, or else that he is more provident for
sinners, then for saints; therefore he shows the difference, that troubles
and vexations are intermingled with the goods of the wicked, and his servants
are freed from them. Yet it is not so to be conceived, as though no good men
had any troubles with their riches, and that whosoever does find grief, and
perturbations in these earthly things, were deprived of the blessing of God,
and testimonies of his favor: but this is the meaning, that so far as he
does beestow them, and they depend upon him for them, so far they escape from
vexations; so that the cares and troubles grow merely from their own
infirmities.

The blessing, etc. As everlasting life is the gift of God, so is David in his
A comfortabl^ estate is a blessing of God.
thanksgiving to God makes a free confession thereof: saying, both riches,
and honor come of thee, etc. 1. Chron. 29. 12.

First, neither the commodiousnesse of any trade, nor skill, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. Psalm.
117. 1. 2.

Secondly, he alone works contentment, which is an high

Thirdly, he gives a cheerful heart with the portion, and causes them to
take their part of their possessions with comfort. Eccle. 2. 24.

Fourthly, he preserves them from the fears of losses Job, who by his
patience declared himself to be as rich when all his goods were gone, as he
was at that time when he possessed them all.

Instruction, to use the means that we may be blessed, and Psalm. 112. 1. 2.
Secondly, by calling upon the name of God, and exercise of prayer for such
things as are needful for us. James. 4. 2. Thirdly, by the good employment
and usage of those things which we enjoy already. Prou. 3. 9. 10. Fourthly, by
mercy and liberality to them that are in necessity. Prou. 11. 24. 25.
Fifthly, by faithfulness and diligence in our places and callings, as has
been showed in the fourth verse.

Consolation to such as serve him, that they shall surely be stored Abraham and
Jacob enriched among strangers, and infidels, not only aliants from their
religion, but vowed enemies to their nation? And where in his wisdom he
sees it not sit to fill their houses with amplitude of substance, he will make
few things to yield many comforts, and small things to be of great force, and
mean things to be very precious and excellent. Psalm. 37. 16.

Terror for the wicked, that they can never be rich: though Eccle. 2. 26.

It is a pastime to a fool to commit wickedness: but wisdom of a man of
understanding.
It is a pastime to a fool to commit wickedness, etc. That is, sinful men
take great pleasure in doing that which is evil, as if it were a sport, or
recreation to them: and it is as much joy, and refreshing to him that is Godly
wise, both to get wisdom, and to perform all the good exercises thereof.

Sin is the delight of sinners, and grace of good men. Of Sin is a pastime
to sinners, and grace is the joy of good men.
the second Chapter especially, ver. 14. They delight in doing evil, and
rejoice in wicked frowardness. And in the fourth Chapter ver. 17. it is said,
that they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence, it is
meat and drink unto them to do mischief. Of the other sort the Prophet is
an example and pattern, in the hundred and ninetenth Psalm: where in many
places he professes his singular comfort and delight, that he conceiueth in
the heavenly word of God, as when he says: how sweet are thy promises unto
my mouth? yea more then honey unto my mouth. And they are the joy of mine heart.
Psalm. 119. 103. 111.

First, this contrariety arises from the contrary causes of

Secondly, it is seen in the contrary effects of both sides. yet they may be
easil^ retracted by counsel, and admonition, as David was from s^^^ing of
Nabal, but they constantly proceed to the perfor^^^^e of every good duty.
Secondly, wicked men do medi^^^e in ^^e night, and endeavor in the day to
fulfill their sinful desir^ (...) Micah. 2. 1. Godly men do meditate in the
night, and endeavor in the day, to know and obey the holy will of the Lord
Isa. 26. 9. Thirdly, when wicked men have accomplished ^^eir sinful desires,
they surfait with gladness: when they a^^ ^^sapointed they are filled with
bitter vexation. Prou. 4. 16. (...) godly men have committed sin, it brings
anguish (...) their hearts, when they have performed any Christian service, it
is a comfortable refreshing to their souls. Fourthly, the custom of sinning
is so sweet to the wicked, that they will not forsake it, but take them for
Job. 20. 12.
their enemies that shall dissuade them from it: the yoke of sin is heavy to
the Godly, that they still strive to be disburthened of it, and the yoke of
Jesus so easy that they willingly yield themselves to it, and account them
their best friends that shall help them against the one, and further them to
the other.

Confutation of therronious opinion of those, that allowing

Consolation, to them that are wearied with the rebellious

That which the wicked fears, shall come upon him:
The condemnation in the world to come, which ungodly men through the
guiltiness of their consciences are often summoned unto, when God shall draw
their soul out of their body, they shall certainly fall into. And those
judgments, and miseries of this life, which they most hate, though they hope
to escape them, they are in danger to bring upon themselves.

And that which is most desirable, and will be most comfortable to Christians,
the Lord which knows what is most acceptable to them, and profitable for
them, will in due season bestow upon them.

That which the wicked fears, etc. Whatsoever is most contrary That which ill
men most fear shall surely befall them.
may expect to be plagued withal. This the Lord threatened to the rebellious
and obstinate Jews by the Prophet Ezekiell, I will take from them their power,
the joy of their honor, the pleasure of their eyes, and the desire of their
heart, their sennes and their daughters. Ezekiel. 24. 25. The things which they
are altogether unwilling to depart with, those would he strip them of: and
consequently, that which they would be very loath to bear, should heavily be
laid upon them.

First, ordinarily they fear that which is the most proportionable,

Secondly, their fear and dread of falling into those cuils, Prou. 28. 22.

Thirdly, the Lord does make choice of, and singleth out to them. What could
have been so grievous to Haman, Joel. 5. Isa. 3. 16. 17. etc
as first to be made Mordecayes page, and then afterward to be hanged upon
the gallows, then which nothing could be invented more horrible to him, and
therefore he had provided it for Mordecay whom he most mortally hated?

Instruction, first to fence our selves against the imitation

But God will grant, etc. The best way to have our wills Good men's desires
shall be granted.
that God will fulfill the desires of them that fear him. Wherein yet these
rules are to be observed: First, that our will be agreeable to Gods will, the
desire must be holy, and seasoned with the spirit; and not carnal, and
corrupted by the flesh. David in a passion would needs know how long he was
to Psalm. 145. 19.
live. And James and John would have fire to come from heaven to destroy a
whole town, and an other time they made suit to be the second men of the
whole earth. These petitions were not granted, because they were not advisedly
asked, nor safe for them to be obtained. Secondly, that sometimes lawful
desires are not performed in the same kind, but exchanged for better, and that
which does more good is bestowed in steed of them. Moses desired to enter into
the land of Canaan, he was denied that, but he entered sooner into the
heavenly and blessed rest of everlasting life. Paul would have been perfectly
freede from all original corruption, or at least from the stirrings, and
working of it, but it stood not with the wisdom of God to yield that unto
him: but he assisted him with grace against it, which was much more for his
own glory, and the sound comfort of Paul's conscience. Thirdly, that we tarry
the Lords leisure, and depend on his hand, to minister in fittest time, all
those good things which our souls desire, and so we shall not fail to
receive them, when he sees that they will be most expedient for us.

First, he rayseth up the heart to seek for them, he inclines Psalm. 10. 17.

Secondly, he gives the spirit of faith, and prayer which will John. 15. 7. 1.
Job. 5. 14. 15.

Thirdly, he calls us to him by commandment to seek all good things at his
hand, and incourageth us to the same by Psalm. 27. 4. and therefore his own
truth is our security for them.

Fourthly, his all sufficiency, and absolute ability for performance Ephesians.
3. 20.

First, consolation to righteous men, against the defects that John. 16. 24.
Psalm. 81. 10.

Secondly, terror for their enemies, that by tyranny, and violence

As the whirle wind passes, so is the wicked no more:
The meaning of the words is, that ungodly men, howsoever they flourish for a
time, yet do suddenly come to ruin, and destruction, as the whirle-winde
swiftly blows over, and is less constant, and permanent then the ordinary
wind is, though there be no stabilitie in any. But when it is said, they are
no more, he does not intimate any mortality of their souls, as though they
should be wholly dissolved as brute beasts: for their souls are everlasting as
well as Gods peoples, and their bodies shall be raised up again at the day of
the Lord as well as the Saints: but it is their hope and happiness, and not
their being that perishes, they shall never recover any good estate any more.
Now against these are set the righteous, whose soul, and body, and
blessedness have a settled safety as a foundation that can never be removed:
So that this is the opposition: the wicked are as a whirle-winde, and so are no
more: but the righteous are like a firm foundation, and so perpetually remain.

Though the state of the ungodly be more ruffling, then the Ungodly men have
fare shows: but good men have a firm foundation.
and stable then the ungodly ones. The whirle wind mounteth aloft, and tosseth
up hay, and straw, and stubble, and fills men's eyes with dust, and comes
violently upon them with a blustering blast, but immediately it is gone, and
passed far away: the foundation lies low in the ground, and is neither seen,
nor heard, yet there it continues immovable for many generations. The
unconstant, and tickle estate of wicked men is fitly expressed by lively
comparisons in the prophecy of Hosea. They shall be as the morning cloud, and
as the morning dew Hos. 13. 3.
that passes away as the chasse that is driven with a whirle wind out of the
floor, and as the smoke that goes out of the chimney. The contrary
stimitude, and stabilitie of the Godly is by our Savior himself likened to an
house that is built on a rock: and the rain fell, and the floods came, and
the winds blew, and Mat. 7. 25.
beat that house, and it fell not: for it was grounded on a rock.

First, the one sort have been as unconstant in their ways, Isa. 64. 6. Hos.
6. 4. The other have rooted and settled as well in faith, as in all faithful
behavior: and for these causes the one side slitteth away, and is gone to
misery, and the other remain happy and blessed for ever.

Secondly, the one sort have God, and his Angels to pursue,

Terror, for sinfullmen whose short and momentanie prosperity

Instruction, first, not to affect the pleasures of sin, wherein Psalm. 146. 3.
4.

Consolation to such as are molested with the boisterous Isa. 29. 19. 20. and
51. 13. 14.

As vinegar is to the teeth, and smoke to the eyes, so is the
As vinegar, etc. That is, too much vinegar, or other things We must be
careful who^ we employ in our affairs.
does bring both smart, and hurt to the eyes: so does the slothful person, or
he that is given to any other lewd behavior, does work vexation of heart to
them that send him, or commit matter of moment unto him.

He that imployeth in any service, unworthy and careless persons, shall bring
sorrow and molestation upon himself.

There is another proverb which tends to the same purpose, though the
similitude be different: As though he should cut off his messengers feet, so
he drinks violence, or hurt, that sends a message by a fool. Prou. 26. 6.
He does as much injury to himself, as if he should maime his messenger of his
feet, or make him lame of his legs: for as the one in that case should not be
able to dispatch his journey, so neither can the other well perform the things
that are committed to his care and wisdom. It is a speech that is ordinary
in use, that he must never look to speed well that sends a fool on his
errand.

First, there is peril of falsehood, and treachery, or of much Mephibosheth,
and Benhadad found by the services of Ziba and Hazaell.

The curse of God does usually accompany the actions and

Thirdly, all the faults, and absurdities in word, or work,

Fourthly, the contrary will clear the truth of this point.

Admonition, to be very heedefull to avoid that noisome Prou. 25. 13. 3. If
we have obtained such as be not as smoke to offend our eyes, but our eyes
may behold them, and their good behavior with delight, let us not be vinegar
to their teeth, or smoke to their eyes: let not our soreness and
coffeehouse, our niggardliness and overmuch sparing, be any means of their
discouragement. Deal kindly with them, and be liberal to them, that thou
may not only retain them still to be thy servants, but give all good
furtherance to the continuance of their uprightness.

The fear of the Lord increases the days: but the years
The fear of the Lord, etc. That is true piety and religion, with the
exercise also of justice, and righteousness, increases the days, That is, as
a means it preserves those that are endued with it, from an untimely death:
but the years of the wicked shall be cut off. Their ungodly and sinful
course of life is sometimes an instrument to bring them speedily to their end,
as by surfets, and evil diseases, or falling into the hands of the magistrate,
or by quarreling, and such like. Sometimes it provoke the Lord to stay them
in the midst of their race, and not to suffer them to come to that age which
by their strength and constitution of body they might have attained unto. And
in this sense the Prophet says in the Psalms, that the wicked Psalm. 55. 23.
shall not live out half their days. This doctrine of this verse has been
handled already in the eleauenth verse of the former Chapter.

The patient abiding of the righteous, shall be gladness:
After that the children of God have once embraced his promises, afflictions
and temptations do usually ensue thereupon, that it would seem to sense and
fleshly reason, that misery and troubles were the only rewards of piety, and
obedience, and nothing else performed to them that trust in his word. Now
therefore he shows that a better state and condition remains for them: that
their sorrow shall be turned into joy, and their mourning into gladness, when the
Lord shall deliver them from troubles, and fulfill all his promises. Which is
illustrated and further amplified by the contrary case of the wicked: which,
howsoever now they seem to have the pre-eminence, and are most likely to
prevail hereafter, shall yet be deprived of their present prosperity, and
frustrated of all future expectation. This then is the opposition: The hope of
the righteous shall prevail, and bring them gladness: but the hope of the
wicked shall perish, and so work them sorrow.

The patient abiding, etc. They which depend on God in their They that in
affliction wait on God shall timely find ease.
this ground an exhortation is raised in an other place of this book. Let thy
heart be in the fear of the Lord continually. For surely there is an end, and
thy hope shall not be cut off. Prou. 23. 17. 18. Though troubles and sorrows
are in appearance, perpet^ll, and endless, yet they are but temporary, and
come quickly to an end: though hope, and possibility of help seem ready
continually to vanish away, yet it never cease, nor is taken away.

First, there is nothing in all the world that is more infalliblie Romans 5. 5.
For faith does support it, and the truth and fidelity of God himself is the
foundation of it.

Secondly, that which is long delayed, and much waited The hope that is
deferred, is the Prou. 13. 12.
fainting of the heart: but when the desire comes it is a tree of life. The
virtue of it cures all the former faintings, and the delightful taste does
swallow up all the sorrows. If Isaacke had been borne to Abraham, or Jacob to
Isaacke the first year after they were married, their joy would have been but
ordinary, whereas the long barrenness made their birthes exceeding comfortable
to them, as the benefits were memorable to posterity.

Thirdly, the delay does draw out many prayers to God,

Fourthly, it gives men experience of their faith, and patience,

Fifthly, the longer it is before the Lord does perform his promises, the
larger his mercies are when he does bestow his blessings, when he prolongeth
his seeding, he provides a plentiful harvest: when he does not presently
give the reward, he takes time to tell out much, that his gifts may be the
greater.

Encouragement to patience in all distresses, let us ta^rie the Luke. 21. 18.
19.
to possess our selves with patience. If we keep all sound within, every
thing shall be safe both within and without. And then we begin to lose our
advantage when we leave the possession of our selves, and the power of our
souls through distempers.

Reproof of them that make more have than good speed to

But the hope, etc. Ungodly men beguile themselves with a Ill men seckeing to
be happy deceive themselves.
after repeted again in the next Chapter, ver. 7. When a wicked man dies his
hope perishes. When good men enter upon possession of their happy estate, the
term of sinners is out, and their lease determined, and grown out of date.

First, the Lord knows their purposes, desires, and expectations, Psalm. 1. 6.

Secondly, their hope arises not from faith, nor is grounded on the

Thirdly, they hope for things which are altogether impossible to come to
pass. As first, to see the euersion and overthrow of Gods people. Psalm. 112.
10. Mica. 4. 11. 12. Secondly, that God should fail of his justice and truth
in executing his threatenings denounced against them. Deuteronomy. 29. 20. Thirdly, to
take their fill of sinful pleasures here, and to enjoy also felicity and
happiness in the life to come. Luke 16. 21.

Confutation and terrors for them that live ignorantly, and impiouslie,

The way of the Lord is strength to the upright man: but fear shall be to the
workers of iniquity.
By the way of the Lord, is meant his whole administration, both of his word,
whereby he makes his will known, and of his spirit whereby he gives grace,
and of his providence, whereby he protecteth his servants, and performs all
good things unto them. By every one of these means, does he establish and
confirm both the hearts and states of such as be faithful. But as for the
wicked, howsoever he suffer them for a time to proceed in their ungodly ways
without any great crosses, yet at last he executes such judgments upon them,
as the very sight thereof causes them to quake and tremble. Thus stands the
opposition. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright, for preservation,
and therefore it works boldness: but it weakneth the wicked for destruction,
and therefore it brings fear.

The way of the Lord, etc. They that are most godly, are in best safety. The
point has been handled in the first verse of

But fear, etc. They that be most bold and ventrous to sin, Ps. They that
are most forward to sin are most terrified at the sight of the punishment.
the Prophet describing the conceits, conversation, and condition of
irreligious miscreants, does bring them in at the first, saying that there is
no God, and therefore they corrupt and do abominable works: but afterward
declaring the event, he shows that there they are taken with fear, and as
the words are, they feared with fear, intimating the greatness of their dread
and terror. Psalm. 14. 5. An example whereof we have set down before; namely,
the foole-hardinesse, and cowardlinesse that was found in Belshazzer. Dan. 5.

First, the great guiltiness that is in their consciences does

Secondly, the Lord does show himself terrible in his judgments, Isa. 33. 14.
Apoc. 6. 16. 17.

Thirdly, their foolish flattery whereby they have illuded These. 5. 3. And so
it is said in anoother place: They shall be taken with fear, where no fear
was, that is, where was no suspicion of fear, or likelihood of danger. Psalm.
53. 5.

Instruction, to prevent sin by fearing the judgments that Job. 31. 3.
Secondly, to prevent the punishments, after that we have sinned, by a holy
voluntary fear and humiliation. 2. Cor. 7. 11. Thirdly, to confirm our selves
in both these, by fearing and trembling at the word of the Lord. Isai. 66. 2.
Habac. 3. 16.

The righteous shall never be removed, but the wicked shall
The righteous shall never be removed. They shall never be removed from Gods
favor: they shall never be removed from the constant graces of the spirit in
their souls: or hurtfully, in the way of a curse, from an outward good estate,
nor unseasonably be cut off from the earth. Now because some of these
judgments do seem sometimes to fall upon some righteous persons, who for a
season be eclipsed of grace, and separated from the fruition and comfortable
sight of Gods kindness, and favor toward them, and their estate in
appearance is wholly ruinated and overthrown, therefore the word does well
bear it, agreeably to the meaning of the holy Ghost, to say, that the
righteous shall not be removed for ever. Though they seem to be cast down for
a time, yet they shall be restored again afterward. The contrary is here
affirmed concerning the case of the wicked, who shall certainly fall unless
they repent: they shall not continue in that estate wherein they are most
grounded, and have greatest establishment, they are so far from inioying
eternal life in heaven, as that the vengeance of God will not permit them long
to keep their own breath, or to hold the outward possessions of the earth.
The opposition therefore in effect is this: The righteous shall never be
removed, but have an habitation for ever in heaven: but the wicked shall be
removed, and not suffered so much as to dwell in the earth, the sense is the
same with, verse. 25.

The mouth of the righteous will be fruitful in wisdom,
This verse agrees altogether in substance of matter with the cleauenth: only
the comparison is altered: for there the tongue of a good man for the constant
store of holy speeches, was resembled to a plentiful fountain, and here to a
fruitful tree, or fertile field: and there the wicked for lewd speeches was
threatened to have his mouth stopped, and here to have his tongue cut out, that
is, the judgments of god upon him for his ungracious and cursed speakings
shall strike him as mute and dumb, as if the tongue were cut out of his head.

The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable, but the
The meaning of these words is, that a righteous man knows and regards what
is best pleasing to God for him to speak, and what is most grateful to good
men to hear, and what does deserve acceptance at any man's hand for
faithfulness and truth, and therefore he will use his lips to utter it: but the
wicked neither knows nor regards these things, and therefore he vomiteth
out only perverse speeches, such as tend to rebellion against God, the
damnifying of men, and the annoyance and hurt of his own self.

The lips. It is a point of godly wisdom for a man so to speak He speaks
wisely whose words make most for his advantage.
by manifold examples of holy men in the Scriptures of God, when the
Ephraimites were imbittered against Gedeon, and chide with him sharply, how
easily did he still them, abating their spirits with a mild and modest answer?
Judge. 8. 2. When David was in a great rage, coming with a purpose to destroy
Nabal and his whole family: how readily was Abigails mind instructed with
understanding, and her lips provided of prudent speeches, whereby she presently
pacified his displeasure? 1. Sam. 25. 23. 24. This skill also had David himself
to win the hearts of his people, and to hold them fast unto him by the wisdom
of his words: yea by the force and efficacy thereof he made the heart of
bloody Saul his cruel and implacable enemy for a time to relent. What shall
we say of Paul, who knew what words would draw his mortal foes to turn after a
sort to be his friends, his persecuters to preserve him, the Priests and
Pharisees to stand for the defense of the apostle of Christ?

First, the word and spirit of God does inform his servants Isa. 50. 4.

Secondly, the use and exercise of gracious and religious speeches Col. 4. 6.

Confutation of all Popish prayers which are offered without are botelesse, as
the deliverance of such as are irrecouerablie damned. And their best apology
for these things is, that if they do no good, they will do no harm, whereby
they make profession that they are uncertain whether their prayers be like to
please God, or otherwise be vain and idle.

Reprofe, with terror for them whose mouths speak froward

Consolation to them that order their lips aright, they shote

FINIS.

