A LARGE AND TRVE DISCOVRSE, WHEREIN IS SET forth all the circumstances, in
what manner all the six great Galleys (sent out of Spain into the Low
Countries) are destroyed, forced, and run on ground, how they were called,
what Captains and Governors commanded, the number of Soldiers, Ordnance and
Slaves: what ships of war of ours did stem and sailed over them, and also
what number of their people were saved.

All written aboard the ship of Captain Gerrit Euertson, in the presence of
Captain Jacob Micheelson, Captain Corneles Veytson,Captain Cleinsorghe and
others, the seventh day of October 1602.

Truly translated out of the Dutch printed copy.

depiction of a galleon

Imprinted at London by Felix Kyngston, and are to be sold by John Newbery, at
his shop in Paul's Chu^

THE NAMES OF THE GALLEYS AND OF THE Captains; written aboard the ship of
Captain Gerrit Euertson, in the presence of Jacob Micheelson, Captain
Cornelis Veytson, Captain Cleinsorghe and others, the 7. day of October 1602.
THe Admiral, wherein was Don Fredrico Spinola called S. Loys, was cast away
before Schouen, being driven thither by the winds and tempestuous weather,
wherewith Captain Dirrick Cleinsorghe of Amsterdam meddled not, in whose ship
the Commissarie Henrick Ioachimson was, as I wrote unto you yesterday. The
Commitor Gual. that is, the Treasurer called Cardinalin, was Captain commander
of the slaves and other footmen. Captain Cascalis Dauila a Spaniard, was also
in this Galley with a company of soldiers.

The Vice Admiral, called Vergas, was in the Galley called the S. John: the
Committes General of Victuals and Munition was therein also, with Captain
Gasper de Sossosicquere a Portingale, with a company of Portingales, and
Captain Mattheo Rondon with another company. This Vice Admiral, with the
Galley called S. Iacento, hereafter mentioned, are reported to be cast away on
the Flemmish Coast, to wit, the one upon the Splinters, and the other to the
Eastward of Newport. Some report that they saw them so lost without any further
particularities.

The Galley called Padillo* (the Captain of this Galley was named Hosso)
wherein was a Colonel called Don John de Menese a Portingale: the Auditor, and
Secretary of Spinola were also therein, but at Bluet they went out of the said
Galley, and went into the Galley called Lucero, which is by interpretation the
Morning Star. This Galley the Morning Star Captain Hartman stemmed and
sunk. In the Galley the Padillo was the Captain Bartholomes d' Oliueres, with
a company of Portingales. And in the Morning Star was Captain Lucena also a
Portingale, and had with him a company. And the Lieutenant of the Colonel
called Matheo Rauelo, with the Sergeant Mayor called John de Payua. Captain
Mol stemmed and sunk this Galley the Padillo, and was the second which was
fought with and drowned. Lucero or the Morning Star was stemmed by Hartman,
and first of all drowned. The Captain of this Galley was called Collado, whose
legs were both shot off, and afterward died in Hartmans ship.

The Galley called the S. Philippo, was stemmed by Captain Cerrit Euertson
Oly, wherein were no chief officers of the soldiers, but Captain Rouy Mendos
with his company, the said Captain being dead. The Captain of this Galley
was called Don Rodrigo de Narroys, and was ouersailed by Gerret Euertson Oly,
and was the third that was encountered and drowned.

The Galley called S. Iacento had no chief Commanders in her, but only of the
soldiers, to wit, Captain Loys de Camons a Portingale, with a com^anie of
soldiers.

John Vidal a Spaniard died of sickness in the Capo Finis Terre, who had also a
company in some of the said Galleys, with another Captain and his compa^ie,
whose names I could not learn: so that they were in all nine Companies, to
wit, two Companies of Castilians, and seven Companies of Portingales, which
were esteemed to be 900. strong. The ^orsares, or slaves which rowed, were in
all about ^^fteene hundred persons, and of the one and other were saved as
after follows.

Every Galley had three brass pieces, as the cast ^eeces which were demi
Cannons, or Culuerings, and in the two wings on both sides smaller pieces, and
no more Ordinance.

Captain Gerrit Euerts saved some 80. men, to ^it, 35. or 36. slaves, the rest
were officers and soldiers.

Captain Mol saved 49. men, among whom ^ere five or six soldiers, the rest
were slaves.

Captain Hartman saved 42. persons, among whom were also five or six
soldiers.

The Admiral S. Loys (before named) was said to (...) driven ashore on the
land of Schowen, near to ^^rick Sea, and was supposed there to have peri^^^d,
because some of the Oars and other baggage ^^s there found floting in the Sea:
but since it is said ^^^t it got thence, and put into Callis, where the
Go^^^nour attached the lading, and set the slaves at ^^^ertie.

FINIS.

