Here begins a little treatise called the dysputacyon or co^playnt of the
heart thorughe perced with the lokynge of the eye.

My heart is through perced with the lokynge of thine eye.







IN the first weke of the season of May
When the wodes be covered in grene
In which the nyghtyngale list for to play
To show his voys among ye thorns kene
The^ to rejoice which love servants been
Which fro all comfort thy^ke the^ fast behy^de
My pleasyr was as it was after seen
For my dysporte to chase heart and hynde.
Than I commanded my hounds to goo
To draw about if they might find a vewe
And forth we went both I and other moo
Now here now there the huntes for to sewe
Which in their horns many blastes did blow
To find an heart they did their full entente
In a forest of mine for to say true
In which to hunte I had great talente.
We sought so much about in every part
Till at the last we found right well to chase
Great hearts out of the hyrde a part
Which went about their pastoure to purchase
And than anon we went for to embrace
Many branches of Elm and of hable tree
With which to dress us a good standing place
We made us busshes well as seemed me.
When this was done I turned my bak anon
To fette my hounds and came sone again
Where of aloundes I brought many one
And when I came in to the forest plain
I found anon the hounte of hearts twain Heart and eye.
For which I made to blow horns hye
And hounds six score and mo certain
Which made me thought a Joyous melodye.
For that pour heart that sorrow does manace
Might have pleasaunce and also great comfort
To here the hounds make that merry chase
So properly they ran of one accord
And eke so swyfte was their merry report
That it me thought as very paradyse
For in that forest was much more dysporte
Than Instrument coud make to my deuyse.
And in chasynge not fer out of my way
I herd a woman's voyse wonder clear
More swetter herd I never none to my pay
Than of my horse I descended right there
To understand the better and to here
So long till yt their songs were song and done
And for to know the place I drew me nere
Where as I herd this noble enprese sone.
And I serched ladies many one
I found sitting about a fair fountain
Under a pyne which shadowed them echone
It was thing to me yet uncertain
To know of them which was the sovereign
Their behauynge so Inly notable
And to their beauty if I should not feign
Of all other they were Incomperable.
And in thyr presence if I should not lie
Were gentle women of right goodly statute
I had not seen before in company
More fressher folk of shap I you ensure
And in their doing sad and eke demure
To fest the people they had great delyght
All that I saw was done by good measure
And well demend every manner wight.
And I approached as nygh as I might
And saluted them anon full curteysly
And toward me there came two anon right
Which said to me us seems verily
Ye list to take your dysporte secretly
As it appears well in your person
When ye be weary ye may rest hardely
And let your hounds make them game alone.
Than we pray you that ye will come and se
These ladies and damoysselles in fere
And they shall fest you as they can perde
To your worship and theyres in all manner
And in singing they have none here their pere
For above all other they have the name
And goodly stories who so list to here
They can report and there of have great fame.
So much of well they began to me record
That I was rauysshed meruelously
For which my thoughts fell sone to accord
To se them and when I saw trewly
Their fair bodies made so parfytly
Where god him self and also dame nature Heart and eye.
Had planted beauty right plentyuously
Far above any erthely creature.
And to all them I did such reverence
Which as to me thought I ought to do soon
Not oonly after the high apperence
Of their nobleness but after one by oone
And there wanted nothing that should be done
Of worship there men might ensample find
So goodly folk yet saw I never none
For in all plesaunce set was hole their mind.
And I was of these ladies gracyous
Received well with perfyte gentylnesse
The which of flowers right delycyous
Made a fresshe chapelet the soth for the express
I had not seen such one by fore doubtelesse
The which they gave to me right courteysly
And than I found that eye of all gladness
Was retresshed right well and Ioyously.
Than one of them me by the hand did take
And began to sing a song of great pleasaunce
And to all that other answers sone began make
Hole together without varyaunce
So parfyely with all the cyrcumstaunce
That I have not hard none of such mesure
It was a life to voys all dyspleasaunce
Out of a troubled heart I you ensure.
All these lerners that were present
Began to sing that Joy it was to here
In such places where they did talent
They cast their sight each man in his gre there
And some began syghe with pytuous look and chere
Offrynge their hertes with hole intent
While that / that their life and body were in fere
So much that love should there with be content
That one of them went out fro the feast
And with drew her out of the company
And can not say why it was at the leest
But well I wot and dare say verily
Mine eye had great pleasure her to aspy
Warning my heart on her to take good head
Which of all sorrow was all void trewely
When I beheld her goodly woman head.
It seemed an angel that god had made
To come adowne for beauty sovereign
There could no man se with his eyes glade
A more gracyous lady the sothe to said
Her for to please though I did all my pain
I could not tell her fetures halfendele
Therefore I commytte this matere all plain
With them that lust with materes to dele.
And for her beauty which was imperyall
My pleasure always began me to complain
To sewe for grace and did me hole trauayll
To whom my thought began to strain certain
Yet my pour heart said he would do his pain
And took none head to her noble grace
In his seruyse for to be true and plain
Her for to serve during my lives space.
And when she had thought all that her list
To the feast she turned anon right
And with her voys which was most swetyst
Began to sing with all her force and might
And as she cast about her gooly sight
Which was great plesaunce to all there
Unto mine eye it gave so great a light
That in all comfort I stood verily clear.
And or that she had ended her song
An heart came rynnynge by them haftly
And lepte in to a well all them among
Than for mine hounds I blewe certainly
With whom the heart was hold so strayt truly
That he thought he should not long endure
And for great rere he lept full besely
For of his death he demed him very sure.
The ladies and the great gentle women also
Had great pleasure to be hold and se
And did their part to help the hounds so
The heart to take at soil if it might be
But such dysporte before I did not se
Mine eye would not thereof no treasure make
But her in whom all virtue was plente
Beheld all way I dare well undertake.
And when this heart aspyed well his time
He leped lightly out of the fountain clear
My weary hounds laid them still by me
For none of them might nothing nygh hyre ne^
He brake the busshes so here and there
He went his way withouten any arest
And rennynge for the among the bows shere
He scope us fro and took the thyk forest
I went to these ladies my leave to take
The heart to pursewe I did mine entente
Within a while my courage began to shake
Mine heart such dyscomforte to him has hente
That I ne knew well what hontynge mente
But well I wot I was full of disease
Me to dysporte I had but small talente
But late my thought forth all at his ease.
And what for walking I was weary sone
Seeing the son began to go to rest
Of heart ne hounds I coud se right none
As far as I coud look both est and west
An one the night began to make him pressed
So fast he came that I lost my place
And still to abide me thought it for the best
Till that the day began to show his face.
I tied mine horse unto a fair grene tree
Again the which mine head anon I set
The earth as cold as marble seemed me
Which made my tethe all in mine heed to whette
My self compleynynge how that I was set
That I might not that lady se again
Whom that mine eye promised an behette
When I had first sight of her certain Heart and eye.
And with that thought I found that eye
Had lost mine hope and Joys euerychone
And that hard sorrow ny^hed me so nigh
That I should not but weep wayle and groan
And diverse pains come upon me sone
For I coud not se in no manner wise
Her in whom all my Joys were alone
And than I slepte a while me to suffyse.
heart
And in slepynge mine heart I herd complain
And with mine eye anon began debate
Seeing falls eye thou do me great pain
To be so hardy that erely or late
To cast my look upon so great estate
Where all beauty is set in little space
I trow to me thou have some manner hate
That thou have set me in so hye a place.
eye
The eye than said thou heart to what entente
Say thou that I have done the any wrong
I am thy friend if thou list be content
I may well swear mine oath if thou will it song
And leave me well both at short and long
That I did never evil unto the
I doubt me not though thou with words strong
List thus to chyde take this for certaynte.
heart
Have thou not made by right sweet adventure
Me for to chese the flower of womanhede
The most pleasant of living creature
Surmountynge in verrey goodly head
And for the swetnesse that in her does sprede
Thou have on her planted thy stedefast sight
Which is to me great preuydyce in deed
Sith I may not se her as it were right.
eye
For soth I will not the contrary
But that I have a goodly lady said
In pleasant wise I woll not fro it varye
In all honor she has no pere certain
Among all other chosen sovereign
As for the fairest and the best also
Therefore thou have no cause on me to complain
No me to hate / a well why doyst thou so.
heart
Yes for soth for when thou so do
O^ so great desire thy sight on her thou cast
Through the which I was rauysshed so
That in all Joy me thought I was stedefast
And her goodness in me portted thou have
And or I ask mercy or grace
She was right far out of thy sight ypast
For which dyspayre me straytly does embrace.
eye
I have fraunchyse that all mine own pleasaunce
My sight to cast when that me lyketh best
For which thou ought to have no dyspleasaunce
Thy dread and mine be not like at the lest
Though that we both in one place take our rest
I am ordained to behold and se
And than to leave sholdest always be pressed
Why put thou this blame than all on me.
heart
Like as fruit may not wexe type kyndely Heart and eye.
But if he take of the son some manner hete
In like wise I may not live trewely
Without thy counseyle wherefore cause great
I have to blame the sith I may not get
Sith of her alas the hard while
I am not like with her to mete
How may thou forth me thus begyle.
eye
Though I behold a ladies great beauty
Through which thou art be comen amerous
And as of hope thou art in no suerte
Which makes the happily right dolorous
Yet sholdest thou not with words rygorous
So woefully me to repreue and blame
Now in good faith thou art not virtuous
To do or say that should be to my shame.
heart
Thou ought well somewhat longer to abide
Till that the mouth had her be sought of grace
And that the ere had take good head that tide
In his concept if I had any place
So might thou to me his pleasaunce purchase
But I now feel that I am so purueyde
Of sorrow which does me sore embrace
And of all Joy I know me dysperueyde.
I recke no of the mouth nor of the nose
Of eere nor foot nor of the hands twain
It sytteth me much better as I suppose
To look upon a fair lady certane
And to be hold them I shall do my pain
Which is my pleasaunce and ever shall be
For I recke not whether thou laugh or complain
Take now right good head what I say to the.
heart
Thou scornest fast mortherer as I trow
Thou have me smite with a stroke mortal
By thy falls look thou have me overthrow
I wend full little thou had be such at all
Thou have me cast with out the castle wall
Of good comfort and out of all gladness
Therefore in faith I may the right well call
Worse than an erytyke the troth to express.
eye
I am no mortherer nor out of believe
Thou shalt me find always both plain and true
Nor by no witness shalt thou never preue
That ever I was to man untrue
And namly to name whoos stappes I show
And if thou would say ought to the contrary
To desire the marshall I will pursewe
And make him Judge I will not longer tarry.
heart
As much as is in me I am content for certain
Before him the causes need
Of our strife between us twain
And let the truth for us proceed
That he may know where the fault is in deed
And let him Judge for us both ryghtfully
Without mercy for right so god me speed
In that quarrel I dare well fight trewely.
eye
Than the eye answered in this manner
That he would him defend with all his might Heart and eye.
Than both two were accorded thus in fere
To go toward the court of love full right
When they came to show their right
Than said desire of love the marshall
Tell thou thy cause anon here in our fight
Of our rumor that is between you fall.
heart
The heart than took no manner of counseyll
But his own tale he told full trewely
And desire lo here my cause saunsfefayll
The eye has done to me vncurteysly
Not long a go he put his sight trewly
On the fairest and best where ever she go
For his pleasure and not for mine trewly
Right in this wise as I shall tell you lo.
When the eye had on her set his sight
Love put in me of his great worthynesse
Thought desire / and pleasaunce these three full right
Which should make me to stand in stedefulnesse
For to love her without doubleness
If than I might her grace to attain
Whom I am like never to se doubtless
Wherefore I have great heaviness and pain.
And thus the eye has set me in such plyght
For when he saw that I was thus take
With love of her he parted from him quyght
Or that I coud my certaynte make
Wherefore of time I trymble sore and quake
And think right long after allygeaunce
Thus by the eye my woe begins to wake
All in dyspayre thus standing in balaunce.
And with this gryefe I am to death brought
And out of Joy standefull forowfully
All in dyscomforte as I ne rought
Of erthely thing so troubles me the eye
For if the fair had not so pleasauntely
Her goodly look on me be set so sore
This sorrow had not comen to me trewly
But I had lived as I did before.
Wherefore I complain me thus ryghtfully
Of great iniurye that the eye has done
And my cause is mente most faithfully
Wherefore to you I do submyssyon
And on my troth I make promyssyon
To fight with him in loves high presence
Before the which we shall know soon
The right fro wrong without more dyffence.
eye
The eye answered and said in this manner
I have done nothing contrary to thine heart
For though I cast mine look both here and there
Upon the fair if ye list well aduerte
The heart should not in his conceyt peruerte
Sith love has granted me the high office
I will it keep an never fro it sterte
Of him I have none other benefyce.
heart
The heart replied with his full entente
And said thou eye thou art falls and untrue
I cast to fight in this quarrel present
The eye answered and said I am as true
As ever thou were therefore in words few
To know the right thy wedde I up take
And in presence of love we shall it show
Who has the wrong and no more noise to make.
Than when desire had herd the matere plain
In mids of May he sygned a day
The great quarrel before love to tarrayne
And letters write and sealed both to say
With sealys of their arms fresshe and gay
Each one of them his right for to maintain
Thus to be there in all best array
They made there both two their promysse certain
Than went this worthy mershall of love
To tell his lord and master part and all
Of this affraye rehearsed here above
And love anon commanded forth with all
To make a field where in both great and small
Might have their sight closed about with lyces
And there with all if I the soth say shall
A rych scaffolde arayde with delyces.
And when love had him his charge thus told
And anon was made a field both long and wide
With double lystes all of right good gold
Covered with tyssewe well on every side
Nabugodonosor with all his pride
Which was the rychest king as in his days
Had never such one before that ylke tide
As was that field with all the rich arrayes.
For in that field were two fair entrees
All made of Jasper and of clear crystal
Which good work men of strange countrees
With baryers of passing fine coral
Had wrought right well by craft especyall
All set with keys made of yuery
Which a lock smyth that came fro portyngale
Fyled with a fyle smothe and craftily.
The scaffolde of love was made of ambre
Founded on pyllours of right fair baleys
With warderobe an hall and also with chamber
As though it were within a great paleyse
The tapettes also as the book says
Were the story of the rose the romaunce
For lovers to read both clerks and lays
Were written right well with good dyamaunce.
The chair was also passing fresshe and gay
Where love himself in his estate sit should
Of clear burell well polysshed soth to say
And four spare hawks made of massy gold
And on the back there were to behold
Syxte carbuncles right well set and even
Which were clerer and bryghter many fold
Than ben the planettes shynynge from heaven.
The day and the hour above said
When the heart should fight against the eye
Love came him self with his wings dysplayd
Dyscendynge down of his scafolde trewely
And in his chair he sat down softely
A robe on him embrodered with rych stones
And fine perles set full craftily
Browderede of emeraudes for the nones.
The flores fresshe of the crown of love
And chamehyeux were made of great richesse
And of clear saphers set all above
All his wings were of such bryghtnesse
Federed de byen en meulx doubtelesse
As of tapyses shynynge wonderfully
I trow none aungelles the troth to express
Have not their wings made so plesauntly.
He had also a bow of unicorn
And two strings made of great substance
Of gold of cypress at each end
A shefe of arowes set in ordenaunce
To teache the lovers his trace to dance
Federed with fine rubyes bright and shene
Which gave him for a great pleasaunce
Poynted with dyamondes sharp and kene.
And when that love this noble god archere
Had bow and arowes set down him beside
Regard his heraude with voice inly clear
Thryes as it was commanded that tide
Called the heart that he should not lange abide
Which had promised to fight there tha day
Against the eye which was so full of pride
And not to make taryenge nor delay.
The heart came forth to fight against the eye
Upon a courser covered all with larmes
His arms were made of sorrow truly
Also three syghes he bare in his arms
Painted well upon his cote of arms
They appeared all with pyteous weeping
And his sword with which he should do his arms
Was tempered with sorrowful complaining.
In whose company came honor also
Hardynesse / prowess / and eke gentylnesse
Thought and good hope and many other mo
That were of his alyaunce as I guess
All clothed like for their worthynesse
With roses reed and also with lylyes white
Chapelettes they had eke for their nobleness
Of lauendre a flower of great delight.
And when he entered into the fresshe field
Than from his horse he dessended lyghtely
And on his knees fell down and beheld
This noble love and salued him goodly
And a little after full worshypfully
With drew him self and took him to his tente
Which of roses many made was pleasauntly
There tabyde the eye was his hole entente.
Than regard this noble heraulde and wise
Called the eye before love tapere
Which was ready in all goodly wise
Armed with sweet dysporte on a coursere
Which to my conceyt had no where his pere
And seemed well he had no werynesse
Covered with mirth embroded here and there
His sword was of solace and of lustynesse.
Of Joy was made his cote of arms rich
Fygured all with pleasaunce and gladness
Right goodly folk also none of them lyche
He had as happed him beauty and prowess
Goodly port melodye and eke nobleness
Of peruyncle arayde all in grene
And of mergelyne in right great largess
His fair coursers were covered all be dene.
And as soon as this full noble eye
This lystes approached on foot he light
And entered in and salued curteysly
His worshypfull lord love as it was right
Which had made promise with the heart to fight
And after went in to his pauylyon
All arayde with gyllofres reed and whyght
Which was worth a kings great raunson.
The ordeyner of the field named desire
Made come anon in to the high presence
Of which was their noble lord and fire
Both the heart and the eye full of prudence
And made them swear upon their conseyence
That in their cause each of them had right
And to cry it in open audyence
And not to tarry that they have be hight
Than after this the heart went again
Unto his tente his rest for to make
And set him on his sege the sothe for to feign
Made of eglantyne for his own sake
Also the eye his friends had let make
A sege for him of woderon plesauntly
Where he made good watch I undertake
Upon the eye when he should come trewely.
And after came love the field unto
And chose knights to awayt upon them twain
Thought sweet hope / and rememberaunce
And honor eke and I should not feign
All armed with margaretes certain
And each of them bare in his hand a spear
Of grene lauer well made both smoth and plain
To depart these champynyons if need were.
And than this love which is worthy and dygne
To whom no creature may him resemble
Unto regard his heraulde made a sign
That he should make ye heart and the eye to assemble
And when they were thus both two assemble
The heralde cried do your devour anon
For which the heart and the eye began to tremble
And so did they that were present each one.
And thus the heart which was thappalaunte
Out of his tente yssues right manly
Which bare as he that was right valeaunt
A spear heed with sorrow sekerly
The eye from his pauylyon by and by
Issued also in his hand a lance
The which he gyded full gentylmanly Heart and eye.
Poynted it was right fresshely with plesaunce.
Forth with the heart hente in his fyst a spear
Thryse before the eye / namly he went
The eye anon as he that had no fere
Came forth a goodly pace anon of his tente
And the heart with a good auysemente
Cast his spear and perced the vysere
Of the eye which demed him almoost shente
And thought he was unto death right nere.
And when the eye felt him thus sore wounded
Rudly against the heart he went anon
And first of all that his heart was founded
His spear he caught manly and tyght soon
Unneth the heart might stand his fete upon
For he smote one of his platys a part
And of that stroke he had so much to done
That he demed that his body and soul should part
Yet for all this his heart he took again
And right manly his sword anon he took
And on the eye he smote right fast certain
Such mighty strokes that all the ground shoke
And than the eye with a courageous look
The heart strongly he bare so with his sword
Against the lystes and him not for soke
Whereof the heart was than right sore aferde.
The heart saw that he was in daungere
And right nigh dyscomfyted thus by the eye
Full hardtly he cast away his spear
And drew his dagger well amsely
And laid on fast and smote so fervently
Upon the eye that he was nere attaynte
And from his strokes he voyded lightly
For which to cover he had great constraynte.
And as they fought these great cha^pyons twain
With their sharp daggers with so great courage
Which were like to fall down in the plain
Dame pity than that lady sweet and sage
Came forth anon with a certain message
To love and prayed her crande for to here
Right as he sat on high upon his stage
Which came from venus his own modet dear.
Than love to her made glad and Joyful chere
And gave to her a welcome honorable
Saying thus dame pity mine own friend dear
Sith my mother of her estate notable
Uenus I mean the goddess amyable
Has you commanded thus to come to me
Think it is to me right agreeable
To here your message what so it be.
And than pity thanked love right mekely
Which was always on knees as I read
Saying right high lord here is trewele
A great debate of these knights in deed
Which have been ever both in word and deed
Wykynge of love the stepes for to show
And of Uenus who so list to take heed
Above all other servants good and true. Heart and eye.
For when Uenus herd this mortal strife
That was between the heart and eye thus fall
Of very love and of heart attentyfe
Co^sydereth the beginning and all
And wot full well that her esate ryall
Without them two may not be kept up right
Nor her mayeste exalted be at all
But they were ready always in her sight.
And for they be both of her court in fere
She now commands them to call again
And before her they both must needs appear
As for this cause thus fell between them twain
For she would know the very cause all plain
Of their debate which to her eere appertains
And would they were in pease full feign
For all such causes unto her perteyneth.
Than love for the which to give his obeyssaunce
To his mother and would no more abide
Saying thus she shole have cognoyssaunce
And there debate would no longer hyde
But called the watches that went by their side
Chargynge them the champyons to dysioyne
And to pity whoos goodness is known wide
Deliver both in peace them for to Ioyns.
The pity bad them warn them both
And after went of love her leave to take
And charged the^ whether they were leefe or loathe
Between the^ twain no more quarelles to make
But late their strife / an their debat slake
And eschew hate and love together again
What marvel though their hertes did quake
Toward Uenus when they should go certain.
By wene them went his good lady pity
And led them by the hands in full friendly gyse
And said to them now sith ye are with me
I shall you two make to morrow or ye rise
My cosyns germayns your hate to depryse
And Uenus shall you of one accord
Which will not suffer in no manner wise
Her own folks to be at dyscorde.
Than they aryued all in a strong isle
That was made right strong about with all
Ofbrennynge brondes by craft abyle
Because it was so derke in especyall
Were two fowls which ostrydges men call
Bare on high in the air in lettere
Of gold enhameled of a^ure at all
Uenus the goddess of love most entere.
I saw his lettere which borne was so hye
Covered with cloth of great substance
And she in whom all Joy is most trewly
And gladness continued with pleasaunce
A robe of purple she had at her ordeynaunce
With flames of fire and sperles light
Which was made to the suffysaunce
Of young lovers for comfort day and night
And when madame pity found there present Heart and eye.
Her lady venus of love goddess
With a sote salve she did her present
And said madame to your high nobleness
Are come these two knights of great prowess.
The heart and the eye to know your entente
Whom love has dread and with humbleness
Now at this time by me to you has sent.
To that intent that of their great debate
As ye my lady commanded by me
That ye might know the cause of all their hate
For he would ye had the soueraynte
By cause he knows verily that ye
Can best Judge them as to their behoue
Also he wot that ye be oonly she
Because all goodness falls to love.
And than Uenus with a goodly countenance
Took to her these noble champyons
Which had so long at their vtteraunce
With hardy hertes fought as were lions
Which trowed well in their opynyons
If pity had not take them into ward
And made to staunche their heavy accyons
Any of them to escape it had been hard.
The heart him set anon up his kne
And said Uenus our sovereign lady dear
Sith it pleases you to know the certaynte
Of our dyscord the very true manner
Not lyenge a word but both plain and clear
I shall you tell beginning and the end
Of our debate thus standing here in fere
If it please your highness now to entende.
That forth with venus gave the heart license
That he should of his cause the substance
Also the eye should ordain his sentence
To answer him in way of replyaunce
And eke they were charged on their alygeaunce
That in their causes they should nothing varye
And for to stand at venus ordeynaunce
And none of them thereto say nay.
The heart attained his cause thus trewely
Saying to venus our sovereign lady goddess
Lo here nature has given to me the eye
To set me in the way of ryghtwysnesse
To find Joy / solace and also gladness
And he has taken a pyler to behold
The fair plesaunte and flower of lustynesse
Which fro me parted sooner than I would.
And of that pleasure that the eye had take
He warned me and that right suddenly
And than anon in me there did awake
Lovely desire / and remembrance trewly
And lodged them in me full plesauntly
And so did thought and in many other mo
And also sweet hope to hold me company
And hap comfort lakked not also.
And after this it happed me full ill
For the eye had no list there to abide
Till I required as it was skyll
Other that I had chosyn to be me gyde
But her absentynge taught me well that tide
That who soever that is far from the eye
Is far from the heart and thus on every side
I live in tourmente and great pains trewly.
Wherefore if he had not thus set his syghte
I had not be taken in the snare
But that I had yet hope my Joy up right
And in no wise I should have this care
For his beholdynge causes evil fare
As to me for this rale is full true
That folks say that women called are
That the eye sees the heart does rewe.
For in the eye is the gate which in no wise
Should not open to let in heaviness
But always should be ready to deuyse
To keep me surely from all pensyuenesse
And let in hope good hap and gladness
Comfort and Joy and also good adventure
For whom he should do his true business
And not to make an hasty adventure.
I feel well he did the contrary
For he has let wepynges and complayntes
Enter in me he may not from it varye
With which my Joy with great sorowmentes
And all my comfort in me now attaynted is
Which is to me a marterdome mortal
Thus I conclude that by his constrayntes
That he is causer of my sorrow all.
Than the eye which him greatly applied
To find matere to his saluacyons
With right goodly advise anon replied
Unto the hertes composycyons
And said I se well by his accyons
That he has been at scole I trow of love
Which brings forth plesaunte Intencyon
Himself further for his own behoue.
And said lady Uenus of love goddess
The heart says thus that he has of nature
Given unto him as he does express
That he all way in gladness should endure
Yet might it hap by some adventure
That he shall not in Joy always abound
For as I trow there is no creature
But in the contrary some time shall be found.
Yet will I in no wise my self excuse
But that nature me made for him doubtless
And yet forsooth he ought me not to accuse
That he bears by me the heaviness
Of sorrow nor of no manner dystresse
For in good faith there can nothing be done
Without his consent as I can express
For all the cause by him is wrought alone.
And as the clock may smite in no wise
But that he have some manner of moeuynge
As he that keeps him list to deuyse
So of myself in deed I have nothing
But to behold and then in tidings bring
And thus the heart is cause of all trewly
For without him thus have I no doing
But as an Instrumente forfoth am I
If Ion her have set all my beholdynge
By his advise that causes me thereto
And to this cause he is most attendynge
By his desire her for to love also
If he absente him and sorrow come him to
I may not get that he list not to save
For as some say the heart the work must do
If he will not / I may no pleasure have
So my lady I pray you to take heed
To these cau^es and how I me excuse
And keep ye well my right and so proceed
Against the heart which does you obstuse
To this intent that he shall not refuse
But at the lest that he be take anon
And pi^^ in prysorn there to be recluse
Till he have amended all that is mysdone.
Than Uenus thought well that without the^ too
She might in no wise her court maintain
Wherefore the did the process call her to
And made to write the matter hole and plain
And (...) there of should remain
In her own hand what so ever be fall
And for they should abide her ward both twayn
She made them swear before her folks all.
Of which trewely they were content
And Uenus than wrote unto her servants all
And to all true lovers the hole entente
Them commaundynge both great and small
Each man search on pain that might fall
As to their advise which of them had right
And this was the very cause in especyall
There peace to make she did her will and might
And who coud bring the very true report
Of the oppenyon of this foresaid matere
As for either should have for his report
Of her a chapelet of roses to were
Than anon I found all the substance clear
Of my thoughts which I had done before
Which I wrote as ye have herd me here
With any leasing less or more.
I pray them which led their life
And of true love be set in the way
That of the heart and eye and the doutfull strife
Will in their conceyte eueryma^ assaye
To send his opinion as soon as he may
Unto Uenus and who the chapelet plain
Shall get than to love for him I pray
That to all his desyers he may attain.
Here ends a little treatise called the dysputacyon or the complaynte of the
heart through perced with the lokynge of the eye.
Inprynted at London in Fletestrete at ye sign of the son / by Wynkyn de
Word.

WC

Wynkyn ^de^ Word.

printer's or publisher's device


