A PLAIN AND FAMILIAR EXPOSITION OF THE Thirteenth and Fourteenth Chapters of
the Proverbs of Solomon.

PROVERBS. 2. 10. 11. When wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge
delights thy soul, Then shall counsel preserve thee, and understanding
shall keep thee. PERIIT ET INVENTA EST printer's device of Richard Bradock

Imprinted at London by R. B. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop
in Fleetstreet, near the Conduit.

1608.

To the right Honorable, John Lord Harrington, Baron of Exton, and to the
worthy and Noble Lady his wife: Grace, and Peace.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
YOur Christian love generally toward all the servants of God, together with
the especial favor showed to us, by your good acceptance of our former
labors: has given us great encouragement to offer this present treatise unto
your Honors patronage, the purpose and upright desire of our hearts in all our
writings is, to glorify God, and to edify his people. The method which we
observe herein, is the self same with that in our former books: and the
matter and manner of handling, we commit to the judgment of your Honors, and
of every godly and indifferent reader: If our endeauours be as charitably
interpreted by others, as they be faithfully intended by us, we are sure they
shall give offense to none, but satisfaction to all. And thus nothing doubting
but that your Honors will vouchsafe to receive this testimony of our duty and
unfeigned love, we humbly commit you to the gracious protection of Almighty God,
beseeching him always to direct and bless you.

Your Honors in the Lord to be commanded, John Dod, Robert Cleauer.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER OF THE PROVERBS.
CHAPTER XIII.
Verse 1. A wise Son harkeneth to the instruction of his Father: but a
scorner will hear no rebuke, A Wise Son, that is, a godly and prudent child
of either sex, male, or female, son, or daughter, will receive, observe, and
obey the good lessons, and counsel both of father and mother. But a scorner,
that is, an obstinate, sinful person, will hear no rebuke, that is, he will
be so far from profiting by the reproves of any, though he be a friend,
though a brother, though a most tender father, that he will not so much as
brook, or bear it, without contempt at least, of the party which rebukes him.

The wholesome precepts of parents are not to be light set by.

It is the usual course and custom of the Scripture to intimate necessary
duties by praising their wisdom which carefully perform them, and censuring
their folly which negligently omit them. As the wise builder lays his
foundation on the rock, and Mat. 7. 26
the foolish on the sand. The wise virgins took oil in their vessels with
their lamps, and the foolish took no oil with them. Mat. 25. 4.
And so for our present purpose in an other place of this book, A fool
despises his fathers instruction, but he that regards a rebuke is prudent.
And why is the one called foolish? because he Prou. 15. 5.
plays the part of a fool, and must therefore bear the burden of his
folly. And why is the other called prudent? because he walks in the way of
wisdom, and shall accordingly inioye the welfare of the wise.

First, the authority is so ample, and amiable, as that in every

Secondly, the lessons of godly parents be very forcible, when

Thirdly, the peril of contemptuous children is so great, and The eye that
mocketh his father, or Prou. 30. 17.
despises the instruction of his mother, let the Ravens of the vallie pick it
out, and the young Eagles eat it. Such a one is like to suffer a violent, and
shameful death, and to want an honorable, and honest burial, either hanging
on a gibbet, or lying in a ditch, and so exposed to crows, and Kites, and
other ravenous souls, that feed on carrions. Now though it be true, that many
of them escape this ignominious end here, yet neither is this a wish without
success, nor a threatening without execution. Though their bodies come not at
the gibbet, yet if their souls go to hell, what are they the better for being
buried, as the rich man was? Luke 16. Though their flesh, and eyes be not
devoured of Ravens and Eagles, yet if their souls and bodies be an everlasting
pray to eternal death, how much is their misery abated?

Admonition to children, as in all good services to be officious, Balaams Ass,
only to reprove Balaams foolishnes, it was Balaams great fault and folly, that
he took no more heed to that which was spoken to him, and therefore when he
chooses so honorable a messenger, as is the parent to the child, and not so
much to reprove, as to direct and assist him, what regard ought to be had of
his admonitions?

Reproof of sinful Sons, contemptuous, and refractary children, have any
faults, or frailty, which they should beware of, or give them allowance in
ought that is unlawful, his facts are authentical presidents for them to
follow, his words are all oracles, for their warrant: but if he propose unto
them many holy examples of true piety, if he faithfully inform them in the way
of godliness and virtue, his course of life is too austere for them to
imitate, and his precepts so strict, that they are not bound to the practice of
them But is it in the choice of children to enlarge, or extenuate the power of
patents at their pleasure? Will they authorize them to be commanders for the
service of sin, and disclaim their jurisdiction when they deal for the Lord?
Let them know (for in time they are like to feel it) that this contempt is the
forerunner of some judgment. Though the father happily can not punish them,
yet God is able; though the father would pardon them, yet the Lord will plague
them. Eli was more willing to have his admonitions neglected, then his sons
to be destroyed, but God would not suffer them so to escape, and therefore it
is said, That they obeyed not the voice of their Father, because the 1 Samuel 2:
25.
Lord would slaie them.

Instruction to parents to teach their children, seeing the Lord Ephesians;
Children (says he) obey Ephesians. 6. 1. 4.
your parents in the Lord. And ye fathers bring them up in instruction, and
information of the Lord. This will be a means to frame them to obedience: this
will be a means to make them wise, whereas the neglect thereof works in them
stubbornness and folly. Of which of all his sons had David so much comfort,
as of Solomon. And which of all David's Sons was so well taught as Solomon?
Which of all David's sons were so proud and rebellious, as Absalom and
Adonijah? And which of them all were so much without good education and
government as they? It is noted by the Holy Ghost concerning one of them, that
his father would not displease him from his childhood, to say, why have thou
done so? It usually comes to pass, and it is to be seen in most places,
that a dumb parent makes a deaf child, and a fond father a foolish Son.

But a scorner, etc. They that most deserve to be reproved, can least of all
others endure reproves.

The more guilty any man is, the more unwillingly he hears Rebuke not a
scorner, says the wisdom of God, least he hate thee. And again, A scorner
loves not him that Prou: 9. 8.
rebukes him, neither will he go unto the wise. Prou. 15. 2


First, they are all proud men, as appears by the opposition with the
scornful he scorneth, but he gives grace unto the humble. Now to be taxed
for misdemeanors, Prou. 3. 34.
is to such, a matter of reproach, and disgrace, and that an haughty heart,
and lofty mind, can never well digest. They affect nothing more then applause
and commendation, nor mind any thing less then repentance, and reformation,
and rebukes without amendment, work them nothing so much as shame and
discredit, and therefore how can they choose but abhor them? Of such our
Savior speaks, when he says, That every man that evil does, hates the
light, neither Ioh. 3. 20.
comes to the light, least his deeds should be reproved, And accordingly
Saint Paul testifies, that all things when they Ephesians. 5. 13.
are reproved of the light* are manifest: for it is light that makes all
things manifest. Such as keep their houses unclean, would not have the
filthiness thereof discovered by a lamp, and they that have stolen goods lying
by them in corners, delight not to have their rooms searched with a candle.

Secondly, scornfulnes grows from an habit of many great sins. which men
have formerly committed and lived in,

No Man is borne a scorner, nor becomes such a one at the first, but is made
so by degrees, as appears in the first Psalm* After he has walked a while,
in the Counsel of the wicked, he comes to stand in the way of sinners, and
then at the last he takes up his rest, and sittes himself down in the
Seat of the scornful. So that by their own sinful custom, and GODS
righteous curse, their hearts are hardened to work Jniquitie with over
greedynesse, and then will they malign all those that dislike their course,
with bitterness. And add yet further, that there is in their consciences a
hidden discouragement, and privy despair, both of pardon of their sinfulness,
and possibility to leave it, and that does exasperate them against such as
shall be dealing with it. Who is willing to have his filthy wound vnwrapped and
laid open to his disgrace, and raked into, and tented to his torment, when he
takes it to be altogether incurable?

Jnstruction, to declare our selves to be no scorners by opening David looked
as well to his ways as other men do, and had as good a nature as other men
have, and was of as great place as other men be, and yet he makes request to
God, to give him friends that would help his soul against his sins, Oh,
let the righteous smite me, Psalm. 141 5.
(says he) for that is a benefit: and let him reprove me, and it shall be a
precious oil, etc.

Reproof of them that show themselves scorners by professing that they scorn
all manner of censures and admonitions It is the Be no mockers, least your
bonds increase, Instruction is evil to Isa 28: 22:
him that forsakes the way, and he that hates correction shall Prou. 15. 10
die.

Because ye have despised all my counsel, and would none of my correction,
Prou. 1. 25. 26
I will laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear comes, etc.

Consolation to them that disdain not to hear of their sins,

Verse 2. A good man shall eat the fruit of his mouth: but the soul of the
transgressors, violence. THe meaning of the first part of this verse is, that
godly men shall be blessed both for, and by their gracious, wise, and
seasonable speeches, and consequently for their religious, and righteous
behavior; and to this, in the other part is opposed the condition of the
godless, that their souls, that is, themselves, at least in their souls,
shall be required with violence for their cruelty, and other evil deeds which
they have done, and consequently for their wicked words which they have spoken.
So it is all one in sense with the fourteenth verse of the twelfth Chapter,
where it is said, that a man shall be saciate with good things by the fruit of
his mouth, and the recompense of a man's hands, shall God give unto him.

Verse 3. He that keeps his mouth, keeps his life: but destruction shall be
unto him that opens his lips wide. HE that keeps his mouth) which is
considerate and wary in his words, never speaking but when he ought, nor
uttering any thing but which is true, and convenient, he keeps his life,
provides for his safety, peace and quietness. But he that opens his lips, or
strideth too wide, to lewd speaking (for so the word signifies, as a harlot
prostitutes her self, or spreads her body to filthy companions. Ezech. 16.
25. destruction shall be to him, he is like to meet with much trouble, and at
one time or other, to be quite overthrown.

The safety and happiness of the whole life depends upon the

That is commonly a means, when it is guided aright, to lengthen the years of
men's lives: and that is usually an occasion, when it is misgouerned, to lessen
their days and make them shorter. That being wisely and religiously employed,
will procure supply of all their wants, and that being rashly and sinfully
used, will quickly dispatch them of great abundance. That being peace able,
discreet, and modest, will help to rid them out of their troubles: but that
being boisterous, hasty, and arrogant is like to entangle them with
molestations. Death and life (says Solomon Prou. 18. 21.
in the eight Chapter) are in the power of the tongue. And therefore it is both
a prudent and holy direction, which the Spirit of God does give us in the
Psalms. What man is he that desires life, and Psalm. 37. 12. 13
loves long days for to see good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips
that they speak no guile, etc.

First, it is proper only to good men to moderate and govern their tongues in
due manner; they that can do that, are able to order If any man sin not in
word, says S. James, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle all the James 3.
2:
body. And contrariwise, If any seems religious, and refraineth not his
tongue, but deceineth his own heart, this man's religion is James i. 36
in vain. So that if it be peculiar to godly persons to keep their mouths,
and unseparably annexed to religion, it does necessarily argue their happy
condition, which have attained unto it, and their dangerous case which be
careless thereof.

Secondly, all our actions are suitable to our speeches, and a good S. James
calls it the rudder of the man, by which his life is directed, and he that
wants it, is in as great peril, and is like to perish, as a ship in the
roughest seas, without either stearne or Pilote.

Jnstruction to set a guard of attendance and watchfulnes before out thence:
for that would work on our selves alone, but these will hurt our brethren with
us: that would only kill the body, and take away natural life: and these will
endanger both body and soul, and deprive us of eternal life.

Neither is it an easy matter to keep them in, unless a continual and
serious care be had thereof. There are no malefactors more ready to break out
of prison, nor waters to flow out of fountains, then lewd, or foolish, or
fruitless words are to proceed out of men's mouths. How quickly shall the best
forgette themselves in their talk, if they be not very vigilant, and wary?
How many unfit, at least frivolous, and idle speeches will steal away, and
slip from them, if they give any passage unto them without examination of their
purpose and business? The Prophet Isaiah was in good earnest, and spoke as he
found, and felt, when he said, that he was a man of polluted lips, and dwelt
in the midst of Isai. 6. 5.
a people of polluted lips. Saint James was well advised, and knew what he
writ, and had the Holy ghost to warrant him, when he calls the tongue An
unruly evil, more untameable then the wild beasts, or any other living
creature: and if it were not Iam. 3. 6. 7. 8.
well looked too, Hell, the Devil, that hellish fiende, would fire it, and it
would set the whole course of nature on fire.

And David did not without cause, or need, direct his petition to GOD for
help from heaven, saying, Set thou O Lord Psalm. 141. 3.
a watch before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. If it were a
matter of no difficulty to govern the Tongue, his own wit and reason would
have sufficed him for it. If it were a matter of no peril, to give it head
without government, he would not have asked aid to keep it: but knowing it to
be impossible with his own strength to rule it, and as dangerous to leave it
at liberty without restraint, he craves the assistance of the spirit, for
supply of his wants.

Terror of them that turn their tongues loose, and yield them withal. Their
case is a thousand times more cursed then that of the Serpents whom Satan
spoke by, to beguile Euah: and far worse is it with them for their
everlasting state, then with Mark 5. 5. 7.
the possessed man for his present condition, whom the devil made to strike
himself with stones, and compelled his tongue to cry out against Christ,
which came to deliver him. He was driven to this extremity so to do, and so to
speak, by compulsion, but these do voluntarily offer the use of their lips to
Satan, and willingly apply them to his service, against God, and their own
souls. And therefore the misery of that distressed captive, moved the Lord to
commiseration and mercy, and the sinfulness of these blasphemous wretches,
provoke his wrath and vengeance. Such sinful persons yet may be said to
keep their mouths, though not as our Text does admonish us, by shutting them
up against all unlawful discourses, but as musketours having them always
churged, with some impious, false, and corrupt matter, and leuelling every
where at such as they mind to infect or deprave by them. But it were safer for
them to shoot with rustie pieces, though peradventure they might mar their
faces, then with venomous mouths that will surely wound their souls. Their
virulent and wicked speeches will every one recoile upon themselves and strike
them to the heart, besides their shame and misery, that is like to forgo their
death and damnation.

Consolation to all those which have power over their tongues Peter assures,
that they are heirs of 1 Pet. 3. 9. 10. 12.
blessing, that the eyes of the Lord are over them, that his ears are open to
their prayers, and what can then be amiss with them? His beholding is with
pity and compassion, his hearing has always in it a readiness of granting,
and he cannot but help, when he sees their misery, and they seek for succor
at his hand. Albeit therefore they seem to expose themselves to perils that
will not requite wrongs with the edge of their tongues, yet they ward of
injuries, they have the Lord for their refuge. Albeit they seem to run upon
the point of the sword, that will speak bouldly for the cause of God, and set
themselves against the wicked ways of the world, yet they only provide for
their safety, they are never disarmed of their buckler. Faithful and plain
dealing does often and commonly procure evil will, and blame, and troubles, but
never bring any hurt: the greatest molestations for truth and equity are not
harmefull: death it self in that case is desirable, and not dangerous.

Verse. 4. The sluggard lusts, but his soul has naught: but the soul of the
diligent shall be made fat. THe sluggard lusts) that is, negligent and idle
persons have strong affections to riches and credit, and all things which are
in request and estimation, but his soul has naught, they go without that
which they long for, their wishes get no wealth, they fail of their desires,
through the want of constant endeavors to effect them. Bu the soul of the
diligent shall be made fat, that is, the industrious persons themselves which
painfully labor in some honest vocation, shall all be competently provided
for, and many of them, diverse times shall attain to plenty and abundance.

The sluggard lusts, etc. No men are more covetous, then they

Where the hands and other parts of the body be negligent and remiss in
working, the mind and thoughts of the heart are wholly intent, and occupied in
wishing. The best Be in the hiue, is not more desirous of honey than the idle
drone, nor the most laborious husband in a country more willing to be rich,
than the luskish loyterers. The Prophet Isaiah reprehending the blind Isai,
56. 10. 11.
watchmen the dumb dogs that could not bark, says, that they lie and sleep,
and delight in sleeping. And these greedy dogs can never have enough.

First, this may appear by the causes of it: for they want the

It is very ordinary and common, that slothful persons be high minded and
luxurious. And that testimony is given of them by the Lord himself, who
narrowly looks both into their hearts and ways. He tells us, that the
sluggard is wiser in his own conceit Prou. 26. 16.
then seven men that can render a reason. And likewise that the sleepy doggish
shepherds as they were insatiable for their gain so were they sensual for
their bellies, saying, Come, I will bring wine, and we will fill our selves
with strong drink etc. And Ezechiel Isai 65. 12.
lynketh them all together as three lewd companions in the example of the
Sodomites, saying, This was the iniquity of thy sister Ezech. 16. 49,
Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her, and in
her daughters. And though the Scriptures should be silent herein, yet their
own practice would publish the truth of this point. Who sees not appara^tly
that they which do least good service to God or man, be most vain, garish, and
luxurious? do not they that mind to set up the trade of laziness desire to
creep into such families as where they may fare well, and go fine, and look
bigly, and do nothing, unless it be to play the ruffians, and commit
wickedness? Now then if it be certain, that they are proud and voluptuous, it
will follow also that they must needs be greedy minded and covetous to
maintain, if it were possible their credit and pleasures. This cause arises
from their own sinful corruption, but an other proceeds from Gods just
judgment upon them. jf they lusted, and obtained that which they wished for,
it would be a pleasure to them: though they wa^ted that which they desired not,
they would not greatly feel it: but now that they are so hungry for wealth,
and yet kept fasting from it, when they see others so stored with plenty, this
is a stroke of the Lords own hand, as a punishment of their sin, and
addition to their misery. Hereof he speaks in another place, saying, The
desire of the slothful Pro. 21. 25. 26.
slaieth him, because his hands refuse to work. He coueteth evermore
greedily, but the righteous gives and spares not.

Secondly, this is manifest by the effects of it: for who will use so come to
visit them, or be invited by them, all is one, so that they may come by the
coin, they care not who they be that loose it. They will hazard their lives to
wrest and extort away men's money by robbery, and filch away their cattle by
stealing: does not this declare a violent affection of having, when they
strain themselves so far to get substance?

Confutation of them that charge none but rich men with covetousness, as if it
were impossible for any to affect wealth, that

Instruction, that we be not sluggards in spiritual things, satisfying our
selves with wishing for grace and salvation without further Strive says
Christ, to enter in at the strait gate: for many I say unto you, will seek
to enter in, Luke 13. 24
and shall not be able. If all should be saved that are not willing to be
damned, we should have swarms of reprobates in heaven. The foolish Virgins
would gladly have gonne in with the Mat. 25.
Bridegroom, but they thought it too much pains and charges to provide
themselves of oil in due time. And the rich Mat. 19.
man had good liking of eternal life, but no will, to part with his wealth for
it. And so are there innumerable with us, now, like as there have been almost
in all ages, that would never fall into destruction, if words and desires
without Christian behavior and mortification, would preserve them from it.

For the other part of the verse, concerning the plenty, which they that be
diligent are stored with, see Chap. 10. 4. in the second doctrine.

Verse. 5. A righteous man hates a false matter: but it causes the wicked to
stink and be ashamed. THe meaning is, that all that are truly just and godly,
(...) decline from bad causes, words and deeds, with hatred thereof, so far as
they appear unto them to be unlawful. At least it is the duty of all good men
so to do, though sometimes peradventure they fail in practice. But contrariwise
the wicked do not so, but take pleasure in sinfulnes, and thereby are brought
to disgrace and reproache, especially in the sight of God and good men, and often
also ordinary men, such as are merely civil, yea ungodly men and sinners do
loath them, and speak evil of them for their lewdnes. Thus stands the
opposition. The righteous hates a false matter and therefore gains reverence
and honor: but the wicked loves a false matter, and therefore is made odious
and shameful.

True righteousness consists not only in forbearing that which

The affections are of as great force in the services of God, as the words and
actions, and the heart has no less place then the members of the body. It
must be one and the principal agent in love, where they have calling to deal:
and it must deal alone with detestation of those abominatio^s which they are
discharged to intermeddle with. To this purpose it is that Amos says, Seek
good and not evil, that ye may live: and the Lord God of hoasts shall Amos 5.
14. 15
be with you, as you have spoken. But hate the evil, and love the good, and
establish judgment in the gate, etc. And to the same purpose tends the
description which Isaiah makes of a righteous man that lives in safety, when
others are in peril, and retayneth his Isa 33: 15:
boldness when others live in fear. He that walks in justice, and speaks
righteous things, despising gain of oppression, shaking his hands from taking
of gifts, stopping his ears from hearing of blood, and shutting his eyes from
seeing of evil.

First, it is the effect of sound pretty, and the work of a heart The fear of
the Lord is to hate evil. Prou. 8. 13.

Secondly, it makes men careful and constant in shunning that which is unjust
and sinful: as David says, I hate the work of them that fall away, it shall
not cleave unto me. No man takes delight to converse with his enemy, or to
put his hand to that which his heart rises against. Why do not men and weomen
use to play with Adders and Snakes, and serpents, as well as with whelps, and
birds, and such like creatures? because they hate them. Why will they put
sweet flowers and those things that are odoriferous to their noses, and stop
their noses at unsavory smelles? because their nature is delighted with the one
sort, and abhors the other. Though sometimes men make show of reformation of
things that are amiss, yet if it arise not from an internal enimity against
them, they are very like to fall back again unto them: as Saul returned to
listen to witchery, notwithstanding his former sharp proceeding against
witches.

Thirdly, though godly men are sometimes surprised by sin, I allow not Rom 7:
15. 16 17:
that which I do: for what I would, that do I not: but what I hate, that do
I. If I do then that which I would not, I consent to the law that it is good.
Now then it is no more I that do it, but the sin that dwells in me.

Instruction, to inform our hearts against all manner of wickedness, Conviction
of many to be unrighteous men, by countenancing just Lot, who was 2 Pet. 2. 7.
daily vexed with the vncleanlie conversation of the wicked? It is evident,
that whatsoever the heart hates, the eyes will abhor, and our senses will
loath every thing that is offensive to us. Who without necessity would stand
by and behold him, that were plucking off the skin of an unsavory carrion?
VVoulde not every man in such a case stop his nose, and turn away his face,
and make have to be gone? The comparison is homely, but that which is compared
is incomparably more homely, and therefore we take leave to describe such
filthy behavior by that which does most nearely resemble it, though it be not
foul enough to express the loathsomeness of it.

But it causes the wicked to stink. etc. The love of sin brings

He that nourishes rotten affections in his heart, and expresses the same by
unholy and corrupt conversation, is far from having reverence and true
honor. As grace, like Spikenard, or other redolent ointments, does make the
godly to be amiable, and much set by: so foul sins, like filthy diseases, or
ill savors, do cause the wicked to be vile and loathsome. And so is the Prou.
10 7.
meaning of the Holy ghost in the tenth Chapter, as we have there showed, that
their names shall be turned into infamy, as dead corpses are into putrefaction:
God and wise men, will take as little delight in them, as people use to do in
sents that be noisome.

First, the threatening and curse of God is directed against such, which will
surely take hold of them, and not fail. The Lord, says the law, shall send
upon thee cursing, trouble, and shame, in all that Deu. 28. 20. 37
which thou set thine hand to do, until thou be destroyed. And thou shall
be a wonder, a Proverb, and a common talk among all people. Yea this was
denounced against, and executed upon the very Priests themselves that were
impious and sinful, notwithstanding their place and function was so venerable.
Behold, says he, I will Mal. 2. 3. 9.
cast dung upon your faces. And I have made you to be despised and vile before
all the people, because ye keep not my ways, but lift up your faces against
the law.

Secondly, it is a judgment that carries weight with it, and Honor and
glory, Romans 2. 10.
with everlasting life; and one of the grieuousest punishments of the wicked,
that they shall arise to shame and perpetual contempt. Dan. 12. 2.


Thirdly, it answers proportionably to their behavior, and Samuel: Them that
honor me, I will honor, and 2. Sam. 2 30.
they that despise me shall be despised.

Confutation of them that perfume all their words, and works that it is
esteemed the best way for men to grace themselves in the world, by professing
themselves graceless and void of all godliness. But either Salomons
affirmation is false (which were impious to imagine) when he says, that sin
is a shame to a people, or Prou. 14. 34.
else their expectation is foolish (which will surely so appear) when they
think to gain glory by that whereby so many others are made contemptible.
Vain, needs must the hope be, of washing fair in a foul puddle, or of making
ones self sweet by wallowing in a sink, or filthy privy.

Verse. 6. Righteousness preserves him that is upright in his way: but
wickedness overthrows the sinner. Righteousness, etc) that is, Gods favor,
grace and goodness for righteousness, and by it, does protect both the bodies and
souls of such, as are of a sincere heart and holy behavior. And wickedness
overthrows the sinner, or man of sin, as it is in the original text, it is
always a cause by desert, and many times a means by occasion to draw down
misery and destruction upon him. The sense does little differ from the third,
fifth, and sixth verses of the eleventh chapter.

Verse 7. There is that makes himself rich and has nothing, and that makes
himself poor, having great riches. THere is, etc) that is to say, diverse men
take diverse unlawful courses concerning their estate. Some boast themselves to
be rich when they have nothing, being poor and in debt they make show of great
wealth, by keeping a great port. Others, feign themselves poor, when they have
great substance, they complain of want, and go barely, and fare hard, and
would make the world believe that they are nothing worth at all.

It is a sin for men to dissemble their estate, by making it either

The Lord is not pleased with such as feign prosperity that he gave them not,
nor with those that counterfeit crosses which he inflicteth not upon them. It is
not safe for any man to arrogate to himself that which he has not, nor to
deny that portion which he has, least need and penury make the falsehood of his
bragging manifest, and the curse of God cause his murmuring to prove true.

First, the one shows his pride, and lifts up himself, when

Secondly, the one endangereth his brethren by his fair show,

Thirdly the one staieth the other men's hearts and hands from

Reproof of them that are ashamed of their poverty, but far their pride does
testify to their face, and they do not return to the Hosea 7. 10,
Lord their God, nor seek him for all this. For it is a contempt of
corrections, when they strive against his strokes, and stubbornly resist his
hand that smites them. The particular manner we have briefly spoken of in the
ninth verse of the former chapter. Only one sort of men we may not pass by in
silence, but somewhat must be spoken of them, and that is such as being
acquainted fully with the insufficiency of their own state, are yet most
greedy of getting all bargains into their hands, to the defrauding of all
those that have any dealing with them. They are like to quagmites ouergrowne
with green grass, wherein is no appearance of peril, before a man be plunged
in them. These easily fall to both the extremities here specified. So long as
they are borowing though they have nothing, yet they will make themselves very
rich, that they may be trusted: but when they should make payment, though they
have wherewith to discharge many of their debts, yet then nothing is to be
found to satisfy any man. In the next place it serves to reprehend those
niggardly persons, which swimming in plenty and great abundance, do yet almost
statue with penury and want; God offers them means and opportunity of doing,
and inioying good, that like flowing fountains they might send forth streams
unto others, and be largely refreshed with comforts themselves, and they become
bottomless gulfes, and whirle pooles, which draw away, and swallow up all from
others, and yet themselves have use of nothing.

Jnstruction, that we deal plainly concerning the state of our Laodiceans to
say that they were rich, and increased with goods, and had need of nothing,
when they Apoc. 3. 17
were wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; and it
proceeded from too great a discouragement in the godly Eunuchs, to say that
they were dry trees, when God has given Isay 56. 3.
them the fruitful sap of grace.

Verse 8. The riches of a man are the ransom of his life: but the poor
hears not the rebuke. THe meaning of these words seems to be, that
howsoever there is in diverse respects, very good use of wealth and riches, yet
many times they bring dangers to the owners thereof, who are driven to depart
with them for the preservation of their lives. And though poverty be not
without sundry inconveniences, yet poor men are more free from the contrutions
of envious persons then those of higher place and degree. Notwithstanding it
comes not to pass always, necessarily, that every rich man is brought into
such troubles, nor that every poor man escapes from all rebukes and
molestations, but he speaks of that which often befalls the one, and seldom
the other, especially in regard of his estate.

Life is more precious then wealth and riches.

Every godly man, every prudent man, every natural man, that is not stripped of
all humanity, and the very nature of a man, will be at charges to redeem his
life with his goods. That which our Savior speaks concerning food, and
apparel, the most needful outward things, is consequently true in all other
things Mat. 6. 25.
being less necessary. Is not the life more worth then meat? and the body
then raiment? And it is ascribed to the Lords mercy that Lot Genesis 19. 16.
and his daughters were delivered from the destruction of Sodom, though, as it
appears by due consequence, all his goods did perish. Jobs cause does also
make it manifest, whose life the Lord so dearly tendered, when he gave Satan
liberty to spoil him of all his substance.

First, all manner of goods and possessions are for the service of

Secondly, the fruition of riches depends upon life, and whereas

Thirdly, Gods justice in putting a difference between him

Reproof of them that either by immoderate labor and travail,

Consolation to Gods people that have assurance of the eternal Solomon had,
for the same.

But the poor, etc. As the state of rich men is more fenced then

The one sort are like to tall trees and well rooted, but subject to wind and
weather on the top of the hill, and the other like to low shrubs with little
roots, but sheltered from all strong blasts in the bottom. If Isaacks beards
and flocks had been fewer, the Genesis 26. 14. 15.
Philistines would have suffered him to dwell in more peace and quietness by
them. If Jacob had gained no more in Labans service, than he brought thither
with him when he came first, Laban and his Sons would have continued as mild
toward him, as they showed themselves at his first coming.

First, God his provident hand does so dispose of the matter, that help is
wanting, there ordinarily violence shall not be offered.

Secondly, there is no fit subject for envy to work upon; for

Thirdly, there is no pray or booty to be gotten by contending Judah was sacked
by the Babylonians, the poor of the land were most spared from the captivity.
And among us, who 2 Kings: 5. 12.
may travel so safely by the way, and sing so merrily in sight of the thief,
as they that are known to have little money in their purses? Who may live more
securely at home, without fear of robbers by day or night, than they that have
neither plate, nor coin in their chests, nor any good stuff in their houses?
And who are freed so much from molestations and suites of law, as they that are
neither able to pay the fees of the Court, nor to answer the charges of the
plaintiff?

Instruction to help our selves to contentment, though our condition be
inferior to sundry others, by beholding the discommodities

Verse 9. The light of the righteous shall rejoice: but the candle of the
wicked shall be put out. THe light of the righteous) that is, the good estate
and prosperity of godly men, rejoices, is stable and increasing, as it is
said of the Sun, from whence the similitude is taken that he rejoices like
a mighty man, to run his course. And likewise here is joy ascribed to it in
respect of the effect, for that it makes righteous men, not without due cause
to be joyful. But the candle of the wicked, their wealth credit, dignities,
and pleasures, or whatsoever fleshly men have in admiration, or delight in, are
but like to a candle light in comparison of sun shine, and shall be put out,
even suddenly be taken from them, or by degrees, in continuance of time
consume away, and vanish to nothing. The opposition stands in this manner:
The light of the righteous endures for ever, and therefore is full of joy: but
the candle of the wicked will soon be put out, and therefore is full of
sorrow.

Only good men enjoy a comfortable estate.

It is always day with them, though they endure storms and foul weather, now
and then for a season: and sinful persons travel all in the night, without
any moon shine, or starre-light, their guidance, and comfort, and safety
consist altogether in their lantern and candle. This is the meaning of the
Prophet when he speaks to the Church: Behold darkness shall cover the earth,
Isay 60 2.
and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his
glory shall be seen upon thee.

First, the joy and gladness of Gods people is in the assurance His light,
says Job, shined on my head, and Job. 29. 3, 4.
his providence was on my tabernacle. Now ungodly men contrary to this, rest
satisfied in the desire of these earthly things, and look no further, then to
the corruptible treasures of gold and silver, and such like commodities. Of
this nature is that confused good which many so earnestly wish for in the
fourth Psalm, Psalm. 4. 6.
and in such things, is the hope of all wicked worldlinges reposed.

Secondly the condition of all good men, both within, and The way of the
righteous shines as the light Prou. 4. 18. 19
that shines more and more unto the perfect day. The way of the wicked is as
the darkness: they know not wherein they shall fall.

Consolation for godly and religious persons whom no man Though Mica 7. 8.
I fall, I shall arise: when I shall sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a
light unto me. The hideous black clouds of disgrace and contempt, of
slanders and injurious accusations do threaten to cover them for evermore,
and yet says David, Psalm. 37. 6.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, and he shall bring forth thy
righteousness, as the light, and thy judgment as the noone day. So that
whiles there is a God to send help to his people from heaven, or to call them
to glory in heaven, they are not destitute of happiness.

Reproof and terror of the ungodly, who by loving a sinful firmament, that
visible planet to rise upon the wicked as well as the godly, to minister warmth
and light to their bodies for the present, yet he will withhold the shine of
his savor from yelding joy and glory to their souls for ever. But in the
mean time, say they, who is brightest? who is richest? who is greatest? See
whether there be more of them that give themselves to religion, in eminent
places and honor, or of them that take their liberty according to the course
of the world. Sol. True it is indeed, that most commonly worldlings go before
Christians, in earthly preferments, though not always; for by Gods mercy many
good men attain also to riches and dignities. But know that your case is
lamentable, when you have nothing else to comfort your hearts with but this,
that you are wealthy and mighty. What makes your small candle seem to give
you so great light? Because you have bin always shut up in a dark prison, and
were never acquainted with the bright beams of Gods gracious presence. But
what shall become of you when your candle shall be wasted? when your light
shall be extinguished? when your prosperity shall perish? It is certain that
all carnal excellency will come to an end, either being blown out by
violence, or worn out by time. Remember that Haman had, as it were, a lynke
carried before him, and yet it was put out suddenly, snuff and all, at one
blast, and he left in hellish darkness of shame and misery. The king of Babel in
greatness was like to Lucifer, the brightest morning Isa 14: 12:
star, and yet fell from the heaven of his magnificence, and lost all his glory
in a moment.

Verse. 10. Through mere pride does man make contentions; but with the well
advised is wisdom. Only by pride, etc) that is, wheresoever strife grows,
there is pride, at least in one of the parties contending, if not on both
sides. Sometimes it stirs up men, and imboldeneth them to offer wrongs:
sometimes imbittereth men; and makes them way ward against the right:
sometimes it causes the one to be careless of dealing according to equity,
and the other to be impatient of bearing any injuries. Yet notwithstanding this
condemns not all kind of contending, but the frowardnes of the faulty
persons in it. It is lawful to give a rebuke and correction, if it be done
upon good grounds, with an upright heart, and in due manner, though it be the
occasion of some jar or debate, and he only is to be blamed, which receives
not the admonition. Is^y 59 4
And so to stand in the cause of God is commendable (for the Prophet reproves
them that contend not for the truth) and they are to be charged with the sin
of contention, which oppose themselves against good causes. Neither are such
here to be taxed as defend their state, or by the help of the magistrate and
laws against those which go about to defraude or defame them Neither yet are
they to be reproved by this, that follow suites against malefactors to bring
them to just punishment. Provided always, that in these cases the cause be
weighty, their proceedings equal, and their hearts free from all malice and
revenge. But with the well advised is wisdom, they which have discretion and
judgment in themselves, or be willing to harken to advise and counsel of
others, will beware of unnecessary controversies. The opposition is this: Only
by pride and folly does man make contentions: but with the well advised is
wisdom and humility to follow peace.

So far as any man is contentious he is proud.

Humility is ever joined with love; and both of them with mildnes and patience,
and all of them are enemies to bitterness and debate. No man was more ready to
pass by wrongs and injuries Numb. 12. 3.
done unto him then Moses, and that was because Moses exceeded all the men of
his time in humility and meeknes. And Jesus Christ was the most patient and
peaceable of any that ever was in the world, because never any was so humble
and lowly as he. And thus very reason among diverse others, is brought in the
twelfth chapter of Saint Matthew to prove it: He shall not strive Mat. 12. 19.
nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets. And
contrariwise it has appeared in all ages that where pride is deepest, there
patience is shallowest, and they that ouerflow with the one, are void and
empty of the other: And therefore the wise man opposes them together as
contraries, saying, the patient in spirit Eccl. 7. 10.
is better then the proud in spirit. And in another place: He that is of a
proud heart stirs up strife. And this will appear the better Prou. 28. 25.
if we observe the principal branches which the venomous sap of pride
breaks out into.

The first is self-liking, a high estimation of their own worthiness

The second is emulation whereby they enuiously repine and

The third is contempt and disdain, when they conceive a base

The fourth is ambition, when they strive for victory, and propose Lamech to be
feared for Genesis 4. 23.
their force and boysterousnes.

Reproof of them that being most unquiet and troublesome,

Confutation of them that think none to be proud, but such to tax them with
suspision of that, as though it were impossible for them to be touched with it,
sithence their garments and houses and furniture, and all do apparently show
the contrary. But how do they demean themselves? what agreement have they
with their neighbors? Indeed they cannot deny, but that there is great
discord between them and other without doors, the whole town is at variance
with them, and within doors they cannot but fall out with the whole household:
for there is none abroad or at home which does not abuse them. Who sees not a
high mind in allow state, and much pride in small wealth, and a great stomach
under ragged raiment?

Instruction if we would show our mildnes, and not vex our

But with the well disposed, etc) As every one is more discreet James teaches
us that to be apt and forward to bitter behavior, is earthly, sensual, and
devilish. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated.

First, a man of understanding feels the weight and burden

Secondly, they well discern that they shall gain nothing by the loss that
they cause other men to sustain: their neighbors infamy will not heal their
credit: and the trouble that they put others unto, will not be a means of
their own quietness. It is impossible that the hurt of one member by violence
offered to it, should turn to the help of an other that has wounded it.

Thirdly, they foresee and ponder of the perils that may grow to themselves
by unnecessary contentions. Should they not vex

Reprofe of them that take it to be the best means for making

Verse. 11. The riches of vanity shall diminish: but he that gathers with the
hand shall increase them. GOods ill gotten, and wealth attained unto by
unlawful means, shall not prosper, but either wax less and less, or perish
together on a sudden, or at least depart from the unjust owner, and become
another man's: but he that uses honest labor and diligence, does take the
right way to thrive, and daily to grow richer. See chapter 10. v. 2. 3. 4. and
12. v. 27.

Verse. 12. The hope that is deferred, makes the heart sick: but when a desire
comes, it is a tree of life. THe hope deferred) that is, when the thing hoped
for is not obtained according to his expectation that hoped for it, but is put
off from one time to another, it brings great grief and affliction; but when
the desire comes, when a man has that which he long wished for, it is a tree
of life, that is, very pleasant and comfortable, and heals the spirits which
were weakened by the former delay.

As hope is never conceived without comfort, so it is seldom

The elder sort and every sort of people are like to little children in this
point: that which they hope for, and long for, they would not long wait for,
and their hearts will cry if they be not soon satisfied. The Prophet thought
the time not short wherein he had continued expecting deliverance and comfort
at Gods hand, when he said, mine eyes have failed in waiting for thy salvation.
Especially Psalm. 119. 123.
in the 13. Psalm does David declare his ardent desire of speedy help by
multiplying of how long.

How long will thou forget me O Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide thy
face from me? How long shall I take counsel within my Psa. 13. 1 2.
self, having wearines daily in mine heart?

First, that which men desire with hope and yet cannot have it,

Secondly, it commonly comes to pass even to good men, or that the Lord is
remiss in fulfilling of it.

Instruction to hope for nothing but that which is haueable, and Deuteronomie,
that their goods, and cattle, and children, Should be given unto another
people, and their Deuteronomy 28. 32.
eyes should still look for them till they failed, and there should be no
power in their hand. Now what is meant by this, that their eyes should fail?
That their expectation deceived should turn them to as much woe, as if their
eyes had lost their sight. And that was because that they incurring the curse
by their sinful behavior, did yet presume of a restitution to happiness, as
though nothing had appertayned to them but blessings. So slothful persons,
expel and chase from them all wealth and riches, by violence, and yet trust,
that in time, they shall be able to compare with the best of them all, in
wealth and riches.

Not to limitte God, nor prescribe to him in what space he Elisha, that he
neither would, nor ought to attend on the Lord any longer. But we need not
draw admonitions against this from the infidelity of the wicked, but from the
infirmities of the godly, as Abraham and Sarah had much ado to believe, that a
child should be begotten and conceived of their bodies, after their natural
vigor was consumed, and therefore Hagar was brought in to help the matter,
and to supply that which was wanting in Sarah.

Not to depend on man, nor to repose our hope in flesh and

The poor Israelites sound this, and felt it, and cried out upon their own
folly for it. Whiles we waited for our vame help, our eyes failed: for in our
waiting we looked for a nation that could not Lam. 4. 17.
save us.

Where we undertake to minister succor, and can accordingly effect it, let us
not grieve the hearts of them that are already in affliction, by lingering too
long before we relieve them. So does God teach us to show mercy and
beneficence timely, Prou: 3. 28.
and in due season. Say not unto thy neighbor, go and come again, and to
morrow will I give thee, if thou now have it. And this was one among sundry
other testimonies of a good conscience, whereby Job was comforted in his
extremities, that he had not restrained the poor of their desire, nor caused
the eyes of the widdowe Job. 31. 16.
to fail.

But when the desire comes, etc) The longer we stay for any

Verse 13. He that despises the word, he shall be destroyed: but he that
fears the commandments, he shall be rewarded. HE that despises the word,
etc) that is, every one is in a dangerous case, and at least certain to perish
in the end, who contemptuously rejects the holy Scriptures, which because the
Lord does as it were, speak in them, and declare his will by them, are called
his word, and that, for the perfect agreement and consent of all the parts, is
set down in the singular number, as if it were but one. Neither is this
punishment threatened only to the contemners of the books, and sentences, and
Texts of the Scriptures, but likewise to the despisers of the ministry
thereof. But he that fears the commandment, which reuerenceth, and loves,
and makes conscience of the whole doctrine of God he shall be rewarded with
peace, and blessings of this life, and glory and blessedness in that which is to
come.

No sin is more dangerous and hurtful, then the contempt

The ignorance and neglect thereof in them which have opportunity to know, and
embrace it, is not a small fault, nor often passed over without punishment,
much less may they look to escape without some grievous plagues and
judgments, that set naught by it, that despise it, that obstinately reject and
deride it. And in this case there is no privilege or immunity by age, or
state, or place, or multitude: our Saviors threatening is general, without any
respect of persons: Whosoever shall not receive you nor Mat. 10 14. 15
he are your words, when ye depart out of that house, or that City, shake off
the dust of your fee^e. Truly I say unto you, it shall be easier for them of
the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, then for that City.
Who knows not that the mystery of the Sodomites is very grievous, as their
wickedness was very heinous? Who has not heard as well of their lamentable
plagues, as of their damnable sins? They are condemned as Saint Peter says,
already, and therefore not like to be saved hereafter: and what then shall be
the condition of those which are subject to a greater destruction than these?

First, all the threatenings of the law be due unto them, and will Deuteronomie:
All these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake
Deuteronomy. 28 45.
thee, till thou be dectroied, because thou obeiedst not the voice of the Lord
thy God.

Secondly, they renounce the Lord himself from being their My people would not
hear my voice, and Israel Psa. 81. 11.
would none of me. The punishment of such contemptuous rebels our Savior does
foretell in the gospel, saying: those mine enemies which would not that I
should reign over them, bring hither, Luke 19. 27.
and slate them before me. Earthly Princes will not endure despite at their
greatest subjects hands, to have their dignity defaced, or their laws
violated, or their governance trodden under foot, and therefore much less
will the Lord of glory, of justice, and power bear such indignities at the
hands of sinful men which are his most abject and contemptible creatures?

Thirdly, they cast from them all the remedies and medicines, their evils.
What is the best way to be delivered from pernicious plagues and punishments?
to pacify Gods wrath and displeasure, what is the way to pacify Gods wrath
and displeasure? to have a communion with Christ in his passion, merits, and
graces, what is the way to attain to this communion in the passion, merits,
and graces of Christ? to bring a faithful and humble heart to lay hold on his
promises. And by what means may the heart be seasoned with faith and humility?
by the efficacy and virtue of the word. So then they that contemn the word
refuse to be faithful, relinquish the promises, loose all right in Christ,
live in Gods displeasure, and consequently expose themselves to pernicious
plagues and judgments. And thus much the Scripture does testify by showing us
a president of the perverse and froward Israelites. The Lord God of their
fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising early and sending for he had
compassion on his people, and on 2. Chron. 36. 15. 16.
his habitation. But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words,
and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his
people, and till there was no healing.

Terror for the Papists, whose religion is altogether confected and deprauing
all the holy means of salvation. Howsoever they pretend to stand for
sincerity, yet they resist it: and taking upon them to be champions for Christ
his kingdom, they fight against it: and though their arguments seem to be
grounded on the word, yet being well sifted they prove mere falacyes, and have
no agreement with the meaning of the Holy ghost, in the word. They are strongly
illuded by Satan, and made his agents, as much as may be, to pervert the right
ways of the Lord. 3. It generally condemns all those which wish that Gods
will might be put back, that their own might be set forwards: that would have
his word to give place, that their lusts might take place: that be readier to
break all his commandments, then willing to cross any one of their carnal
affections. He shall rather lose his service, then they will lose their sinful
pleasures: his laws shall rather be transgressed, then ought of their
commodities lessened: they care not how low his glory falls, so that their
name and credit may mount up aloft. Some therefore bitterly profess hostility
against sincere preaching: some scoffingly deride the faithful preachers: and
some fainedly make semblance of love to both: but all these, as David says,
Do hate to be reformed, and cast the Psalm. 50. 17.
words of the Lord behind them, and therefore all these as Jeremy says, shall
be ashamed, and afraid, and taken, and so destroyed. Ier. 8. 9.
Many hope for safety in regard of that which they are not, as because they be
not adulterers, nor thieves, nor gross offenders against man's laws; but they
never think of the peril in respect of that which they are, being irreligious
and profane, and impious contemners of Gods laws.

But he that fears the commandment, etc. Whosoever are religiously

Though nothing be merited by desert of their part, yet all happiness is due
unto them by promise, on Gods part. And if any one of them should fail to be
blessed, the whole body of the Scriptures should cease to be true. For it is
the current of all those holy writings, and the covenant which is confirmed by
the blood of Christ, that Gods people in whose heart his word is, shall never
want safety, nor comfort, nor glory. They that love thy law, says Psalm. 119.
165.
the Prophet to the Lord shall have great prosperity, and shall have Psalm.
119. 165.
none hurt. And to him will I look, says the Lord by the Prophet, even to him
that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at Isay. 66. 2.
my words. His look to his whom he loves is very effectual, and he will
look that nothing shall be amiss with them, whom he in mercy beholds.

First, this reverence and fear which is here spoken of, is compounded

Secondly, by this they manifest their loyalty to him, and subjection

Thirdly, where the word is truly feared, there it is saithfully obeyed:

Confutation of that impious error which by temptation and Job speaks of
such, and brings them in, saying; Who is the Almighty Job. 21. 15.
that we should serve him, and what profit should we have, if we should pray
unto him? And Malachie speaks to such, and in sharp manner, charge them to
have affirmed that it is in Mal. 3. 14.
vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his commandment,
and that we walked humbly before the Lord of hoasts? Such have bin in every
age, and many such are in our own age, which are all refelled by this worthy
sentence, whereby it appears that the faithful are so far from loosing the
recompense of their holy words and actions, as that their religious thoughts
and affections shall not be unrewarded.

Consolation to all them, whose consciences are upright and tender world, for
sin. Do the wicked molest them with wrongs, and vexations, because they run
not with them to the same excess of riot, and evil? The Lord will refresh
them with rest and comfort because they cleave unto his word, which forbids
every thing that is not good. Js any thing taken from them unjustly for his
sake, and the gospells? He will give all things unto them abunddantly in
recompense of the same. In this world, as our Savior says, their gain shall
an hundred fold exceed their loss, if it be Mark. 10. 30.
expedient and needful for them, and in the world to come, they shall receive
eternal life. And in the mean time when plagues shall be powered down upon
the earth, for the iniquities of the people, they shall either altogether
escape them, or else be delivered from the venom and hurt of them. They that
take Habakuks course, and tremble when they hear the word spoken, shall be in
Habakkuks case, and rest in the day of trouble. Habak. 3. 16.


Verse. 14. The doctrine of a wise man is a welspring of life, to depart from
the snares of death. THough the meaning of these words has been showed, and
prosecuted already in the eleventh verse of the tenth chapter, yet we will add
somewhat to the explication thereof. When it is said therefore that the
doctrine or instruction of a wise man is of such force, it is to be understood
of wholesome and sound doctrine, such as he receives from God, and delivers
to his brethren: for wise men sometimes draw their instructions from their
errors, and now and then from grosser corruptions, as David did, when he gave
direction to Ioab how he should cause Vrijah to be made away. And as the lesson
ought to be sound for the matter, so must it be seasonable for the manner, as
spoken in due time, in meet place, and fitly applied, wherein Jobs friends
much failed, though otherwise the men were godly, and their words very true and
weighty. And yet further to these must be added of his part that will drink of
this lively fountain, an attentive ear, and believing heart to hear and
embrace the doctrine. And then it will be constant and not dried up like
ditches or ponds that are fed with rain water: it will be comfortable, and
refresh the hearts of them that are in affliction: it will be profitable, and
make them that receive it, fruitful: it will be necessary and forcible to
deliver them from sin and destruction, though therein the similitude be
altered: for that is meant by turning from the snares of death.

To depart from, etc) Sin is satan's snare to catch men to perdition.

He that is in the power of it, and entangled therewith, is in great peril of
perishing, being caught in a trappe, and held fast there, till either grace
deliver him, or death devour him. He is Job 18. 8. 9.
taken, says Bildad, in the net by his feet, and walks upon the snares. The
grinne shall take him by the heel, and the dreadful fowler shall come upon
him. There is no safe treading any where but in the ways of God, every step
without it, through the length and breadth of the whole world, has somewhat
set in it to entangle us. Without the direction of the word, and virtue of the
spirit, what is in man? what comes from man? what is done by man, but that
which will work his woe, and turn to his ruin?

First, every man's nature from his birth and conception, has

Secondly, ignorance, errors, and carnal reason of the mind, together taken 2.
Tim. 2. 26.
at his will, as the Apostle testifies.

The practice of sinful men must needs be damnable, when Eliphaz had made a
sound conclusion against Job, if Job had been liable to his premisted
accusation. Is not thy wickedness says he, great, and thine iniquitias
innumerable? Job. 22. 5. 10.
Therefore snares are round about thee, and fears shall suddenly trouble
thee.

Instruction to be as careful to fly from every sin, as we are in^o his
enemies hands; whom he knows to lie in wait for his blood: and the brutish
creatures with all their might do fly from those that seek to kill them; and
shall we then be more heedles of our souls then they are of their lives, to
expose our selves to the baits of the devil, whereby he goes about to
destroy us? True it is that he proposes pleasures and delights to allure us by
them, as he did Euah, but when we have consented and yielded unto him, there
will follow nothing but pain and misery, as Euah felt. Great offers he will
make us of advancement and credit, if we will use his means to attain unto
it, but shame will ensue upon it, and confusion, when we give over our selves
to be directed by him. Wealth and riches he knows man naturally to hunger and
hunt after, and therefore he commonly does feed their humor with hope of
commodity, but when they bite at his bayt they swallow down the hook withal,
and so are made his pray to their perdition. And though they miss of the gain
which they look for, yet he misseth not of their souls which he fisheth for
if he can fasten his angle upon their desires, and catch them by the gills. For
so the Holy ghost himself witnesses, saying, They that will be rich fall
into temptation, and snares, and into many 1. Tim. 6 9.
foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction.

If we be fallen into any sin, let us seek to this welspring for remedy
against it: for as it preserves some from entering into Satan's nets, so it will
be a means to others to bring them forth, God thereby giving them repentance
that they may know the truth, and that they may come to amendment out of the
snare of the devil. 2. Tim. 2. 25. 26. But it is sit that we make all possible
speed to procure our liberty, because the longer we continue in the net, the
more we shall be entangled, and with greater difficulty get out. This holy
direction is given to rash sureties which are come Prou. 6. 4. 5.
into the hands of their neighbors, whose state is ensnared with the words of
their mouths, that they should hasten as fast to avoid that danger, as the
nimble heart runs from the hunter, or the swift bird flies from the fowler,
and not sleep upon it one night, before they have obtained their inde^nity,
much more then it concerns them which are fallen into the hands of satan, and
of Gods justice, and be subject to eternal death to bestir them, and not
suffer one moment to pass, before they labor effectually for their freedom.

Reprofe of their ingratitude and folly that contemptuously reject

Verse. 15. Grace gives good success: but the way of the transgressors is
rough. GRace) that is, the work of Gods holy spirit, begetting true piety and
righteousness, does give good success, it makes good men to deal wisely and
prosperously in all their affairs. But the way of the transgressors is rough.
Their life is unhappy, and full of many vexations. The sense and opposition
stands thus: Grace gives good success, and therefore the way of the
obedient is plain and comfortable: and sinfulness brings evil success,
and therefore the way of the disobedient is rough and troublesome.

So far as any man is truly religious and godly in heart, he is

This is a point that is scantly believed of men, and few will give credit unto
it, and therefore it is largely set down by God, and many Scriptures consent
in the confirmation of it. As in the first Psalm, the man that delights in
the law of the Lord, and constantly meditateth in the same, is promised, that
whatsoever he Psalm. 1. 3.
shall do shall prosper* In the third chapter of this book, it is given for a
commendation of holy wisdom, that her ways are ways Prou. 3. 17.
of pleasure, and all her paths prosperity. Jn the prophecy of Isaiah the
careless Jews are vpbrayded with their sinful folly that had bereft
themselves of so good an estate, whereunto the Lord was most ready to have
promoted them. Oh, says he, that thou had harkned to my commandments: then
had thy prosperity been Isay. 48. 18.
as the flood, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea,

First, grace will conduct men to the right way of truth and equity,

Secondly, it does as well make them prudent to deal wisely,

But it comes to pass commonly, as is daily to be seen in

Ansvv. As good men do fail in some duties, and have not so much grace as they
might attain unto, so are they many times corrected of God for the same,
whereby it comes to pass that their faults and defects do work their woe,
and not their faithfulness and graces. Moreover it is not absurd to say, that
the afflictions and troubles of Gods children, in regard of the end and happy
issue thereof, are helps of their prosperity, as rain and thunder are diverse
times, more seasonable weather for come and grass, then Sunshine. Well was it
for Jacob at the last, though maruailous bitter at the first, that Joseph was
sold and sent away from him into Egypt. And Joseph was highly promoted, by
that way which seemed only to tend to his ruin. The violence of his brethren
to sell him, the falsehood of his mistrisse to defame him, the rashness of his
master to imprison him, all these were occasions and means to advance him.

Thirdly, they deuolue their way upon the Lord, as he bids and therefore he
will bring it to pass, as he promised them. Psalm. 37. 5.
They seek the knowledge of his will for direction, they crave the aid of his
hand, they propose the praise of his name, for the end of their enterprises,
and how then should they miscarry in their affairs?

Fourthly, he takes delight to converse with them, and offers Ioshuah, and
all other that are faithful Joshua. 1. 5.
and obedient, in Ioshuah his person, saying, I will be with thee, I will not
leave thee nor forsake thee.

Instruction to kindle our hearts and desires more ardently and 1. Tim. 4. 8.
Godliness is profitable to all things which has the promise of the life
present, and of that that is to come.

Reprofe of their folly that begin at the wrong end, and trust to

But the way etc) As ungodly men shall fall into damnation at

Their iournies end is most miserable, and the way to it is very uncomfortable:
they take more pains to go to hell, then Gods people do to obtain everlasting
life. The wicked as Isaiah tells us, are like the raging sea that cannot
rest, whose waters cast up mire Isa. 57. 20. 2^.
and d^rt. There is no peace, says my God to the wicked. It is as possible for
the sea to be still without ebbing or flowing, or waves, or motion, as for
sinful persons to be void of all peturbations. Their own hearts are seldom
without a tide, and the Lord often sends blasts of trouble upon them, that
either within, or without, somewhat is amisle with them.

First, they are inheritors of Gods curses, which are conveyed to the Lord
shall send upon them cursing, trouble and shame, in all Deuteronomy. 28. 20.
that which they set their hand to do, until they be destroyed.

Secondly their own lewd and wretched behavior in matter them, besides the
fellonies that diverse fall into, and the punishment which they suffer for them.
Now for Epicures and bellygods, for gluttons and drunkards, the holy ghost
describes their Prou. 23. 29.
doleful condition, being plagued with woe, with sorrow, with strife, with
wounds, with redness of eyes, etc. And how offensive too much wine, and strong
drink, and surfeiting is to the brain and stomach, they that use it feel, and
others behold by their loathsome and swinish behavior. We speak not of
adulterers, nor thieves, nor of sundry kinds of wicked malefactors, which
bestow their whole time in making their ways foul, and deep, and dangerous,
and tedious.

Their infidelity, and pride, and guiltines does fill their hearts they pearce
themselves through with sorrows, either 1. Tim. 6. 10.
because they fail wholly of their wills, or are not so fully satisfied as
they wish, or others succeed and prosper, as well as they, or better then they
would have them. But if there were nothing else that did make any sinful man's
life unpleasant, yet this were sufficient to make every sinful man's life
uncomfortable, that he lives in perpetual dread and danger of death and
damnation. So says the Apostle to the Hebrews, for fear of death they are
all their life time subject to bondage. Heb. 2. 15.


Instruction to be well advised and wary, that we be not illuded fills their
hearts with bitterness.

Verse 16. Every wise man works by knowledge: but a fool lays open his
folly. Every wise man) whosoever is prudent, works by knowledge,
enterpriseth and manageth his affairs discreetely and with judgment, and so
declares his understanding. On the contrary side, he that is indiscreet and
foolish, goes rashly and rawly about his business, and so bewraieth openly,
and publishes abroad his ignorance and foolishness.

He only deals well both for his comfort and credit, that to every one that
is wise, to walk in this way, and none is to be reputed prudent that is a
stranger unto it. A real example hereof we have in our savior Christ, whose
steps we ought to walk in, and who will impart to his people, the wisdom of
his spirit, that they may be able to walk in his steps. He, as the Prophet
Isaiah foretold of him, does Isay. 11. 3.
not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither approve by hearing of his
ears, but with righteousness, etc. That is, he will not proceed by conjectures
upon slight and superficial shows, without a clear insight in the matter,
nor determine any thing upon hearesay, with out full hearing and examination of
the cause: for if he should so do, he could not but fail in justice, whereas
now taking due knowledge of all things, he orders all things with perfect
equity.

First, they that do not work by knowledge, do not walk

Secondly, whatsoever is not done in knowledge, is not wrought

Thirdly, they shame themselves, as the latter part of the Text

Instruction therefore to be as diligent to get knowledge, as

Reproof of them that put hope and good meaning in place of

Some answer a matter before they hear it, and so, as the Scripture says, it
turns to folly and shame unto them. Some take upon Prou. 18. 13.
them to be sharp censurers of other men's lives and actions, and that with
clamorous accusations and condemnation, and yet they know nothing amiss by the
persons, further then they have heard by false flying reports, and the causes
which they pass so peremptory a sentence upon, they have no skill at all to
judge of. Let such men hear S. Peter telling them what account is to be made
of them, and what is like to become of them. These as bruit 2. Pet. 2. 12.
beasts, led with sensuality, and made to be taken, and destroyed, speak
evil of those things which they know not, and shall perish through their own
corruption. Some break out into conuitious reuilings, many times into violent
outrage, before the parties so rated and punished be convicted of any fault.
Job was far from that disposition, he would show cruelty to none of his
people, his bondmen, and handmaides, and meanest in his house had liberty to
speak for themselves, and were sure to be equally dealt with, as their cause
required.

Some are forward, and free in their testimonies, being ready to give
commendations of any that will speak them fair, though they have no experience
of any goodness in them. It would rise to a volume, if we should declare all the
evil that insueth upon this swiftnes of praising men at random, without the
proof and trial of them, for the countenancing of worthy persons: for the
beguiling of them that give credit unto them: and for their own disgrace by
making their testimony nothing worth. If saint John had taken their course, he
could not so boldly have challenged a right to be believed. Demetrius says he,
has a good report of all 3. John. 12.
men, yea and of the truth it self: yea and we our selves bear record, and
ye know that our record is true.

Verse 17. A wicked messenger falls into evil but a faithful ambassador
heals. A Wicked messenger) or servant, which either undertakes unlawful
errands, or services, as Rabshakeh did, when he was sent by his master to
blaspheme and defy the Lord and his Church: or deals vntrustily with them
that use him in a lawful business: or is injurious to them to whom he is sent,
either by concealing any thing from them which were fit for them to hear, or
adding any thing which were meet to be suppressed, or doing his message in
indecent manner, or returning an answer so as may turn to their hurt, he shall
fall into evil, Gods heavy hand and judgments by one means or other, shall
sooner or later, light upon him, as the two churlish and imperious captains
found with their fistes, which were sent for Elijah. But a faithful
ambassador or messenger, he that faithfully performs his charge, whether
public or private, does heal, is a means and instrument of good to his
master, whose mind he freeth from fears and griefs, and so heals the
maladies thereof, as a physitia^ cures the diseases of the body. He is also
helpful to them, to whom he is sent, by delivering co^forts comfortably, and
lenifying that which is harsh and sharp, and mending that which is amiss, and
by love and discretion pacifying co^tentions, and furthering peace; whereupon by
consequence he also procures his own comfort. So stands the opposition: A
wicked unfaithful messenger hurts, and therefore shall fall into evil: but a
godly faithful messenger heals, and therefore shall receive good.

He that does prosper in his own estate, let him deal faithfully when he is
put in trust with other men's affairs.

Some good men are wro^ged with evil messengers, and yet never know it, or
pass over without punishment, or else want power to give correction, but God
says, and observes it, and will surely plague the offenders for it. Others
are truly dealt with, and yet know not how to make recompense: the service
performed to them they find to have been faithful, but themselves are unable
to requite it, notwithstanding the Lord is rich in substance, and ready in
goodness to yield them a proportionable and plentiful payment. The wicked spies
that were sent to search the land of Canaan, were more in number then the good:
for there were ten for two, which carried the matter by multitude of voices,
and color of reason, and the peoples forwardnes to give credit unto them, but
the few good were more happy in success, then the many wicked. Experience and
the holy Scriptures have made all succeeding ages and nations to know that
their words were true, and so confirmed, and the others false, and so confuted;
they were presently encouraged by Gods favor and promise; and the other
terrified by his anger and threatening: it was to them according to their faith;
for they entered and dwelt in the promised land, and it Numb. 14. 37. 38.
came to the other according to their unbelief; for they were all destroyed by
a plague, and perished in the wilderness.

First, whosoever is perfidious to man, is rebellious against

Secondly, a wicked messenger infringeth the rules both of love and equity,
disappointing them that reposed confidence in him, As vinegar is to the teeth,
and smoke to the eyes, so Prou. 10. 26.
is the slothful to them that send him.

Thirdly, good messengers are not only profitable to them for Me thinks I see
Ahinaas come running says the 2. Kin. 18. 27.
wachma^ then shall we hear good news says David; for he is a good man, and
brings good tidings. And to this point speaks Solomon in another place of
this book: As is the coolnes of snow water in the time of harvest, so is a
faithful messenger to them that send him: for he refreshes the soul of his
masters. Now was it ever heard that he which uprightly does good to others,
should have nothing done for himself? Or that any by honest dealing may make
men joyful, and yet have his own heart void of gladness?

Jnstruction to them that are appointed to be messengers, or to Elisha sent his
man before, and followed after himself to restore the Shunamites son to
life. If any good chare be to be done, let Abraham's trusty servant be a
president for expedition, who would neither Genesis 24.
eat nor drink, before he had set his masters business on foot, and make a
speedy return home, so soon as he had well dispatched his work. If comforts
are to be brought, why should any stay be made to refresh the hearts of them
that are in fear, or sorrow, or in any kind of affliction? Ahimaas ran as fast,
and as long as he was able to take breath, to bring report to David of his
safety and deliverance from Abshalom. And among all these, secrecy is required,
least by untimely disclosing of their masters counsels, or their own purposes,
men should betray their masters causes, and defeat themselves of their desired
success.

Admonition to the ministers of the word, who are, as the prophet

Verse. 18. Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuses instruction: but he
that regards correction shall be honored. Poverty, etc) Every one that
rejects knowledge, or the means whereby it is to be obtained, shall either
fail to get wealth, or not long keep it, or have it and hold it in judgment,
without the use and comfort. And as he shall be needy, so shall he also be
base, shame shall come upon him, and cover him. Some are made contemptible and
vile by poverty and want, and some by the filthiness of their sins, though they
abound with wealth. They may have riches, but not honor: they may have cap and
courtesy, but not reverence and estimation. But he that regards correction,
which hearkeneth and yields obedience to wholesome council, and profits by
chastisements, shall be honored, shall either attain to riches and
preferment, or be of good account, and well thought of (especially among the
wise and godly) in a meaner condition.

They only are provident for their estate and credit, which are

No path does lead to true prosperity in earth, but that which does tend to
happiness in heaven. If we walk in this way, we have the promises for us, as
he says; The reward of humility, and the fear of God, is riches, and glory,
and life. If we wander out of Prou. 22. 4.
this way we have the threatenings against us, as he tells the wicked by the
Prophet: I spoke and ye heard not, but did evil in my sight, and did choose
that thing which I would not. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold my
servants shall eat, and ye shall be Isay. 65. 12. 13.
hungry: behold my servants shall drink, and ye shall be thirsty: behold my
servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed.

First as the Scripture says, riches and honor come of God, and in his hand
it is to make great, and to give strength. Whence it may easily be collected,
both how sinners shall be dealt with, and 1. Cro. 29. 10.
how the Saints shall speed. What tender hearted father would disinherit and
beggar his own towardly children, and give away his lands and goods for the
advancement of his mortal enemies? or who will thrust out a tenant, that is
every way duetifull and serviceable, and let his Farm to him, whom he knows
that he will neither pay him rent, nor acknowledge him for his Landlord?

Secondly, contempt of instruction is commonly coupled, either

Confutation of them that take impiety and frowardnes to be

Instruction to them that are in want, and ignominy, to examine I know thy
works, and tribulation, and Revel. 2. 9.
poverty, but thou art rich. And that also wherewith Isaiah did animate the
despised saints of his time: Fear ye not the reproach of Isai. 51. 7. 8.
men, neither be ye afraid of their rebukes. For the moth shall eat them up
like a garment, and the worm shall eat them likewooll. But are their hearts
empty of grace, as well as their houses of substance? have they no goodness in
their lives, as they have no goods to live by? Then it goes hard with them,
and it may be truly said that they are shamefully behind hand, and in miserable
want. What though Paul did rejoice in his poverty, and the more commended some
of the Churches for theirs? Yea what though Jesus Christ himself became poor,
and had not such store of possessions as many other men have? yet it does not
lessen the shame of these irreligious vnthrifs, whom God plagueth with beggary
for their sinfulnes, and they by sinfulnes make themselves to be beggars.

Consolation to such, as for their faithfulness in the services of God, or
lownes in their outward estate, are contemned in the shut against them, nor
they bid to stand back, or be gone. And the Angels never think themselves too
good to bear them company, nor them too base to be guarded by them. Good men's
tongues do praise them, and bad men's hearts do fear them, and all men's
consciences which know their ways, do justify them. This is their state now
at the worst, eue^ while they grouel on the ground in the dust, or rather be
reputed as dust on the ground. What then shall be their condition in time to
come at the best, when they shall ascend above the stars, to the heavens,
when they shall be more glorious then Angels, when they shall be like unto Jesus
Christ himself? Though the Lord then do sometime rebuke us by his word, when
we are worthy to be blamed: though he smite us with his hand when our faults
deserve correction: though the wicked deride us in scorn, both in respect of
the word and corrections: yet the honor wherewith we are graced presently, and
the glory wherewith we shall be crowned hereafter, will superabundantly
counteruaile all.

Verse. 19. A desire when it comes is pleasant to the soul: but it is
abomination to fools to depart from evil. THis sentence depends upon the
verse aforegoing, where the promise in the later clause of that, is amplified
by the effect in the former of this: for there it is said, that he which
regards correction shall be honored, and here it is added, that when such a
desirable gift is bestowed, he shall have joy with his honor, which obtains
it. And the threatening in the former clause of that, is aggrauated by the cause
in the latter of this: for there it is said that poverty and shame shall be to
him that refuses instruction: and here it is proved to be just and equal,
that it should be so, because he is wholly devoted and given over to
wickedness. The coherence and agreement of one part with the other will be the
more evident, if that be supplied which is understood in both. It is
abomination to wise men to continue in evil, and therefore the desire
accomplished will delight their soul: and it is abomination to fools to
depart from evil, and therefore the punishment inflicted will torment their
souls.

Though godly men have many discomforts in the performance

The delay of their hope and desires is not so bitter and tedious as the
inioying thereof will be sweet and comfortable. This point has bin already
handled in the tenth chapter, v. 28. upon these words: The patient abiding of
the righteous shall be gladness.

But it is abomination to fools, etc. Nothing is more offensive

It is death unto them to take a good way, and to be honest: they will rather
depart with their credit and comfort, and wealth and safety, and salvation,
than with their old acquaintance, their Psalm. 50. 17.
dear and well-beloved sins. We read in the Psalms, that God says to the
wicked: Thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee. He
does not lay to their charge so little as negligence, that they had not yet
amended their lives, but as much as obstinacy that they would not: as rebellion
in behavior, that they showed contempt to his words, as bitterness of heart
that they detested all wholesome erudition.

First, this may be seen by their demeanor toward such as would draw them
out of their iniquities, and persuade them to holy and Christian conversation.
How do they fret and scorn at them? how passionate and bitter do they grow
against them, as if they had offered some great indignity unto them?

It is truly verified in the most which the Lord testifies against the
Israelites. When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Hose. 7. 1.
Ephraim was discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria. When their faults are
spoken against, they stand as stiffly for them, as they would for their dearest
friends, traduced by make bates. When they are dissuaded from satan's service,
they more abhor the motion, then to be enticed to disloyalty by traitors. The
Sodomites were as violent against Lot, dehorting them from their sin, as if
he had been found subuerting their City.

Secondly, this grows from the great love they bear to evil, Zophar in the
book of Job speaking of every such one, shows that wickedness is sweet in Job.
20. 12.
his mouth, and he hides it under his tongue, and favors it, and will not
forsake it. And David says, that pride is a chain unto Psalm. 73. 6. Col. 3.
5. Mat. 5, 24.
them, and cruelly covers them as a garment. Saint Paul calls sins by the
name of members: and our Savior compares them to our right hand, or right
eye. Now then they seem to have reason to stick to their sinfulnes: for who
can take it well to have his meat plucked out of his mouth, or chain of his
neck, or his coat from his back, or his limbs from his body, or his eyes out
of his head? Ye offer violence to his life, if ye restrain him of his lusts. As
every godly man has a double life, one of grace, and an other of nature, so
has every wicked man also two lives, one of nature, and an other of
corruption, and he is for the most part, equally sensible of them both.

Thirdly this causes reformation of life to be so much diseasted S. John
testifies saying, We know that we are of God, and the whole world heth in
wickedness. And yet that were not so much, if the multitude of the^ that live in
their lewdnes, 1. John. 5. 19.
would permit them to pass peaceably, that incline to leave their lewdnes. But
whosoever will not run with them to the same excess of riot, must look to be
maliciously depraved, and conte^ptuously derided, insomuch that Jsaias says,
that he which refraineth Isay. 59. 15. Use. 1.
from evil, does cause himself to be counted a mad man.

Instruction to labor first to heal them of their folly, whom we would have
helped out off their faults. They will never be willing to relinquish their
wickedness, until they be brought to embrace wisdom. The idolatrous
Ephesians had the same nature with the Christians, and the Christian Ephesians
had been subject to the same corruptions, with the idolaters, and yet the one
sort having learned Christ, did cast off their sinful conversation, as an old
rotten, and ragged garment: and the other having their understandings darkened,
kept on their filthiness still, and gloried in it, as if it had been a precious
ornament. When mention was made of disgrace offered to their devilish idol
Diana, Act 19.
they came running together, on an hurry, and bellowing for her, like a
tumultuous drove of Oxen.

Men's ways can never be good, whiles their heart is without soundnes, and the
heart can never be sound, whiles the mind is without judgment. As therefore
it comes to pass, that so many loose their labor in attempting
impossibilities, in seeking to draw up a sap of knowledge and wisdom, our
of the root of ignorance and folly. They would have their people to be at
their back, ready to forbear every evil which they forbid, and to perform
all the duties which they require, and yet not to meddle with religion, or have
any dealing with sermons or Scripture. So they would have their words obeyed,
and Gods resisted: so they would have their own wills satisfied, rather then
the souls of the parties saved; but so they shall find themselves crossed, and
their commandments utterly contemned. And besides this, we may learn to
look for strong encounters when we assault the holes of Satan, and strike at
sin, we must prepare for a sharp conflict, a short skirmish and bickering
will not suffice to vanquish him. It is expedient to bring with us all sort of
weapons and munition to this battle: especially good arguments to convince
the parties whom we deal with, that that which appears in show to be
abominable, may be proved in truth to be reasonable and necessary. And
withal it must be provided that patience be not wanting: for that will help
to win those at the last, which cannot be induced to yield, at the first: and
that will be a means to protect us from the stroke of the clamorous outcryes
which are like to be made against us. If it be thought an abominable course
for the^ to depart from evil, it will be judged an execrable crime for us to
persuade them to it. S, Peter says, that they will speak evil of them which
leave their society and fellowshippe, and therefore much more will they do so
of us, which both leave it our selves, and lead away others in like manner 1.
Pet. 4, 4.
with us.

Consolation for them to whom nothing is so acceptable, as Who shall deliver
me from this body of death? and for constant perseverance Romans 7. 24.
do pray with the prophet: Establish me with thy free spirit. When evil is as
loathsome to them as a prison, when corruption Psalm. 51, 12,
is as bitter as death, when their hope of stability and freedom depends on
the spirit, how unlike are these men to the fools which abhor goodness? what
though they loath not sinfulness with so great a detestation as Paul did? What
though they long not for grace with so ardent a desire as David did? Yet if
they hate evil truly, though not so vehemently, or pray for the spirit
faithfully, though not so fervently, they have wisdom in the same nature
and kind that these holy men had, though not in the same degree and measure.

Verse. 20. He that walks with the wise, shall be the wiser; but he that
uses the company of fools, shall be the worse. BY walking here with the
wise, is meant the society and conversation with wise men, and that is a means
of knowledge, and virtuous behavior to them that have, and use the opportunity
of it, and so thereby they are made the better: whereas on the other side they
that associate themselves with sinful fools, and join in fellowship with the
wicked, are more corrupted with sin and folly, and so become the worse.

Much help, or hurt does come to men by the company which

All sorts of companions are market men, and the usually traffic together,
when they meet together, whether they be good, or bad, the wares being
commonly precious, or vile, according to the disposition of the persons which
utter them. When the Prophet would approve himself to God to be diligent to
seek him, and faithful to serve him, he shows it by this, that Psa. 119. 63.
he was a companion to all them that feared him and keep his precepts. When he
would clear himself of falshoode and guile, of rebellion and wickedness, he
urges it as a forcible argument that Psalm, 26, 5.
he had not haunted with vain persons; neither kept company with the
dissemblers. When he would profess his integrity and vprightnes, with desire
that the godly should not doubt of his standing, nor the wicked have hope of
his falling, he makes his Psalm; 119. 116,
mind manifest in this manner: A way from me ye wicked: for J will keep the
commandments of my God.

First, the unfeigned love and faithfulness that is in good me^ makes them
merciful and helpful to their companions. No men are so liberal as they, and
they are not more liberal of any thing than of wholesome counsel, and
encouragements to piety and wisdom. They are most ready always to bestow
that, which is of greatest value, and will yield their friends the largest
comfort. Such as are truly religious do esteem it a greater gain to procure
souls to God, and increase to the Church and grace to their brethren, than to
get wealth and promotion to their own selves. And the wicked on the contrary
part are no less busy then they, though not so well occupied: for they bestir
themselves about their masters work, to corrupt all that have fellowship with
them, and to draw as many as they can possibly, into their fellowship. It is
noted in diverse that are infected with the pestilence, or other foul diseases,
that they are very desirous to infect their neighbors: and so is every one
that has the plague sore of sin running upon him, he wishes (and would
work it also, if it lay in his power) that all the world were overwhelmed with
iniquity. Our Savior condemning the notable wickedness of the sinful
Pharisees, does charge this upon them as one mark of ungracious miscreants,
that they would compass sea and land to make one proselite: Mat. 13. 15.
and when he was made, they would make him two fold more the child of hell then
themselves.

Secondly, there is a certain virtue in the words and behauior Salomons
attenda^ts: 2. Chro. 9. 7.
Happy, says she, are thy men, and happy are these thy servants which stand
before thee alwaie and hear thy wisdom. And in like manner there is a venom
in the works and words of the ungodly, which as the Apostle says, do fret
like a gangrena, and men's souls are much more subject to the contagion of
sin, than their bodies are to any diseases. Oh, how many ways, and by what
degrees does mischief and ruin grow to them which haunt their company? The
use of hearing of lewd or blasphemous speeches does quickly quench zeal, and
make them seem to be nothing affensiue. The custom of seeing of abominable
practices, does quell their hatred of them, that they can be lookers on without
dislike. And so from the ear in time comes contagion to the tongue: and from
the eye infection proceeds to the hand, that that which they hear they will
speak, and that which they see they will do. Moreover though there were in
them before, some good opinion of godly men, and Christian exercises, yet when
they shall daily hear them spoken against, and iested at, and none to refute
the slanders, or reprove the scoffing, it will at length estrange, and utterly
alienate their affection from them. When a brand is taken out of the fire, and
cast into the snow or rain, it cannot but be extinguished at last, though it
blazed much at the first. And add yet this to all the rest, that they shall
not only be perverted by the gross sins and vices of the wicked, but also
enchanted by their evil qualities, and seeming virtues. If there be any
natural or counterfeit humility, or patience or courage, or liberality, or such
like, these shall give countenance to their filthiest corruptions, and make
them both tolerable, and imitable.

Jnstruction to them that sincerely affect understanding, and Joshua prepared
for government by Moses, and Elisha for prophetship by Elijah, and the
disciples for Apostleship by Christ. The schools of the prophets were fit
seminaries for the ministry that was under the law, and the universities are
meet nurceries for the ministry that is under the Gospel, and godly society
has bin a forcible help to Christian conversation at all times. What is
desirable that is not therein to be found? They whose minds are ignorant, may
there have a daily market to buy knowledge, and that good cheap with diligent
attention without any money, or charges. They which are distracted with
doubts, may there have means for their resolution, to rid them out of their
perplexities. They which are dull and lumpish, may there find such quickening,
as whereby their spirits shall be made fresh and lively. They which are in
fears and anguish, may there recover comfort, and be delivered from their
agony and terrors. And as much heedfulnesse is to be used for the abandoning
of bad companions, least they be means to quench good desires in them as fast
as the godly kindle them. These which would be saved from damnation S. Peter
admonishes to save themselves from a froward generation. 2. This does teach
men warines, and great circumspection Act. 2. 40.
for their houses, that they give not entertainment to wicked fools that will
infect their families with the leprosy of lewdnes* One sinful servant that
dwells in their house: or one graceles ghest that haunteth their house, may
quickly pervert their whole household, as a little leaven leaueneth the whole
lump. We are so provident for our beasts, that we will not permit such others
as have contagious diseases to eat with the^, or to stand with them, and shall
we be less careful for our, frinds, for our servants, for our children, for
our yokefellowes, for our selves for the state of our souls? Shall plaguey
persons have liberty to open their botches, and carbuncles, among our people,
and in our presence, and at our very tables?

Reproof of them that make no difference of any company, the Sodom it self,
among Papists, and idolaters, among the blasphemers, and Sabbath breakers,
among whoremongers and drunkards, among all sorts of wicked persons. Some
adioyne themselves to such as neighbors, some as servants, some as yoke
fellows, of whom it may be truly said according to the proverb, that they
get the devil and all. And this is a sin so much the more heinous, if they
be delighted with these venomous companions. As it is to be observed in a
number, that no wine is so sweet unto them, as the company and talk of
ruffians, and scoffers, and no vinegar so tart, as the presence and conference
of such as fear God.

Verse 21. Evil pursues sinners: but that which is good rewards the just.
BY evil is meant the punishment of sin which is resembled to the ravenous,
strong, and swift kind of creatures, and wicked men to them that are weaker,
and flower, and so chased by them, and made their pray. Now as affliction and
misery will in this manner come upon the ungodly as the wages of their
rebellion, so blessings and comfort shall come to the godly as a recompense of
their obedience.

Sinful men live in perpetual peril of destruction all the days

Their danger foregoeth the misery and mischief which at last falls upon
them, as the hare runs in hazard and ieopardie before the greyhound comes
at her, and snatcheth her up. And yet the hare does often outrunne the
greyhound, or gets to covert, whereas the wicked can never avoid Gods
judgments, unless they avoid their sinfulnes. For so does the lord De^t. 28.
45.
threaten in the law saying. All these curses shall come upon thee, and shall
pursue thee, and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed, because thou obeiedst
not the voice of the Lord, thy God.

First, the plagues which follow sinners are mighty and forcible, Amos
speaks home to this Amos. 2. 14.
purpose, and does fully confirm our point in hand. The flight shall perish
from the swift, and the strong shall not strengthen his force, neither shall
the mighty save his life; Nor he that handles the bow shall stand* and he
that is swift of foot, shall not escape, neither shall he that rides the
horse save his life.

Secondly, as they are powerful and puissant, so are they also Psalm. 140. 11
misery, for that cause speaks David in one of his Psalms: The backbiter
shall not be established upon the earth* evil shall hunt the cruel man to
destruction.

Terror for all them that are in the power of their sins, that they live in
continual danger of one stroke or other, yea of death, yea when they shall
say, peace and safety, then shall come upon them sudden destruction; as the
trauail upon 1. These. 5. 3.
a woman with child, and they shall not escape? Who can say with warrant, I am
here free from the dart of death* J shall surely carry my self from hence, my
life shall not be taken away in this place? Can any house, can any fort, can
any cave, can any place upon the earth, or in the earth, or above the earth,
keep back Gods curse, and make a separation between sin and misery? If the
one be let in, the other will not be shut out: for it has right and might to
come to his companion. Paradise could not privilege our first parents from the
punishment, after that they committed the fault, and heaven could not help the
reprobate Angels against their damnable condition, when they had fallen into
rebellion. And who can say and make it good, at any repast or recreation, I
shall continue this feast, or game, or sport, to the end before my fall and
ruin? this delight shall not be interrupted and broken off by fear and torment
before it be fully finished? Do they not remember that the wrath of God came
upon the lusting Jsraelites in the wilderness, whiles they were eating the
dainties which they so much desired, that he slew the strongest of them with
meat in their mouths? Was not Aminon David's wicked son killed in his own
brothers house at table, at a banquet, when his heart was most merry with wine?

Admonition to hasten their conversion to the Lord, that their Jonah that their
desolation approached so near unto them, they forthwith set themselves to fly
from it, and with all expedition fell to fasting, and by that means prevented
it. It is not safe for the hunted beast to stand still, when the stronger that
seeks his life, has him in pursuit, and much less for wicked men to be
secure, when the vengeance of the Almighty does follow them. If they say, we
have power, and friends and are well able to stand for our selves, let them
remember that which has bin formerly handled, that though hand ioyn in hand,
Prou. 11. 21.
the wicked shall not be unpunished. The strongest Wether in the fold, and all
the rest of the flock with him, cannot encounter with the Lion. If they say, we
have policy and plots to help our selves by, and know how to provide for our
safety, let them know that there is no wisdom, neither understanding, nor
counsel against the Prou. 21. 30.
Lord. If they say, why should we now be more afraid then hitherto we have
been? We walked in the same way before, and the same punishments were threatened
before, and sithence we had no hurt till this time, what likelihood is there,
that it will come hereafter, especially our present state being so prosperous.
Let them consider, that in the course, the poor hunted creature, though
unreasonable, is not yet so silly, as to think that there is no pursuit after
her, because she sees no peril before her, her fear is in regard of that,
which follows at her heels, and not of that which is in view of her eyes.
And the longer they have escaped, the lesser time remains to escape, as the
beast is nearer to her death, toward the end of the course, then at the first
setting forth.

It is the argument which Saint Peter uses to prove, that the perdition of
such impious persons, approaches on fast, and is at hand, because that their
judgment long agone was not far off, and their damnation sleeps not, that
is, has been iournying toward them ever since, both night, and day, without
any stay or intermission.

But that which is good, etc) They which do God good service, shall be
recompensed with good wages, See Chap. 11. 18. on these words, he that sows
righteousness, shall receive a sure reward.

Verse. 22. A good man shall leave inheritance to his childrens children: but
the riches of the sinner is laid up for the just. THe meaning is, that the
godly person not only himself inioyeth his goods whilst he lives, but when
he dies, leaves the same to his children, in such sort as that also their
children through Gods mercy inherit the same. Again, the wicked man is so far
off from leaving his goods to his posterity, as that by Gods providence they
oftentimes are rolled from him upon the righteous person, who is as it were his
heir against his will. Yet this is not so to be taken, as though it held
universally and perpetually in every person. Many good men have no children at
all; many good men have no children suruyuing them: many good men's posterity
ends in their immediate issue: many good men leave their children poor, and
in mean estate. Soon the contrary side, diverse wicked men leave their lands
and riches to their own children, though impious also like their parents, and
they convey them to their seed after them, which in like manner possess them,
as the Prophet says in the Psalm: Thou fillest their bellies with thine hid
treasure: their children have enough, and leave the rest of their substance for
their children. But he speaks of that which comes often to pass* though not
always, and which are the readiest means for such effects. He that would
provide well for his posterity, cannot find out any way so good for his
childre^s estate, as to be godly himself. And if the Lord withhold that
blessing from him, he may recompense it by making his children inheritors of
grace and salvation: and if either he give him no children, or children of no
piety and goodness, he will undoubtedly counteruail it with increase of heavenly
gifts, and glory for his own soul. And he that gives himself to iniquity and
sin, does as much as in him lies to subvert both his estate and family, and
if that both stand, notwithstanding the course he takes, to bring them to
ruin, then as David said in the forerecited Psalm, his portion is only in
this life, and his punishment reserved to be the larger in the world to come.

They make the best provision for their posterity, which enrich

If men would so provide patrimonies for their children, they might hope that
the Lord would become their executor, and faithfully perform their bequests.
If by this means they would compass livings for their offspring, they should
have less cause to fear the alienation of them from their houses, and to
incumber themselves and their seed with so many Intailes. Plentiful experience
hereof is to be found in the Scriptures, especially concerning the progeny of
Abraham, and Isaacke, and Jacob, whom God abundantly blessed with large
posterity, and ample possessions for many hundred years together.

It is one part of that happiness wherewith God does often recompense Blessed is
the man that fears the Lord, and delights greatly in his commandments.
His seed Psalm. 112. 1.
shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the righteous shall be blessed.

Secondly, good men will get their goods well, and use them He is says David
ever merciful Psalm. 37. 26.
and lends, and his seed inioyeth the blessing.

Thirdly, godly men will in such manner educate and train up plants, to send
forth seed and sciences to the succeeding generations. See the 21. verse of
the 11. chapter for other reasons, and the uses of this point, where it has
been more largely handled in the second doctrine.

But the riches of the sinner, etc) That which the wicked do get, is oftimes
appointed for the godly to enjoy.

The ungodly has the burden laid upon him, to bring goods together, and the
righteous has the prerogative given unto him, to use them. And it is not a new
fashion taken up of late, for wicked men to work for the servants of God, but
it has been anciently, time out of mind in former ages. The Egiptians took
great pains to sow and reap and prepare corn, for Jacob and his family, and
were themselves pinched with great penury, whiles he and his household were
plentifully replenished with it. The Canaanites built houses for the Israelites
to dwell in: and planted vineyards for the Israelites to eat the fruit of: and
dug wells for the Israelites to drink the water of: and prepared many
pleasant things for the Israelites to have the inioyment of. Neither was it a
case peculiar to them, as though it had been an accident not seen before, nor
like to fall out again afterward, but Job declares it to be a judgment due
to all wicked worldlings, and ordinarily inflicted upon them, unless there be
a commutation of it, for some other more grievous punishment* This, says Job.
27. 13. 16.
he, is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of tyrants,
which they shall receive from the Almighty. Though he should heap up silver
as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay, He may prepare it, but the just
shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver.

First, the Lord has in his power, the hearts, and hands, and Solomon in the
book of Ecclesiastes: Surely to a man that is good in his fight, God Eccl. 2.
26.
gives wisdom, and knowledge, and joy: bus to the sinner he gives pain to
gather, and to heap, to give to him, that is good before God.

Secondly the godly are the sons of God, and fellow heirs both

Thirdly, just me^ will justly administer, and dispose of those things which God
commits unto the^, for the furtherance of his service, and the refreshing of
his servants, whereas the wicked do either pervert them to sinful abuses, or
else detain the^ from al use, and therefore it is just with the Lord to tra^sfer
them from such unrighteous stewards to the hands of those which will more
faithfully dispense the^. And according to this, is that saying in the eight
and Prou. 28. 8.
twentieth chap. He that increases his riches by usury and interest,
gathers them for him that will be merciful to the poor.

Consolation for just men though poor, having neither stock aforehand for
their own maintenance, whiles they live, nor portion to leave to their
children when they die. Albeit to sense and in men's fight their case seems
miserable, yet to says, and in Gods presence their state is comfortable. What
does theirneed require that cannot or shall not be readily supplied, when it is
expedient and seasonable for the^? There is corn and grain enough to make them
bread: there is great store of flesh and fruits for their food: there is
plenty of wool, and flax, and such like means for their apparel: there are
diverse buildings and houses for their habitation there are many purses and bags
replenished with money for their necessary uses. So long as others abound with
plenty, it is impossible for them to perish with penury. Good men in mercy will
minister unto them: evil men upon necessity, must provide for them: for to
that end both they themselves, and those things which they have are provided of
God.

Instruction not to be distempered with envy or anger, or fear or any other
kind of passions, when we see sinners gather riches Hester and Mordecay could
brook no man less then Haman, and yet they had no reason to grudge at the
building and furniture of his house, though Hester. 8. 1. 2
it was sumptuous, because he therein did only make provision for them.

Admonition to those simple persons whom prosperity does so much puff up and
make to swell, that they learn more moderation and sobriety. The king of Babel
was justly taunted for increasing that which was not his, and for lading
himself with thick clay, and why then do not these that are so proud and hie
minded, as well deserve to be derided, for boasting of that which is not theirs,
even of thick clay wherewith they have laden themselves. Were it not absurd
for a Tailor to take himself to be a beter man tha^ Hab. 2. 6.
all his neighbors, because he has a garment of silk or velvet ha^ging in his
shop, which is put to him to be made? or for a common cowheard to ouercrow al
his masters, because he has more cattle before him every day then any one of
them? Let all wicked worldlings know, that the preferment promised to the
godly, is a debasing threatened against them, when the Lord faieth, The
strangers shall stand and feed your sheep, and the sons of strangers shall
be your plowmen, and dressers of your vines. These str^ngers are they, that are
reputed to be the native inhabitants, these keepers of the sheep pretend to be
the owners of the sheep: these plowmen and dressers of vines take themselves to
be Lords of Isai. 61. 5.
the lands and vineyards, but the Scripture describes them according to that
which they be, and not which they think to be, or seem to be: for that is
altogether contrary to the condition which the Lord has appointed them unto.

Verse. 23. Much food is by tillage for the poor; but some are consumed by
indiscretion. BY food, he means all such things as are needful for the use
of man's life and by much he understands a fit and competent measure, which
diverse times grows to be large and ample. And this do poor men often
attain unto, when they are provident, and diligent in managing of their
affairs, and by name in the work of husbandry, and so it also holds in all
other honest and lawful vocations. Now again on the contrary side, some are
consumed by indiscretion. For many a one who has a good stock, and fair
livings and fruitful grounds, by neglecting labor, and not ordering things
aright, wastes all that he has, and falls into great want and necessity.

A little with good husbandry, is better than a great portion

It is not greatly material how much men have to begin with, but how well and
wisely they guide their affairs. He that is painful and prudent in his
business (notwithstanding his wealth be small) is rising from the bottom
toward the top: and he that is remiss and careless in his state (though
his substance be great) is falling from the top toward the bottom. Tending
to this purpose there are many sentences both in this book, and in other
places of Scripture, as where it is said, that by wisdom an house is builded,
and with understanding it is established. And by Prou. 24. 3. 4.
knowledge shall the chambers be filled with all precious and pleasant riches.
By house here, like as else where, he means men* whole estate, the founding,
and finishing, and furnishing whereof being all ascribed to wisdom (of which
one especial point is to be industrious) as is also the establishment and
supportance of it. And contrary by slothfulness (which is a great branche of
folly) the Eccl. 10. 18.
roof of the house goes to decaie, and by idlonesse of the hands, the house
droppeth through. And for this cause is that exhortation given in the 27.
Chapter: Be diligent to know the state of thy flock, and Prou. 27. 23.
take heed of the beards. For riches remain not always, nor the crown from
generation to generation. As if he should have said, let not thy great
substance bring thee to neglect thine affairs, least the neglect of thine
affairs bring thy great subst^nce to nothing. What though thou have large and
ample possessions, and dignity left to thee by thy ancestors? Yet if thou be
careless, and heedlesse in thy government, thou art like to leave neither
wealth nor honor to thy posterity.

First, the earth and the fruits thereof were created as well for Genesis 3. 19.


Secondly, discretion and industry make gain of seasons and places, and
opportunities, and many commodities, which indiscretion and idleness, either
see not, or mark not, or get not, through want of labor and pains taking.

Thirdly, the promise of blessing is made to them that are faithful He that
tilleth his land, shall be satisfied with bread; Prou 28. 19.
but he that follows the idle shall be satisfied with poverty.

Consolation for poor beginners, that have little or nothing to take to, if
they have wills to take pains, and wisdom to deal discreetly, and
faithfulness to walk uprightly in their callings. It is neither impossible nor
unlikely, that beginning with one Cow at first, they may attain to many at
last: that one lamb may grow to a flock of sheep: that a small tenement or
cottage, may be turned into a freehold or Farm. When Jacob came into Padan
Aram, he brought only his staff in his hand, but when he departed thence, he
drove away sundry flocks, and diverse sorts of cattle. For God had ordained
the fields as well to maintain Jacob, though he was but a stranger there, and in
place of a servant, as it did Laban, who was an inhabitant in the country, and
had hired him only for his own turn. And albeit that many diligent men find
not the earth and their labors to yield them such plenty, as thereby to become
opulent, and have much aforeha^d, yet how many of them fail of sufficiency, as
not annually from time to time to be provided for? And then if they be not
destitute of apparel, if they be not deprived of competent meat and drink,
if they want not those things that are needful for them, this Scripture is
truly verified to the comfort of all that apply themselves to any good
trauells, that much food is by tillage for the poor.

Confutation of them that when their state is shrunk and their wealth
consumed, are as unrighteous in misplating their complaints as the very
unthrifty in mispending their portions. Some par^e of the blame must lie upon
the greatness of their charge: some upon the negligence of their servants: some
upon the smalnesse of their livings: some upon the unfaithfulness of them whom
they trusted, and gave word for: some upon the hardness of the season, and
vnseasonablenes of the weather: but nothing upon their own evil husbandry and
sinfulnes. But why did they entertain such false servants, and trust such
unfaithful friends? why would they for ostentation burden themselves with more
in family then were needful? As for the other causes, have not some of their
neighbors as many children, and as little living as they, and that in the same
times, and places wherein they live? And they prosper, and decay not: their
substance is augmented, and not diminished: they have enough for their own
present inioyment, and surplusage to leave to theirs after them. But tillage,
say they, which inforceth a necessity of housekeeping, has brought us down,
and therefore we lay down tillage, and give up housekeeping, and so we hope to
recover our selves again. But sithence God does commend tillage as profitable
to every degree and yielding food plentifully to all, why do they traduce it as
a thing that were hurtful, and cause of undoing to any? Does it not come often
to pass, that many by overthrowing of that, do ouerturne their whole estate,
and they that pick such a quarrel at housekeeping, are driven to make sale of
all, and leave themselves no house to keep?

Reproof of their folly, that think the very having of lands and goods
sufficient for perpetual maintenance, howeuer they order them. They never
dream that wealth is subject to waste, when it is not well managed, and that
their state may fall into a consumption, if it be not heedfully looked unto.
Hence it is that they are so greedy to provide livings and riches for their
children, but no wisdom and discretion how to use them. Nay they train them
up in pride, and idleness, and other foul sins, as though their desire were to
have them expert and skillful spendalls: they set them betime to learn the art
and trade of unthriftiness whiles themselves live, that they may swiftly run
through their patrimony and inheritance, when they are dead.

Verse 24. He that spares his rod, hates his son: but he that loves him,
chastneth him betime. HE that spares his rod) which withhouldeth due
correction from his child when it is needful, hates his son, becomes his
enemy, though not in affection, yet in effect, by omitting a duty so necessary
for his welfare. But he that loves him unfeignedly, with a ^^^nd affection, and
the love of a godly father, corrects him betime. The words in the Original
tongue are of great force: for this betime which seems to be an aduerbe, is
there a verb, and signifies to rise timely in the morning, and diligently to
seek, so that it signifies as well the due care which good parents have for
the nurturing of their children, as their providence to do it in good season,
whiles they be tender, and young, before they grow to strength and stomach, and
so either utterly refuse, or little regard all fatherly correction. And that
which we translate correction, does also signify instruction, so that the
sentence may thus be well Englished: He that loves him, hastneth chastisement
and instruction to him. And those are meet to be joined together, sometimes
stripes with admonitions, and always admonitions with stripes. For the smart
of the flesh, and the pain of the body, will bring small profit to the soul,
unless they hear their fault declared, and have direction how to reform it.

They are the best parents which show love to their children,

Fond love is cruel hatred, a cockering father is a deadly foe, and they that
most faithfully exercise Gods discipline toward their sons and daughters,
do prove to be their surest friends. The admonition which is given to parents
in another Chapter of this book, tends wholly to this purpose. Correct thy
son Prou. 19. 18.
while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare, which is to kill him. The
Holy ghost makes them accessory to the destruction of their children, which be
so indulgent unto them, and tender over them, as that their hearts will not
yield to give them correction. The example of God himself, the father of
spirits does evidently confirm our point in hand. His love to every one of his
children does infinitely surmount the love of all the fathers in the world to
theirs, and he does not only declare it unto them by promises, and blessings,
but likewise many times by chastisements and crosses: insomuch that the Apostle
says to the Hebrews: Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth: and scourges every
Heb. 12. 6, 8.
son that he receives. If therefore ye be without correction, whereof all are
partakers, then are ye bactards, and not sons.

First, every child whatsoever his estate, or birth, or disposition
Foolishness is bound in the heart of Prouer. 22. 15.
a ch^ld but the rod of correction shall drive it away. It is in vain to
bid foolishnes be gone, unless it be expelled: and to as small purpose to
persuade him to cast it out, unless you help to loose it.

Secondly, the comfort and profit that insueth to children the rod and
correction give Prou. 29, 15.
wisdom. And therefore does he also require that our children be not defrauded
of it. Withhold not, says he, correction from the child if thou smite him with
the rod he shall not do. Thou shall smite Prou, 23: 13.
him with the rod, and deliver his soul from hell. Now what inhumanity is it
for a man to see his son in danger, and will not succor him? to see him
plunged in a river, and will not pluck him out? to see him falling into the
fire, and will not preserve him? to see him sinking into hell, and will not
help to save him?

Reproof of them that use all the shifts that they can devise Almighty? Are
not children mortal and subject to death as well as men of gr^^^^^ age? Shall
not children appear before the judgment seat of Jesus as well as those which
are elder? And sithence we had the same corruptions our selves, it should cause
us to be more pitiful toward them, and watchful over them, otherwise it is
to be doubted whether as yet we be healed of the sins of our youth and pardoned
for them. But it is needelesse say they, so far to trouble our selves, years
will bring wit and discretion* or at least their own rod will be ate them, and
make them to amend. But who told them that they shall live to the yeras of
discretion? How if the sword of justice cut them off before for their
lewdnes, and give no time for their own rod to work any goodness in
them? And though they should remain, and smart also for the sinfulnes of their
childhood, yet there is greater danger lest their hearts will be more hardened,
and made worse, than hope that they will repent and be made better, because Gods
medicines have been detained from them, and his blessings are not promised
unto them. And who shall make any prayer for them with comfort of good
success? The sinful son is neither able to do it, nor willing nor
accepted, if he should: and the negligent father has small encouragement to
entreat the Lord to do that wherein he himself has utterly failed of all
duties to serve his prouid^nce. But granting all this to be true, that so
much evil proceeds from the neglect of correction, and so much good by the
seasonable and moderate use thereof, yet one impediment hinders them that
they cannot be brought to exercise it. Their kind heart is so tenderly
affected toward their little ones, that they cannot endure to hear them
cry, or see them weep, and the rod will make them do both, and therefore
they must needs forbear it, But you mistake the cause, and miscall your
affection, it is not ki^dnesse but cruelty, nor the tenderness of your
heart, but the hatred in it (according to Gods testimony) that can rather
endure the diseases of sin in your childrens souls, then the curing of them
with tears, and sorrow.

And yet this unmerciful favor does rather prepare them to sorrow, then
privilege them from it, because it will increase their misery in time to come.
If David had mo^^ ^rieued Adonitah with the rod and rebukes when he was a
child, it is like that he might have escaped the sin of treason, and the
grief of violent death, when he was a man. But the scripture notes that he
would not displease him to say, why have thou done so? 1. Kings. 1, 6.


Instruction to children to take notice with thankfulness of their

Verse. 25. The righteous eats to the contentation of his mind: but the
belly of the wicked shall want. THe righteous,) all those which are religious
in heart, and upright in their ways, eat, that is, enjoy all good things, as
they shall not be starued through want of food, so they shall not be destitute
of clothing, or lodging, or habitation, or any other thing that is needful
for them: either they shall abound with plenty, or be provided of that which is
sufficient. Sometimes they have no great store for their eyes to look upon,
yet living by faith and not by sight, they have always enough for their
souls to be satisfied with. But the belly of the wicked shall want, and their
backs also very often and according to the curse of the law, many of them
live in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in need of al things. And
albeit this judgment is not Deu. 28. 48.
executed upon them all, yet commonly some other more heavy and hur^full is
inflicted upon them that escape it. And of neither of them which get most, nor
of them which fare best, it can be truly affirmed, that they eat to the
contentation of their minds. For though they have much wealth in their hands,
and much meat at their tables, and much wine in their bowls, yet they have not
much, nor any contentment in their hearts, for they remain insatiable.

As the godly are in better case than the wicked for their souls

He only is blessed in earth, that is to be glorif^ed in heaven, and none can
possibly be happy here, so long as he stands in state of damnation for
hereafter. When the Spirit of God gives grace to the soul, his providence
will not fail to minister all good things to the body. And therefore the
Apostle says, that 1. Tim. 4. 8.
godliness is profitable unto all things, which has the promise of the life
present, and of that that is to come. On the other side, ungodly men having no
piety in them, have likewise no promise to them. The best that may be hoped for
is this, that if they be Gods elect, he will draw them to himself by penury
and wants, or other scourges. If otherwise, let them know, that he never gives
any thing to them in mercy, whom he is minded to destroy in justice. A larger
prosecution of this point, see in the tenth Chapter, verse the third, upon
these words: The Lord will not fam^sh the soul of the righteous: but he
casts away the substance of the wicked.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE FOVRTEENTH CHAPTER OF THE PROVERBS.
CHAPTER XIIII.
Verse 1. A wise woman builds her house: but the foolish destroieth it with
her own hands. A Wise woman) Such a one as is both godly and discreet,
builds her house, is helpful and profitable, to the state and family of her
husband, and her own. But she that is foolish, being destitute of grace and
good providence, how much wit soever she has: for many times the most witty
wives, are the least thrifty huswiues, destroieth it, vndooeth her hus^and, her
self, and children, and overthrows the whole household.

It behooves a man in regard of his whole estate, to be wise raze the
foundation of it, and quickly empty it of all the furniture. Some by their
sloth and carelessness, neglect either to get or save: others by their pride or
luxury, or like vices, spare not to lavish out, and mispend, and all by
sinfulnes and rebellion against God, do draw down his curse and judgments
upon them. Somewhat has been already spoken to this point, in the twelfth
chapter and fourth verse, upon these words: A virtuous woman is the crown of
her husband: but she that makes him ashamed, is a rottenness in his bones.
And more remains to be handled in the one and thirtieth chapter, where the
Lord himself does at large illustrate the several properties, and good
effects of a prudent, godly, and gracious woman.

Verse. 2. He that walks in his uprightness fears the Lord: but he that is
lewd in his ways, despises him. BY walking, and ways, is meant in the
Scriptures, the ordinary, usual, and common course of men's behavior: and by
uprightness, the sincerity and faithfulness of their hearts, contrary to fraud
and guile, which pretends one thing, and purposes another, in them which
make a show to do service to God in that wherein they only, or principally
propose some carnal end to themselves: and by fearing the Lord, is understood
true piety and godliness. So that the sense of the former clause is, that every
one which accustometh himself to well doing, unfeignedly, without hypocrisy
and halting, is undoubtedly the child of God, and truly religious. But he that
is lewd in his ways, that leads a wicked life, whether openly, in the sight
and view of the world, or secretly, so as is known only to the Lord and his
own conscience, despises him, does actually, and in deed show contempt to God
by violating his laws, howsoever he may bear himself in hand, and make
others to believe, that he does much reverence him.

The faithfulness or falslood of the heart, may be discerned by the course of
the conversation.

The grace of the spirit cannot be dammed up in the soul of a man, but that it
will flow forth, and show it self by goodness in his behavior: neither can
there possibly be a constant stream of goodness in his behavior, unless he
have a spring and fountain of grace in his soul. The Apostle S. John is
plentiful in this point 1. Ioh. 3. 7. 8. 9
and makes discourse thereof with many words. Little children says he, let no
man deceive you: be that does righteousness is righteous, as Christ is
righteous. He that commits sin is of the devil: whosoever is borne of God
sins not: for his seed remameth in him, neither can he sin because he is
borne of God. In this are the children of God known, and the children of the
devil: whosoever does not righteousness is not of God etc. Where, to do
righteousness, is the same as heereto walk in uprightness: to be righteous,
as much as as here to fear the Lord to commit sin is that which is here to be
lewd in his ways, and to be of the devil, is nothing different from that
which is here the despising of God.

First, the heart is in the man, as the sap in the tree, and his a bad tree
cannot Mat. 7. 18.
bring forth good fruit. nor only of faithful ministers, but also of sincere
christians, when he said that a good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit.

Secondly, the communion which Christians have with Christ, does cause their
conversation to be holy, and the want of the same S John does intimate, saying,
If that we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness we lie,
and do ^. Ioh: 1. 6, 7.
not truly. But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowshippe, one with an other.

Thirdly God himself does judge and reward every one according to his works,
and therefore the works are correspondent to I the Lord, says he by the
prophet, search the heart, and Iere, 17, 10.
try the raines, even to give every man according to his ways, and according
to the fruit of his works.

Consolation to faithful men, though not void of infirmities, against against
God, as they which are most religious, in his service: none are so much
burdened with imputations of hypocrisy, as they which are most upright in
their hearts. The devil in his malice, because he sees their tender co^scie^ces
easily affrighted does labor to persuade the^ that there is nothing in the^
but fraud, and falsehood. Sinful men when they can charge them with no
misdemeanors not lewdnes of life, take upon them Gods office to be come judges
of the heart, exclayming that they are hypocrites, and dissemblers, yet
proceed contrary to Gods justice, condemning those of hypocrisy and
dissimulation: whom he does commend for truth and sincerity. And many doubts
arise in their own souls by reason of the manifold imperfections of their
lives. They feel want of knowledge in their minds, and disorder in their
affections: they are privy to them selves of duties neglected, or negligently
performed: they find a guiltines in regard of sundry sins committed, and of
diverse not soundly avoided: they see still in their nature a pronenes to pride,
and many vanities, but no aptnes to that which is good and needful to be
exercised. All these things trouble their hearts, and make them very suspicious
of themselves, least all their piety be nothing but an outward profession, and
all their former comforts but merely illusions. But are they desirous
vnpartialie to keep every commandment, if there power were answerable to
their will? Do they endeavor truly to please God, although they cannot do it
perfectly? Are they of the mending hand, to yield more obedience to the
commandments of God, though they cannot fulfill them Then there is no cause of
discomfort: then they are upright in their ways, and walk in the law of the
Lord: then God testifies of them here that they are of the number of those
that fear him: and else where he testifies of all those which fear him that
they are blessed. True happiness is appropriated to them, that none but they
can be pertakers of it, and none of them but have a portion in it.

Conviction of profane persons to their terror, whose only hope of happiness
consists in this that they have a good soul toward God, howsoever men think
and speak of them: for they love him with all their heart, and with all their
strength, and that is as much as he requires, and as the holiest of them all
performs And therefore preachers and others are too full of judging when they
repute him to be so bad, and their faults to be so heinous, and their state to
be so dangerous. But will you have the matter to be referred to God himself,
as it must be whatsoever your will is? And will you stand to his sentence
therein, as you shall be compelled, though it be against your wills? Then
hear what he pronounces of you that he which is lewd in his ways, despises
him, nay yet more for the greater aggrauation of the sin that he is a
despiser, or despising of him, which is more emphaticall, and imployeth an
habit, and accustomable practice, and professed contempt. You imagine that men
are too sharp in their censures, and condemnings: you shall feel unless you
repent, that the Lord will be far more severe in this sentence, with the
execution of it. You will swear, and blaspheme the name of God, if it be but
to anger them that like not of it you will use wanton and sinful exercises on
the Lords day, in despig it of those that be grieved at it: You will proceed
on your own ways, and vilify all such as shall reprove you for it: but whom
in the mean time, do you contemn? and whom have ye sought to reproach? Even
the mighty and glorious God, who is both able in power, and ready i^ wrath to
return your ways upon your own heads. He will be honored and you shall be
despised: he will have eternal praise, and you shall have everlasting
confusion. But for those that sin not so presumptuously, nor with such an
high hand, if that they be in the power of sin and without repentance, this
point is very uncomfortable. They dream that the Lord is not so much offended
with them, and their behavior, as they hear spoken in sermons, but that he
will lightly pass by those things which here are counted great matters: but
let them know that he is more righteous then man, and hates every sin more
then all men hate all sins. And howsoever through Christ, he pass by the
infirmities of the godly, and takes things at the best, which they do, yet
he deals not so with the wicked being his enemies, but judges of their
ways according to the nature, and effects, and consequents of the same. As he
will do them no wrong to make their faults more or more grievous then they
are: so he will show them no favor to extenuate their sins, or mittigate
the punishment which they deserve. This he testifies of all that are lewd in
their ways, whatsoever their cloakings, or defenses, or excuses be, but they
are no better then despisers of him, and therefore to be plagued no less than
they that despise him.

Verse. 3. In the mouth of the foolish is the rod or wand of pride: but the
lips of the wise preserve them. IN the mouth of the foolish; in the usual
talk of wicked men, especially, when they are of any hawty heart and high
minded is the rod of pride, such speeches as proceed from pride, and whereby
they strike at others, and are commonly smitte^ themselves, either man taking
advantage of them, or God inflicting punishments, for them. But the lips of
the wise, such words and answers as in humility they utter to men, and such
prayers and petitions as they send up to God, preserve them protect themselves,
and others also from hurts and dangers.

It is property of proud men to have arrogant and hurtful Behold says David
they brag in their talk Psalm. 59, 7, 8.
and swords are in their lips: for who say they, does hear? But thou O Lord,
shall have them in derision, and thou shall laugh at all those nations.

As this their sin is common and frequent, so are the scriptures also plent
full of complaints against it in many places, and so are they in denouncing
proportionable punishments, and so are they in declaring how they have been
executed.

First, pride does engender malice, and envy, and fiercenes, and it came no way
more readily and harmefully exercise them by

Secondly, in striking at men with contumelious and proud David in the twelfth
Psalm. The Lord will cut off Psalm. 12. 3.
all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks proud things. Which have
said, with our tongue will we prevail: our lips are in our own power: who
is Lord over us? And to the same effect he Psalm. ^9. 11. 12. 13.
prays in another Psalm: Scatter them abroad by thy power, and put them
down, O Lord our shield, for the sin of their mouth, and the words of their
lips: and let them be taken in their pride, even for their perjury and lies.
And let them know that God rules in Jacob, even to the ends of the world.

Instruction that so far as we are unwilling to be hurtful or to be

But the lips of the wise, etc.) The use of a good tongue is a defensive

Verse. 4. Where none Oxen are, the cribbe is empty: but much increase comes
by the strength of the Ox. BY Oxen) he means those kind of laboring
cattle, which are applied to plowing, and other works of husbandry, and where
they are not, or not set to work, there the cribbe is empty, and so is the
barn also, food for man and beast fails: but much increase comes by the
strength of the Ox, abundance of corn, and necessary provision, arises by
the travel of cattle, and laborers, in diligent plowing and husbandry.

The serviceable creatures are most profitable and necessary. Eccl. 5. 8.
and the mighty, according as it is said, that the King also consists by the
field that is tilled. This matter is more largely entreated of in the twelfth
Chapter, v. 11. Doctrine the first, upon these words: He that tilleth his land
shall be satisfied with bread.

Verse. 5. A faithful witness will not lie: but he that tells lies will be
a false witness. A Faithful witness) he that makes conscience, and is
resolved before the judgment seat constantly to testify the truth, will not
usually, nor in his common speech tell untruths: but he that tells lies will
be a false witness, whosoever accustometh himself to lying in private, will
not stick to forswear himself, and bear false witness in public. It is
all one in sense with the 17. verse of the 12. chapter, where it is said, that
he which speaks truth will show righteousness, etc.

Verse. 6. The scorner seeks wisdom, but finds it not: but knowledge is
easy to him that is prudent. THe scorner) that is very sinful, and
contemptuous persons: (for it is a collectiue, and meant of all, or at least
of diverse of them) seeks wisdom, by wisdom we may understand the true
knowledge of Gods holy will, and where it is said, the scorners seek it, the
meaning is, that some of them make show of seeking, and seem so to do, being
present at those means, and outwardly dealing in those exercises, whereby
others truly seek, and effectually find knowledge. And as these use the
means without any desire of having wisdom, so others would have it, but
contemn all those means whereby it is offered, and to be received, trusting
to their own wit, and carnal reason. And a third sort seek it, and are
willing to have it, and at the ministers hands would gladly obtain it, but
only upon their death beds, or in great extremities, not in love to God, or
sincere affection to his word, or in holy liking of his graces, but only in
terror and passion, that they might escape hell and damnation: or the present
dangers wherein they stand. Hereof the Prophet speaks in the Psalm, saying,
When he flew them, they sought him, and they returned Psalm. 78. 34* 36
and sought God early. But they flattered him with their mouth, and dissembled
with him with their tongue. For their heart was not upright with him, neither
were they faithful in his covenant. And therefore being so affected it is not
str^^ng^ that their success is no better. For though our Savior say, that
every one which seeks Mat. 7. 8.
finds, yet it is to be understood of every such one as seeks faithfully,
and in due manner. But knowledge is easy to him that is prudent. We must not
so conceive of these words, as though men of understanding could increase their
wisdom and graces without industry and pains taking, but that when they have
used diligence in the exercise of Gods ordinances, they may know for certainty
that they shall speed well, and be stored with all such graces, as will lead
them to life everlasting. And therefore we see the sense of this sentence
expressed in the second chapter of this book. If thou call after knowledge,
and criest for understanding Prou. 2. 3. 4. 5.
if thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for treasures, then
shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.

They are not capable of any grace, which will not be brought

Jf they deride admonitions, and make them frustrate of that which they were
given for, they shall make themselves ridiculous and disappointed of that which
they seek for. Wisdom is wise enough to know her friends from her foes, them
that love her unfeignedly, from them that flatter her, to discern who will use
her well, and who will abuse her: who will subject themselves unto her
government, and who would make her an underling to pride and lust, and Satan.
Indeed she calls upon one kind of scorners to come to her, and learn of her,
and promises to pour out her mind unto them, but they are such, as ignorance
has drawn to scorning, rather then malice* such as in whom there is
possibility of amendment, and not they that are desperately given over to
obstinacy. And even these silly scorners, that are not yet incorrigible, must
not only be reformable in hope, but reformed in deed, before wisdom will
impart her counsels unto them, for their comfort. And therefore she says,
Turn you at my corrections Prou. 1. 23.
l^e I will power out my mind^ unto you, and make you understand my words. As
for those which are possessed with an inueterate hatred of instruction, and
purposely picking quarrels against the truth of God, have contemptuously
rebelled against it, the Prophet declares by their ways which are past hope
of any reformation, that their minds are incapable of all sound understanding.
For, says he, can the black More change his skin? or the Leopard his Ier. 13.
23.
spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. Jf they
could have changed their minds, and been able to judge rightly both of that
which is good, and also of the evil, they could not choose but change their
behavior to practice the good, and eschew the evil: but for as much as custom
was grown into a nature, and nothing was to be looked for in all their life,
but works of darkness, it follows that their souls were likewise finally
blinded, and never to be illuminated with any gracious light.

First, the wisdom of God is mystical, and understood only

Secondly, they are all proud, and therefore as the Apostle testifies, God
resists them, and gives grace to the humble. Yea they are not in a common
manner proud, and equal therein with other Iam. 4. 6.
men, but more presumptuously than any other, in the hight of contempt, they
despise the counsels of the Lord, and therefore in an extraordinary manner he
lays his punishments upon their hearts, and is said to scorn the scornful.
Prou. 3. 34. 3.


Thirdly, all scorners live in some grievous sins, out of which the breath of
scorning sumeth, and therefore no room is in their sinful hearts for wisdom
to lodge in, unless she should bear the devil company, and inhabitate in that
house, whereof he is the master or commander. Saint Paul speaking of simple
women, laden 2 Timothy 3. 6.
with sins, and led with diverse lusts, says, that they are ever learning,
and never come to the knowledge of the truth. It was not then the sex, nor
silliness of the persons that made them to profit so little, but the sins
and corruptions of their souls: If therefore the same be in men, why should
there not be the same effect also of them? if they be more abounding in men (as
when they wilfully withstand the truth of God, whereas the poor weomen were
seduced by deceivers) why should it not be thought that they will make them
less teachable or capable?

Fourthly, if scorners might find wisdom, this holy and heavenly Wicked men
understand not judgment: but they that seek the Lord, understand all Prou.
28. 5.
things. And likewise in the psalms he declares it to be a degree of good
men's happiness, that the secret of the Lord is revealed to Psalm. 25. 14. Use.
them that fear him; and his covenant to give them understanding.

Instruction for every man with all heedfulnesse to take heed that they finke
not into so great a sin as scornefulnes is, that will draw down so
grievous a plague as scornefulnesse does, Though no hurt seems to come by
it, but benefit rather. If the outward state of many scorners be respected,
yet nothing but mischief and misery insueth upon it, if the state of their
souls be considered, they all lose all their labor, and return frustrate and
disappointed, when other of meaner place, and natural parts have happy and
prosperous success: they are rejected of the Lord, as contemptible persons,
and abiects, when others whom they despise, are graced with his presence and
countenance: they are shut out of doors, and excluded from all spiritual
commodities, when others whom they malign, are let into Gods treasury, and
stored with all heavenly riches. They therefore that are tending toward it, let
them stay themselves before they go too far: they that are come to the gate
thereof, let them beware how they enter in: they that are already in the house,
yet let them return back again, and not sit down in the chair: for then
their case is desperate. And this is not one lie to admonish men that they
become not scorners, but that also they satisfy not themselves with every
slight and superficial seeking of wisdom. It is not enough to seek, (for
the worst men, we see, may do that) but to seek so as we may find, which none
can do but they that are good and godly. A greater blessing God gives to none
in this world, than to make his ordinances forcible to them for wisdom, and
comfort: and a greater judgment is not executed upon any before their going to
hell, than the withholding from them grace and understanding. No sickness, no
pain, no poverty, no disgrace, no imprisonment, no banishment, no loss of
limbs, or life is so dangerous and hurtful as this is. Though the eyes should
be plucked out of the head, yet if there be sight within the mind there can
be no extremity of darkness, and though the heart were plucked out of the
body, yet if religion abide in the soul, the happiness remains, but then is
the state of men woeful when there internal shape is changed, and they are
transformed into dumb idols, when it may be said of them as it was of the
heathen Gods: they have eyes and see not, they have ears and hear not and one
degree beyond the images, they have hearts and perceive not.

But knowledge, etc Understanding is neither impossible nor D^t. 2.
difficult to come by, when men have discretion. If any be so wise as to
discern their need of knowledge, and unfeignedly to desire and labor for it,
though their learning be not great, nor their capassity deep, yet they shall
obtain it in seeking, and be made more wise by having of it. Else why is the
scripture commended for her largess and bounty to all sorts of people, that
have skill to be upright without dissunulation? It gives unto the simple
sharpness Prou. 1. 4. 5.
of wit, and to the child, knowledge and discretion. And a wise man shall hear
and increase in learning, and a man of understanding shall attain unto wise
counsels.

First, in regard of holy prudence here spoken of: it is said that Eccl. 2, 14.
the wise man's eyes are in his head, though the fool walk in darkness. Albeit
others that are blind, see not how needful and precious knowledge is, yet all
that have use of their eyes (though some be much quicker fighted then others)
see that they are miserable without it, and happy and blessed by it, and
therefore they price it as a thing of great value, and therefore they seek it
as a thing most necessary for them. Now they which are so well affected toward
Prou, 8: 17.
wisdom, are better affected of wisdom, who professes to love them that love
her, and they which seek her yearly shall find her.

Secondly, they understand where saving knowledge is to

Thirdly they discern what means are to be used for the finding were void of
this holy discretion, and incapable of knowledge. But this we say that
according as these graces are more ple^tiful in thy man, so he is more prudent,
and shall more multiply his knowledge; and as they are most scarce, so is he
less prudent, and shall get less knowledge: and he that is wholly without
them, is wholly imprudent, and standing in that case, unlikely to come by any
knowledge that is spiritual.

Confutation of them that lay all the blame of their ignorance, upon the
darkness of the Scriptures, and no part thereof upon their shining light, and so
the holy ghost calls it, and therefore if they see nothing in it, either it
is because 2. Pet. 1. 19.
they have no eyes, or because their eyes have no sight, or because that Satan
has blind folded them.

They say that the Scriptures are obscure and hard, but God knows that their
hearts are profane and hard, that the doctrine of truth cannot pearce them, If
the word be as a sealed book unto them, their own sins have caused it to be
clasped from them, as being both unworthy of, and altogether unfit for such
holy mysteries.

Consolation to them, whom God has graciously illuminated

Verse. 7. Depart from the presence of the foolish man, and from him whom thou
know not to have the lips of knowledge. DEpart etc. break off society and
fellowship with the ungodly person, be not familiar with him. Not that it is
altogether unlawful to have any dealing with the wicked in common duties, but
to be joined too near unto them. We are not simply forbidden to buy or sell,
or to eat or drink with them sometimes, when upon due occasions we are called
thereunto, so that we willingly make not choice of their company, but to join
in marriage with them, to make them privy to our counsel, or to use them as
inward and special friends, this is here forbidden, and this is unlawful.
And from him whom thou perceiuest not to have the lips of knowledge, that
is, separate thy self, and converse not, especially confer not with such as
from their ignorant minds use to talk ignorantly with their tongues. And yet
his meaning is not that we should forbear all speech with them that want
knowledge; or speak not according to knowledge: for they have most need to be
instructed: but he does admonish us to beware both of them that breath out
pestilent and contagious words, to pervert others, and resist the truth
contentiously and will never be brought to see their own ignorance and error.

Neither conversation nor communication is to be had with

The former part of this point may appear by that which has been handled in
the thirteenth chapter. ver. 20. upon these words, A companion of fools shall
be made worse, and the latter is according to the admonition given in the ninth
chapter. ver. 8. Rebuke not a scorner.

Verse 8. The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his wai^^ but the
foolishnes of fools is deceit. THe wisdom of the prudent) that knowledge and
understanding which any man has that is truly wise, is to understand his way
is to understand his way, is given of God, and used of him for the direction,
and guidance of his heart and behavior. But the foolishnes of fools, all the
wit and skill that is in the wicked: (for howsoever that carries a show of
wisdom, yet the substance of it is folly, and though foolish men use to call
them wise, yet the wise God calls them fools) is deceit, whereby themselves
are beguiled both in opinion of that they are, and in expectation of that which
they hope for, and whereby they beguile others also, either in their souls, or
in outward matters.

So far only is every man wise as he is of godly and Christian

That is true wisdom indeeed which beginning at knowledge does go forward to
practice, and beginning at faith does further proceed to the fruits of faith.
For unless there be profitable use of knowledge both in our general and
particular callings, it has neither the sense nor the savor of heavenly
wisdom. To this purpose is that which is spoken by Moses in Deuteronomic:
Behold I have taught you ordinances, and laws, as the Lord my God Deu. 4, 56.
commanded m^, that ye should do thou within the land whether ye go to
possess it. Keep them therefore, and do them: for that is your wisdom, and
your understanding in the sight of the people: which shall here all these
ordinances, and shall say, only this people is wise, and of understanding.
Many of other nations had witie and skill to get wealth and power, as the
Ninevites and Tyrians with diverse more whom the scripture mencioneth to be very
opulent and mighty: Many among other people had Art and learning being
greatly seen in matters of policy and nature, as the Grecians, the Egyptians,
the Cooldeans etc. many hypocrites, in Israel understood the sense of the
Scriptures, and were able to teach others the meaning thereof, and yet the holy
ghost testifies that only they were wise, and none other but they kept the
laws of God, and did them.

First, all true wisdom consists in the fear of God, and the fear

Secondly, no man can be said to be wise at any time, which shall be found
foolish at the appearance of Jesus Christ: and therefore because all, besides
the godly, at that day shall bear the burden of folly, it is evident that none
which are ungodly, have at all the blessing of wisdom. And by this argument
does Moses convince the stubborn and stiffenecked Israelites to be a nation
Deuteronomy 32, 28. 29.
void of counsel, and not to have any understanding in them. Oh, says he,
that they were wise: ^hen they would consider their later end.

Thirdly, in regard of their present condition and good estate

Jnstruction that we satisfy not our selves with ability of speaking James
tells us that it is to no purpose for man to say that he believes, Iam. 2.
14.
unless he show forth the fruits of belief: for it does him no more good
than talk of eating without food, does to one that is hungry, or speech of
warmth without fire, or clothing, does to one that is cold and naked. If the
mind be stored with no more knowledge than will furnish the lips for discourse,
it were as good for a man to be void of that also, and to become utterly mute:
for profession without conscience and practice, is as dangerous as an
accusation against him, and does much aggrauate his disobedience. They that
dispose not themselves to travel toward heaven, deal very foolishly when
they prate of the way to it: for so much the swifter is their passage toward
hell and destruction. The Lord will not have the doctrine of salvation dealt
wi^h* as many use some of the liberal sciences, to be studied only for
contemplation: but he requires all that seek for the knowledge of it, to
resolve of practice. The word of God is not to be looked in as a Map of strange
cuntries, wherein men take a view of many places which they never mind to
visit: but all the celestial coasts which are there described to us, we must
address our selves to travel in, and know by experience.

Confutation of them that think it a work of wisdom to set fools, and all
their crafty practices nothing else but foolishness and deceit. Neither Ier,
4, 22.
does Jeremy give any better testimony of them, when he says, They are
foolish children, and have none understanding: they are wise to do evil, but
to do well they have no knowledge. It cannot be that the Spirit of God which
is omniscious, should mistake any thing, or being perfectly righteous, should
call men by wrong names, and therefore sithence he styles these which were so
skillful in harm doing by the name of foolish men, do they not bewray their
ignorance or falsehood, which contrary to his testimony do give unto them the
title of wise men.

What though they see that which others perceive not? yet if they have not
understanding to make good use of it, it were safer for them, not to discern
it. Js it not hurtful for a desperate man to find a knise ready to cut his
own throat, or to espy a well wherein he may drown himself? And such is all the wit and cunning of crafty persons.

Verse 9. Sin makes fools to agree: but among the righteous, that which is
acceptable makes agreement. ONe wicked man loves an other for his sins
sake, and is the more willing and desirous of his company for his lewd
conditions. The word which we translate making to agree, does signify to do
the part of an interpretour between men of different languages, by whose
means they mutually understand each others words, and of an ambassador between
princes sent either for the making of a league, or for the confirmation of love
between them: and the messengers which Baradoch Baladan the king of Babel sent
to Ezechian are so called 2 Chronicles, 32. 31. But among the righteous that which
is acceptable etc. The meaning is, that goodness, eue^ such as is approved of
God, and pleasing to good men, does unite the minds of those which are godly,
and makes them loving and kind every one to other.

Likeness of manners is a forcible means to link men's affections

It is a thing common in the nature of all men, and almost of al other living
creatures, for like to desire the like. The Scriptures testify it, our own
hearts feel it, and general experience makes it manifest. Before that men
are converted to God, that may justly be charged upon them which saint Paul
speaks to the Romans, that not only they commit such things as are worthy
of Romans 1* 3^.
eternal death, but also favor them that do them. But after that they are
effectually called, they may truly say with the Prophet I am a companion of
them that fear thee, and keep thy precepts. Examples are pregnant and
plentiful on both sides, such as wilfully Psalm, 119, 63.
confirm the point. Who remembers not what was the cause of the
reconciliation between Herod and Pilate, who were before at variance? And of
the agreement of the Herodians with the Pharisees, which were of contrary
factions? Was it not the violence and practices against Jesus Christ? And the
prophet makes mention in a prayer, of the confederacy against God and his
church, by all or the most part of the idolatrous nations which were nere unto
Israel. They have taken crafty counsel, says he, against thy people, Psa,
^3, 3, 4. etc
and have consulted against thy secret ones. They have said, Come, and let us
cut them off from being a nation, and let the name of Israel be no more in
remembrance. For they have consulted together in heart, and made a league
against thee. The tabernacle of Edom, and the Ishmalites, Moab* and the Agarims
Geball, and Ammon, and Amalech, the Philistines, with the inhabitants of Tyrus
Ashur is also joined with the^* they are in arm to the children of Lot. Were
all these nations never at any difference among themselves? was there such
innocence in them, as that none would offer wrong to others? or such meeknes
and patience, that every man would bear it at the hands of others? There was
nothing less: for all may read that Ashur was violent, and Tyrus proud, and
Moab insolent, and none of the rest but ignorant, and unrighteous And then all
may know, that discord is, where humility is not, and when knowledge and
equity fail, contentions, and strife abound: but it falls out with them as
with greihounds that go together by the ears for a bone, the sight of a poor
hare will part them, and make them with one accord to pursue her. On the
contrary side, the hearts of the godly are strongly joined together by the
graces which they see each in others, and the good services which both parts
perform to the Lord, and his people. Hereby came Ionathans soul to be so
nearly knit unto David, and David so constantly to cleave unto Jonathan:
hereby was Ruth so firmly united to Naomi, and Boaz to Ruth: for the bonds of
alliance* affinity and marriage were not of such force with them, as the piety
and faithfulness that was in them. Jsaiah speaks of two adversary nations,
being always at deadly fend one with an other, and both of them mortal foes
of God and the church, that they should be reconciled together, and to God,
and to the church by their conversion to Jesus Christ. Jn that day, says he,
shall there be a path from Egypt to Ashur and Ashur shall come into Egypt, and
Egypt into Ashur: so the Egiptians shall worship with Ashur. In that day shall
Israel be the third with Egypt, and Ashur, even a blessing in the midst of the
land, for the Lord of hoastes shall bless it saying, Blessed be my people
Egypt and Ashur the work of mine hands, and Israel mine inheritance.

First the wicked of the same disposition, have a near union one with an other,
as contrariwise the godly have among themselves. They are subjects of one
prince, soldiers of one captain, servants of one master, children of one
father, members of one body, having the same soul and spirit to give life and
motion to him.

Secondly, both the wicked and the godly are sociable to the^ of their own
sort, and much affected with the company of those which approve of their
ways, and be ready to ioyn with them in the exercises which delight them.
Dru^kards cannot well relish their ale or wine, when they sit at it alone: and
as chapmen without custom: so are gamesters without company: the presence and
communication of filthy persons does much recreate the persons that are filthy:
and thieves do think it a very great benefit to get companions with them in
their theft. And therefore in the first chapter are there persuasions and
reasons, to that purpose declared Come with us, say they, we will lay ^ait for
blood, and lie privily Prou. 1. 11. 13 14.
for the innocent, without danger: we shall find all precious riches, and fill
our houses with spoil: thou shall put in thy lot among us: we will all have
one purse. And the fellowship of faithful Christians in fasting and prayer, in
participation of the word and Sacraments, and in all holy exercises of
religion, does as much refresh the hearts of them that addict themselves to the
services of God, and unfeignedly seek eternal salvation. They gladly come
together, they willingly stay together, they co^fortably converse together, as
it is said in the Acts of the Apostles, that they continued Acts 2. 46.
daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at home did eat
their meat together with gladness and singleness of heart. Confutation of
them that give the Papists so high a commendation for unity, which deserve so
deep a condemnation for conspiracy.

Instruction to try what vprightnes is in our hearts, by our love or righteous
men for righteousness sake. Whosoever does that all his delight was in the
saints that were in Psalm. 16. 3.
the earth and in the excellent. And when he appealed to the lords own
testimony of his holy zeal, saying, Do not I hate them O Lord, that hate
thee? and do not I earnestly contend with those that Psalm. 139. 21. 22.
rise up against thee? I hate them with an unfeigned hatred, as they were mine
utter enemies.

Consolation to them whom no ungodly man can fancy, but malice on the one
side, and saithfulnes and well doing on the other? It proves that themselves
are too spiritual for fleshly fools to favor, and their ways too righteous
for sinful men to like of. If they were of the world they should find more
friendship at worldly men's hands: if they would run to the same excess of
riot and sin with the wicked, they should be less traduced by wicked men's
tongues. In regard whereof, on the contrary side, it is not a credit, but a
blemish, not for comfort, but for terror to be magnified and much made of,
among them of whom God, and his best servants are despised, and lewd men of
worse behavior are most countenanced.

Verse. 10. The heart knows the bitterness of his soul, and a stranger
shall not meddle with his joy. THe heart of a man) that part of him which is
the fountain of life, and seat of affections, knows the bitterness of his
soul, feels inward anguish, and has experience of pearcing sorrows: the
meaning is, that the fears and heart* grief of them that have a troubled
conscience, are more felt of themselves, than known to others. And a stranger,
any other besides himself, shall not meddle with his joy, cannot discern how
great his comfort 1. Pet. 1. 8.
is, being the same that Saint Peter calls an unspeakable joy.

No grief is so great as that which lies upon an afflicted conscience. the
spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, but a Prou. 18. 14.
wounded spirit, who can bear? The mind of a man may bear out with patience,
the pains and diseases of the body, or any outward crosses, but what strength
(besides the power of Gods holy spirit) is able to make a man without fainting
or shrinking, to endure the torment of a bitter afflicted soul? No health, no
pleasures, no comforts of this life can cheer it up: no might can enable any
to stand firm and sure under such an intolerable weight. David compares the
horror of it, not to stripes on the body, or breaches on the skin, or wounds
in the flesh, but to the very breaking of the bones, as he says. Make me
hear joy and gladness, Psalm. 51. 8.
that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.

First, the sight of sin is very hideous for a wakened conscience David
moved with such importunity to sue for mercy at Gods hands, that the book
might be crossed, and all his iniquities pardoned, because says he, my sin
is ever before me. The memory and guiltines of Psalm. 51. 3
it pursued him every where continually, by night and by day, abroad and at
home, in bed and at board: no time could free him from it: no place could rid
him of it; no power could prevail against it.

Secondly, the apprehension of Gods displeasure, of all things Job had
afflictions upon afflictions, and losses upon losses, loss of sheep and Oxen,
loss of Asses and Cammels, loss of servants and children, loss of foundnesse
and good estate of his own body, and yet for all these his heart was not
troubled, until God seemed to be offended, and then he was presently much
perplexed. The Prophets knew well that rebukes were wholesome, and chasticements
necessary, and yet they pray earnestly that the Lord would not rebuke them in
wrath nor correct them in anger, but only chastise them in judgment least they
should be brought to nothing. Psalm. 6, 1. Ier. 10. 24.


Our Savior Christ himself could easily endure both pains and poverty, and
hunger and thirst, and contempt, and reproach, and all other crosses from his
youth upward, but when our transgressions brought upon him Gods indignation,
when for the sins of his people, he was to sustain the wrath of his father,
then, though he was most perfectly patient, yet he could no longer forbear to
bemone his importable burden that lay upon him: My soul says he, is heavy
even unto the death: then he prays; Father if it be possible, let this cup
pass from me; then in a bitter agony he falls a sweating, and that of drops
of blood: and lastly after all this, at the finishing of his passion, and the
perfecting of our redemption, he sends up a patheticall complaint to his
father, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Admonition to be heedfull continually, that we expose not

Instruction to be pitiful to them whose hearts are wounded Jobs friends to
the end of the world, as it is now for their dispraise, if they had dealt like
skillful and merciful physicians, as through indiscretion they showed
themselves miserable comforters. But they that mock at their mourning, and
deride their grief, as though it grew from melancholy or childishness, let
them know that their own hearts will one day be bitten with gripings and
grief, unless they repent, they shall be stung with the guiltiness of an
evil conscience, either before they come to the end of their race, or upon
their deathbed, or in place of destruction. They now scoff at their brethren
which groan under a burden that they feel not: who knows but that
hereafter they may sink and perish under a burden which their brethren shall
never feel?

Encouragement to those of Gods people which fear their case

And a stranger shall not meddle with his joy. etc.

Gods people feel their greatest comfort after their bitterest grief. When
they have tasted more gall then others were ware of, they shall be satisfied
with honey above that which any canue conceive of. Heaviness comes before to
soiourne in their hearts for a short time, but gladness follows after to
inhabit thee forever.

Many testimonies does the Scripture yield for confirmation of this point,
because (most men being carnal) a few are persuaded of it. In Matthew Christ
in a word pronounces them blessed that mourn, because they shall be
comforted. Math. 5. 4.


In John he more largely dwells upon it, affirming it by promise and
confirming it by proof. Ver^ie, verily, I say unto you, that you shall weep
and lament, and the world shall rejoice: and ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow
shall be turned into i^^e. A woman when John. 16, 21:
she trauelleth has sorrow, because her hour is come: but as soon as she is
delivered of the child* she remembers no more the anguish, for io^^ that a
man is borne ^^to the world etc.

Jn Isaiah he foretells it, auouching the same as well in the old testament as
the new. The Lord, says he, has sent me to preach Isay. 61. 1, 2, 3.
good tidings unto the poor and to bind up the broken hearted, to preach the
acceptable year of the Lord, and to comfort all that mourn to appoint unto
them that mourn in Zion, and to give unto them beutie for ashes, the oil of
joy for mourning, the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness.

First, godly sorrow is caused by faith, and causes repentance

Secondly, great afflictions compel the godly to pour out many

Thirdly, where the soul is humbled by sorrows and fears, the Lord The
sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a Psalm. 51. 17.
contrite and a broken heart O God thou will not despise. And so much himself
most graciously professes when he says, I dwell in the Psalm. 57. 15.
hie and holy place, and with him also that is of a contrite and humble
spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to give life to them that are
of a contrite heart. Now is it possible for comfort to be absent where his
kindness is present? or can that heart be void of consolation, which is
inhabited by the God of consolation? or may he which has the fountain and sea
of gladness within him, remain a dry pit, and be utterly empty of gladness?

Jnstruction when griefs and troubles, disquiet our hearts, to examine of
what sort they be, whether worldly or godly: if worldly, from whence they
spring at first, but whither they lead us at last: for many times it falls
out that those fears and sorrows which grow from worldly respects, and matters
concerning the body, are changed into a contrary nature, and be merely for
the sins Act, 16.
of the soul, as may appear by the example of the Iayler. Do they therefore
cause us to search our hearts more deeply, and to hate our sins more deadly;
Are we further from selfe-liking, and better persuaded of God, and more
attentive to Gods word and the counsel of his servants, than formerly we have
been? Then though our anguishes are not pleasant yet they are profitable,
though they seem not joyous for the present. yet they procure joy to follow
after. According to this is that saying in the Lamentations: Remembering mine
afflictions, and my mourning, the wormwood, and the gall. My soul has the^ in
remembrance, and is Lam, 3, 19. 20
humbled in me, therefore have I hope. It is the Lords mercies that we are not
consumed.

Verse. 11. The house of the wicked shall be destroyed: but the tabernacle of
the righteous shall flourish. THe house of the wicked) the wicked himself and
his whole estate, shall be destroyed, shall be ouerthorwn and rooted cut by
the curse of God, either sudde^ly, and all at once, as is to be seen in some or
in continuance of time, and by degrees, as it falls out to others. But the
tabernacle of the righteous, his habitation himself, and those things which
belong unto him, shall flourish, shall be blessed of God and made prosperous.

The mean estate of the godly is safer, and better than the great prosperity
of sinners.

When he speaks of that which is present, he rese^bleth the condition of the
one sort, to strong and stately houses, and the other to weak and low tents:
but when he foretells their condition to come, he threateneth to the one
destruction and ruin, and promises to the other prosperity and grows. See
this point handled in the tenth chapter, v. 25. upon these words. As the
whirlwind passes, so is the wicked no more but the righteous is an
everlasting foundation. And in the twelsth chapter. ver. 7. where it is said
that God overthrows the wicked, and they are not, but the house of the
righteous shall stand.

Verse 12. There is await that seems right to a man: but the issues thereof
are the ways of death. THere is a way,) namely, a lewd and sinful course of
life, that seems right to a man, which wicked men persuade themselves to be
free from dangers. It is agreeable to their lusts, and carnal reason: it
makes either for their pleasures, or profits: they have beeue long acquainted
with it: they have found prosperous success by it: they see the greater
personages, and number of me^ to travel in it: and therefore conclude of safety
therein. But the issues thereof are the ways of death, it is certain that the
beginning of it, and first step into it, did tend to death, but when they
have proceeded in it, they shall come at the last to their iourneys end, and
that is to be destroyed for ever.

Wicked men are most bold and confident in that which is most

Then many look for commendation, and think their works to be most
allowable, when shame is due unto them, and their ways are altogether
abominable. Then they hope for greatest safety, and to be far enough from all
manner of peril, when they make have to their undoing, and run with all
speed toward destruction. See the twelfth chapter. ver. 15. Where the same
matter has been handled by occasion of the like words, that The way of a
fool is right in his own eyes.

Verse. 13. Even in laughing the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth
is heaviness. THis is to be understood of the ungodly, and such as are privy to
themselves of some great evils, who even in laughing, amidst their sports and
greatest delights, have gripings of fears, and vexations in their hearts. And
the end of that mirth is heaviness, when their pleasures are ended, their pains
will begin: their mirth was mingled with many secret heart bitings, but their
sorrow shall be pure of it self, without all mixture, and have neither hope
nor comfort to delay the bitterness of it.

The wicked are often iockund and merry: but never heartily joyful

They may rejoice in the face, and not in the heart: they may have many things
without to move them to be merry, and yet a sting withal in their hearts to
mar their mirth. The Lord has spoken it once, and again, that there is no
peace to the wicked, Isay, 57, 21.
and then we may truly speak it again, and again, and as often as
opportunity serves. that there is no sound joy in the wicked.

First, they are wholly destitute of the sap and root of true Gal, 5, 22.
comfort and gladness, because they are not partakers of the spirit of God; for
the Apostle testifies that joy and peace are the fruit of the spirit. It is
as possible for thorns to bear grapes, and figs to grow on thistles, as for
graceles flesh, being altogether corrupt, to bring forth sincere joy and
comfort.

Secondly, no pastime and pleasures, no sports and merriment,

Thirdly, they are not ignorant, though they would willingly for fear of death
they are all their life time subject Heb, 8, 15.
to bondage.

Jnstruction that we fear not sin the less, because that sinners What bitter
sorrow is in their souls, when dainty morsels are in their mouths, and
pleasant music in their ears, and merry sonnettes in their lips? But what
life is more delightful, and what state more desirable then theirs which
continually follow their sports and pleasures, which always converse with
merry companions, which every day and at every meal do eat and drink of the
best and fairest? But what life is more loathsome* and what state more
miserable then theirs who are driven continually to use those exercises for
physic, without which the heart would be oppressed with fittes of fears, and
wast away with the consumption of the spirits.

Reproof of their folly, which purchase the uncomfortable delights Know
thou not this says Zophar to Job, of old, ever since God placed man upon the
earth, that the reioicing of the wicked is short, and that the joy of the
hypocrites is but for a moment? Job, 20, 4, 5. Eccl, 7, 8.
Like the noise of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the fool* this
also is vanity, says Solomon. His great blase of merriment will quickly be
extinguished for want of fuel to feed it. But this were a small matter if the
end of their pleasures were the end of their being, and not the beginning of
their torment. But Luk, 6, 25.
our text says that the end of that mirth is heanines.

And our Savior says woe be to ye that now laugh: for you shall wail and
weep. How unwise then are they to delight so much in the relish of such a
deadly poison? Why do men so violently follow their fleshly desires? No man can
dissuade them from vnholly recreations on the Lords day: no man can dissuade
them from quaffing and drunkenness: no man can dissuade them from unlawful
pastimes and gaming, manifold are the sins, and great are the mischiefs from
which no man can dissuade them* in far better case are they that refuse (as
Moses did) these moment any pleasures of sin, though they fall into many
afflictions: for they are not without great comfort in the mids of their
troubles, and how happy will their state be then, when they shall be delivered
from them all? And how vnutterably shall they be blessed, beyond all the reach
of thought and meditation, when the fullness of joy and glory shall be
conferred upon them for ever?

Verse. 14. He that is of a froward heart shall be satiate with his own ways:
and a good man with that which is in him. HE that is of a froward heart) which
sets his heart upon lewdnes and evil, and declineth every day, waxing
worse and worse, shall be satiate with his own ways, even sated and filled
full with the plagues and judgments, which his own deserts shall draw upon him.
And a good man with that which is in him, shall abundantly enjoy both inward
comforts and outward happiness, for his constant uprightness, and holy
behavior.

Every man both good and bad shall feel himself sufficiently

They that serve the flesh, and increase their labors to fulfill the lusts
thereof, shall at length receive their pay, and have more wages than ever they
looked for, or wished for. And they that seek the Lord, and show themselves
diligent in doing his will, shall in the end be fully requited, and their will
far exceed their hope. Both shall reap the crop which they have sown, and
neither of their seed shall fail of growth, or ripening. See the same point in
effect prosecuted in the eleventh chapter, v. 18. where he says, that the
wicked works a deceitful work: but he that seweth righteousness shall
receive a sure reward.

Verse. 15. The foolish believes every thing: but he that is prudent takes
heed to his steps. THe fool) he that is silly for his own soul, and
ignorant without understanding of the matters of God, believes every thing,
rashly giving credit to every vain tale that is told him, and harkening to
every deceiuer that misleadeth him. But a prudent man, he that is of a settled
judgment, and provident for his own safety, takes heed to his steps,
examineth first what weight and soundnes there is in that which is spoken,
before he consent to it, either in persuasion or practice.

They which are least careful to learn the truth* are most credulous to
hearken to lies. They could not but attain to wisdom, if they would give ear
to their instructions of knowledge: and truth embraced would preserve them from
listening to errors. We have a common proverb, that fair words make fools*
feign, when we see by common practice on the contrary side, that ^aithful words
do make fools to frette. The counsel of God which Ezechiel and Jeremy
delivered to the people of their time, were no more regarded of the most than
blasts of wind: but the lying diuinatio^s which the false prophets uttered were
of as great force with the^ as oracles, those they hoped would be confirmed.
And our Ezech. 13. 6.
Savior himself speaks of the manner of his entertainment among Ioh. 5. 43.
those of his time, saying, I am come in my fathers name, and ye receive me
not: if an other shall come in his own name, him will ye receive.

First, in the things of God, and matters which concern eternal life, they
are as much void of judgment, and good affection as little children, which
can hardly brook the nurture which is most wholeso^e for the^, and as hardly
forgo the liberty that is most pernicious unto the^. Every precept that tends
to the informing of their minds and the amending of their manners, is like to
gall in their stomachs; but every persuasion that infecteth their hearts, and
peruerteth their behavior, is like to honey in their mouths.

Secondly, Satan reigns and rules in them: he has power

Thirdly, the heavy stroke of God is upon them in sending

Reproof of many sorts of people, which may justly be charged devil promises
help by sorcerers, or speaks of hurt by propheciers, they undoubtedly expect
the accomplishment thereof. When faithful preachers by warrant out of the word
declare what conscience is to be made of the Sabbath, and how to be
sanctified, and after what manner the other commandments are to be observed,
their ministry is not of credit enough to be regarded: but if false Prophets
tell them that the Sabbath is abrogated, and all the old testament abolished,
or broach any other pestilent points, for a licentious course of life, they are
presently esteemed worthy and comfortable teachers. And so Jusui^es and
Seminaries intising them to idolatry, and disloyalty, yea and some of them many
times to shameful impurity are devout and reverend fathers. And so
stage players, and minstrels, are teachers of good lessons, and more edify
with their interludes and songs, tha^ the ministers do with their sermons and
preaching. We will not speak here of uncharitable persons which are prompt and
ready to traffic with any that carries a pack of malicious reports against
such as unfeignedly fear God, those we shall deal with, when we come to the
seventeenth chapter, v. 4. where it is set as a note of the wicked to give
heed to false lips, and that a liar harkneth to the naughty tongue.

Instruction to show our wisdom according to the direction 1 Thessalonians. 5: 21.
Try all things says S. Paul, and keep that which is good Believe not every
spirit, says S. John but try the spirits whether they are of 1 John. 4. 1.
God, for many false Prophets are gone out into the world.

We are not willing to be blindfolded at our meat, nor to eat our supper
without a light, especially in strange places where we neither know well the
fidelity of our host, nor what dishes are set before us: and shall we be more
provident for the outward man, than the inward? Shall we keep out of our
bodies whatsoever is not wholesome and sauory, and receive into our souls such
food as will poison us?

But is it not contrary to charity to fifth men's words, and not to Ob.
rest upon the truth and faithfulness of their testimony?

Ans. There is nothing contrary to charity that is agreeable to Paul by the
prudent Bereans, which searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things
were so, as he taught. We use to tell silver, and to weigh gold, and yet
preiudge not them at whose hands we receive them. Jf the things which they
speak to us be true, they shall be the more justified and approved, after
that they have bin tried: if otherwise themselves may by the discovery of their
error, be better informed, and others the less endangered by them.

Verse. 16. A wise man fears, and departs from evil: but a fool rages and
is careless. A Wise man) he that is religious, and truly godly, when he is
rebuked, or hears Gods threatenings, or beholds Gods judgments, or
foreseeth plagues to come, by the present view and sight of sin, fears, his
heart trembles, both in respect of Gods displeasure, and the mischief like to
follow, and departs from evil, both purges his heart by humiliation, and
redresseth his way by reformation. But the fool rages and is careless, a
sinful person scorneth when he is reproved, and presumes of impunity and
freedom from all perils.

They which are in greatest safety, are farthest from carnal

The godly have not so many sins as the wicked, and yet they feel them more,
and fear them more, and flee from them faster. And the wicked have not more
valor then the godly, nor so much freedom from punishments, and yet go
beyond them in audaciousnes and fleshly confidence.

When David was dealt with by Nathan, he confessed his falt, Psalm, 51.
he craved pardon, he set his heart to seek help from heaven, against his
sin: but when Achab was spoken to by Micaiah, he 1. Kings 22.
persecuted the Prophet, he proceeded in his purpose, he promised himself a
safe return from his voyage. And Amaziah also scorned, and threatened the
messenger that was sent to him from God, 2. Chron. 25. 16. Josiah hearing the
law of the Lord read by 2 Chro. 34. 19
Saphan, in regard of the threats therein contained, did rent his clothes in
grief and fear: but Iehoiakim hearing the words of God read by Baruch, in
regard of the curses there denounced, did Ier. 36, 23.
tear the book, and burn it in wrath and fury.

First, the one sort have faith, seeing God in his word and ways,

Secondly, the one sort are of an humble spirit, and that always

Thirdly, the one sort are provident for themselves, and therefore do heedfully
prevent all perils that may befall them: and the A prudent man sees the
plague, and hides himself: but the foolish go Prou. 22, 3.
on still, and are punished.

Consolation to them that attain to this holy fear, though they

Confutation of them that take security for magnanimity, and David was nothing
their inferior in valiantness of heart, and yet his heart was tender, and
fearful of sin. It is to be observed continually that none are so bold in
wicked attempts, as they which are most base minded. Who are so ventrous to
oppose themselves against God, impiously to defraude him of his glory, as they
whose courage will not serve them to encounter with their equal in a just
cause, for mainteynance of their own right? Who are so fierce and violent, like
Lions to oppress their inferiors, as they which are as submisse as spaniels,
to fawn upon their superiors? And in making presumption and carelessness a
part of strong faith they are strangely deluded, for faith is the work of Gods
holy spirit, and is founded wholly on the truth of his word: but the devil is
the damme of presumption, and it hops that the word is false, so that nothing
in the world does more manifest their infidelity. If that be faith, what wicked
man is without faith? If that be faith, the curse of Deuteronomy, 29. 20.
God is due to faith, and faith will bring men to destruction.

Verse. 17. He that is hasty to anger commits folly, and he that plotteth
mischief is hated. HE that is hasty to anger) is suddeinly moved to
distempered passions, before he has advisedly examined the cause of offense,
commits folly, breaks out into some absurdity or injustice by word or
deed: and he that plotteth mischief, which dissembling his displeasure,
inte^deth revenge, and sets his thoughts on work how to effect it, is hated,
is abhorred of God, and detested by those that find out his malicious practices.

They which are given to wrath, do bring a blemish upon

He that plotteth mischief; etc) They which are malicious and

Doeg was delighted in doing of harm, and thereto applied his heart, and
tongue, and all his power, and therefore all good men were as glad of his
downfall, and rejoiced at his destruction. Behold, say they, the man that took
not God for his strength, but trusted to the multitude of his riches, and put
his strength in his malice. See chap. 11. v. 10. in the first doctrine
amplified by the contrary, and the second use of it.

Verse. 18. The foolish do inherit folly: but the prudent are crowned with
knowledge. THe foolish such as will learn no wisdom, nor practice any
goodness inherit folly, shame and other punishments are due unto them for
their ignorance and sinf^lnes, and shall in time also light upon them. But the
prudent are cro^ned with knowledge, such as are discreet and godly wise shall
receive the glorious fruit of their understanding and obedience. For by being
crowned is meant commonly in the scriptures honor and dignity, and for the
certainty of the reward on both sides, he speaks of that which is to come,
as if it were presently performed.

A wicked man has no certain state in any thing but in shame

That is their inheritance, and that remains for them, and that they shall
surely possess when they come to their years.

Many things they have in the mean time, as strength, and titles, and profits,
and pleasures, but they have them only, and own them not, nor shall be able
long to hold them.

When Nabuchadnezzar was heaping up all these to gether, the Holy ghost derided
his sottishnes, and caused a tanting proverb Hab, 2, 6.
to be taken up against him, saying, Ho, he that increases that which is not
his? How long? And he that ladeth himself with thick clay? Indeed he did also
increase that which was his, as ignominy to himself and ruin of his family,
and torment for the time to come, but that was done against his will, and
without any purpose of having.

First they are borne to this wretched estate, as being the children

Secondly, they have strengthened their title, and procured a

Thirdly, they have no right in Jesus Christ, without whom, no man has right
in any thing, saving in Gods wrath, and his own destruction.

Terror for sinful men which hope to be made happy by their

But the prudent are crowned etc. Every one that has godly

Which has been already showed partly in the tenth chapter. v. 7. upon these
words, The memorial of the just shall be blessed, and partly in the twelfth.
v. 8. where it is said that A man shall be commended for his wisdom.

Verse 19. The evil shall bow before the good, and the wicked at the gates of
the righteous. THe evil shall bow before the good) sinful persons shall be
depressed, and brought down, and godly men exhalted, and raised up: they shall
crouch in token of submissio^, and these shall have obeisance done to them in
token of honor. And the wicked at the righteous, the meaning is, that good men
shall not only be greater than the evil, but such as the evil must be
driven to seek unto for help and favor, as suitors use to wait at the gates
of a great personage, till either he come forth, or they be let in, and
admitted to his presence.

Godliness is no cause of contempt and objection.

It may not be denied but that many goodmen are in low place, and for their
goodness oppressed of the wicked, but it is sometimes, because they have
faults withal, for the which the Lord does humble them, though their enemies
envy their graces: and sometimes, because they have not strength enough to
bear their prosperity, with such love to their brethren, and humility in them
selves, as is needful: and always because their poverty and sufferings are a
foundation low laid for an hie building of glory. So that howsoever ungodly
men take occasion by religion to persecute the righteous, yet it cannot be
truly said, that religion does cause the righteous to be cast down, or the
sinners to be set up. The promise which God makes to his people in Deuteronomy
runs in this manner: The Lord shall make thee the head and not the tail,
and thou shall be above only, and not beneath, Deuteronomy, 28, 13.
if thou obei^ the commandments of the Lord thy God, which I command thee this
day, to keep, and to do them. And thus much does David acknowledge to be
verfied to himself, the Lord performed this good promise unto him: Thou have,
says he, delivered me from the contentions of the people: thou have made me
the head of the heathen: a people whom I knew not, does serve me. As Soon as
they hear they obey me, strangers be in subjection to me.

First, there are manifold occasions whereby ungodly men are often brought to
be so submisse to the servants of the Lord, as in Joseph, and all the Persians
to Mordecay, and because distresses make many to seek help and counsel at
their hands, whom formerly they have maligned and hated, as wicked Iehoram, at
Elisha, Balshazzar, at Daniel, and 2. King. 3. Dan. 5.
proud Pharaoh sundry times at Moses.

Secondly, if godliness were a cause of contempt and vileness, the^ as the
godly were more multiplied, so they would be more contemptible e^vile, and the
whole body of them would be basest of all, whereas the contrary is evidently to
be seen, fithence the Church is the most glorious company that ever was, o^
shall be in the world. There is no state, nor kingdom, nor empire, that has
been or can be comparable to it. And to this purpose hear what the holy spirit
of God testifies of her in the songs of Solomon: There are threescore Queens,
and fourescou^^ Concubines, and of the damsels without number. But my done is
alone, my undefiled are she is the only daughter of her mother, and she is
dear to her that bare her: the daughters have seen, and counted her blessed:
even the Queens and the concubines, and they have praised her, Who is she that
looks forth as the morning, fair as the moon, pure as the sun, terrible
as an army with banners?

How many nobles, how many princes, how many kings, how many nations do yield
obedience unto the Church? Yea the very wicked also and evil men do bow
before her though they love her not, yet they pretend love, and hypocritically
make femblance of reverence to her: their mouth gives her testimony, and with
their lips they would make me^ believe that they have her in estimation. Eue^
the very Atheists themselves scarce dare grow so andacious, as to profess that
they are none of Gods people, nor members of the Church. And that did David use
as an argument of his greatness, and predominatio^ over his enemies, that
strangers did fainedly Psalm, 18. 44.
subject themselves unto him.

Thirdly, if piety and religion did make men abject and despised

Confutation of that error which is in the mouths of money have it so, and
therefore fleshly men imagine it to be so: they carry an envious heart against
the righteous, and therefore be grieved that the righteous should either rise
or stand: but he that sets up and establishes, and he that casts down and
depresseth, declares his purpose (which his power also accomplisheth (that his
servants shall be made honorable with preferment, and his enemies made
vnderlines with debasemen^: Daniels faithfulness did never bring him to reproach,
nor his adversaries falsehood did ever win them credit. Mordecay could not be
kept down, because he was a godly Jew, nor Haman could not be held up,
because he was an impious Amalekite. Read through the whole book of the
Scriptures, and it will appear that of all the kings (they which were most holy
and zealous for the worship of God,) did always best prosper in their own
estate. That which is spoken in the Psalm concerning the happiness of them that
fear God, will infallibly be verified of every one of them in due season: His
Psalm, 112. 9. 10.
horn shall be exhalted with glory. The wicked shall see it, and be angry,
he shall gnash with his teeth, and consume a vaie: the desire of the wickedsh
all perish.

Admonition to ungodly persons that they be not too fierce and violent Joseph's
brethren had as much believed his dreams that they should come and bow to him,
as they euuied him for them, they would have used him with more mildness. Jf
Shimei had thought that David would have recovered again the crown and
kingdom, and soueraignety over him, he would have spared his cursed speeches
against him,

Verse. 20. The poor is hated even of his own neighbor: but the friends of
the rich are many. THe poor, he that is fallen into poverty, or disgrace with
great personages, is hated of his neighbor, they that dwell by him, and his
kinsfolks, and old acquaintance, and such as were wont to be familiar with
him, being yet but carnal men, will altar their countenance and behavior
toward him, and pick quarrels against him, and take any occasion to alienate
themselves from him. But the friends of the rich are many, diverse fawn on
the wealthy, and flatter them, and make a fair show of love and good will,
when as notwithstanding they bear no such affection to them in their hearts.

The friendship of fleshly men is grounded on the state of them

Be they never so religious and godly, and yet wanting wealth and countenance,
they contemn them as abiects: be they never so, impious and profane, and yet
having titches and dignity, they admire them as Angels. While Job was in
prosperity and held the weapon of authority in his hand, every one respected
him, a chair was set for him in the street to rest him by the way, well was
he that could do any good office to show how much he honored Job but when
his goods were gone, and his bowstring was cut, as he says, no man regarded
him, his seruents, his ha^dmaids, yea even his own wife despised him. He had
experience of this point, and therefore it shall not be amiss to let him speak
to it, and declare what befell him. My neighbors says he has Job. 19. 14.
15.
forsaken me, and my familiars have forgotten me. They that dwell in mine
house, and my maids took me for a stranger in their ^ight: I called my
servant, but he would not answer, though I prayed him with my mouth. My
breath was strange unto my wife though I pra^ed her for the children sake of my
body. The wicked despised me and when I rose they spoke against me. All my
secret friends also abhorred me, and they whom I loved are turned against me.

Neither was it Jobs case alone, nor belonging only to that time, but the like
usage has been found, and is to be expected of every one that falls into
misery at all times. For the Holy ghost which best knows all customs which
men have used heertofore, and what is now in practice presently, and what will
surely come to pass hereafter, does testify that all the brethren of the
poor do hate him how much more will his friends depart far Prou, 19, 7.
from him? Though he be instant with words, yet they will not.

First, they look to their credit herein, esteeming it an honor to be in
league with them that are of eminent place, and good ability, and a disgrace to
be sociable with them that are little se^ by. Secondly, they have also an eye
to their commodity, knowing that mighty men and wealthy, may greatly pleasure
them if they be their friends, or much endomage them if they be their
adversaries, and so for their own sakes will be linked to them in kindness.
And therefore it is said, that riches gather many friends. The person of the
rich man is not so much regarded as his wealth, nor would be at all, were it
not for his wealth: for that Prou. 19: 4
is it which gets so many men's good wills. And on the other side they fear
that if they should give countenance to their needy neighbors or kinsmen, or
old companions, they would press too heavy upon them by begging, or borrowing,
or coming often to their table, or expecting help from them, and so grow
burdenous unto them.

Instruction. 1. If we fall into afflictions, that we seek not to Enter not
into thy brothers house in the date of thy calamity: for a neighbor that is
near, is better Prou: 27. 10
than a brother that is far off. He that is further off in nature and blood,
may be much more near in faithfulness and love. 2. To depend upon the Lord who
rejects not his people for their poverty and crosses, but pitieth them the
more for their afflictions: and though all men should cast them off in their
misery and troubles, yet he will not forsake them, as David's case does
witness. When my father and mother, says he, forsook me, the Lord gathered
me Psalm. 27, 10:
up. 3. To associate our selves with godly men, for they will prove our surest
friends. Vicinity and neighborhood will fail, and alliance and kindred will
fail, but grace and religion will never fail. Jf we adioyne our selves unto
them for their virtue and goodness, they will not separate themselves from us
for our calamities and trouble. Ruth was no less kind to Naomie, when she went
away empty, than when she came thither full: and Jonathan was as faithful to
David, when Saul sought to slay him, as when he made him his Son in law, and
showed best countenance to him.

Verse. 21. He that despises his neighbor is a sinner, but he that shows
mercy to the poor, blessed is he. THis verse depends on the former, wherein
was declared the property of fleshly men, which will despise their friends and
neighbors in their necessity, and here is set down their state and condition
which show such unfaithfulness, that he which does despise his neighbor when he
is poor and distressed, shall be a sinner, that is, shall be charged with
sin, and convicted of it, and plagued for it. The same word is so taken in
the book of Kings, where Bathsheba tells David how needful it was for him
to appoint his successor before his death. Else, says he, when my Lord 2.
Kings, 1, 21.
the King shall sleep with his father, I and my Son Solomon shall be
sinners, that is, shall be counted as guilty persons, and punished as
offenders. Now this is illustrated by the contrary, the great reward which they
shall receive that pity poor men in their afflictions, and seek to relieve
and succor them in word, deed, and countenance: they are pronounced blessed,
such as shall abundantly partake of Gods favors and mercies.

It is not safe to despise poor christians in their adversity. As God Moabites
be an example, whom the Lord most grievously plagued Ier. 48, 26.
for this sin as the principal cause of their destruction. Moab says
Jeremy, shall wallow in his vomit, and he shall also be in derision. For did
thou not deride Jsraell, as though he had hin found among thieves? for when
thou speak of him thou art moved.

First, they add affliction to the afflicted, and make their burden endured,
the Scriptures foretelling of it, and numbering it among his grievous
calamities. J am a worm and not a man a shame of Psalm. 22, 6, 7.
men, and the contempt of the people. All they that see me have me^ in derision
they make a mow and nod the head at me, And the Church also in the Psalms
does complain of the bitterness thereof, and vehemently craves help at Gods
hand against it. Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we
have Psalm. 123, 3, 4.
suffered too much contempt. Our soul is filled too full of the mocking of the
vvealthie, and of the despitefulnes of the proud.

Secondly, they thwart and contrary Gods word, and nature, Jaws so sharply
reprooueth the partiality which is used in preferring the gold rings and gay
garments of the rich with the disgrace and contempt of the poor. Has not God,
says the Apostle, chosen the poor of this world that Ia^. 2 5.
they should be rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he promised to
them that love him? But ye have despised the poor. etc. Though a Parent
himself will sometimes give correction to his dearest children, yet he will
no: take it well that every servant, and kittchin boy should therefore laugh at
them, or think the more basely of them.

Thirdly, the contempt and reproach which is offered to the He which mocketh
(...) 1^. 5.
the poor, reprocheth him that made him and he that rejoices at his
adversity shall not be unpunished.

The uses see in the eleventh chapter, and 12, ver. inferred upon these words:
He that despises his mighbor is destitute of wisdom.

But he etc. He takes a good way for his own happiness, that

The point has been handled in the eleventh chapter. ver. 17. where it is
said, that he which is merciful rewards his own soul:

Verse. 22. Do they not err that imagine evil? but to them that think on good
things shall be mercy and truth. THe question is not moved here in way of
doubting, as though it were uncertain whether they that study to do evil should
speed evil or not, but of assurance that they shall certainly fail of their hope
and expectation. And therefore the interrogation is put for a confident
asseueration of that which is affirmed, that, never any wicked man could obtain
his hope to his sul contentme^t in has sinful devises. Either he comes too
short of that which he concludes to do, or misseth of that happiness which he
looked for in his exploits, or falls into those troubles which he never stood
in fear of. But to the^ that think on good things, which set their minds to
meditate of performing good services to God and his people, in the best manner,
to them shall be mercy and truth, the mercy of God shall be manifested by
the multitude of his blessings upon them, and his truth declared by, fulfilling
of his promises to them.

No men are so much defeated of their purposes as they which most apply their
hearts to mischief.

They look for the best success, and meet with the worste: they hope to
find great happiness in their enterprices, and are miserably vexed with great
repulses. The Lord sees all their dangerous plotting how they are continually
undermining the scate of his servants, and therefore by a watchful providence
does cou^termine their practices. It has been already showed in the 12
chapter, that deceit comes to the hearts of them that imagine Prou. 12. 20.
evil, and there this matter has been more largely prosecuted.

Verse. 23. In all labor the^e is abundance: but the talk of the lips only
brings want. IN all labor,) in every honest vocation wherein a man shall
diligently and faithfully employ himself, there is abundance, a competent
measure of provision to be found for his own maintenance, and a surplussage to
bestow on other good uses. But the talk of the l^ppes only, bare and vain
words, when a man will labor with his tongue, and let the rest of his members
be idle: when the mouth shall be ready to discourse of his business, but the
hands be negligent to perform it; when words alone shall be used in steed of
works, that brings only want, fills him with need and poverty.

No man's thriuing consists so much in the gainefulnes of his Blessed is
every one that fears the Lord and walks in his ways. In eating the
labors of thine hands thou shall be blessed, and it shall be well with thee.
There is not a limitation, Psalm, 228. i, 2.
that if they have good livings, or great stocks, or gainefull trades and
occupations, they shall be so happy, and not otherwise: for that were to
restrain the largenes of Gods liberality, and al sufficiency, and make him a
respecter of persons in his promises, and mercies.

The blessing of God is that which makes rich, and it is not appropriated to
such sciences as men like best of, and hope to

Secondly they that painefully and conscionably employ themselves in any
vocation, how base and contemptible soever it seem himself? It appears by
the parable that many receive Mat. 20.
much more at his hands than either he promises, or they look for, but none
has less wages from him than his work comes to.

Encouragement to those of low places, to labor cheerfully in in all labor
there shall be abundance, they shall never have cause to contradict him, and
say, we labor hard and faithfully, and yet live in penury.

Reproof of them which in the decay of their state and extremities

Terror for iesters, and stage players, and others of like lewd over his
flock, and study to make provision for them, if he will show himself a
faithful minister of God. If he be negligent in that duty, howsoever he be not
laden with poverty, he will be empty of knowledge and comfort, and pressed with
the burden of an evil conscience.

Verse. 24. The riches of the wise are their crown: but the foolishnes of
fools remains folly. THey which have wealth with godly wisdom, are made
the more honorable by it for their credit: for so much the word crown does
often import in the Scriptures. And though sinful fools have never so great
abundance of riches, they nothing avail them against their foolishnes. They be
as ignorant and more wicked than if they possessed nothing: their lewdness is
not made the less grievous and damnable by their great substance: and their
absurdities be more seen, and noted to their shame, than if they lived in a
poor estate, and obscurely.

When the heart of a man is beautified with grace, his outward

Some in the Scriptures be commended for their strength and valiantness, as
David's worthies: some for their understanding and wisdom as Chusai, and
Daniel, some for their authority and promotion, as Joseph and Mordecai: some
for their wealth and substance, as Job and Abraham: and some for all these, as
David and Solomon.

First, to godly men they testify the love and kindness of the Job says, that
the light of Gods countenance shined upon his head; and by his light he walked
through the darkness, (...). 9 3
in the days of his great prosperity.

Secondly, they glorify God, and adorn religion, and get true

Instruction for wise men to be thankful to God when he deals riches and
glory, though she bring them in her left hand, it is a gift of greater value
Prou. 13. 16.
than if the mightiest monarch in the world should give the greatest treasure
in the world with his right hand. If a man be inritched by virtue and
godliness which has the promise of this life 1 ^in ^4 8
present, and of that which is to come; If God give him power to get Deuteronomy. 8
18.
substance to establish his covenant with him, there is just cause why he
should conceive comfort in his own soul in regard of the Lords loving favor
toward him: but more equal it is that he should return praise to Gods name,
who has so multiplied his mercies upon him.

Reproof of those which seek to disgrace the godly so much their eye is
evil, because he is good, and they think that he gives Mat. 20. 15,
too much wages to his servants, and too short allowance to them.

Confutation of their folly that think riches, and other outward fool, and by
that shall he be known to the end of the world, and then be evidently seen to
be such a one. Herod had dignity and power, and wit, and eloquence, and pomp,
and fleshly glory, and yet what is written of him, or spoken of him which does
not continue the memorial of his miserable and wretched estate?

Verse. 25. A faithful witness delivers souls; but a deceitful one
forgeth lies. A Faithful witness) which both has sure knowledge of that
which he affirms, and an upright heart to do service to God, and good to his
brethren by his testimony, delivers souls, indeauoureth by declaring the
truth, to help innocent men out of their troubles, and infamy where into they
are fallen, or like to come, by unjust accusations or false surmises of them.
For by souls in the Scriptures is often meant the persons of men. As Exodus 1.
5. All the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob, were seventy soul. But
a deceitful one, a false witness, or crafty accuser forgeth lies, as
sometimes* he peruerteth the truth, and abuses it to cross justice and true
dealing, so if that will not be for his turn to effect his purpose, then he
inuenteth a lie, and sets a color upon it to destroy or molest his
harmless neighbors. For here does the holy ghost oppose the deceitefull to
the faithful, and forging of lies, to delivering of souls, in regard of the
effect that it works, because by that means many men are brought to danger
and destruction. And as this is understood of the whole man, that a faithful
witness will deliver him, so it is true concerning that part of man, the soul
so properly called, that a faithful witness, either minister, or private
person, according as opportunity serves, will specially labor to deliver the
heart from sin, by testifying the truth of God against it, and so preserve
his brother from destruction. This is according to that which S James speaks:
Brethren if any of you has erred from Iam 5. 19. 20.
the truth, and some man has converted him, let him know that he which has
converted the sinner from going astraye out of his way, shall save a soul
from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. On the other side, the false
Prophets* and seducers of all men, are the most deceitful and dangerous, and
do greatest mischief with their corrupt doctrine and pestilent errors. The
sense of this verse is agreeable to the sixth verse of the twelfth chapter,
where it is said, that the talking of the wicked* is to lie in wait for
blood: but the mouth of the righteous will deliver them. There it was observed,
and here it is confirmed that wicked men mix their cruelty with craft and
falsehood. For they lie in vvait for blood, and they are deceitful, and forge
lies. And that a good man will have a good word ready to help them that are
oppressed. For the mouth of the righteous will deliver them, and a faithful
witness will deliver souls.

Verse. 26. In the fear of the Lord there is assurance of strength, and he
will be a refuge for his children. IN the fear of the Lord) in soundnes of
religion, and true godliness, there is assurance of strength, certainty of
defense both for soul and body. And he will be a refuge for his children. This
is added to the former clause, as a reason for confirmation of it* Godly men
must needs be in good safety, because they be Gods children, whom he in Christ
has begotten to himself by the immortal seed of the world, and he does
perpetually protect all his sons and daughters.

No men are in so good safety as they which are religious and pillars which
wisdom has hewn out for their preservation which come to her banquet.

Verse. 27. The fear of the Lord is a welspring of life to avoid the snares
of death. AS religion was commended in the former verse to be forcible for the
defense of them that embrace it, so in this it is declared to be comfortable to
them, and profitable, as appears by the similitude of a welspring, whereof
there was great use in those hot countries for the refreshing of men and
cattle that were thirsty, and the moystning of the earth, to make it the more
fruitful. And therefore it was given for a principal praise to the land of
Canaan, that it was a good Land, in the which were rivers Deuteronomy 8 ^.
of water, and fountains, etc. And A^hsah the daughter of Caleb made a request
to her Father to give her a blessing, that is, to do her a special favor:
which was, that as he had bestowed upon her a dry coast, a barren field, so
he vvoulde also give her springes of water, a more fertile Ioshu. 15. 19.
piece of ground, which he accordingly yielded unto her. And it is called a
Welspring of life, both for the constant fullness of it, as never failing, as
also in respect of the gracious effects thereof, because that blessedness in
this life, and eternal life in the world to come, does abundantly proceed from
it. To avoid the snares of death, that is, it both gives men instructions and
works in them a care to fly from sin, whereby they would be otherwise
entangled to destruction. The same words are in the thirteenth chapter v. 14.
Where they have been already expounded.

Verse. 28. In the multitude of the people is the honor of a king, and through
want of people comes the destruction of the prince. IN the multitude of the
people) when the number of the subjects are increased, and prosper, it is both
for the glory and safety of the prince. And through want of people, when they
are few and feeble, comes the destruction of the Prince, he is exposed to
perrils, as wanting power to defend his state and territories, and to contempt
also, contrary to the honor before mentioned.

That which is good for the state of the common wealth, is best

That it is a benefit and blessing for a nation to abound with a multitude of
people it appears by many testimonies of scripture, especially by that prayer
which Moses makes for Israel in the book of Deuteronomy, saying, The Lord your
God has multiplied you: and hehold ye are this day as the stars of heaven in
number. The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many Deuteronomy.
1. ^0.
mo as ye are, and bless you, as he has promised you. Now in this our text
we see that it is honorable and necessary for the ruler to have his dominions
well peopled. It was one of the ornaments wherewith the Lord adorned Salomons
government that his kingdom was filled with people and plenty. For so it is
said, that Judah and Israel were many as the sand of the sea in number,
eating drinking and making merry. And it was one of the 1, Kings. 4. 20.
greatest blessings wherewith the faithfulness and obedience of Iehoshaphat was
rewarded, that there was such an increase of men under him, that he could choose
out eleven hundredth and threescoure thousand of the most valiant of them, to
be trained soldiers 2. Chro 17. 14.
in a readiness, and that without any difficulty or inconvenience to the
country. And who knows not that the Scriptures do celebrate and set forth
the glory of Christ his kingdom by the innumerable company of the believers
that are, and shall be subject unto him?

First, the increase and prosperous estate of the people does witness Jacob
does approve his faithfulness to Laban, Thou know what service I have done
thee, and in what taking thy cattle has been under me. For the little that
thou had before I came is increased into a multitude. Ge. 30. 29. 30
and the Lord has blessed thee by my coming. And contrary, one of the kings
of Judah, at the time of the captivity was vpbraided with this, that coming to
the crown he found so many subjects, and now through his fault the land was
so spoiled of the inhabitants. Where says the Lord to him, is the flock that
Ier. 13. 20.
was given thee, even the flock of thy beauty? meaning these people whose
multitude should have been for his honor.

Secondly, though as the prophet says, a king be not saved by an army yet by
Gods blessing the increase of men, and number of warriers is made a strength to
the king and kingdom: without which Nauies and Holds, and Artillery, or any
kind of munition, will be to no purpose.

Thirdly, they serve for his profit, that his treasury may be

This may be a motive to put princes and great potentates Job so pitiful to
the poor oppressed, and so severe to the violent oppressors: and therefore
came so great a blessing on Jobs government, and so great comfort to his heart,
and so great prosperity to his estate, and so great honor to his estate, and
so grear reverence to his person, and so great honor to his name, and so great
blessedness to his soul and body for ever. I was, says he, a father unto the
Job. 29. 16.
poor, and when I knew not the cause, I sought it out diligently. I brake the
jaws of the unrighteous man, and pluck^e the pray out of his teeth. Neither
does the Scripture purpose the example of Job only for magistrates to imitate,
although it may well beseem them all to tread in his steps, but Jobs better
and master, even Jesus Christ the Lord of Lords, and king of kings, is set
forth for a pattern for Solomon himself, and every other good ruler to
follow, He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children
Psalm. 72, 4, ^.
of the needy, and subdue the oppressor. And therefore in his days shall the
righteous flourish, and abundance of peace shall be so long as the moon
endures.

Reproof of those hurtful and inhumane creatures, those spoilers

Verse. 29. He that is slow to wrath is of great wisdom; but he that is of
a hasty mind exalts folly. HE that is slow to wrath) which is able to
master the rage of his affections so, as that he will not he care^ed away to
distemper, contrary to the rules of lawful anger, is of great wisdom has
received from above in his heart that pure, peaceable, and gentle wisdom
which Saint James speaks of, and does also Iam. 3. 17.
declare the same by his long susterance and patient forbearance, when by
indignities and wrongs he is provoked. But he that is of an hasty mind, being
rashly moved to passion without due cause of displeasure, or immoderately
offended, when the fault deserves not so much anger, exalts folly, does
openly commit it as though he would lift it up, that all men might see it. See
chapter 12, 16. where this point has been entreated of.

Verse. 30. A sound heart is the life of the flesh; but ennie is the rotting of
the bones. A Sound heart) that is, a tender, kind, and compassionate heart
toward them that be in afflictions, with a desire to relieve and succor them:
for the word signifies an healing heart, such a one as wishes well to them,
and studieth how it may best comfort them, so free it is from evil will, and
despite, and grudging at other men's good estate* is the life of the flesh,
brings health and soundness to the whole man that has it. But ennie is the
rotting of the bones, it is painful to the mind, and hurtful to the body,
and will quickly consume a man, and bring him to his end, as the diseases which
lie in the bones, and eat up the marrowe.

No man lives so cheerful a life, as he which is mercifully

His happiness is not detayned from him until he come to heaven, but he has
some fruition thereof whiles he lives on earth: neither does it consist alone
in the joy of his soul, but is very effectual for the health of his body.
And therefore David declares the felicity of such men, when he pronounces
every one blessed that wisely considers of the poor. Psalm. 41, 1:


First* it is a means to procure plenty, or at least competent

Secondly in their adversities, it is commonly seen that their Job well found:
and so they are assured of supportance in their tribulations, and deliverance
out of them. And so much is meant in the Psalm, when it is said, that unto the
righteous arises light in darkness, he is merciful and full of compassion
Psalm,. 1^2. 4.
and righteous.

Thirdly, they never want matter of joy and gladness so long The Lord out of
Zion shall bless Psalm. 12^. 5.
thee, and thou shall see the wealth of Jerusalem all the days of thy life.

Instruction to use this holy physic of mercy toward our the mightiest,
and as well rewarded for it: and he that can do least in deed to succor his
distressed brother, may sometimes prevail most in word to comfort him.

But every etc. Whosoever has an envious heart, does live in

Even the very body and outward man is plagued therewith, as it is made the
more healthful and strong by love and compassion: but especially the griefs
and gripings of the mind and inward parts are many, and marvelous bitter, as
Caines case declares.

First, he can never be without vexation, so long as his desires

Secondly, how much soever he has of wealth or promotion, Saul could have been
as well content to have lost the victory, as to have David preferred before him
for the atchieuing of it, though himself had as much praise as his prowess
deserved. The spiteful man thinks himself decaying, whiles those whom he
maligneth do prosper: and his neighbors rising, is little less grievous than
his own fall. No ulcer, or stone, or strangury is more painful to him, than
to fee others to go before him, or to keep pace with him, or to follow fast
after him.

Reproof of their folly, which choose a tedious and unhappy be without mercy
toward his people. It is an infallible and everlasting verity which the
Prophet testifies, that the horn of the Psalm, 11. 9, 10.
righteous shall be exhalted with glory, the wicked shall see it and be angry he
shall gnash with his teeth, and consume away: the desire of the wicked shall
perish.

Jnstruction to fence and fortify our selves against this dirall and

Verse. 31. He that oppresses the poor reproacheth him that made him, but he
that shows mercy to the poor does honor him. BY poor) he means not
only such as live in want and penury but those which are under the burden of
any other afflictions and unable to defend themselves: and by oppression he
understands all kind of hard dealing, whether it be by craft or force, or
false accusations and slanders, or bitter and contumelious speeches to bring
them into contempt or hatred: He that thus wrongeth any distressed person
reprocheth him that made him, that is, the Lord who has allotted to him that
poor estate But he that shows mercy to the poor, which does good, and
ministers comfort to them that are in misery, by helping the Lords servants,
declares his love and estimation of the Lord their master.

All the wrong that is offered to the poor, the Lord does take as done to
himself.

Though in the sight of the world they seem forlorn persons, without any
friends to take their sufferings to heart, and in appearance sees nothing but
safety in trampling upon them, yet God professes his tender care so far
toward them, as that he makes their case his case: and their friends his
friends, and reputeth them for his soes that declare themselves to be theirs.
In an other chapter not only they are charged with contempt of him, that
practice mischief against them, or violently work them woe, Prou, 17, 5.
and sorrow, but it is said, that he also which macketh the poor dispiseth him
that made him.

First his commandment is thereby violated and broken: for Zachary tells
the people of his time, what duty the Lord required by the former prophets
before the captivity, and what message was committed to him now, after their
return, and that was, Execute ye true Zach. 7. 9. 10.
judgment, and show mercy and compassion, every man to his brother. And
oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger nor the poor.

Secondly, he has undertaken to be their gordian and keeper,

Thirdly, our text yields a forcible reason, why they which oppress the
poor do in like manner despise the Lord, because he is their creator: in
respect of their persons they are the work of his hands: and in respect of
their condition, they are also his handy work as Hannah fang, The Lord makes
poor, and makes 1. Sam. 2. 7.
rich: he brings low, and exhalteth. So that if they wrong them as men, they
misuse his creatures, which have their form and being from him: if as poor
men, they disgrace his workmanship in shaping them such a state.

Terror for cruel me^, who use, as the prophet says, to grind the faces of
the poor, and tread upon their heads: for they ouermatch themselves
infinitely, and bid battle to him that will crush them in pieces with his
countenance. The less power they have to defend themselves, the more he
exercises for their defense: the weaken they be, and more unable to resist
their adversaries, the stronger he will show himself to be and more ready to
destroy their adversaries. Men think it easiest to go over where the hedge
is lowest, and most safe to press down them that are least friended, but they
will wish in the end, that they had rather climbed over the tops of trees, and
provoked those which have greatest potentates to take their parts. They shall
find it their folly to contemn Salamons wise precepts, and it will turn to
their pain that they cast themselves into such perilles. Rob not, Prou: 12. 12
faith he, the poor because he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in
judgment. For the Lord will defend their cause and spoil the soul of those
that spoil them. And again in an other place, he repeateth the same matter in
other words, saying, Remove not the ancient Prou. 13. 10: 11
bounds, and enter not into the field of the fatherless. For he that
redeemeth them is mighti^: he will defend their cause against thee. If it be
then so dangerous to wrong men because they be poor, how perilous is it to
persecute them because they be poor and godly? If for this cause oppressors
be reputed despisers of God for that they lift up their hands against his
pupils, how much more shall they be counted his enemies when they deal cruelly
with his children? when they strike at the members of his body? when they
attempt to scratch out his eyes? As Zachary speakeh, He that touches you,
touches the apple of his eye. If so severe a Zachar, 2, 8.
sentence shall be passed upon them at the last day that neglect to comfort and
relieve him in his members, shall there not be a far more heavy punishment
inflicted upon those which shall wou^d Mat. 25.
and spoil him therein?

Instruction to them that be poor and oppressed to contain the^selue; Ecclc.
5. 7.
purpose, or with no truth animate us against such grieuances, when it says,
If in a country thou see the oppression of the poor, and the defranding of
judgment and justice, be not astonished at the matter: for he that is higher
than the highest, regards, and there be higher than they.

Consolation to the poor and afflicted, especially if they be the members of
Christ, howsoever they are discountenanced of men, and rejected of the world,
as refuses whom it world willingly be rid of, yet they are more esteemed of
him, whose estimatro^ is more worth, tha^ all the mightiest worldlings. Ab^athar
thought himself in good safeguard, though Saul sought his life, when David told
him that the enemy which came against one of the^ should be common to them
both, and yet David himself who must defend Abiathar, was pursued by the King,
and in peril of his own life, how great cause then of boldness and encouragement
have they, whom David's keeper does keep and protect, which takes their cause
for his cause, their wro^gs for his reproach, the hurts do^ne to the^ for
defya^ce bid to himself? And what a grace and favor is this on the otherside,
to his poor servants that he chooses to be honored and served by the mercy
and compassion that is showed unto them? do hoe not thereby-assure, and induce,
inioyne, and bind all his people to do them good? It serves also for the
great comfort of every good man that is pitiful and helping to them that be
needy and distressed. It is accepted of the Lord Jesus Christ as if it were a
benevolence to his own person, I was an hungered says he, and ye gave me
meat: J thirsted and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye lodged me; I
was naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in
prison, and ye came unto me. And being asked by the righteous, when and how
this kindness by them was showed unto him, he tells them, that inasmuch as
they did it to one of the least of his brethren, they have done it to him We
think it a great preferment (as there is cause, why we should) for Mar^^
Magdalen, and other women to minister unto him of their substance: and for
Martha and Mary to have him for their ghuest, and for the woman in Bothania to
power the ointment on his head: and for Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicode^^s to
bury him, and why then should it be counted a matter of no value (since it is a
prerogative not much inferior to those before specified) to have a merciful
heart, and liberal hand in succouring and relieuing his members? Diverse of the
Pharisees and other ungodly men, as it may seem, gave him entertainment in
their houses, and had him to dinner, and neither yielded honor to him, nor
received praise from him, nor ever shall be rewarded by him: but none that is
merciful to any of his, though never so mean and despised, shall be passed by
without acknowledgement, nor sent away without recompense. Whatsoever is lent
unto them in compassion, is bestowed upon him in regard of acceptance, and
whatsoever is bestowed on them in pity, is lent unto him in regard of
repaiment.

Verse. 32. The wicked man is pursued in his misery, but the rightious has
hope in his death. THe wicked is pursued) the word which we translate
pursued, signifies to be thrust ^t, or to throw down, meaning that when his
calamity once begins, he shall be driven on forwards until he fall into
destruction. But the state of the righteous is contrary, for he has hope, that
is, not only confidence and good expectation, but refuge and deliverance in
greatest extremities, yea in the very danger and torment of death it self, yea
than especially and more than ever at any time before.

When godless men stand in greatest need of help and comfort, they shall
be most of all pressed with plagues, and terrors.

The imprecacion which David made against his enemies may stand for a
co^mination against al Gods enemies, that when they Psalm, 35. 5, 6.
are become chafe, or dust, the wind shall rise and blow them away: and when
they walk in ways that be dark and slipperie, the Angel of the Lord shall
persecute them. We read of diverse kings and Canaanites which came to destroy
the Gybeonites, because they entered into league with Israel, that first they
were discomfited Joshua, 10, 11.
by Joshua, then they fled in fear, and great confusion, and then fell great
hailstones upon them, and so they perished. Jn the some case or as bad was
Sisera, who being vanquished by Barak was driven from him his chariot, and
army, to take himself Judges. 4*
to his heels, and fly away alone, in dread and danger, being weary and
thirsty: and where he hoped for help, there felt he hurt; and wheme he
took for his friend, and preserver of his life, he found to be his foe, and
worker of his death.

And nothing better went the world with Saul, who for want of answer from God
in his calamities, was driven to ask counsel of the Devil: and then was
daunted with threatenings, and afterward wounded with weapons, having the
Philistims against 1. Sam. 31.
him, and the Lord against him, and his conscience against him, and his own
heart, and his own hand, and his own sword, and all to hasten his own
destruction.

First, they reject all admonitions one after another, and will

Secondly, many of them incessantly and proudely follow as many, and as fast
after them, which shall never leave them until they have brought them to
ruin. So it is said of that Romish and whoorish Babylon, that idolatrous
kingdom of Antichrist: Revel. 18. 7: 8.
Inasmuch as she glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, so much give ye to
her torment and sorrow: for she says in her heart, I fit being a Queen, and
am no widdowe, and shall see no mourning. Therefore shall her plagues come at
one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire.

Thirdly, the most part of wicked men, by word or deed, it is a righteous
thing with God, as the Apostle says, to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble 2. These. 1. 6:
his people, and to cast down those which thrust so sore at his servants.

Admonition to every man, so to demean himself in time of Haman, when he
sunk into adversity, as his pride and presumption, while he swimmed in
prosperity? Down would he have the whole Church, and all the people of God,
both men, women, and children, and therefore down must Haman himself come
into reproach and disgrace. And then how many tongues were against him? how
many feet were upon him? and how much anxiety and horror was in him? His wife
forespeaketh him, the Queen accuses him, the Eunuch conuinceth him, the king
condemns him, the executiones hangs him, and the Lord destroys him.

But the righteous, etc. No danger nor death can take away the

It stands not with the will and wisdom of the Almighty to exempt his
servants wholly from troubles, and to free them altogether from fears: for
they are ofttimes very needful and expedient, but it is most agreeable with
his providence, and best for the praise of his power to preserve and deliver
them when they are in distresses. Many are the promises which to this purpose
are made by God, and manifold are the professions which holy men make of their
confidence therein, both in the old and new testament. As for example, Job
says, though the Lord should Job. 13. 15:
slaie me, yet would I trust in him still. And the Psalmist says, God Psalm.
46, 1:
is our hope and strength, and help in troubles ready to be found. Therefore
will not we fear, though the earth be moved, and the mountains fall into the
midst of the sea. Though the waters be troubled, Romans 8: 35.
and the mountains shake at the surges of the same. And saint Paul says, Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written,
for thy sake are we killed all the day long: we are counted as sheep for the
slaughter. Nevertheless in all these things we are more than conquerours
through him that loved us.

First, because it is not in the power of troubles, temptations, David's enemies
could hinder him for a time from going to the Temple, but not one moment from
repairing to heaven: they would not suffer him to bring his sacrifices to the
Altar but they could not withholde him from presenting his petitions in Gods
presence. That he might do, and that he did, and that he found a mean of his
help and succor. His distresses were exceeding great: his supplications were
very fervent: and his deliverance was marvelous comfortable. And so much
himself acknowledges, or rather the Lord by him does testify, saying; The
sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of wickedness Psalm,. 18. 4. 5.
6. 16.
made me afraid. The sorrows of the grave have compassed me about; the snares
of death ouertooke me. But in my trouble I did call upon the Lord, and cried
unto my God; he heard my voice out of his Temple, and my cry did come before
him, even into his ears. He has sent down from above, and taken me; he has
drawn me out of many waters, etc,

Secondly, the Lord loves his people as well, and is as well able

Thirdly, our Savior Christ has so vanquished the power of

Fourthly, death is so far from depriving the godly of the

Instruction to strive against that timerousnes and want of courage David's
afflictions, or Paul's, to be partakers of Paul's felicity or David's? who does
not think that well it is with the martyrs now, though their bodies were burnt
once, since their souls enjoy such glory? If according to the Apostles
direction we could divert our eyes from looking on temporal things which are
seen, to the contemplation of everlasting things which are not seen, we should
think those momentany affections light* in comparison of that far most
excellent weight of glory which they cause unto us. And even for the present,
they are nothing so heavy to them that have faith to behold Gods helping hand
therein, as to flesh and blood they seem to be. And thereof let the Apostle
testify his own experience, who had as great a load laid upon him, as almost
upon any that can be named. We are says he, afflicted on every side, yet are
we not in distress, in poverty, but not overcome of poverty, we are
persecuted, but not forsaken: and cast down, but perish not.

Consolation to the faithful against death, whereof there is Isai tells us,
that righteous men dye, and merciful men Isai. 57. 1* 2:
are taken away, not to come into evil, but to escape the evil to come: not
to lose their peace, and to fall into troubles, but to be freed from troubles,
and to enjoy peace: and that the grave i^ a bed for the body, wherein it
lodges and rests, and sleeps. And as for the soul how vnutterably happy
and blessed, is the state thereof? What Pen can describe, or what tongue can
recount, or what heart can apprehend the exceeding greatness of the joy which it
possesses* It is delivered from sorrow and pain, from hunger and thirst, from
cold and heat, from shame and contempt, from dread and danger, and that which
is most of all, and all in all, it is purged from sin and corruption for
ever. On the other side, that which it most desires, it has most plentiful*
fruition of, as of perfect righteousness, perfect holiness, glorious
companious, both of Angels, and souls of just men departed, continual
conversation with the Lord Jesus Christ, the face and favor of GOD never hid
from them, and we know what the Prophet says, that in his presence is Psalm.
16. 11.
the fullness of joy, and at his right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

Verse. 33. Wisdom rests in the heart of him th^^ has understanding, and
that which is in the heart of fools shall be known. Wisdom) that is, holy
and heavenly wisdom and grace, rests in the heart (continues therein, and
dwells as in her house and habitation) of him that has understanding,
namely, of every such one as is of sound judgment and sincere affection. And
that which is in the heart of fools shall be known, that sinfulnes and
corruption which they nourish in their souls, and take pleasure in, will
break out, and discover it self at one time or other. The agreement of the
two clauses together will the better appear if that be supplied which is
understood in each of them, which may be in this manner: Wisdom rests in the
heart of him that has understanding and will be manifested, and folly
inhabiteth in the heart of fools and shall be known.

In them only is grace well settled which give it entertainment

There she keeps residence, and there she rules, and thither she brings
her treasures and comforts, and every good thing that is to be wished for. And
therefore she calls for it, as most meet for her to possess, and safest for
every wise man to Prou: 23. 26.
yield unto her. My son, says she, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes
delight in my ways.

First, they and none other, have the virtue of the word and of When wisdom
enters into thine heart, and knowledge delights thy soul, then shall
counsel preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee, and deliver Prou.
2. 10: 11. 16.
thee from the evil way, and from the man that speaks froward things and
from them that leave the ways of righteousness, to walk in the ways of
darkness. And it shall deliver thee from the strange woman, even from the
stranger which flattereth with her words etc.

Secondly, they receive direction and willingness, and help to David, that the
mouth of the righteous will meditate wisdom, [that is, will Psa. 37. 30.
speak of wisdom whereof his heart has meditated) and his tongue will talk of
judgment. For the law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not
slide.

Thirdly, they have the constant and continual possession thereof wise men lay
up knowledge.

And that which* etc. The most secret and hidden corruptions of

That which is affirmed concerning the external actions and behavior, will be
as truly affirmed concerning the internal lusts and desires. It is said that
he which perceineth his ways shall Prou, 10, 9.
be known: and it is as sure also that he shall be known which corrupts his
heart.

First, the Lord knows all their inward thoughts and cogitations, and
purposes, and what they love, and what they hate, and he will lighten things
that 1 Cor, 4 5.
be hid in darkness: and he will make the counsels of the hearts manifest, and
he will bring every work unto judgment, with every Eccle, 12, 14.
secret thing, whether it be good or evil.

Secondly, God does give unto many of his servants the spirit David
professes so much of himself, saying, wickedness says of the wicked man,
even Psalm. 36, 1.
in mine heart that there is no fear of God before his eyes.

Thirdly, an evil heart will either sooner or later bewray himself

Instruction to cleanse our hearts from all folly and wickedness, least our names
be stained at last with reproach and infamy, If we would be ashamed to have
our uncleanness, or falsehood, or pride, or any kind of impiety, or naughtines
bud forth in our lives, beware how we suffer the roots thereof to grow in our
souls: If it be our disgrace that men should see the streams of sin issuing
out in the practice of our behavior, we can never be out of danger of
disgrace, so long as God beholds the fountain of sinfulnes springing in our
hearts. No Art nor wit can serve to keep it in, when occasions shall be
offered to draw it out. When Achitophell himself, though a most cunning
politician, would not take heed of secret disloyalty against David, he
could not but break out into open rebellion with Abshalom.

Verse. 34. Justice exalts a nation, but sin is shame to the people.
Justice, that is true religion and obedience to Gods holy commandments, and
the enacting, and executing of wholesome laws does exhalt a nation, causes
the inhabitants of well ordered common wealths, and countries, and cities, and
towns, to prosper, and be commended. But sin practiced and not punished, is a
shame to people, it brings to contempt, and makes them infamous, and draws
down judgments on the places where it is committed and tolerated.

Nothing does so much make for the prosperity of any state, as

Where the Lord both service duly performed to him, there the La^d shall have
his favors freely bestowed upon her: but if he be defrauded of his honor, it
shall be descated of his blessings, and feel his plagues, and judgments. It is
a worthy saying that is in the book of Chronicles, which Azariah the prophet
uttered to Asa, and his army, saying, O Asa, and all Judah, and Boniamin, here
ye me. The Lord is with you whiles you be with him: and if ye seek 2. Chron.
15. 2.
him, he will be found of you, but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. And
before that time Moses had foreshewn to every succeeding age and generation
what they should trust unto, and certainly look for: that is, if they would
obey the voice of the Lord their God, and keep his commandments, he would
make them the head, and not the tail, and they should be above only, and
not beneath: Deuteronomy. 28. 13. 43
If not their inferiors should climb above them on hie, and they should come
down beneath allow: their underlings should be the head and they should
become the tail.

First, it is the best way to procure plenty; for the Lord in regard He
turns the floods into a wilderness, Psalm. 107: 33 34.
and the springes of water into dryness, and a fruitful Land into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.

Secondly, it brings peace and safety as it is promised by Micah, that men
may break their swords into mattockes, and their Micah 4. 3: 4.
spears into sithes, and sit without fear under their vines and figtrees: or
if any adversary should rise up against them, to invade their country, or to
vex their borders, the Lord will work such courage and fortitude in them, as
that they shall be able valiantly to resist and repel all their enemies,
according as it is said, Leuit. 26: 8.
that five of them should chase an hundred, and an hundred of them should put
ten thousand to flight. Whereas if they provoke him with iniquities, and
pollute their land with sin, he will pursue them with perils, and plague
their land with wars and slaughter. This does Azariah prove by experience,
and puts them in mind of it, which saw the certainty of it, and knew it
to be true. Now, says he, for a long season Israel has been without the 2.
Chro. 15: 3: 5: 6:
true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without the Law. And in that time
there was no peace to him that did go out, and go in: but great troubles
were to all the inhabitants of the earth. For nation was destroyed of nation,
and City of City; for God troubled them with all aduersitio.

Thirdly, it obtains and preserves the lights and glory of a the life, or
defend the state of any prince, than his own goodness, and his subjects godly
behavior. That is continually, in every place a strong guard for his safe^y:
and that is the best physic for his health: thereby are worthy counselors,
and other subordinate ministers of justice protected, and thereby are godly
pastors, and fruitful ministers of the gospel established. But when a nation
is filled with impiety and sinfulness, it must be emptied of these treasures
and ornaments, as is threatened at large by the prophet, saying, The Lord God
of hoastes will take away from Jerusalem and from Judah the stay and the
strength. The Psai. 3. 1. 2: 3
strong man, and the man of war, the judge and the Prophet, the prudent, and
the aged, the captain of fifty, and the honorable, and the counselor, and
the cunning artificer, and the eloquent man. And I will appoint children to be
their princes, and babes shall rule over them

Instruction, that sithence justice and just men do help to advance for 1.
Pet. 2. 14
the punishment of evil dooers, as Saint Peter testifies, and the praise and
encouragement of them that do well. It shall be then a worthy service to
God, and a benefit and kindness to the whole kingdom, for them that have
authority so to use their authority, as that righteousness and piety may
prosper and flourish more and more, and all injustice and wickedness may be
suppressed and wither away.

Confutation of their opinion which dream that nothing can be disgraceful,
that is common, and general: whatsoever many by the allowance of many. And
that causes riot, and quasting, and garishnesse, and covetousness, and
execrable oaths, and impious sabbath breaking, and diverse other vices of like
nature, to be so little feared and so much committed. But how should a whole
people then, have sin turned to their shame, if the practice and consent of
the multitude could take away the shame of sin? The great number of biles, and
blanes, and botches, together, does not lesson the loathsomne* thereof, but
augment it. Neither is the face of any man or woman disfigured by three or
four pockhoales, and made beautiful by three or four score. Neither is a
garmente made the more handsome by having the more stains, or patches, or
rags, or rents upon it.

Verse. 35. The favor of a king is toward a wise servant: but his wrath shall
be toward him that causes shame. THe favor of a King, etc. Every wise king,
and all other Godly great personages, will take delight in, and show
countenance unto their servants, or officers, or any other that depend upon
them, so far as they shall find them diligent, obedient, discreet and
trusty, and therefore will also be ready to reward them according as their
faithful service shall deserve. But his wrath shall be toward him that
causes shame. He that by folly offends his governor, especially if he
discredit him and his house, by lewd prankes and misdemeanors, must look to
feel his masters displeasure and that with frowning checkes, chiding,
punishment, or displacing.

The honest and virtuous behavior of inferiors, is the best way to get the
favor of superiors.

By this means there are none solowe, which be not in way of preferment,
even very servants are like to grow to greatenesse, neither is any so
high, which will not respect them, even Kings themselves will take pleasure in
them. This is verified, by that which Solomon speaks in another Prou. 16. 13.
place, that righteous lips are the delight of Kings, and the King loves
him that speaks right things. If words well spoken be of such force to
procure so much good liking, and favor, it cannot be that works faithfully
wrought, should fail of as comfortable success to those that perform them.

First, the providence of God has a strong hand in disposing Nehemiah and
Daniell, and many others have found to their honor and comfort.

Secondly, the grace and fear of God prevails with Christian governors to
love, and choose, and make much of, and prefer David did after a sort vow the
conscionable care of this duty, when he said, My eyes shall be unto the
faithful of the land, that they may dwell with Psa. 101. 6. 7.
me: he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me. There shall no
deceiptfull person dwell within mine house; he that tells lies shall not
remain in my sight.

The gain that wise and godly men's services do yield to their Laban saw and
acknowledged in the labors of Jacob, and therefore was so unwilling for many
years, to part with him, and that Potiphar, and the keeper of the prison, and
Pharao, and all that employed Joseph well perceived: forasmuch as their houses
were blessed for Joseph's sake, and their estates did prosper by Joseph's means.

First, for inferiors, it se^ueth to confute their erroneous conceit
greatest makebates between Masters and servants, and the only hinderers of
all preferment. But commonly they that so seek to rise, be either kept from
promotions, and so defeated of their hopes, or fall from their dignities, and
so are overthrown by their sins, when they which seem to lie open to all
contempt for their profession, are usually most regarded for their uprightness
and honesty. Wicked Haman being the worst of all that were about Ahashuerus
was for a time the nearest unto him, and good Mordecai which was most
faithful, was most hardly proceeded against, as being proscribed, and
destinated to death with all the nation that he came of, for his sake, and yet
Haman could not still stand in that high estimation nor Mordecaie lie long
under that heavy disgrace, but down must Haman, with the kings indignation into
a shameful destruction, and up must Mordecay with the kings especial favor,
to a supereminent place of authority. And albeit it come often to pass, that
bad servants be too much made of, yet it is to their greater hurt at last, and
though good servants have bad requital at their masters hands, yet their best
master the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom they perform their service, in doing
their inferior masters work, will in due time recompense them with a better
reward.

Secondly, for superiors, it serves to instruct them to do that praise for
the virtues of their people: and by suffering misbehauiour in their houses or
charges without punishment, all the faults of their inferiors do turn to
their reproach. For if sin be a shame to a whole people, as the former verse
testifies, how can it but be ignominious also to a familye, and the Master
thereof, as experience declares?

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 4. line 21. for commands read commends. page. 20 line 34. for
contrutions read contentions. page. 32. line 4. for protection read
protraction. page. 34. line 10 for mystery read misery, page 39. line 32 for
premisted read premised. page 40. line 19. for gills read wills. page 44.
line 29. for displeasures read pleasures. page 48. line 22. for fittes read
fifties ibid line 35. for does read would page 49 line 4 for says read sees.
page. 50, line 13 for his read this. page 68. line 3. for thine read their.
ibid. line. 4. for all that they, read all that they have. page 83. last line
for mischance read mischief. page 115. line 6. for objection read abiection
page. 121. line 23. for seat read state.


