THE BRIGHT STAR WHICH LEADS wise men to our Lord Jesus Christ: OR A
familiar and learned exposition on the ten Commandments: gathered from the
mouth of a faithful Pastor: by a gracious young man, sometime scholar in
Cambridge.

Ruth. 2. 17. Ruth gleaned, and carried it home to her mother. LAEORE ET
CONSTANTIA
woodcut, printer's seal

LONDON. Imprinted by John Harison for Thomas Man, dwelling in Pater Noster
Row, at the sign of the Talbot.

1603.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, the good providence of God has vouchsafed thee benefit
abroad, by the labors of a reverent faithful Pastor, which he meant only to
his own flock at home. These fruitful doctrines which in this book are
offered to thee, were received from his mouth, but neither penned nor perused
by himself, nor published with his consent or knowledge: for had he been
willing that they should be exposed to open view, he would have garnished them
with richer attire, and yet with modesty according to the Apostles rule, 1.
Cor. 2. 1. Without affected excellency of words or carnal wisdom. They were
collected by a godly ingenious young man, whose diligent attention and
painefulnes, deserne no small commendations: yet what hand or memory can
follow so fast the fluent speech of an eloquent Preacher, as to set down all
in the same form and elegancie wherein it is delivered? Moreover, at the
printing diverse faults have escaped, both of Orthographie, poynting, and
method in some places. But howsoever it is, a religious and well seasoned heart
will find and feel herein such comfort and light, as that light and slender
defects will easily be passed over. And let not God be defrauded of his due
praise, who has multiplied that food to feast so many, which of man was
appointed to feed so few. And here is that in some degree verified, which
(...) Savior foretold his Disciples, Luke 12. 3^ What ye have spoken in
darkness shall be heard in light, and that which ye have spoken in the ear
in secret places, shall be heard on the houses. Well good reader, let this and
such other wholesome writings kindle thy desire to the preaching of the word,
that thou may be more frequent in hearing, and judicious in understanding.
Beware thou grow not conceited of a sufficiency to be found in reading good
books, and so begin to distaste the Ministry: they are not ordained to kill
our appetites to the word, but to sharpen them. And so I commend thee to the
Lord, who of his mercy grant thee wisdom, with good success to thy
everlasting happiness, thorough Jesus Christ.

Thine in the Lord, R. C.

A necessary Table, referring the Reader to the principal matters contained
in this book.
A.
Abundance of love breeds abundance of patience. Fol. 20 Abraham's offering up
of Isaac. 33. his courtesy. 46 Abusing of Gods titles. 49 Abusing of his
properties. 50 Adams disobedience. 3. 98 Adultery. 53. 54. 55 Agnus Dei. 38
Ahabs sin. 38 All disorders of the second Table, from the fifth command. 1 All
duties contained in the commandments. 2 All scripture proceeds from God. 1
Anger. 48. 40.
B
BEginning of wisdom fear of God. 20 Behavior of a christian. 54 Benefits
by the love of man and wife. 19 Blessing for keeping the Saboth. 90 Body
abused. 57
C
Carnal reason. 22 Charms and spells. 48 Children of God must not faint. 11
Children. 41. 2. Christ came to obey the laws. 3 Christ Jesus Lord of the
Saboth. 64 Christians. 54 Commandment, first. 1 Commandment, second. 28
Commandment, third. 43 Commandment, fourth. 61 Commandment, fifth. 1
Commandment, sixth. 37 Commandment, seventh. 51 Commandment, eight. 57
Commandment, ninth. 80 Commandment, tenth. 97 Comparison between the laws of
God and men. 2 Commandment broken as well by omission as commission. 55
Confession of sin. 56 Contentedness ones estate. 73 Compassion. 45
Correction for children. 6. It must be done with compassion. 8. With prayer.
ibidem. Covetousness. 51. 68. 69. 100
D
Day of judgment. 47 Damnable to spend time idely. 71 David is persuaded by
Abigail. 4. his presumptuous sin. 7 Death. 47 Delight in Gods commandments. 25
Deliverance from Pharaoh. 11 Disobedience to God. 40 Devil. 47. 86. He is the
author of oat 51 Drunkenness. 51 Duties of a child. 3 Duties of servants. 11
Duties of husbands and wives. 19. 21. 22 Duties of public persons. 25 Duties
of Majestrates and people. 29
E
ELI his to much love to his children. 13 Eli his patience. 57 Elder persons
duty. 33 Enemies of Daniel. 84 Enclosers of land. 70 Evil conscience. 80
Envy. 40. The causes thereof. ibid. Envy, murderer of him self. 41 Envy
guilty of murder, two ways. ibid. Examples of obedience. 6
F
FAlse swearing. 53 False witness. 89 Faithfulness in servants. 13. In
husband and wife. 21 Fasting. 36 Fear of God. 19. 50 Flattery. Flatterers.
91. 93 Foolishness and uncharitableness, the cause of ill suspicion. 81
Fruits of the spirit. 10 Frugalitie. 74
G
GEsture offensive. 41 Glorifying of God in words. 55 Gods nature. 1 God is
Jehovah, and why. 8 Gods benefits general special. ibid. God the author of
the ten commandments. ibid. Gods cursings and blessings. 3. His goodness. 9.
His insight into man. 14 Gods name taken in vain. 44 Governors must see the
Saboth kept. 8
H
HAbakucks fear of God. 23 Hearing. 36 Herod's incest. 5 He that breaks one
commandment breaks all. 6 Hezechias patience. 57 Honesty. 29 How to employ
the Scriptures. 49 Humility. 39 Husbands must dwell with their wives. 22.
Edify them by example. 23. By instructions. ibid. He must honor her which
consists in two things. 24
I
Jacobs trust in God. 26. His Obedience. 5 Jacobs diligence. 6 Jehovah what it
signifies. 7 Iealouzie what. 37 I am thy God, what it implies. ibid. Idleness, a
sin of Adam. 72 Idleness. 65. 75 Idle persons pouerties prisoners. ibid.
Images forbidden. 29 Images are teachers of lies. 33 Idolatry, Idols. ibid.
34. Instructions for householders. 82 Instructions for servants. 83 Inferior
gifts. 32 Jobs mildness. 3. his zeal. 15. his patience. 57. his fear. 25.
his trust. 27 Joseph's fear of God. 20. His duty to his father. 3 Isaie his
fear. 21. 25 Justice. 49. It consists in getting and restoring. 73
K
KEeping of the Saboth day holy, in what it consists. 73 Kinds of liars two.
90 Kings. 29 Kings chosen by lots. 39 Knowledge of God wanting, all
disobedience grows. 16
L
Laziness. 57 Liberality. 75 Lies against ones self. 85 Lying tongues make
three mortal wounds. 87 Life of man consists in the blessing of God. 74
Lots. 36 Love. 17. Love of God. 18 Love to servants and children. 81 Love of
the husband to the wife. 19 Love is armor against jealousy. 20 Lusting after
other men's goods. 57
M
MAnasses repentance. 8 Manna 78 Marriage. 57. Maraiage for children. 8 Mary
Magdalen. 78 Means to avoid adultery 54. 55 Meditation on the word. 16
Meditation on Gods curses necessary. ibid. Masters. 11. 19. 101 Mercy, power,
justice infinite in God. 8 Mercy to the needy. 48 Ministers duty. 25. they
must be good examples. 29 Moses and Aron. 88 Moses patience. 12 his staff and
the power thereof. 88 Mothers duty to her children. 8 Murder either secret or
open. 43
N
NAture of man. 20 Nature of the Storke. 5 Nabuchadnezzar. 88. 89. 32.
Neighbors. 97. they must be loved as our selves. 44. Nehemiah commended. 84
Night of the sabbath to be spent holilie 72 Note of the fear of God is fear
of his word. 23
O
OAth. 36. 51. Oath lawful. 57 Obedience 17 Obedience to God must come from
the heart. 5 Obedience of children. 3 Obedience of the wife. 22 Offense in
words. 41
P
PAtience. 11 Papists care little for the sabbath. 6 Papists superstitions. 35
Parents. 40. 2 Parents duty to their children. 7 Paul his fear. 20 Perfect
love casts out fear. 19 Perjury. 53 Peoples duty. 25 Peace a branch of
meekenes. 44 Prayer. 36. 67. 74. Prayer for Parents. 6 Preparation to the first
commandment. 1 Pride. 50 Punishments for breaking the sabbath. 71. 78
R
REading the word. 36 Receiving of the sacrament. ibid. Reason of the second
commandment. 37 Remembrance of the sabbath day. 70 Reasons why to obey the
sabbath. 74 Reverence of children. 3 Repentance. 67. 88 Rewards for keeping the
sabbath. 72 Riches improfitable. 59 Rules to be observed in correction of
servants. 17
S
SAboth day why consecrated. 90 Saboth day. 61. 62. Instituted in Paradise. 63.
First the day of rest. 65. Now the Lords day and why. ibid. Sacraments. 17. 82
Salomons duty to his mother. 3 Servants. 55. 11. Their service of God. 13
Servants more to be regarded then goods. 100 Sin. 98 Speech. 46 Spells. 48
Spirit of God the spirit of truth. 90 Subjects duty. 29 Superiors in gifts. 32
Suretiship. 67 Suspicion. 94 Superstition the hatred of God. 39 Strange Gods.
13 Strange apparel. 57 Swearing. 51. swearing wickedly 52
T
THe law delivered. 1 The tables broken. 2 The works of the Trinity. 2
Thankfulness of children. 3. it consists in two things. 5 The fear of the
three children in the furnace. 24 The brazen Serpent. 33 The Cherubines. ibid.
Theft. 71. 72 Temperance in meat and drink. 53 To avoid idolatry is to avoid
Idols. 31 To honor what. 1 Trust in God. 26 Truth. 96
V
Vain swearing. 52 Vain iangling. 46 Vineyard of God. ibid. Visitation of the
sick a private work of the sabbath. 73 Vnreuerent speeches of Gods works. 51
Uncleanness two fold. 56 Vows when to be used. 36 Use of Gods words. 47
W
Wantonness. 57 What God hates hating the world. 78 What it is to fear God.
20 What to be done on the sabbath day. 71 We must love God. 16 We must not
be discouraged wanting means. 71 Why children should first fear their
mother. 3 Wherein children must obey their parents. 4 Wicked impiety to make
an image of Christ. 32 Worshipping of Images. 34 Word of God. 47 Wonders in
Aegipt. 88 Worldly crosses. 11
Z
ZAcharies vprightnes. 7 Ziphi^^. 84
FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION UPON THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.
Exodus 20. 1. God spoke these words, and said, I am the Lord thy God, which
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
THESE words contain a preparation to stir us up to keep the law of God,
partly in general, to all the keeping of all the commandments. Partly more
specially, to the keeping of the first. That preparatiue which pertaines
generally to all, is in these words God spoke. It seeeth they have God for the
author of them, therefore we must settle our selves to obey them without
gainsaying, because God will not be disputed withal. The preparation to the
first commandment, more specially is drawn partly from the nature of God,
partly from his benefits. His nature, where he says, I am Jehovah, which
signifies the essence of God, incommunicable to any creature. From his
benefits, either general in those words thy God. i. One that have bound my
self in covenant with thee, to be thine, and to do thee good in matters for
this life, and the life to come. Or else special in the last words, which
have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, signifieng that he had proved and
showed, himself to be their God, by drawing them out of that bondage, and
because the mercy of God might more appear in their deliverance, he shows
the grieuousnesse of the state, out of the which he delivered them, it was an
house of bondage, i. a place of most extreme slavery. Since he is thy God
then, and has been so kind unto thee, thou must willingly acknowledge him
and him only to be thy God.

God spoke these words.
In that it brings the author of these words, he says God spoke them. This
doctrine arises to us, that God is after a special the author of the ten
commandments, they are his words more specially then any other. And as all
scripture is to be regarded as proceeding from God, so more especially these
ten words, because they be after a more peculiar sort Gods words.

That this is so, it is proved plainly in Deuter. five. verse two and
twenty. Where Moses having repeated this law, sets down two privileges that
it had above all other scripture, to win the more authority unto it. First,
he says these words, the Lord spoke unto all your multitude, noteing this
unto them, that whereas the ceremonial and indiciall laws were delivered by
the ministry of Angels, and the other scriptures, by the means of the men of
God the Prophets, these words and these commandments, God himself, as it
were in his own person full of Magestie and terror, accompanied with all his
Angels, in a flame of fire, did pronounce so terribly in the bearing of them
all, as that they trembled, and came to Moses, requesting him that they might
no more hear God speaking on this manner, for if they did assuredly they
should die for fear, wherefore in this first regard they must be exceedingly
reverenced, because Gods own voice did speak them.

Secondly, for the writing of them, they were not written as other scriptures,
which Saint Peter says, holy men of God write according to the instinct of
Gods holy spirit within them, but God him self did write them, as it were with
his own finger, not using thereto either men or Angels as instruments. Yea at
the first he made the Tables himself also, (that there might be nothing
seen, wherein was not the immediate work of God,) wherein they were written,
but afterward when Moses brake them before the Isralites, that had made the
goulden Calfe, to show that they by their idolatry had broken the covenant,
and were vvorthie to be cast off, then though God did bid Moses make the
second Tables, yet himself write the law, not using thereto the ministry of
any of his creatures, showing that in this regard they be more specially GODS
words, and so more to be regarded: And besides this testimony, diverse
reasons may be used, to show that these are GODS own invention, and words
after an extraordinary manner.

For first, the wonderful and perfect holiness that is contained in them,
shows who is the first founder of them. Because there is no good duty, which
God bound Adam to perform, but it is comprehended and commanded in one of
these, and there is no sin, that we are bound to abstain from and eschew,
which is not forbidden, in some one of these ten words. It was above the
wit of men or Angels to contain in so few words, the whole perfection of
our duty; to God and man.

The laws of men, though they fill many large books and great volumnes, yet
they are imperfect, and do continually stand in need to have some increasing
or deminishing, and daily some thing is added to them, that was not before
thought upon, and some things be taken away, which now more experience has
proved not to be so profitable, so that yet they still stand in need of
renewing and mending. But now, this Law is so absolute and does set forth so
full and complete a righteousness, that if one could keep them all, he
should be fully acceptable unto God and needed not fly to Christ, to be his
redeemer. For indeed this meets with all sins, yea with the first and least
motions, as Paul says, that he had not known, that lust, (meaning the
motions of original concupisence) had been sin, but that the law says,
thou shall not lust. And as their perfection of holiness does witness
sufficiently from what an one they had their beginning. So secondly this will
prove them to be the words of God, because they be ingraffed and written and
engraven in every man's conscience, so that let wicked men shuffle and take one,
and keep what stir they can to make themselves Atheists, yet it will not be,
they cannot blot out Gods writing. These laws stick imprinted in their hearts
and souls, so firmly, as they cannot be removed. For as Paul says, in the
Acts. 17. God has not left himself without witness, but in every man's bosom
and in every ones nature, has planted so much of this his law, as will serve
to leave them without excuse, and to condemn them. For who is there among the
most profane and absurd of men, whose soul does not constrain him even
against his will sometimes, to confess that there is a God, and one only true
God, and that this God is to be worshipped also, so as is most pleasing to him,
and that he is not to be blasphemed, nor his name to be abused, but that he
is to be reverenced, and sometimes to be set a part and consecrated to his
worship who can blurre out these laws out of themselves? do they what they
can and, strive they never so much to choke these seeds of knowledge. So for
the second table, of them, what man's nature does not tell him, that there is an
order of government amongst men, which must not, nor cannot, without sin be
violated, and so heathen and profane ungodly men, having committed murdure,
were not able to stand before the fury of their own conscience, but were in a
continual chase and vexation, which shows that even corrupt nature brings
with it, this knowledge into the world, that one must not kill. And for filthy
persons and adulterers, though in time of their prosperity, they have soothed
up themselves, and hardened their own hearts, by living in pleasure, and giving
themselves to idleness, and the lusts of their hearts, and so seemed to blot
out this law, yet in misery when any affliction has wakened their drowsy
hearts, and consciences, these would give them no rest nor they durst not abide
the face of their own conscience, but are driven to acknowledge the
filthiness of their sins. Besides this place that they have in man's nature,
which proves they came from God, man's Lord. This also proves them to be his,
because all the punishments that are at any time inflicted upon the world, have
come from the disobedience against this law, and all the blessings and
benefits that men enjoy, do proceed from the disobedience yielded to it. For
when God sets down his curses and his blessings, are they not all grounded on
this law? does it not run thus, if thou observe and keep this law then thou
shall be blessed in soul, in body, in children, in cattle, in field, in all
things thou put thine hand unto. Contrarily, if thou will not obey, but
neglectest these, then shall thou be cursed in body, in soul, in children,
in all thou putst thine hand unto. So that since God has so great care to
punish those that rebel against these laws, and to reward those that perform
obedience to them, it proves that he is the lawmaker, and that though the law
be brief in words, yet it is full of matter, and much to be marked and thought
on.

Lastly, Christ himself came into the world, to perform obedience to these
laws. For they require a perfect and absolute obedience, as they are perfect,
which since no man could do, therefore Christ took our flesh upon him to
fufill them, that as Adam by his disobedience had cast us out of Paradise, so
he by his obedience might let us into heaven, and he came not only to obey
them himself fully, but also to make his Saints able to obey them to, though
not in perfection and without any defect, (for that only he himself can do)
yet in truth and perfect sincerity: for that he requires all his children and
members to do. So that these reasons will confirm that which was said before,
that the ten commandments be after a perculiar sort the words of God, and do
more peculiarly challenge him for their author.

The use that we must make of this to our selves, is to teach us, first to
hearken unto them, and willingly to here the rebukes and admonitions, that are
contained in them, whosoever and whatsoever he be that applies them and
speaks them unto. And indeed hence we shall show our selves in truth, to
believe that God is the author of these words, if we can be content to bear,
that these precepts should be pressed and urged upon us, though by one that is
our inferior and baser in outward respect, then our selves. And this affection
was in Job, as he testifies of himself in his 31. Chap. 34. ver. That though
he was a man of such wealth and authority, as he could have made afraid a
great multitude, and could have crushed them by his power, yet the poorest and
most contemtible of his family, might have dealt with him, and if he had
seen any fault in him (as who lives so justly but sometimes those that be
about may see infirmities in him,) and had come to tell him that he had broken
the law of God, he would have been quiet and mild, and would have been so
far from fearing them with big words as that himself would fear
before GOD, and labor to get pardon, he would not chafe with his servants
that had brought Gods law to him, and said what have thou to do to meddle
with me, who gave thee authority to control thy master, but he would
control himself, and would not go out of his doors to complain of his
servants injury, but he would complain to God of him self that had broken
his Law, and done injury to his Majesty.

The like may we see in that holy man David, who though he was a King
anointed at Gods appointment, and one of excellent gifts, a valiant
warrior, and had four hundred men well appointed waiting on him, yet when
Abigail a woman and mean in comparison of him, came alone, and brought with
her the sword of the spirit the law of GOD, that it was not lawful for him to
commit murder, and to revenge his own cause. What though Nabal had done
injury, she denies not but he was as his name signified, a fool, and the
fool had done foolishlie, that was not the question though, but this she
would know of David, whether he might lawfully kill one in his own private
revenge contrary to the law of of GOD.

Now when David sees that she comes so well appointed and brings such strong
reasons, and that he could not rush on Nabals blood but he should rush upon
the sword of GOD, and God would plague him: he would none, but leaves of, and
thanks her for her good counsel. So that when she brought the law of GOD for
her vvarrant, this was so good a vvarrant, as that David durst not but yield
to it, though he was a King and a Prophet, and a man of most excellent gifts
every way, and she but a woman, and far his inferior in graces.

Contrary to this was the spirit of wicked Amaziah, that when he most
absurdly, had (having chased the Edomits) taken their gods and worshipped
them, and set them up as means to help him in the service of GOD, and God sent
the Prophet to him to tell him that he had dealt foolishly to worship those
gods that could not save their own people out of his hands, why he now, could
not bear this but begins to mock, who says he, I pray you, made you of the
Kings counsel, are you become a counselor now to tell the King what he has
to do, go to, hold your peace least you be smitten for your pains.

The Prophet sees him to despise the rebuke of God, and then he would not
bestow so much cost as to give him any more admonition on him, but well says
he, I will hold my peace as you bid me, but know that thou shall surely
perish because thou have done this thing, and not hearkened to my counsel,
though it was foolish and naught in him to do that thing, yet if he could
have hearkened to the Prophet of GOD bringing the law of GOD, he had been on
the mending hand, and all would have been well, but when he would do
sinfully and then refuse to be admonished, then in truth he must needs be
destroyed.

And so he was shortly after, most fearfully and strangely by the hand GOD,
and neither his kingdom nor his wealth nor any thing could keep off the
judgment of GOD and destruction from him.

So then will we show that we do in truth beeleeue that these be the
words of GOD, we must when any man shall press any of these laws unto us,
straight ways yield and stoup unto them, and we do then confess that GOD
spoke all these words, but if one begin to shift and cloak and color and
distinguish, then he declares evidently that his heart is not persuaded that
God is the author of these laws.

The second use that we must make of this, that God spoke all these words is,
that therefore we must not be afraid nor ashamed to stand for them, and
defend them, as also to practice them in our lives, though the Atheists and the
profane swine of the world, mock and scoff at us never so much for the same.
For what need we be ashamed to maintain those words* which God himself was
not ashamed in his own person to speak. If we do, remember what Christ
says, he that is ashamed of me, before men in this world, I will be ashamed
of him, before my father in the world to come. If God had but sent his Angels
unto us, with any commandment, the gloriousness of such messengers, should
have might to make us bold to defend and stand for the message, but since God
did not send an host of Angels, but came himself in his Magestie, accompanied
with all his holy Angels, attending and waiting one him, should we not now
give much more reverence to those things which he spoke, and take much more
courage, to stand for the maintenance of his commandments?

This serves therefore exceedingly to condemn their dastardlynesse, that are
afraid to keep the sabbath, or to do any such duty, because they should be
counted puritanes. But is it not better that men should hate us without cause,
then that God should have a quarrel against us, upon a just cause, is not it
much better that they should scoff at us for good, then that God should plague
us for evil. What a shame is it for us therefore, that when we he are wicked
heretics, speaking against the law of God, and profane Atheists breaking his
law, and blaspheming his name, we should pluck in our horns and become mute,
as though it were a matter of some great discredit for us, to speak for that,
which God himself in his own person, has spoken unto us.

Thirdly, this serves to prove this law to be spiritual, for such an one as
God is, which made the law, such an one is that law which he made, it reaches
therefore to the inward heart of every man, and lies close upon his conscience.
And indeed in this it does especially differ from the laws of men. For they
do tie the tongue, and the hand, and the foot to the good vpbearance, and
take notice if any often; this be faulty against them, but they meddle not with
the heart, and make no question of the inward motions of the soul, because man
can bring in no proof of the breach of such a law, nor can have no, witness
of such faults.

But God searches the heart, and tries the reins, and enters into the
secrets of the soul: and therefore he commands to love him with all our heart
and with all our soul; not contented with such a love only, as is declared
by the outward behavior of the body. And so for our neighbor he commands
every one to love his neighbor as him self; now we know that men do love them
selves with a deep and inward love, not outwardly only in salutation and
courtesy and good speeches, but every man loves him self in truth with a
good meaning and in good earnest, not dissemblingly. So must all the obedience
performed to God, proceed from within and come from the heart, else it should
be no whit acceptable to him, that that grows without, if it come not from
the root of uprightness and sincerity within, shall afford no comfort to our
selves, but if we will that our outward obedience shall bring any fruit to our
own souls or glory to God, we must look, that it have it beginning from an
upright, and sound and faithful heart. Now, then our obedience shall be
spiritual, when first it proceeds from the soul; and secondly, if it be done
with a good intent and to a good end, but if we do some things, either for
credit, or else for merit as the Papists, or for vaineglorie, as the scribes
and pharisees did, this is not spiritual, this proceeds not from the love of
God, but from self love, this is a reflecting kind of friendship, that makes
one do some one or other thing unto an other that he may have the like or some
other thing done unto him self. But then is our obedience true and upright
when it comes from a good heart, with desire and purpose to show our
obedience to God and our love to men.

All these Words.
GOD spoke not the first commandment only nor the second or third and left
there, but he spoke them all, and gave as great and strict a charge to keep
every one as any one, and no one was uttered more by Gods voice or written with
his own singer one then other. The doctrine that arises hence, that whosoever
will have any true comfort by his obedience to Gods law, must not content
himself to look to one or two, but must make conscience and have a care to
keep them all, and every one first, because he that is the author of one, is
the author also of all the rest, and he that has promised a reward for
keeping one, has promised a reward also for keeping all, and he that
threatens to punish the offender, does not say, if thou break this or that,
thou shall be cursed, but he that continues not in all without exception, is
accursed, and living and allowing himself in the breach of any one, shall be
sure to bear the wrath of God: for he that does many good things, yet
allowing himself but to be disobedient in any one thing, he stands in danger
to revolt continually, and to become a wicked and open persecutor. As this was
Herod's case, he did many things according to John's preaching, and did hear
him gladly, and for all the other nine was reasonable willing to be ruled: but
for the seventh there he must needs have a gappe, and he kept this for
certain, that let all the preachers in the world say what they would, he
would not be brought to leave his incest, but would still keep his brothers
wife. Therefore we see how soon he fell to break first the third
commandment, in swearing to that light huswife, to give her what ever she
should ask, and then also he grew to persecute John, and cut off his head,
and when he had once taken leave, to break the seventh, he could not long
stick at the rest.

So the young man in the Gospel, he thought himself in a good forwardness
to heaven, and indeed he had done many things, and had many good parts in
him, so that Christ himself did love him, but when Christ had told him one
thing was lacking, and that he must sell all that he had, and if he did so
he should be no leeser by the bargain, for he should have an inheritance,
but then he must know where his inheritance should lie, and whence he must
look for his revenues, namely, from heaven, then he looked sadly, and went
his way. He could have been content to have had that inheritance that Christ
spoke of, so that he might keep his earthly inheritance to. But if the
question were, whether he would take heaven or earth? he would rather leave
Heaven, then he would part with earth: so that he that is hollow, is always
in danger to backeslide.

And so James says in his second Chapter, and tenth verse. He that keeps
all, and breaks one is guilty of all, not meaning that if one through
infirmity slip into any fault, he was straight way guilty of the whole Law,
for so it may be truly said, that he that breaks all through weakness,
not allowing himself in it, but striving against it, and craving pardon, is
guilty of none, but this he means, that whosoever seems to keep all the
other commandments, yet will willingly maintain and bear with him self in
the breach of one, he did never perform any true obedience to any, though one
be no thief, yet if he be an adulterer, or though he be no adulterer, yet
if he be a Saboth breaker, he breaks the whole law. For if one ask him,
why do not you commit adultery? if he say, because God commands that I
should not, then he would keep the Saboth also, for they be both alike the
commandments of God, but if it be not because God commands, then he does not
obey the law, but serve himself. Therefore he that makes no conscience of all
Gods laws, has no soundness and fidelity in him, because he does not
remember that God spoke all these words.

The use of this, is first to confute Popish religion, and to prove that they
be altogether carnal and sinful people, and make no conscience of any law of
God. Because for the second commandment, they does wholly allow themselves to
break that, for the scope and sum of that commandment is, that we should
serve God, not according to our own inventions, but according to his
commandment, but for their religion, what is it? but a mere device of men's
brains, and what does it consist of? but of the precepts of men. For where
does the word of God teach them to make Images, lay men's books, nay does not
God directly call them teachers of lies: and what warran^ have they for their
Masses and pilgrimages and such other stuff whereof their religion does
depend. Therefore they be hipocrites and make no conscience of any of Gods
commandments. And most of them that be any thing devout Papists make no care
of the Sabbath, but have more regard of their idle holidays which the Pope
has appointed, the^ of the Sabbath day which God has appointed. So far most
carnal professors amongst us, who almost is there that regards the Sabbath
and cares to break it, any further then the law of man will take hold of
them, and some be afraid least if it be known they shall be reproved for it
publicly, and the Minister will let them hear of it in the Church, but if
they could keep themselves close from the Magistrate and Minister, would not
most men willingly be following their business that day.

This is to proclayme themselves hipocrites and that they have no fear of God
nor regard of him in their hearts. O but they hope they are good Christians and
do keep the law of God, for they do not steal nor swear nor lie, but do
they not know that God spoke all these words, and therefore he has no sound
heart to God that settles not himself to keep them all.

This must also teach us, when we see that God does not bless us according to
his promises to those that fear him, then we must examine our selves
diligently concerning our obedience to this his law, whether we live not in
some sin, or whether some old sin lie not in us which has never been
repented, for certainly of all Gods plagues that he lays upon us for our
neglect of this his law, wherefore when he strikes us we must begin to look to
our obedience.

So did Jacob in Genesis: when his sons Simeon and Levy had committed that
cruel fact and he was therefore made odious in the sight of the people of the
land, then he knows that there could not be such trouble without if all were
well within* therefore he begins to search his family and to see how all things
went there, and then he perceues presently the cause of all these stirs, for
his house was full of Idolatry, his wife had gotten his father in laws Idols,
and many of his people fell from the pure worship of God to abominable
superstition, then no wonder if there were such sturres without when there was
such disorder within, therefore he purges his house of all this filthiness,
and buries all these Idols in the ground that they might never hurt him or any
of his any more. All this serves for the singular comfort of all Gods children:
that sees these be Gods commaundeme^ts all as well as one, therefore they
shall have power also to obey them all as well as one, for that God which gave
us power to obey one can give us the like power to obey the rest, and that
power which any has to obey one, it is not from him self but from the work of
God in him.

And indeed God does not give us these laws that we should imagine we could
obey the^ our selves, but that seeing our own wants we might go to him for
help, why then should not every christian hope to be able to yield obedience to
God, in whatsoever God commands him. As God witnesses this of David, that he
was a man after Gods own heart, in all things but in the matter of Vriah, he
never sinned presumptuously but then, his heart was upright in all things else,
and likewise as it is spoken of Zachary and Elizabeth that they were perfect
and unblameable in all things, not that they were quit from all infirmities, or
had not their faults as well as any other, but they were upright and sincere,
their heart was true with God, and so God can and will give grace unto all his
to obey every one of his commandments with a true and upright obedience. So
that no man ought to discharge himself. Oh, for other things I have some hope:
I, that I shall overcome them, but for this or that sin I shall never get the
better of that while I live. Well then for other sins you hope you can
overcome them, but this is the point then, whether have you power to subdue
them by any virtue of your own, or else from the vvorking of Gods spirit in
you? If you say from your self, then you speak ignorantly and foolishly, for
flesh cannot kill any sin, this must be the work only of God. I but Christ
Jesus did give help to me against those, but for this one thing I doubt: and
why should you doubt. He that gave you ability to ouerrule your flesh in
some things, cannot he give the like in all? Yea, this very mercy, that he gave
you a disposition and power to obey him in one thing, is a sure testimony to
you that he will do the like for all, only if you ask it you need not
doubt.

So that this which he says, GOD spoke all these words, is a merueylous
encouragement to the Saints, therefore feeling their wants in any, they may
go to God and say Lord, thou art the author of all these Commandments a
like, and the keeping of them all pertaines unto me as well as to any other,
but thou know O Lord that there is no power in me to obey the least of
them, therefore I come now for power from thee, to make me obedient: and hence
he shall have power to keep all as well as any one.

I am JEHOVAH*
THese words signifies the essence of God and his absolute perfection in all
his attributes. It is expounded in the 13. of the Hebr. and 8. ver. Christ
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. And Revel. 1. He that was, and
is, and is to come: He that is the self same in all his properties. It
signifies first Gods eternity in which he differs from all creatures, for men
and Angels are everlasting, they shall have no ending, but they be not
eternal, for they had their beginning from God, but he has his being in and
of himself, neither had he any beginning from any other: all other things had
beginning from him, but he from none, he is from himself alone. Also power and
wisdom and mercy and Justice and such other things which are properties in
men and Angels, in him they are natures, in us they are weak and imperfect,
but in him endless and perfect. As in Exodus 34. Where he tells his name, The
Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, gracious, etc. Men and Angels are strong,
but this is a quality in them, in him a nature, so men and Angels are kind,
but this is derived from his kindness and is a quality in them, but in him a
nature, and in them finite because no creature can have any infinite thing in
himself, but in God they are infinite. So that it signifies that God is
eternal and has his being from himself, and other creatures have their being
and beginning from him. In him power, mercy, Justice, etc. are infinite, in
others they are finite: In him they be natures and therefore unchangeable, in
others qualities and therefore mutable.

The use of this must be to make us earnest to seek his love and favor, which
if we have, nothing can hurt us, for in him we live, and move, and have our
being. Having his love, we have all power, all wisdom, and all counsel, on
our side. If he be perfect in himself, and all creatures have what ever they
have from him, what need we fear he being with us, what all the creatures can
do against us, being that all their power is derived from him and used at his
direction. We see among men, if there be one whose estate depends wholly upon
his landlords courtesy, he may put him out, and beggar him when he please, how
careful is he to please him and have his favor, least through his
displeasure he should be turned out of all. So is it with all the men on
earth, they be all Gods tenants, and that at will, no man holds any thing by
lease for an hour, our breath is not our own, but his: it is at his
discretion what shall become of our souls and bodies, whether they shall be
saved or damned, and he is such a God whose anger is an eternal anger, and his
wrath an eternal wrath, and his plagues everlasting plagues, how careful
and diligent should we be to please and obey him. And then we show our
selves to beeleeue his power and infiniteness, when it is our greatest care
to seek his favor.

Secondly, this is for the consolation of Gods children, Is God the same for
ever and that in his dealing to his children, and has he heretofore used his
power for their defense, his vvisdome for their direction, his mercy for their
comfort? then he will do the same still to us also. Therefore when any of
his children have been brought into great misery, and that for their sin as
Manasseh he was brought to that hard case for his great sin and wicked
deeds, yet when he repented and beetooke him self to prayer, we see God
heard him and helped him out both of his sin and his misery. Did he deal so
with him, then the question is, whether he be Jehovah, or not, whether the same
for ever without any change? If he be, as sure he is, then he must deliver
us also, when we call upon him. But I am sure to be delivered out of this
prison, and to be set out of this debt, or temptation, if I call unto God.
This I am sure of, that if I cry to God, he will deliver me from my sin, and
if it be good for me then also from the punishment of my sin, but if the
curse do remain one still, he will recompense it with many spiritual
blessings.

But unless we believe that God is Jehovah, and unchangeable, then all the
stories of the scripture, are made unprofitable unto us, then we have no use
nor comfort of those things, which we hear read, how God heard Abraham, and
how he delivered Jacob, and did many wonderful things for his people in
former time. But if we hold this for sure, God is the same for ever, then
this is sure that whatsoever good thing, he did for them, he will do the like
for us, if we use the same means. So also if any one has found in himself,
that at such time, I was in great trouble and temptation, and then I prayed
unto God, and I know that he heard my prayer, and helped me. Are you sure that
God did hear you when you cried, then you are far more sure of this, that if
you cry again, he will hear you again, else he should not be Jehovah: If
he have been yours, he is yours, and will be for ever.

This is also for the terror of the wicked, is God Jehovah, constant and
unchangeable in all his judgments? Why then look what plagues proud persons
have had heretofore, the same shall they now have, so sure as God is true,
unless they repent, and get pardon in Christ. Has God plagued thieves, and
filthy liars, and Saboth breakers in former times: He is Jehovah, let them
look to it, it is his name and nature to hate and plague them that be such
everlastingly, least there be repentance on their part and pardon on his.
Likewise can any man say by experience I fell into sin heretofore, and then
I got a wound to my conscience, a blot to my name, and hurt to my body: why
then as sure as the Lord lives, as sure as God is Jehovah, without change; so
sure make account to speed as ill in sinning now as you did before. Many that
did steal before and were brought to shame and could scarce save their lives,
yet when they are delivered* they will fall to it again, but more closely as
they think, they will be more skil^d in their trade, and be more secret, and
then all shall be well. But who found them out before? was not that a just
judgment from God? that will reward to wicked men according to their
wickedness: then be sure that sees he has once showed his power, and gave
them both by weal and woe, means to bring them to repentance, he is the
same. Who will think to fall into former sins, and yet have better success;
for it cannot be but God is the same* and both must and can punish them. So
some have played the filthy persons and God has showed it to men, to their
discredit, will they then fall to it again, and think they can hide it, no
they shall not, for God will reveal it: though they may think God will be
careless of them, yet he will not be careless of himself and his name. As
sure as he is Jehovah, that brought them through the pikes before, so sure if
they turn again to their filthy vomit, he will bring them to shame again,
either in this life, or if not in this life, to make them repent and judge
themselves, then sure in the life to come, where the burden shall be much more
heavy and unsupportable upon their conscience, and shall press them down to
hell. For the best privilege for such sinners, is to come to shame here, that
if it may be, they may be brought to repentance and amendment. So much for the
name of God, Jehovah, that is without change or shadow of change, what ever he
has done, he will do for ever.

Thy GOD.
THe former argument of obedience, was taken from Gods nature, that he was
eternal in justice to punish sinners, and in mercy to reward his children. Now
this is from his goodness, I am thy God, so almighty, infinite, eternal, and
perfect, as that I abase my self to take care for thee, to have a loving heart
to thee, and to be thy father, if thou will be my child, to be thine husband,
if thou will be my spouse, one that have promised to give thee all good things,
and to remove all ill things from thee, this is, to be thy God. If God had set
down only his infinite magestie, and greatness, and his glorious, and
incommunicable name, that would have feared us, and made us fly from him. But
now he encourages us, by this that he is our God, and gives us these
commandments because he loves us.

The doctrine hence gathered is: that if ever we will obey God in soundness,
then we must know him to be our God, to bear a care of us, to love us, and
that we shall speed better by obeying him, then by breaking his commandments.
And this reason Moses still urges upon thee Israel, thou must obey him, and
hear his voice, for he is the Lord thy God, that loves thee, and cares for
thee. Reason will show this: for if we hear that God is infinite in power, and
do not withal know that he is our God, to use his power for our good, then it
maks us fear, because we know not where to hide our selves from him, when we
hear his infinite justice, we quake and tremble, as nothing vexes the thief
more then to hear of a just judge, for then he has no hope of escaping,
unless he have a pardon, and know that the judge comes to deliver him, and to
do him good. Also when we hear of gods goodness, and patience, and mercy, this
will be but a vexation to us unless we know that he be good and merciful
to us. This adds to the grief, to hear that God is good, if we must not
feel it, for then the wicked heart objects thus: they keep a preching that god
is good, merciful, gracious, and I know not what, but what is this to me, that
he is so to others? I am sure he is not so to me, I must go the broader way,
his mercy is shut against me. This vexes the guilty conscience to hear that
such good things be laid up in store for gods children, but he must taste of
none of them. As for a poor beggarly fellow, that has nothing, to hear tell
of large possessions, and great revenues that must be left to such, and such an
one. This is a tedious anguish unto him, and makes his misery more bitter. So
that nothing can move or alure us to obey God, til we know that he is good to
us, and will give us salvation. The use of this is, that would we ever yield
any cheerful obedience to God, the^ let us feel the truth of that which God
speaks, that he is our God, our savior, and has done more for us then any
other can, and therefore we will obey him above all. To this intent then we must
examine our selves, whether God has wrought those things in us, which he does
in those, whose God he is. As first for God the father, he regenerates us, and
begets us a new by the word of truth, try then whether we have this note in us
or not. Does the word of god abide in us, are we begotten a new, has the seed
of immortality, made us new creatures, and begun to work immortality in us,
then conclude, sure God is our God. Secondly God sheds his love abroad in the
hearts of his children and makes them cry Abba father. This is not so in men,
they when they beget a son cannot beget a child-like affection in him but
often children be rebellious and stubborn. But if God beget a child to himself
by the seed of his word, he makes him have an affection to him as to a father,
if then we have this affection to God, that we love him as our father,
certainly this is his work, and we are his children. Also God the son Christ
Jesus, where he comes, he kills sin, he abates our lust and worldlines, and works
a fresh spring of grace and holiness. But if we feel no working of his death in
us, to mortify our sin, then how can we know that he dyed for us. If the
power of his resurrection have had no effect in us for our sanctifying, how can
we believe that he did rise again for us. So for God the holy ghost, where it
comes, it conuinceth the world of sin. Before a man can say much, for his sin
he can defend, and has with to say many things for it, and will hold up his
head in maintenance of it. But when Gods spirit enters into the heart once, that
sets one down, and makes him he cannot look up, till he have confessed his
sin, and craved pardon, and ben ashamed of it thoroughly. But many men there be,
that would be thought to have Gods spirit, yet will not be reproved, but that
is veryfied of them that is spoken of the fool in the Proverbs, Bray a fool
in a mortar, as Wheat is brayed with a Pestile, yet will not he depart from his
folly. They will maintain it, and stand for it, and therefore it must needs
be, must practice it.

But if Gods spirit reprove one, and if he have sinned it check him, and make
him fear, blessed is he, for God is his God. Oh, but I am more feared and
troubled now, then I was before. True, and it must be sotfor Gods spirit, where
it takes place must needs convince and condemn one of sin. For it is not as
many think, a matter of wit, to stand in defense of sin, and to be able to
speak for a bad thing, but it is a matter of lust, for where lust has dominion,
it whettens the wit to speak for it, and the devil helps, but if Gods
spirit come once that drives to a plain confession, it casts down Satan's
dominion, and then lust rules the wit no more. Also the fruits of the spirit
are Patience, Meekness, Modesty, Love, and Chastity, then let one try
himself in these things, not for beauty and strength, for a Bull and Lion are
stronger then man, and other beasts to, but if one have patience and
gentleness and a moderate spirit, to adorn his mind, these be sure signs of
gods spirit. Also the holy Ghost makes us able to cry Abba father, it makes us
able to breath out our requests unto God, and to power out our supplications
before the most high, if we have this spirit of prayer, then it is plain, the
holy Ghost, is ours. So that if God have regenerated us, and Christ have killed
our sins, and the holy ghost make us ashamed of them, and confess them, and
it work in us Love and Patience and moderation of our affections, and make us
able to pray unto God, then God is our God, and then this will make us obey,
but if this be shaken all is shaken, this is the foundation of obedience. But
men will say, that they have a faith, and believe in God, which if they had it
would bring forth obedience, and have works, for how can one choose but strive
to obey God, if they hold this for sure, that God loves him, and regards him,
and will give him a reward for every good thing that he does, and this every
one must hold that will say, God is his God.

Which brought thee out of the land of Aegipt, out of the house of bondage.
NOW he proves himself to be their God, because he had done so wonderful
things for them, from their merueilous deliverance, that though Pharaoh and all
Aegipt was against them, though the Sea and the wilderness resisted, and which
was worst of all, their own unbelief: yet God brake through all, and set them
free. Hence this doctrine is gathered. That whatsoever misery Gods children be
in, yet God will deliver them: For this is not written for them but for us.

They were under a long and strong affliction, for four hundred years space,
almost under a tyrant, that whipped their bodies and scourged them, and put them
to labor above their strength, and which was a most intolerable vexatio^,
made the parents drown their own children: None ever entreated any so
spightfully as they were used, yet we see god delivered them. So in the Psalm
he says, Many be the troubles of the righteous, who shall deliver them: not
their wealth and money, for of that they are bare enough often times, nor
friends, for sometimes they have none, nor strength, for they be weakened often,
and brought low enough. But God will deliver them, let one get righteousness
and faith, and the spirit of prayer, though they were in an iron furnace under
Paraohs tyranny, in an house of bondage: let them but cry, and from thence God
will deliver them. So in Hesters time, a wonderful affliction it was that the
day of execution was appointed, when all the godly should be put to sword, not
one servant of God should be left alive. But now when they could cry unto God,
and had none else to go unto but him, and him they would go unto, and trust
upon him, knowing that he could help them if he would, and would also for his
promise sake deliver them. Then we see the day that was appointed to their
sorrow, turned to their joy; that which was thought to bring destruction upon
them, brought destruction upon their enemies; and the day of their most
extreme captivity, proved to be the day of their most joyful deliverance,
that ever they had. And it must needs be so, for else God should loose the end
of his corrections, for he corrects them to make them pertakers of his
holiness. But if he should suffer them to pine away, and to eat up their heart
with grief, this would not make them more holy, but more sinful; and therefore
he says, he will not let the rod of the wicked always lie on the righteous,
least he put forth his hand to evil; noting that if the Godly should be too
much afflicted, they could not hold in, but would turn a side to sin by
courses; but God will none of that; for then he should miss of his intent. So
he speaks in another place. Isa. 57. 16. That he will not always chide, least
the spirit should fail before him, showing that if he should not moderate the
crosses of his Saints, they would faint, and perish utterly, and then he should
be the looser. As if when one goes to tame his colt for his use, he should
break his back, and by some means spoil him, the master should loose by
that, it were no profit for him to do so. So when God comes to his own elect,
which are before their calling (as Job speaks) wild ass coltes, untamed, and
unruly, he will master them, and crush them, and make the^ stoop, but he will
not break them, and destroy the^, and consume them, for then the damage were
his, for he should cross his own purpose, which is to bring them to life.
Therefore Gods children may be assured of comfort, an happy end shall follow
an uncomfortable beginning, an happy delivery shall come insteade of an unhappy
servitude.

The use of this is, to teach us never to faint under our crosses and troubles,
be they what they will be, never be discouraged, God is Jehovah, that can help
though men will not, yea though all were against us, as Pharaoh and the
Egiptians against Israel, and none would move the hand to help, yet his help
is sufficient to gainesay them all. For has God delivered us from spiritual
enemies, which is the greatest misery, this is the great and hard slavery, to
be under the devils yoke, to be in bondage to filthy lusts, now has God set
us at liberty from the yoke of the Devil, shall he not give ease from those
men that press our flesh? has he removed the tyranny of sin which would
have damned our souls? and cannot he give us refreshing from the misery of
our body. If God deliver from sin, death, and hell, never faint as though he
could not deliver from outward afflictions; if he have overcome the greater,
the lesser shall not withstand him. God did give freedom from those that be
simply evil, as sin is simply evil, and the cause of all ill, then it is
easier to succor against those which are not in themselves and simply evil,
but often are turned into blessings. Has Christ washed us from our sin, the
worst and hardest enemy, for all the world cannot wash away one sin, then
never fear these lesser matters.

O but this makes me doubt whether I am Gods child or not, because I have such
long and fiery troubles, if God loved me, would he afflict me thus? why then
look to these people hear, they were the best nation under the Sun, and
none so good as Israel, even then when they were thus threshed under Pharaos
cruelty. All other people were but as thorns, they were the rose, and other
were but harlots, they the Lords spouse, yet they were afflicted, and indeed,
to keep them from running after Idolatry, and so to damnation; So that outward
ease is no sign of Gods favor, else none should be in Gods favor, but the
Sodomits and the Cananits, for they had all the ease, and wealth, and outward
prosperity, and the credit and worship of the world. And before the flood
Kaines children, had all the beauty of the world on their side. They found out
Music and keeping of Cattle, and all must be beholding to them; But that is
no matter, let us keep Gods favor, let us fear him and pray unto him, and
then our long and strong crosses, shall bring long and strong comforts.

Secondly let us hence learn to prepare for crosses, since gods children may
be sorely afflicted, else little do we know how they will sting us when they
do come. It is our best course therefore to get wisdom while the price is in
our hands, labor to get patience, and to acquaint our selves with God, that we
may seek to him, and wait for deliverance at his hand. For that makes crosses
so tedious and grievous, when they hit us on the bare, whereas if we had
patience to bear them, and faith to empty our hearts by prayer in Gods bosom,
they would be easy. Nothing makes crosses burdensome but when they meet with
an heart in which remains some sin unrepented, or some passion unsubdued.
But if with faith and patience yield our selves unto Gods will, we should be
as quiet as lambs, as Christ was as a sheep before her shearer, dumb, and
answered not a word. So Paul in the Acts, when they persuaded him not to go to
Jerusalem, what do you weping and greeuing mine heart, I am ready to dye for
Christ's sake at Jerusalem, he could be content to give his skin to be whipped,
and his body to be imprisoned: yea, and his life also to be killed, for Christ's
sake nothing could be to dear, or to much to bestow on him. Prepare therefore
for crosses, and we shall be able to bear them. But if we go on in a fools
paradise, and think indeed this world is a vale of tears to others, but to me
it shall be a place of pleasure; they must have trouble, but I must have ease;
then when instead of joy, we find grief that we looked not for, and we
dreamed of creadit, but there comes nothing but contempt; we imagined that God
should lift us up higher and higher, and he casts us down lower and lower;
this casts one into such desperate passions, that he is neither fit to serve
God nor man. All this would be helped, if we could think gods children have in
all times suffered afflictions, it is the lot of the righteous, and I must look
to taste of the same cup, and therefore labor beforehand to get patience, and
to trust in God, and look for help at his hand, then we should be like Moses
that in all those doings when other were at their wits end for vexation and
fear, he was quiet and still, and God delivered him out of all, as he will do
us also, if we will as he did patiently trust upon him. So much of this
preface. The first commandment is contained in these words.

Thou shall have none other gods before me.
THe drift of this commandment is that we should sanctify God in our hearts,
and give him his full privilege above all his creatures. First of the negative
part. To have none other gods, is not to have any thing whereon we set our
delight, or esteem it more then God. The doctrine from hence is that we must
suffer no thing to withdraw our heart, our mind, our soul, our hope, or any
thing in our soul and body from God. For who soever withdraws any thing in us
from God, that is a strange God unto us, that is every man's God which every man
is most set upon, what ever the mind of man is more set upon and busied about
then the glory and service of god, that is another God. As for matter of
commodity. If one set his hope, and his trust, and heart upon his wealth, this
is Idolatry. As in Job 31. 24. If I made gold mine hope, etc. So the rich man
in the gospel, made his wealth an Idol, because he trusted in that, and did
worship that, for here he speaks of the inward worship of God, in soul. If
one then rely upon wealth, and think himself safe when he has it, and undone
if it be taken from him, this is to make his goods his God, gold is his hope.
For if his hope be gone with his gold, what was his hope before? If when his
riches depart, his confidence also departed. Did not he say to the^ before, thou
art my confidence. So, covetousness is called Idolatry, not that men bow
down their bodies to worship it: But which is worse, their souls and
affections, their wit and memory, and understanding, and all their faculties
stoop to that, which should only stoop to God. So that he that loves his
riches above measure, and sets his heart upon earthly things, is one of the
worst sort of Idolaters. So if one set his heart upon pleasure, what ever thing
it is, that he hunts after, more then gods glory, this is an other God to him.
As the Apostle speaks of some that did make their belly their god: they would
have thought it an injury if one had come and told them that they worshipped not
God, but their belly, for they profess religion and to serve God, as well as
the best. Yet the Apostle says in plain words, they made their belly their
god: for though that they did not kneel down and hold up their hands to their
belly, yet they set themselves more earnestly to feed their body, then to
glorify God, and were more grieved if they were pinched in a matter of
vittaile and good cheer, then to see the name of God dishonored and
blasphemed, and any sin committed. So those that set their whole selves to
hunting, hawking, dicing, carding, gaming, whoring, or any such vilde practice,
they make these things their god: for they are more glad and more rejoice when
those things are effected according to their desire, then if any thing be
brought to pass for Gods honor, and if they be crossed in any of these
things, they are more vexed and troubled with it, then for swearing, or
stealing, or breach of the Saboth, or lying, or any thing whereby Gods law is
violated; these filthy monsters then be worshipers of false gods, and make
these filthy things Idols to themselves. So Jeremiah. 17. cha. 5. ver. To
make flesh ones arm, is Idolatry, that is, to trust in any fleshing thing,
for faith he, cursed be he that makes flesh his arm. Why may he not do so*
and serve God to? No, says he, but withdrawes his heart from God, so that
look how much any one rely upon any fleshly things, things, so much he
forsakes God, and in what measure he pleases his confidence in any thing else,
in that measure he displaseth it from God. So Eli was said to honor his sons
more then God. Though he were a good and holy man, yet, being to indulgent to
his children, in that he contented himself only to have admonished the^ for
those faults, and did not proceed to punish them according to their fault, when
admonition would not serve the turn; because he was a magistrate, in that he
had not such a zeal of Gods glory, and of the breach of Gods law, as to punish
his children for it: he honored them more then God. But that he did honor God,
and was a good man, but through infirmity and to much love of his children, he
was borne away from that care of the glory of God, that he should have had, and
so did bear with them more then he ought to have done, and this was that sin
for which God did both in word reprove him, and in deed also correct him with
so great a punishment: this was to dishonor God.

The use of this is, first to confute all ignorant men and women, and all
unregenerate men and women, it is certain, they have other gods: for every
unregenerate man depends either upon himself or some other thing else, never
upon God, as he says of such, they sacrifice unto their nets, not that they
did offer burnt offerings unto them, but because they got much wealth by
fishing, they thought their riches came from that, and therefore imagined that
God did not provide for them, but that they had provided for themselves, and so
did not give thanks unto God, but unto their own skill and wit, that could
find means how to get these outward things. So that every unregenerate man
sets up himself, he does nothing but seek and serve himself, and therefore
is his own Idol, and an other god unto himself.

This serves also to humble Gods children daily with the consideration of it:
for who lives so holylie that does not oftentimes set up an other god, that
does not sometimes fear men more then God* and that does not often depend to
much upon outward matters, and has to great a love of earthly things. This
should humble us then to think that we are so much given to set up vain helps
in our hearts, as that none lives so clear, but sometimes he makes a false God
unto himself. Secondly, that we may keep this commandment, we must learn to
use all outward things as though we used them not, that so our minds and
affections and judgments may be ready to serve God, and we may also press
to do his will. For whosoever sets himself wholly to root and dig in the
earth, and to seek earthly matters, his heart will be so occupied and
forestalled with those things, as that if he be called to any service of God,
he must be feign to say I have married a wife, I cannot come, my farm and mine
Oxen will not let me come: and all this while he sets up a strange God. But
then shall we attain a sincere, though not a perfect obedience to this
commandment, if we can come to use the world as though we used it not, and
never to trust on these things when we have them (for the abundance of the^
cannot help us, without gods blessing) and not to be discouraged and cast
down, though they be all taken away: because the want of them shall not hurt
us, if God be with us, for we live by his blessing, and therefore we must set
our selves only to rest on him, and not to lean to any creature.

Before my face.
BEcause this is the most spiritual commandment and does most press upon the
heart, and we are most ready in this matter to dissemble with men and with our
own hearts, therefore God sets a narrower scantling of it, and says before me.
Hence we are taught, that it is not enough for us to behave our selves as that
no impiety break forth from us into the face of men, but we must look to our
hearts and see that none come in Gods sight* For a man may be preaching and
exhorting others to the love of God, yet if he do this for his own vain
glory, not for Gods glory, to get promotion to himself and not salvation unto
Gods people, he at that very time sets up an Idol in his heart, for God
searches the heart, as David says to Solomon, see that thou serve God with an
upright heart, or else for all thine outward obedience, thou shall do as good
as nothing, for God has a special regard of the heart, and does as well see and
discern the most secret things of the soul, as any man does the outward
actions of the body. So Jeremy. 17. ver. 10. I the Lord search the heart, God
does not look on the outside only, but on the inside also, shows cannot
deceive him.

If we say and swear, and protest never so much, that we love him and fear
him, and this be not in our soul, it is not before his face, but in his fight,
there is nothing but hypocrisy and dissimulation. For men first must look to
the outward, and hence descend to judge of the heart, but God first approves
the heart, and then the outward action* if we see good things outwardly, we
are bound in conscience to think well of that man, but God will first see
uprightness, and then he will account well of the practices that we do
outwardly. This then confutes them, that think if they can carry themselves
that men cannot blame them, then all is well. But it is nothing, for God says,
wash thine heart from iniquity, O Jerusalem, no washing of the outward, can do
any good, unless the heart be first well and thoroughly scoured.

Secondly, this teaches us to carry our selves watchfully and warily, and to
fear as well secret as open sins, because all secrets are open to God, and
every hidden thing is light before his face. This meditation helped Job, that
he would not allow so much as a wanton look and by thought, for he knew that
God beheld his ways, and told all his steps, and he could not be delivered
from his highness. If God had seen them only and not taken any great heed
or notice of them, it had not been so much, but as he saw them, so he did keep
them in a reckoning, and regard them, so as that according to these Job should
receue his reward. In this regard he made a covenant with his eyes, and did
walk in fear circumspectly, and would suffer no vanity or filthiness, once
to enter into his heart. But the want of this persuasion that God looks always
full upon us, and his holy and pure eyes, that are like a flame of fire, are
always fast'ned upon our ways and doings, is the cause that men have so many
covetous and crafty and cruel and filthy thoughts, and are come almost to
that point of Atheism, that thought is free. But they shall find that though
it be free from men, yet it is not free from God, and that they shall be liable
to the sentence of condemnation, and culpable of everlasting death, before Gods
Judgment seat, unless they have as great a care to have holy and good
thoughts, and to purge their heart in the sight of God, as to have honest and
civil actions, and walk well before men. So much of the negative part of this
commandment. The affirmative follows.

In this commandment we are commanded four especial things. viz. To know
God, to love God, to fear him, and to trust in him. These things if we have in
our hearts, then God bears the sway there, and he is the commander of our
souls and bodies. And first of knowledge. This commandment enjoynes every
man to know God, according as he has revealed himself in his word, in
essence, and his persons, in his properties and actions, and according to this
knowledge we must order our selves. As in John 17, ver* 3. This is (says
Christ) life eternal, to know thee and him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.
He that knows God in Christ, has the life of grace in him, which is called
life eternal, because it has the beginnings of life eternal, which shall
never dye but increase, till they come to the perfection of this life. For if
any one do thus know God, how can he choose but love him, and trust in him, and
fear him, and do every thing that he commands. As Psalm. 9. Those that know
thee will trust in thee. Some trust in God, some do not, what is the cause of
this, Because some know Gods power, and his truth, and his justice, and
sufficiency, and these will never trust in any lawful means, nor fall to any
unlawful, but for others that do not know him, they make no account of
trusting in him. So David says to Solomon, 1. Chro. 26. My son, know thou
the God of thy fathers, and serve him with an upright heart and a perfect mind.
This is the foundation of true religion, and the groundwork of all upright
worship, to know God, when we know him, then we shall serve him: till we know
him there can be no serving. But if we know that he is such a God as in whose
eyes all things are naked, and that he searches and pryeth, into the hearts and
secret imaginations of the soul: this will make one take heed of dissembling,
and strive to get an upright heart, and so he will serve him with a willing
mind, that does know him; for why do men so willingly serve great personages,
and are ready to employ them selves in their businesses, but because they
think that hence they shall have honor and credit, and come to credit as a
reward of their services; but now if we know that God does give such excellent
wages as no man can give the like, for what does he not bestow on those that
fear him? he gives them his son, he gives them his holy Spirit and grace, in
their hearts: he gives them his fear and his blessing in this life, and life
eternal in the world to come: if one know this, then he will sure serve God
with a willing mind. But on the contrary, the cause and fountain of all
rebellion and disobedience against God is, because there is no right knowledge
of God, as he complains in Hosea. 2. That they lie, they steal, they commit
adultery and blood touches blood. But what was the cause of all this
confusion, why, because there was no knowledge of God in the land, and where
men know not God, what should be looked for else, for then they cannot love
him, nor fear him, nor trust in him, nor seek, nor do any duty, if there be
no knowledge.

This serves to confute all ignorant persons that do not know God, they cannot
tell how many persons there be, or if they do, they cannot tell what any of
them did for them, they are not acquainted with the properties of God, nor with
his actions, they never thought on his name, nor pondered on his truth, his
justice, his power, his mercy, and such like things. These may brag of love
and faith, and hope, and confidence, and patience, but they have none of them,
it cannot be, for all good things flow from this, that we do know God.
Therefore Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. ver. That God will come with thousands
of his Angels in flaming fire, rendering vengeance to all those that know not
him, nor obey not his gospel, these things follow close, does not one know God,
then it is clear he does not obey his gospel, he makes no conscience of that;
Therefore an ignorant heart is always a sinful heart, and a man without
knowledge, is a man without grace, and this ignorance is so foul a sin, as
that it shall be sufficient to bring gods vengeance upon one, how ever light
account men make of it, God will damn them for this, because they have not
known, and then it is to to sure they could not nor would have regard to his
commandments. And on the other side, this must stir us up to call for
wisdom, and to cry for understanding, to seek for it, and to dig for it as
for gold, or precious stones; We must often read Gods word, and confer of it,
and meditate on it, which if we do it will give us understanding, and then we
shall see gods properties, and see his goodness, and his love, and how able
and willing he is to help us, and then we cannot choose but trust in him. And
indeed this often meditating and thinking on Gods word, is the next way to
make us like God, and to renew and repair the image of God in us. For by
seeing Christ in the gosple, we are changed from glory to glory, and the more
we know him, the more we increase in being like to him: so long as we know in
part we are like in part, but when we shall have perfect knowledge, then shall
we be perfect in holiness, and perfect in righteousness, perfect and holy as
he is perfect. As 1. John he says, Now it appears not what we shall be, but
when he shall appear we shall be like him, and why like him? because we
shall know him, as he is, so that the perfection of knowledge, will bring the
perfection of holiness, and the more we increase in knowledge, the more all
good virtues will increase, and if this were perfect, we should be perfect,
without all weakness and infirmity. But the more we meditate in Gods word,
the more our knowledge will grow, and therefore also the image of God will grow
more lively, till we be made perfect and absolute in the life to come.

The next duty is Love. That we must love God withal our hearts, and all our
souls, as is commanded. Luke. 10. The reason is, because he is that Jehovah in
whom we live, we move, and have our being, he is our God that gives us all good
things, and can only free us from all sin and misery, therefore we are
bound to love him. And indeed, this is the chief duty, and the best fruit of
knowledge: but because it is so plain a duty, as that no man will deny it,
it is best for us (leaving to use more words in proving the duty) to show some
marks of love of God, (that we do not deceive our selves) whereby we may see,
in what measure we keep this first and chief commandment. The first mark
may be, how we delight to meet God in those means, wherein he has appointed to
meet us: for in what measure we can offer our selves to God in those things,
wherein he offers himself to us, in that measure we love him. If we be
willing to ask all good things and seek comfort at his hand by prayer, and to
lay open our wants to him, and as it were to confer with God. If we be
desirous to come to hear his word spoken unto us, wherein we may see his
wisdom for our direction, his mercy for our comfort, his power for our
defense, and for the subduing of our sins, and his riches to make us rich,
and supply all our wants, then we do indeed love God, and the more we can
rejoice in these things, the more we love God, and the less, the less we love
him. So for the sacraments, in them Christ Jesus offers himself unto us, and
to make us partakers of his body and blould, would we then try how we love
God? we may do it by examining what desire we have to these things, would we
rather come to this banquet of the heavenly King to eat the body and blood of
his son, that is set before us, rather then to the table of an earthly king,
to taste such good cheer as he can make us, is there such an affection to us?
then indeed we love God, for then we have a delight to come where he is. For in
these means God does bestow himself upon us, and comes to dwell in us, as
Christ says, that he will dwell in us, and his father: the holy ghost will
come into our hearts.

The second note whereby we may try our love to God is, obedience, as Christ
says. John. 14. 20. He that loves me keeps my commandments: He then that
keeps Gods commandments best, he loves God best. But if any will say that he
loves God as well as the best, yet he will break the saboth, and lie, and
dissemble, and be a miser, wholly rooting on the earth, and setting himself and
all his heart after his covetousness, if no good speech proceed out of his
mouth, but only froward and filthy, and vain speeches, if it be so, will we
say that we love God? No, the love of God breeds obedience unto God. If one
should say that he loved the King as well as any subject in England, yet he
would always be practicing and inuenting treason, and rebellion against him,
who could believe him? So, if we will speak foolishly, and vainly break Gods
saboths, and blaspheme his name, and do such other wickednesses, do we love
God? Nay, so far as any allows himself to do these things, so far he hates
God, as he that allows himself in rebellion, hatas the prince: so he that
maintains any sin whatsoever in himself, he hates God. So that by these two
things we may examine our love of God: first, in the means of salvation what
good affection we bear unto them.

Secondly, how we keep Gods commandments. For says Christ, He that has my
commandments and keeps them, he loves me. Frst we must have his
commandments in our understanding, to know the meaning of them; and in our
memory, that we may remember them; and then in our heart, to work on our
affections; and lastly in our practice we must keep them, and in what degree
we do this thing, in that degree do we love God.

A third mark. That we observe and note our affection to Gods children. For
this is a sound note that we love God, if we love his children. As in John. 5.
He that loves him that begets, will love him that is begotten. If then we find
in our hearts a good affection unto christians, because they are christians,
how beneficial or not beneficial to us, that is nothing; whether they take
notice of us, or pass by us, that is not the matter: but if they be such that
love Gods word, and have the virtues of Christ shining forth in their hearts: if
love and patience, and temperance, and meekness, and such like, do appear
in them, if we love these, this is an undoubted testimony of our true love to
God.

The fourth mark of our love to God whereby we shall in deed make trial of our
love to him is, how we love his coming. How we desire the appearance of Christ
to judge the quick and dead. And how we desire to be dissolved and be with
Christ. What desire we have either to go unto him, or to have him come to us.
For if our heart be set truly upon any thing, that thing we cannot choose but
desire, and be willing to have it with us. Love draws the mind to that which
is loved. So Paull when the love of God waxed warm in his heart, he desired to
be dissolved and to be with Christ. So in the Revelation, the spirit, and the
Church, and the bride, and all say, Come Lord, come quickly: and in the
natural marriage, in which the love is much more weak and slender, yet this
is manifest, for if the wife love her husband, when he is gone far off she
will be desirous of his return, and will be glad to have his company: if this
be so in the natural marriage, where there be many infirmities and crosses,
yet they do wish for the company one of another, how much more in the
spiritual marriage, where there is such perfection now in the one party, as
he is full of love and mercy, and also shall free the other party from all
miseries and wants, and infirmities, when they shall be joined fully together,
and fill them full of all virtues and graces, in this marriage I say, how can
one choose but long after this perfect and happy meeting, how can he stay
himself that has any love and assurance of these things, but he shall be
ready to fly up into heaven, and the flame of his desire will burn above the
clouds, to wish that God would come and dwell with us. If the wife should say,
I love mine husband as well as any woman in the world, O but how say you, your
husband has been from you a long time, but at such a time he will return. O
I pray you speak not of that, you will make me sick if you talk of it,
indeed I love him, but I care not how far of from me he be, who would not
perceive that this were mere dessembling and no true love indeed, can a woman
love her husband, and not desire his company? So if we will bear others in
hand, that we love God above all, and no man loves God better then we, yet we
never desire to come at him, or to have him come at us: what a love is this? a
very weak love it is sure or none. We must pray therefore and endeavor that
we may long for, and wish for the coming of Christ, for God has given this to
other of his children, that were as weak as we, that when they did think of
their good estate, and freedom from all misery and sin, and that the love
of God was shed abroad in their hearts, this did so inflame their hearts, as they
desired his coming, by which they should be delivered from all sin and
misery, more then any woman could desire the coming of her husband.

The fifth and last note, whereby we shall find out in truth, how we love God,
is to consider how we stand affected to that which he hates. One indeed may
love a man truly, and yet not hate all that he hates, because his hatred may
be unjust, or else he may exceed in the measure of hatred. But for God, we
know that he is perfect, and hates nothing but that which is hateful, and
abhorres none but those which deserve to be abhorred. Therefore try and see how
we stand affected to the wolrd. God says that he hates the world, by the
world is meant, as Saint John expoundes it; the lust of the eyes; the lust of
the heart; and the pride of life; we must hate these things, for the love of
the world is enmity to God. He that loves it then, is an enemy; for he that
loves Gods enemies, makes himself an enemy: as he that hates that which God
loves, hates God, so he that loves that which God hates, hates God also. Also
we must see how we hate covetousness, malice, pride, filthiness, falshoode,
and such like, for all these things God hates. But if one be so far from
abhorring lying, as that he himself will lie; and so far from hating flattery,
as he himself will flatter; and speak fair before ones face, but ill enough
behind his back, if one be so far from hating unthriftiness, as that he will
be a gamster and spend those things idly and foolishly, which God gave him for
a better end, and will take an account of him also, how he spent them, because
God bestowed them for better ends, and he bestows them proudly, vainly, and
vnthriftely, to no glory to God, or good to men; he that will do these or any
such things, it is plain that he hates not that which God hates, and
therefore does not love God.

By these things then, we may examine our selves, and find whether we have
any true love to god or not: namely by his love, to the means of salvation,
and by his keeping Gods commandments, by his seruent and hearty love to Gods
people, in wishing and also doing then good to his power, by his desire to be
joined to Christ Jesus, and lastly by his hatred of those things which God
hates, which though they do often overtake him, yet he loves himself the
less, because he can hate them no more, and thinks the worse of himself,
because he loves them at all.

These things who so can find in himself, he loves God and obeyes this
commandment, though not in perfection (for no man can in his nature, and
indeed it is not needful that any of us should, for Christ did it for us)
yet in uprightness and in some good measure, and he serves God with that which
he accounts a perfect heart.

So much of the love of God, a fruit of knowledge, when knowing his goodness,
his mercy, his truth, and other his properties, we give him all our soul,
setting our affections on nothing in earth besides him, delighting in him
alone, and in nothing but that which carries a stamp of his goodness.

The next duty that is here commanded, is the fear of God, a duty
proceeding from knowledge also: for as the sight of Gods goodness, and mercy,
and truth, will inflame the heart with a love of him: So if one behold and
consider his greatness, and his power, and his excellency, over all his
creatures, this will strike his heart with a wonderful reverence, and a great
fear of his Majesty. As also he that knows Gods power that he can do what
he will, and his mercy that he will do what is needful for the good of his
children, this will make him trust wholly in God. But for this fear, an
objection must first be answered. For 1. John. 4. he says, Perfect love
casts out fear. And Luke. 1. We are delivered from all our enemies, that we
might serve him without fear. To this we answer, that perfect love casts
out fear; namely a slavish fear, and such as is in the devils, who tremble
before God, but so as they run from him, such as is in wicked men when the
threatenings of God arrests their evil conscience, and summons their wicked
hearts, and draws them before Gods judgment seat, and makes them therefore not
love Gods word and ministry, but hate it, and cast off all care of Godliness,
and religion from them. But it is true that whosoever loves God, cannot choose
but in the same measure also fear him: for the spirit of God that persuades
them of his favor and works love, will declare his power and greatness,
which will work a fear and awe of him. It casts out the hellish fear that
makes one fly from God, but it causes that holy fear, that makes one more
careful to come unto him, and to worship him. We must then love God with our
whole hearts, and souls, and minds, so that we fear nothing but in him and
for him, and that with such a fear, as must draw us unto him, but terrifieng
our hearts from committing all evil. It must be a fear mingled with love and
confidence, that must be holy, and crucify, and restrain all ill affections
and desires. This is commanded. Isai. 8. 13. Sanctify the Lord in your hearts,
and let him be your fear and your dread. The occasion of this precept was
this. Before in the chap he shows that there were stirs and rumors of
wars, in the land, the people and King and all did quake as leaves shaken
with wind by reason of the great fear which was in them. Now then here he
brings a medicine that will make them still and quiet: for the cause of their
false fears was, because they were empty of true fear, and they were so
exceedingly troubled with men, because they could not look up unto God. But in
the 12. ver. the Prophet faith, You that be Gods children, do not you fear
their fear. Fear not you the fears of wicked men, for they fear nothing but
poverty, and outward disgrace, and a temporal death, all weather and hard
casualties to themselves and their goods, these be base fears, and not
worthy that the hearts of Gods children should be taken up with them being but
trifles, fear not these things then, nor fear them (that is) not wicked men,
fear neither the fears which wicked men fear, nor fear not wicked men
themselves. But now because the heart of man must fear something, and least it
be very well armed, it is ready to fear man, and the fears of man, therefore
he shows a means how to keep one from all infection of such foolish fears,
and that is, to sanctify God in our heart, and to let him be our dread.
Sanctify god in our heart j. give him the praise of his power, of his mercy,
of his truth, and of all his attributs; and then he shall be our dread. For he
that gives god the praise of his power, will never stand in fear of a man; for
he knows the power of god is greater the^ the power of man. He that gives him
ye praise of his mercy, will not be dismayed, though he see all wants, and an
hard estate outwardly, for he knows that gods mercy will supply all, and he
that gives him the praise of his truth, will not be discouraged for any danger,
because god has promised to stustain him in all, and to deliver him out of
all. This is then to fear God with all our hearts, to fear him only, and
neither to fear wicked men, nor the things which they fear, for so far as we
do fear either of these, we break his commandment, and our hearts are void
of the true fear of God. So Luke. 12. 4. 5. Christ Jesus says, Fear not them
that kill the body, and after that are not able to do any more, But I will
forewarne you whom you shall fear, fear him that after he has killed, can
cast into hell, I say unto you, him fear. Where he says, that can kill the
body, it is not to be understood as though any man had any power in himself to
kill it, but God gives them leave sometimes, and by his permission, for the
humbling of his children, they are able to kill them; as if he had said: This
is the nature of men, that if they see any grow powerful and great, they are
afraid and think how shall we escape, how can any be free from danger, now
such persons be set up: but why should you be so troubled at their promotion,
or why should you be afraid, when they have done their worst, what can they
do, the most is to trouble you a little, and to send you from this house of
clay, to heaven: they can go no further then to the killing of your body. But
if you will fear profitably, and so as you shall be the better for your fearing,
I tell you who you shall fear, and I repeat it again, that you may the better
mark it, I say, fear him that when he has killed the body, can kill the
soul to, and if you fear him you need not fear men, for this true fear
will cast out all false fear. Likewise Eccles. 12. 13. The holy ghost says,
That this is the end of all, to fear God and keep his commandments. And
Proverbs. 1. The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom. Would we have the
beginning of wisdom then, and the end of all, then let us fear God, give him
the honor of his greatness, and tremble always before his face. There are
diverse reasons also to move us with all our strength and endeavor, to get this
fear of God in our hearts. Draw from the benefits which will flow from it, to
every one that does in truth embrace it. First that may be a good reason to
persuade us, which is said. Proverbs. 8. 13. The fear of the Lord is to hate
evil, as pride and arrogancy. Where he shows that in what measure any one
fears God, in the same measure he will loath, and detest all evil: yea, not
only the open and hateful sins that the world will condemn, but the most
secret and bidden. For he says not to hate evil, as murdure, and adultery,
but pride, and arrogancy, those which lie in the heart, and do not show
themselves to the world, yet he that fears God, will hate those. This is one
excellent privilege that he has that fears god, that he will not offend
God, and therefore hates what ever might offend. So that he is well fenced
against all secret wickedness. As we may see in Joseph, though he might have
done that evil to which he was solicited most secretly, that no man could have
spied or perceived it, yet he would not for all the world consent: and the
reason was, the fear of God made him hate it in his heart, and hating it
inwardly, he would never practice it outwardly. So Job speaks of himself,
That he could have borne out his oppression, and could have made all stoop to
him, no man would have gone about to find fault with him, yet he durst not for
all that, his heart would not let him, for gods Judgment was terrible in his
eyes, and he could not be delivered from his highness, and this was that, that
kept him from doing wrong, though no man durst have gone about to have sought
revenge against him.

Secondly, the fear of God if it once thoroughly do possess the heart, will
make one pliable and frameable to Gods will, though it be never so contrary to
his nature, and former behavior. As the example of Paul will show: for when
God comes to him and sinites him down off his horse, and fills his heart full
of horrible fears and terrors, and strikes him down to the ground with them,
and let him perceive a little the majesty and power of God, and then after
begins to reason the matter with him, and shows him that he is a persecutor of
Christ Jesus, then he is presently quiet and says, Lord what shall I do? That
which all the preaching in the world could not do, nor all the miracles that
he had seen and hard, that did this fear of God work in a short time, and
did so effectualy call him in that little space, as that he never turned back
again. One might have thought; what would men say, if I should turn from
persecuting to preaching, and of the sudden all at once go to be an Apostle,
that was a persecutor? what will the high Priests say, from whom I have
letters, they will say I am unconstant, and that I do them injury, and Paul
might seem to have many reasons to keep him from preaching Christ so, all
upon the sudden, but all is nothing now, no, no, the true fear of God casts
of all objections, for it so surpriseth the lusts of the flesh, and makes the
strenght of sin so much to abate, as that one cares for nothing, nor regardes
nothing in all the world, so that God may be pleased, and he escape the anger
of God.

So Isaiah 6. God did send him about such a piece of work, as he knew would be
full tedious unto him, and go against his stomach, namely that he must
preach to harden the hearts of the people, and be a minister of death unto his
hearers, which was as bitter as death to him, and he could never have yielded to
it. But now God comes not with the bare precept, for that would have done little
good, the thing was so contrary to Isaiah, that he would never have obeyed,
but he shows him self to him in a vision and lets him see his magestie in
such a fearful sort, as that he falls flat on the dust for fear, and his body
quakes and he cries out, what shall I do? I am a man of polluted lips and
dwell among people of polluted lips. I shall surely die, for I have seen the
Lord. When he was thus thoroughly affrighted and the pride of his flesh was
beaten down, with the apprehension of Gods infinity, then when God asks who
will go, he is ready and says, Lord send me, and so God sends him, and he
goes immediately and willingly, there is no disputing now, nor reasoning the
matter, for all the objections that men make, and all their disputing, that
they think Gods commandments be hard and greiuous, and why should they
deny them selves? why should not they have their pleasure? Hence it comes,
that they fear not God, they do not think of his greatness, nor consider
his wonderful might and strength, for if they could bring their heart once to
consider his exceeding greatness, their heart would soon stoop, all arguments
would fall to the ground, and all would be quiet straight. For this will tame
the fierceness and boystrousnesse that is in men's hearts, and make them gentle
and still enough. As we see in Job, though he was a very good and patient man,
yet when his flesh began a little to work, and his heart was disquieted and
vexed by the words of his friends, then he would needs be dealing with God,
he thought he had reason to speak, and imagined that he could say much for
himself, he would fill his mouth with arguments, and feign he would have God
to come to hear what he could speak, in his own defense, and to show what
wrong was done to him. But now when God comes, and there shows him the nature
of the snow, and the ice, and of some other creatures of god, as it were to let
him see how childish he was in these several matters, and foolish and ignorant
of the creation or preservation of these least things, that he had no
knowledge, and therefore he was a trim man to call God to account, and that
God must come to give his answer before him, that he should sit in the seat
of Judgment and on the bench, and God stand at the bar, he was like to
dispute well with God his creator; that did not know the nature of the least of
his creatures. When God had argued with him thus a while, and he saw how great
God was, and how exellent: Job was done, he had no more to say, but now
indeed he confesses he had spoken foolishly, but he would do so no more,
he would now be still and content to bear Gods hand, let him do what he
would, if he would kill him he was content to die, but he would never
dispute with God any more. So we see how quiet Job was now, and what good and
notable effects this fear of God will work in the hearts of men, if it once
soundly and thoroughly possess them.

Furthermore, God has promised that he that fears him, shall want no good
thing, he may want oftentimes that which his wicked flesh would have, for in
deed and truth nothing is more hurtful and pestilent to a man, then that
which his flesh does most eagerly pursue and hunt after, and with greatest
vehemency desire: and on the contrary, nothing is more truly profitable and
good for the soul, then that the flesh and desires of it should be mastred and
crushed and broken, therefore it is true that he which fears God most, shall
most want those things which his flesh desires, because they would do him
hurt, but God will withold no good thing from him, that which indeed is
good, and the word and wisdom of God shows to be good, and will by effect
show it self to be good, that he shall never want. Also in the 112. Psa. he
says, Blessed is the man that fears God. This always brings Gods blessing
with it, whereuer it comes: so that would we be helped against our sin, and
have the pride of our flesh crucified, and be helped to obedience? would we be
rid of all evil things, and want no good thing? the very pathway that leads
to these, is the fear of God, which is accompanied with the blessing of God,
that is, the treasure of all good things.

The use that we must make of this is, that so far as we would have all our
wants supplied, and have the blessing of God upon our soul and body, and have
abundance of all good things for this life, and the life to come, then we must
labor to bring our hearts to the true and right fear of God, that we may
tremble before his greatness, and to reverence and dread the great name of the
Lord of hoasts. The way to attain this is, first, to deny our selves quite, to
renounce utterly our carnal wisdom, as he says, Pro. 3. 7. Be not wise in
thine own eyes, but fear God, and depart from evil. If one will be reasoning
the matter according to the fleshly wisdom of men, and he has reason to do
that he does, then surely he will never have reason to be religious and serve
God, for that is against his reason, for Solomon would have us fear God, and
how shall one come to do that, he must not be conceated of his own wisdom,
he must not think well of carnal reason, nor be ruled by it, for the wisdom of
the flesh is enmity to God in all things: yea, the carnal wisdom of a
spiritual man is enmity to God, and goodness, and so long as one follows
it, he shall never fear God. As we may see this in Euah, when she would go to
consult with that carnal reason that the devil had put into her head, and
began to think with her self, surely this fruit is fair to look to, it has
a good color to the eye, and it is like the taste will be pleasant to the
mouth, and then I shall get well by it, for I shall get much knowledge, and be
made like God, so that my state shall be mended, for this the Devil had
persuaded her off: then she falls to eat the forbidden fruit, and to tempt her
husband; and to do any thing that the Devil would tempt her unto, and fears
God no more then if she had been sure there had been no God. We must forgo
our fleshly wisdom, and forsake our carnal reason then, if ever we will
fear God, and not consult with flesh and blood, for if we do, that will draw
us far enough from God, and make us never regard him. The second thing that
we must do, to obtain true fear of God, is to ask it of him; to confess
that in our selves, we have no true fear of God; but are altogether profane:
as David speaks of unregenerate men, that they have not the fear of God
before their eyes, but think that there is no God; and live as if there were
no God; we must then confess and see our own wants, and entreat God to
supply the same, to put his fear in our hearts, especially since he has
promised this to all his elect; and in his covenant has said, that he will put
his fear in their hearts that they may fear him. And he has bestowed it also
upon others of his children; as on David, for he says that he did fear and
tremble before the judgments of God: and if we ask it God according to his
own covenant, and according to his former dealing with other of his children,
will bestow it upon us.

The last means to obtain this holy fear of God, is often to think and
meditate upon Gods fearful judgments, which he has executed upon sinners,
for this will breed in our hearts a sense and awe of his Magestie: as to think
that God did not spare the Angels, being more excellent creatures, and far
exceeding us in glory and strength, but when they forsook their place that
their creator had set them in, and rebelled against him, he cast them into
hell, into extreme and miserable torments; and keeps them fast linked and
tied in chains of darkness, for a wonderful great addition of pain, for all
their sins at the last day. So upon the old world, when they forsook God,
and the law of God, and grew to be earthly minded, and to set their hearts
altogether on the world, not regarding God nor religion. In this general
apostacy and departing from God, he sent a general flood, which did
ouerwhelme and drown them all, so that they could not escape his hand of
justice. So on Sodom and Gomorah, when they grew filthy and profane, and were
full of idleness, and abusing the good benefits of God, he rayned fire and
brimstone from heaven upon them, and devoured them all. And in all times, what
city, or particular person, or country did grow sinful and stubborn
against him, he grew terrible and showed himself terrible, by his fearful
vengeance and plagues upon them. Thus the often meditation and dilligent
pondering on Gods threatenings and curses, and the most certain and fearful
execution of them upon impenitent persons, will soften our hearts, and draw them
more and more to stand in fear of this great God. And if we will thus deny our
selves, and our fleshly reason, and pray unto God for his fear, and labor to
kindle his fear in our hearts, by calling to remembrance his fearfulness, and
just, and terrible vengeance upon those that have not feared him: this will at
lenght bring our profane hearts, to some dread and reverence of Gods holy
Magestie.

The next use that we may make, is for the comfort of those of Gods children,
that can in some measure bring their flesh to fear and tremble before God, and
to stand in awe of him, this will certainly bring all happiness unto them,
and those that can do so, they may be assured that whatsoever affliction they
be in, it shall either be removed, or be so sanctified and blessed unto them,
as they shall bear it with much comfort and profit. As Ps. 112. ver. 2. His
seed shall be mighty upon the earth. Seed mighty, will we think? how can that
be, what have they to make them mighty? what has he to leave them? how can
they be mighty, when he has nothing to bestow on them: yes he has enough,
for so he ads, his children shall be blessed. It is not lands and livings, and
great possessions that make ones children great, for one may have them and yet
he has no promise, but that himself and his children shall have the curse of
God upon them while they live, and be cast into hell fire and everlasting
damnation when they dye. But it is the fear of God that makes a man happy
himself, and that will leave a good and happy state unto his children after,
for this brings the blessing of God upon himself, and upon his seed after him,
that they shall continue happy so long as they continue fearing God. But that
we may not deceive our selves and think either that we have not the fear of
God at all, because we have it not perfectly, though we have it in some good
measure, or else think that we have it when indeed we have it not: It is good
that we consider some marks whereby we may know whether we have indeed this
fear of God or no.

One true note of the fear of God is, to fear the word of God, as Isaiah
says, Hear the word of God ye that tremble before him. As if he had said, I
would that all mine hearers would profit by the word of God, which I speak
unto them; but I know that none will make use of it but only those that fear
him; as also the prophet Habakkuk said. That when he heard Gods threatenings,
he feared, and his belly trembled, and rottenness entered into his bones, and
he was wonderfully dismaide and terrified. If then the threatenings of gods word
can affright us, and make us tremble, and afraid, to do those things which he
has forbidden, or if we have sin, they make us confess our sins, and
humble our souls before God for mercy: this is an undoubted token of the
fear of God. But if one will say that he fears God and reuerenceth the
magestie of God but for his word let God threaten as much as he will he cares
not for it; let the Minister denounce gods Judgments and curses upon him, and
against him, he is a sleep, and it does not awake nor prick him, he neither
has any touch nor feeling of it, but lets it pass without any regard; it is
most sure that such an one for all his sayings has no fear of God in his
heart. According as God complains, by the prophet Amos, That if the Lion did
roar, all the beasts of the field would tremble: but they were more beastly
then beasts, and so senseless, that let god roar and roar again as loud as
he would, yet they cared not, nor were not a whit afraid; so that the very
beasts gave more reverence to the Lion then they did unto God. If we hear the
threatenings of God denounced powerfully against covetous and deceitful and
cruel persons, and against such as break gods saboths, against earthly minded
men, that set themselves wholly to root in the ground, and to seek for fleshly
things; If we hear these threatenings, and believed that they were true, when we
find them in our selves, how could we choose but fear and tremble. But herein
most men bewray their monstrous and shameful hypocrisy, that if a great man,
some king, or prince, did but threaten that they should be put in prison, and
lie in prison all their life, or that they should be put to death, they would
shake every joint, and show their fear in their face, that no man could make
the^ merry, in such a case, but they would lament and take on immeasurably. But
let god threaten and protest that he will curse them and damn the^, and cast
them into hell for ever, it never fears the^, they can go about as merely and
cherfully as though there were no danger: yea, they will make often times a mock,
and a scoff at those judgments. What a most plain and palpable disse^bling is
this, that men will pretend to fear god above all, and yet will be much more
afraid if a man do but threate^ to turn them out of their house, then if god
threaten to turn them out of heaven to be in hell for ever: that one angry
word of their la^dlord will fear the^, but twenty threatenings out of the
scripture of God, will not move them one whit, nor work the least sorrow in
them. By trying our affections to the word of God then, we may see our
affections to God himself; either in love, for he that loves Gods word most,
may assure his soul that he loves God best: or in fear, for he that most
trembles and is most humble at Gods threatenings, he carries the greatest
reverence toward God himself, and so that he that puts greatest confidence in
the promises of God, does most faithfully trust in God.

Another sure badge of this true fear is, that it will make one depart from
evil, it will not make him only confess and say, indeed it is naught, and
it is my fault and my nature, and I would I could leave it, but it will work a
separation beetwixt sin and the soul, so that it will depart from evil,
what danger so ever seem to ensue upon it, and he will not be alured by any
reward to commit sin. In what measure the fear of God has seasoned the
heart, in the same measure it will work this departing from sin: as we see it
plainly proved by the example of the three children. The case stood thus with
them, that either they must bow to the filthy idol which was before them, or
burn in that flaming furnace, which was prepared for him that would not;
either they must purchase and procure the wrath of God, or suffer the wrath and
displeasure of Nabuchadnezer, but having the fear of God within them, it gave
them courage and boldness, that they feared not Nabuchadnezers threatening and
power, but stood resolute for the cause of God, and showed the King plainly
that they would not dishonor God, to please him, or for his anger; if god would
they knew that he could deliver them, if he would not yet this they let him
know, that they would not incur Gods anger, and danger of everlasting death,
for fear of any bodily death. But on the contrary side, so far as any man
has not the fear of God, but fears man more then God, then they will upon
every occasion run to evil, as if one be in some fault, that he thinks he
shall be punished for it, then he will help himself by lying, and thinks that
he has made a very good shift, if he can escape by that means, this is now to
make man a god, and god an Idol, when one will seek to make the face of man
mild and gentle, by making gods face angry and frowning. So those that when
they be in distress and in some need by poverty, will venture to help
themselves by breaking gods saboth, and taking time from his worship to labor
for their own gain: this is plain, that they fear the fear of the wicked,
and do not make God their dread, for if they did, it is most sure, they would
depart from evil. So he that fears god, no hope of promotion or outward
benefit can make him consent to wickedness; as Joseph might in likelihood have been a great gainer, and gotten much promotion, by yelding to the wicked and
filthy allurements of his mistress: yet he would not give the least mark of
consenting, because he was afraid to sin against god. So in Isa. 51. 12. Who
art thou that fear mortal man, that must be given to the worms, and
forgettest thy God that did spread out the heavens. The great fear of man's
power arises from the forgetting of gods free power. When one is in such a
terror of man that is but dust, and cannot defend himself against the worms,
but they shall creep in his bowels and eat up his heart, will he nill he, it
comes from hence that one does quite forget that there is such a God as was
able to make heaven and earth of nothing, and that has fearful judgments
laid up for sinners, and then indeed he fears man, and then he will sin if
he bid him, and rather be so servile to his master and superior, as to break
Gods law, then to bear his anger and chiding or correction, and if man bid*
him do any thing, he will do it, though God bid him do the contrary.
Therefore in the Revel. when he reckons up a great rabble of reprobates, and the
whole host of damned sinners, he puts the fearful in the very forefront of
them, and makes them the captains and ringleaders of all the rest, those
which be fearful and not fearful; that be not fearful to displease God and
break his law, but herein they be audacious and impudent, but for any good
service of God, they be afraid to do it. They be afraid to keep the saboth,
or go to hear sermons, least they should be accounted to precise: they will
not serve God, least their old acquaintance and friends should forsake them,
and least their neighbors should mock and laugh at them; they fear least they
should be jested at. This dastardlinesse and coldness to do good, but courage
and readiness to do ill, that if men do but hold up the finger, and the
basest and most abject persons in a country, do but speak a word or two, he
may allure and persuade them to drink and swill, and break the sabbath, and
such other filthy sins which they have promised to forsake, and God has
threatened to punish; shows plainly, that they be void of the true fear of
God.

The third and last note of the true fear of God is, to delight in Gods
commandments, to walk in his ways, as he says, Blessed is the man that
fears God, and delights greatly in his commandments. He that has no
delight to walk in gods ways, but in his own, and has all the pleasure in
talking of his own commodity and profit, not of Gods laws: as though
himself were the god to be served, and lust had the soueraintie and command of
his heart and not God; such an one has not the fear of God, but if one delight
to confer of gods law, and take his greatest pleasure in speaking and
thinking of Gods commandments, such an one may conclude with him self
assuredly, that he has that fear of God in his heart, which will keep him to
everlasting life, so long as he keeps and embraces it.

Hence then the best man in this world may learn to confess his own
weakness, and to acknowledge the wants and defects of this fear of God; for
that so much fear of death and of poverty, and of disgrace, and of men,
shows a great emptiness of the fear of God. This trembling at men's
thratnings so much, and at gods threatenings so little, that is in all men by
nature, the great fear of loosing earthly things, and little fear to loose
heavenly things, the much delight we have in matters of this world, and little
delight in the law of God, testifies to our faces, and shows plainly that we
have but a very little spark of the true fear of God, those which have most
of it. These wants we must see and confess, and run unto Christ Jesus that
made a perfect and absolute satisfaction, that he might supply our
imperfections, and then of his fullness we shall have enough to fulfill that
wherein our selves came short.

Thus much of the true and holy fear that God commands, such a fear as being
joined with love and proceeding from it, makes us love him more, and more obey
him.

The next and last duty commanded in this first commandment, is to trust in
God with all our hearts, to put our full confidence, and rely wholly upon him,
and him alone.

This is commanded. Prou. 3. 5. Trust on God, with all thine heart, and lean
not to thine own wisdom. Though thine own reason tell thee, now that I have
great prosperity, and the world at will, I shall be safe, yet trust not to
that, but make God thine only stay. So Iere. 17. 7. Blessed is that man that
trusts in God, and makes him his stay, for he shall be like the tree planted
by the water side. He shows that he that trusts in God, shall be blessed of
God, so that he shall be still in a florishng estate, what ever heat, j.
stirs or alterations and changes others feel, he shall be well still, for
he shall be always fruitful, and indeed this is the only happiness of a
christian to be fruitful in good works, and this is the misery of all
miseries, to be barren in good works, that pincheth his heart, and is as a
scorching heat indeed, but so long as one trusts in God, he shall be kept in the
spring still, it shall be no winter nor fall of the leaf; Faith makes a
perpetual spring time. So he says in the Psa. Trust in God, and he shall
give thee thine hearts desire, he that would have what he can wish or desire,
let him trust in god, for this intitles him to all gods promises, yea it gives
him intrest to god himself, and having him, he can want nothing. The means
how we shall come to this trust in god, is to meditate on his power, to know
that he is able to help us, though we have all the world against us, and
contrariwise that unless God do help us, all the world, and all the helps in
the world, shall be no furtherance unto us. Then also to consider his mercy,
that has delivered other of his children, when they were in as great
necessity, and when they were drunken with gall and vvormewood with sore and
grievous afflictions, he has made them sober with true comfort and
consolation. These meditations often arising and nourished in our hearts, will
bring us at length to lean to him, and build only upon him, that is the sure
and unremovable foundation.

The use of this is, to teach us to get this confidence and trust in God, that
so we may have our hearts desire, and may always flourish, that though heat
come, though temptations and calamities befall us, and all things seemed to be
tumbled and cast vpside down, yet we be in safety, for no man is hurt till
unbelief and distrust hurt him, if the soul be not hurt by unbelief, all
other things are so far from hurting us, as that they shall do us great good.
Now the marks whereby we may know that we do in deed, not in word only,
trust and rely upon God alone, are (that we may name some of them) these:
first to use all good means faithfully to serve Gods providence, no man is
more diligent in putting all good means in practice, then he that has a most
constant and firm faith in God. As we may see that in Jacob, he had a promise
that he should prevail with men, since he had prevailed with God, and that he
should not now be called Jacob any more, one that takes men by the heel, but
he shall be called Israel, one that so wrestles with God, that preuailes with
him. When Jacob received this promise, and did fully trust in God for his
deliverance, yet he was slack in providing all things that might pacify
Esau, nay who could have used more wise and good means then he did, but still
honest means, for straight he sends him a present to assuage his wrath, and
sends them out all together, but sets a distance twixt one and other, that so
this pause might make him digest them the better, and his wrath might by little
and little go out, otherwise the flame might have been so great, that it
would have made him devoured and consumed all, if they had run to him all at
once, and then he bids them all to make legs, and do obeisance, and call him
my Lord Esau, in great wisdom and discretion: for give a covetous man wealth
enough; and an ambitious man honor enough, and you may lead him whether ye
will. So did Paul likewise, when God had promised him to bestow upon him all
that were in the ship, he would not neglect the means, for when the mariners
would craftily have gotten them away, in the boat, he would not suffer it, but
tells them, that if they went away, they should be all drowned, and so they
should indeed, for as God had appointed to save all, so he had appointed to
save them all together, and by those means. So for our feeding, he that would
say, he trusts that God would feed him, yet would not stir his hand to put
meat into his mouth, all men would say that he counterfaited* for he that
trusts that God will feed him, will eat that meat which God has appointed to
feed him. So for that man which hopes for a crop, he will not sit at home and
be idle, but he that trusts that God will give him a good harvest, will use
all means, he will plow, and sow his ground, and leave nothing undone, and he
that uses this means in conscience to God, shows that he does trust in God.
So for the soul, if you say I trust God will give me everlasting life, and
save my soul, then you will pray, then you will hear the word, then you will
meditate upon the word, and receive the sacraments; otherwise, if you will
persecute the ministers of God, and be troublesome to those that teach you,
and care not at all to pray, or do any such thing, these words be but wind,
you do not trust that God will save your soul, what ever brags you make. And
in truth though there be many among us that will say, they trust to be saved,
as well as the proudest (as they that be proud themselves, always think that
other men are proud) yet they do but deceive their own hearts, they have no
faith in God for their salvation, for if they had, they would pray, and confer,
and meditate, and keep themselves unspotted of this wicked world, and do
other things which God has appointed as means of salvation, and has no more
promised to save any without them, then that any should be fed without food.

A second note of this true confidence, is not to be discouraged, when we
want the means, as when we have them, we will not trust on them, so when
we want them, we will not be dismayed, if we put our confidence in God, for
the heart is never dismayed till the hope be gone, and if God be our hope, then
so long as he remains, our comfort remains. But this is the miserable
corruption of our nature, that if all these outward things be gone, then we sit
down discontented and discouraged, and think that our case is desperate, and
we are undone, but if riches and outward matters flow in, and we have the
world at will, then as the rich man in the gosple we say, though not in word
yet in deed, Soul take thine ease, now thou have store laid up for many
years. And why would he give his soul allowance to take it ease, not because
his heart was full of gods promises, for that had been a good reason, and a
sound rejoicing: but because his barnes were full of corn, and this was to
withdraw his heart from God, for who ever promises himself more fafetie one
whit for his wealth, makes an idol of his wealth, and sets it in the room of
God.

Therefore Job proves by this, that he did trust in God, for he did not greatly
rejoice in it wealth, he was not very glad that he had much gold, and many
cattle and grounds, for he knew God did not love him one jott the better for
all that, nor all his wealth could keep one cross from him, or prolong his
life one minute of an hour, and therefore he did not much rejoice to see these
things come in by heaps, and so when all was gone, he had soon made his
accounts, God has given, God has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord, when
I had them I was not the better, I did not trust in them, and therefore now they
are gone, I am not much vexed, it was no part of my greatest happiness to have
them, nor is no part of my greatest sorrow that I have so suddenly lost them.
But this our discouragement and whining and murmuring, when we want the means,
shows that we trust not in God, but in them, for if we live at Gods finding,
who must provide for us, no man's life consists in his riches says Christ, if
God be our father and he must find us, why are we not content with his
promise? what though he keep things in his own hand, because we know not how
to use them. But this is the matter we would be our own gods as it were, and
be at our own finding, and in this matter we be far more foolish then our
own children, for they keep no stir, and do not trouble them selves to
think how shall I do to bring the year about, how shall I get provision for
the next year? or what if ill weather come, and so many doubts, but they are
merry and fresh, and think not of these matters, but make account that their
fathers will see them provided for, and will not suffer them to want any thing,
and therefore when they need they go to them, and make account that all is
well, and they shall have it. And why should not we do so to God, if we did in
truth as we say we do, account that he is our father, and trust upon him,
and give but so much credit to him as our children do to us, why should not
we think our selves sufficiently provided for, if we have his promise, if
we could indeed come to make him our trust, thus we should unload our hearts
of much coffeehouse and disquietnesse, and live far more cheerfully, then
now, by reason of our unbelief and distrust we do, or can do.

The last sign to know whether we trust in God or not, is to examine whether
we seek his love and favor, for that which any man makes his trust, that he
does most labor to obtain. What does any man speak of most in the day, and
think of most in the night, and seek after most in all his life? If it be
lucre? then he trustes in his lucre. So that man that places his happiness
and seeks his felicity only in pleasure, he will most seek and strive to
get his pleasure, and is most vexed if it be taken from him. But if one trust
in God, then he would most labor to get the love and favor of God, because he
knows he can have nothing from him self, or any other, but only from god; as
in Ps. 62. 11. 12. He sets down two causes why we must not trust in man nor
riches, that is, in any outward thing, for power belongs unto God, and mercy
belonges unto God: All the men in the world, and all the riches in thee world,
have no power to help us, unless god put it in them, for all power is his
own, and so for mercy, there is no kindness in any man or angel which they
have not from God, no man nor angel can show us any kindness, unless God
give them that kindness, and if they do, we must confess that it comes from
him. Since then all power is reached from Gods hand, and all mercy is derived
from him, that nothing either can help us, or if it could, yet would help us,
but so far as he puts both the power and will into it: therefore those that
believe this, cannot choose but seek Gods favor, for then they are assured
that nothing can be able to hurt them; yea, God can make all things, so far as
it is profitable, willing, and ready to do them good.

So much concerning the first commandment, which shows us whom we must
worship, namely God, and wherein this worship consists, namely in a sound
knowledge of him, and from this knowledge, in loving and fearing and trusting
in him, with all our heart and soul. Now follows the second commandment.

Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven. etc.
IN all which commandment is showed by what outward means we must worship
God, namely, not after the inventions of flesh and blood, but after the
commandment of his holy word. The commandment contains a prohibition, in
these words, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the
likeness of any thing in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the
waters under the earth, thou shall not bow to them, nor worship them. These
words contain the prohibition, forbidding us to have any Images to represent
God, or to help us in his worship, or to have any superstitious or will
worship, thereby to please him the better. The reasons ratifieng the
prohibition, are two, one drawn from the vengeance of God against Idolaters
and superstitious persons, in these words, For I the Lord thy God am a Jealous
God, visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children, to the third and
fourth generation of them that hate me. Showing Gods power in that he is
Jehovah, and a strong God, as the word signifies, and his will that he is a
jealous God: the similitude is taken from a jealous husband that can abide no
light behavior of his wife, but he will be revenged on it. So God cannot
endure that any one that is his should once look to Images, or superstition,
for if any do, as by reason of his strength, he is able, so he is willing also
to revenge it on the sons, and sons sons, to the fourth generation of
such as do it.

The second reason is taken from the reward that God will bestow upon all such
as worship him purely, hating Idolatry and false worship, that he will not
only bless them, but theirs, to a thousands. Never forgeting to show mercy
unto those that worship him purely, so that all their posterity shall fare the
better for them.

Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above. First, in that God does set down so largely and
so plainly, and in so many words this commandment, he shows how exceeding
ready we are to fall into the breach of it. Hence then we may gather this
doctrine, that our nature is wonderful prone to Idolatry, and we are very
apt and ready to worship God falsely and superstitiously, for if it were not
so, then why would not God content himself to be as short here as he is in
most of the rest: but we see for this and the saboth, how largely he sets them
down, and how he mounds and fenceth them on every side, with strong reasons;
which does declare that he knows us very willing on any least occasion, to
break out from keeping of them: as we may mark here. First he says, Thou
shall make to thy self no Image: No, might some carnal man say, indeed we
will make no Image of any earthly thing, for these cannot set out God well
enough, but for heavenly things, those be more excellent; therefore to prevent
this, God shuts out all excuses, and says, that no man must make the Image of
any thing in heaven, or in earth, or in the sea, or in any place whatsoever.
But yet flesh would shift and say indeed it is true, we must make no
resemblance or Image, or piece of an Image of any thing, but this is meant that
it must not be done to that intent to give any divine worship to the Image it
self, and to honor that as God, but we may make these Images to help us in
worshipping God. Nay, says God, thou shall not bow down nor worship them.
j. neither give them the greatest honor nor the least honor, nor any honor
at all: so that God meets with every objection, that our flesh might have no
pretense of breaking this commandment, left it.

Then the grievous threatening that God uses to affright men from it, shows
that they are easy and vvilling to be drawn unto it, and that there is a
strange promise and inclination in every man's nature, to this sin of false
worship. So in Deuteronomy. 7. 25. 26. God labors with the people of Israel there,
that they should not in the land of Canaan when they met with Idols covered
with gold and silver, covet or touch one parcel of the plate, or meddle with
it, for if they did, it would ensnare them, it would make them remember the
Idol, and from remembering fall to liking, and at length to worship it;
therefore it is an abomination to God, and he that will keep a piece of gold
of the Idol, it is the next way to make him grow a worshipper of the Idol,
which that God is so careful to remove the least occasions, that might draw
them to Idolatry, shows that men be wonderfully bent and inclined to this
idolatry that God hates; and this appears by the example of the children of
Israel, which were the church of God, and the seed of Abraham, for, for all
the world else, there was nothing else but false worship, and the whole
earth was overwhelmed with a sea of Idolatry; but these Israelites were but
a while among the Egiptians, and we see how soon they were infected with
their disease, but when God had pulled them out of that hell of the world, that
was so full stuffed with all such abomination, and brought them into the
wilderness, where they were alone, and no people else to provoke them to
it; yet when Moses that restrained them was away but forty days, then they
took liberty, and the lust that had been smothered by his presence, now brast
forth, and they gave themselves and all that they had most part of them, to
Idolatry, and to a calfe. And after when God had brought them into the land
of promise, and they had been there a while, they could no sooner have any
little space of prosperity and ease, but presently they run a madding after
the Idols of the land, so that God was feign almost continually to keep them
under with afflicton and trouble. And then after when David and Solomon had
reigned, one would have thought that in that space all relics and
remembrance of Idolatry had been quite banished and swept away, so that no man
should ever have persuaded them to fall to worship calves again. But no
sooner had Jeroboam parted with the house of David, and set up two calves, but
without any stay the whole ten tribes generally became worshippers of
calves, so that the two calves which he set up, could do more harm then all
the good instructions and examples that was in the days of David and Solomon,
could do good to keep them from Idolatry. And when Rehoboam had a little
ease, he began to set up Idolatry, and then the people quickly yielded unto
him; so that both Isarael and Judah were quickly polluted and ouerrun with
false and Idolatrous worship. But after when Hezekiah came, he was a good
man and stood for Gods worship, and so near as he could, swept away all
monuments of the Idolatry of Judah; yet shortly after, when Manasses came up,
the people were turned the vvrong way again, and then they grew more mad then
ever before; for then he would kill all that would hold up their heads for Gods
true worship, and would not yield to his invention, so that he filled Jerusalem
with innocent blood* from corner to corner. So we might see it among our selves
in popery, no wall or window, or house, or church, but it was full of Idols, for
when God withdrew the light of his spirit a while, all was ouerwelmed with
Idolatry; so prone is our nature to this spiritual whoredom.

The use of this is, to teach us to avoid all means and occasions that may
draw us unto this filthy sin. In which thing when Solomon was not very
circu^spect, but would marry with superstitious wives, how quickly did he grow
supersticious like them. And Amaziah when he had overcome the Edomits, and put
them to flight, so that they were constrained to leave their Gods, and fly for
their lives, yet the very looking on these Idols did infect him: for as the
eyes of an harlot, and looking on her will infect one with uncleanness, so the
looking on an Idol will pollute an ignorant and blind heart, and bring it to
confusion. But David did otherwise, for when he was following the Philistines,
and had them now in chase, so hard as they were driven to leave their gods and
run for their lives, yet he left pursuing them, and had rather stay, for he
found a greater work then slaying his enemies, because he knew that such was
the corruption that was in his men, and himself, as that these Idols might
have done them more harm, then all the Philistines could; and therefore that
none might be infected and corrupted by them, he and his men took them all and
burnt them with fire.

Therefore if we have any care of our selves, and to keep our selves from
idolatry, beware of the company of idolatrous persons, for as an honest and
chaste woman cannot be long in the company of adulterers, but she shall be
stained with their impuritie, and shall get some blot by their filthiness, so
it is impossible that one should converse long with idolaters, and not get some
taint of their superstition. For as an adulterer will first strive to draw the
wives mind from her husband, and accuse his laws and dealings as hard and
unjust, and afterward endeavor to draw to his own lure, so it is with these
spiritual adulterers, first they will do what tkey can to bring one in
dislike with Gods pure service and with his ministers and ministry, as indeed
our love of Christ, and his word, and ministers is not so hot for the most
part, but that a few idle clamors and false accusations will quickly cool it,
and then haueing, drawn us from the true worship of God, we are easily caught
and persuaded to any thing, so that no opinion can be so fantastical and
heretical, but if the author of it can bring us in dislike with Gods service,
and his ministers, we shall be ready enough to embrace it, and to follow it.
But since our nature is so prone and inclinable to this sin, we must not come
in the company or place where idolaters and idols be, nor let our eyes once
look upon them* for if we do, it is to be feared least that which has
poisoned and infected others, may poison and infect us also.

Also this serves to confute the rash boldness of many, that nothing
considering their own nature, nor the filthiness and poison of idolatry, dare
say that none shall be able to infect them or hurt them: indeed many may say to
their shame, that none shall make them worse, for howsoever, it cannot be but
some addition will be to their sin, yet they be so bad already, that they can
hardly be made much worse by any company, yet many such there be, so bold and
foole-hardy, that think it a childish thing to fear, least one should be
drawn to worship an idol; what should I bow to an image, or look for any
good from a stock and a stone? but what will they say of Solomon, was he a
fool? did he want wit? nay he was filled full of all wisdom, and was beloved
of God yet when he would be familiar with idolaters, he could not keep
himself, but he was overtaken with idolatry. And Amaziah a man in the
beginning of his reign, that walked outwardly in the ways of God, and was
for other matters a good and valiant prince, when he would but look on these
adulterers and idols, he was caught, though it seemed he had many things to
keep him back, for he had then experience of their weakness, how that they
could not help the Edomits, as after the Prophet told him. Therefore this is
not courage in many, that will not care to go into the houses of idols, to
look on the^, and gaze on their ornaments and pictures, they are not afraid to
go to see and hear the mass, and such like things, indeed a vagrant and a
runnagate, that has nothing, cares not whether he goes, it is all one with him
to go by night or by day, to go in the most dangerous places as the safest,
not because he has more courage and strength, but because he that has
nothing, can loose nothing, and so these vagrants and runagates in religion,
that have no piety nor fear of God, they care not to bow and stoop and do
any thing to idols, but he that knows his own frailty, and his nature what
it is, and has any thing to loose or keep, will take heed and beware in what
places and company he comes, least he take hurt and infection by them. For
men must not think that ministers have least strength and courage of any
other, or are the most dastardly and weak men, because they will not
willingly come in ill company, and among ill persons and hear ill words, but
they know the curse of God on those that do so, and they know their own
weakness and frailty, and in this regard, as every one has more virtue and
more godliness, so he will more beware of any thing that may hurt him, or
infect him. So much for the general, in that he stands so largely in
forbiding all manner of idols, and all manner of worship, showing how apt we
are to seek shifts in this point.

Thou shall not make to thy self any idol.
IN that God first forbids the making, then the worshipping of idols. The
doctrine that we learn from hence is, that he that would avoid idolatry,
must avoid idols, as in the corporal marriage, those that would avoid
adultery, must avoid adulterers, so in the spiritual marriage those that will
keep themselves from idolatry, must keep themselves from idols. Therefore the
holy Ghost himself 1. John. 5. says, Babes beeware of Idols, meeting with a
secret objection that might be made. Indeed I hate idolatry, but yet to have
idols, to put me in mind of God, and to beautify the place, that I trust is
no such peril? Yes it is, beware of idols, if you will be freed from
idolatry, put away all prouokements and inducements to it. Now of these idols
some are more damnably blasphemous, and most directly against this
commandment, and those are such as are made to represent any of the three
persons in Trinity, the Father, Son, or holy Ghost, and these what ever
pretense or purpose one has in setting them up, are simply evil. Therefore
Deuteronomy. 4. 12. Moses shows the people, that when God came purposely to show
his power near unto them, and to speak in their ears, yet he showed no
image nor resemblance of himself, but only they heard a voice; and therefore
in any case they should not go about to make any image to represent God unto
them. So Isai. 40. 18. Whereunto will ye liken me? what similitude will ye
make of me? There he shows the cause of making of images to resemble God, is
because we cannot conceive of him, and his greatness so as we should, for if
heaven and earth, and all things in heaven and earth be compared to him, they
are not only nothing, but less then nothing, and therefore what thing can
they find to set forth Gods Magestie, what comparison is betwixt a spiritual
substance and a bodily, betwixt a thing infinite and finit, betwixt that that
contains all things in himself, and that which is less then nothing.
Therefore it is a blasphemous debasement of his Magestie, and lifts not up our
hearts unto him, but draws down our hearts from him, to conceive carnally of
him, as of those things which we see. If we should see a man have snakes and
toades and adders in great account and reverence, and if we ask him why he
gave such honor to these things, why, because I set them up as pictures of my
prince, I but is there no other thing to set out your prince? these be not fit
things nor comely, to put you in remembrance of your sovereign, who will not
say, that this were a great disgrace to the prince: But now, there is a
thousand times more agreement, betwixt the greatest prince and a toad, then
betwixt God and an idol? for the toad is a creature of God, as well as the
prince, but an idol is the work of man's fingers; a toad has life and sense
excellent gifts, and wherein it something resembles the prince: but to set God
out by any Idol, him that is infinite in wisdom by a senceles thing, him to
the workmanship of man's hands, that cannot sufficiently be conceived by all
his own works, what a shameful and miserable disgrace is this unto his
Magestie: but yet here arises an objection, that some make; indeed for God
the Father, and the holy Ghost they be spirits, and cannot be represented to
us, by any thing, but what say you of God the Son; he took upon him the
nature of man, may not one make an image of him? But to this we may answer,
that it is unlawful to make an image of Christ, because we cannot choose but
in painting or making any image of him, we must needs leave out the chief
part of him, which is his divinity, for it is the Godhead that makes him to be
Christ, and what is this, but to separate those things which God has
unseperably joined together, which is accursed; and in so doing, what
difference do we make betwixt Christ and the thief that did hang upon the
cross with him; that therefore is a vvretched resemblance, but if we would
see an image of Christ, look upon poor christians, that walk up and down
amongst us, for they be flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, and there is
some resemblance of him; for they have a body and a reasonable soul, as he
had. But for the Idol, he that will say he can be better put in mind of
Christ, by gazing upon a picture painted on the wall, or an image hanged up in
some place, then by loking on poor christians, for whom Christ shed his blood,
and in whom he dwells continually by his spirit, he shows himself to be a
blind and ignorant man. Since then Christ is both god and man, and the maine
thing that makes him Christ is his godhead, let us know that it is a wicked
impiety to make an image of Christ, since we can no way resemble that, that
makes him Christ. But if we would see God, and see Christ, let us look one him,
according as he has reueald himself in his word, for so Christ is called the
engraven form of his father, that as he which would know what is graven on the
seal, need but look upon the wax, and there he shall see it: So he that
would see God, let him look on Christ as he is set out to us in the word, and
there he shall see his power his wisdom, his mercy, his truth, and all his
properties. So much of the first and most notorious kind of idols. Another
kind of idol there is, not so presumptuously wicked, and in such an high
degree of impiety, and that is to make an image or picture of gold or silver
or wood, or any such matter, to be put in mind of God, and helped the better to
worship and serve him. For this putting in mind, God has showed what an idol
will put one in mind of, and what an image will teach, Habak. 2. 18. What
profits the image? the maker thereof has made it an image, and a teacher of
lies. He shows indeed that images be teachers, and as they call them lay
men's books, but then he shows what lessons they teach, namely lies, and then
in the next verse, he shows what one shall get by being a scholar of these
teachers. viz. the curse of God: for so he ads, Woe unto him, that says to the
wood arise, and to the dumb stone arise, it shall teach thee, I but will some
say, no man will be so foolish as to say to the stone arise: But indeed they
do say so, for in that they kneel down to them, and knock their breasts
before them, and creep unto them, all this implies that they hope to speed
the better by that wood* or stone, and by that means to get themselves some
good: and this is all one, as if they should say arise, awake and go. We would
count him an absurd fellow that would say, I will go to yonder stone, and
speak to it, and entreat it that at my request it would walk up and down a
little; but now whosoever goes to it, kneeles before it, kisseth it, set a
candle before it, or any such like, is even as absurd, for in so doing he
shows that he thinks that stone can arise, and has some power to bless him,
and do him good, therefore God gives him his wages for his work, and says he
is accursed.

So in 106. Psalm. from 35. to 39. ver. He shows the cause, progress, and
reward of this idolatry in the Jews: they mingled themselves with idolaters,
what came of that? then they learned their manners, and what then? that was
their ruin. There he shows, that they did not root out idolaters, as God
commanded them, but would grow in acquaintance with them, and by that means
learned their ways, and their manner of serving God, till at length they
became so zealous and so hot, as that they would offer their own children to
the idols, indeed to devils, for they would imitate Abraham, and that which he
was content to have done, that they would do indeed, he was willing to offer
Isaac to god, but they went further, they offered the^ up indeed to their idols,
and so thinking to please God, they did that which he abhorred, and thereby
defiled and stained themselves and the land, for as Gods ordinances do cleanse
and purge men, so the inventions of the flesh do polute and defile, and
heerevpon his wrath flamed against them, so that he gave them up to their
enemies that hated them, because they gave themselves to that which he hated.
So Psa. 135. 15. The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, even the work
of men's hands, they be but the wormanship of man at the most, and therefore
inferior and less then men, for always the work is inferior to the maker of
it; and then he discribs them, They have eyes and see not, ears and hear not,
feet and go not, etc. And so says he, are those that make them, and those
that trust in them, j. hope by their means to fare the better, think by
kissing, knocking, kneeling, etc, unto them, to get any good; Idolaters and
idol makers, will you know what they be? they have eyes and see not, ears and
hear not, mouths and speak not, they have no use of soul or body, for if
they had they would never be so base minded, as to hope for any good from
stocks and stones, or look to be helped of them. Therefore they are even as
blockish and foolish as the idols themselves. But here may be an objection to;
Did not Solomon make Cherubins in the temple, and did not Moses make the brazen
serpent? Why then should idols and images be so odious and hateful unto us.
But to this we may answer, that God forbids to make an image to our selves:
now Solomon did not make the Cherubins to him self, but to God, because he had
a commandment and warrant from God so to do. So for the brazen serpent, Moses
made it not of his own mind, but from the direction of God, so that was no
more an invention of man, then the scriptures and sacraments are; for he was
commanded of God how to make it, of what figure, in what place, and to what
use. So for the Cherubins, God appointed them likewise, to signify, that God
had his wings as it were, spread out, that whosoever would come to him in the
Church, should have protection and shelter from him, at all times. But this
makes nothing for making of idols, to worship god by them. For because Solomon
made an image at Gods appointment, therefore, may we make one at the idols
appointment? and if Moses set up a brazen serpent by Gods direction, may we by
the direction of flesh and blood? that follows not. But for that very serpent
that God had commanded to be set up when men would look on it with to great a
reverence, and had it into great request and honor; Hezekiah was so bold as to
pull it down and grind it to powder, and this is written as a thing of
commendations in him. We must make no images to our selves then, but if God bid
us, then we may, for then we make them to God, and then if God say who required
these things at your hands, we may answer with comfort, thou did O Lord.

Since then the worshipping of images is the worshipping of idols, as it is said
in the Psalm before named. 136. For he that does Gods work he worships God, and
he that does the devils work he worships the devil? and since all idols be
condemned in gods service, because they have no warrant from God, nor he has
not appointed any signification of them. This serves for the reproving of all
those that have bowed down unto them, kissed them, or used any homage unto
them. For in Isai, 66. 3. He sets down this as a note of an unregenerate man
to bless an idol, one need go no further for the note of a wicked sinner,
then if he bless an idol. For by worshipping it, in this commandment, he
means not to account it as God, but to think that by any reverence done before
the idol, one shall get some help, that this shall be a means of good, to do
this, is spiritual whordome. For so in Isai. 42. 8. He says, I am the Lord, I
will not give my glory to an other. One had better therefore dye the death, then
use any bodily gesture of reverence to an idol* And this the three Children
knew full well in Daniell. For when the King commanded them on pain of death
to fall down, he did not bind their souls but only their bodies, yet they
would not; one would think they might have done that, and done it in their
hearts to God, but they knew that if they had defiled their body with the
least bow, it would have drawn Gods curse upon their soul and body; and
therefore they durst not do it. Therefore since this is spiritual whordom,
those that have done it must repent for it, and know that they have infected
their souls with a damnable sin, for which if they do not thoroughly repent,
it is said, that when times and occasion shall serve, they will fall to it as
freshly as ever before, for then it is not the fear of God that has repressed
it, but the positive law does a little restrain it, which if it be removed,
their lust will break forth as much as ever before; as it was seen by the
Israelits, in the wilderness, therefore we must be truly humbled, for it, and
labor for assurance of pardon. And though men will say they did it with a good
intent and in good meaning, and in love to Christ, yet all these excuses will
not serve the turn. It were an ill excuse in a wife to say she loved her
husband exceedingly, and therefore in his absence she must have others to see
them, and look on them, and to embrace them, and all this for love to her
husband, the husband would scarce think well of this love; yea, it would be
abominable unto him. And it is much worse to kiss an idol, and bow down to
it, and then say, it was for love to Christ.

An other use of this is, that we must labor to get the true and sound
knowledge of God, out of his word, and a fervent love of him; for till then a
man is in danger to fall to idolatry. But if one see Christ in his word, and
know his spiritual properties, then they shall say as the church, in Hosea.
14. What have we to do any more with Idols, we have hard God and seen God.
For then we shall see better and more excellent things in him, then can be
found in any image: but till this we are not well fenced against idolatry, as
in the natural marriage, the wife is sure from adultrie if she love her
husband, but till then she lies open to adulterers, so betwixt christ and us;
then are we safe from idols, when we have gotten a fervent love of Christ. Many
will boldly say, what bow down to an idol? kneel to a stock or a stone;
sure I shall never do it, but as good as you have done it, but what cause or
what reason have you to think you shall not? have you seen Christ Jesus
discribed in his word? have you seen him, and received his body and blood in
the sacrament? if one have seen his excellent beauty in these means, he
shall abhor an idol, as an ugly thing, and if ones soul love Christ and seek
after him in these means, he will never fall to this filthiness, but loath and
detest it, but else he is in continual danger to fall to spiritual
whordome, what ever he can say now, when the times do not serve. Thus much for
the gross and direct breach of this commandment, by making an image to
represent god, which is impious, or to help one in his worship which is
idolatrous.

The second breach of this is superstition, when one does not go to stocks
and stones, but uses those ways and inventions in worshipping God, which are
not commanded of God in his word, but be the appointment of men, for Mat. 15.
9. Christ says that they worship him in vain, teaching for doctrines men's
precepts. If it have no further beginning then man's brain, God will give no
blessing to it, yea he sends a curse upon it, for cursed is he that ads any
thing to Gods book, God will add so much to his plagues. And the reason is,
because he makes himself wiser or better then God. For if God be perfectly
wise, then he knew best what worship would please him, and if he be perfectly
good, then he would reveal unto us, what ever he knew fit for us to practice.
Again it is a great injury offered to God, when we will let his deadly
enemies, have the ordering and appointing of his service, rather then himself.
A king would think it a great indignity, that his servants would not serve
him after his direction, but some base fellow that were a professed enemy
should set down, what meats he must have, and in what manner he must be
served, and all his attendance and provision: but much more absurd and
injurious it is, that we will let flesh and blood bear the sway in his
worship, for these do join with the devil, and are enmity to God. And if
we will have this pre-eminence in our house, and that our servants must do
that which we bid them, not what they themselves think good, for he is a good
servant that does his masters will, not his own, then why should not we think
it right, that god must be lord in his house, and we must do his service after
his appointment and not our own.

This serves to condemn the Papists, that are most guilty in this point, and
have defiled the whole worship of God with their own inventions, and
superstition; as in prayer, by praying to the dead, and for the dead, and by
making other mediators then Christ, in all which God may, and will say unto
them, who required these things at your hands? So likewise in the sacraments;
for the Lords supper, the bread must be conjured and crossed, and likewise the
wine, or else they think it is not sufficiently sanctified: but where has
Gods word commanded any of these things? If they be so needful then, they
condemn God for want of wisdom, that could not see it, or if they were not
needful, how dare they be so bold as to add them to Gods ordinance? So in
baptism, they have added spittle, salt, and cream, and such trompery, all
which is wicked and abominable, and comes under this, who required these
things at your hands? So for the ministry, how have they corrupted it, by
Popes, Cardinals, Abbots, Monks, Friars, and the rest of that crew, and then
they have appointed their Priest to offer a sacrifice propitiatory, for quick
and dead, whereof there is no mention in the scripture of God, and therefore
there can be no blessing upon them, for they proceed from the flesh, and not
from the spirit, and sprang from out of the earth, and did not come down from
heaven. Therefore also we are to be exceeding thankful unto God, that has
freed us from all these things, and that we are taught to worship God aright,
taught to pray in the holy Ghost, and have the word purelie and soundly
delivered unto us, having such a teaching as God has commanded, and to which
he has also annexed a blessing, and so for the sacraments, that leaving these
toys, they are administered in that sort, that God has commanded.

So much for the things forbidden in this commandment, namely, idolatry and
superstition. Now as this false worship is forbidden in this commandment, so
the contrary, namely the pure and holy worship of God is enjoined, and we are
commanded here to stand for, and to practice all the good means whereby God
has commanded himself to be worshipped. These are either more ordinary as
prayer, hearing, and reading the word, and receiving of the sacraments and
discipline. The less ordinary, are fasting, which is to be used to the intent
that we may the more soundly humble our souls before God, and be reconciled
unto him, and is then specially to be practiced, when that we would be freed
from some judgment of God, that we either feel or fear, or else when we
would obtain some special blessing that we do earnestly desire. It was
commanded in the law once a year, that they might be acquainted with it, and
have a perfect reconciliation with God. A second less ordinary means of Gods
worship is vows, which are to be used on special occasions, when to
stre^gthen our selves against some sin, or in performing some duty, we do
bind our conscience, to avoid all occasions that may draw us into the one,
and to use all good means, that may further us in the other. The third is
lots, which is apart of gods worship, to be used in matters of weight, to the
deciding of controversies to the ending of strife and contention: an example of
which we have in the Acts. 1. Where being to choose an Apostle in Judas stead,
and not knowing the fittest they committed the matter to Gods special
piouidence, in casting lots. So in choosing of a King, which was a matter of
great importance: because no strife and contention should arise of any tribe,
toward other, therefore they cast lots and so chose him, whom God pointed out
as it were by the finger. And the like they did in dividing the land of Canaan,
least any emulation or envy should arise among them, they used Gods own hand
as it were in giving every tribe his inheritance. In such matters of weight and
moment, then these lots must be used for these ends, as a good service of God.
The last less ordinary part of Gods worship is an oath, which is in like
matters of weight to be used. Since these things are as stricktly commanded, as
the other are forbidden, this condemns the corruption and looseness of our
times.

Many think that if they be free from idolatry and superstition, then they
have kept this commandment, and have not broken this, Thou shall make to thy
self no graven image. This is not so, for one may be a damnable breaker of
this commandment, for all this, for God commands as well as forbids, and we
must turn from dumb idols, to serve the living God, or else there is no true
conversion. Many can say, that they do not pray superstitiously, but do they
ever pray religiously? they spend no time in vain repetitions, but do they
spend any time in faithful and holy petitions* praying in the holy Ghost? they
read no Popish books, but do they read the book of God? they come not at
Mass, but do they reverently receive the Lords supper? they have left off
Popish fasts, like enough, for we are fallen from Popery to plain impiety:
but do they fast a christian fast? as they did it sinfully, do they do it
conscionably? in casting down themselves and celebrating a sabbath unto God,
to confess their sins and crave pardon for the same. But for want of these
things, many want the blessing of God, which they might have, and are breakers
of this commandment, because they be not so dilligent in using the good
means of their salvation, as they were in using the ill means of their
destruction; and are not as careful to plant in the holy worship of God, as to
pull up the superstitious, so that such are as well guilty of the breach of
this commandment as idolaters, they for doing that they should not; we for not
doing that we should; they for using false worship; we for not using the true
worship of God: but then we shall be true worshippers of God, when we shun and
hate all false worship, and put in practice all the parts of this true worship
of the true God.

So much of the commandment, forbidding all kind of false worship, and
commanding the contrary, viz. with all reverence and conscience, to perform,
love, and stand for the true worship of god. Now follows the reason of this
commandment, drawn partly from Gods judgments against all false worshippers,
and from his mercy and kindness to the^ that worship him in truth. The
judgment toward the breakers of this commandment is, that he will not only
plague them, and take vengeance on the^ in their own persons, but he will
execute his wrath also on their seed and posterity to the third and fourth
generation. Which is therefore set down because it is a very hard thing to
persuade even that this is so great and fearful a sin, when in a good meaning
as they say, they serve God after another manner, then he has warranted and
commanded. The reason taken from his kindness, to those that are obedient,
because we are very slow and slack to the right service of God, is to allure
and provoke us, because that god will not only bless such an one in his own
soul and body, both in life and death, but his blessing shall reach further
even upon many generations in his posterity, so that God will never leave
blessing those that with an upright heart worship him in truth according to his
word.

I am Jehovah thy God, a jealous strong God.
IN these words calling himself our God, he implies that there is an everlasting
marriage betwixt god and us, and therefore as it is a foul fact, for a woman
after her marriage, and the covenant of god betwixt the^, to defile her body
with filthy adulterers. So it is a much more heinous and abominable thing, for
any man or woman, after his covenant with God, to follow idols and images, not
contenting himself with the perfect beauty of Christ. Then where he says a
jealous God, he compares himself to an husband, that as he loves his wife
most tenderly and dearly, whilst she remains chaste and faithful, so is he
most offended and provoked if she deal lewdely and trecherously with him, so
Christ Jesus has loved us most dearly, and given his blood for us, but if we
deal not chastely with him in this case, he will be as a jealous man, whose
most abundant love being abused does burst forth into the strongest hatred, as
Solomon says that jealousy is the rage of man, and the eye of iealousy sees
all things.

Then he calls himself a strong God, showing his power, that he has ability
as willingness to punish, in that he calls himself jealous, it declares that
he wants not will and cause to power vengeance on them, and in that he is a
strong God, he is of might sufficient to plague and confound those that
wickedly break his covenant. From all this description whereby God has set out
himself unto us, to be our God, and a jealous God, that cannot abide any such
filthiness, and a strong mighty God, that is able to execute his wrath on the
offenders: we may and must take courage and comfort, to stand for Gods pure
worship, against all idolaters and idolatry, and all manner of superstition;
being that he is our God, one that has bound himself in covenant to defend
and protect us, as also he is jealous, which carries a flame of love to all
those that be faithful, as well as an exceeding detestation of the
unfaithful, and then he is a strong God, not strong with an idle kind of
strength that lies hide within him, and never is put in practice, but he does
use his strength to the maintayning and protecting of all such as are true
friends to him, and maintayners of his worship. Which is for comfort of those,
whose friends and such from whom they have their maintenance, are popish and
will hate them and be enemies to them, if they be enemies to superstition, and
love God and his worship: but fear not that, God is a strong God, if they will
not help, he will, they have no such power against you, as god has for you,
so long as you continue upright in his worship. This is also for the terror of
all idolatrous and superstitious persons, that have many things to uphold them,
and are well friended and strong defended, but yet mischief shall be their end
in the end, because he is stronger then all men, that sets himself against
them, and whom they provoked even to jealousy by their filthiness; who sees
all their ways, as he says, pull out thine adulteries from betwixt thy
breasts, that is those monuments of idolatry, which idolaters put so much trust
in, as Agnus dei, etc. pull them out, they offend him, he cannot abide the
sight of them, no more then a jealous husband the wantonness of his wife
before his face, God cannot I say endure this impuritie and wickedness, and
withal he is strong, which name he gives here to himself, not bragging and
boasting of his might, but to let all idolaters know, what an one they shall
find and feel him to be in their punishments and plagues. So much for the
names by which God sets out himself in this reason.

Visiting the sins of the fathers on the children.
FIrst it may be objected, how God can in justice do this and punish the
children for the fathers fault: But to that one may answer as God does in
Hosea. 2. 2. speaking to the Jews, he bids them plead with their mother,
comparing him self to an husband, he shows that there is no fault in him, but
all the blame lies on the adulterous mother, for as an husband may without any
fault put away the wife, that has dealt trecherouslie, and her adulterous
brood to, so God may justly plague and forsake both the parents, and the
wicked children of wicked parents.

Now his vengeance upon the children of Idolatrous parents, is showed
especially in these things. First in withholding the means of grace from
them, and also the spirit of grace: secondly in letting them see their fathers
evil ways, so imitate them: thirdly in withholding from them, those means
that might turn and convert them, and help them out of their sin, as the
admonition of his children, and such like. But the doctrine that we may gather
hence is, that ungodly parents are the most deadly enemies unto their children,
as in Exo. 34. Where God sets down his name most comfortably, and the
abundance of his mercy, yet he ads this withal, Holding not the wicked
innocent, but visiting the sins of the fathers, on the children. This the
example of wicked Ahad, does evidently prove, for in that he would shed the
innocent blood of Naboth; in that he would commit idolatry and serve Baalim;
who could have done a greater wrong to Ahabs posterity, then Ahab did by these
things: for hence it was that the kingdom was taken from his house, and that
his children about seauenty persons, had their heads chopped from their bodies,
and were made as dung, and all his kinsfolks and acquaintance fared the worse
for his wickedness. And so Jeroboam that seducer of Israel, he thought by
his idolatry to have established the kingdom to him and his, so that it should
never have been taken from him, and his offspring, but was it so or not? nay this
overthrew him and his house, this was the bane of all his, for because he made
Israel to sin, therefore God swept away him and his stock as dung from the
face of the earth, that none remained of them, as one would do with an
unclean and filthy beast, which if he abide long in a place, will defile the
house with his dung, and the place cannot be clean and sweet, till both the
beast be removed, and his dung swept out: so was Ieroboams offspring as
excrements of an vnpure beast, that did so polute the land, as it could not be
clean until they were all scoured away. And so Chams posterity, for many
generations bare the curse upon them, for their fathers sinful dealing.

This serves to confute those parents, that think and go about by oppression,
by wrongful and injurious dealing, and such wicked courses to better the
estate of their children, and hope by these means to make their seed great
upon the earth after them. Nay this is the way to bring the curse of God, and
consequently destruction upon their family. If men did but give credit unto
the word of God, that such vilde practices would overthrow, and not build up
their houses, and that they did by these things pull down the plague of God
from heaven upon them and theirs, it would keep them from enriching themselves
by wicked ways, and make them take heed how they filled their houses with the
riches of iniquity, for fear least they should fill them also with the
reward of iniquity, the vengeance of God.

For these sins* as James says, do cry up to heaven, they make an
exclamation in Gods ears, and he uses not to repel this cry with a deaf
ear, but he hears it to the ruin of those against whom the cry comes,
for after this cry of their iniquity, follows their cry and howling for
misery. As Gods daiely Judgment upon enclosers and oppressors, in our own
land, shows it; for when they begin to molest poor men, to unpeople towns,
to seek how they may dwell alone in the land, this enclosing does but exclude
them and theirs, so that if men would but mark and observe it, they should see
before their faces how God plagues their sins in them selves, and their
howses. This must teach us likewise to be humbled and to crave pardon for the
sins of our forefathers, because they do send an ill breath of Gods curse
unto us to. And so we see in Daniell 9. he does not only confess his own
sins and the wickedness of the people, then alive, but he is wonderfully
cast down and grieved, for the sins of their ancestors and predecessors,
and of the Kings, Priests and Prophets that went before them. And then there is
a promise, Ezekiel 18. 14. that he that sees his fathers sins and fears
being humbled for them, and does not the like, he shall not smart for his
fathers sins, nor bear the punishment of them, howsoever he be liable to
the punishments of such, yet if he see them and forsake them and be sorry,
then, God will see his sorrow, and be merciful to him, and remove the
punishment; for indeed this is a true note, that one does not justify and
defend his fathers evil ways, when that he is grieved and forsakes them. But
he that sees his fathers evil way, and will either justify them and defend
them in word, or else by his practice mantaine them, he makes up the measure
of his fathers sins, that both may be laid together, and bring a double
plague upon their heads.

Of them that hate me.
IN that God calls Idolatry and superstition, hatred of him, this doctrine may
be learned from thence that all false love is hatred, for Idolaters pretend
that they love God above all, and more then all; why they can find in their
hearts to bestow their sons and daughters upon him, and is not this zeal? No,
false love is true hatred, and in that they do those things that God hates and
forbids; what ever their pretense be, they are haters of God. So Pro. 13. He
shows that a fond parent, that spares the rod, hates his child; why but
they do love them, and are so tender over them, as that they cannot find in
their hearts, to give them due and fit correction, why but this is hatred. So in
Leuit. He commands to admonish our brother, and not to hate him in our heart,
showing that if one be so carnally affected to any man, that he cannot tell him
of his sin, he is loath to grieve him by a sharp reproof, and to reprehend
him so, as that he might be brought to repentance, he that is so tender hearted,
has an hard heart against his friend, and this is the worst hatred that may be.

This then serves to confute such people, as will say of papists, oh they be
good honest men, and though they have not so strickt a regard of his worship as
he commands, yet I hope they love God, and have a good heart to him; nay they
be not honest persons, neither do they love God, but they hate God. For this
is as if a wife should say, indeed in mine husbands absence, I must have
another man to keep me company and to lie with me, and to be familier with
me, but yet I love mine husband, the husband nor any man else would account
finally of this love, yea they would think the wife hated rather then loved
her husband: And so those that must look one idols to help them in their
devotion, they must have some image to gaze on, that they may be put in mind
of God, they do it, that they may remember God, but God will give them but a
small reward for this love, yea they shall be accounted of him, as professed
enemies of his name: So for those parents that are so kind to their children,
and love them so dearly, that they cannot bring them up in nurture and in
correction, and in the fear of God, they cannot cross them, nor go against
them in their ill course; such a parent is a most mortal foe, as often the
children feel afterward, and accordingly do recompense, for they hated them
with a false love, but the children reward it with a true hatred* so he that
will not offend his friend, nor trouble him with telling him of his faults,
but rather smooth up all, and flatter him, and speak fair words, he is a
grievous enemy, and yet who is there almost that does not delight in such
enemies, and makes more of the^ and esteems them more welcome, then a true
faithful friend that seeks his souls health, and will not suffer him to
fling himself headlong into destruction; but we must learn to abhor all
carnal love to God and men, as that which is the most pernicious hatred.

This must also teach us not to join our selves in society or in marriage
with idolaters, for this is to join our selves to those that hate god. And for
this Iehosaphat was reproved, what says the prophet, would thou love those
that hate God, and help them? what had thou to do to be so friendly and
familiar, with Gods enemies? Yet if one had come to Ahab and told him that he
had hated God, he would have defied him, and said, that he had loved God as
well as the best, but that is no matter what Ahab would say, so long as God
accounts him an enemy, Iehoshaphat should have had no society nor freindship
with him: so that they are much to be condemned, that will seem to have some
care of religion them selves, and to look to their own ways that they be
good, but yet they can be familiar, and make friendship with Idolaters and
professed superstitious persons; why but is not this an hatred of God, and are
not you then subject to that reproof of Iehoshaphat? what would thou love
them that hate me? No man will be known to be a familiar friend to an open
traitor, that the King and counsel has proclaimed a traitor, for fear least
he should be tainted with some suspicion of treason. And in deed he that will
be so conversant, and so well acquainted with such as God has proclaimed
traitors, those that have any spiritual wisdom and true love of God, may not
without just cause vehemently suspect him, as one that him self bears no
great good will to God and his pure religion.

And shows mercy to thowsands of them that etc.
IN that that God promises to show mercy to thousands of them that love him,
and keep his commandments, we learn that the best way for any man to do good
to his children, is to be godly him self, as the very words of the
commandments do carry it. So Psalm. 37. 21. ver. A good man is merciful and
lends and his seed enioyes the blessing, etc. After 29. The righteous shall
inherit the land and dwell in it for ever. Not this in his own person, for
that were no blessing for a good man to live still in this world, but in his
seed he means. One would think the contrary, what is he always lending?
still doing good? why alas how shall his poor children do, how shall they do,
nay they be rich children and shall do well enough, they have a rich legacy
left them, for they shall have Gods blessing, for when he says the blessing,
it is more then if one had said the whole earth, and all the world, for so one
might have and yet be under the curse, and live and die a miserable man, but
he shall have the blessing, all things necessary for soul and body, heaven
and earth, for so much the blessing contains. So 112. Psalm. The generation of
the righteous shall be blessed. If then the blessing of God be the cause of all
prosperity and happiness, and contrary the curse of God, the beginning and
ground of all misery, then so far as we are good or ill, so far do we do
good or ill to our stock. For in Leuit. God threatens that if one be
disobedient to God and his commandments, he shall be cursed in his soul and
body, in his wife children and all that he puts his hand unto, but on the
otherside, if one be upright and with a perfect heart, set him self to follow
Gods commandments, then he shall be blessed in soul and body, in wife and
children, and all that he shall put his hand unto, so that the blessing of God
shall meet him at every turn.

Since then God is so merciful to all those that love him, and show it in
keeping this commandment. This serves for the comfort of all such, that be
good children of good parents, though perhaps their parents, can leave no great
matter for outward things, yet if they have laid up many prayers for them in
heaven, and leave them Gods favor for their possession, they have a good
parentage, for they have Gods blessing to trust unto better be the child of a
godly, then of a wealthy parent, for he that him self is a good man, and has
proceeded of good parents, is now possessed of a double blessing, for his
fathers prayers and for his own prayers, for his fathers mercy and for his
own mercy to.

This likewise serves for the comfort of gods children, that have many
children, and little wealth, little goods to leave them, but that is not the
question, what goods they have, but if they be good, and labor also to have
their childen good, if they were thowsands of them, they have the blessing of
God, and that shall maintain them well enough, those that be blessed of god
shall not want for signs of his blessing.

Sometimes indeed the godlyest parents have wicked and ungodly children, as
Jacob, had, but yet God will either couuert them as he did Jacobs sons, so
that those which at the first he saw to be as profane as any, he lived to see
converted, and very holy men, and pillars of the church, or else if all be not
good, yet God gives grace that some one of them at the least shall be holy, as
Abraham had ungodly Ismael, but yet he had godly Isaac, and Isaac had profane
Esau, but he had holy Jacob to, and David had wicked Absalon, and incestious
Ammon, but yet with all he had godly Solomon, and Nathan, or if none of the
next offspring be good, yet some of them that follow shall be holy, the
godliness of the parent will show it self in the bud sooner or later, as in
Hezekiah, though Manasseh that succeeded him was at first a wicked idolater,
yet good Josiah was in the next generation a good and holy man, or if that good
men at any time be barren, yet his own soul and body shall feel the
blessing.

Those that love him and keep his commandments.
THat is, those which have such a true love to him, as does show itself by the
faithful using of his pure worship, and by keeping not the duties of flesh and
blood, but his commandments. So that here God sets down this, as a note of
loving him to keep his commandments, whence this lesson arises, that the
love of God consists in keeping his commandments, but before the doctrine be
further declared, an objectio^ must be removed, for one may say, what? do you
say that none love god but those that keep his commandments, then I pray you
where can you find one that loves God, and who is this that is able perfectly
to keep and fulfill the law of God. But for the absoluing of this doubt, know
that there is a great difference betwixt these two, to keep Gods commandments
and to fulfill Gods commandments, for keeping notes a truth, fulfilling a
perfection, this perfection Christ only had, but this truth, every christian
must have, for every christian man may so far keep Gods law, as that he
shall be both accepted and also rewarded, though not for the merits of the work,
yet for the mercy of him, that accepts the work. But this true keeping must
be known by these notes, first in keeping one, must aim at all, there must be
a full purpose and true desire to keep all, for if one lie in any sin, and
break any wilfully, then the wilful and known breach of one, makes him
guilty of all. Secondly, the obedience must be done willingly, with a free
and cheerful heart, as David bids Solomon, serve the Lord with a willing
mind. Thirdly, the end of our actions must be good, to show our loyalty to
God, to approve our hearts to him in obedience to his commandments, that we
may be blessed of him, and not for any other end or intent of our own, as to
be magnified of men, and to merit by them, or such like.

He that has all these things keeps the law of God; indeed no man can
fulfill it, neither is it required of Gods children, that they should: because
they be under grace, and not under the law, for the rigor of it. But for those
that be out of Christ, this condition is proposed to them, win it and wear
it, keep the law in full perfection, and have happiness in full perfection,
but break it in the least title, and loose your salvation: those which are not
in Christ are thus bound, but those which are his members, and that are made
one with him by faith, are under grace, and there is a more favorable
obedience required of them, not to fulfill the law in the extremity of it, but
to keep the law in the uprightness of their hearts, and to do so much as Gods
spirit that is bestowed on them, gives them power to do.

But now to return to the doctrine it self, whosoever loves God, must in this
manner as has been spoken keep the law of God. This is proved 1. John 5. 3.
4. This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments. Is it so may one
say? then that is a very hard piece of work, few can do that, nay says he,
his commandments are not grievous, for all that is borne of God over comes
the world, he shows that a christian so far as he is regenerate, he has
conquered the world, and then Gods commandments cease to be burdensome, for
the things that make Gods commandments heavy unto us, is our worldliness
and fleshly lusts which strive against the spirit, but when Gods spirit which
regenerateth us, has set down and over come those lusts, in that measure,
Gods commandments are very easy and lightsome, and we shall with as much
comfort and quietness obey them, as Adam in his innocence, when we are once
truly converted, according to the measure of our conversion. It is a most
tedious thing to a christian heart, to obey the devils commandment, but it is
most joyous to follow Gods. As if it were permitted to a christian man, for the
while, to steal, to lie, to commit adultrie, and to break the sabbath, or
such like, why, his soul would abhor it, and he would rather die then do
these things: it would be such a vexation unto him, but now, to hear the
word, to pray, to confer, to do works of mercy, and the rest of this kind,
it is even a recreation and delightful sport for him to do them, for Gods
commandments are pure and holy, and do delight the heart so far as it is
pure and holy. So John. 14. 15. If ye love me keep my commandments, and I
will pray the father, and he shall send you another comforter. As if he
should say, he that loves me best, and keeps my commandments most, shall
have trouble and misery, but let not that trouble him, for he shall have my
spirit which will comfort him and sustain him in all his miseries. But I do
keep Gods commandments, and have a care to be obedient unto Christ, then
Christ says, verse 21. He that has my commandments and keeps them, one
must first have them before he can keep them, have them in knowledge and
understanding, have them in memory, have them in Judgment and affection, and
then fall to keep them in action; do this, and then indeed you love Christ,
but many talk of loving Christ and what good friends they be to Christ, but
try them a little by their works, and you shall see that they neither have
Gods commandments nor keep them, and so far as they fail in these things,
so far they fail in the love of god, and provoke God also not to love them.

This serves to confute those disordered persons, in whom one can see nothing
but open rebellion against Gods law, open breach of the sabbath, and manifest
contempt of Gods word, and yet tell them of it and come to ask them if they
be not ashamed thus in the face of the world to proclaim enmity against God,
then first they fall to shifting and cloaking, but if you come with so good
proof and ferret them out so soundly, that they cannot deny it, but are
convinced to their faces: why then this is next, what are you without sin,
have you no fault? do you keep all Gods Commandments? yes, miserable man,
there are faults in the best. But this is blockishnesse, for is there no
difference betwixt falling by frailty and through infirmity, and living and
lying in a sin? and allowing ones self in the committing of it: that
frailty is in Gods elect children, but this wilful disobedience and
maintayning is in hipocrits, that God puts away and regards not, this he will
never put away, unless there be an amendment and greater soundness: for such
persons love not God, and it is just if he plague them, and pursue them as his
enemies.

This likewise serves for the great comfort of Gods children, that do their
best endeavor to keep all Gods commandments, and that with a vvilling heart
and good intent and mind, not thinking to merit any thing by them, for they
know God must still show mercy even to those that love him, and keep his
commandments. This I say comforts all them, for when he has done all he
can, he comes short and fails, but yet God will show mercy, this word may
rejoice them, for he will show mercy, as if he had said, though you come
far short of that you should, and would, yet so long as your heart is true,
God will show mercy, for he requires not fulfilling but keeping, if one will
stand to himself, then he must have either perfection or confusion, but if
he trust to Christ, then he is under grace, there is mercy in Christ,
pitying and rewarding, rewarding all their good, and pitying and passing by
their infirmities.

Thus much for the second commandment, now follows the third in these words
following.

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.
THE sum of this third commandment is, to teach us that we should not
profane the name of the Lord our God, but use it with all reverence. The parts
are two, A prohibition in these words, thou shall not take the name of the Lord
thy God in vain. By the name of God, is understood all those things whereby
God as by his name has made himself known unto men as his titles, his
attributes, his word and his works. In vain j. rashly, idly, carelessly,
without reverence and due regard. The second part is, a reason in these words,
For the Lord will not hold him guiltless, j. God will surely punish him;
which reason God sets down because no sign goes more easily unpunished
through the hads of men then this, for many will take it hainously to have
their own names spoken ill of, and abusd. But so slight a regard have most men
of God, that though his name be blasphemed and profaned, though he be
dishonored and vilified, they lay it not to heart, nor care for it, therefore
least men should make no account of this so great a sin, because it is a
thing that man's laws takes little or no notice of, he sets down the
punishment, that though the positive law of men take no hold on such persons,
yet the God of heaven and earth, will take such in hand and deal with them
himself, he will not commit them to the hands of inferior officers, but
himself will see their execution done. Now the commandment does partly
forbid, partly command; it forbids in general to take the name of God in
vain: as is showed in this Table following.

Gods name is taken in vain in life, by living ungodly in the profession of
religion. speech or without an oath in speking irreverently of Gods word idly
and curiously, jestingly, wrestingly and to charms.
titles admiration, imprecation, gratulation.
attributs irreverently in freeting, in defense of ill.
works within as without as election, reprobatio^ creation, passion.


with an oath swearing vainly in common talk. wickedly to do evil. falsely
of that we know not to be true, and purpose not to do.



FIrst Gods name is taken in vain in life, by an ungodly and unholy
conversation of those that profess the religion of God. And so Romans 2. Paul
sets down a reproof of Jews, that, for their sakes the name of God is ill
spoken off among the Gentiles. The Gentiles hated Gods name and were enemies to
religion enough of themselves, when no occasion was given, but when they saw
the Jews that professed themselves to be Gods people, and to love and worship
him, and to be loved of him also, to live so wickedly, to deal so craftily,
couetously, and cruelly, this made them hate religion much more, and speak ill
of God more presumptuously. And so in Ezekiel. 36. The prophet charge this upon
them in the 22. ver. That they polluted the name of God among the heathen. They
were so far from converting any one by their good example, that by their ill
behavior, they made those to hate God, which else might have been drawn to
some liking. For that which the wise men speaks in the natural family, is
true also in the house of God, a wicked son says he, is a grief to his
father, and a shame to his mother; Let an hundredth rogues and vagabonds, and
runnagates, play the filthy persons, the unthrifts, and the thieves, this
brings no discredit to the father, no man charge the fault upon him; he
bears no reproach. But if his son that is brought up with him in the family,
and is called after his name, shall do any such thing, himself has not only
a blot, but he brings also an ill report upon the whole family, and his father
shall bear a great part of this disgrace. So, let all the Atheist and papists,
and carnal worldlings in the world, live wickedly, and show themselves to be
as they be, filthy beasts, goats and swine, without grace and the fear of
God, it is no such great matter, they bear all the blame themselves, and the
shame lights upon their own necks, God and his children and his religion, are
no whit the worse thought of, but the better rather, when the life of one kind
is compared to the other. But now let a professor, fall into any wickedness,
one that makes a show to be begotten of God by the immortal seed of the word,
to be a child of the church, a member of Christ, a temple of the spirit, let
such an one break forth to some gross sins, and here will be matter for all
the hel-hounds in a country, to talk of; now the devil and his lims will exult
and brag, now they sharpen and whet their tongues, the religion of Christ
shall be blasphemed, the professors of religion taunted, every one shall have
this laid in his dish that desires to be a christian, and the name of God, and
the spirit of God shall not escape without some blot of reproach: ho say they,
these be your professors, these be these holy men that be so full of the
spirit, these be they that will be the holy saints of God, these be they that
run to sermons and carry bibles, these be the fruits of their profession, you
may see what godly men they be, I warrant you they be all alike, never a
barrel better herring, you may see by one what be the rest. Thus we see what a
great stain religion has among men, by the name of those that be
hipocritically religious, and live ungodly lie, without the power of it, how
they fill wicked men's mouths full of slander, and give their malicious hearts
matter to set it self a work against God, and Godly men, and this was the
sin of Ophni and Phineas, they should have been the Lords high priests, have
given such good exhortations, and have showed such grace in their conversation,
as that all men might have delighted to come into the place of Gods worship,
and to serve him, according to the law, but they were so wicked and so ungodly,
and so full of filthiness, that the service of God by their means, was made
hateful, odious, and loathsome. Since then this is such an high taking of gods
name in vain, to be a bramble in gods vinyard. This serves for the confuting
of those men, that think if they can keep their tongues from swearing and
forswearing, then they be never a whit guilty of the breach of the third
commandment, if no man can charge them with an oath or perjury, they think
they need not repent for taking Gods name in vain. Not so, but let them know,
that by an ill life, by walking and conuersing after a sinful manner, they
may profane Gods name more, hurt religion more, and bring more grief into the
hearts, and shame into the faces of professors, then an other by a thousand rash
oaths; yea, by gross and open perjury. It is a great fault to abuse the
religion of God in life, as the titles are attribute of God in speech, and
therefore unless those that be called christians, labor to be christians, that
their works be suitable to their words, and they show forth the virtues of
Christ, as well as take upon them the name of Christ, unless they be careful
to frame their life according to the line of Gods word, and so to order all
their carriage, that their conversation may be answerable to their profession,
and the fruit that shows it self in their life, agreeable to the seed that is
daily sowed in their hearts, they are as gross profaners of the name of God, and
as liable to the curse and vengeance of God, as he that swears many a vain
and idle oath.

Secondly, this serves to instruct all men that would be called christians, and
be accounted the sons of God, to live so, as that we bring some glory to God
by our life. And this Paul bids the bond servants. 1. Tim. 6. 1. Count their
masters worthy all honor, that the name of God and his doctrine may not be ill
spoken off. Speaking to such as were servants to unbelieving masters, he bids
them give them honor and reverence, not for any religion or goodness that
could be seen in them, for they were infidells, but for conscience sake, to
Gods ordinance, whose place these masters did supply; and that because if they
did not those, all the fault should be laid upon the name of God. But how does
he prove that Gods name should be evil spoken of, because, his doctrine should
be ill spoken, so that where ever the gospel is slaundered, there God himself
and his name is dishonored. So in the second of Titus, Paul also speaking to
servants, wills them to show all good faithfulness, and not to pick nor
steal, nor to answer again, and that for this reason, that they may adorn
the doctrine of Christ Jesus. He would have those which are in the basest
estate, and in the lowest condition of all men, even servants and bondseruants,
in their place to adorn religion, by their good behavior, in that place. No
place is so mean and of so small account, but you may do God good service in
it, if he beautify his profession, by an unspotted and pure conversation; for
nothing can glorify God more in all this world then when those that will
belong and appertain unto him, show what household they be of, by their works,
and he that will be esteemed the son of God, must do more good work then one
that is only the son of Adam, this will stop the mouth of wicked men, and
mussell them up, that they shall not have a word to bark out against christians
and christianity: yea, this will beget a good liking in their hearts of that
word and that religion, which works so good effects in the life of them that
hold it. As in the family, let the children be good and temperate and modest,
and behave themselves gently and humbly to all, then they do not only get
good account and estimation to themselves in the hearts and mouths of men, but
they are an honor to the house of which they come, and to the parents which
begat them, and a crown to all their friends and brethren, that those which be
enemies, cannot for shame give out an ill word of such a man whose children be
so well brought up and behave themselves so orderly. So is it in the church, in
gods household upon the earth, would one bring credit to God his father, would
he cause the church to be praised, and all his brethren and fellow members to
rejoice, and to be well reported of? then let him, show forth the virtues of
Christ, let him live worthy his vocation and calling, let him cause his light
so shine forth in the darkness of the world, let them not keep their virtues
in their own bosom alone, but let the brightness and the warmeth of them
lighten upon all those that live with him; and if he so do, he shall be honored
himself even in the consciences of wicked, but especially he shall win great
reverence and reputation, to the name of God, to christians and christian
religion; and though some enemies be reprobates, and therefore irreuocable, yet
he shall make them dumb and stop their foul mouth, that their furious barking
shall either not be heard, or if it be, shall not be heard. And whereas others
that are yet in their present estate enemies, but in election gods children,
may seem for a time perhaps to be hardened and not to submit themselves, yet
afterward this good example will work, and the seed will appear in the
fruit, for says Peter, They shall glorify God in the day of their visitation.
As if he had said, Happily for a time it will seem vain to show any good
example to those that be not good men, for they will it may be, be so far from
profiting and glorifying god, as that they will rail and blaspheme. Be it so,
that for the present you see no better success, yet know, that if these men be
gods, when he has softened their hearts and opened their eyes, and converted
their souls unto him, and resited them with his good spirit, then they shall
magnify God, and praise him; then they shall say, blessed be God that ever I
lived in such a christian family, that ever I was under so good a minister, I
thank God that ever I was acquainted and did converse with such a man or woman,
by whose gracious behavior, I was brought the better to like of religion; Now
the old seed that seemed to lie dead under the clods, reuiueth and sprouts up,
now the fruits of all good precepts and good admonitions, begin to appear.
Therefore we must strive to be such good children, for better it were, never to
profess religion, then thus to profess it, and live like a worldling. If
there grow brambles in Gods vineyard, the axe of Gods vengeance meets with them
straight, and they of all other shall be most fearfully and horribly destroyed;
if one will be a brier then, let him keep himself in the wild wast, and not
press into Gods garden, for if he do, most undoubtedly, he shall be cut down
and cast into the fire. Thus much for the first dishonouring and taking gods
name in vain by life.

The second follows by speech, and that first without an oath, and that by
speaking irreverently of Gods word, titles, attributes, or works, without due
regard and estimation of the thing one speaks. First of the word, in speaking
of it idly, curiously, vainly, to pick out needelesse questions, and to show
ones wit in learning, in discoursing and amplyfieng matters, or in objecting
against the truth (whether one think not so, yet it is an abuse of the word) I
say by this vain putting up objections, in ostentation of their nimble wit,
and ripe head, that they can put down the ministers, as many proud, foolish,
vain fantastical, mad-headed youths will brag, that they can hold argument
with the best preachers, and set them down, and put them to a non plus, even
out of the scripture. This vain and fruitless jangling is a great abuse of
the scripture which is one excellent part of gods name, by which he will bring
us to the knowledge of himself, when one has no care to make the end of his
speech the glory of God, for high talk becomes not a fool, it is an unseemly
and absurd thing to hear a profane wicked beast, be prating and discoursing
of Gods word, that does not account of it as he should, why should he have it
in his mouth, that has it not in his heart. First let him get the law of God,
written in his own heart, and then let him open his mouth in wisdom, and
instruct others, as God says in Deuteronomy. 6. 6. Let these words be in thine heart,
and thou shall rehearse them continually. First then let one labor to have the
use of Gods word in himself, and to make it his own, and lay it up in his
heart, and then he may with fruit and comfort bring it forth and confer of it
to others, else if one be an idle talker, and a foolish vain disputer of that
which he never had any experience and working in himself, the more he
speaks the worse it is, the more he dishonors God, abuses the word, and
hurts his own soul. First then Gods name is taken in vain, by the abuse of
his word, in curious and fruitles prating of it. Therefore one must never talk
of gods word, but that he may bring some glory to God, and some good
edification to men, as the Apostle says, Edify one another in your most holy
faith, unless this be our scope when ever we take Gods word in our mouth, to
build one another up in godliness, we pervert the word of God, and profane
his name. Secondly Gods name is polluted by us, when we speak of his word in
mockage, after a jesting and a scoffing manner, as those did, of which Peter
speaks, that derided the doctrine of the last judgment, ho say they, all
things continue a like since the fathers, when will he come, q. d. We hear a
large discourse, and here is much a do among these preachers now a days,
about the great day of judgment, a terrible day that must come, wherein all
men must be called to account they say for their works, but where is it? where
is the truth of their fearful tale? when comes this judgment? we would
feign see it once: and thus because God does not presently sit upon the bench,
and pass sentence, and see the execution done immediately, and reward every
one, the wicked by casting them to hellfire, and the good men by taking them
up to the joys of heaven; foolish vain men that have no faith, make a
merriment, and a sport to laugh at this doctrine. So in Isaiah, because he told
them of death, the Atheists fell to flouting, come say they, these prophets
tell us we must all die, if we must die then, let us take our pleasure whilst
we may; let us eat and drink, and be merry, to morrow soul and body and
all must come to nothing, there will be nothing left, well, we will plie it
while time serves, and thus these vilde irreligious beasts, turned all the
exhortations of the Prophet to a mock. So, many lewd persons in these days
are ready to abuse the words of Christ, where he said, if one give thee a blow
on the one ear, turn the other to him, to deride Christians; nay say they,
pray you turn the other ear to. Shameless persons; will not the reverence of
Christ fear them from the abuse of such words, as he with his own mouth
uttered? These be the words of God spoken and penned by the wisdom of the
holy Ghost, for the direction and instruction of his children, not for every
profane swaggerer, and drunken beast, to roll up and down in his filthy
mouth, to move laughter with them: and this is a common thing among
fantastical fellows, that desire to be thought witty and conceited, that if
any place of scripture serve their turn, to gird or quip one another or such
like purpose, they had rather god should loose his glory, and gods word the
grace and authority of it, then that they will loose their jest; and thus that
which God appointed to edify their souls in godliness, they pervert to
stir up themselves and others to foolish and wicked, and profane laughter.
So thirdly the word of God is abusd in a most gross and notorious manner, when
one brings it in the defense of any sin or error, or heresy, which is to
presume to wrest Gods weapons out of his hands, as it were, and beat him with
his own sword. This is a greater abuse of the sacred word of God, and more
hurtful and mischievous, then either swearing or forswearing. Thus the devil
did most damnably profane Gods name and word, when he misused that, to make
Christ go out of his way, that was written to encourage all Gods children in
their ways, thus setting as it were an ill-fauoured shape upon Gods word, that
it may seem to agree with his devilish temptations; so let wicked and
voluptuous livers that spend all their time and labor in pursuing vain and
fond sports and games, and such foolish and fleshly delights, as makes them no
whit more serviceable to God or the common weal, nor do any good to their
own souls or bodies, or any man's else; let such men I say, be reproved and
told that this kind of living is not allowable, it will not hold out before
god, man was made to bring glory to god, and do good in this world, not to
bring pleasure to his flesh, and live idly in the world, and therefore they
must repent and amend, you shall have an excuse straight, Gods word must be
brought as a defense, they do not break Gods commandment, without warrant
out of the scripture, if you will believe them; what say they, would you have a
man live without delight? do you not allow recreation? why the scripture does
afford a man recreation, and then a number of places must be brought in, for
recreation, to maintain their voluptuousness. But vain man, does not the
scripture command a vocation, and the recreation as an help to further in it;
now if one may ask you that stand so much for recreation, what is your
occupation? what sore travail is that that wearies your body? what earnest
study troubles your brain? that you must have so much refreshing, and so much
recreating, it must be some very painful labor, that needs so much rest,
to make one able to perform it: it is a sore labor indeed, for it is the
service of lust and the devil, two hard masters.

But this turning of recreation into a vocation, or a vexation rather, is not
alowable by Gods word. How dare thou then be so impudentlie audacious, as to
rob God of his treasure, to maintain thy filthy lust, and defile his holy
word, by defending thine unholy practice. So likewise come to a covetous
person, touch him a little with a rebuke, for his wringing and oppression, show
him that the love of the world is enmity to God, and that covetousness is
idolatry, then comes in this place of scripture which must salve all, what
has not God commanded a man to labor in his calling, does not God say he is
worse then an infidel, that prouides not for his family, and so all must go
under the name of good husbandry, and thrift and providing for his family.
But consider thou that stand thus for thy labor, God will have thee labor,
but not to serve the devil in thy labor, take pains in thy calling, but hurt
not thy neighbor by it, provide for thy children and lay up, but lay up a
treasure in heaven, provide to bring them up in the fear of God, and in some
christian vocation, first provide that they may be christians, and then one
has well provided for them, store up merciful works, and then the righteous
is merciful and lends, and his seed injoyes the blessing. Thus God will
have one labor with godliness and provide so for his children as he prouides
for his own soul. So come to angry and passionate persons, they can have
some thing to say for their sin to, and that out of Gods word, when they have
broke out into foolish and unadvised passions, tell them this is naught, anger
rests in the bosom of fools, and the wrath of man fulfills not the law of
God, oh but I pray you does not S. Paul say, be angry and sin not: It is
true hipocrite, but if thou will be angry without sin, be angry first with
thine own sin, begin at home, and condemn the folly that is in thine own
soul, or else thine anger is not holy and spiritual, but devilish fleshly
and carnal. So al-most in all other sins, there is scarce any other sin so
bad, but ungodly persons will stand in defense of it, and if they can snatch a
few words out of scripture, and tear them violently, from the true sense
thereof, unto their own lust, they count this a matter of great wittiness,
but in truth it is a matter of great and horrible wickedness, and a damnable
profaning of the name of god, when one can wrest and hale together many
places, and say much for his sin, it is not a note of more wit, but of more
acquaintance with the devil, for their tongue is set on fire of hell, it is
tipped with hell fire, and blown by the stinking breath of Satan, and when
they have said all they can, they have made their sin more grievous, their
heart more hard, and them selves more cursed, in that they have done no thing
all the while, but dishonored God, to make him a patron of wickedness, and
his word a sword for the devil.

Fourthlie, the word of God is abused and profaned, by turning it to charms
and spells and all kind of sorcerie, to cure such persons as be mispoken as
they term it, and ayr'd, as such foolish terms they have, and to say the
Lords prayer or some place of scripture, to find things that be lost, with many
such wicked things, this a sinful perverting of Gods word. And whereas men
commonly excuse themselves for this sin, because the words be not ill, yet let
them know, that when one abuses good words to a wrong end, they be evil words
to him, and if the word of God be perverted to such an end, as he has not
appointed, they be the devils words to him that thus peruerts them, and Satan
is no less dangerous an enemy, when he comes like an angel of light, then
if he appeared in his colors: and this charming God himself condemns, and
in the law says, that he will find out such persons. So that, both these
charmers and those that go unto them be wicked abusers of Gods name, and
either, they shall have no success in the thing they sought for, or if they
have, it is a greater plague, for now they prosper in their sin, and their
heart is made more hard and incureable. And thus the word of God is abused. Now
the remedy against this abuse is, that we labor to apply Gods word to the
right ends that he has appointed; and if we will know these ends, we may see
them, 2. Tim. 3. 16. The whole scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and instruct in righteousness,
that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works.
Here he shows how we must employ the scriptures of God, and first generally
he says, they be profitable, showing in general, that the word of God must
never be meddled withal, but for some profit, in all conferences wherein we
bring in the word of God, and in all manner of using Gods word, this must be the
closing and shutting up of all, that there be some good done, that some body be
the better for, that some fruit be reaped; where profit is not the end, Gods
word is not rightly applied. Then perticulerly he shows wherein this profit
consists; first to teach, j. to enlighten the understanding, that one may get
more knowledge, and his mind is thus bettered. Secondly, to convince, that is,
to refute and beat down heresies and false opinions before, to teach the truth,
now to pull up heresies, that the judgment may be sound. Thirdly, to correct,
j. to reform and amend the offenders, to convince ill opinions, to correct ill
conuersations. Fourthly, to instruct, j. to show how one should amend his ill
manners, and how he should do good, as well as that he must forsake that that
is ill; how to live well, and how to have such a good conversation, that one
may have comfort in his life and death. These are those ends of the scripture,
to which whosoever imployes it, shall not dishonor Gods name, and hurt his
soul, but glorify God, and himself be made absolute perfect, and ready to
every good work. Thus much for taking Gods name in vain by speech, without an
oath, but in vain speaking and other abusing Gods word. Secondly, Gods name is
thus taken in vain, by abusing his tytles, as God, Jehovah, Jesus, Lord, and
such other. And that either in admiration, as when one in the hearing of any
odd matter or strange report, shall break forth into such vain wandering
speeches, good Lord, O Jesus, O Christ, Lord have mercy upon us, what a thing
was that, wherein one names Gods titles, without any conscience and reverence
of him. Therefore those which have done so, must repent. So likewise, we abuse
Gods titles in rash petitions and imprecations, as, Sarah in a fuming chafe
comes to Abraham, and says she, the Lord be judge betwixt me and thee, and
thus she must needs have a purchased sessions, and God must come down from
heaven in all the have, none else would serve the turn, to redress some wrong
that she thought she had; what was the matter, why, Hagar had dealt something
unkindly with her, and God must needs come to look to this disorder. But if God
had come and hearing her rash prayer, straight made examination, and proceeded
to punish the chief offender, who should have been first plagued, who was the
first mentioner of taking Agar to Abraham, was not Sarah her self? what, must
Abraham take her through her means and motion, and now when the matter falls
out ill, she will fall out with her husband. How could it fall out better, since
she was the author of so ill a beginning. So that such kind of imprecations as
to wish God be judge, in auengme^t, rashly and hastily, is a great dishonor to
God; as likewise in cursing, as Gods vengeance overtake you, and such like
horrible speeches, when God forsooth, must needs become their officer to
revenge their quarrel, and serve their malicious humor. So likewise to praise
God and give God thanks for an evil thing, as Saul at the wickedness of the
Ziphims, when David had delivered them and done them good; now they to curry
favor with Saul, and to get his good will, came to betray him to Saul, and to
discover where he was, that Saul might take him; he breaks out, blessed be
you of the land, etc. One might have done a good duty and discharged a good
conscience as Jonathan did, and he would never thank God for that, but let one
come and help him to bring his mischeuous purpose to pass, then God be
blessed, and much good thanks there must be. But David did not so to him that
slew Saul, though he had been a cruel and an unjust adversary. So for
gamsters, when they cosen and rob one an other unjustly of their money, without
conscience and warrant, they might even as well before God cut his pursse, then
forsooth God must be praised for their theeuerie, or I thank God I have sped
well, I have good luck. What, is God a gamster, is he a dicer now, must he be
at every idle persons beck, when he is robbing his neighbor? Monstrous
persons, that dare be so impudent, they shall feel and see if ever God waken
their conscience in this life, and if he do not in the life to come, that it
was a fault bad euough to take away ones goods in this manner, and far greater,
when they will dare to abuse the name of God in it. Now the best medicine to
preserve us from all these sins and abuses of Gods titles, is that which is
set down in Deutero. 28. 58. Fear the glorious and fearful name of the Lord
thy God. Fear it so, that one name it not, nor think not of it, but with great
awe and reverence, for if one be audacious, to take Gods name in his mouth,
without fear and due regard, God will lay plagues on him, and those not short
and slight, sore and grievous, of long continuance and durance. And if one do
tremble and fear before God, thus he shall never abuse his name.

Thirdly, Gods name is taken in vain, by abusing his properties, and by
abusiue speaking of them; as of his power, his wisdom, mercy, patience,
goodness, and such like, which are abusd when we speak of them carnally and
carelessly, or contemptuously. As in the 2. Kings. 7. When the prince, on whose
arm the king leaned, heard the Prophet say that corn should be so cheap, so
suddenly after that extreme dearth, he said though God should make windows
in heaven, that could not be so. Now to speak so basely of Gods power, and so
contemptuously as though his strength were to be measured by man's strength,
and God could not tell how to bring it to pass, because he could not tell
how, nor saw no means; for there he aludes to Noah's flood, q. d. if God
should rain corn as fast as he rayned water then, it could not be so, but
it could be and was so, and he saw it so, but had no good by it, for he was
pressed to death of the throng, as a just reward of this his contemptuous speech,
and unbelief of gods power. So likewise his providence and wisdom is abused,
when one frets, and speaks grudgingly against Gods work, under the name of
fortune and chance, oh what ill luck was that, what ill-fauoured fortune; for
either one must say that things come to pass by chance, hap as hap may,
without any disposing of Gods, and so he charge God to be too careless a
governor, that lets all things run at random without counsel and advice,
when he had made a world, to let it go at peraduentures, and at random, or
if we say that God gouernes all things, and rules in the world, and appoints
what things and how they shall come to pass, then he chafes and murmureth
against Gods government, under the name of fortune, and speaking ill of luck,
speaks ill of Gods wisdom, a property of his.

So likewise in abusing any of Gods properties to defend evil, as is the
common custom of most men, if you reprove them and admonish them of any
fault, this makes them care for nothing; oh God is merciful, true, God is
merciful, but to whom? to the penitent and humble person, that hates his sin
and studies to forgo it; but he is not merciful to those that love their
sin, and like their sin, and that have a root of bitterness in them, and
make Gods mercy an encouragement to harten them in their sin, and not to
allure them to repentance, and make his love and kindness a protector to their
lewdness, to such he will show no mercy, but his wrath shall burn against
them, to the bottom of hell. So that in speaking of Gods attributes, speak of
them with reverence and to that good use for which God has revealed them.

So lastly, Gods name is taken in vain, without an oath, in speaking
irreverently of his works, either those admirable actions of God within
himself, as his election and reprobation, when vain man because his shallow
conceit and foolish brain, cannot comprehend how God should be just if he
appointed any to damnation, or how it were not long of him if he should decree
of their destruction before, that it were as they say a plain wrong, and God
could not maintain it, for this weakness of his, that cannot reach to the
depth of these things, he will therefore deny them, and say there be none,
whereas he should rather with silence and reverence wonder at this hidden
secret, and not pry into it, as Paul in Romans 10. did, having spoken sparingly
of it, he breaks out in admiration and so concludes, O the deepenesse of the
riches of the wisdom, etc. This is an horrible profaneness. So for the
outward works of creation, and of redemption, and the passion of Christ, when
one can speak so lightly and without all use of these great things, that
should make one fear before God, and increase the reverence toward his
Magestie, and grief and hatred of sins.

Thus much for taking Gods name in vain by speech, without an oath. Now
follows that taking of his name in vain, which is with an oath: and this
three ways, by swearing either vainly or wickedlie, or falselie. Vain
swearing is, when one in his common and ordinary talk, mingle words and fills
up his sentences with needelesse oaths, which though men account as a small
sin, yet it is a most notorious dishonor of God, and proceeds from the
devil, he is the father of it, as Christ says, Mat. 5. Let your yea, be
yea, and your nay, nay, for whatsoever is above, comes from the e^ill one, j.
the devil. So that the root of it is exceeding evil, and therefore the
branch it self, is not any thing commendable, and then if you will know the
fruit of it, S. James shows it in his 2. chap. verse. 11. Swear not (says
he) my brethren, neither by heaven nor earth, nor any other oath, but let your
yea be yea, and your nay nay, least you fall into condemnation. So that the
devil is the author of vain oaths, damnation is the end and fruit of vain
oaths, and he that is willing to be lead by such a guide, and come to such
an end, he may take his liberty to use them: but one may say, I do not
swear great oaths, as by God, and by the blood and wounds of Christ, and such
fearful oaths, but petty and small oaths, as by my faith and truth, by
this bread, this fire, this light, etc. and such trifling things. But Christ
answeares for this, that we must not swear neither by the temple, nor the
gold, nor heaven, nor earth, no not so much as by any hair, because God is the
author and maker of all things, and there appears such a Magestie and power of
God in the simplest of his creatures, as no man can express, and must
therefore reverence them more, then so lightly to abuse them. So that whether
greater oaths or lesser oaths, if they be idle oaths, Gods words has
condemned them, and they shall without repentance bring damnation. I but I
swear that which is true, it is not a lie: be it so; that if it be the very
truth, yet God has not bound you only not to take up his name falselie, but
also not to take it up idly and vainly: and again, this ordinary swearing in
ones common talk, will at length bring false swearing, it cannot be avoided,
but that he which usually swears vainly, shall now and then swear falselie,
for the often tossing of Gods holy and sacred name, or any of his creatures in
ones mouth friuelously and carelessly, does beget at length such a base opinion
and account of these things, that they care not how they use them. Oh but says
one; I would not swear indeed, but they constrained me, and urged me to it,
for they would not trust me else: but if they will not, better they not trust
you, then God not save; better undergo man's unjust suspicion, then Gods just
damnation. And what is the cause that some men's credit is grown so weak and
feeble, that it will not stand unless it be underpropped by an oath, because
they have so wounded their name, by lying dealing, and by cosenage, as that men
take all fo^r falsehood that comes from them, but if one would deal justly and
truly, and live an honest life, he should not need to use such sinful
shifts to get men to trust him; for there be many of Gods people, that through
gods mercy can say, they have dealt so honestly and conscionablie with men,
and have made such due account of their promise, as now no man that knows them
will go about to put them to their oath, their bare word shall end the
contrauersie, so that if they would deal plainly and justly with others, and
let them see some truth in their words, they should not need this idle kind of
adjuration to the hurt of their souls; so that to swear when no oath is
required, or accepted, nor cannot edify but rather hurt, is greatly to be
condemned. But if vain swearing be a plant of the devils setting, and will
bring forth fruit for his store, viz. damnation; then how much more horrible
and odious, is that blaspemous and furious, and outrageous swearing of many
men, that if they be never so little offended, and their mind displeased,
then they fall to disgorge their filthy stomach upon the name of their
creator, and spue out all the venime they can upon his most sacred Magestie,
without any fear or reverence; if in their hunting their dogs agree not to
their mind, they fall a cursing and swearing, as it were to ease their
distempred stomach, by shameless and blasphemous tearing and rending the name
of God; if God cross them in their dice, which are dear to them, they will
cross him in his glory, which is dear to him; if he will make the dice run
against them, they will not put it up so, but they will be revenged, their
tongue shall run as fast against him.

Here is an heart fully possessed with the devil, or rather changed into a
devil, that can find no other remedy when they are crossed and moved, but to
dishonor God, as who should say, it is an ease and pleasure to their mind,
when they can bring any foul disgrace unto his name, so much as in them lies.
Hell gapes with open mouth for such hellish persons, and a most horrible and
fearful damnation remains for such horrible and fearful sinners. But this
may be an unspeakable comfort to poor christians, if God bear with such
persons, with this furious mad beasts, that bite at his name, and seek to rend
and tear his glory, how much more will he do to them that love him and
reverence him, and desire to obey him; if God be so patient that for a while he
will suffer men as it were to spit in his face in a chafe, then those that
humbly cast themselves down at his feet shall find mercy. But let such
persons, take heed how they presume often thus to cross God in their anger,
in the thing that he most accounts of, for he will not long sit down by it, he
will not still bear it, but he will arise in his anger, and plague them in
their soul, and in that that is nearest unto them, if they set their tongues
against heaven, heaven will send down thunderbolts of vengeance against them;
and if one dash often against Christ, and will take no warning, at length
Christ will fall upon them and grind them to powder. And thus much for idle
and foolish swearing, as also beastlike and outrageous blaspheming.

Secondly, Gods name is taken in vain by swearing wickedly, that is, by
swearing to do evil, as David in a passion, and in an heat, swear to kill
Naball. Indeed Naball had deserved death, and God did meet with him after, but
David had no warrant to seek so sudden a revenge, and to swear to do that
too which as yet he had no calling. This kind of swearing takes Gods name in
vain, which way so-euer one do not keep his oath, nor commit the evil he
swear too; yet he sinned in that he made no greater reckoning of Gods name, but
to take it up lightly, and pawn it before he had considered, whether he had
lawfully so done or not; and if he do keep his wicked oath, that is most of
all sinful, for then he makes God an author and patron, and calls him for a
witness and allower of his evil. So that for one to swear he will be meet
with such an one that has done him wrong, that he will be revenged of him, or
such like, this is a grievous profaning of Gods holy name, for Gods name should
fear us from evil, not bind us to evil.

Thirdly, Gods name is exceedingly dishonored and polluted by swearing
falsely, by forswearing ones self, which is most usually called perjurie. This
is an horrible sin, tending to a most fearful damnation; for if one shall
give account for every idle word, as Christ says, and if one be subject to
damnation for every vain oath, as Saint James affirms, then what shall
be-come of those, that will dare to call God to bear witness of a false
thing, and bear themselves out in a lie, by pretending his name. Therefore in
Zaccar. 5. the Lord shows that his curse like a fretting leprosy, shall come
upon the forswearer, and upon his house, to consume him and devour his
posterity and substance, and shall eat into them, like a fretting leprosy,
till it have brought them to naught. And in the 15. Ps. it is set as a note and
mark of a true christian, that having sworn to his hindrance, he will yet
keep his oath. Then how far is he from a good man that will of purpose swear
that, which he never purposes to perform, and set a better color upon an
untruth by garding it with an oath. For it were better loose any commodity
then of Gods favor; and suffer damage in any thing, then in the matter of Gods
glory.

Now the circumstances do aggrauate this sin; It is very wicked and cursed,
if it be in a private place, and in a private cause. But when one comes before
a magistrate, in a public assembly, and in a matter publikly known, and to
be publikly tried according to the truth and justice, then, to win credit to
a lie and unjust dealing, by calling the true God to witness, and to behold
is most notorious, and even to lie against the holy ghost, as Peter says to
Ananias. And this is to bring a many sins into one; to be a thief and rob
the innocent, to pervert justice and truth, and therefore when one comes to be
a witness before the face of the congregation in judicial manner, then
purposely upon set malice, to shroud and thrust forward a lie, as it were
under the protection and safeconduct of Gods most holy name, is one of the
highest and sorest breaches of this commandment, and abuses of his name.

Now the way to preserve one against all these abuses of Gods name, is to fear
an oath, as in Ecclesiasticus, setting a good man and opposing him to a sinner,
he gives him this mark, that he fears an oath, and if one be a frayde to
accustom his tongue to swearing, he shall not easily be overtaken with wicked
and much less perjured swearing, but he that has so lavish a tongue as it can
with as much facility and nimblenesse pour forth oaths as any other words,
he is in continual danger to fall into that foul and most odious and
hateful sin of perjurie. And thus we have heard how this commandment is
broken.

Now where God forbids any ill, he commands the contrary good. Therefore we
must see what it commands. It commands generally to glorify Gods name. As is
showed in the Table following.

Gods name is glorified in life, by a godly and holy liueing in christian
profession. speech or without an oath in speking of Gods words titles attributs
works reverently and to good use and edification.

in the lawful use of an oath, by observing these rules in the persons or
making that he be a christian and believer, else he cannot swear lawfully.
taking that he do require and will accept an oath, else there is no calling.
thing that it be first, true in judgment and knowledge. secondly, a matter
of wait and importance. thirdly, taken with great fear and reverence of gods
name.




FIrst, for life, a christian is bound here to behave himself so, that his
whole conversation may bring glory to the name of God. He must so profit in
knowledge and conscience by the word of God, which he professes, and make such
a good proceeding in pure religion, as that he may beautify his religion by a
blameless and unspotted behavior. Thus in Mat. 5. Christ says, Let your
light so shine forth, that men may see your good works, and glorify your
father which is in heaven. He would have christians be as lights, and the light
which they must send forth on every side must be a gracious, and christian
behavior, that men seeing and beholding these beams, may glorify, not them,
and commend them, for this a Pharise will do, seek to have men magnify him,
and speak well of him; but a christian must desire that by his means men may
be brought to magnify the profession of God, and to speak and think most
reverently of that word, that has wrought such grace and such reformation in
them. The life must be the first beginner in religion, or else the speech is
but ridiculous; as the Lord says, What have thou to do, to take my words
within thy mouth, and hate to be reformed; One goes beyond his calling and
commission, when he dare call himself a christian, and God his father, and
will not yield obedience unto his commandments in his practice. So 1. Peter. 2.
12. Have your conversation honest among the gentiles etc. that they may
glorify God in the day of their visitation. q. d. Therebe many of Gods elect
that are as yet unregenerate, and as bitter against Gods truth, as any of the
reprobates, and will speak as ill of profession and professors as any other,
but God will visit them hereafter by his good spirit, and the sun of grace
shall shine in their dark hearts, to their enlightening; and Gods word shall
work faith and repentance in their hearts, who when God has showed the same
mercy to them that in former time he did to you, shall magnify God for those
good things that have been in you, which have caused them that bare an hard
mind to religion before, to love and like it so much the more now. And though
they stand out long, yet at length they shall be won, and then they will
magnify God. And even bond men are commanded, notwithstanding their low
estate, and the baseness of their condition, yet, to bring some glory to God,
and win some reverence to their glorious profession, by their good dealing. No
man is in so mean a place, and so contemptible a degree but that he must if he
will, take the name of Christ upon him, and the profession of christian
religion, he must adorn, and deck it, which he may do, by being faithful and
diligent in his place, and giving every man his due conscionably. Even a
servant, if he be not audacious, and saucie, and malapart, and picking, and
false, but trusty and diligent, and serviceable, and patient, and meek, and
humble, he keeps Gods commandment, he glorifies God, he graces religion, he
works out his own salvation, does what in him lies, to convert his unbelieving
master, and shall have a reward for this, as well as if he were in an higher
and more honorable calling, that the world made more account off. Therefore
this serves again to confute those professors, that are so slenderly seen in
the meaning of Gods commandments, as that they think if they be not common
swearers, and outrageous blasphemers, the third commandment has nothing to
say them, and they be free from the breach of it. But this and all other of
Gods commandments are broken, as well by omission, as commission, as well by
not performing that that is therein enjoined, as by doing that that is
forbidden, for God does not give a law altogether negative, but it consists of
a part affirmative to. And because neglecting obedience to the first branch of
this holy commandment, and care not to cross God in that that is nearest unto
him, therefore he crosses and plagueth them in that that they do most set by.

In the very first petition Christ bids us say, Hallowed or sanctified be thy
name. j. Let us and all professors, be so well grounded in the understanding
of the word, and rooted in the good affection to the same, as that their life
led in all good conscience, may bring glory to thy name, and religion. Now for
one daily to make this prayer, and never to regard his actions, how they be
agreeable to his petition, and such as in truth do sanctify Gods name; what
is that in deed, but to dishonor him both in his life and in his prayer. And
thus much how ones life should glorify God.

Now follows how he must glorify him in word and speeches. First in speaking
of Gods word, as one ought, for we must not only not speak of it vainly,
jestingly, or wrestingly, but we must look that we do speak of it, to
those good uses, and with that good affection and reverence that is meet. And
so in Deutr. 6. 7. These words shall be in thine heart, and thou shall rehearse
them continually, etc. So that it is not left at ones discreation, whether
having gods word in his heart he will speak it, but it is laid as a
commandment with equal authority with the former, that he shall talk of
it: and surely if it be within, it will be heard without; as Psalm. 37. 30.
31. The mouth of the righteous will speak of wisdom, the law of God is in
his heart, his feet shall not slide. He shows the privilege of a righteous
man, that he has Gods law so rooted and settled in his heart, as it will sprout
and bud forth in his mouth, and these do so keep and preserve him, that
either he shall not do any thing that is wicked, or fall into sin, or if he
do, he shall be soon and happily recovered: Those therefore fail much in
this duty, that will never talk of any thing in the scripture, or of any part
in gods word, they will come to the church, and give the preacher an hours
hearing, but follow them out of the church door, and what kind of conference
shall you hear come from them? not one word of the sermon, but presently of
earth, earth, straight to the rooting again; though these men be not common
swearers, yet they have broke this commandment, for God commands us here to
speak so wisely and discreetlie of his law, as others may reap fruit and
himself to. And therefore howsoever foolish persons are ready to excuse
themselves that they be not booke-learned, and therefore they cannot talk of
scripture, but they have a good heart, and if one could see into them, he
should see wonders forsooth, and many great matters they have in their heart, as
this by the way must be marked for a general rule, that as every man is more
empty of goodness, so he is most full of bragging, and the most ignorant
persons be the greatest boasters, those that neither know God nor themselves,
nor have any spark of grace and repentance, of all others, these will make you
the most flourishing show in words, what a good heart they have, how good a
faith, how they serve God day and night, and many excellent things, rare men
they be, if you will believe their own report; for such persons I say, that
have all their goodness locked up so that it can never come abroad, they may
say what they will of themselves, but Christ says, that a good man out of the
good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things. This is such a treasure
as must needs be brought to light now and then, yea continually, for if one
say, he has a coffer full of good gold, and yet can fetch nothing out but
counters, no man ever saw him bring an handful of pure gold out of his chest,
but every day counters good store, sure by this that comes abroad, one may
quickly guess what store is within, and few wise men will count him ever the
richer for his golden words, when he has nothing but brass comes out of his
purse. And so in the Pro. the wise man says, that the tongue of the righteous
is a tree of life, and that it feeds many. And therefore he that can feed
no man, how comes this to pass, surely he is not a tree of life, he wants
grace. So that as a man must not speak idly and peruertinglie of Gods word, so
he must not hold his peace neither, as if he were dumb, but he must have
the law of grace under his lips, and speak of it reverently to edification,
and he that does not so, breaks the third commandment.

Secondly one must speak of Gods titles and properties, with fear and with an
holy trembling, to the benefit of men and the praise of God by them. Thus
David in the 40. Psalm. 9. says of him self, I have declared thy
righteousness in the great congregation, I have not hid thy righteousness,
and I consealed not thy mercy and thy truth etc. These were the things whereof
David would speak of, the great mercy of God, and of his wonderful and
stable truth, that men might learn hence, to fly unto him, and depend upon
him in their miseries. And he should show forth his righteousness, that men
should know that it would surely go well with the righteous, and that the
wicked should have according to the work of his hands, for God being
righteousness itself, must needs punish the one and reward the other, as
their life and deeds had deserved. These were the things about which he would
willingly exercise his tongue, and speak joyfullie to the people, for one
cannot speak of these things conscionablie, but it will work in him a feeling
and a love of these things, so that him self shall get more good and those
also that hear him. So the 107. Psalm. 8. Let them consider before the Lord his
loving kindness, and his wonderful works before the sons of men. He would
have us have such a feeling in our hands, as that we should not only confess
Gods kindness to him, but before men also make the same known. And therefore
all of us must here be humbled and acknowledge how exceeding short we come,
how seldom or never we break forth into such confession or declaration of
Gods power, wisdom, mercy, and such like good, as our selves and others might
thereby be stired up the more, to be thankful unto him, and to stay upon him:
Who almost has said as David in the Psalm. Come and I will tell you what the
Lord has done for me, what carfulness he has had over our souls and
bodies, what faithfulness he showed unto us in all our needs, and of all his
wonderful mercy and wisdom, whereof we may see experience.

Many can make long discourses, of the kindness of such a friend, and spend
an hour together, what this and that good man has done for him, but for God
that gives life and breath and all things, and that gives power to our friends
to do us good, and kindness to put that power in practice, who does almost
speak of all his goodness, of all his power that he continually does show
and practice toward us* to move himself and others the more earnestly to
glorify his name. Likewise thirdly we are here commanded, to speak of Gods
works, with reverence and thanks giving, wether the works of mercy or of
justice. And thus the children of Israel with there leader Moses after that
wonderful deliverance at the red sea, did fall to praising and magnifieng God,
and to confess his excellent greatness and magestie, and set out the same to
all posterities. And as one must magnify God for all his works, so especially
for those that go most beyond the reach, and seem most contrary to carnal
reason: and thus Paul having disputed of election and reprobation, such works
as carnal men and fleshly wit most snuffes at, and would willingly snarle and
speak most vildly of it, if it durst for fear of men; he being a man of Gods,
speaks most reverently, and with wonderful awe of the greatness of God. Romans
11. 33. O the deepenesse of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God, how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out, and
then who has known the mind of the Lord. j. who can tell why God chooses
one to life, and refuses an other to death, why he will have one saved and an
other condemned, who can assign the cause of these hidden things. And in the
next verse having before spoken off, ordaining one to shame, and an other to
glory; he shuts up and closes all with this holy and reverent conclusion,
wondering at his greatness, of him, (says he,) and to him, and for him are all
things, to him be glory for ever, Amen. q. d. he made all things at the first
himself, he sustaines and preserues all things by his own power, still;
therefore it is most just and equal, that he should dispose and order all
things according as seems best to him, for his own glory. And as we must
strive to magnify God in these works, that cross our reason, so in those also
that are most contrary to our affection, as in our crosses and afflictions.
And thus did Job, when God had taken away his sons, his servants, his sheep,
his Oxen, his Camels, and all his goods, and that all of the sudden, he falls
not to murmur and grudge against God, but breaks out into the praise of God,
The Lord has given, says he, the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the
Lord. In all these miseries he could find in his heart and find good cause to
bless the name of God, for he knew that it came from God, and though the devil
were a chief stirrer, yet he could not go beyond his commission; and though
God had taken away all, no wrong was done to Job, Gods it was, and God had
given it him, and might have taken it away sooner, and therefore still he was
to be blessed. So did Hezekiah, so did Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what he
will, so that even in gods chastisements and corrections which are tedious to
the flesh, and go against the grain of our affections, we must praise him. As
Nebuchadnezar in the end of his seven years misery, says, He is holy in all
his works, and Just in all his ways. And thus we must glorify the name of God
in speech, without an oath.

Now it follows to be spoken of an oath: and first, we must know that it is a
duty and service of God when we have a lawful calling and just warrant to
take an oath, so it be done aright, as rash swearing is a sinful thing, so
reverent swearing is an holy thing, and one may sin as well in omitting this
when it is lawfully required, as in committing the other which is forbidden. So
Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20. Thou shall fear the Lord, and serve him and swear in
his name. In both which places god plainly commands it, as a service of him to
swear by him, when one has a warrantable and just cause to take an oath.
Therefore their error must be condemned, that would altogether root out the
use of oaths as unlawful, and being called thereto refuse it, because they
say they would not take gods name in vain; nay, now they do take Gods name in
vain, in refusing to swear by it reverently, and upon good ground and
allowance, they might even as well refuse to hear, and read, and pray, as to
swear, being thus called thereunto. Likewise it serves for our instruction,
that when the case stands so, as that an oath is required at our hands, by
those which have authority, and when we have a sufficient warrant, then we
should willingly and cheerfully do it, and that with a mind to glorify God,
and an expectation of a blessing upon this, as upon hearing and reading,
because it is an ordinance of God, as well as they be: and it is a fault, when
men coming to this, do not propose the glory of God unto themselves, or look
for any reward for this duty, but only look to the civil ends, to set
agreement, and make all things right, and such like, not thinking that this is
a matter of highly honoring God, nor looking to his name, nor to his promise
of given good success and blessing to all his ordinances. Many will hope to
speed better, for a good prayer, as in deed they shall, which never hope that
god will look any whit, the more favorably upon them, for a lawful and a
just oath, but if God will punish vain swearers, he will reward good swearing,
and those that use it aright, as a curse is denounced against the foolish and
idle abusing of it, so the reverent and conscionable use of it, must have a
promise of blessing annexed to it also. But for want of knowledge and faith in
this point, we want the fruit of it, whereas a christian swearing for conscience
sake, and in obedience to Gods commandment may lay upon an oath among his best
services, and accounts, and treasure it up as a precious jewel that shall
bring an excellent reward with it; for God will not forget those that sanctify
his name, and one cannot do that more then in an holy and reverent swearing by
it. Now that one may swear lawfully, these rules must be observed, both for

the persons and either thing making or taking.

FOr the person making, this must be known and observed, that he must be a
christian, for no unregenerate man can swear lawfully. And therefore S. Paul
swearing says, I call God to witness, why but so may an unregenerate man, and
his oath be worth nothing, therefore he ads, whom I serve in my spirit,
showing that he that will comfortablie take the name of god in his mouth to
swear, must sanctify him in his heart, and serve him in his spirit, or else
he does take the name of God in vain, he does not glorisie him at all, for an
ill tree says Christ, cannot bring forth good fruit, and though others may
have good by that which he shall do, yet it can bring no good or comfort to
himself; nay it is an ill work in him, as the preaching of Judas, and casting
out devils, and other works which he through christ's commission was able to
do, were wicked things in him, and so far from doing good to him, and
yelding him any comfort in time of his afflicted conscience, that they rather
were torments, and as hell fire in his bosom to vex and terrify him, that had
made so fair a show, when in truth he had so soul an heart. So if an
unregenerate man take an oath, though it be most true, yet he sins and
dishonours God in thus swearing, because whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
now he has no faith, nor never looks to Gods commandment or glory in his
oath; therefore the man must be good, sanctified by Gods spirit, and by faith,
able to look to the commandment and promise, being truly converted unto God.
Therefore whosoever has taken an oath before his calling, how ever in it self
lawful, yet he must be humbled for the doing of it, because it was a sin in
him, being void of faith, and wanting a good conscience, and all true
reverence of the magestie, for these things can never be wrought, but by the
work of Gods spirit, converting and regenerating, therefore in time of ones
vnregeneracie, he took Gods name in his mouth, when there was no fear of him
in his heart, and to the impure all things are impure. This must be observed in
the maker. Now in him that takes an oath, this is requisite, without which an
oath cannot be lawful, that he require it and be willing to accept it, for if
the party unto whom one swears, do not desire nor will not receive an oath,
then the oath is a wicked oath, and therefore many men are to be reproved, that
in common buying and selling, are so ready to swear, as that though no man be
willing, they should swear, ye, rather is grieved and troubled at it, yet
every thing of never so light moment, must have the confirmation of an oath
joined unto it. But what get they that will make a trade of swearing? surely
this, that they grow to be suspected of unfaithfulness, and when they be so
lavish of Gods name, both their own hearts grow less to reverence it, and
others will not believe them, but the more suspect them, the more they think to
remove all suspicion; for a godly man and one that has any true fidelity in
him, sets more by the name of God, then to pawn it upon every small occasion,
and therefore those may be justly thought most deceitful toward men, that be
most profane to God, and he that cares not to dishonor God, will never make
any great bones of cousening his neighbor.

These rules are for the persons. Now for the thing it self. First it must be
true that is sworn, that is, the thing which we confirm by taking the name of
God in our mouths, must not only be true in it self, but it must also be a
known truth, of which he that swears has some certainty, his conscience
must not doubt of the truth of it, if he do, he sets to light by Gods name.
So Ierem. 4. 2. He requires that one must swear in truth and in judgment; if
one will come to aver and affirm a thing with an oath, he must be able to say
I swear nothing but that which upon sound ground and good proof I know to be
true, I am sure of it, and have in mine own heart, just warrant for that which
I speak, else if one will come upon every light conjecture, and slender
opinion, to bind a thing by the name of God, though it fall out to be so, yet
he has profaned Gods name, and taken it up with a vain and vnreuerent
affection, in that he is so rash as to venture so easily and suddenly upon so
great and weighty a thing.

Secondly, an oath must not be tendered in light and small matters, but in
things of moment and importance, though the matter be true and in our
knowledge, such as we may safely testify the truth of it; yet if it be but a
trifle, and such a thing as if we be not credited, it is not worth an oath, in
such case a man must rather be content not to be credited, then to call Gods
name to witness. When Moses was the judge, he appointed inferior officers to
be conversant in smaller matters, and only the greater and waightier causes
were brought to him to hear and decide; now then, if it were not fit for Moses
to be called to the ending and making up of every light and idle controversy,
much less is it fit for us to debase GOD so much as to bring him in upon
every trifle. We would count it a very unmannerly thing, if one should go to
the Lord chief justice or some high officer about a sheafe of corn or cock of
hay, and no man could serve his turn, but some great officer in high place, to
have the hearing of these toys, and if it be to much disgracing of a noble
man's dignity to call him forth about every such thing of no weight, much more
profaneness is it toward God, and shows an heart nothing touched with the
greatness of his magestie, to urge him to come out of his place, and be a
witness to such matters. Therefore unless it be matter of weight that tends
to some glory of GOD, or some great good of man, to end some contention that
would be dangerous, and to set unity and good order amongst men, we must not
be bold to meddle with the name of God, and solemnly to call him as a witness
of the thing in hand.

Lastly, one must do it with great fear and reverence, as in Eccles. It is
noted as the mark of a good man, to fear an oath: and though one be the child
of God, and an oath be required of him, and he know the thing to be
certainly true, and the matter also of weight worth an oath, yet if he come
lightly without any regard of God, and reverence of that excellent name, he
is to take in his mouth, he has failed in his swearing, and has taken Gods
name in vain, and is to be humbled for it. For in the Psalm. he says, Serve
the Lord with fear. Now if a man must not undertake any service of God,
without fear and reverence, much less must he call God to be a special
witness, and after a special manner set himself before him without
trembling, and a special awe of his Magestie. And thus much for the
commandment; now follows the reason of it.

For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.
Here God from the greatness of the peril, goes about to terrify men from
the sin: now where he says, I will not hold him guiltless, something more
is expressed, then is understood, for the meaning is, that God will account him
as guilty, and execute a sharp and severe punishment upon him. So that this
we may observe as a plain doctrine out of this doctrine, that he which
sins against this commandment, unless he do soundly repent, shall feel
Gods hand heavy upon him, God will never put it up, but will be thoroughly
revenged upon him for it. Of all sins this seems most safe in the eyes of
men, a greater penalty is laid upon him that robs a man of his goods, then
upon him that robs God of his glory, and one may with more ease carry out a
blaspemous and furious oath, yea many of them, and wicked scoffing and mocking
of his word and works, then any slanderous reproach or taunting term against
his neighbor, that is but dust and ashes like himself. Therefore since men let
it slip so easily, God will take the more notice of it, and punish it more
sharply: for indeed men are more careful far of their own vaineglory,
then of Gods glory, and therefore if God should refer it to men's assizes, it is
sure, little order would be taken for it; yea commonly it is seen that those
which should reform and correct others, in this point have themselves most
need to be reformed and corrected, and the greatest rulers that should most
repress blasphemy, of all others practice it most; for if they be never so
little crossed, how do they seek to ease themselves, but by violent and
outrageous swearing. Therefore if God should put over the punishment of it, to
their discreation, like enough a very slight penalty should serve the turn:
and men also could not inflict a sufficient punishment, answerable to the
fault, for damnation is the due punishment, as in James 5. Therefore God will
have it come before his judgment seat, and himself will be the judge, and the
executioner in this offense. Since then god undertakes to punish it? the use of
it is for the tenor and affrighting of all ungodly persons, that take liberty
to themselves, to run ever in the breach of this commandment above the rest,
that they grow shameless, they never seek to hide it, nay they will do it to
anger one, and they take a pride in it to; many also of the ciuiller sort, will
be loath a man should see them take away their neighbors sheep, or prig a
sheet from off the hedge, but if they swear in a passion, come and tell them
that they are in great fault, they wrong God, in that which is most dear unto
him, they profane and dishonor his name, then they turn all into a jest and
laughing; what, is that such a matter, do you stand so much upon an oath, why
who is there I wonder, that does not swear sometimes, and drop out an oath now
and then, before he be aware, when he is angry? and do they make so light a
matter of it, is it a small thing to fall into the hands of God? nay there be
some of Gods people that can say, truly through Gods mercy, they had rather
choose to have their soul drop from their body, then an unadvised and
passionate oath from their mouth, for if God have threatened to bring damnation
upon light swearers, then where shall mad and frantic swearers appear, these
bitter swearers, how great a damnation must they look for? unless their
repentance be exceeding great, for though men let them pass, yet before the
great judge of heaven, they be liable to an action of eternal death; wherefore
in a case of such danger, men must be content to be admonished, and to be
helped out of the sin, and not take one and chafe at him, that by an
wholesome rebuke desires to draw their souls out of hell, which they would not
do, if they did believe that God would so severely punish them.

Lastly, this may serve for the comfort of those that have received wrong by
false oaths, and have false matters carried out against the^, by the help of
perjurie; though corrupt judges for their own gain sometimes regard not this,
but look slightly over, and it goes for current, yet the judge of judges will
make a better inquiry, and come with a more true verdit, and will lay open
their innocence, and the damnable hypocrisy and impudency of their
adversaries, and not only discover it, but plague and confound them for it, if
they persist impenitent: and this was the case Naboth and his children, they
were by such wretched dealing, surprised and brought to death, as malefactors,
as traitors against the King, and blasphemers of God, but has not God in his
word showed how he brought destruction upon the actors, and rooted them out,
and swept them and their seed away like doung from the face of the earth, and
Naboths name is now cleared, and every one that hears of him knows him to
have been better then Ahab or Iesabel were: so that God brought their sin
upon their heads, and has not suffered his innocence to be stained; God
would not bear with it, how ever Ahab being the king, no man durst go about
to redress it. Therefore all be it sometimes wicked sinners, will impudently
outface, and by swearing and forswearing ouer-sway the good causes of Gods
children, and carry away matters for a time, that are altogether false: yet be
pacient, God will not let the uprightness of his children be oppressed; he
will not suffer that his sacred name shall be thus wickedly abused, to be made a
shelter for lies and slanders, but when the good time comes, he will let the
world see how vildly and shamefully they dealt, and though now whilst God
holds his peace, they flatter themselves and care not a jot to profane his
name, so they may effect their malicious purpose, and matters go on their
side, yet God will have a care that their wickedness shall return and fall
upon their own heads, and their own shame shall cover their faces, and the
wrong done both to his name and to his servants shall be fully discovered and
avenged. Thus much concerning the third commandment, for the glorifieng of
Gods name. Now follows the fourth, In these words following.

Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath day, six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the sabbath of the
Lord thy God, in it; thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son, and
thy daughter, thy man servant, thy maid servant, thy cattle and the stranger
that is within thy gates, etc.
THe sum of this fourth commandment is, to command the setting a part of the
seventh day, from all worldly business, and affairs, to the exercises of
religion and mercy, and in the night that our sleep also be seasoned with the
word, and the exercise of which we have been pertakers. The parts are two. The
one sets down the duties to be performed, the other the reasons to move us to
perform them. The duties two fold, showing what we should do, and from what
we should decline. The things to be done, is keeping it holy, celebrating an
holy rest unto God. The things to be forborne, are all body lie works, and to
see that those which be under our government, as children, servants, and all
inferiors do the like, and that our beasts be not put to any civil labor,
yea that the stranger, when he comes amongst us, do not openly profane the
same, though we cannot enforce him to come to the publik exercises, yet those
that are in superiority, must restrain him from publik violating of it, by
open working, and must lay the authority so far upon him, as that they
suffer him not among their people, and in their jurisdiction, in the face of
the congregation, openly to break the commandment of God. The reasons are
diverse, first drawn from the equity and righteousness of it in these words,
six days shall thou labor q. d. I have given thee six days for thy
business, and have taken but one for my self, therefore thou must be very
well contented, to yield to me in this so reasonable and equal a commandment.
If I had taken six to my service and given thee but one for the works of thy
caling, yet thou should in duty have obeyed me, but now that I am so
liberal to thee, and scant to my self, having so large allowance, there is no
reason why thou should refuse. The second reason, is taken from the
authority and right of God, in these words, The seventh day is the sabbath of
the Lord thy God, q. d. I have taken it to my self, I have challenged it to my
self, to be employed in my service, it is my day not thine, therefore, unless
thou will be accounted a sacrilegious thief, to take holy things for unholy
uses, unless thou will deuoue things that be sanctified to thine own
destruction, see that thou meddle not with it, it is a part of the church
treasury, and thou shall be no better then a church robber, if thou convert it
to thine own uses. The third reason is taken from Gods example, in these
words. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth the sea and all that in
them is, and rested the seventh day, q. d. if thou will follow example and
be led by others, then follow the example of the best; now what better example
can there be, then the example of God himself; now God himself when he went
to make the world, and all the things in the world, contrived all his works so,
as that he finished them within the compass of six days, and on the seventh
day did rest from all his works of creation, only preserving those things
which before he had made, therefore from his example learn thou so to dispatch
all thy business on the six days, as that on the seventh day ceasing from
labor in thy calling, thou may wholly give thy self to the duties of
sanctification, and to meditate on Gods power and greatness, in his six days
work, for which end, as one special thing to be done in it, he has appointed
this resting of the seventh day. The last reason is taken from the end of the
sabbath, in these words, Wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day and hallowed
it. q. d. If neither the equity of the commandment, nor the authority and
right of God, nor yet his example will prevail with thee to persuade thine
heart to keep this commandment, yet in regard of thine own profit, and the
benefit thou shall reap to thy self, yield to keep it holy, for God has not
taken this to himself for any commodity that he shall have by it, but even
for thy good, for he has appointed it for holy uses, that it might be a means
of blessing not upon the soul only, but even upon the body and estate of
those that observe it; there is no readier way to bring Gods blessing upon any
man then the sanctifying of it, nor no more present means to pull down a
curse, then the neglecting and breaking of it. Therefore if thou love thy self
and would have prosperity on thy soul and body, yield so much obedience to
God, as to sanctify his sabbath. Thus much concerning the sum and exposition
of this commandment. Now because there be many that do disagree in this
doctrine of the sabbath, and account the keeping holy of the seventh day in the
number of those ceremonies which be abrogated by Christ, and reached only to
the Jews, therefore it is requisite that we approve and confirm by some sound
reasons out of Gods word, that this commandment is moral and perpetual, and
as carefully to be kept under the gosple, as under the law, and to continue in
force, so long as any of the commandments, even so long as there is this
world, and a Church militant upon earth. The first reason to confirm this, may
be drawn from those reasons which God uses for the confirmation of it, in the
text; the reasons are all of them perpetual, and none of them ceremonial, and
every one as much belongs unto us, as unto them, and therefore it is without
reason, to make the commandment it self of less scope, and binding fewer to
keep it, then those reasons which are brought to confirm it. For go through
the whole commandment, what one word in all of it, has any note of ceremony,
what reason savors of any special thing to the Jews, that the commandment
should be tied only to them; for god commands them to keep the seventh,
because it is most equal, being that he has permitted six days for their
business. Why, and has he not given us liberty to labor six days in our
calling, and is not the equity altogether as forceable to us in every age, as
it was to them, in their ages. If God have taken from us none of the six days
which he gave to them, what reason have we to take away more of the seventh, or
any of the seventh more, then they. Then secondly, it is the Lords, therefore
the Jews may not dare to employ it, any other ways then according to his
will, and does not this reason hold as strongly now, have we any privilege
granted, to lay theeuish hands, upon those holy things which are Gods, more
then in old time the Jews had; and for the example of God, that he ceased from
creating, does it not reach to all ages a like; are not we as much bound to
follow Gods example as ever any. Lastly it is a day blessed to them that keep
it, and to this end consecrated, that it may bring a blessing; has time worn
out the force of this argument, is God less able to bless us, or should we
less desire, or do we less stand in need of his blessing, then they? We see
then that all the reasons are firm and strong, the length of time cannot
abrogate the truth and strength of the reasons; therefore neither can it
disanul the commandment. For where God gives a ceremonial commandment, which
he would have the Jews only to observe, there he frames his reason
thereafter, from some thing that specially touches the Jews, and has no such
affinity and agreement to other nations, as for the passover, he commands the
Jews to keep that, why, because the Angel passed over their houses, when he
destroyed the Egiptians, and they must give the first borne to God; why?
because God did not smite their first borne, in the slaughter of the Egiptians,
and so many other ceremonies, have reasons annexed unto them, which being
peculiar to the Jews, showed that they did only bind the Jews under the
law; but of all the reasons here alleged, we see that none is ceremonial,
peculiar or proper to the Jews, but every one common to all, and as large as
all the world; therefore those that cannot exempt themselves from the arguments
confirming the commandment, may not pull their necks out of the commandment.
Secondly, from the time when this commandment was first given, and the keeping
holy of a sabbath day instituted, we may easily perceive, that the commandment
is no more ceremonial then all the rest. For it was given in man's innocence,
when Adam was perfect and needed no ceremony to lead him to Christ, because
he did not need to believe in Christ, being himself perfect, and holding his
happy estate, not by faith in Christ, but by faith in Gods word, and his own
obedience unto Gods word. For this commandment was not first made at Mount
Sinah, no more then any of the other 10. but equally with them bound the
conscience of Adam, the first man, and is of like antiquity. The first seventh
day that ever was, was as much to be sanctified as any that followed, as may
appear in the second of Genesis last verse, where it is said, that God after the
creation in the six days, rested from creating the seventh, and therefore he
hallowed the seventh day, and blessed it. Now then, since it was first
instituted in Paradise, before there either was a ceremony, or need of a
ceremony; it may not be reputed among the Jewish ceremonies. And this reason
is to be noted, because it shows the foolishness of that frivolous reason,
which some men bring against the sabbath day. Oh say the Jews they were
children in Christ, and weaklings, and therefore they had need of a sabbath;
But we are past babes, we are men grown and have more knowledge, we are
stronger then they; Are you stronger then the Jews? be it. Though if it were
tried, many of these that brag of their strength above the Jews, would be
found inferior to many of the Jews. But be it for the time, grant them this,
yet are they stronger then Adam in his innocence; have they greater knowledge,
and more grace then he had before his fall? Why, but God saw it needful for
Adam to have a sabbath, and if it were needful that was without sin
himself, had no clog of corruption to hinder him, no sinner to infect, no ill
example to seduce, yet I say, if he had need of this as God in his wisdom
judges, because his calling, though followed without tediousness, would yet
partly, have withdrawn his heart, that he could not so freely and wholly have
given himself to praising of God, and considering of his power and wisdom,
and mercy, and therefore was to set one day apart from all works of his
calling, to employ it wholly in praising and magnifying God, and such like
duties, that he might with greater liberty and comfort, do them; then what
need have we, and how far is our necessity greater, which are burdened with
many corruptions of our own, and have much temptation from many ill
presidents, and many allurements of the world, to pull our hearts from the
worship of God, which are men of polluted lips, our selves, and devils amongst
people of polluted lips, and which cannot without far greater distructio^ and
weariness also, follow our callings.

If Adam had need of a sabbath, when he had no let within nor without, how
much have we, that both within and without are beset, and one every side
compassed with such strong impediments, from our selves and from others, that
when we have a sabbath to bestow wholly and only on Godliness and religion,
can yet hardly, and with much ado keep our hearts from wandering after the
world and earthly things. Therefore most fond is this objection, if Adams
strength must be helped by a sabbath, then no man in this world has so much
strength, as that he for that cause may exempt himself from keeping a
sabbath: it was given to strengthen and help the Jews, and they needed it, and
it is given to us to make us stronger, yea it was given to Adam, and he needed
it, that he might more freely serve God, and more comfortablie rejoice in him;
and for this reason also is perpetual and no ceremony.

Thirdly the manner of delivery confirms the perpetuity of it, and shows
that it is still of as great force as any of the rest; for this was written by
the finger of God in the table of stone, with the other to show the durable
continuance of the same, and therefore this is not exempted, Deuteronomy. 40. 4. That
reason which Moses brings to confirm the authority of all, is not taken from
this, that God first spoke it with the rest, and after wrote it also in tables
of stone. God did give the ceremonial law by Moses hand, and used him as an
instrument to write them, but for the greater reverence of these ten, he would
not use the help of Moses hand and pen, but with his own finger wrote them,
not in paper with ink, but in stone to show the strength and continuance of
them, and commanded Moses to put them in the arc to show that no man could
fulfill and perfectly obey them but only Christ: If these ten were all written
by God, and no exception made, whereby the sabbath should be inferior to the
rest, but altogether put into the Arc, then a man may even as well rend any of
the other ten away as this, yea and with more warrant to, for none of them all
is more fenced with reasons, and mounded about with more strong arguments to
keep out the cauils and objections of men then this, so that where God has as
it were of set purpose, given more strength, for a man to impute more
weakness to this thing, is a note either of great folly, or else of singular
impudency and impiety.

The fourth reason is drawn from the persons upon whom it lies, and unto whom
it is given: for we know that the ceremonies did lie only upon the Jews, the
Gentiles were not bound to observe them: but now this commandment says not
only thou, thy son, thy daughter, thy man, thy maid, which contains all
the whole commonwealth, but it goes further and says, thy stranger which is
within thy gates: so that if an heathen man of another country and religion,
had come amongst them, the magistrate was bound to look to it, that he do not
openly and publicly violate the sabbath, but of force should celebrate an
outward, though to perform duties of religion, that lay not in man's hand to
constrain them. Now the ceremonies were as a partition wall betwixt the Jews
and Gentiles, to separate the church of the Jews, and the seed of Abraham,
from all other congregations, until after this partition was broken down by
Christ, and both brought into one fold, for when Christ's death did tear
asunder the vale of the temple, then he tare all ceremonies in twain, that
they could no longer bind the conscience either of Jew or Gentill: but for the
sabbath even the Gentiles must keep it, and because they would not themselves,
when they came among the servants of God, they were to be constrained; as in
Nehemias time, when the men of Tyrus came to sell wares on the sabbath day, in
Jerusalem, he would not suffer them, but threatens to lay hands upon them, if
they did any more come after that manner. If God had here commanded only to
look to the Jews, and not to strangers, it had been some appearance, but
since God will have strangers of the Gentiles bound to the keeping of it, so
far as men can, if they come within the walk and reach of Christians, now
the matter is put quite out of doubt that this is no ceremony.

Lastly, Christ Jesus himself the Lord of the Sabbath, confirms the sabbath
most strongly. Mat. 24. 20. Where speaking of the destruction of Jerusalem by
Vespasian, and speaking to the faithful of the church and true Christians,
whose prayers shall surely prevail, he bids them pray that their flight be
not upon the sabbath day, or in the winter. Forty years after a fearful
destruction was to come upon Jerusalem, and this was decreed so that it might
not be altered, yet Christ bids his servants pray, that it might be
mittigated to them in some measure, and therefore that they might not be
enforced to fly for their lives in the winter, for that would be grievous to
the body, because of the shortness of the days, and the durtinesse of the
ways would be very tedious to them, nor upon the sabbath, because this would
be as grievous to their souls, if they must be constrained to spend that day
in taking pains to preserve their bodies, which God had appointed to be spent
in those things that should help forward the salvation of their souls. What,
will some say, is it not lawful to fly for ones life on the sabbath? yes: and
Christ allows it. But he knew full well what grief it would bring to a
christian soul, to think, Alas I was wont as this day to sit quietly in the
church and among Gods Saints to hear the sweet comforts of his word delivered
unto my soul, and with praise to sing Psalms of thanks unto God, and to ask
those things with the rest of Gods people which we stood in need of, where I
received such strength and comfort, that I walked in the strength of these
exercises the whole week after, but now the pain of my body and the fear of
my soul so distract me, and take me up that have neither leisure nor ability
to do so, but I must want all these comforts. Christ knew that this would be
as bitter as death to a Christian soul, and therefore he wills them to pray to
God to prevent it, that no such necessity be laid upon them. Now if this
commandment and this day had been ceremonial, they might have fled with as
little care as any other, for it had been abolished long before by Christ's
death, and no such regard had been to be made of it. In that Christ does allow
this conscience and regard of flying on the sabbath day, more then any other of
the week, he shows planly, that the force of the sabbath was to abide after
him for forty years, and therefore no ceremony, for then Christ had not done
well to put a needless fear into their hearts of flying on the sabbath, if God
required no keeping of the sabbath, and then he should rather have bid them
pray to God that they might have had all respect of it, being a ceremony taken
from them, and told them that they need not to regard it, for it had been a
great sin to have made such conscience of keeping a ceremony so long after
the abolishing of them, then if one should not willingly and not without grief
fly to save his natural life, when he should be seeking to strengthen his
spiritual life, (as Christ words do plainly prove) then how much less should
he do any other outward business of far less necessity. So that these
reasons do most effectually confirm to the hearts of Gods children, that the
keeping of the sabbath day holy, is a moral law, and binds us, and shall all
to the end of the world, as much as the Jews, at any time before Christ. But
for those wicked persons that will cavil against every thing that crosses
their corrupt lust, as the keeping of a sabbath does exceedingly, we must not
greatly be moved what they object, for of them it is most true that Solomon
says, Bray a fool in a mortar as wheat is brayed with a pestell, and he will
not forsake his folly. But this may suffice to confirm and establish and
instruct a christian, that with a true heart is willing to be taught, and to
confound also, and condemn, and leave without excuse before Gods judgment
seat, such as will not yield to plain and strong reasons drawn out of the
word of God, but continue obstinate in their false conceits. But because the
point may be more plain and manifest; it is good to answer some of their
objections, whereby they would ouerturne this plain truth. Now the grand
objection is, because we keep not the same sabbath that the Jews did, but the
day is altered, therefore they say, we must keep none. This is their argument
of so great weight, but how foolish it shall appear easily, if we examine it a
little more narrowly. For though we keep not the self same day that they did,
yet we have the same commandment and authority for our day that that they had
for theirs. Therefore this day that we keep is called the Lords day, in Revel.
1. Where John says, He was in the spirit upon the Lords day. Before it was
called the day of rest, because God rested on it, from the work of creation;
but now it is called the Lords day, because Christ Jesus instituted it as a
special memorial of his resurrection and perfecting of the work of our
redemption. For the Apostles by the authority of that spirit which always
assisted them in their ministerial office, did alter the day, and themselves
kept and ordained it to be kept in all the churches. As may appear 1. Cor. 16.
1. Where he says, The first day of the week when ye meet together, etc.
Where the Apostle shows that the congregations of Christ were wont on the
first day of the week to meet together, for the performance of all holy
duties, of the number whereof collection for the poor was one, because of the
manifold persecutions, wherewith in the primative church they were more
afflicted and had need of continual relief. This was the first day of the
Jewish week, and our Lords day. So also in the Acts. Paul himself kept this
day, which he spent in preaching till midnight, and after administered the
sacrament, in which two exercises, he continued till the dawning of the day. So
that the keeping of this day was instituted by God in the ministry of the
Apostles, and kept by them and the churches in their time, and therefore as
strongly commands us as the Jews, and is of no less force now then before.
Then secondly, the reason of the change, and of our keeping this day, is no
less then of their keeping that day: For when the creation of the world was,
the greatest work that ever was done, then the memorial of that was chiefly
to be regarded. But now that a greater and more excellent work was done,
namely, the redemption of the world, it was reason that the greatest work
should carry the credit of the day. They rested the seventh day because on
that, God rested from the work of creation; we this eight day, because in it
Christ rise again from the work of our redemption; which being a greater work,
caused a change of the day. Since then the day was not changed without good
warrant and strong reason, that alteration and varying of the day detracts
nothing from the truth and force of the commandment. And whereas they say, that
the church may at their pleasure alter it, that is not so, for there can never
be an authority greter then the authority of the Apostles, nor a cause, greater
then the resurrection of Christ, and the redemption of the church; and
therefore neither can the day be changed, for to make a new day, where no such
warrant did allow, nor no cause occasion it, were to take more upon them then
is fit.

For if the Jews in former times were bound to keep it holy, having only the
creation of the world to think upon, and to remember, by the celebrating of
their seventh day, then how much more are we bound to this reverence and a
greater, since besides this benefit of our making, we have a greater of our
redeeming by the blood and death of Christ added unto it, so that any one of
the two ought to sanctify it more, rather then to cast it of all together, and
to be so much the more careful to give this day wholly to God, by how much he
has showed a great mercy to us, so that we should never speak or think of
this change, but we should also call to mind, this great benefit which was
the cause of it.

If Adam had cause to spend a day in praising God for his creation, then we
have greater cause, sees besides that we have also the redemption to be
thankful for. And if this be a good argument, we keep not the self same
day that the Jews did, therefore the duty is abollished, and we are bound to
keep none, then by the same reason one might conclude thus: you see we have
not the same sacraments, for the outward seals that the Jews had, for they
had circumcision, and they had the pascall Lamb, what tell you me of the
consecrate water, and of the bread and wine hallowed, the Jews had no such
matter, since these signs be altered, I think it was but a ceremony, and we
need not regard baptism, and the supper: this were no good argument in this
case, for though the shadows be other, yet the substance be the same, Christ
Jesus is signified by our bread and wine, as well as by their Lamb, and our
baptism is the sacrament of regeneration, as well as their circumcision.
Therefore we should not despise them, but so much the more be careful to
prepare our selves for them, because the service is more easy and the promises
more lightsome. If then it will not hold that we have no sacraments, because
the outward seals be altered, then it is as weak a consequence, that we
have no seventh day to be sanctified, because the day is altered, and we
keep not the same that they did. So that no proof can be gathered from the
varying of the day, that the duty is abolished, because the authority is as
strong, the reason as good, and the same reason does not hold in other things.

Again they object that to a christian every day is a sabbath day, and
therefore we should not restrain it to one day more then another: but the
answer to this is, that it is most false, for God does not require neither is
a christian able to keep every day a sabbath day, so long as they remain on
earth, indeed in heaven he shall keep a continual sabbath unto the Lord,
but now so long as we live, there is as much difference betwixt the sabbath
day and otheir days, as betwixt the consecrate bread we receive at the Lords
table, and the common bread we receive at our own table. This is true that
every one must serve God on the six days, and all his life long, but on the
seventh day we must not only serve God, but we must serve him in the duties
of religion and mercy, only. As for example, Gods children will not eat meat
at their own table, without craving Gods blessing upon them, but when they are
to come to the table of the Lord, they use a greater and more solemn
preparation, because they expect a greater and more excellent blessing: so
likewise a christian in all the works of his calling, has a regard to serve
and glorify God, but in a more special manner upon the seventh day, because
he then looks for a more plentiful and liberal benediction both upon his
soul and body; and these men that among us keep such a prating that every
day must be a sabbath, and we must rest from sin, mark them whether they
rest from sin at all, and observe if there be any families so bade as
theirs, that commonly if one would rake hell, as we say, he could not meet
with more profane and irreligious persons that speak of keeping every day
holy, but in truth keep every day unholy; but others that in conscience of
Gods commandment, do bind themselves to keeping of the sabbath which God
has instituted, go far beyond them in all virtue and holiness, if they
could show any good effect in themselves of this their every day sabbath, we
might give some credit to them, for God does always give a blessing to his
own ordinance, but for such vilde and unholy persons, that in all their life
never kept a sabbath holy, to make a talk of keeping every day as a sabbath,
it is most palpable and damnable hypocrisy.

The last objection of which we will speak, is taken out of 1. Colos. 2. 16.
Let no man condemn you in respect of an holiday, or of a new moon, or of the
sabbath days. So that the Apostle say they, puts the sabbath among other
ceremonies, which are to be abrogated: but for the answering of this, we must
know that the Apostle speaks of such sabboths, as are in the same rank with
the meats and drinks, whereof he speaks before of, which sort were the first
day of every month, and the first and last day of every one of their solemn
feasts, of these he speaks in the plural number, and not of the sabbath day,
the Lords day in the singular number, which has a singular excellency, and
how ever times change never changes: then Easter and Penticost, and the other
feasts of like kind, are indeed abrogated, as being ceremonies not written in
the tables of stone as this was.

And thus much for the proouing of this, that this sabbath is morrall and
perpetual: which since it is so, the use is for the confutation of such as
sharpen their tongues and wits, and open their mouths to speak against it,
not content to take liberty themselves, but would make a gap for others to
break out also. It is a vilde and notorious sin, to be profane in ones
own person, and to practice the breach of any of Gods commandments, but to
draw others to impiety, and as much as they can to break the yoke wherewith
God has yoked them, this is much more intolerable. This is just the devil
himself, when he had fallen from his uprightness, and rebelled against God,
the next work he took in hand was to allure Adam to sin, and make him as
very a rebel against God as himself, so these wicked men, limbs of the
devil, that themselves are corrupted and lie under the curse of God, will take
so much pains about nothing, as to pervert others, and being stark naught
themselves, to make all men if it might be like them.

This also is for our instruction, that we must so rest upon Gods reasons, and
so stand for his worship, as that every blast and objection of a profane
person may not blow us away, and weaken our reverence to Gods ordinance: It is
a great fault that we are no better confirmed in the truth, but that every
breath of an heretic will put us down, and set us to the wall as it were,
that we stand in a mammering, and know not whether we go right or wrong: it
is an evident token that men be ladenwith sins, and carried away of their
lust, when the often preaching of the truth, cannot so establish them it, as
that they can say, we are so resolved in our hearts that this is the truth of
God, as that by Gods mercy we had rather forsake our lives then forsake it,
but none can attain to such knowledge, but such as have a pure and an upright
heart. And this that men be so quickly moved from the truth, is not because of
the strength of the arguments made against it, but by reason of their own
weakness, which have not the spirit of truth to lead them into the truth, and
to confirm and show them errors and heresies, and make them loathsome unto
them, and give them power against them. Therefore we must labor for this spirit
of truth, which may so settle and ground us in the truth, as that every storm
of a false opinion from the mouth of some fantastical and vain person, that
has no godliness nor learning to commend him, that never did any thing nor
suffered any thing for Christ's sake, may not weaken our hold, and shake our
foundation, and cast us down from the truth, that we should be seduced by
them. Nay, we should be so far from yielding to the false dreams of such, as
that when they grow obstinate, we should not show the least token of allowance,
or any countenance, to them; we should not entertain them or receive them to
house, or bid them God speed, for he that does so as Saint John says, is
pertaker of his evil deeds, because in so doing, he confirms them in their
sin, and brings himself in certain danger to be infected by them. And thus
much for that, that this keeping of a seventh day holy, by setting it apart to
the duties of religion only, and mercy is a moral and perpetual duty to
continue while the world continues. Now let us come more perticulerly to the
words of the commandment. First for that word:

Remember.
IN that God prefixed, in special terms as it were of set purpose to meet
with men's forgetfulness, a memorandum here more then in any other of the
commandments, we may hence learn that who ever will faithfully and
conscionablie keep the sabbath when it is come, must before hand have a
special care and a forecast to prevent those things that may hinder them in the
keeping of it. A reason of this caveat which God gives, and of the diligence
that we must have in thus remembering and preparing for the sabbath, may be
drawn from our own infirmity, that unless we be very circumspect, and
cast about with care indeed, we are ready easily to let slip some business,
and leave something undone which will then distract us and draw our minds and
bodies to, from gods service, some money to pay or to receive, some journey to
take, some odd thing or other, that being forgotten in time, will rush in upon
us now, and must be done now, because it was omitted before, and cannot tarry
till after; since then we are so subject to destruction, and so soon to forget
things, that if we had had a care before, might have been done well without
any trouble in the sabbath, but now through our negligence comes upon us on
that day, this must teach us to have a heavenly foresight that we provide
against all such lets, and cut off by our godly care all such incombrances.
That policy and care which we see in natural men about the market of their
bodies, we must learn for this market of our soul, they will be providing
and thinking before what they must buy at the market, and what they must carry
to the market, and will not have the things to be in doing, when they should
have them ready to carry with them, but look that the things they purpose to
sell be prepared, that so they may not be hindered but be there in good time to
make their markets for their best advantage. So if ever we will make good
markets for our souls, we must all the week before, be preparing our hearts,
and setting all things straight, that our hearts may be burdened with no sin
nor no worldly care the^, which should carry away the force of our meditations
and thoughts from the exercises of religion; for they be spiritual and we be
carnal, and a little thing God knows, will make a great stir in our fleshly
hearts, to draw them from heavenly things, and therefore unless we take great
heed to examine our hearts, and watch over our selves that we walk purely and
holily all the six days long, and to cast out and discharge all affairs of
this life on the one side, the sin committed on the other side, the business
omitted will hale and pull our thoughts, that no attention can be given to
matters of religion; no constant or settled meditation of any heavenly thing can
take place; we must therefore stop out all distractions and encombrances, and
raise up our hearts against deadness and dullness, which will make us heavy
and dull, and slow to any good thing, by a wise managing and finishing our
outward affairs, and a godly and religious ordring and preparing our hearts, if
ever we will comfortably and profitably spend the Lords day, in the Lords work.
Then again besides these needless lets, which through our own weakness we
pull upon our own heads, therbe hindrances enough on every side, which do we
what we can with all the industry in the world, we shall never be able wholly
to prevent, but they will set upon us. As in what family shall one come but he
shall see idleness and slepinesse, and foolishness manyfold ways, and who
that knows himself any whit at all, does not feel that he is readier to
follow ill example, and be led by ill company, then to be led by Gods
commandment, especially when no positive law will take hold upon him, for the
breach of Gods commandment. And then we have the devil as a Lion continually
seeking to devour our souls, and to hinder us in all things he can from
religion, and in the best there be such strong lusts, such a love of the
pleasure and commodity of this world, that unless we be strongly guarded and
defended, will break in upon our hearts, and disorder the rank of our
affections. As come to a professor that is given to covetousness, and over to
whom the world bears to great an hand, though he have a true heart to God, and
some sound graces of the spirit of God wrought in him, do but up some covetous
talk that tends toward gain and filthy lucre, see if he will not be quite
gone, and forgetting God and the sabbath, and himself and all, give his heart
and tongue and all, to be imployd about worldly things, unless he mound and
fence his heart about diligently with these thoughts, what though I do, has
not god bidden me remember the sabbath, has he not set a special mark upon
it, that I should in no hand forget, and thus by earnest striving, shake of
these untimely words and thoughts. And then we shall have the world be
objecting, and putting in it carnal reasons to make us negligent; why, what
need you be so strict, this is to much niceness, you are more precise then
wise, and such like; which will certainly carry one away unless he strive to
confirm himself, by thinking on Gods commandment, and so shut out these
objections; what, has not God bid me remember, and shall I suffer men to make
me forget it? has not he given me two reasons to keep it, the one stronger
then the Jews had, and shall I be more negligent in keeping it, then they,
which had but one? they had weaker means of comfort, the blood of bulls and
goats, and the sprinkling of water, and an earthly tabernacle and high priest,
and yet they were with reverence to use these; and shall we, that have more
excellent means, as Christ Jesus offered up for a sacrifice offered up once
for all, and the sprinkling of his blood to purify our souls, and the
heavenly tabernacle opened for us, by him our heavenly high priest, and
continual mediator; shall we I say, that have all these means, more plain
and excellent then theirs, be negligent to keep this sabbath; especially, since
God has given us this as a means to draw us from earth to heaven, and to make
us grow in a spiritual life. Having then all these impediments, unless we do
arm our selves in the week day, and strengthen our faith by remembering Gods
commandment and reasons, and by a wise cutting of those distractions which by
diligence may be cut of, we cannot with any comfort or cherefully celebrate a
sabbath unto the Lord. Lastly, if we read the scriptures of God, and see how
often God urges this point, and how earnestly he presses it, this will make
us labor often, and continually to call to mind that, which he so often has
repeated unto us, because if it were a necessary duty, God will not so many
times, in so many places require it at our hands. So that every one must labor
by searching his conscience, and watching over his soul, to rouse himself
from that lumpishnesse and drowsiness which is within him; and by providence
and forecast of outward business, to put away all outward encombrances and
distractions.

This then serves first to confute those that make this kind of objections
against the sabbath; Oh we cannot keep it, we should be undone if we should
rest upon the sabbath day, for these losses and damages would ensue, these
hurts would come, such businesses would be left undone; but I pray you whence
come all these losses? what is the cause of these damages? is it not because
you forget the very first word of the commandment, Remember the sabbath day.
Then this is no warrant for us to break Gods commandment, because we had
forgot that, which God bids us remember: this is even as if a man should forget
his purse behind him, when he went to the market, and when he came to buy
things wanting money of his own, should go and cut another bodies purse, and
then if one come and tell him, this is not honest dealing, it is plain theft,
and why would you be so bold to cut your neighbors purse? why alas neighbor,
I hope I was in no fault, necessity drew me to it, for I had left my purse at
home, and I knew not how to do for money to buy my things, and to have gone
back again would have been to much pains. Why but does this make it lawful
to cut your neighbors, because you had forgotten your own, nay who should
have remembered it, and not come to make such shifts: and even so men deal with
God, oh they cannot choose but break the sabbath, they are driven to it of
force, necessity compels them, and what necessity? why, such things lie to
be done that will be spoiled else, why, but why did you forget them before,
now shall your former forgetfulness be a warrant for you to steal Gods holy
time, and abuse it to unholy things? Some has a bond to pay that will be
forfaited else: and why did you not remember before to make your condition with
such an exception, unless it were on the sabbath, and then to defer it for
some reasonable time after, or some such like condition? and so I have this and
this thing that must be done, and why did not you think of this before to
prevent it, as it is sure you might, if you did serve God in your calling and
not covetousness? so others say it is so tedious and irksome to spend that day
holy, that they cannot endure it; and why is it tedious to you? is it not
because you prepared not your soul to keep it? you let sin keep dominion
in your heart all the week, and then it must needs be dull and dead to all
goodness on the seventh day, but those that do labor to walk vprightlie
and purely before God six days, find such comfort thereby, as no outward
pleasure can bring, nor any thing in this world but only the ordinances of
God can afford.

Secondly, this teaches us to lay as a duty every one upon his own
conscience, to remember this day, and in all our affairs to have this in our
mind, that we entangle not our selves by any business which might hinder us
from keeping of it; first because we have so direct an item as we call it, to
remember this day; secondly, because whereas God contented himself in all the
other commandments, to set them down either only affirmatively or only
negatiuelie, he has not done so in this commandment, but to set the deeper
impression in our hearts has set it down both affirmatiuelie and negatiuely,
keep it holy says he, and as though that were not enough, do no manner of
work in it, and then whereas other of the commandments for the most part have
no reasons annexed to them in the decalogue, though in the scripture else where
they have; this and the second commandment have diverse reasons added unto
them, that men might have a greater regard unto it. Therefore if we will do
any thing for Gods sake, then do this for his sake: if a friend should come to
us and say, I have some ten errands, which I would have you do for me, and I
will recompense you thoroughly for your pains, but of all the ten there is one
amongst the rest, which I would have you especially to remember, and of all
loves see that you forget it not; would not one think him very negligent and
unmindful of his friend, that would forget this of which he had such a
special charge, especially if his friend should in most of the other give but
the bare commandment and thing set down without any more words, but should
insist upon that, and give him reason upon reason why he should have a
special care of it: but so God says to us, he gives us warning before,
showing that we are ready to forget it, but he would have us strive against
this forgetfulness, and then because we should not forget but do it, he
urges it with many reasons; now then to forget this is it not a plain
contempt and neglect?

It follows.

To keep it holy.
NOw the Lord shows what is to be done on the sabbath day, namely we must
keep it holy? it is not enough to forbear our own work, and so to keep it
idly, but we must be as careful to do Gods work, and so to keep it holy.
Hence then we learn this doctrine, that the sabbath must be employed in holy
exercises, it must not be a bare rest, but a sanctified rest, so ceasing from
worldly things, as that we be taken up in heavenly things, for idleness is a sin
every day, but much more on the sabbath. No man has alowance in gods word to
spend any time idly, but it is a damnable sin in the week days, much less
are we warranted to spend Gods time unprofitably and idly; of the twain it
were better leave ones own work undone, upon ones own days permitted for
his labor, then Gods work on Gods day appointed for his service.

Now the reasons why this must be spent only in holy exercises, are taken
from the ill effects that will follow if we do not spend it in these works.
These ill effects we shall see in Exodus 31. 12. Where God commands them that
they should abstain from all works, and keep it an holy, for if they do
work even in making garments and things for the temple, which seemed to
pertain to god, much more in things of their own, these two evils will
follow, first they shall die the death, their life shall be taken away, they
must die a natural death, and then secondly they must be cut off from their
people, j. be subject to the curse of God, and be cast off from the people of
God, by solemn excommunication. These be the punishments of polluting the
Sabbath, no small punishments; and these God does execute daily even among us,
for though the law of the land takes not hold on such persons to put them to
death, yet God gives them over to commit some sin which man's law punishes
with death, and the first cause of all and that at which God strikes, and which
their own soul feels most heavy, as appears by the daily complaints, when
they be brought to execution, is, that they never regarded the sabbath, had no
care to hear Gods word, and to spend the day in duties of religion, and in
prayer, but followed after vanity, and their own lust, and therefore God meets
with them. And though the minister cannot by law excommunicate them and cast
them out of the congregation, yet God excommunicates them, that in the hearts of
Gods people they be as heathen men, their souls are cut of from the church,
they have no life of grace, no fruit or working of the word and sacraments,
more then of any idle tale, and profane story, no grace wrought by it, no
death of sin, no hope nor desire of heaven, but live as beasts; no recourse
to God in Christ Jesus, nor no virtue that they draw from Christ, so that
indeed they do not live in Christ, but are dead in their spirit, while they
live in their bodies. They may say indeed and say true, that they can see no
good by the exercises of the sabbath, they be unpleasant to them, and
unprofitable, so that they have no benefit by it; and why is this, not because
Gods ordinances want their force and virtue, but because they want reverence of
them, and being wicked, contemn them; therefore their souls be cut of, their
hearts hardened, they have forfaited their salvation.

Then an other ill effect is, as in Ierem. 17. where he says, If they pollute
his sabbath, he will kindle a fire in their houses, that shall not be
quenched. For their outward estate they be no gayners that break the sabbath
for God sends a curse, which like a violent flame deuoures more then they can
get. So that if we would not be guilty of death, and have our souls cut of
from communion with Christ and his church, and our goods also consumed and
brought to nothing by the vengeance of God? Then let us keep his holy sabbath
holy, and bestow it upon holy exercises. But on the contrary side, to sanctify
it and spend in those duties that God commands, brings all comfortable
blessing and happiness. As in Isai. 56. 2. If the gentiles that be converted
will keep the sabbath of God holy, he promises that they shall have a better
name and more reverence then the Jews that profess the religion of God, but
regard not his sabbath, and at large there he shows how he will bless them,
and good reason to, for he that keeps the sabbath aright, exercises the whole
body of religion, for this brings in practice the whole law, and teaches one
his duty to God and to man, and builds him up in every grace. And so in Is.
58. 13. If thou turn away etc. Where he shows that if any man will on Gods
day, forsake his own work, and leave of vain words, and delight in the work
of God, and his service, then God will give them, God will set them on high,
and give them the inheritance of Jacob, for indeed then they be Gods sheep,
and the flock of Christ, when they delight to follow him, and to hear his
voice, for then they shall have access to him, and he shall have opportunity
to bless them, and dwell in them by his spirit. So that if we would avoid the
curse of God on our soul and body, and gain the blessing of God upon both.
Let us yield to this his commandment, and with as great joye serve God in the
duties of religion, and his worship on that day, as we do our selves in our
own affairs on the six days; yea with a greater delight to, because we have
a promise, and may look for a greater blessing.

The use of this is to reprove those that think if they abstain from work of
their calling, that they take no pains in outward toyling about affairs of
this world, then they keep the sabbath very well, and if no man can accuse
them of going to plow or cart or such works, then they think they have not
broken the fourth commandment. But idleness is a sin of Adam, naught every
day, as we said before, but much more naught upon that day that should be
spent in Gods exercises: But much more wicked are they, that be evil
occupied, in dancing and dallying, in swilling and brawling, and so make it
the devils day insteede of Gods, and do more dishonor to God, and hurt to
their own souls, then any day in the week else. Many also are to be
reproved that will come to the church, and for the time of the day will be
content to hear the word and do such exercises, but at even when darkness
comes, then comes the works of darkness, and when they be in their bed, then
they be plodding and casting about for worldly affairs, and their heads be as
busy, and as full of earthly matters, as any night in the week else. But we
are to know that the sabbath contains four and twenty hours, as well as any
other day, and therefore the night must be spent in an holy rest to, else one
shall hurt himself more and displease God more by these vain thoughts in the
night, then he could please God and benefit himself by keeping himself in
good company and good actions in the day; and therefore they want the blessing
because they perform not all the duty, and that which they did was in
hypocrisy, because they do not care to remember that which they heard, nor
examine with what heart and with what profit they have performed the duties of
the day; not but that a man may have sleep, but his sleep is to be seasoned
with the sweetness of the former exercises, and his dreams have some taste of
religion, more then at other times, and when they wake their thoughts and
meditations must be carried after holy things, because Gods eyes are as fast
fixed on them in their bed, as in the church, and he sees and knows their
thoughts in the dark, as well as their behavior and carriage in the midst of
the congregation.

Now God bids us keep the whole seventh day, for he would have us give as
long a day to him as he has given unto us; and if day contain day and night,
when he says, six days shall thou labor, and we upon that permission and
allowance of Gods, take it for granted, that in the night we may do what
business we have to do, and when we be in bed may spend the time in ordering
our private affairs, and pondering how to deal in such things as we have to
deal in, by reason of our calling. I say, if we do this, and think as indeed
it is true that he gives us the night and day both for our callings, why is it
not so in the sabbath then, that he takes the seventh day and night to
himself as well as he gives six to us. Therefore we must know that the Lords
day must contain xxiiij. hours, and for want of this, we deprive our selves
of those blessings which else we might have, because we undo that in the night
that we did in the day, we did Gods work one part of his day, and that was
well, but we take the remainder to our selves, and that is a fault.

Thirdly, this teaches us to do the duties of the Lords day upon his day. Now
this sanctifying and keeping of it holy, consists in doing things either
private or public. The private are these; After examination of our own
hearts, and finding out of our sinful ways, with repentance and sorrow for the
same, to beseech God that he would prepare and fit our hearts to profit by the
public exercises of religion on the sabbath. And to entreat him that he would
so direct the ministers mouth, is that he may speak to our hearts, and say
something that serves to kill our sin, and to comfort and build up our souls,
that as he is appointed for a physician, so he would fit us with some medicine,
as well as others, as saint Paul bids them pray for him that he may have the
door of utterance; And when one does this in an humble heart, desiring to repent
and turn from his sins in good earnest, he shall never come to the sermon
but he shall hear some one lesson or other that will make him better, and he
shall have cause to thank God for it. But if one come rudely into Gods house
from brauling and chiding at home, or so soon as he is out of his bed to come
to the church without preparing his heart or fitting himself by any prayer to
God, or confession and sorrow for his sin, then he shall feel, that to his
unclean heart all things are unclean, the word shall be but a tediousness, and
serve to the further hardening of his heart. Also one must read some part of the
scripture privately, that may season his heart, and settle and quiet his mind
and affections, that he may be more teachable. And that he may the better fit
himself after this sort, he is to rise betime in the morning, for there is
none so good a master, no work so good in it self, nor none that will bring so
great a reward, and therefore we should rise as early to serve this master in
this work, as any day else for any other work, and if we do thus, we may have
sufficient to provide for the public exercises, that we may come unto them
with profit. Also an other private work of the sabbath is, to rele^ue and visit
them that be sick, or in any kind of misery. And so also to reconcile those
that be at jarre and discord. Further, also to meditate upon the word, that we
have heard, and to ponder of it, to apply it to our selves, to mark what we
have remembered, what we have laid up in our hearts, and purpose to follow; and
how matters stand betwixt God and our selves in the things that have been
delivered, for till the word be thus made our own, it is but as chafe lying
loose in the heart, that every puff of wind will drive away, and every
temptation will blow from us. It is not as a treasure locked up that will stand
us in some steed in the time of need. Likewise to confer with other
christians among whom we live, and to talk of the things taught, calling them
to mind, and how they were proved unto us, and then further to enlarge them
according to our own particular necessity, and as it were to spread the
medicine upon one an others hearts. These be the private things, which as every
one is more careful to perform, so shall he receive a more large and abundant
blessing upon the public. Now the public themselves are; To join with the
rest of the congregasion, in praying and praising God with one heart and voice,
in diligent attending to the word publicly read and preached; for there is a
greater blessing promised to this ministerial reading, then to any man's
reading at home. Then also the use of the sacraments, as to be present at
baptism, for the departing away, argues a great contempt of it, and with a
public disgrace of Gods ordinance, for if one or two, have liberty, the rest
have the like, and then where were the reverence. Therefore one must tarry at
such exercises, as to show his reverence; so secondly, to help the congregation
in praising God for ingrafting an other member into his visible body of the
church; and to pray, that God would give the inward working and fruit of the
same, by his holy spirit. And to edify himself also, by calling to mind,
that he is also made pertaker of the new covenant, and joined to Christ Jesus.
And to examine himself what fruit he has felt in himself of the death of
Christ in killing his sin, and of his resurrection, in raising him up to
newness of life, and so either to be humbled, if he feel not that profit, he
would; or to be thankful, feeling this work of baptism, and to comfort
himself in the remembrance of this that the merit and virtue of Christ Jesus,
his death is his, to satisfy for his sins, and to kill by little and little,
the power of them, all which things we see now presently sealed up to the
party baptized in the present action. For the baptising of the infant, is not
only for his profit, but for the good of all the church, that every one may
see his duty, and what God has promised, and what benefit himself is to
receive and look for.

Another duty, but private, is prayer after the sermon and public meeting,
that those good things which one has remembered, may be turned into a prayer,
which he must offer unto God, beseeching him that has showed him what is to be
avoided, to give him power to avoid it, and to incline his heart to keep the
things commanded, as well as to tell him the duty that belongs unto him, and
as he has hard many sweet promises, which will do him no good so long as he
has an unbelieving heart, and cannot bring himself to give credit unto them,
therefore that God would also knit the promises unto his heart, and give him
grace to trust upon them, and to remember them when he shall have need. Thus
much for one duty required to sanctify the sabbath. Now the next words follow.

Six days shall thou labor etc.
IN which words God shows a reason why we should obey this commandment. God
has given a man six days for the duties of his calling, but on this
condition that he shall contriue all his works so within the compass of the
six days, so that he let none remain till the seventh, nor reserve any
outward thing to trouble him from the service of God, on the sabbath. From this
equity God draws a reason to move every one of us to keep the sabbath. From
this we may gather that Gods commandments are equal, as he says in Ezekiel.
18. 25. God deals with those that charge his laws of injustice, and shows
that his ways be all together equal, and the ways of man be unequal. So 1.
John 5. he says, that the commandments of God are easy, indeed to many
they be most tedious and heavy, but this is not from any vnequalnesse in the
law, but from the naughtiness of the men, that have carnal hearts, and worldly
minds, for if one have overcome the world and grown any thing spiritual, so
far Gods commandments are lightsome, the spiritual heart feeds upon the
spiritual law, and delights and rejoices in it. This must serve therefore to
cut off those dangers that men cast to themselves in keeping of this
commandment, as though God had ouershot himself in making such an unjust law,
as no man can keep it, but he must be undone by it, as though he knew not
what he did when he bad them rest the sabbath day. It is a marvelous
impudency in many that no man durst speak so hardly and presumptuouslie
against any positive law of the prince, as every base person will speak
against this law of God. Oh it is impossible to keep it, such losses it
brings, and these damages it brings, that he must needs come to beggerie that
will observe it: what did God seek the impouerishing, and the spoil of men,
when he bad them serve him? nay he appointed it as a day of blessing: and it
seems so hard and unjust to them, because they be carnal, and fleshly, and
not having faith in Gods promises, nor any desire to obey him, they will still
have shifts, and something to say against it, the heart is dead and wicked, or
else the law would bring comfort. Oh how should one do for recreation, say
some? is it not a recreation for a christian to hear the voice of a christian,
and for a sheep of Christ to feed in his pastures? is it not a recreation for
a person condemned, to come where he may get his pardon sealed to him? is it
not a recreation for a man subject to death, to hear a direction that will
lead him to life? therefore if we were not altogether senseless, and
blockish in respect of spiritual sense and life, it would be as great a joy
for us to feed at his table, and in his house, upon the bread of life, as in
our own houses upon corruptible bread. And again could Christ find in his
heart for our sakes willingly to bestow his soul and body, and give his body
to death, and his soul to suffer the wrath of God, and shall we account it a
burden to bestow one day in seven upon him, to be made pertakers especially
of such benefits. And God has willingly given us six for our calling, and
may we not well afford the seventh to our souls? but we have such business
we cannot do it. But for matter of business God shows two things, that if
one would observe should easily prevent these businesses: first six days
shall thou do all thy work. Where he shows that if one would labor
faithfully and conscionablie in their calling upon six days, they might well
dispatch their business, but indeed this makes men so loath to give a
seventh day to God, because having been idle and unthrifty on the six, they
have neglected some business that now lies upon them the seventh day, and
then it is a great burden indeed, and impossible for such to keep it, but
they must loose by it, but Gods commandment brings no such loss, their own
sin is the cause of it: and if this be not the cause, then the other is; men
take more upon them then their own work, for if one take nothing but his
work, he may dispatch all well in six days, if one serve God in his
calling, his calling will not hinder him from keeping Gods commandments; but
if one serve covetousness and filthy lucre, then indeed he can find no time
to serve God.

When men in have to be rich, and eager desire of wealth, will take more in
their hands then they can manage, this is their fault, and all this is not
their work, but the work of their lust, this is to be a busy body: but let
any man be faithful in his calling on the six days, and not through
greediness encomber himself with more then is needful, and he shall see
he may easily keep this seventh to God, there is no cause of such
complaining against it: And indeed to a spiritual heart, that has any grace
and measure of Gods spirit, (how ever it seem to carnal men) it is most just
and equal, yea most sweet and comfortable, so that they can with all their
hearts thank God, that he has given them one day wherein they may lighten
their hearts, of all worldly cares, and throw of all griefs and thoughts of
debts, or such like, to give them selves wholly to seek comfort in him, that
will provide for them in due time, and has provided this sabbath, as an ease
unto them, that they should not trouble them selves wtih any such thoughts on
that day. And thus much to prove that the keeping of a seventh day, and
spending it in holy duty, is a moral law, and perpetual, and belongs unto us
as well as to the Jews, and so much the more unto us, because we having more
excellent means, a greater perfection is required of us. As also to show that
every one must make a preparation for the sabbath. Both by dispatching his
business, as nothing may be left undone till the sabbath: and by behauing
himself so in the business, as his affections may not be to much tied unto
them, for the former will hinder the rest of the sabbath, and the latter the
holiness of it. Therefore that we may keep an holy rest; he must do all that
he has to do upon the six days, and if he take more upon him then he can
finish in the space of six days, it is more then God lays upon him, and he
does not labor for conscience sake, but for covetousness sake, and this is
not his work, but the work of his corruption, and then secondly a man must
draw his heart from the love of the world and worldly things, and then neither
worldly losses will fill his heart full of worldly grief, nor commodities
with worldly delight, which two things would hinder him from delighting in
spiritual exercises, so that he that will empty his hands of all worldly
business* and his heart of worldly affections, shall be able with comfort, to
keep a rest and an holy rest unto God. And for the first reason drawn from
the equity of Gods commandments, that having given us the large allowance of
six days, and taken the small pittance of one day unto himself, has dealt
in great equity with us, so that one must not go about to make hipocriticall
shifts and excuses, for if he do, it is not from the hardness of the law, but
the hardness of his heart; not from difficulty in the thing, but want of love
in the person, for nothing is so easy, but a worldly heart that loves not God
will be shifting, and have some odd reasons against it. Now we must speak of
the second reason.

It is the sabbath of the Lord thy God.
IN which God lets us know, that he which is our God and the mighty strong
God, has impropriated this to himself, as his own possession, set a part for
his own service, therefore we must willingly let him have it, and not intrude
our selves upon his inheritance, since god has laid claim to it, it is no
wisdom for man, to go about to wrong him, that will not be wronged. Hence
then we learn this general doctrine, that those things, which God has set
apart for himself, man must not set upon, that which he has sanctified, for
his proper use and worship, man must not abuse, to his profit or pleasure. If
any man be so bold to enter upon Gods seuerals, he may know before hand what
success he shall have, namely, he shall rush upon his own destruction, for
so the holy ghost says by Saloman. Prouer. 20. 25. It is a destruction for one
to devour holy things, and after the vow to enquire, If one will fill himself
with that which God has made and appointed for his service, let him take
leave, but withal let him know, that it shall be no wholesome meat unto him,
he shall be poisoned and destroyed by it.

And was not this true in Achan, God had taken the whole pray of Jericho, for
his part, and that was a consecrate thing, and so he knew well enough, but yet
he thought there was enough for God and for him to, and therefore he would be
so bold as to take a little, thinking to have benefited himself and his
children by it. But what got he by it, was there not an hook in the bayte that
pulled him into a fearful and miserable end? Now if so fearful a punishment
befell him for devouring of silver or gold, for which God had not given so
strict a charge, nor backed his commandment with so much strength of reason,
how much more then shall it bring in devouring of holy time, which God has
more strongly confirmed and commanded. And so in Malac. 3. 8. 9. God
complains, that they had spoiled him in tithes and offerings, in converting
these things that he had consecrated for his use to their own uses. But what
came upon it? Therefore says he, you are cursed with a curse. I but we do but
as every body does, all the country does so, why therefore says he, you be all
accursed, even this whole nation, if you will do as every body does, this is
all the help, they shall speed as every body does, they shall be accursed for
company, if they sin for company.

We know also in John. 3. That Christ cries out against those which bought and
sold in the Temple, and says, they made it a den of thieves. Why, but is it
theft to buy and sell for their money, to give wares in exchange honestly for
silver, did they rob men because they let them have good ware for their lawful
coin. No, this was not the matter, they did not rob men, but they robbed God,
for they did convert that to profane and common uses, which he had ordained
only for religious and holy uses. Now if men rob God which abuse the temple,
being but a ceremony, and then shortly to have an end, much more those that
abuse his sabbath, which is moral, to continue to the worlds end.

This serves then, to confute those that will be bold and ventrous to do the
works of their calling, upon the Lords day, and then if they be reproved for
it. The answer is, why, what need you make such a stir, I hope I am neither
whore nor thief? yes, they be thieves, and cursed thieves, and thieves that
rob God, for the sabbath day is his, in as much right and property as any of
our goods is ours; many would be ashamed if their son or daughter, should be
found pilfering or priging, from their neighbor, and it is well they should
do this, but these men are never a whit ashamed that their son or daughter
should rob God of his day, run abroad to vanity and dancing, and
wantonness, upon his sabbath. That is youth, and it must be borne withal,
nay, it is theft, and must not be suffered, for he that will deal thus
unfaithfully with God, if occasion serve, will deal worse with men, and he
that is not holy in the first table can never be truly righteous in the second.

Then this serves for the instruction of those that have this ways dealt
unfaithfully with God, serving their lust, when they should have served him,
they must repent for this, and purpose hereafter to keep it faithfully, and be
as much afraid to steal Gods time as men's goods, and to take away any part of
the sabbath, as the communion cup, or any such like things, pertaining to the
church, for neither has God taken that to himself by so special a
commandment, neither is the taking away of that, so dishonorable to God, and
hurtful to others and our selves, as of the sabbath. But men will be
objecting, what, shall men have no recreation, shall our selves be still toyling
and moyling. No, God forbid, for a christians life is full of joy and delight,
and cannot want comfort. But if one will allow their servants recreation, let
them allow part of their own time, and be liberal in that which is theirs, not
in that which god has given them no such warrant to give to their servants.
This is a most shameful excuse, children and servants must have recreation,
therefore they must needs dishonor God, and rob him of his sabbath.

How wicked this excuse is, will appear by the like: If ones children or
servants should rob and steal other men's money and goods, and they come to the
househoulder and say unto him, why will you suffer your children to do such
wrong to your neighbors? why alas you must bear with them, young men must have
maintenance, they cannot have meat and drink for nothing, they must needs get
money, I hope you will not so much condemn them for this, they do it but for
maintenance, would you have them starve? no, nor I would not have them steal
neither, but since they must have meat and maintenance, it is fit you should
allow it, and give it them of your own, and then they need not steal? nay
sure you must pardon me, I cannot spare so much money, I had rather they
steal it, then I give it: what man would not think this man's excuse very
foolish and ridiculous.

But now men deal as madly or more madly with God; children and servants must
have recreation, and what of that? therefore we will not spare it them from
our own service in the week, but they shall take Gods day for their delight
if they will have any; this is a cursed shift, for if we hire a day labourer
and give him wages, and he covenant to do our work for that day, and after an
hour or two should leave off all, and go to follow his pleasure, and say he
must have recreation, we would count him little better then a thief or
cousener, but God has couenanted with us to reward us, and we with him to
obey him, and what is it but theft to do thus, to take away part of his day,
and the greatest part too, for our own lusts. Therefore though it be an ill
occupation, to rob men, and he that does it long is like to come to the
gallows, yer it is a worse thing to rob God, and he continues in doing that,
shall find a worse punishment at length then hanging.

In it thou shall do no manner of work.
He means works of the world, and of ones worldly calling, for, for works
of religion those are commanded, else God should command idleness upon the
sabbath day, which he does not allow any day, therefore it forbids all manner
of worldly businesses, commanding the works of religion and mercy. Hence then
we learn, that no worldly business great or small must be done upon the
sabbath, all worldly cares and questions, and works must be cut off. For
smaller works, Exodus 16. we have a plain proof, where God condemns them for
gathering, yea for purposing to gather Manna on the sabbath day: now what work
more easy then this; it was to be done between five and six in the morning
or not long after, so that all the day after they might serve God, and they
needed not take any great journey for it, go but out of their doors a little,
it was wont to be there, nor the pains was not very great, but to stoop and
take it up, and there an end; and this is to be noted by the way, that they
went out and found nothing, and so this is perpetual, that whosoever goes out
to get any outward gain on the Lords day gains nothing, what ever he think,
certain he finds just nothing, Gods curse eats up more then his gains. Now
when they went but a little way, had but little time to spend, and it was no
great pains to gather Manna, yet God says for this, How long will this people
break all my commandments. It was but the breach of this one, and yet God
charge them with the breach of all, because in truth he that makes a breach
into this, sets open a gap into all.

So Luke. 23. in the two last verses, it is noted of Mary Magdalen and her
companions, that having prepared their perfumes to anoint the dead body of
Christ, and not having time to get ready enough for that purpose before the
sabbath came upon them, they would neither anoint him with those they had, nor
buy any more till the sabbath was ended: now what smaller thing then to buy a
few ointments, that might soon be done, and without great trouble, and if a
man may do any thing that is not a duty of religion or mercy on that day,
then he might buy sweet ointments, to embalme the dead body of Christ, but
because Christ's body was dead, and their embalming it, did yield no ease and
refreshing, and so was no work of mercy, nor was not a worship of God, they
durst not do it. I, but might one say, sure they were more precise then wise,
they made a scruple where none was, nay the holy ghost frees thee from that
charge, and shows that they rested according to the commandment. It was well
done of them, for in doing it they obeyed Gods commandment, and it had been
amiss if they had not rested, for then they had broken Gods commandment. So
for the man that would gather sticks upon the sabbath, he did it in deed
contemptuously, for to try Moses, and set him at stand, he would break the
sabbath, and yet not dye neither; therefore he did the smallest work, yet that
little work was so great a sin, that God appoints him to be stoned to death
for it. So that no work so small, if it be a worldly matter, and not a matter
of religion, must be done. What smaller thing to step over the dore-sil, and
gather a thing under his feet for a while, what thing of less trouble then to
buy some precious ointment to embalme Christ's body, what lighter matter then
to gather a few sticks, yet not the lightest of all these, but God condemns
it, and will not have it break into the possession of his day.

Now for great matters, and affairs of importance, God does not allow any
worldly business seem it never so great, to shoulder out religion and mercy,
upon the sabbath, all works great or not must yield. As Exodus 31. 13. He
commands that no man must do any work for the building and setting forward of
the sanctuary upon the sabbath, and yet that was a work of some weight, so
that no thing so great that can bear one out in breaking the sabbath, one must
not build a church on the sabbath. So God commands expressly, that one shall
not do work upon the sabbath, neither in earing, nor harvest. Now those be
matters of greatest moment. If one may as it were streyne courtesy for any
thing, then he might to inn his corn, when it lies in the field, comes a
fair day on the sabbath, if he omit, it is catching weather, his corn is now
ready, if he let it alone, he is like to loose it, and to let it rot upon the
ground, why though it be Gods sabbath must be inviolable, better loose all your
corn then Gods favor, better that rot in the ground, then we carry a rotten
heart. So that it is plain, we must do neither least nor most of our own
works upon the sabbath day, none so little, that God will give it allowance,
to take up of his time, none so great, that may thrust out his exercises,
because his commandment and the obedience we owe unto him, is greater then all
things. Therefore this confutes the shifts that men have. Oh this is a trifle,
such a toy I hope does not break the sabbath, as to set things in order, to
lay the buck against monday morning, that is nothing, that is a small work, but
is it your own work, then in the least work* God says, why do you break my
commandments. So others hope they may set Ieauens, that is not such a great
matter; but it is a great matter, to do the least thing that God has
forbidden, and this is the next way to bring a curse upon themselves and their
dow to.

And others, oh it is a great and weighty matter, it lies upon me, and
concerns mine estate to do it: but it is not so great as the obedience of
God, and keeping of a good conscience, better if one must, that some decay come
to your outward estate, then to your soul. Is it of such moment? and the
getting in of your corn that lies in hazard like to be spoiled by ill
weather, yet you must not do it, trust in Gods providence, if he have
commanded you to rest, you shall be no looser by resting* unless it be your
own negligence that endamage you: for the Prince will not allow one to spit in
his face, in jest or earnest, nor will take it well if a man should rob his
treasury, because he needed twenty or forty shillings or more, so God will
not take in good part the breach of his commandments, and casting his fear
behind our backs in trifling things, or in matters that seem to carry more
sway with them.

But here seems to come in an objection, may one do no business, may not
one look to their cattle, serve their sheep or their horses, and order them
on the sabbath? yes, a christian man on the sabbath day must serve his beast,
but always provided, that he do it not as business of his own, but as a
work of mercy to the beast, not seeking or respecting his own commodity, as
the creatures necessity, and doing it thus for conscience sake, to help the
poor creature, it is a work of the sabbath, and in it place pleases God; for
God himself commands to be merciful, even to the beasts, therefore one must
see that he do it with a merciful heart in compassion to the creature, so
that the end must differ from the end in the working days.

Secondly, his affection and meditation must be diverse from that he may have
at other times; for this work must raise him up to some godly and spiritual
meditations for his edification; as for example, when one goes on the sabbath
to serve and order the dumb creature, he may make this use of it; why I can
in obedience to God, and compassion to the creature, care for it, and bring it
things necessatie, though it cannot call upon me, yet the very need of it
cries loud, that I cannot but help though I bough it for money; what care then
must I persuade my self God that is a sea of mercy, of which I have but one
drop, will have to me, whom he has bought with the blood of his Son, and
which cease not to call upon him, and make continual supplication for things
needful unto him, and so strengthen ones faith: or else such a meditation I
see the poor dumb beast that has done me painful service all the week,
when I come to serve it, is contented to be served at my pleasure, if I give
it more it is content, if less it does not fret against me, if it be better
provision it takes it in good part, if courser, it does not murmer and take on;
why then should not I be content to live at Gods finding, and take in good
part that which he gives me, be it more or less, since it is my portion from
God, especially since I have often rebelled against God as the poor beast never
did against me, and it has done me more faithful service, then ever I did
God.

These and the like meditations ones heart must be seasoned withal one the
sabbath day, more then necesitie is imposed upon him other times, If then our
end be mercy, and our affections be holy in doing these things to the
cattle, they be sabbath days works, because mercy is a work pleasing to God,
on that day. But if one feed his cattle, not because their want craves this at
his hand, but because his desire of gain moves him, they will be in better
liking, and I may sell them to more profit, or they will be better in heart,
more able to do my work after, and then his heart be carried after the gain he
may have by these cattle, and his meditations taken up with thinking how he may
sell them for most gain, he breaks the sabbath, he serves not God, but
himself, and though man cannot indite him for the very action, yet God will
find him out and plague him for the ill affection.

And so much for the things that must be done on the sabbath, and those that
must not be done, and two reasons taken, one from the equity of the
commandment, the other from the right and title of God, to the day. Now here
he comes after to a declaration of the persons, severally comprehended under
this commandment; naming first the governors, and then charging them with the
inferiors, which are either continual, as those of the family, or for some
time coming under their jurisdiction, as strangers in the gate, to which the
public magistrate must look. First he says:

Thou.
BY this is meant, you which are master or mistres in a family, for both are
comprehended, because heads thy son and thy daughter. Now the son and
daughter pertain equally to both the parents. I, might one say, I will keep
it holy, and rest, but my children may work: nay says he, thy son, nor
daughter. Naming them first, because parents, through natural affection, are
ready to wink at them, and to let it slip, though they profane Gods sabbath,
by seeking their pleasure, and they think, why alas, youth must have a swing,
we must let them alone a little. Not so, says the Lord, how ever you bear
with them for others, yet you must look to them carefully for that day, and
not let them break the sabbath. Then he names the man, and maid, because
commonly some lucre is gotten by their labor, and some commodity seems to
follow, if they follow their worldly business, men are slack to cause them to
serve God, but would be content they should serve them; God says also look to
them, if any servant would be so wicked as to labor, yet thou must not suffer
him receive not this gain, for it is the gain of wicknesse, and therefore
accursed, better be without it then have it. I, but I hope I may let my cattle
be employed; nay says the Lord, thy ox, nor thine Ass, nor thy cattle, not
because the dumb creatures can sanctify the sabbath, but because their labor
cannot be used, but some man must attend upon them, and look to them, and
therefore God would prevent all occasions of hindering man's rest, wherein also
God understands all such other liuelesse things which cannot be set a work
without the hand of man be joined to them, as a mill, or a boat or such like.

Then he adds the stranger meeting one of an other nation and country and
religion, which though we cannot compel to come to the church, yet the
magistrate may and must forbid him to break and pollute the sabbath by any
public labor, if he come in such places where he has authouritie. Here
then we see that God charge the master of the family with all in the
family, he says not you servants and you children see that you break not the
sabbath, but you masters labor not you selves, nor break the sabbath, nor
suffer your children or servants so to do. Hence we may gather this
instruction, that it belongs to all governors to see that their servants
inferiors what ever keep the sabbath. And this testimony God himself gives
of Abraham I know him that he will command his servants and children to keep
my commandments, God knew Abraham's mind that if the case stood so that either
some work of his must be neglected, or some service of God undone; Abraham had
rather that all his business should wait, then one part of Gods service be
omitted. And great reason why a christian should be of this mind, for if he do
(as he professes) indeed love god above all, ought he not to be more careful
of Gods glory then of his own commodity, and more see to gods service then his
own gain, now we know that masters suffer not their servants to be idle on the
week days therefore if he love god, he should be so much more diligent over
them, that they neglect not the word of God on his day, by how much the glory
of God, is more dear and precious to him, then his private commodity. For as
he that is a true subject to the prince and loves him indeed will not keep such
a man in his house that will not be subject to his laws, so he that is
himself rightly affected to God and his glory, will not suffer such a profane
person under his roof, that will dishonor him openly, and not care to observe
his sabbath.

Secondly, if one bear any love to his servants or children, even for their
own sakes, he must see to them that they break not the sabbath, but that
they come to such exercises where they may receive the spirit of God, and the
chief good to their souls: always a good governor must govern for the good
of those that be under him, now what greater good can he do to them, then to
use those means whereby they may know God in Christ Jesus, and be brought to
salvation. So that if one will not show a disloyal heart against God, and
unloving and unfaithful heart to his people, that he cares not for their
salvation, he must see that they keep the sabbath so far as it belongs to
him, namely by being outwardly present at the works of religion.

Thirdly, in regard of our own good to, such as be masters must be careful
over their servants in this regard, for take this for a general rule, he that
will not be faithful to God, will never be faithful to man, he that has
no care to serve God in duties of religion, will have less care to serve his
master in the duties of his calling, as indeed they have; for if the honor of
God and their own salvation will not move them, why should they be moved for
their masters profit or business, but he that serves God with a good
conscience, will serve his master with a good conscience, and though his master
be not present to rebuke him, his own conscience will check him, and when
the fear of his master will not keep from idleness and untrustiness, the
fear of God will keep him, and the commandment of God will restrain him:
else either they will do nothing, or what they do is all for eye service to
be seen of men, and when the masters eye is off, then by idleness or
wastfulnesse or pilfering they will hurt one more then the faithful keeping of
the sabbath can hinder them, for that will not hinder them at all, but be a
means to bring, the blessing of God on their labors in the week day. As
Jacob a faithful servant to God, was blessed in all Labans business, and
Joseph a true worshipper of the Lord, had prosperity to follow him, and
accompany him in all his travails. Therefore if we will show our love to God,
and to them, and desire that they be faithful to us, and God should bless
their labors in our affairs, bring them to the service of God, and exercises
of religion on the sabbath, and have a care that they break not the holy day
of the Lord.

This serves for the reproof of those men which bear this mind toward their
servants, that so their own work be performed, they care not how Gods work
is neglected, let their servants be careful to do their business on the
six days, and let them be as careless as they list of Gods, on the seventh
day, let them spend it even how they will, they have free liberty from the
masters. This shows men to be lovers of themselves more then lovers of God,
and proves that they love filthy lucre and gain of the world, more then the
glory of God, for if Gods glory were but as dear to them as their money,
they would be as impatient at his dishonor by their servants negligence, as
at losses that come to themselves by their servants negligence. Oh but they say
they be rude youths and will break out from us, we cannot keep them in. Be
not these deep dissemblers? is not this gross hypocrisy, can you not keep
them in? Who keeps them in on the six days, can you make them tarry at home
then, can you set them to their business, and not suffer them to be gadding,
yet that is for six days space, this is but for one, that labor which then
they do is far more toylesome to the body, and can you make them will they
nill they, spend six whole days in more painful and tedious work, and can
you not constrain them to keep at home and do more easy works in respect of
bodily labor, and that but for one whole day? this is miserable shifting, and
plain halting, these excuses will not hold before God, he will show you that
you had made as much account of serving his honor and glory, and obeying his
commandment, as you do of serving your own filthy covetous lust, and
obeying the devil, if his name had been as dear to you as gain, you might
with as much ease, cause your servants to spend the seventh day, in his
service to his glory, as six before it in your own service to your profit.
But what is the cause that youth is so rude, is it not because they have learnt
it of age? Why, be inferiors so profane, but because they follow the pattern
and tread in the steps of their superiors? how come the branches to bring such
ill fruit, but that the root has no better sap, for if the servants might but
see so much love of God and care of keeping gods commandments, appear in the
conversation of their masters and dames, as they see of the world and
eagerness after lucre, they would at least for outward show be better. But now
that they see their masters and know his disposition, they frame themselves
thereafter to serve him in his covetous lust, and rob God of his honor.

If the servant should but leave his business one or two hours in the weak*
and run hoyting about some sports and vanities, when he comes home his
master will be upon his back, his dame would have a saying to him, he should
be so bayted with rebukes and chiding, as if it were a bear with dogs, so that
though he had a good mind to be abroad, and had no great heart to stand
sweating at his business, yet miserable fear would make him tarry at home,
rather then he would endure the sharp sauce that must come after, and be
chidden thus again, he will keep within doors; but let him be where he
will; and do what he will upon the sabbath day, when he comes home either his
master or dame allow him in it, or else they be mute and say nothing to him,
or if they do begin to reprove him, it is done so coldly, so carelessly, with
so little vehemency, that the servant may well perceive it comes from the
teeth outward, his master is not greatly sorry within, it never vexes his
heart for the matter, and therefore he cares not for such chiding, he will to
it the next sabbath again.

Then secondly this serves for the instruction of all householders, that desire
to be indeed, as well as to be accounted christians, that they should have
an eye to their servants in the keeping of the sabbath. Even as one the week
day, they will call them up, and see that they be ready to their business,
so on the sabbath call them up in the morning, and see that they be ready for
the work of God; especially since the works of their calling be such as they
may do without any great preparation: A man may rise out of his bed, and go
straight and hold the plow, or drive the cart as well as if he had an hours
consideration, but unless one have sometime to disburden his heart of worldly
thoughts, and to fit himself by prayer and holy meditations to hear the
word, he can never do it well, nor so as the word will be profitable unto
him, therefore they must be stirred up, that they may have time to make ready
their hearts, that they come before God with a quiet an empty mind.

Now in this duty many of Gods children fail, that even themselves and their
whole family take liberty to sleep out a great part of the morning, and think
it enough to rise and go to church, not regarding any time of preparation, and
hence it is that the exercises be so uncomfortable and unprofitable to them.
And then secondly the master must be careful to have his family come with
him in good and due season to the house of God, with the whole congregation;
not as many do, that are so negligent, as much is past before they come. The
wife comes at the second lesson, and he drops in at the end of prayer, and the
servants follow when half is done. They would not do thus to harvest work,
but he would make them get all things ready, that they go together to get in
his corn, and not come dropping, one now, and another anon; why should not
one therefore be as careful for the food of his soul, and to eat of the
bread of life, in the house of god, to come joyfullie himself and his wife,
and bring their family with them, that they may be at the beginning, and
tarry out till the ending; that they may have the whole fruit, and not as some
do be gone before the sermon end, or at least, run away before the prayer
be made for a blessing, and the blessing pronounced by the minister; which
shows they never felt the goodness of the blessing, they are so loath to
tarry the ministers prayer, because they want the spirit of prayer themselves,
and cannot tell the benefit of a faithful prayer, for if the sweetness of
gods blessing had distild upon their souls, or they had never felt the comfors
that follows, a prayer made in the holy ghost, they would be more desirous of
these things then they be, and not have so from them, as if it were a curse,
not a blessing, and some things tending to their hurt, not a supplication to
God for their good. And as they must call them up in the morning, so an other
duty is to examine them after, and call them to account how they have
profited, as if men's servants be sent to the market, they will not let them go
without taking account, how they have done their business, and what markets
they have made, so when they come from the church, they come from the market of
their souls, they should question with them, to see what good bargains they
have made for their souls, what profit they have had by coming to Gods
ordinances, and thus laying their store together to help one another.

This serves also for the instruction of servants, that since God has laid
such a charge upon their superiors, to look that they keep his sabbath;
therefore they should willingly be ruled, and suffer themselves to be guided by
them in this point, and as well obey them in the sabbath; to be diligent in the
works of God, as in the week days to obey them, for matters of their own
calling. They must not say as many profane servants will, if they call them
and will instruct them in religion, they will none of that, but you hired me
say they, to do your work, and take my wages, and there an end, what needs
all this do about keeping the sabbath, and coming to the sermon, let me
look to that my self. Nay, but if they be Gods servants, and you Gods
servants, your masters hired you to do Gods work, and in the Lord to do their
work, therefore this is a profane answer, and these be ill servants. But much
more vilde are they that will run abroad to wickedness, to dancing, to
swilling to wantonness etc. making that their sabbath days work, which is
unlawful at any time, to plow and to cart be things lawful and profitable in
fit time, but to dance and follow wantonness, is naught every day, but much
more vilde and abominable upon the sabbath day. Therefore such servants must by
force be constrained not to violate Gods sabbath, or if no means will serve, a
christian master must not have his house pestered with such open rebels
against God.

Thus much God shows the duties of christian householders, that they must
themselves and see that their servants abstain from all the works of their
calling, and do only works of piety and mercy, which works of mercy they
must not do, upon the Lords day, in love to their own commodity, but in
obedience to God and compassion of the creature. Now the Lord goes further to
show what course must be taken with men of an other religion, saying:

Nor the stranger that is within thy gates.
Here he shows that if a stranger come within our jurisdiction that are
christians, though we cannot command him to come to the exercises of religion,
yet the magistrate must not suffer him to do any servile work to pollute the
sabbath, for by the gates here the Lord means authority and jurisdiction,
because in former time the place of judgment and where authority was
exercised was in the gates. Hence then in that the magistrate must look to
forreyners, this general doctrine may be gathered, that it is our duty being
christians, not only to keep the sabbath our selves, and to look to those
that are belonging to us, but so far as we can even to strangers, or to any
other. And this is that which is commended in Nehemiah, that when the men of
Sidon that knew not God, nor cared not for the sabbath, came with wares to
Jerusalem on the sabbath, he shut the gates against them, and told them, that
if they did so any more, he would lay hands upon them.

And there is great reason why one should be careful of those of other
congregations, and of other places, for if we have the true love of God in us,
it will grieve us to the heart to see gods name dishonored, and his laws
broken of any one whosoever, and therefore so much as in him lies, he stop all
such practices who ever they be that do them. Also every man is bound to
love his enemy, yea his enemies beast, and if he see his enemies beast under
his burden, he must help him up, if one must help a man's ox or ass, if he
be burdened, much more his soul, that is burdened with the sin that will
kill it, if it be not taken off. No man is so savage that if he see a blind
man running into a well, wherein he may be drowned, will say let him go I
care not, he is none of my family, nor of my friends, though he be not,
mercy is to be showed to all, and nature in such a case will teach one to
run and call to him, and hinder him by what means he can. So for the soul
much more, if we see a person who is in truth blinded through ignorance, and
knows not the danger, about to cast himself into the pit of hell, mercy will
move him that has any true mercy, to seek to reclaim him.

And then in regard of the good of the whole congregation, one must hinder
strangers from giving such ill examples, for though it seem at first a small
thing to suffer a stranger, let him do what he list, it pertaines not to us,
yet it is dangerous, for our nature is so subject to infection, and we so
easily drawn to evil, that if one suffer a stranger, at length his children
and servants will learn and come after, to do the same things; so that for
our own sakes we must be diligent, to cut of occasions, and warily prevent
danger, for one house on fire may burn the whole town, and if a stranger
would buy an house in the town, and then be so foolish to set it on fire, men
would not let him alone, for fear it should also catch their houses, and so in
truth if the fire of sin kindle in the heart and practice of a stranger, and
we seek not to quench and suppress it, it will not tarry there long, it will
catch some in the congregation, and set them a burning to. Therefore in love to
Gods glory, to our brothers soul, and to our selves, and those that be near
unto us, we must labor by what means we can, to hinder even a stranger from
breaking the sabbath; now if one must hinder strangers, how much more such as
be borne and dwell in the same place, our neighbors, children, or servants,
if we see such profaning the sabbath, we should much more hinder them by
admonition and reproof, but especially if we see them run to things that be
simply evil, and in their own nature at all times unlawful: therefore for
men that be of some account and note in a congregation, in a town to come
among headdie youths, and see them violenly carried to dancing, to gaming, or
any such lewdenesse, on the sabbath especially, and let them go on without any
rebuke or exhortation, never tell them of it, never dehort them from it, this
shows that there is but a little love of God in none of the parties souls,
and that they have little regard of themselves and their own families. But in
truth, this is the cause that makes wickedness grow so fast, and sin get up
with an high hand, and youth grow to such impudent and shameless boldness,
because the minister fights alone against sin; None else will open his mouth
to speak against it, or discountenance it, he that would not stand by and see
the Ox fall into the ditch, but he would help him out, will look on while the
children run headlong toward hell, and say not a word to reclaim them. This
remisenesse of men that are of some estimation in the town, makes proud youths
often times so audacious to set themselves openly against the ministers doctrine,
and as it were by their practice in the heat of lust to contrary him, even when
he is reproving any sin, when the doctrine is yet hot, and the sound of his
voice is scarce gone out of their ears, then to run openly to gainesay that
which was taught in the church, so soon as they come out of the church.

This strength of impiety proceeds hence I say that the minister has no
help, none has a zeal of Gods glory, so that he is grieved at his dishonor,
none has so much charity and compassion over their neighbors, as that they
seek to pull them out of the danger of hell fire, for if but two or three or
some more of the ancient men that have some authority and sway in the
congregation, would join their hands with the minister, and set in with their
private rebukes and reprofes, to make his public reprofes forcible, younger
people would be more ashamed of sin, and learn to behave themselves more
soberly, then in public as it were, to bid battle to the public doctrine
of the minister. Therefore this slacknesse and coldness, is much to be reproved.

Then secondly, this is for the encouragement of such as do desire to help
others out of this or any other sin, they may boldly with a good heart and
conscience, rebuke a sabbath breaker, whereas they will object, why, what is
that to you, if I sin my self, I must perish my self, what have you to do
to meddle, yes, they have to do to meddle, they have to love the^, they have
to love the congregation, and to love Gods glory, and therefore as much as they
can to disgrace sin, for though sinners begin to set sin a foot, yet if
some godly wise man will encounter it with a sound admonition and sharp rebuke,
that will dash and disgrace it, as much as the practice of sinners will support
it, so that it cannot get an head so soon. Therefore because they be men that
sin, and it is Gods law that is broken, and the whole congregation that is
infected and poisoned, he that has that affection he should to any of these,
has to do to use a preservative against this poison, and to stand for Gods
commandments, and the salvation of man; let wicked sinners while they will
accuse them to be busy bodies, that is no matter, better displease man by
good, then God by evil. It follows.

For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, etc. and rested the
seventh day.
BEcause this commandment is much oppugned by the examples of great men,
because almost all men break it, therefore it is confirmed from the example of
the great God, whose example is able to counteruaile all theirs, q. d. If you
will be led by example, follow the most perfect example; now what more
perfecter example then the example of God, who has proposed himself for a
president, sinful men break it, but the holy God kept it, and would have you
keep it, whether example is best to follow? God made an end of all in six
days, and ceased creating on the seventh day, therefore he would have you
cease from the works of your vocation. For, for works of preservation Christ
says, John. 5. My father works hitherto, and I work. But he ceased works
of creation, so that the reason stands thus, God left no work of creation till
the seventh day, but ended all in six days, therefore he would have you end
all your works of vocation in six days, and give the seventh only to
works of sanctification.

Hence then we learn this doctrine, that whosoever desires to live godly, must
propose the example of God to himself to imitate. Thus Ephesians. 5. 1. The
Apostle wishes them to follow the example of God as dear children, he had
before exhorted them to gentleness and courteousnesse: but he has done me
wrong says some man, how can I deal kindly with him? why freely forgive him,
says the Apostle. But who would put up this wrong patiently, God would, and
therefore do you follow god, and imitate him, God does not presently seek
revenge, if any man break his laws, but uses all gentle means to bring him
to repentance, and to cause him to turn, so do you, then tread in Gods steps,
indeed some froward man would take a more violent and boisterous course; But
if you will be accounted the child of God, bought with the blood of Christ, and
regenerate by the spirit of God, you must rather be directed by his example
then man's, and then no better argument that you be the sons of God, and no
surer proof that he has begotten you to life eternal, then when you grow
like unto him, and show forth his image in your life.

Now the reason why it is best to set God before us, as a pattern, is, because
his example is so absolute in all fullness of perfection, that no exception can
be taken against it: bring the example and there is some thing against which a
man may except to lessen the force of it, as David and Peter, and such good men
have had their slips, and no man lives so holy but as Saint James says, In
some things we sin all. But the example of God is so exact and altogether
righteous, without any spot at any time, that no such thing can be alleged
against it.

Secondly, if one make God his example he shall grow better and better,
because still he shall come short of the mark he aims at, and never be able to
attain to the perfection which is in his example, so that still he shall have
a proportion to go on and to grow. If one set man for his coppie, either he
may write as well as his coppie, or at least he may imagine that he does and
then he stands at a stay, and thinks he has done well, he may cease now, but
this example is not subject to such conceit, no man either can or will dream
that he can be as good as God, so that here is still occasion of mending and
increasing. Thirdly, he that follows the example of men, has great means of
pride, and to be puffed up, for comparing himself with men, he is not put in
mind of his faults, but rather thinks this and this I have done, and in most
things I am equal to the best, and so is in great danger to grow conceited of
himself, but now he leaving men, looks unto God, and casts his eyes first on
God, and then on himself, he sees so much imperfection in himself, and such
infinite righteousness and goodness in God, as that upon this comparison, he
grows more humble and holy, and to know himself more, so that though he grow
better every day then other, yet he thinks worse of himself every day then
other, and has a greater insight into his own corruption, by how much, he
gets more strength against his corruption. In these regards therefore, and for
these reasons, it is most safe and profitable, to make Gods example a line for
himself, and to follow his president, so near as he can in all things.

This then may serve to the confutation of those men, that letting pass Gods
example as nothing pertaining to them, think to dash all commandments, and
all rebukes, with this one answer, that all men do so, as though it were a
sufficient buckler to bear off all Gods commandments, and the force of his
example, because the example of most men is contrary: as namely in this one
commandment, which of all the rest God has most strongly fenced with reasons
and among other, with one drawn from his own practice and example. Come to
sabbath breakers that abuse it to sin and vanity, how dare you be so bold,
as to break Gods express commandment with so high an hand, and to provoke
him to his face thus? why I hope we are not those that alone play upon the
sabbath, we shall do as well as others, all the towns round about us do the
like, but why should not you look to Gods commandment* and example rather
then to wicked men; would a father take this for a good answer if he should
come to his child and say, why do you lie or steal, know you not that it
offends me, and I like it not? why should you chide me, I hope I am not the
first that ever swore, other children have lied and stolen before me, what need
you be so angry with me for the matter, no father would endure such an answer
of his child; this manner of defending were worse then the fault. But so we
deal with God, he sends his ministers to reprove us, and say, why do you
dishonor the name of God, and break his commandment and sabbath? why I hope
others do so as well as I, this is the most common answer. But should not a
child be ruled by his father? should not a servant follow his master? and
should not the children of God follow God? and be content to be ruled both by
his commandment and example? What a miserable thing is this, that we will
forsake the light to run to darkness, and leave God, to go after Beliall.
The way is not broad, that leads to heaven, nor many walk in it, their sins
are no warrant for us to sin, but if we be Gods, then let us follow God, as
dear children.

So, 1. John. 6. verse. If we walk in darkness. The Apostle shows that if
we be in Christ, we must walk as Christ walked, for if one should say, this is
a member of the body, whereof this is the head, and the head go east, and the
member west, no man would believe it, so if we say Christ is our head, but we
go a quite contrary way to that in which he went, it is altogether false, and
a lie, as Saint John says; but if Christ be our head, let us walk in the
light wherein he walked, let us tread in his steps of meekness, of denying
the world, and of placing our joy in heaven, and those virtues that shined in
him, let them appear in us, though not in the same measure, yet in the same
manner and truth, for the like measure is impossible, to us, but the like truth
and uprightness is not only possible, but so necessary, that without it we
can have no assurance, that we are in him.

This serves likewise for the encouragement and comfort of Gods children, that
live in such profane places, where they can have no pattern of godliness in
man, nor none that will join with them in any holy thing, as it often times
falls out. Then the devil is ready to object against them, and to hinder them
with this objection from going on; what will you be singular, will you be one
alone, without any example? No, they are not without example, but they follow
the best example, even the example of God, and it is far better to be lead by
his example to heaven, though foolish men mock them, then by the example men to
be drawn to hell, and have God to plague them, his one example should more
encourage and strengthen us, then all their contrary practices discourage or
fear us. O will you keep the sabbath so strictly, that you will not play among
your neighbors, and do as every body does, they will mock you and hate you,
and count you more precise then wise. Well, if they do, yet a christian may
bear off all, with this I know God will love and allow me for it, he commands
to do as he did, he created all things in six days, and one day, the sabbath
only, preserved; therefore I must cease from works of my calling, and do
those works whereby I may preserve mine own soul or others, therefore let the
world, go which way it will, we will walk in the ways of our God, and
follow his example.

In six days the Lord created the heaven and earth.
IN this example which God has proposed, we may consider something of the
power of God in the creation, and in that he spent no longer time then six
days in creating the whole world; we must understand by this doctrine, that
God is able to bring to pass great matters in a short time, and by small
means. The making of the world, one would think needed some good time for the
thing it self, and some thing also, for the preparation of so long a building,
but when God would be the workman, and take in hand so great a matter, what
time took he to finish it? he began and ended it and all within the compass
of six days, and left not the least creature unmade, till the seventh; and
he took so long time, not because he needed such a space, for he could have
done it with as much ease in an hour, yea, in a minute, as in these six
days, but he has divided the whole into six days work, because we might
have a fitter occasion, and be better moved to consider of every one, for if he
had folded up altogether as it were in the compass of an hour, then it had
not been so fit and easy for our meditation. In this then we generally see
what wonderful works, and great things God can bring to pass in a very small
time, and with very small means, if the power of them be judged according to
humane reason, for he spoke, as the Psalm. says, and it was done, he willed it,
and without any more ado it was effected. This we see likewise by other
examples in scriptures, as Nebucadnezar the mighty prince and monarch of the
world, when he was walking in his princely palace, in that great city of
Babell, which was the seat of his kingdom, yet how quickly was stripped from
all, how soon deprived of his kingdom, so that he had not so much as an
house, yea, a poor cottage to put his head into, nay, not one rag to cover his
nakedness, not a dish to drink in, not a morsel of the courcest bread to
eat, but of a King became more miserable then the basest beggar under the
Sky; yea, as miserable as a beast: so that from the highest top of
prosperity, he was cast down to the extremity of misery. And then when he
was at worst, his wit and reason gone, his form and beauty departed, and he a
misshapen creature, his hair being grown like Eagles feathers and his nails
like birds claws, altogether deformed, not like a man now, and his kingdom
possessed by an other, for seven years space; yet, so soon as he looked up
into heaven, his wit and discretion was restored, his beauty and fashion
renewed, and he plast in his kingdom, with as full power and authority as
ever before.

Both these wonderful alterations, in how little a time were they wrought,
when God took in hand to work them. So in Aegipt, God took in hand to deliver
his people from cruel Pharaohs tyranny, what army had he, for that conquest,
and who should be the captain? Moses and Aron, two old men, the one eighty,
the other eighty three, these must go, themselves alone. But how were they
furnished against Pharaohs resistance, and to take the Israelits perforce from
his servitude; Aron must have nothing, but he must speak what Moses bad him;
And Moses he must carry his shepherds staff; weak men, and weak means one
would think, to make an encounter upon so great a King; If a carnal man had
seen these two going against Pharaoh, and thinking to set the Israelites at
liberty perforce, whether he would or no, he would have judged that they
should have been slaves till this day, unless they had seen some b^tter store
of provision, then an old man with a shepherds staff in his hand. But God
taking in hand to work by these means, we see of what force and power that
staff was, that when Moses but held it up, it brought such plagues upon
Pharaoh and all Egypt, that all the kings in the world could not have vexed and
troubled him more with all their power; he never shook his staff in vain,
but still some notable plague followed, that devoured the whole land. With this
staff he stroke the waters, and they were turned into blood. He stroke the
dust with this staff, and it turned into lice; He held up his staff toward
heaven, there came grassehoppers, flies, thunder, scabs, and when he had made
any of these wounds, he could cure them in as litte space. One word unto God by
Moses made all whole again. So for our redemption, a poor maidens son, that
himself seemed a poor base fellow of no reckoning or note, that had no wealth
nor authority in the world, nay had not so much as an house to put his head
in; he must come and be brought before a judge, and there be condemned,
scourged, mocked, spitted on, crowned with thorns; at length must be carried
and hanged upon a cross, and bear the pains and anguish of Gods curse in his
soul on the cross, and by these means, God must be set at peace with man, a
perfect reconciliation was made, and all former sins and jarres twixt God and
man, put away. This greatest work that was done, when heaven was purchased for
man, sinners made just before god, and miserable men of the earth, had the
right of an immortal kingdom in heaven, bestowed upon them; all these things
were brought to pass, and fully effected by these means, that to man's reason
seemed of all things the most unlikely to bring to pass, a matter of such
wonder and difficulty. And so at the resurrection in the twinkling of an eye,
what great chaunges shall be, those that lay in the dust rotten, some thousands
of years, shall be raised from their grave, made alive, and to stand on their
feet, and that body that was at the best before subject to death, to pain,
and all misery, but now turned into earth, devoured of worms and corruption,
and as it seemd, vanished to nothing, shall be in a moment, if it be Gods child,
freed from mortality, from being subject to diseases, or any affliction, and
shall be made immortal and incorruptible, and like to Christ Jesus, in glory. So
wonderful we see be the works of God, so mighty he is, and so full of power,
that in the shortest time, and by those that seem the weakest means, he can
bring to pass the most strange and glorious effects that can be.

This then if we often meditate upon it, will serve wonderfully for the comfort
of all those children of God, whose case is so grievous, entangled with such
perplexities, oppressed with such ruins both of body and estate, as they
think it is impossible to get out, and to be repaired again, or if it might
be, yet it will be a long time first. Oh but if we could believe Gods almighty
power, all things are possible to God, and all things are possible to the
believer, it makes no matter what the disease be, so God be the Physician, it
skils not what distress a man be in, so God take in hand to help him, he can
as soon and as easily cure the deadliest wound, as the lightest scarre, and
bring one out of the greatest misery with no means, as out of the least
misery with all means; Oh but I am poor, owe much, and have nothing to pay
it. No matter. So was the prophets wife, yet the little oil in the cruse held
out to fill so many great empty vessels, that she was restored and made in a
better estate the^ ever before; it is not to the purpose, how weak the means
be, and how great the ruins be, so the great and strong God put to his hand to
help. No man was ever more dejected then Nebuchadnezar, from a King to be worse
then a beggar, from a palace to the briars and bushes; from princely robes, to
plain nakedness; from a man to a beast, from among men, to be among beasts;
and yet none in less time and less means, advanced to an higher outward
estate then he. And for the soul, so great sins, such hideous darkness in
mind, and hardness of heart, such perverseness in will, such disorder and
rebellion in affections? and what of all these? how shall one get out of so
many sins? can one cry to God? can one lift up his heart to heaven, though he
cried out of the bottom of the sea, and out of the fishes belly with Jonas,
God will hear him and let him see the Sun; if he were in the dungeon tied
with as many chains, and burdened with as many sins as he, yet God can and
will, if he call in truth, bring him out of all, and set him in a better estate
then ever he was before.

There Is not the least sin or misery but would be to hard for us, if we have
nothing but our own strength to help us; there is not the greatest sin nor
the greatest misery that shall hurt us or prevail over us, if we have the
strength and power of God to hold us up. Therefore christians should take
comfort in their afflictions. Can God raise up his body when it is dead in the
earth, and glorify it when it is rotten in the grave, and can he not raise him
out of some debt or misery of his estate? Oh but then he loves the body? and
does he not love it as well now? Then he will use his power, and is it curbed
in, and shortened now? Nay, God uses his infinite power now, for the help and
preservation of his children, as he will use it then for their glorification.
If we cannot believe God can help us now, how will we say we can believe he
will raise our rotten bodies out of the grave, since we have the same power and
promise for the one as the other. Therefore it is a great fault and shame for
christians to sit down discouraged; why, is gods power lessened? is his hand
shortened? has not he said that a little that the righteous has, is better
then all the great riches of the wicked? Gods blessing can do more then
wealth, and he alone is better to us then if we had all the world without him.

This serves likewise for the terror of the wicked men of the world, God can as
easelie set heaven and earth on fire, and bring them to nothing, and in as
little space as he made them of nothing: then much more can he bring to
destruction a base sinner, notwithstanding all his worldly helps, if he be
their adversary, as he is a professed enemy to all unrepentant sinners.

They flatter themselves, and think it shall be well with them, why? they be
vnderlaid with wealth, supported with friends, mounded and fenced with
policy: but how stands the matter betwixt God and them, are they his
inheritance or not? is he reconciled unto them or no? nay for that, though
they will not in word say so, yet their life proclaims it, that they do not
greatly respect his favor, for they care not to break his law upon any small
occasion, surely then let them know that they are in no safety, god can pull
up their defense, and pull away their props and supports, he can as easily
bring a rich man's soul to hell, as a poor man's, and as soon damn the soul
of the richest king, if he be naught, as of the basest beggar.

Therefore those that leaving God lean to worldly props, show that they little
believe the power of God, and little think of the creation of the world. Thus
much for the example of God: now the last reason is drawn from the end of the
sabbath, namely that God has consecrated it, to bring a blessing on the
keepers of it, in these words.

Wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.
Here God shows, that if none of the former reasons will prevail, yet we
should be moved for our own benefit to regard it, for nothing is more
available to bring a blessing on soul and body, then the religious keeping
of the sabbath, for God has appointed it to the end that he might have
occasion to communicate his goodness to the diligent obseruers of it; So that
from this reason that he says God sanctified the day, j. set it apart for his
use, and blessed it, that is, appointed it, for a means of blessing to the
obedient, for the day it self is no more blessed then other days.

From hence I say we may learn that: the way to get all blessing, is to keep
holy the sabbath; this is the most direct and sure means to get all
comfortable prosperity, to keep an holy rest to God upon his day. One reason
is, because God has sanctified it to this end, as for inward benefits is
showed. Isaiah. 56. 4. 7. Where the Lord shows that for inward blessings, if
any of what estate so ever, will keep Gods sabbath, he shall have his heart
filled full of spiritual joy, God will give him the spirit of prayer, and
hear his prayers, God will give him ability to serve him, and accept and
reward his service. And Isai. 58. 13. 14, If one will keep himself from
polluting Gods holy sabbath, and keep it carefully, then he shall delight in
the Lord, that is, God shall so show his favor and love to his soul, as he
shall be joyful in God; so bless his heart and conscience as that he shall
feel that God is his God, loves him and cares for him, so that he shall exult
and rejoice in this, and find Gods blessing both for heaven and for earth: so
that the mouth of God has spoken it, what ever flesh and blood will object, we
have the sure promise of God, and it shall be found true and faithful. So for
things of this life, Iere. 17. 24. The Prophet having foretold the destruction
of Jerusalem, prescribes a preservative to the^, which if they would take, as
yet their case was curable, and that would help all, namely to forbear their
worldly business on the sabbath, and so do the works of the Lord, and then
they shall enjoy their city, and their houses, and their wealth, withal
prosperity and abundance. So that we see for soul and body, Gods promise
is, that the sanctifying of the sabbath, will bring happiness and comfort to
both.

The use then of this is, first for the terrifying of all sabbath breakers, for
if the keeping of a sabbath, be the way to blessing, as the truth of God has
said it, then on the contrary side the contempt and neglect of it, leads to
all curses and wretchedness; For God has showed that this will kindle a fire
upon their houses; but they hope to quench it? no, they shall not, it cannot be
quenched, one may as well quench hell fire as the fire of Gods curse, in this
life, if they continue still in this sin. And in truth experience shows it,
that there is a wild fire most continually set upon such men's goods that they
come to naught, and if they get money, yet they put it in a broken bag, the
canker of Gods vengeance eats all up, and they come to need and want, where
shall one find one in twenty that be common sabbath breakers, as carriers,
and such like, but they come to misery, or if they do thrive in the world and
whord up outward riches, the curse of God seises more violently on their
souls, and this is the greatest plague of all, for now it shows that God has
no purpose to do them good, for those whom he loves he corrects, and this is
the sorest misery that can be for a sinner to thrive in his sin, this
hardens his heart, and makes him run with full course to hell, as no such men
is seen, they be the most wicked and disordered persons that can be, they
profit nothing by reading Gods word, hearing works not in them, they have no
affection in prayer, but even as dead stones; no spiritual thing can work
upon them for their good, but every wicked and worldly thing, has strength
and power enough to work on them, for their greater hurt. So that in truth,
God shows how he likes of their course, and this should terrify them from
this so dangerous and miserable a course of living.

Secondly, since God does promise a blessing upon those that sanctify his
sabbath, that they shall thrive in the Lords house, and in religion, and in
other worldly matters, so far as may stand with true prosperity, since he
has spoken this, and that must stand which goes out of his mouth, therefore it
is for their comfort, that the blessing of God shall attend upon them whether
they have little or much; If they have abundance, the abundance shall be for
their good, to be more abundant in good; and if they have but from hand to
mouth, God will so provide, that yet they shall not want necessary things, but
he that brings the day, will bring food and maintenance for the day, so that
he need not care for to morrow, but cast his care upon God, whose truth it
concerns to care for him: and this they are sure off, they shall have a soft
heart, and a quiet conscience, and shall receive comfort from Gods promises, and
if one thrive in Gods house, he need not care carkinglie and distrustfullie,
how he shall do in his own house. One may know how he shall speed at home,
by looking how he serves God in the Church. If he keep an holy rest, with
an holy heart, holylie, he shall have rest to his soul, peace and joy to his
conscience, and be set in so sure an outward estate, as that nothing shall
befall him for his hurt.

But then if one will have this blessing, he must keep these three rules.
First, let him make it a delight to keep the sabbath, and his joy to do the
works of the sabbath, let him long for it before it comes, and be glad of it
when it comes, because it frees him from all worldly cares and thoughts, and
then he has a commandment more especially, to cast his care upon God, and
not to trouble himself a whit with them.

And so he says in Isay, call it a delight to consecrate it to the Lord, take
as much pleasure in doing the exercises of religion, as the works of your
calling. And more to, indeed; for they be more easy and comfortable by
far: we must come as hungry to the house of God, and with as good an
appetit, as to our dinner or supper at home, for in deed God keeps the best
house, he makes the best cheer, if we can bring a good stomach to the bread
of life, that he breaks unto us. But if one be loath to come, and must be
drawn as a bear to the stake, let him make account that the preacher will
bait him, and trouble his conscience, for comfort he can look for none;
Therefore if we would have a blessing by the sabbath, let us keep it
cherfullie, knowing that God loves a cherfull giver.

Secondly, one must labor to do all the duties of the sabbath, those that
must be done before the sermon, and those that must be done after; let no
ordinance escape undone, use meditation on Gods word and works, heareing,
reading, praying, singing psalms, conference, works of mercy, and of every
thing, something, so far as we have ability and opportunity. But if we will
perform them scambling lie, do this, and leave that, undone; either make no
preparation before, or no application after, either no public; or no private,
then it may be, he shall find some blessings, but the fewer of these he
performs, the fewer blessings he shall have; he that does the work of God by
halfes, shall (and it is just he should) find the comfort and benefit of them
by halfes.

Thirdly, as one must do all the duties, and that with delight cherfullie, so
he must keep the whole day; he must do all the duties and also spend all the
time in these duties; he must continue from the beginning to the ending. As in
Psalm. 92. 2. To declare Gods loving kindness in the morning, and his truth at
night. So that the sabbath must be spent both morning, night and all the day,
in holy duties. One must forbear worldly business; yea, worldly thoughts,
the whole four and and twenty hours, for if one give his thoughts liberty
to run after matters of the world in the night, he breaks the sabbath in one
part; sleep one may lawfully, but his sleep must be sweetened with holy
exercises, and so sanctified unto him, as in it he must also keep an holy
rest. And here many fail, that out of the Church will be talking with their
neighbors, and musing with themselves about earthly businesses and affairs,
and think they have made a good hand if they spend the most part of the day
till after the evening exercises in works of religion, and then they make no
question to take their recreation or to go about their businesses if occation
be. But he that commands to keep it in the church, bids us keep it in the
house, as to hear him, and speak to him in public, so to speak to him out
of our hearts in private, and not to give our selves leave to think, the least
thought of any worldly business.

Now then we if seem to make conscience of the sabbath, and yet do want that
blessing which we do look for, let us look to our selves, and we shall see
that we are halting in some one of these, either we keep the sabbath
lumpishlie and heavily, that it seems as a tedious burden unto us, or else
we do some one or two duties, and leave the rest undone; or else if we do
all the duties to be done, we want here that we observe not the whole day, but
keep some part of it from god, to our selves, and accordingly as any man comes
short in any of these duties, so he comes short of the fruit of the sabbath;
But if one labor with joy, to do all the duties of the sabbath, the whole
day, he shall find in his own soul, that it is in truth a day of blessing,
and brings more joy and comfort, yea, and a greater blessing with it, then all
the week besides. And so much for this fourth commandment of the sabbath, and
the reasons of it.

The sum of the fifth Commandment is to show what duties we owe one to
another in respect of their and our place.
The persons in this commandment are either with authority either private
either further from equality as parents and children. masters and servants.
nearer equality as husband and wife.
public in Church. Commonwealth.

without authority in age gifts


Exodus 20. 12. Honor thy father and thy mother, etc.
Hitherto the duties of piety to God out of the first Table have bin handled.
Now follow the commandments of the second table concerning the duties of
righteousness to our neighbors. This is the first commandment of the second
table; upon which all the rest do depend, as in the first table the keeping of
all the commandments following, did depend on the keeping of the first
commandment of the table, so here if this first commandment be well observed
both of governors and inferiors, there could be no disorder against any other
of the commandments following. For all disorders in the other commandments of
the second Table do flow from hence; that either superiors are negligent in
performing their duty of governing, or else inferiors are proud and
stubborn, and refuse to obey their superiors. The words contain a
commandment, and the reason of it. The commandment in those words: Honor
thy father and mother. The reason in the words following: That thy days may be
long in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Because the benefit of
obedience is not so great to the superiors, which are obeyed, as to him that
does for conscience sake obey them; they shall not be gainers so much as
himself, for he shall gain to himself a long and happy life.

Honor. To honor is to reverence in heart, and perform all outward duties.

Father. That is, all superiors, in what place soever set above thee.

Thy father. This is the first reason whereby God would move inferiors to
obey, because he is thy father. In that God makes this his reason why the
child should obey his father, because he is his father, We gather this
doctrine. That the chief motive to obedience must be Gods ordinance. If God
have made him the instrument of thy life and maintenance, and have set him over
thee, thou must for this cause perform all duty of honor unto him: So in the
Proverbs. Honor thy father that begat thee, and thy mother that bare thee: as
if he had said, honor thy parents, and be duetifull, unto them, not because
they be rich or in great place or for any other respect but this, because they
be thy parents; be they father and mother? how ever rich or poor, thou must
be duetifull unto them. So the Apostle speaks to wives.

Wives obey your own husbands. Using this as a reason, if they be your
husbands. If God has set them over you, as your head and governor, you must
submit your selves to them for this cause, and in obedience to Gods
commandment, howsoever they be otherwise froward and foolish, if they be
yours, then you must perform your duty unto them. So for servants, the point
is not whether he be a poor man or rich, a simple man and ignorant, or wise
and discreet, but is he a master? has God made him a governor? then for the
time that one is a servant, he stands in the place of Christ in his family, and
is to be obeyed, as if he were the most honorable and wise in the world.

The use of this is to consute those wretched and miserable children that take
occasion to be undutiful, because their parents be poor and low, and in
disgrace and small account among men. But be they so? then the child ought so
much the more to honor them, or else he adds afflication to afflication.
Therefore so far should he be from contemning his parents, because they be
low and afflicted, as that he should reverence them, and honor them the more,
that he may be a comfort and relief unto them in their trouble.

For, for the child to honor his parents, when all the world honors them, and
has them in account, and to be dutiful then when they can either reward him
if he be dutiful, or punish him for his undutifulness; is no trial of his
honesty and obedience to God: For then it may be he does it either upon
constraint, because he dare do no otherwise, or of a base mind, because he
loves and gapes after his fathers wealth, more then for conscience to Gods
commandment. But then the obedience is most sound and acceptable to God, when
there be fewest worldly means to provoke one unto it. So for the wife or
servant to say, O had I an husband or master of such great account, of such
gifts and wisdom that could promote and reward me; then I could frame to
obedience. Nay, for he that is not faithful in the least will not be faithful
in the most. And God accounts not of that obedie^nce, or reverence which
proceeds not from conscience of his commandment, but from hope of some outward
reward.

Therefore it is our duty not so much to trouble our selves in enquiring what
heads other have, as to labor to make best of our own. For this in the
natural body we see, that if one have an head full of infirmities, and
subject to diseases, he will not therefore knock it against the walls, and
contemn it: but he thinks; this is my head that God has given me, and
therefore I must not make it worse by ill usage, but strive to make it better by
all means I can. O but say they, other children have better parents that be
more careful of them. But let such turn back a little, and look to
themselves, and examine their own stuff; other, you say have better parents;
true. But look to your self a little, and think on the other side, have not
other parents also better children, more duetifull and obedient, and more
virtuous every way then you be? Put these two together now, and then the mouth
will soon be stopped. So the wife; other husbands are more kind and loving,
and be better to their wives.

But if you stand so much in examining his goodness by other men's, you will
drive him to try your goodness with other women. Be not there many wives,
more subject to their husbands, more quiet and meek, and that go far beyond
your self in many graces? So that in such objections, let inferiors couch
these two one with the other, and look to their own faults as well as to
another, and they shall not find great cause to complain. O but he sails in
doing his duty to me: but God fails not in commanding you to do your duty
to him. This is the point, be you a Christian or an hypocrite? If you be a
Christian, then GODS commandment must be the rule of your obedience, and not
the dealing of others to you. Therefore this does justly reprove their
audacious boldness and shameless impudence, that if their parents grow old,
or impotent or poor; then they think they may take liberty to caff of the
yoke of subjection, and to grow stubborn; as who should say, that age and
poverty of such like things, could cut of the nature of a parent, and take
away the authority of a superior, and that outward things should have the
chief account, and Gods commandment be least of all regarded.

This likewise may serve for some comfort to these governors, that are in a
poorer or lower condition; that God has challenged unto them as much honor in
their place as to the greatest prince in the world. For the poor man's wife is
as much bound by God to honor her husband, as the Queen to honor the king.
And the meanest parents and masters are as much to be acounted of in their
families, as if they had all the wealth and honor in the world. Therefore they
should bear their poverty so much the more patiently, Because no poverty or
lowness of their estate, can give license to the inferiors to account any
whit the worse of them; and if the inferiors do for this cause despise them,
they sin against God, do injury unto them, and GOD will be revenged of them
accordingly.

So much for that, God bids the inferior to honor his superior, And the
child his father, howsoever matters stand in other respects.

Honor. The duties of the natural child commanded in this word, are
comprehended under these three heads. First, reverence. Secondly, obedience.
Thirdly, thankfulness. for the first. For reverence. Children are commanded
to reverence their parents. Now this reverence must be both inward and outward;
In the heart, and behavior of the body. For if the outward begin not at the
heart it is hypoctiticall, and therefore not pleasing to God. And if one
pretend the inward reverence and show it not outwardly, this is but
dissembling and falsehood; for it cannot be within, but it will show it self
without. So that it must be both inward in heart and outward in carriage of ones
body. The inward is commanded. Leuit. 9. 19. 3. Ye shall fear every man his
father and mother and keep my Sabboths.

In those words GOD commandes the substance of the whole law, both in the
first and second table, and for the second table he begins with the first
commandment. Fear every man his mo there. One would have thought he should
have begun with the father, but though more be due unto him yet because it is a
greater not of truth to perform it to the mother, because her infirmities
whereto she is more subject, make her more subject to contempt and for her
indulgencie, commonly the mother does less exact this at her child's hand,
therefore God does begin there where obedience is best tried, and faith,
Fear thy Mother and thy father. and then for the first table he sets down the
last commandment of it. Keep my sabboths, and whosoever is careful in the
first table conscionablie to keep the sabbath, and for the second to keep the
fifth commandment in duty to superiors, he shall be sure to hold out in all
the other commandments; so that reverence of the heart is required of
children. The second branch of reverence is in the outward behavior; as in
bowing to them, in standing bare and putting of before them, in an humble and
lowly countenance and behavior when one speaks unto them. And this the
example of Joseph shows. Genesis. 48. He was a great Prince and his father but
a poor man, and lived at his finding, he had his sight and his father for age
was blind, and therefore could not see his duty, yet when he comes to his
poor father and his blind father, he bows to the ground, and behaues himself
so lolily as if his father had been a mighty man, and had his sight as
perfectly as ever in his life. Because he knew that neither blindness nor
poverty could take a way the nature of a father nor the duty of a son.
Therefore he being a prince is as dutiful to his father a poor man, as if his
father had been a Prince and he poor, for the outward estate did not move him
so much as the conscience and regard of his duty which he knew to be nothing
lessened. So king Solomon when his mother came unto him sitting on his throane,
it is noted that he rose up from hsi throane, and bowed himself unto her; and
caused all things else to cease, till he had set his old mother in a place of
honor fit for her.

And he would have all his people to know that though he was as wise and rich
a king, and that of Gods own appointing as ever was; yet this his greatness
did nothing diminish his mothers superiority, nor his reverent cariadge
toward her.

This serves to confute those vngrations and wretched children that do not
reverence their parents in heart but, contemn them, and think basely of them;
and content not themselves with this inward undutifulness, but show it also by
rough words, by froward countenance by vnreuerent and unfit actions. and many
grow so familiar with their parents, as that one that had not known them,
seeing their behavior, would rather think them to be neighbor and neighbor
then father and son; so irreverently, and vndutifullie do they behave
themselves without any outward tokens of reverence. And indeed what does the
froward speeches and looks of many children proclaim, but that they have no
fear of God in their hearts, no righteousness in their hands, nor any regard
of the duties of the first or second table? If ever these persons live to have
children and God do not in his justice cut them of, they shall find, that
their children will revenge their fathers wrongs into their bosom, and be as
ready to despise them, and carry themselves irreverently to them, as if they
were to do it to their parents.

The next duty is obedience. which is commanded. Coloss. 3, Children obey your
parents; and he adds a reason, this is pleasing to God. It is not only a
pleasing and a joyful thing to the parents that the child should obey his
comandements; But this is a thing that God takes great delight in, and is well
pleased with all, and on the contrary it does not only greiue and offend the
parents that children be stubborn and rebellious, but it offends Gods
majesty also and greeueth his spirit.

Now the things where in children must obey their parents, are especially
these. First in doing the things that they command, and performing that work
that there parents set them about; that it be never so base and painful to
do, so far as their strength will permit. For though some children may think;
why, this work is to base and unbeseeming my worth, (for as every one is more
proud and idle, so he has a greater conceit of himself, and as he is most
base and contemptible, so has he a higher imagination of his own excellency
and worth,) though they may think the works too base, yet that may not
excuse. Is it too base? I; but did your father command it, and resraine you do
it? Then you are a base and proud person, that make no more account of your
own flesh then of Gods commandment; for so soon as the father has commanded
it being a lawful thing, Gods stamp is set on it, and it caries the face of
Gods commandment, and he that thinks himself to good to do it, thinks
himself too good to obey God. This will not serve the turn then, it is a
contemptible thing in the world and men will mock me; why but are you a
christian and have you not learned so far to deny the world, as to prefer
Gods commandment before the contentment and mocking of men? and were it not
better for you that the world should speak evil of you unjustly, for well
doing. Then that god should instly plague you for well doing? An example of
this obedience we have in Isaac who yielded to his fathers commadement so far
as to suffer his head to be chopped of, and himself bound and laid one the wood
and burnt. Because his father being a Prophet had warrant so to do, and could
show the commandment of God unto him, to prove it a lawful thing he did, and
it was his duty to obey.

If he had not seen Gods commandment, Abraham had gone beyond his commission;
for it had been wilful murder, and he ought not to have obeyed but when the
thing was lawful, Isaac was bound to submit himself to his father even unto
death. So Christ was obedient to his father in the most base and painful
thing of all, for what burden more contemptible then the burden of our sins,
and to be hanged on the cross, mocked, and spitted on and buffetted? and what
more painful, then to undergo the curse and plague of God? yet if he his
father would have him suffer all this, he would not stand with him for such a
mattter but willingly submitted himself to the death of the cross. So that if
the thing be lawful, though it be a thing of no credit and of much pain, yet
if it be the fathers commandment, it is Gods commandment and, the child must
obey; and by how much the thing is more base and contemptible, and more hard
and painful; by so much he is a better child and shall have a greater reward,
for in matters that be easy and pleasing, he does serve himself; now a good
child should serve his father; for every christian child must be his fathers
servant, but he that is undutiful and stub borne is a rebel against God. And
as in other matters the parents are to be obeyed, so espeically in marriage. As
Isaac being a man of discretion of 40. years old, yet would not once go about
to take a wife for himself, but was content to stand at his fathers chosing.
And Jacob would not dispose of himself in marriage till Isaac and Rebecca had
consulted upon the matter, and had directed him whether he should, and among
whom he should chose his wife. Naomi being but a daughter in law, yet would not
be at her own disposition, to take what husband liked her best, but was
willing to be disposed by Naomi in matter of marriage especially. therefore
children must give this honor to their parents, to think their fathers wiser
and better able, to make choice themselves, and as in matters less weighty,
so especially to take their counsel and be directed by them in this great
matter that so nearly concerns their estate.

A second thing wherein children must obey their parents is in bearing their
admonitions and corrections. As it is often said in the proverbs. Despise not
the correction of thy father nor contemn not the admonition of thy mother. Set
not light by them, but weigh them and consider well of them in thine heart.
Now the child is bound to obey his father, as in doing the things commanded,
so in suffering his rebukes and chasticement. Because it is a duty lying upon
the soul of the father and commanded unto him from God; and secondly, because
it is a testimony of his fathers love to him, for he that spares the rod
hates the child; but he that loves him corrects him betime. And then
correction is a means of their salvation and keeps them from hell, for
foolishness is bound to the heart of the child, it is tied there as with a
cord or rather chayned; so that nothing will make a separation but the rod of
correction, that will part them, and he that is not corrected, is a fool and
so shall continue still. Because then it is the fathers duty, and a token of
his love and a means of the good of the child, he must suffer it patiently
and humbly, and not only so, but he must see that he profit by it, and make a
good use of it; for else he makes his father take much pains and undergo a
great deal of greese in vain, and to no purpose; and therefore not profiting
by correction is guilty of contemning Gods ordinance. This serves for the
reproof of such children as are sour and angry at the admonition or
correction of their parents, that although they be fond and light headed, and
have neither experience nor knowledge, yet think they can tell how to carry
themselves well enough, and scorn to be admonished or told of a fault. but of
such that is verified that the wise men faith, afoole is wiser in his own
conceit then ten men that render a reason. But for these parsons that pout and
swell thus at an admonition, the best course that can be taken with the is, to
beat out that pride by sharp correction. For this makes them so audacious when
words are given unto them, because they have not been soundly and thoroughly
corrected.

The third duty of Children is thankfulness to their parents and consists
especially in two things. First, in releiuing their parents, when they shall be
in want; if the parent be blind the child must be an eye unto him; if he be
lame he must be a staff unto him, if he stand in need of any thing, the
child must to his power help, and succor him. And this duty indeed the
very law of nature does require, for the father has paid for it before hand,
and it is but a due debt; for when the child was borne naked without any
friends and could not help himself nor put one morsel of meat into his own
mouth, nor hang a ragge on his own body to keep him warm, who pitied him,
who releiued him? were not the parents then insteede of all limbs unto him:
and had much care and fear for his sake, before he came to this estate wherein
he is now? were it not then a shameful ingratitude in him? and were he not
worse then a beast, if he would not have care to recompense all these
kindnesses and to pay so due a debt? So the holy Ghost commands children. To be
like the stroke. Now the manner of the stroke is this, that when the old one
is grown weak and cannot fly a broad for himself, the young storkes will
help him, and the old stroke fares as well, and is as largly provided for by
the travail of the young, as when he was in his full and perfect strength. So
Joseph dealt with Jacob, when Jacob was in want and his son had plenty; when
his father sent money to buy corn the son would not take it but gave him
corn freely, and whereas sieve years of famine were behind, he sent for him,
and had great care to bring him thither, and having brought him thither, was so
careful to provide for him, and to administer to him whatsoever he had need
of, as that Jacob did never fare better and with more ease in all the time of
greatest plenty, then he did, when the whole world, was affamished for want of
bread. for before he sent to the market for it, and there he must buy it for
his money, but now, that he was come to Joseph in dearth, he needs not be at
so great pains or cost, for it is said, He did put meat into his mouth; that
is, he was a good tender hearted nurce to his father, and his fathers family,
and as careful that nothing should be lacking to them as the mother for the
child, that will even put her teat into the child's mouth. So Ruth though she
was but Naomies daughter in law, yet now that Naomies years and strenght were;
spent, she being young took pains and traveled for both; and when beside
that which she had gotten with her pain and labor Boaz being a merciful
man, gave her some victuals, she would not devour all her self, but even
spared it from her own belly for her mother; only she took so much as was
needful to refresh her body, and to strengthen her in her travail, the rest
she reserved for her old mother in law, and knew well that it was better young
folks should be pinched, then their old parents lack anything. Therefore we
see how God honored her with the marriage of a Prince and great man in Israel,
and gave the son of God Christ Jesus to be borne of her seed.

This serves for the sharp reproof of the swinish, and unnatural disposition
of many ungracious children, that so long as the parents have any thing to
give, and something may be be gotten by them, all that while they will be so
kind, and so loving, and there is such striving and catching, that well is he
that can get the old one; but when their parents are drawn dry and they have
sucked all from him, and left nothing once, then he is neglected of all, then
every day is an year till he be dead, then he is a burden and a clogge, and
he must be eating and drinking, then he does nothing but spend, he gets
nothing; such foul and currish speeches shall be heard often times from the
mouths of wicked and unnatural children. This is the fowlest dishonor that
can be, not to relieve and help the weak and distressed parents. As Christ
faith, Matt. 15. 6. such honor not their parents, those that pretend by
bestowing it an other way to be freed from releeuing their parents, these do
not honor there parents. And for these churlish and beastly people let them
look for it, if God cast them not into hell before, their children shall make
even with them, and revenge, and quitte there parents wrongs to the full, by
the like fauage dealing with them.

A second duty of thankfulness is to pray for their parents. As in Tim. 2.
He commands that prayers be made for all in authority, And if any must pray
for those that be further of in common weal, much more for those that are
nearer in the family. Therefore this is a fault to be greatly condemned in
many, that can see their parents faults and speak of them too much, but cannot
find time to fall down before God, and beseech him to heal their nature and
help them out of their sins. Many have lived a long time with their parents
yet cannot say that they sent up an hearty prayer to heaven for their parents,
so unnatural and unthankful be they.

The use of all these duties to those whose parents are not alive, is to look
that their sins be not alive after their parents death. And therefore to
examine themselves, whether they have been faulty in any of these things, and
if they do repent for it, and desire pardon, else they be liable to two
plagues. First that their children should take their parents quarrel in hand,
and requite their wicked dealing in what ever duty they have failed, and have
not repented of it. And secondly, that as honoring parents, brings a long and
happy life; so their dishonouring their parents should make them have a short
life and miserable, or if a long life, yet full of Gods curses for their
unrepented son. Therefore let such as be now fatherless, mark themselves,
and finding that their children are stubborn against them, and unthankful and
rebellions every way, as many may see it openly and woefully, let call
themselves back, and see what kind of children they were before, how they
behaved themselves to their parents, whether they were not all together faulty
in this point. If it be so, let them confesle that their own sins have found
them out, and are turned open, let them acknowledge that God is just, and has
given the same measure into their bosoms; their own evil is fallen upon their
own heads, they dug a pit in their youth, and now in their age are fallen
into it. And thus much of the duties of children.

Now follow the duties of parents to their children. For under the duty of
inferior is comprehended also the duty of the superior. And as God would
have inferiors to give honor, so he commands superiors to carry themselves
in that manner that they may deserve honor. And does bind them as straightly
as the inferiors.

Now the duties of parents, to their children are either in their tender
years. riper age.

The parents duty to the children in their tender years and childhood, is
first to instruct them in religion, to season them with the words of piety, or
by little and little to drop in the grounds of holiness into them, even so
soon as they are able to speak and begin to have the least use of
understanding. So Proverb. Teach a child in the trade of his youth, and he
will remember it afterward. Where the holy ghost exhorting men to teach their
young children meets with an objection. Alas might one say, teach such
little ones? what good will that do? we shall but loose our labor, for they
cannot understand it, nor conceive the meaning of these things. The holy ghost
answers. Be it, that for the time he cannot understand the sense, yet teach
him the words and terms of goodness, and though while he continues a child,
perhaps it seem a fruitless thing; yet you shall see afterward it will not
be in vain; for the crop of this seed, that was soon in the childhood, will
appear when he comes to age, though for a time it lay hidden, and then he will
remember these things, and that to good use, which it seemed he got no good by
when he was so young, and wanting understanding. Therefore let him have the
words taught him when he is able to hear and speak words, and after when he
is of more discretion, he will conceive and remember the sense too. And this
duty the holy ghost commands. Ephesians. 6. 4. Bring them up in instruction and
fear of the Lord. And this Timothies mother did put in practice.

For it is noted of her that she instructed Timothy in the scriptures from a
child, and that was the cause he was so holy a man, she was a nurse to his
soul as well as to his body, and gave him milk out of the breasts of the
scripture, so soon as he had done sucking her own breasts, so that as he
waxed strong in natural strength of natural life, so he waxed strong in the
knowledge of the life to come, and therefore he grew so excellent a man, and so
worthy a preacher and member of the Church, because his mother fed his soul
as well as his body.

The second duty of parents to their children in their younger years, is to
correct them, to give them correction, which the holy ghost in the Proverbs
commands often, and shows the fruit of it: Correct him and thou shall save his
soul, chasten him, and he will give thee pleasure. In the latter, the rod of
correction drives away folly, this is the only means to make a divorce
betwixt folishnesse and his heart, which are so nearly wedded together. But in
correction these rules must be observed.

First, let it be seasonable and done in time, pass it not over to long, but
begin early enough. So Solomon says: He that loves him corrects him be time,
and does not omit it till it be to late, but takes the fittest opportunity,
when he may with most ease and fewest stripes do most good. For indeed a small
twig, and a few blows in time when he is yet a child, and not hardened in
sin, will do more good, then many tods and abundance of stripes, afterward
if this seaso be let slip: for if the child be not mastred when he is young, he
will master his parents when he grows elder. Therefore let them not get an
head, for if they do, they will prove like an young colt that has gotten an
ill trick at the first, and he has once cast his rider; he was marred in the
beginning, and now you may sooner almost kill him, then break him, and bring
him in any good order again.

Secondly, it must be done with great compassion and mercy, not in bitterness
to ease ones self with the pain of the child, which is too barbarous
cruelty. For in truth commonly, there is good cause why the father should be
as much grieved or rather more then the child, because for the most part he
does but correct his own sins in his son; for if the child be cursed and
froward, is it not because he has seen the parents brawling and contentious?
if he lie, has not his father given him a pattern of dissembling, and if he
swear being young, are not oaths too reefe in the family among elder folks?
if he rail and speak evil, was not his parents dealing a president to him?
Lightly, there be but few ill humors in the child, which he did not draw from
the parents, and that ill sap which does appear in the bud came first from
the root. Therefore in pity, as smiting at themselves and their own sins,
they must give chasticements to their children.

Thirdly, it must be done with prayer, that God will give them wise hearts, to
give most due and seasonable correction, and their children also soft hearts,
to receive it with patience, and to their profit. Be it, that the child do
well deserve correctio, yet to fly upon him in a passion, this is too beastly
a rage. for a cow will not rush upon her calse in fury, nor a sheep will not
deal so with her lamb, and indeed this does but harden the child's heart, and
imbitter him, and make him more stubborn and fearce, and mischievous.
Therefore that one may correct his child for some good end, it must be done
with prayer, and so it shall be done also with great calmness and meekenes,
and without mixture of wrath and passion. For if the word and Sacrament, be
unprofitable without Gods blessing, which why should he give, if one think too
much to ask it? much less may one look for either blessing or profit by the
rod, unless he ask it of God. But being joined with prayer, because it is
Gods ordinance, God will give a blessing and it shall do good.

A third duty to be performed in infancy, (especially belonges unto the
mother, the former were common to both parents, but this is her special duty)
to nurce it. Not to throw it from her so soon as she has brought it into the
world, but as God has given her, as her womb to bear, so breasts and milk
to nourish her child; so let her be thankful to God for the blessing, and use
them to that end that he gave them. For this is so natural, that even the
beasts will not omit it, the poorest and leanest beasts that is, yet will
suckle her young ones her self, and will not be so unnatural, as to post them
over to another. And this is noted of the good women in scripture that they did
much rejoice in suckling their children with their own breasts, as Sarah
says, that now she shall give sueke, a thing that greatly gladded her heart.
And it is noted as a plague and punishment to have a barren womb and dry
breasts, and therefore it is foul fault when God has given a good blessing for
one wilfully to turn into a curse. Those women therefore that have failed in
this duty, must be humbled as having omitted a good duty, that god required at
their hands, and those that have done it, must do it still. For in the
primitive Church, when widows were to be chosen that should have the sick and
weak servants committed to their charge and tending, none were to be admitted
to this office but those that had nourced their children themselves; though
they were otherwise good women and virtuous, yet if they had not been so
merciful to their children, there was a suspicion left, that (howsoever God
would change and alter their hearts) if they were unnatural to those, that
were so near to them, ye would be negligent to those that were further of
them; and therefore they were not to be trusted with this office. So much for
the duties which parents must perform to their children in their tender
years. Now those follow which must be performed when they grow to more ripenes
of years.

And these are first, To bring them up in some profitable and lawful calling,
by which they may live honestly and Christianly, and not be fruitlles burdens
of the earth, and clogs to their friends, drones that must live on other men's
sweat, and can do nothing themselves, but that they be trained up in some
honest occasion, whereby they may be able to maintain themselves, and do some
good to others. So Adam did, though he was rich enough, and had large
possessions to leave to his sons. For they had the whole world to be divided
amongst them, that was patrimony sufficient, yea he would not let his sons
spend their time idely, and live like idle fellows having nothing to do, but
brought up the one in husbandry, and the other in keeping sheep, probable and
lawful vocations. The like is seen in Isaac, who was a great man, and of such
great wealth, as that Abimelech the king confesses he was greater and mightier
then he. Notwithstanding all this greatness, Jacobs bringing up was not in
idleness and sloth, but he was exercised in husbandry, and had very good
skill in handling cattle, and had it not been for this, what would he have
done when persecution came, when he was feign to leave his fathers, if he had
done nothing before, and could have done nothing now, but eat and drink and
sleep, who would have given him intertainment, and where should he have had
maintenance on that price? but having been trained up laboriously, and being a
very good shepherd, though he was gone from his father, yet he could take
pains and get his living, so that every one would be willing to have had him;
and the place where he came was much the better for him. And Jacob
himself(...) till they begin to set up and enrich themselves, by this cruelty
and oppression of others. Therefore either let it be well gotten or it will do
them no good, for it carries the curse and plague of God, who will do more hurt
then all the wealth can do good.

Secondly, for the using while one has it, use it well, be not a slave and a
drudge for his children, but let one enjoy his portion, and take his part while
he lives, and rejoice in Gods benefits with thankfulness and temperatenesse.
For it is a soul fault that one should say: O, I have many children, and what
then? therefore, there is nothing but ravening and scraping: for God faith,
that a good man is merciful and lends, and his seed enjoys the blessing:
he is merciful first to himself, for mercy begins at home, he will not be
afraid to take a good meal, and enjoy Gods benefits, because of his children,
but is merciful in an honest cherishing his own body, and then he is
merciful to others also abroad, he will lend, and do good to whom he can, and
doing so, then his seed enjoys the blessing, they fare the better for it.

For indeed those children are always best provided for, whose parents bear
this mind, that they had rather trust God with their children, then riches with
their children; and make this their hope, when we are dead, yet God is alive.
Indeed if God were dead or should not look to our children, though we were
living, yet we might be afraid, and think they should be undone; but so long
as God lives, use the good means we can, and he will provide for the children
of his servants. Therefore one should neither withhold himself, from any works
of mercy, nor nigardly and pinchingly restrain himself of any necessary
thing, yea any comfortable delight for his childrens sake.

Lastly for disposing, let this be the first and maine rule, that those be used
best, which are best, and those have most goods given them, that have more
grace in their hearts. So Jacob had the blessing, though Esau was the first
borne, and Joseph had the double portion, though he was the youngest but one of
twelve. For grace makes the younger to be the elder, and sin makes the elder
the younger; therefore he was indeed the right heir; for every one of the
former ten had stained themselves with some soul and gross sin, which did
put them out, and therefore they were justly disinherited. So Solomon was not
David's eldest son, but he was the son of his age; yet he succeeded him in
the kingdom, because the other were proud, and undutiful, and there was no
hope that they would do any good in Church or common weal. This must be the
first then, that grace have the first place; virtue must make the heir.
Secondly, the other also must have their portion proportionablie; not one all,
and all the rest never a whit, as is contrary to the common practice, that the
eldest must go away with the whole, and the rest have just nothing, as though
he only were a lawful child, and the rest not legitimate; and hence grows
much hurt and much heart burning, and emulation among brethren. Now God says,
parents must lay up for their children, not for one child only. And others that
if they have no heir male, but all daughters, the heritage must be put away
from them and given to some other; and why so forsooth? because of the name
sake, that the name might continue; but how know you that he shall continue to
keep up your name, or how know you that he may not live so, as that he shall
be a blotte to your name and to your self, rather then a credit? why then
should one for a foolish regard of name, break both Gods law, and the law of
nature too? For God has appointed, Numbers. 27. That if there be no son the
land and heritage shall be divided among the daughters. And thus much for the
duties both of parents and children. So much for the duties of parents and
children.

Now follows the duties of servants and Masters. First, for the duties of
servants. The first duty is reverence to their governor, and that is both
inward and outward. The inward commanded in Ephesians. b. 5. Servants be obedient
with fear and trembling. 1. Peter. 2. 18. be subject to your Masters with
all fear. 1. Tim, 6. 1. let servants count their Masters worthy of all
honor. So that it is not enough for a servant to perform all outward duties
required at his hand, unless he begin with this first duty, to have his
master in an high account in his heart, and to carry a reverend estimation of
him in his heart; he must account him worthy all honor. Paul in that place
speaks to christian servants which had unbelieving and infideli Masters; yet
he would have them count such worthy of all honor; not that their insidelitie
did deserve to be honored, but because they carried on them the authority of
God, standing in Christ's place, as his vicegerents in the family. Because of
Gods ordinance thereof, and his commandment laid upon the servant he must
reverence his master though an insidell. So that every christian servant must
set his firm conclusion with himself; This is master and governor that God
has appointed over me, and that stands in Gods room to me; therefore because
of his place, and the charge laid on me by God, I will highly and reverently
esteem of him.

Secondly, this reverence must appear in the outward behavior and cariadge
of the body. Else for one to pretend fear in the heart, and not declare it by
the outward gestures, this is not sound dealing, but hypocrisy and falsehood.
Therefore the inward account must show it self in the body, and in the
actions of the body. As first, in not aunswering again, if they be at any
time reproved, for any thing done amisle, they must not have a gainsaying
proud and undutiful spirit, but in all good speches and submissiue cariadge,
manifest their inward reverence. But contrary to this is the vnteuerent
behavior of most servants, especially to poor men. if the master be poor
and mean, and of small account in the world, the servants take themselves for
his companions, and not as inferiors, they think themselves not bound to
show any duty of subjection unto him; in standing bare, in bowing to him, and
rising up be fore him; where as indeed, the poor man's servant is bound to be
as dutiful to him, as if he were a Prince; for Gods commandment respects not
wealth, and the outward things, but only Gods ordinance.

Indeed if rich men did carry the person of God upon them, and the poor the
person of an Angel, or some meaner creature, then it were some thing; their
commssion has all one seal, and their authority in both is the self same;
and he that will seem to reverence a rich master, and not a poor, is an
hypocrite, and shows himself to be led by some carnal respect, not by Gods
commandment. And for one to deal undutifully with his poor master, that
beside the sin is a double injury, for this is to add affliction to
affliction. For if he be oppressed with contempt abroad, and be had in disgrace
of others, the servant by his dutiful and reverent dealing should comfort and
refresh him, and be a means to mitigate his grief; but to despise him at
home, that is contemned of every one abroad; this is to lay a greater burden
upon him, that all ready sinkes under it.

Therefore if servants reverence their masters, they must not give them
froward speeches, but even outwardly show their inward account, and the more
base their masters be in the world, the greater reward shall they have from
God, and they show the more truth and grace to be in their hearts. For to
reverence a rich man, that will not bear contempt, but will take him down and
crush him; this the veriest hipocrite may do, even for his own peace. But
here is sincerity, here is truth of heart and uprightness, if when the master
is poor and mean and of no reckoning in the world, then the servant can
reckon him worthy of honor, and serve him with reverence and give him his
authority and full allowance in all good carriage, how ever others do debase
and contemn him.

A second thing outward, wherein inferiors and servants must show their
reverence to their masters, is in having a care of their name, and not blazing
outward their infirmities. For this is a fault of many servants, that being
hired to do faithful service, they come as spies into the house, and to spy
out infirmities in the family, and if they can but spy a fault and weakness
in their governors, then out it must to the disgracing and defaming of the
Master, and to bring an evil report upon him; this proves, that there is not
that due account and estimation, for it proceeds from a disloyal and
irreuerend heart, when one cares not to speak ill of his governors. But as
reverence must breed a good and lowly gesture and good words to the master, so
it must also bring forth good speeches of the master, and a concealment so
much as may be of his wants. And having these fruits, it is proved to be true
and upright and not counterfeit and not dissembling.

The second duty of servants is to obey the Master and Dame, for as they be
but one flesh, so make but one government. So the holy Ghost says, servants
obey your masters in all things.

That is to be understood, that are lawful; for if the master command, to lie,
or swear, or break the Sabbath, that is not to be done; but in such case it
is better to obey God then man. But in all indifferent and lawful things the
servant is to submit himself and to obey. This obedience consists both in
doing things commanded cheerfully, and willingly and faithfully, as also in
suffering rebuke and correction, that shall be laid upon him, not only to
yield to the commandment, but also to their chasticeme^t; and as to do the
work set unto them, so if the governor should administer correction unto
them, to endure it with patience and meekenes, for the time of their service
and continuance, and not to make a brawling and contention. 1. Peter. 2. 18.
Peter commands to fear the master. But what say you, if he be froward and
churlish, yet reverence him still; I, but he corrects me unjustly; though he
do, bear it quietly, submit thy self, and by how much the less one has
deferued it, the more reward shall he have from God, if with good and quiet
heart he can be content to endure it, till God release him of it. for if one
deseure sharp correction, and be content to have it, that is no thanks to
him. when the these has stolen and robbed, and is condemned to die, then for
him to be content that the rope be put about his neck, and he cast of the
ladder, that is no thanks, for he is worthy of it, and has deserved it, and
he shall have it whether he will or no, and every man will put to his hand to
help him to it, but if one have done all good service with a good conscience,
and discharge hsi duty faithfully, and yet not being kindly dealth with all,
but for kindness to receive wrong, and for a reward stripes, then to subdue
ones one pride, to tame and master his flesh and in patience to recommend his
cause to God; this is acceptable to God, this shows a great measure of grace,
and here the less reward the master gives, God will give more, and Christ
will recompense his Masters unkindness with kindness from himself.

But contrary to this, is the dealing of such, that may be bidden to do many
things, but will do what they list; and then if they be rebuked, murmur, if
corrected, straight seek to reueng. This is a beastly and rude thing, not to
submit himself to Gods yoke; And those parents which have children abroad,
and hear such things of them, let them look to it be time, for certainly
those that be stubborn abroad, let them get a little more strength and they
will rebel at home; and he that will take the staff by the end, when his
Master or Dame come to correct him, if the parents allow this, they shall have
their heart full of woe and grief, if ever themselves come to give correction;
and this is their excuse commonly; I deserve it not. But if narture should not
be given till most servants confess they deserve it, it should never be given;
for as every one is more damnably vilde, more cursedly wicked, and all together
rooted in sin; so he is more proud and froward, and will least yield
himself to be faulty. But deserve it or not, every one has deserved more at
Gods hand, by some other sin, and that God should set him in such a place, and
God does deserve that we should suffer a little for his sake, that set his
son to suffer so much for our sakes.

The third duty of servants, is faithfulness, as is commanded Tit. 2. 10.
That they show all good faithfulness. How is that? not pickers or stealers;
that is not faithfulness. The servant then must be faithful in his Masters
good, and as thristie and diligent in doing the works of his masters family,
as if it were the work of his own own family and for himself. Let him look
that no ill gotten goods cleave to his hands, for this is a foul treachery,
when the master gives him wages, and meat and drink and things due and fit,
to become a these and rob him; this is against the law of nature and of
nations, to deceive him, and bcome a so to him that trusts one, and puts
confidence in him. Therefore this serves to reprove such as will be prigging
and filching and converting their masters goods to them selves. If either they
look for sound peace and comfort to their conscience, they must make
restitution of all such things. This is one thing then to restrain one, let
him remember that how much soever he steals: so much he must restore; and the
fifth part thereto, or if he keep it, he keeps Gods curse with it, and a woe
to his own conscience. Therefore they sin highly that care not what loss
they bring to their master if it be secret.

And also in an other kind of unfaithfulness is in riotous servants, that can
rid of no work, but meat and drink, to carowse and drink healths, and drink
one an other under the table; let them alone they be men of proof, for such
matters, but if it be to do any thing of good service to the family, that the
master should be the better for it, yet ca^ do nothing. These be unfaithful;
for an idle person is a companion with the waister, and such be thieves, for
they live out of a calling, they obey no law, nor have any warrant from God to
use any of his creatures.

A fourth duty in servants, is to serve God in their calling. For admit one
do all the former. that he reverence his master in his heart, and never give
him an ill word or show a froward gesture, never disobey him, nor be
unfaithful nor idle, but so careful, that he would not rob his master of the
least matter in his greatest necessity: yet all this will afford no comfort,
unless one have done it for conscience, and has served God in it. This is the
main duty and pillar of the rest, that one do it not principally because his
master commands, but because God commands, not because his Masters eye is upon
him, but because Gods pure eyes behold him, either to punish him if he do not
his duty, or to reward him if he do it faithfully. This is the cheese point
at which servants must aim; Commandment. Ephesians. 6. 5. In singleness of your
heart as unto Christ. And there is a reason why one must chiefly seek to
please God and not man, for if one do so, this will follow, that one shall not
do it in eye service, that is this, when the Master looks on to be so nimble
and ready to do as much as two or three; but no sooner the Masters eye is
turned away, but all is given over and the time spent idle, and nothing is done,
or if it be it is naughtily and negligently. But where this is not, that one
chiefly respects God, his obedience can never be constant, it is but by sits
and starts, and hangs upon the masters eye; take away that and all is done.
Secondly, if one serve not God, then he, is straight discouraged at
unkindness, here is no reward for ones pains, no respect had of ones labor;
indeed if oneserue his master only, he may truly say so of times, but if one
serve God and do it in obedience to God, he cannot at any time say, here is no
consideration had of ones diligence; twere impious to say so, and to make God a
liar and unfaithful. but there is sufficient consideration and reward if one
serve God, for then if his master do not recompense him, he whom he serves
will. As the example of Jacob shows. He serve a coueteous master one that
made no conscience of his promise to a poor man, as this is always the trick
of a covetous man, he cares not what promise he break to a poor man. Yet
Jacob made conscience of his duty, and endured his covetousness for twenty
years space, and served him to with all his might, so that he was pnicht by
heat in the day, by cold in the night, and if sleep departed from his eyes,
and if ever any thing were spoild by wild beasts, he made it good; yet Laban
all this while did nothing but seek to eat him up and to raven all from him
that he could. Then God comes and tells him, that though Laban was thus churlish
yet he could have wages enough and because he served God, God will pay him
though man do not, and so he did and that thoroughly and fully; for by Gods
own hand and providence most of Labans best cattle were turned to Jacob, and
so he grew far more welthy, and had a larger recompense then ever he looked
for. So that if on serve two masters he shall commonly have double wages. For
God will incline the heart of his masters to favor him when he is faithful,
and himself also will fully reward him with abundant blessing in his soul and
body and conscience and name and posterity after him. For no man ever served
God in a calling, but he may as well pray for Gods blessing and as surely
look for it, be the work never so mean and base, that he goes about, as the
minister when he preaches or prays or administreth the sacrament or does any
work of his calling.

The last duty of servants is to pray for their governors, and for good
success upon their labors in their governors business. This is commanded.
1. Tim. 2. Where it is commanded that not every place of authority one is in,
the inferior should pray to God for him, if he be bad to convert him, and be
merciful to him, if good, to strengthen him, and give him continuance and
increase of these graces. Likewise, when servants go about matters of weight
concerning their master, they must pray to God for direction and success; as
when Abraham trusted his servant with a great matter, namely to fetch a wife
for his son: he goes about with prayer to God to direct him; and give him a
good proceeding and event; and where God had blessed him; he gives thanks to
God and prayseth him. as he would not trust his own strength but calls to God
for assistance, so having obtained assistance he lets God have the praise, and
then when he was entreated to stay ten days and might have had all courteous
and liberal intertainment, yet he would not, but tells them that sees God had
blessed him, and his master expected his coming, they should not now hinder
him, and nothing could contain him from his Master that looked for him.

This confutes those that never pray God to give a blessing to their
governors, and to bestow grace upon their masters, and hence it justly comes
to pass, that they want many good things from their masters which they shoud
have, because they perform not all the duties of a good servant, in that they
call not upon God for their master. And those are also reproved that will be
desirous to be employed in their masters affairs, and to have dealing in
businesses committed to them, but they are so presumptuous in a carnal
confidence of their own ability, that they run boy strously and rudely upon
matters, not entreating the help of the great God in things of great moment,
and then it is just that God should cross them, because they take away that he
never sanctified, and if they will not ask a blessing, is not it righteous
that he should turn their wit into folly, and though they go about it
prudently, cross and ouerturne all their policy, because they trust more in
policy then in his blessing? The servant therefore must crave Gods assistance,
that he may use good means, after a good manner, and with good success. And
an other use here is to be made of those which have been servants, but now
are not; this is their duty, even to go back and see, wherein they have
failed in any of these things, and for that ask mercy at Gods hand and crave
pardon, else they shall be liable to these two evils.

First; that God may justly plague them now for their former sins, and
secondly, that as they failed in their duty to their masters, so their
servants shall fail in duty to them, whereas if one have repented, he may
look and have some hope that God in mercy will so order his servants hearts,
as that they shall not recompense his own evil unto him, because the blood of
Christ has washed it away. But such as will pilfer and deal wickedly with
their masters, and not repent for it, and make some repentance, it is most just
from God, that they themselves should be spoyld and robbed without any amends.

Thus much concerning the duties of servants; the duties of the master follow.
For as God binds the inferior to his duty, so he requires that the superior
be careful in his place and calling too. Now the masters duties consist in two
maine points. Namely, in chosing them with wisdom and discretion, and in
using them with a good conscience, a good wise choice and a christian and
honest use. Now for choosing the maine duty and the chief thing to be
regarded is, that they get such under their roof as be the servants of God,
such as have grace and virtue in their hearts, and carry a good conscience with
them. This duty is confirmed by the example of David, Psalm. 101. where his
example sets down a rule how every one should order his family. He shows that
for wicked persons, teltales, proud persons, swaggerers, such as have great
looks and no grace, he would have none of them for his servants, but those that
were religious upright, such should be his scruants. And there is good reason
why one should be careful to take none into his family but Christias, for if
they be not faithful to God, as sure as God lives they will never be faithful
to their master. For all obedience and faithfulness flows from the first
table, and begins there, but if a man neglect his duty where he has more
hands to tie him to it, he will be much more slack where he has fewer bands.
Secondly, a wicked person is very contagious, and will infect the children
with his lawdnesse and evil behavior; and indeed many can tell by experience,
that the ill example, and the vilde persuasions of one ungodly, will do more
harm to the children, then all that many good servants can do, will do them
good. So that this is even to bring a leprous person among the whole, and a
contagious man among the sound. Thirdly, a wicked person does bring Gods curse
upon the family, even as a good servant has Gods blessing going with him as we
see in Joseph. So when an ungodly sinful fellow has the fingring and and
dealing in a matter, the curse of God pursues and follows him, for so it is
said: The curse of God is upon the house of the swearer, and upon the house of
the these, not only upon his own heart, but even upon the house and
habitation, where such an one is kept and maintained and countenanced. But
shall I be plagued and punished for my servants sins? yes and justly too; for
he that will relieve and retain such an one, that he knows is an enemy to
God, must needs open his doors to the curse of God. So that if one would not
have the curse of God to rest upon his house, nor unfaithfulness in his
servants, nor his house poisoned with that leprosy, which, only the blood of
Christ can heal, let him take good advice in chosing his servants, and in
planting his family.

And thus wisely men can deal for other matters, for he that purposes to
plant him a good orchard, will not run to every hedge and every grove, and
all the bramble bushes he can see, and thence take him plants for his orchard;
but if he hope for any benefit by his orchard, he will make prousion for the
best graffes and sciences he can get, and those will he set in his orchard, and
so he hopes it may hereafter turn him to good profit. But if one would say,
why I hope, and I look to have as fruitful and commodious an orchard as any
man in the parish; but what does he in the mean while, what course takes he in
planting it, why heeres a bryer and there is a crabtree, and there a thorn;
these be all the plants he looks for, and hence he cuts all his sciences; why
then it is plain he does but dissemble, he is not in good earnest. So for
those that be sheepemasters and hope for commodity that way, they will enquire
and mark out of what ground, the sheep they purpose to buy come, where they
were bred, and if they were bred in a rotten ground, especially if they have a
rotten bleake too, he will not put them in his fold, nor let them come among
the rest, least they should be all infected. Will one deal thus for his
orchard, and for his sheep, and should he not consider likewise in planting
his family? When he takes a servant into his fold, out of what pasture comes
he? has he been brought up in a rotten ground? In a place of disorder of
riot, of swearing of breaking the Sabbath, and such like? and has he a rotten
bleake? will swear, will he lie, will he speak filthily, does he look like a
swaggerer, and like a ruffian? and will you venture on yet? then you are a
foolish master, and love neither your self, nor your house, nor children, if
you take such unto them, that will either infect them if they be not very
good, or if they be, will vex and molest them.

Therefore here many masters are to be reproved; that scorn to be admonished
of the minister, but God will find them out, that use more care by far in
planting their orchards, and chosing sheep to breed, then they do in planting
their family and chosing out servants. Such as may bring glory to God, and
profit to the Church, and be for their own commodity also. And yet this folly
reigns in them too, that of all men they are the most ready, to complain of
ill servants, and how never any was so troubled as they, with untrusty
servants, that they must still be changing. As if one should say, never any
man had so bad an orchard, why? what is the matter? you see others have pears,
and apples, and plums, and good fruit; and I come to mine, and find nothing but
hips and hawes, and sloes. I pray you what did you plant there then? did not
you set thorns and brambles? and can you look for better commodity of such
wares? Therefore even thank your self, and your own folly, that could make
no better a choice at the first; so for these masters; will they take servants
at all adventures, and then cry out, they be not faithful? let them blame
themselves then, that would not at the first see they were religious, before
they entertained them.

It is then a great and common fault amongst most masters, that have no regard
of grace and religion; but if he be such an one as will take a little wages,
and please him in every thing, and serve his lust; take him, what ever he be,
papist, atheist, swaggerer, these, drunkard, or anything, care not. That is
the least part of their thought. But no man shall have Gods blessing in his
service, unless he will choose such as will serve God.

The second point of the masters duty is in using, and that when they dwell
together in part. direction in recompense. matters of religion. matters of
calling.

For direction in matters of religion and Gods service, the master must look
that they come to the public assemblies in due time, and that they tarry it
out, and sit in a convenient place where they may hear and learn, and not in
such by-corners and obscure odd places, where they spend their time in prating
or scoffing or sleeping or such like. This is no good direction in the master,
when he lets his servants come into the Church to proclaim their own shame
and his disgrace. Therefore first he must deal with them plainly; you must
serve God, if ye serve me, and be religious in Gods house if ye will have any
countenance in my house. Secondly, for the works and business of their
calling, the masters direction is necessary, and he must appoint the work,
and set every one his place and duty which he must do, else the house may be
full of servants, and full of confusion, and nothing be well done or in any
good order. And this is commended in the virtuous woman, Proverbs. 31. that she
gives her servants their portion of meat and of work; the master therefore
that the house may be well ordered, must let every one know his place and
calling, and his task, that the weaker may have the weaker work, and the
stronger the stronger. For the master must consider his work and business
that is to be done, and what his servants can do, so that none of them may be
oppressed, nor any be idle; for if either of these things come to pass, that
his servants be either ouerburthened or else may loyter, it is for want of good
direction in the governor, the house might be enriched, every thing might be
done in good order, and would fall out in their just and due compass, when
every one were diligent in his place, and set to do that thing to which he
was most sit.

For want of this it comes to pass, that many foolish masters when they see
things fall out amiss, and there is not that good order that should be, are
ready to chafe and fret, and then they cry out, what disorder? And so they
may well enough indeed; for there is disorder and confusion, but where begins
it? Is it not from the disordered government and governor? because he
performs not his duty well, the others can do no good. Like as if a foolish
pilot at the stern, should never give any direction to those in other offices
about the ship, when, and what they should do, he might sweat and toil
himself, but the ship might be dashed against every rock, and sink well
enough, and all through his folly in want of good guiding. But if the master be
diligent in his place to direct his servants, and to appoint them what is to be
done, then if he see any fault and negligence, he may and must let them hear
of it. And if admonition will not do, nor a rebuke serve the turn, then
chasticement and correction must follow, for the rod is for the fools back.
But always in correction, these rules must be observed.

First, that it be not in passion to ease ones self by the servants pain, but
with compassion to help him out of his sin. Secondly, that it be joined with
prayer, or else it is not instruction but revenge. Thirdly, that for ordinary,
and lesser one take not notice of them, but let them slip: as in Ecclesiast. 7.
23. he says: Give not thine heart to all the words that men speak, least thou
hear thy servant cursing thee, for oftentimes thine heart knows that thou
also have cursed others. Solomon would not have one have too quick an ear to
mark and take notice of the ill speeches of his servants, and he adds a good
reason; be cause no man is so good, but his heart can tell him that he himself
has spoken as bad words against his governors and betters, so that since he
himself has been injurious to his superiors, it should make him something
to pass by the injury of his inferiors. Thus much for direction.

The next part of the masters duty to the servant that dwells with him, is
in recompense, as he must be diligent in setting him to work; and look that
he discharge the task laid upon him according to his strength; so there must
be recompense made first in wages, and that proportionable to the measure of
their work which they do, and paid also in the time, appointed. The master
must not put of his servant from day to day, to make him groan and sigh to
God, or else for need to theeue and steal from him. It is a very dishonest
thing in the master not to pay his servants due wages, and that in due season,
keeping day and in good terms, and willingly and cheerfully. It is a most
indigne and base thing, that the servant should see such a greedy
covetousness in him, as that he pays him with grudging, and so unwillingly,
that he must be constrained to beg for it, as if it were an alms. And thus he
diminishes his authority, and lessons his reverence exceedingly, when they
can perceive that he does wholly serve himself, and is willing enough to have
as much work done as may be, but is very loath to part with any wages.

A second matter of recompense is in the diet, and food of his servants. While
they be well and in good health, he must see that they have wholesome and
sufficient food, and that in due season, and convenient time. For it is more
then barbarous cruelty for one to ride his horse hard all day, and at night
rain him up without meat, to repair and sustain his strength; and he were
worse then a beast that would deal so with a beast, but much more to deal
thus with a man that bears the image of God, and is redeemed with the blood of
Christ Jesus as well as the master, to wear him out, and spend his body, and
not allow him that nourishment, that may keep his strength in repair, is more
then barbarous and sauge cruelty. Therefore while the servant is in health, the
master must see that he have all things necessary for health and sustenance,
such for quality as it be wholesome, and so much for quantity as it be
sussicie^t, that he be no way pinched or weakened. Then if the servant be sick,
he must provide to his power all good means for his health and recovery, and
for the good looking to hime in time of his weakness. And this is noted as a
matter of commendation in the Centurion, that when his servant was sick, he
went to Christ and took the best way he could device for his help and ease.
For the master in the sickness of his servant is to look to the hand of God
that smites him, and thereby to be humbled; for it is a chasticement laid upon
him that God by his own hand immediately should turn those into a burden and
trouble to him, that he did hire for helps and for his profit, and so hoped
they should have. Therefore he must submit himself to God, and as well in
obedience to God, as in a pitiful heart to his distressed, be diligent both to
pray to God for him, and to use all lawful and good means for his ease and
succor. Thus men will deal with very beasts; If it be an horse or ox, that
when he was well, was very serviceable, and by it painful travel brought in
much profit unto the master, if he be diseased by some sore or sickness, he
will let him have rest and look carefully to him, that he want nothing, and
take the counsel of some one that is skillful in such matters, for some drench
or medecin that may help his horse or ox, and restore his health. Thus men
will deal with a beast, but what master almost can be found, that does not
plainly prove, that he loves a beast more for his commodity sake, then he
does a man for Gods sake? for he that will be content to be at cost and
charges, and some trouble also with his diseased and sick horse, his sick
servant may lie and die, and he will never come at him, nor seek any remedy
for him, but rather increase his pains by murmuring and grudging, that he
eats, and he drinks and does nothing but spend, and burden the family. And
when Gods hand has restrained him from working, and not his own negligence,
and ofttimes when he gets his weakness by faithful and painful service
done to him, then some are so cruelly and miserably coueteous, as that they
will abate so much of their wages, as the time of their sickness comes to. And
when he suffers pain and grief enough by his sickness, then he that should
look to healing of him, does not only neglect that, but also, gleanes from
him, and robs him of his wages, which is a double sin and injury. So much
for the duty of masters to their servants that dwell with them.

Now when they part, the masters duty is to look that he send not his servant
away empty, but do something for him according to the blessing of God upon
him by his servants labor, and according to his own ability; and look how
much longer time the servant has been with him, and how much more faithful
service he has done to him, by so much more must he be frank and bountiful
in respecting and believing him. Contrary to this is the dealing of those
shisters, that must have new servants every year, for that either they be so
bad themselves as none will stay with them longer then needs they must, or else
they intertaine such ungodly persons into there family, as it is not sit that
they should tarry long in any place. And those that take in such manner
servants as deserve noe recompense, because they employ their labor about such
things, as the family has no benefit by them, but are fit only to serve their
Masters lust, in vanity and foolishness: for such it is just that though
they dwell many years in a place they should have no reward given them,
because their labor has brought no good to the family, no body has been a
gayner or bettered by it. but here was a great fault on both parts; for both
the Master was a fool to give harbor to such unprofitable companions, and the
servant was a fool, to spend his time and pains about such base service as
could be benefit to no body; and here it is just that both should be loosers.
But when one has had a servant that has been with him a long time and done
him faithful service, so employing his labor and spending both his days and
strength as that some profitte and commodity redownds to the family; And the
masters estate has been better by his careful diligence; now by continuance
of time and by this profitable society they had, the servant should grow to be
unto him as a child, and he if he will seem to be one of a good nature upon so
long experience of his faithful and loving carriage, should put on the
affection of father to him. For indeed nature shows that it is a shame for
one to put away his old servant, that has worn out his body in his service,
without bestowing his liberality upon him in some measure, according to his
own ability and his servants labors. But it is the custom of most men now a
days (so wretchedly covetous are they grown,) that they deal with their
servants as one would deal with an horse when he grows old and can do nothing
any longer, that may bring profit, even pull his skin over his ears and cast
his body to the dogs; and thus brutish are unnatural men to their servants
ofttimes, toil them while they can labor, consume their strength and spend
them out, then age will come and the bones will grow weak, and the body wax
feeble and faint; one cannot be always young and strong, and what then? Then
turn them out of doors poor and helpelesse into the wide world, to shift for
themselves as they can; and they must either beg, or steal, or sterue, and
thus it comes to pass that many become thieves and vagrant beggars, through
the masters base niggardliness, that would not do his duty in bestowing some
proportionable and competent relief upon them.

So much for their duties that be further of from equality in the family, as
parents and child, Masters and servants.

Now those that are more equal are the husband and wife, whose duties are
either common to both or more particular to either of them. The common duties
are these. First, they must love one an other with a pure heart fervently. This
duty both husband and wife must perform naturally one to an other. Which that
they may the better strive for, let us consider of some excellent commodities,
that will proceed from this love and which indeed will show in their practice
whether their be this love or not. First, this benefit will certainly ensue,
where there is love between man and wife, they will be chaste and true hearted,
so far as they love one the other truly, they are guarded from all strange
lusts even in heart, that they will not allow any unchaste desire, much less
any unchaste look or action. For so in Proverbs. 5. 19. 20. Delight in thy wife
and rejoice in her love, for why should thou go after strange women? As if
he had said, sure enough if thou do not love thy wife, thou will follow a
whoare, or at the least art in danger to do it; but if thou love thy wife,
truly thou art strengthened against a stranger. And so may it be said of the
woman concerning her husband. For it is not the having of a wife that makes a
man chaste, and keeps him from filthiness, but the loving of his wife that
will keep him; and so it is not the having of an husband, that makes a woman
honest, and preserues her from adulterers, but it is the loving of her husband
which will do it. For many married men and women, live filthilie and impurely;
but if they did love one an other they were safe from that fault. This then is
one benefit, it is a most sure defense of ones chastity to love each other.

An other benefit that constant love will bring is, that they shall be very
patient; abundance of love breeds abundance of patience, for love hopes all
things and suffer all things. And love is not provoked, but where there is
little love, their is little bearing and little hoping, and there they be
quickly provoked; upon every light and small defect or fault, they grow to
chasing and brawles, and then who ever was troubled with such a husband or such
a wife? Nay they might rather say who ever had such an vnloving and unkind
heart as I? for if there were that love that should be, and in that measure
that there is that love, they would bear with patience and meakenesse such
infirmities, and would not be so quickly provoked nay not by greater matters.
As the mother that in good earnest and without dissembling loves her little
child though it cry all night and be unquiet and break her sleep and
disquiet her very much; yet she will not fling it out of doors, nor lay it
at further end of the house, furthest from her, but she uses it kindly and
will do what she can to still it, and when it cries she will sing, and in
the morning they be as good friends as ever before, and she feeds it, and
tends it never a whit the less for all the nights trouble. One that were not
acquainted, and knew not the love of the mother would wonder; why? did it not
disquiet your rest all night, and can you be so merry with it now? Yes she
can, for she loved it, and she has forgotten all that in the morning. And so
indeed, could the husband and wife love one an other with such a pure and
christian love, they would bear much, and endure much, and yet love never a
whit the less. For love is all ways a brestplate against impatience.

A third profit that springes from love is, that love edifies; and love seeks
not it own things; therefore if they love one an other, they will in all
things seek the good one of another; and then if he see a fault in his wife
he will tell her of it meekly and gently, and labor to bring her to amendment;
and then if he see any fault of his part, she will with all reverence and
humility admonish him of it. But on the contrary, where there is not love,
they will regard their own ease more then the salvation one of an other.

Then if the husband see his wife in any fault, he thinks, indeed it is a
sin, but if I come to tell her of it, she will straight be in a passion and
chafe, and so the wife; I confess this sin is dangerous to my husbands
soul, but if I should go about to admonish him, he is so hiddie, that he
would be bitter and furious against me presently. But now here is a great want
of love in either party. For what though your wife will be in a passion? he
that loves his wife, would rather she should be in passion against him for a
little time, then God with her for ever. And the wife that loves her husband
would more willingly suffer her husbands anger and futie for a while for well
doing, the^ he should suffer Gods wrath eternally for ill doing. Whereas they
not loving one an other, put it of with silence and dare not speak.

A fourth fruit of love is, that it arms one against jealousy, the poison of
all duty; for love will neither be suspicious in matters of goods, nor
jealous in matters of the body. For all jealousy and suspicion (I speak of
evil jealousy and suspicion for if their be evident and apparent causes and
reasons, then it is just and no fault) but all ill jealousy and causlesse
suspicion arises of one of these two points. First, either that one is or has
been wicked himself, and having been faulty and naught himself, he is
ready to judge others by himself, and to measure all with his own measure,
or else from a doting affection, that one makes a God of this or that thing,
and this is not true love. So when the wife doats foolishly upon her husband,
and makes an idol of him; then is she quickly ready to be jealous, whereas a
true and sound love would work the contrary effect in her. So for matters of
goods, he that trusts in them will trust no body with them, but is always
suspicious and misdemeaning, and will neither trust wife, nor servants, nor
children nor any, not because they would not deal faithfully enough, but
because he makes that his God. And therefore is immoderatly afraid to loose it;
but where there is a pure and seruent love, that will cut of all needless and
misdeemings both in goods and body. This is the first duty that is common
both to husband and wife.

The second follows, and that is faithfulness. That both bend their wits and
all their endeavors, to the help each of other and to the common good of the
family. The husband must not follow his private pleasure and delight, nor the
wife her own ease and pride, but though by nature they could both be content
to seek themselves; Yet they must strive both to build up the house, and to
do good one to an other and not hurt. Because they stand in the place of
Christ to those that are committed unto them both for their souls and bodies.

First then, the husband and wife must be faithful in their bodies one to an
other, else, they break the covenant of God. For marriage is not a covenant of
man, but a covenant of God; where in the parties bind themselves to God and
they be in recognisance in heaven, to keep themselves pure and chaste one to an
other. Then for other matters, there must be one purse and one heart, and hand
for the good of the family, and each of other. But now if the wife be wastfull
and idle, then she like a foolish woman pulls down her house; And if the
husband be an unthrift, and consume and spend that idly and vainly to serve
his lust, or pride or any sin, that might help his wife and children, and
be a means to make them live plentifully and cheerfully, whereas now they are
pinched with want and necessity; this lauishing is a great unfaithfulness,
and comes accompanied with many inconveniences. So much for the general
duties belonging both to husband and wife. The particular follow. And first,
the wife must fear her husband as is commanded in Ephesians. 5. 33. Let the wife
see that she fear her husband. and 1. Peter. 3. 2. The Apostle requires a
conversation with fear. So that if ever the wife will be comfortable and
profitable to the husband and do any good in the family, she must have a
care of her heart, and look that she carry an inward fear to her husband;
for the husband is the wives head even as Christ is the head of the Church, and
even as the Church must fear Christ Jesus, so must the women also fear their
husbands; And this inward fear must be showed by an outward meekness and
lowliness in the speeches and cariadge to the husband. As in the place above
named out of Peter he says they must be attired with a meek and quiet spirit;
she must not be passionate and froward to him either to any of the family
in his sight, but should have such a regard of his presence, as that should
govern her tongue and countenance, so that it may not be offensive or
troublesome to him. And for her speech, neither when they be kind and loving
together must she grow into gross terms, nor if any Iarte or offense come,
rush into tart and sour words, to ease her self upon her husband whom she
should fear. Thus must she imitate Sarah and good women as Peter says, and
in so doing she shall prove her self a daughter of Sarah a true christian.
but contrarily if she behave her self rudely and unmannerly in her husbands
sight to greiue him and offend him, she fails in the first and maine duty of
a good wife, and so far shall surely come short of all the rest.

The second duty of the wife is constant obedience and subjection. Now in
what, and after what manner this obedience must be performed, the holy ghost
does declare. for in general there is no woman almost so rude, but she will
yield that she must obey her husband; but in particular things there grows
the question and in the manner of it there is the failing. Therefore the
Apostle has to put all out of doubt set down both the matter and manner.
Ephesians. 5. 24. As the Church is in subjection to Christ, so let the wife be to
the husband in all things. For the things in which she must obey he says, in
all things, meaning in all lawful things. for the commandment of the husband
is as it were the stamp of God set upon the thing commanded, and if she
rebel against his commandment she rebels against God; the wife then must
persuade her self that her husbands charge is Gods charg, and when he speaks
God speaks, and therefore she must resolve to obey him in all things. Then for
the manner he says as the Church obeyes Christ. Now we know that the Church
obeyes Christ willingly and cheerfully with a free heart, and though the
things which Christ commands it be often times very contrary to nature, and
no whitte at all delightful to the flesh, yet the true Church will more set by
the commandment of Christ then her own pleasure, and have a greater regard to
please him then to serve the desires of the flesh. Therefore the wife must obey
her husband in all things cheerfully and willingly without gainesaying.
These be the duties of a worthy woman, of a daughter of Abraham and a christian
wife. Which so far as she is careful to perform, so far as she may look
that her husband should do the duty of a good husband unto her, or if he do
not, yet God will reward her liberally. For such a woman is much set by of
God, and that not with an idle affection that no body can see, but with such a
working love as shall show it self by good effect outwardly in plentiful
blessings on her soul and body, if she can frame for conscience sake to God,
to yield a willing and free obedience to her husband in all lawful things and
that with a meek and lowly carriage of her self proceeding from an holy fear
and reverence of him being in Gods stead.

Now follow the special duties of an husband, for he has not all these
privileges for nothing, and those consist in two maine points.

In Governing her wisely by cohabitation, to dwell with her edification as a
man of knowledge. for maintenance employment.

performing all due benevolence

First for cohabitation. The first duty of the husband is to dwell with his
wife, that sees there is a near and dear society betwixt them, and of all
the nearest; for she is to him as the Church unto Christ, flesh of his flesh
and bone of his bone; therefore he must be willing to have his abode to walk
with her, and talk with her and let her have all comfortable familiarity with
him: that she may see, he delights in her company and may well know, that
of all others she is his most welcome companion. And so in the law it was
commanded that the first year any one was married, he might dwell at home and
rejoice with his wife for that whole year, what ever affairs of the common
wealth or iarres were abroad, yet he was by Gods laws freed, so that neither
King nor captain might command his service from home, but he must dwell with
his wife that she might have experience of his love, and have comfort by him,
that by long continuance and society, their hearts might be so nearly glewed
as nothing might rend them a sunder. This confutes those foolish men indeed
not worthy to carry the names of husbands, that can take more delight in any
foolish riotous and unthrifty company, and have more pleasure in any foolish
vain and lewd exercises, then in the society of the loving and kind wife; that
are never so merry as when the wife is absent, and never dumpish and churlish
but with her. So if that it may well be seen, that her company is a burden and
her presence a clogge unto them, such as dwell with hawks and hownds and
drunkards and gamsters not with their wives. These shall carry the brande and
name of fools so long as they have no more care to prevent so much ill, and
do so much good as if they had any godly wisdo^e or love to their wives they
might. For what do they but flying themselves into danger and lay their wives
naked to Sata^s te^tation? yea and give just occasion to the^ to think that
they love the not. o but we must have our delights and follow our sports: and
pray you why? might not the wif say, I must have my delight too and have part
of recre ation as well as part of the trouble is mine, yet this would not be
counted a good excuse for a woman to be ranging abroad, but they look that
she should accept their company and be willing to be with them, and why should
not they then be as willing to dwell with them according to Gods commandment?
So that the husband must dwell with his wife, and never depart from her but
upon a lawful and good calling: and then also so, as she may perceive, he does
rend himself in twain, and carries but a part of himself, but still leaves his
heart at home with his wife.

Secondly, He must dwell with her as a man of knowledge, and edify her both
by a good example, and also by good instructions.

For his example, first, he must carry himself so wisely, and so holily, as
that he may see in him a pattern and image of grace and wisdom, he must be a
glass unto her by looking into which, she may learn to attire her self in
all holy wisdom. Therefore he must neither be froward, testie, or lumpish,
for then he shall be hated, nor light, vain, and foolish, for then he shall be
despised. He must not be base, mising, and nigardly, for then his base heart
will breed a base estimation of him, neither must he be prodigal, lavish and
unthrifty, for then he shall so pinch himself with want and necessity, as
that he shall not be able to relieve and refresh his family, and then he
depriues himself of his reverence. For want of this wise and holy carriage it
comes to pass, that many can speak much of the weakness of a woman, and make
large discourses of the impotencie of that sex, when indeed it is long of
themselves, as if the head should lead the body among briars and thorns, and
dash it against every wall, and then complain, what? was ever head joined to
such a body, see how it smarts, and aches, and takes on. So many foolish men
when they should frame themselves so, as to draw their wives to godliness and
reverence by their example, they by rude and absurd behavior draw themselves
into contempt, and put undutifulness upon their wives as it were perforce, and
then are ready to complain and exclayme of them, when they should rather cry
out of their own folly.

Next the husband must edify his wife by instruction, for so, 1. Cor. 14. 35.
the Apostle says, If women will learn they must ask their husbands at home.
The husband then must be so well furnished with sound knowledge, as that he
must be able to teach his wife, and sow the seed of Gods word in her
conscience. And one special and chief part of wisdom in the husband, by
which he must learn to frame his instruction, is to observe those good things
which he sees in his wife, and to cherish them; for nothing is more forcible
to encourage a woman in any good thing, then that she perceives that her
husband does work and approve those good things which are in her, as well as
the faults to reprove them; and for want of this encouragement that men are
continually chiding, and never go about to nourish any good thing, it falls out
that many women which by good usage might be brought to goodness, grow too
distemperate in rage and passion. And as he must labor to increase the good
things that are in her, so also he must seek to amend and cure those things
that are faulty, wherein she does amiss, and for ordinary infirmities he
must pass by them; only pray to God for her. But if it be a thing that
needs physic, and must have a medicine; a wise governor, will chose his
fittest time, and consider the nature and disposition of a wife; that if she be
of a gentle spirit, he may use gentle means which will then do most good, but
if she be of a more hard nature, rougher means must be used, and she must be
dealt withal after a more round manner, but always provided, that it never be
done in passion and before others, but with a quiet and merciful heart, that
she may see that he seeks her salvation and not disgrace; not to ease
himself upon her, but to convert her soul. But if the husband be violent in
company to reprove, of badde he shall make her worse, and more alienate her
from him, because she sees, that she has a fool that is not a savior, but a
destroyer. And for want of this diligent care in chosing time and place, and
observing the nature of the party, it comes to pass that rebukes which in
themselves are good, and ought to be performed, do more hurt then good, because
he observes not where he does it, but reproues her before company, to which he
should not disclose his and her shame. And then also most unseasonably and
untimely, for when she is out of temper, and passion has already overcome
her, then he falls to administer his physic as it were upon a full stomach.
Whereas he should patiently wait for a fit time, and not be so foolish as when
she is gone, and anger has ouerrulde her, then to look that she should upon a
words warning return and come again into her right mind, and upon the sudden
reform all that is amiss, for this is not wisdom but testimony of his
folly, rather the^ of any true love or discretion. But what? shall one let his
wife go away so, and take her course? No, but he must at that instant speak to
God for her, when she is not fit to be spoken to. And afer when the coast is
clear, and all is quiet, then with a loving heart and good countenance, and
yet with plain and evident proofs and reproves out of Gods word, he must
show her fault, that godly sorrow may bring her to repentance and amendment.
And by these means he may govern well.

An other duty of the husband is, in giving her all honor and due
benevolence, which stands in two things. First, in giving and allowing her all
maintenance and needful helps both for necessity, and also for honest and
Christian recreation and delight, so far, as his estate, and hers requires,
and their abilities do afford, and he must do this willingly, liberally, and
freely, not tarrying till it be begged, nor gotten ftom him by importunate
entreatie, as of one should wring it out of a Nabals hand, like as if it were
water out of a flint stone, for this is a great suspicion of want of love. For
love is always bountiful, and besides that it lessons the benefit by the one
half, when it must be haled as it were by maine strength from him. Therefore
he must consider, and before he be asked, provide what he sees necessary for
her, and what may be after a Christian sort delightful unto her, and prevent
her with the gift, even as a father that loves his child will not tarry, till
the child must come and beg and apparel or meat but he does cast before hand
how to help him, and unrequested gives him things that be needful; much more
then must he do thus to his wife, which is the one part of himself, and
nearer, and should be dearer also unto him then any other.

A Second duty wherein his due benevolence must show it self, is in giving
her due employment, he must observe and mark the gifts of wisdom and
government, or what ever else God has given her, that he may set them on work
and employ them. And hereby he shall show his love unto her, and the confidence
that he puts in her. For it is said of a good wife in the Proverbs. 31. That
the heart of her husband trusts in her. And this is a means also to keep her
from discouragement and idleness, and besides it will turn to the great good
and profit of the family. Which confutes the practice of many foolish husbands,
that be busy bodies, and will have all come through their hands; and there
nothing goes well through any hand, because of this disordred confusion, as if
the Pilot would both hold the stern, and hoyst up the sail, and be upon the
hatches, and sit upon the neast and labor at the pumpe, and od all himself,
it must needs go ill with the ship, and that is in continual danger of
sinking. But those gifts that God has given the wife, the husband must see
them employed, and then she shall be a fellow-helper unto him, and bring a
blessing upon the family by her labor.

And so much for the duties of husband and wife, which I do not so speak as
though is were in the power or nature of any man or woman to perform these
duties; nay, by nature men be inclined to the contrary. The wife is naturally
disobedient and stubborn, prone to conteme and despise her husband, and he is
prone to be wandering abroad, and take more delight in any ones company then his
own wives, and if he be with her at any time, he is so destitute of all true
saving knowledge, as that he is ready always to be either light or foolish,
or else sour and churlish, and to do her hurt by his example and make her
worse rather then better, and both of them are destitute of all true and
spiritual love one of the other. But God shows these duties in his word, to
the end that we seeing our sins and our weakness, might bewail our wants
before God, and beseech him that requires these things at our hands, to work
these things in our hearts: and as he has given us these good commandments,
and to give us grace to make our hearts good to keep the commandments. And he
that makes this use of the law, he profits by the doctrine.

But if any be so blind, and so unacquainted with the wickedness of his own
heart, as that he dream of some strength in himself, to do these duties; it
is certain, he never did perform any of the^ in truth, nor shall ever till he
do lament his wants with unfeigned grief before God, and desire him to make him
obedient, as well to give him a charge of obedience.

And thus much concerning the duties of private persons. As namely of parents
and children, of masters and servants, of husband and wife. The duties of
public persons follow.

Which are either in Church as Minister and People.
Commonweal as Magistrate and Subject.


For the minister and people. It is evident that the minister is a father. It
is plain: 1. Cor. 4. Where Paul, though you have many teachers yet I have
begotten you unto Christ. And Paul calls Timothy and Titus his children,
because as their natural parents were instruments of God to beget them to a
natural life, so he was Gods instrument to beget him to a spiritual life.

Now the duties of the minister and people are either common or special.

The common duties which mutually belong to them both, are to pray one for
another, and to give thanks one for another. That the minister ought to pray
for the people, the continual example and practice of Paul almost in all his
Epistles does declare, as to the Philip. Coloss. These. for whom (he writes)
that he gives thanks to God, and prays day and night for their increase in all
good graces. By Paul's example, then ministers must learn to pray to God in
secret, for the flock committed to their charge, that God would pardon all
their sins, and heal their natures, and make his doctrine effectual, to
work grace and salvation in their hearts. And then if God have heard his
prayer, and blessed his preaching to convert the hearts of his people, and to
save their souls, he must not let this slip, but mark and observe and return
thanks unto God for it.

So 1. Sam. 12. 23. The people being affrighted with Gods fearful sign and
seeing their sins, then they come unto Samuel the prophet of God, (as
commonly it is the practice of men in time of prosperity to set light by the
minister, and not to regard him at all, but in time of adversity where misery
pincheth, it is often seen, that men will send for him and be content to hear
him and crave his direction) so in affliction they come to Samuel, and
earnestly desired him to pray for them. Then his answer is, God forbid that I
should sin against God, and cease praying for you: showing that it is a great
sin against God in the ministers if he be not frequent in prayer for his
people. So that though the minister study diligently, preach painefully, and
walk religiously, in all good conscience; yet if he do not pray to God, and
beseech him earnestly to amend those faults that he sees in them, and to
convert their souls unto him, and do not also give thanks when he perceiues
any good thing wrought in them, and pray for the continuance and increase of
it, he does sin against God, and fail in a special duty that he owes to
his charge. For all planting and watering is in vain, unless God give the
increase. And how can he respect any blessing of God, unless he do both often
and earnestly seek for it, and render most hearty thanks for it as he finds
it granted?

For the people, that it is their duty to pray to God, and be thankful for
their minister it is plain. Heb. 13. 18. where this commandment is given:
Pray for us, for we are assured that we have a good conscience etc. And Paul
to Philemon says: That he hopes through their prayers to be given unto the^.
and 2. These. 3. 1. He wills them to pray for him that he may have free passage,
and that he may be delivered from unreasonable men. And to Timothy. 2. 1. he
wills that prayers be made for all in authority, that as God has set them over
us as governors, so he will govern their hearts, and order their proceedengs
aright. This confutes those people, that a long time have lived under a
minstry, but all that space cannot say that they have once offered up a true
and hearty prayer to God for their pastor, that he might be furnished with
gifts for the faithful discharge of so great and weighty an office, never
spoken to God in his behalf, to give him a door of utterance to deliver
aright, and divide the word of truth, to be with his meditations, and direct
his tongue that he might to their consciences, and for their edifying. And
again if at any time God have powered down more plentiful grace upon their
minister, that he has been better stird up to teach them, and has spoken
with more power and zeal then ordinary, more earnestly reproving their
sins, and exhorting them to repentance; yet they take it but as an ordinary
thing, and let it pass without any notice, as though it were not any mercy of
God to prepare the ministers mouth to speak to their conscience. And because
they be thus slack in desiring, and negligent in thanksgiving for so great a
favor, God does justly deprive them of a great part of the blessing that have
carelessly omitted a great part of their duty. So for the ministers of the
word, many be there that can say they have preached many sermons, and delivered
many doctrines and admonitions to their parisioners; given them many good
exhortations. But who of many can say as Jerome did, My soul shall weep for
you in secret; if public preaching will not prevail, I will try what private
weeping can do, and if I cannot move them by speaking to them to amend, I
will move God with many tears in secret to convert them. And thus much for
the common duties of both. The particular follow.

And first of the people. The first thing that the people must perform to
their minister, is to have a tender and reverent account of them. And this is
commanded 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. where the Apostle gives this in charge. Now I
beseech you brethren know them that labor among you, and that are over you in
the Lord, and admonish you that you have them in singular love for their works
sake. as if he said, I speak not this so much for the ministers sake; for
whether ye love him or account of him, or not, so long as God accounts and
esteems highly of him he is well; but I desire you even for your own good,
that for those faithful men of God which labor amongst you, to whom God has
given the spirit of grace and admonition, and whom God has set to watch over
your souls, let not them be forgotten and neglected amongst you, but take
knowledge of them and observe them, and that for their works sake. For in truth
they of all men deserve most to be regarded and accounted of, in regard of the
profit that they bring, and the work they perform, which howsoever it be not
outward, and commonly brings no money to the purse; Yet it is inward, and
brings peace unto the soul. For unto them is committed the word of
reconciliation and life, and they are made disposers of the treasures of God,
that bring comfort and rejoicing to the heart. If then they be means to give
Christ Jesus unto you, if they help you to heaven, if they purge the soul,
and build you up in grace, if they beat down sin, and overthrow the power of
Satan in you, ought you not then to love them, and that for their work and
your profits sake?

But many there be that make no such account of him, and why? Because they
feel no such need of him, they see no necessity of his labor, but that they
may well spare him, they can see no good he does; and no wonder, they can see
none to whom nothing is good, but that which serves their flesh. For as they
account of him so they profit by him, and just it is from God, that as they
despise his minister, so he should them, and make them fruitless hearers of
that word, which to better men wants not a most excellent fruit, according as
Christ has said: He that dispiseth you, dispiseth me, and he that dispiseth
me, dispiseth him that sent me.

If they despise God how can they reverence the men of God? And hence it is
that young vpstart boys and girls, in many places are grown to that top of
impudency and shamelessenesse in sinning and standing for sin, as that they
dare set themselves against the minister of God, and oppose their life of
purpose against his doctrine, and stand as stiffly for the dishonouring of God
and the breach of the law of God, as he can stand for his law, whose life is
nothing but a disgracing of their minister, that in public and veiw of all
the world they might gainsay that in practice which he taught publicly; and
even in the heat of the sermon when the reproof is yet fresh, and scarcely
ended, then in the heat of their raging lust, to fall to the thing that was
forbidden by God, and by his minister reproved. But why comes foolish youth and
boys to be thus impudent? But that they are animated by the froward example of
elder persons. As those young children that mocked Elisha the Prophet, how
could they speak so basely and contumeliously of the reverend man of God, but
that they heard such things at home by their governors, and must needs utter
them when they come abroad. But was not this their boldness met with? Did not
God pay them home though they were but children? for two bears came out of
the wood and slew 40. of them. For when they dare profess themselves to be
adversaries to the man of God and to the law of god, they must needs fail in
every other duty, despising the person they must needs neglect the doctrine,
and not reuerencing the preacher, they cannot take good by his preaching.

The minister of god then ought to be esteemed not according to his coats and
wealth, which is the thing that foolish men do only dote upon, but according
to the singular work, and calling in which God has set him; and which he
will have respected.

The second duty of the people is to obey the doctrine of the minister; else
they be no faithful keepers of the eight commandment, unless they make
conscience to yield obedience to the doctrine of their minister taught truly
out of the word of God. This is commanded Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the
oversight of you and submit your selves. etc. He wills them to obey their
ministers, namely in doctrine, and he adds the reason, because they watch for
your soul, since ye stand upon their guarde to defend your souls from
destruction; therefore submit your selves, and obey not so much the men, as the
doctrine and instruction delivered out of Gods word in their calling. And
secondly, if you do not this, you shall be so far from giving joy to the
heart of your minister (which good people should do) as that you shall pierce
his soul with sorrow, and be a means to eat up his heattwith; for what
greater anguish can come to the ministers soul then this, that when he exhorts
his people to holiness they be unholy, he teaches them to be spiritually
minded, and they be set altogether on the world, he shows them that they must
rule themselves and families after the law of God, and follow their own lust*
this of all afflictions does most wound and break the heart of a godly and
faithful minister, that in love to his flock preaches Gods word sincerely
unto them. I but would some say; what need we care for his being agreeued?
Nay, this is it that many desire, and wish nothing more then that, they knew
how to vex the minister. But says he, make not so light account of greeuing
the minister, for that is not profitable for you; he has the sorrow of it, but
you the loss, he is driven to run oftener unto God by your ill entreaty, and
to seek for the love of god when men do neglect them; but in the mean while,
he cannot with that spirit and courage pray to God for you, and so powerfully
and cheerfully preach the word of God unto you.

This confutes them that brag of there good dealing with the minister, and
thinks they pay him all his dues as well as any man, and takes it as a wrong
that the minister esteems not of them as well as he does of any. But do they
perform their duty? and what duty is it they perform? do they obey the
gospel which he preached and submit themselves to his doctrine; this is the
heart of duty, and where this is not, there is no duty done worth thanks,
least they they converted, they do not pay the minister his due; for a
faithful pastor and man of God regards not so much the tithes and looks not
to the fleece; he comes as Christ says to Peter to be a fisher of men, and if
they will not be drawn out of their lusts and sins by his preaching, it is
no duty; for he that neglects obedience to the doctrine of the ministry, is
an ill sheep and ungodly person, show what kindness he will to the particular
person of the minister.

The last duty of the people to the minister is to perform maintenance unto
him both for his relief and sustenance, as also for his defense against the
wrongs of ill deposed persons. For his releife and sustenance that is
commanded. Galat. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the word make him that haih
taught him partaker of all his goods, be not deceived God is not mocked etc.
Where willing them that are taught to provide for the maintenance of the
minister, he meets with common corruption of men, that think all is gotten,
that they can cosen and deceive the minister of; and therefore carnal men are
never more witty in any thing then in withholding his dues, but he says be
not deceived. As if he had said, you think to deceive an other, but indeed you
ouerreach your self; your selves be deceived at the length; for though this
cunning dealing may happily be hidden from men, and done so closely that it
shall not be known, yet GOD will not be thus mocked, he sees and knows men's
fetches well enough, it is noe coloring with him that searches the hearts.

For if you deal thus wrongfully, make an account that as you sowed so you
shall reap, such as your seed time was, such shall be your harvest, this your
corrupt and unjust dealing shall get but a sorry reward, and such as shall
bring but small comfort to your selves; and in an other place the Apostle
says, if they give sprituall things, is it a great matter that they receive
calnall, and those that serve at the altar live by the altar. So that it is the
peoples duty, freely and without grudging to help the minister with
sufficient allowance for matters of this life.

Lastly, they must give him maintenance against the wrongs of bad men as it is
noted of Aquila and Priscilla that they stood for Paul, and that was not a
thing that he alone was bound to be thankful to them for, but in so doing
they deserved thanks of the whole Church, which received good by his
ministry. And if this duty were carefully performed, persecuters would not be
so bold and audatious to molest and trouble the ministers and faithful men of
God as they be. But it comes often so to pass, that though the minister be in
all things faithful to his power, and bear such a love unto his people, as
that he would part with his blood to do them good; yet let but some vilde
person of a wicked and ungodly life, (as indeed the devil never lackes such
instruments, to vex Gods ministers,) let some but base limme of the devil
step forth to set him self against the minister and to persecute him, many in
the congregation will be ready to join with him, and have their hand in as
deep as any. But others of the better sort have no courage to stand for him,
and to defend his good cause; many think they do not break the fifth
commandment, and yet know that God has said, that he that labors in
doctrine is worthy of double honor. Yet when will they speak well of the
minister, when will they open their mouth in his defense? but are ready to say
it was his indiscretion, he was to hasty and unadvised, he might have kept
himself quiet* and thus either because they be dastardly and dare not, or
malicious and will not, almost none can be found, that will stand in the
maintenance of their faithful minister, against the fury and malice of the
Devil and his limbs wicked persecutors.

But this is a most soul fault, for if any had a good friend to whom he were
much beholding, and of whom he had received many benefits, no man almost is so
cowardly and base minded, but if he heard one rail upon him and abuse him, he
would take courage to speak for him, and for his credit* but who almost can
be found, of many in a parish, that can afford a good word for the Minister;
nay, are not most of this mind, that if he be molested all is lost that falls
beside. Thus much for the duties of the people; the Ministers particular
duties follow.

The first is, to be a good example and pattern unto them in love, in faith,
in patience and in every good duty, as 1. Tim. 4. 12. Let no man despise thy
youth. I but, (might Timothy say,) can I keep them from despising my youth? I
cannot hinder it, yet, Show thy self an example to those that believe. This
then is commanded as a duty that gains the Minister great recompense, and
account in the hearts of his people, and keeps him from contempt, that the
light of God shine forth in him, and they may see the graces of the holy Ghost
in his conversation. And therefore the Apostle shows how he must govern his
servants, and order his children and his whole household, else, if he lay load
of doctrine upon others and do nothing him self, they may say, Physician heal
thy self, and pull out the beam out of thine own eye thou hypocrite: and this
will make all his preaching fruiteles and vain, for he that cannot govern
himself and his own family, how is it possible he should order his flock
aright? Therefore he must show his first skill in governing him self and his
family, and those that be nearest unto him.

The next duty of the Minister, is to preach the pure word of God in season,
and out of season, to feed the flock diligently and faithfully, to intend and
take heed to such wholesome doctrine as may nourish the souls of his people,
to divide the word of truth aright, to speak to the capacity and conscience
of his people, in all diligence and faithfulness, not making merchandise of the
word and Gospel of Christ, that so his people may be prepared, as a fit and
pure Virgin to marry Christ, and so far as he does these things, that in
doctrine and example he go before his flock, he may look for duty at their
hand, or if they perform it not, yet he may say, my reward is with God and my
recompense with the most high.

Thus much for those superiors that have authority in the Church and their
inferiors. The superiors and inferiors in the Common wealth follow, and those
are Magistrate and people.

The first duty of the subject, is inward and outward submission in heart to
reverence, and outwardly to obey the Magistate as is commanded. Romans 13. Let
every soul be subject to the highest powers. He commands not only a bodily
subjection, which may be in the most rebellious persons that resist authority,
and lie open to the curse of God for this sin: but a submission inward of the
soul, as unto a spark of Gods authority and an appointment, or if this
inward be not first, the outward subjection will fail upon every light
occasion. There must be an outward subjection also, in obeying their commands,
so far as they command lawful things. As Titus 3. 1. Put them in remembrance
that they be subject to all in authority, and obedient. But if it so fall out
that the Prince, or any inferior Magistrate command things unlawful, against
the commandment of God; then indeed one must with Peter, say, It is better to
obey God then man. But yet so, as one be content without murmuring or
resistance, to bear with every punishment shall be laid upon him, even to
death. As Daniel, when the king made a wicked Edict, would not yield unto it,
but yet he was content to yield to the punishment with patience, and never
went about to gather a power in his own defense against the king. And the
three Children, would not prefer Nebuchadnezars commandments before Gods,
but yet they did not by rebellion seek their own deliverance, but quietly
gave up themselves to death, expecting help only from God. So that if the
Magistrates command be lawful, the subject must obey; but if he command an
unlawful thing, he must not rebel, but suffer the punishment without
murmuring, even in heart: as Eccle. 16. 20. Curse not the king, no not in thine
heart, nor the rich in thy bed chamber, for the fowls of the air shall
discrie it.

Though the king or any in authority under him do thee wrong, yet allow noe
mischeiuous and wicked thought against them, for if thou do God will bring it
to light. But if the king be unjust and wicked, then we must pray to God to
convert him, as Paul commands Tim. that as our sins have brought an ill
governor over us, so our prayers may remove him, or better him. This the first
duty then, is subjection without gainsaying.

The second is to pay their due willingly and freely without grudging, as Paul
speaks, tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, and not every
paiments else are necessary for the maintaynance of their state* partly that
they may be able to repress rebels and enemies, and partly that having
suffient maintenance from the peoples cost, they may not be distracted, but
may bend their whole endeavor to good government and protection of the people.

The duties of the magistrate follow; for he has his charge to, and much is
required of him to whom much is given. First then, his duty is to look to
godliness, that religion and pure worship of God be confirmed and maintained
in his land, as 1. Tim. 2. 2. Paul wills to pray for these in authority that
we may live a godly life under them. And now that which we must pray to God
for. that they may do, is their duty to do. First then a magistrate
according to the authority of his place must have a care of godliness, and
look that the pure worship of God be set up, and all false and idolatrous
worship suppressed. And thus did the godly and christian king in time before.
As Josiah and Hezekiah, and others whose first and eagerest work was to pull
down all idols, and to exhort and command their people to practice the pure
and holy worship of GOD according to his word; and where this is not done,
the duties of the second Table must needs be neglected.

The second duty of the magistrate is to maintain peace and quietness, to
provide for the unity and concord of their subjects, as in the same place of
Timothy, that we may live a godly peaceable and a quiet life. Now they may
provide for peace by pulling down and repressing the wicked with their
authority, as also by maintaining and defending the innocent and rewarding the
good* for unless the magistrate declare his strenght and show his authority
against sinners, they will be practicing and stirring against Gods children,
the Serpent will nibble at the Heel, darkness will hate light, and the dogs
will be wurrying the sheep; the devil drives them and needs they must be
troublesome, as he their captain is, for an ill conscience is feirce, and
having not the peace of God to quiet them, they cannot be quiet* what way must
be taken then? the Magistrate must make them quiet, by showing them the edge of
the sword, he must hamper them, and let them see that if they be troublesome
it shall be to their own cost, they shall trouble themselves, and this will
some thing bridle them that good men may have some reasonable peace by them.

The third duty of Magistrates is to procure honesty, as in the same place of
Timothy the Apostle speaks. Now this they must do by removing all lewd
practices and persons and those things that are occasions to them, as stews
and houses of filthenesse, as houses of gamning, which are means to provoke
men to much lust and unthriftiness, contrary to civil honesty, and good
manners. These things the Magistrates must reform so far as his authority
will stretch, or else he is not faithful in his place. And this was commended
in Asa that he put the Sodomites out of the land.

An other point of honesty is to take order about the poor in a good honest
sort. First, for rogues and runnagates that being strong and lusty, make
begging and wandering their trade of life, that they be severely punished and
set to work.

That no maintenance or allowance be given unto them, for as the Apostle says,
He that will not work, let him not eat. And what more dishonest thing in a
Christian commonwealth, then that such men should be permitted which pollute
the air, and fill the land with sin? making their whole life nothing else
but a continual practice of filthiness, theft, and idleness, sons of Sodom,
that live without a calling, without a magistracy, without a ministry. That
neither glorify God, nor serve the prince, not profit the commonwealth, but
are an unspeakable burden to the earth, and blot to the state, as droanes
living on other men's labors, and the sweat of other men's brows. These filthy
persons, this cursed and ungodly offspring, and unprofitable generation, this
dross of the land, refuse and of scouring of the world, must be purged away by
the hand of the magistrate, in whom hand there is power, and to whom God has
for this intent committed the sword that they cut off or amend such rotten
branches. And this the excellent and worthy example of Job sufficiently
confirms, who though he was abundant in mercy, and in all liberty to the
poor and needy, whose necessity not idleness made them stand in need of his
help, so that he was an eye to the blind, (as every good magistrate
especially, ought to be) and a foot to the lame etc. yet for these wicked
persons, he so hated their sons, and so sharply punished their persons, as
that they had rather fly to the wilderness, and embrace the rocks, lie among
the bushes, and eat the Juniper roots, then be seen in that place where Job
had any thing to do, or come within the limits of his authority, yea so
infamous where they grown, that men shouted at them as at a thief, and they
were almost quite banished from the company of men. And he gives this reason,
they were villains and the sons of villains, more base and vilde, then the
earth which they tread upon; this sentence the holy Ghost gives of these young
and lusty roguing vagrants. But one might say be they not men, and bear Gods
image? Nay says he, they have so defaced Gods Image, as that they be not to be
compared to the dogs of my flock; the dogs of the flock do good in defending
the sheep, but these are good for nothing but to dishonor God, and stain and
defile the land with all filthiness and whordome.

Therefore those whom God has made the head and hands of the commonwealth,
must join their endeavor together, to root out the race of ungodly and vilde
persons. Which some time agone was by wholesome and good laws something well
redressed among us; but now through the negligence of the inferior
magistrates, and foolish pity in not executing these laws, they begin to
revive afresh, and if the wiser care and diligence of magistrates in higher
place be not, will take head again to the shame of them, and the hurt of the
whole commonwealth. Therefore as they will have a care to perform their own
duty, and wipe away their own shame, and heal manifold evils of the
commonwealth, and hinder manifold foul sins amongst men, and establish a
chief point of honesty in and by their government, they must sweep away this
filth of the earth, and so, that no allowance or maintenance be given unto
them; for the only mercy to such is to help them out of their sin by
punishment, and a great note of friendship and love to God and the commonwealth
is to amend or cut of those that be professed enemies to both.

Secondly, for such as are impotent, and by reason either of age or weakness,
or want of limbs cannot labor, or else if they have strength and use of it,
cannot earne so much as to maintain them and their family; they must be helped
by the provident care of the magistrate, and christian orders for that case,
that they be not constrained to beg their bread; for it is a most dishonest and
base thing, to see men stand whining at the door like dogs for bread, and this
corrupts their manners, and is contrary to all good nature, and destroys the
seeds of any good disposition in them, festring the mind with idleness, and
drawing a thick skin of impudence over their faces. Therefore to prevent
these evils and hurts, the wise and merciful diligence of the magistrate must
take order for their timely and christian relief. And thus much for superiors
with authority. The superiors without authority follow, and their inferiors
and those are either

in Gifts. Or Age.

The duties of those that are inferior to others in gifts, is first to
acknowledge it, and reverence them for their gifts. If God bestowed upon any
one more godliness, more wisdom, more discretion or understanding, though he
have no authority, yet, he has an excellency and superiority above those
which have not equal gifts; and this they must acknowledge to Gods glory, and
reverence him that God has honored. Else they clip the Lords coin, and
deface his image, if whom God has graced with the spirit of wisdom and
counsel, with grace and power over their affections, and such like; they by
obscuring them, so far as they can, hinder the glory of God, and the good
fruit that might come by them. They must then with reverence be acknowledged.
And thus the woman of Canaan that at first rested with Christ, at length
perceiving his gifts, acknowledges him to be a Prophet (for so far only
she saw then,) and deals more reverently with him. And Nabuchadnezar seeing
that Daniel was endued with wisdom and knowledge from God to expound dreams,
more then he or any of his nobles, does confess this, and reverence him for
it. But contrary is their practice, which through envy and pride, set
themselves to deprave or to lessen other men's grace, and think no gifts worth
looking after but their own, and judge all men fools besides themselves. Yet
they think it a duty that other men should acknowledge their outward gifts,
as wealth and such like, and reverence them for it, as indeed they ought with a
civil reverence for peace sake, but no man is bound to think better of them
for their wealth sake; and why then do not they themselves confess the inward
gifts bestowed upon others which are much more excellent?

The second duty of inferiors in gifts, is to make a good use of the gifts
that others have beyond them, imitating the godliness and patience that they
see in them, taking direction, and craving counsel at his wisdom and
understanding, as to reverence these graces in another, so to labor for them
in themselves, as it were to light their candle at his, and to draw some few
drops from his full bucket. Thus the woman of Canaan so soon as she perceived
Christ to be an other manner of person then she thought, she left of jesting,
and fell to ask him some questions of religion, that she might be the better
for meeting with a prophet. And Pharo perceiving Joseph's wisdom and provident
foresight, put him in such place where his good might procure the common good.
And Nabuchadnezar seeing Daniels fitness for an high place of office, preferred
him where he might put his wisdom and other graces to the proof and
practice. And this effect will manifest that one does acknowledge and reverence
the gifts of others, else all show of accounting of them is but hypocritical,
and shall yield no comfort to the soul afterward. This shames and reprooues
them that one may speak many grave and godly speeches in their hearing, before
they learn any piece of one to follow it, how many examples of patience and
holiness and mortification may they see in a good man, and yet be never a
whitte the better for it? God has given so many graces for their good, and
will they be better by none of them? that is a soul fault, and it shows that
in truth their is no true reverence, for that which one esteems and accounts
of in an other, he would be very desirous, to be partaker of it himself.

Superiors in gifts, they must do this (for all duties in this commandment
are mutual) they must turn their gifts to the best good of others, use their
wisdom to direct, their knowledge to instruct, their strength to bear
burdens as the Apostle says: you that are strong, What? we must not lay
burdens upon the weak to suppress them, but bear the burdens of the weak,
to help them. Unless therefore he to whom God has given more graces then
ordinary, do use that which he has received to the glory of him that gave
it, and to the good of mankind for which he gave it, he is found an abuser of
the Lords talents, which gave them him; not that he should vain gloriously set
himself above others that want them, and so tread his inferiors under foot,
or cruelly oppress, or craftily circumuent and deceive those of meaner
capacity then himself, but to the common good of the whole Church, and the
further edification of the weaker; that as he has received more, then so
according to the number of his talents he might bring forth a greater increase.
But for one to grow proud, and set himself above others, that brings the
curse of God upon him, and is the next way to make him despised, and to loose
his gifts which he can use no better. As it is seen by woeful experience in a
greater number, that God had furnished with many gifts both of body and mind,
so that there was great hope that they should have much set forth the glory of
God, and done much good to the Church of God. When they began once to lift up
themselves and seek their own vaineglorie more then Gods glory, and so have
turned their gifts the wrong way, themselves have grown in contempt, and
those graces which they have had, have rotted away, and by little and little
came to nothing. And just it is with God that it should be so, for that man
which will not honor God with his gifts God will see that he shall have no
honor, and better that they and their gifts should perish, then they should
have them to do no good, but set up themselves. Thus much for superiors and
inferiors in gifts. These in age follow.

The duties of younger persons to the ancient is to show a reverent opinion of
them, and to show all reverent and submissiue behavior unto them, in respect
that they carry upon them as it were a print of Gods eternity: which is
commanded, Leuit. 19. 32. to rise up before the hoare head, and honor the
person of the aged. I am the Lord. Where giving this commandment of honoring
the aged, he meets with young conceited heads by this reason, I am the Lord, to
whom thou owe obedience, I will have it thus, and in this respect it were the
best way for thee to yield obedience. So Isay. 3. 5. It is noted as a curse of
God and a plague that comes with the subversion of the commonwealth, when such
woeful confusion should take place, as that young boys and children of no
discretion or government should presume against, and proud young youths that
have no grace, nor any thing to commend them, that never did good, that none
can say that the world is the better for them, it might have done as well if
they never had been borne, that such proud absurd persons should grow to that
extremity of impudency and shamelessness, as to presume against their
betters, and prefer themselves before their elders. Which does sharply also
reprove the customable rudeness of our youth that no whit regard their
elders; To show any token of reverence to them, in rising before them, or
uncovering, but go and use such behavior with them as if it were with fellow,
boys, or playfellowes.

The duty of the elder persons is to give a good example. For a gray head is a
glory if it be found in the way of grace if they be godly and holy, and show a
grave, wise, and grave conversation; then either younger persons shall give
them their due reverence, or if they do not, the sin lies upon their own
heads, and they be blameless. So Titus. 2. 2. The elder must be sober, honest,
discreet, sound in the faith, in love, and patience, as their body decays, so
their souls must increase in all gravity and soberness; and for their
unsound limbs and weak, they must get a strong and sound faith, that by the
long continuance of time, and often use of the means of salvation, they must
get great soundness and power of faith, which may work abundantly in them by
the fruits of love which always accompanies true faith; and this love will
make them patient, not forward, not pettish, not easy to be offended, but full
of long suffering, to be an example to others of meekness.

But contrary it is in those, whose sins of their youth have stained them so
deeply, and so filled their bodies, as there is no grace to be seen in their
old age. Their words are altogether vain, and light, foolish, nothing
sauouring of grace, so that no man can in reverence, either crave advise from
them or be silent to hear such foolish and unsavory talk, as customably
comes from them, and their conversation full of testiness and unadvised wrath,
and bloted with miserable and abject covetousness and greediness, that they
are always smelling earthward, and pursuing the world swiftly, when they can
scarce go up and down in the world. No grace no wisdom, nor any virtue
bewtifieth their gray hairs, these want, and that justly their honor, because
they have the first step old age, but they want the vpshot and perfection to
be found in the way of grace. And thus much for the duties of superiors and
inferiors commanded in this commandment.

The reason is next: That thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy
god gives thee.

This is taken from the good effect and commodity that will follow to him that
keeps this commandment. It shall be for his profit, he shall have the
benefit of it himself. So that hence we may learn this lesson, that the way
to get a prosperous and long life, is to be obedient to parents and superiors,
and to honor them. As in Ephesians. 6. 2. He says this is a commandment with
promise, namely, with a special promise. For indeed this stirs up the heart of
the parent to pray to God for his children, that he would pour a blessing on
them, and that not in word only, but indeed, and in the desire of his soul,
he will beg it earnestly at Gods hand, for so the words in the original run
that they may prolong thy days, namely, thy parents, when they shall have
occasion with a glad and joyful heart to thank God for that comfort which
they have received by the obedience and dutifulness of their children; this
brings with it a blessing of God upon the soul and body of such a child to
prolong his life in all happiness. But on the other side when the father and
mother through the rebellion and obstinacy of a child are driven to sigh and
mourn before God with a troubled soul, that he that should have been one of
the greatest comforts is one of the greatest griefs, and he that should have
built up the house does pluck it down; this brings a curse, and prouokes God to
cut of his life untimely, and his soul also (unless he repent) to his
damnation. An example of this we have in the Rechabites, the sons of Ionadab.
Ierem. 35. 19. They did reverence their parents so much, and had such a regard
of him, as that when he seeing the excessive abuse of wine to drunkenness, and
the abuse of lands and houses to covetous greediness, commanded them to drink
no wine nor build no houses, nor buy no land, which might seem an hard
commandment, abridging them of their pleasure and profit; yet in love to their
father, they kept it all their days faithfully. Now God he comes upon the
Israelites, and condemns them by the example of Ionadabs sons; showing that
he had been a better father unto them, then Ionadab had been to his sons,
and his commandments restrained them from no lawful delight, but only from
sin that would damn the soul, yet they would not be so obedient to him as the
Rechabites to their father. Therefore in the last place he comes to give a
reward to the Rechabites, and says, that Ionadab the son of Rechab shall
never want a man to stand before me. Such a good thing, and so acceptable is it
unto God, that children should submit themselves unto their superiors. And so
Joseph having been a good son to Jacob, Jacob prolonged his days; for he
prayed so heartily for him, that God could not deny. Always when Joseph came,
then Jacobs mouth was full of blessings and he was so nimble to pray for him
with his whole heart, as that he could have powered out his soul in a prayer for
him to have done him good, and these did not go into the air, and vanish
fruitlessely, but took place, and God indeed blessed Joseph in himself, and
his posterity abundantly. So that the best diet, and the best air that one
can live in, to make children have a long and happy life is to be obedient to
their parents. Therefore let children learn to be dutiful, and to serve their
parents; as Paul says, that Timothy did serve him as a son serves his
father, so that a good child should be his fathers best servant. This doing
they shall bring Gods blessing upon their souls and body, otherwise they shall
have a short life, and a miserable life, always in bondage to some foul lust
or other that shall play the tyrant over them, and revenge their parents
quarrel upon them.

This serves also secondly to instruct parents that if they would have it go
well with their children, they must not then so much labor to get great
matters in the world for them* but to take them down by time, to instruct them
and narture them in godliness, and to labor to bring obedience and piety
into their hearts; or else be they as great as they will they shall bring a
curse upon them. As we see in David sons when he was negligent in bringing
them up in the fear of God, but let them have their own way, and could not
find in his heart for foolish fondness to correct them, we see how Gods curse
pursues them; one commites incest, the other seeing David would not punish so
soul a sin, vsurps authority and he becomes his brothers judge and
executioner, and after also drives his father out of his kingdom and seeks
his life, till he died a miserable death and a strange, Gods hand taking
vengeance on his wickedness. An other by treasonable practices came to death
by his brother justly. So all these came to a violent and fearful end, why?
because he would not reprove the^ nor check them as is noted. but for Solomon,
his father instructed him and his mother instructed him, he was kept in, and
not suffered to run after vanity so, and therefore we see what blessings
befell to him, and what a curse ouertooke the rest. So Eli for foolish pity
grew so tender, that he would not correct his children according as he ought,
therefore misery came upon himself and both they died in a day. Therefore as
parents may and must desire an happy and long life for their children, so
they must also use the means to get it for them, by good nurture, and mastring
them to make them know and do their duty* for better parents master them by
correction, then God destroy the^ in indignation; for if they be not staid at
first, they will proceed from rebellion against parents, to rebels against
magistrates, and then they will rebel against god also till he cut them of by
destruction.

This serves also for the comfort of dutiful children who happily can see
nothing but poverty, and are destitute of all worldly means of help.

But let them not look on the outside so much, turn to the inside a little;
how have they behaved themselves to their parents, how have they dealt with
them, what affections have they carried toward them, what good have they been
willing to do for them, what obedience have they showed them? Make account
then that God will bless the^ and succor the^, that they shall live a long
and happy life upon the earth. And it is just that their children also should
reward the like to them, to cover their infirmities as Noah's chrildren did, so
that either God will not let them break out, or else they shall hide them and
not lay them open to their shame. But those that be now so rebellious as they
be sick of the father or mother, and desire the parents lands more then their
life; Look for it, a day will come that they shall be sick of their
children to.

But here seems an objection to arise. We see it far otherwise ofttimes, vilde
persons live long and those that be obedient die quickly* but to this we may
answer, that the reprobate lives but to heap up wrath against the day of
wrath, and to make up a greaer measure of his sins, that God may make up a
greater measure of vengeance; so that the greatest promotio^ for reprobates
were to dye so soon as they were borne; for the longer they live the more sins
they commit, and the more shall be their torments. For the godly if God take them
away sooner, it is to take them to a better place, that they may be taken from
the evil to come. As the one good son of Jeroboam died young, to the intent
that he might not be infected with the foul sins of his fathers house, if
he should have been longer among them, and also that he might not be
afflicted with the fight of those fearful judgments that were to fall upon
his fathers house. And this is no ill bargain, to be taken from earth to
heaven, from the battle to the victory, from man to God, and the company of
his Angels and Saints.

That the Lord thy God gives thee.
In that he says, God gives them this land; This we learn, that all good
things are the gifts of God, as the people of god say in the Psalm, the sword
and bow did not bring them into the land of Canaan but the word of God, and
his promise made to Abraham to give that land to him and his seed for ever. So
that God gives possessions and inheritances not wit nor nature. As Deuteronomy. 2. God
says he gave the Edomits, Ammonites, and the Moabites their possession, and he
did cast out great giants, they thought it had been their valor, but God
says it was his gift, for else they could not have stood before those huge and
wast giants. And he says they shall have it still. So that God both puts and
keeps men in possession. For he gave them power, and then giants could not
keep them out. So in the Psalm. The earth is the Lords, and he gives a reason,
he has made it, and founded it on the waters, all men in the world can make
nothing and when is it made they have no power to preserve it; because
therefore God only can create and make these things he is the only true honor
of them. And though he sometime put man in possession, yet he never puts
himsefe out, but he will have the disposing of all; No man has the fee simple
of his life, the best tenure is tenant at will, and if god call the soul, it
must not take day with him.

Since then the earth is the Lords, and he is the right owner of it, this use we
must make of it; thankefully to acknowledge whence we receive all these
things that we enjoy. And men will say why? Who is so simple but he knows and
confesses that God gives him all things? In word it is true, all most none
but will say so, yet indeed and in practice how many be there which deny it
and say the contrary? For where there is a true and hearty persuasion, that
God does freely bestow all things, and we have them of his gift; These two
things will always follow. First, such a one so far as he is thus persuaded
will never be proud, for he can say to himself, what have thou that thou have
not received? and then he will be the more humble rather, when he knows that
he is more indebted to God, and has a greater reckoning to give; For all
swelling proceeds from hence that a man thinks that he is behoulding to no
body but himself. Secondly, he that in truth of heart confesses he has it
from God, will use that he has to Gods glory. Else if one will say. Why I
know that, what need you tell me that I have my wealth from God? I know it
well enough. But how do you use it, to serve your own lust; so that you
think it nothing to bestow twenty pound upon your filthy lust, but cannot
afford a penny to a poor christian, to Christ Jesus, then you are a deep
dissembling hipocrite. For why does God give you so large wages but that you
should do him the better service? and why has the steward his masters money
but to lay it out for his masters profit? else if a steward should say, I have
the keeping of an hundredth or two of pounds, but it is all my masters and not
mine, but yet he will spend it frankely in gamning or riotousnesse, then he is
eitheir a dissembler and thinks not that it is his masters though he say so,
or else he is a thief that will lavish his masters goods so unthriftily. But
in truth the ill use of goods shows, that most men in their hearts, say of
their goods as the Atheists in the 12. Psalm. say of their tongues, our tongues
are ours and we will speak. And they say our wealth is ours and we will do
with it what our lust.

But it is not yours, when did you purchase it of God, when paid you any price
to him for it? Where was the bargain sealed? What? is God shut up within the
clouds and cooped in heaven, that he has nothing to do with the earth? Nay,
but time will come that they shall know to their grief, that the earth is the
Lords, though he for a while has permitted the use of it to the sons of men.
Therefore let them learn to use God as a landlord, and let not their lust be
the master of the lords goods.

This serves also for the terror of those that abuse the good benefits of God
to his dishonor. God will certainly turn the^ out. Or if he do keep them
in, it shall be but as in a prison. They shall not have the use of these things
by the virtue of the covenant, that they may say as it is here said, the Lord
thy God has given thee these and these things; but thus they may say the Lord
thine enemy has permitted thee to have these and these things. Judas could
not say the lord my God has given me this money, But the Lord mine enemy he
permitted me to have it. And so it is with all such as abuse Gods benefits they
come not in mercy as blessings as favors out of Sion, but they come as curses
to harden the heart, to make them proud or covetous, and more strong to follow
their lust.

Lastly this serves for the comfort of Gods true children and faithful
servants. That since God gives all things, therefore surely they shall want
nothing that is good for them; for he himself says, it is not good to give
the chlidrens bread to dogs; and shall we think then that he will do it?
Does God feed the swine and will he starve his children? And therefore that
which oftentimes they take as a discourageme^t, that vile Atheists profane
blasphemers, and filthy drunken swaggerers have money to spare and carry a
sway, when they be in misery pinched with want and necessity; This should be
a great encouragment and strengthening to their faith. For be the dogs kept thus
fat and well liking, sure then the children though they have not things
superfluous to make them wanton, yet shall not be debard of things necessary,
to drive them into want. Therefore the Lord is our habitation, the Lord is food
and apparel etc. And these things they have by virtue of Gods covenant and as
testimonies of Gods love and therefore though they be not altogether so large,
yet a little thing that the righteous has, is better then the troublesome
abundance of the wicked; for they may say, the Lord our God has given us these
things. Therefore if God be true and just, if he be the Lord of heaven and
earth, if they cast themselves and their trust upon him, he will cast all
things good and necessary upon them in the due and fit time; or if they
have some outward wantes, they shall be recompensed with inward and better
comforts.

And thus much for the eight commandment, concerning the duties of all sorts
of men in respect of their place superior or inferior. The sixth commandment
follows.

Thou shall not kill.
And this commandment respects the person of our neighbor, and commands to
procure his welfare and good safety of his soul and body. It bids us to
love our neighbor as our self and forbides all kind of cruelty and want of
love. The parts of it be.

Forbidding things in Omission to Body Soul
commission
Commanding
What the things of omission be that are forbidden concerning the body it may
appear in Math. 15. Where Christ condemns some as goats, limbs of the
devil, and firebrands of hell, because they gave not meat to hungry, and
drink to the thirsty, and clothed not the naked and visited not the sick and
imprisoned, and such like. So that the omitting of these duties of mercy, is
an indictment strong enough to bring such persons to hell. And Luke. 16. In
the parable of Lazarus and Dives. Dives is condemned for want of mercy, that
he had enough to bestow on pride and vanity and pomp to set out himself,
but nothing to give to his poor and comfortless brother, sheweing the doom
of all such wretched persons; such as John says, which have this worlds goods,
and yet let their Godly brethren want, shutting up the bowels of compassion
from doing good; the charge of cruelty and want of mercy, lies heavy upon
such, for he that turns his ear from the cry of the poor shall cry
himself and not be heard. An other thing of omission is when he neglects to
pay the due wages and recompense for the work of any poor man. For if it be a
miserable sin not to do good freely where need requires, it is much more
abominable and damnable not to give a due debt and reward of the work.

So Deuteronomy. 24. 14. Thou shall not oppress an hired servant, thou shall give him
his wages for his day, nor shall the sun go down upon it. This is condemned
as an unjust and unmerciful thing, that when one has hired a servant or any
to do his work, when the work is done, he should either give him no wages,
or else give it him in convenient and due time, but he must seek for it, when
he should have use of it, for his releife, and God says there if such a one be
pinched with necessity and cry unto God, God will hear and reueng his wrong.
And Job to prove himself no hypocrite, uses an imprecation concerning this
sin in chapter. 31. that if he have eaten the fruit of his land without
silver, and has not paid the wages to him that telled it and brought in his
harvest, or if the furrows of his land have cried together against him, then
let his ground be accursed, as indeed he had been an accursed person and
broken this commandment in an high degree. And if he had done so, the very
earth would have cried, the furrows would have made a complaint against. For
two sins there be in the second table that makes the land cry to God, that
he can have as it were no rest till he take vengeance, the one Sodomie, and the
other oppression and cruelty against this commandment. As before in
Deutrimonie and in James he says, Howl you rich men, and why? what misery is
near? why the cry of the poor oppressed by you, is come up in the ears of
the Lord; When one gets his good so ill, and enricheth himself by withhoulding
other men's dues, though the man should be silent and say nothing; yet his
necessity, his belly and his back, would make an hideous outcrie before God
til he had executed his vengeance. And for sinning in this branch of this
commandment Iehoiachin was blamed Ierem. 22. 13. to 20. verse. Which is so much
the rather to be noted, because most men think that the differences of persons
may make some excuse for their sin, but it is not so. For if any might use
the labor of an other without recompense, then might the King who is the
sovereign Lord of all; yet he being a King is reproved by God for this, it is
said he built his house without equity: how is that proved? he uses his
neighbor without wages and gives him not for his work and for this cause and
his filthy covetousness, God would not vouchsafe him the common honor of men,
to be covered with earth when he was dead, but he should be buried as an ass,
his skin pulled over his ears, stripped of all he had, and then dragd without
the City, thrown out that his carcas might be food for beasts and birds and
what was his crime? why this, he did not reward the poor but served himself
upon them. And this commandment is broken in omission of things pertaining to
the body as in not doing works of mercy, and in not paying wages and dues to
those to whom they are due.

The omission of the duty to the soul is either of superiors or inferiors.
Of superiors as first and chiefly of the minister, if he do not preach and
admonish his people plainly and fathfully, he is guilty of murdering and
distroying their souls. As in Ezekiel. 32. If he tell not the people of their
sins they shall die in them, but the blood shall be required at his hands,
and if he do tell them though they amend not he is free as Paul says, I am
innocent of the blood of you, and why? because I have told you all the
counsel of God and kept nothing back. And for other governors also as the
parents and masters of families, for every man is a bishop in his own
family. For so he says in Deuteronomy. Thou O Israel shall teach these things unto
thy children thou shall talk of them etc. Those then that have no care to
teach their children and servants to know God, or to come to the word of God,
whereby they may be sanctified and brought to salvation, such embrue their hands
with the blood of their souls, and are guilty of cruelty, because through
their negligence they let those that are committed to their charge to run
headlong into their own destruction. Such are those against whose soul this
charge shall lie hard at the day of the Lord; That never so much as will their
inferiors to come to hear Gods word and to such exercises, as may increase
their knowledge, but rather permit, yea encourage them to break the Lords
sabbath and spend it in foolish and wicked exercises either at ho^e or else
abroad to gad to other towns to commit sin.

Inferiors also when they will not take instruction, omit that duty that
should save their souls. As in the body that servant that will not eat food
when it is allowed him is a murderer of his body; so he that when he is
taught and admonished, and casts it of, his blood shall be required at his own
hand, and God will proceed against him as against a wicked person and cruel,
that has done no good to his own soul. So much for things of omission.

Things of commission here forbidden, are either Inward as Rash anger. Envy.
Outward in Gesture Word Deed to Hurting only Or Killing also of Another.
Onesselfe




The first thing of commission that is forbidden here is inward, and that is
hasty and unadvised anger, rash wrath and unjust, as Math. 5. 22. Who ever
(says Christ) is angry with his brother unadvisedly, is culpable of
judgment. Guilty of vengeance and wrath of God. Now not all anger but
inconsiderate and hasty anger does offend in this place. Now that is unadvised
and sinful anger which either hinders one from doing good to the person with
whom he is angry, by praying for him, or kind admonishing him, or else when
it is conceived without sufficient cause, or exceeding either in the time or
the measure. As Paul, Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, nor give
place to the devil. That which was for the sudden and present passion is
natural, but if it lie soking and lingering, and sink in deeper into the
heart, it grows then to be devilish; and so if ones anger be above that, that
the quality of the fault requires, this is rash and comes not through the
folly of the party with whom he is angry, but through his folly that is
angry. Therefore we must look that we be never angry without a just cause.
And then that we proportion our anger to the sin committed against God, not
to the injury done to us; for that proceeds from pride, and is no better then
revenge, and therefore must more be grieved at things breaking the first then
the second table, and always that that does most displease God, and is most
odious to him must do the like to us. And yet let not the sun go down upon
it neither, but let it quicken us to prayer for the person, and with a zeal of
Gods glory. Now the means to keep us from this foolish passion of rash anger
are these; first, often to meditate upon our own sin and vileness. As Titus
3. 2. he says, Show all meekness to all men. I but might some say, I am of a
very choleric and hot nature, that I cannot but be angry with them. But you
your self were in times past disobedient. As if he had said, think of this a
little, and consider how bad your self both have been, and are still, and
that will cool your choler and make you more meek to others that offend, so
that he that oftenest remembers his own sin will be most patient to an other,
and none are more eager and passionate against the slips of others, then those
that are most slack and negligent to examine their own great sins. So that
could we consider our own sins how rebellious we have been against God, and
how often injurious to men, this would make us more quiet and to take more
deliberation, before we were so much offended, it would assuage the laying and
take away the edge of our rash anger against the weaknesses of others.

Secondly, labor to get wisdom, always and in every thing to behold gods
providence, and to see his hand ruling every thing, and to persuade our selves
that all things come to pass by his purpose and direction, and then we shall
not so soon fret against men as David, when Shemei rayled upon him and he
looked to God and did not fix his eyes downewarde only to Shemei; it was so
far from distempering him, and ouerheating him that it quickened him to
prayer, and made him so much the more humble and earnest before God. For he saw
then (and so may we) that though it be unjust in man, yet it is just with God,
and though we have not deserved it of men and they wrong us, yet we have
deserved it at Gods hands, and more to he does us no wrong at all.

Thirdly, avoid the occasions that will provoke us to it; as men will keep
gunpowder and tow, or such dry stuff from the fire: so let us be as wise to
preserve our souls from those sparks that would fire it with anger, as; for
the company of froward persons, whose words and ungracious dealing will much
move one to passion and anger from gamning and drunkenness that make men light
and ready to take upon light occasion as the drunkard says, they have
stricken me, but I will to it again.

Fourthly, It is good to mark and observe those that be stird up with
passionate anger, see their countenance, how unseemly and misfigured it is,
and how rude their actions, how absurd their words, how base and contemptible
all their behaniour is, and the light of this in an other will be some means
to make one loath it himself.

Lastly, consider what testimony the word of God gives of this fiercenenesse
and angry raging mood, and of froward and unquiet persons. Anger rests in the
bosom of fools. Every time that one gives place to this unruly passion, he
makes an open proclamation to all that be by of his own folly, so much fury,
so much folly, the more chafing, the less wisdom, he that cannot rule
himself, but must break out to his own shame upon every small and light
occasion; testifies to all that stand by, that he has no true knowledge of
God, no knowledge of himself, no sound discretion, or settled order in his
heart. Let men excuse it how they will, it is their nature and you must give
them leave, then you must give us leave to give credit to Gods word; if it be
your nature, it is a foolish nature, and a proud nature, and if you overcome
not this nature, you shall never be but a fool in Gods account. Oh but you
must bear with us, and not think so hardly of us for our infirmities, well,
sometimes men may put up their raging without words; and bear their storms
with silence, but it cannot be but such a man shall carry the brand of a
fool, and in his heart he that sees him, cannot but bear this opinion that he
is a man without wisdom.

He cannot reverence him in his heart, he cannot but yield that the saying of
the holy Ghost is true, that a focle in a day is known by his wrath, You can
hardly find a fools heart without some coals of fretting and anger. And these
be the means to keep one from this first inward breach of this commandment;
Viz. carnal, fleshly and sensual anger, that comes from the devil, hardens
our brothers heart more, and hinders our selves from doing the good that else
we might.

The second breach of this sort is envy, a bitter affection for the
pre-eminence of an other above our self, an hatred of our brother for
something that he has, which we would have but cannot. Thus the devil was a
murderer from the beginning, in that he carried such an envy to our first
parents, by reason of their good estate, as he never rested till he brought
them to as bad case almost as himself. Thus also Caine brued envy so long in
his heart, till he practiced the slaughter of his brother, with his hands. For
he carried such a malice to him in his heart, that he could not afford him a
good word or countenance; but what was the matter? why his brother was liked of
God, and better accepted then he, but what fault had he done? This was all, God
loved him better, and well he was worthy, for he was more holy and upright,
but indeed a proud heart thinks all is lost that comes not to him self. So
Joseph's brethren, they carried a dogged affection against him, and gave him all
churlish looks, words, and entreatie. And how had Joseph offended them? what
wrong had he done? what evil had he spoke or practiced? surely none. But he
behaved himself so well and honestly, that his father did esteem of him, and
love him better then any of them. And therefore they take it in high scorn,
that any should be preferred before them in their fathers favor. But he had
deserved it; that is all one, they cannot endure that their father should love
any better then them, and therefore they will make him away, he shall not live.

Now how wicked a sin this is, it appears if we consider of the causes of
the same, and the effect. The causes are pride, and abundance of selfeloue,
but exceeding want of true love; for love enuies not, but selfeloue and pride
would have all themselves, and they think that they are wronged if another
have any thing more then themselves. Then the effect that it brings after it is
murder, if it be possible as in the former examples; and the Pharisees who when
they began to bear a grudge against Christ, because he had better gifts and
more account among the people then themselves, and then were not well till they
had nailed him to the cross. This man also is a twofold murderer, and kills
after a double sort. For first he hates his brother whom he ought to love so
much the more; for as God does give more graces to every one, and so shows
his love more unto him, so is it our duty both to be contented with Gods
dealings, as also to show our love and kindness the more, because God shows*
his, but now hates him for this cause, and he he that hates his brother in his
heart, is a manslayer.

Secondly, he he is a murderer of himself to, for envy is the rotting of the
bones, he eats up his own heart, and impaires his own strength. And
therefore as the glutton and drunkard is a murderer, because he weakens
himself, and hurts his body by excess, so be these also that by this cursed
affection dry up their own blood, and consume their own body. So Caine set
his cruelty on work, first in his own body, and was unnatural against
himself, and after against his brother; first by grudging and repining he made
himself sick, disfigured his countenance, and made him look pale and wanne,
his face was cast down, his marrow began to consume and rot, and then he fell
to take his brothers blood for a medicine to ease his pain.

An envious person then is guilty of murder two ways. First, for hating his
brother, whom he ought to love as himself. Secondly, by entertayning such a
fretting and canker that consumes his own body, which he ought to preserve.
Now the way to keep out this monster, is to get store of charity in our
hearts, and then we are fenced and armed against repining at an others good.
When shall you have a loving mother that will grudge at her child's beauty, or
wealth, or good name? when will she think her child does to well and be sorry
because he is in to good an estate? nay never, and why? because she loves it,
and that is a buckler against all envy.

So much for the inward breaches of this commandment.

The outward follow. And first by gesture, by any unhappy and froward action
or behavior done to despite, grieve or anger our brother. As Christ condemns
the saying of Racha, which is not a word signifying any ill name or reproachful
term, but a cutted answer joined with a contemptuous and scornful
behavior to disgrace our brother. As if one should say what you sir, come up
geape, or such like when the untoward and disdainefull gesture to grieve our
brother makes it a finne. And so the wicked persons first practiced murder
against Steven in their gesture, for they gnashed their teeth at him. And so
Luke. 16. Christ had spoken against covetousness, and then the Pharisees, and
so many as were covetous snuffed at him, they will have him know they scorn to
be controlde of him, and therefore they make but a puff of him and his sermon.
And so Jacob was driven away from Laban by his evil and hard countenance and
carriage of himself, for he could not look upon him in peace as at other
times, but his countenance was sour and lowering as Jacob says to his wives.
And therefore he could tarry with him no longer. And this is so much the worse
if it be in an inferior toward a superior, as if the child or the wife shall
sharpen their face, and look frouningly and maliciously upon their parents or
husbands; this is a great offense, and how ever they may count it a small
matter, yet those against whom it is done, feel what grief it brings, and that
they could with more ease suffer a blow of an other then such a dogged look
there. First then here we are forbidden to be bold to grieve others by
carrying our selves in countenance or behavior rudely and ungraciously toward
them.

Secondly, in word by provoking terms as Christ, Mat. 5. with hell fire. And
Paul 1. Cor. 6. Ranks them in the number of adulterers, buggerers, and such
like filthy persons, and says that no rayler shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven. And Christ says, One shall give an account for every idle word. Then
if God be so just a Judge that he will not bear with idle and fruitless
speches, that are scattred in the earth to no purpose, how do they think to
speed that have not only abundance of wast words, but their mouths also are
full of cursing and bitterness upon every small occasion; if they be crossed
but in the smallest matters, and a little ^ogged, their mouth runs over with
all vilde railing and cursed speaking such as it is not meet to name them among
Christians. Those therefore that find themselves guilty of this that they be
so easily provoked, to such foul and reproachful terms, must confess before
God, that they be miserable breakers of this commandment. For this though it
be a dry blow, yet it is a sour blow and strikes to the heart, and dries up
the blood with sorrow and vexation.

But that we may be freed from this evil tongue set on fire on hell, we must
pray God first, to set a watch before our tongues, that we may not speak
unadvisedly: And secondly, to give us a good heart. For according to the
abundance of the heart so the mouth speaks, that is, the guider of the tongue,
and as it were the warehouse to the mouth; and look what stuff good or bad is
laid up in the warehouse, that you shall see stirring abroad in the shop. The
tongue no man can tame, but God can tame it. To him therefore we must run
that he will take away the evil of our hearts, and set such a watch over us,
as that we may speak good and wholesome speeches profitable to Gods glory, and
the good of our brethren. So this commandment is broken in word. Now it
follows how it is broken indeed, and that first when one strikes to the heart
only without death. This hurting of our neighbor in reueng God has appointed
to be punished of the Magistrate, by inflicting the same hurt upon him, that he
in his heart of revenge has done to another. An eye for an eye, an hand for
hand, foot for foot, etc. And that most justly to, that he should drink of his
own cup. He thinks it a light matter in his passion to strike out ones eye,
therefore he shall feel himself how small a thing it is.

He makes no bones to cut of a leg or an arm; well if he like it so well, he
shall make trial in himself how good it is, which shows also that God does
exceedingly hate this venturousnes and boldness of men, to run upon their
brother in revenge. And that we way the better see the foul unlawfulness of
this sin of revenge, consider what wrong it does both unto the party, and to
God, and to his own self that would be revenged. For the person on whom he
seeks revenge, he takes upon to punish him without any calling or authority,
and therefore is injurious. Why but, may not I do to him as he did to me? No,
God gives no such allowance, therefore he goes beyond his calling, and for this
cause is injurious. Then to himself he does injury that seeks revenge. For
it imbitters his enemy more and makes him more mad against him. And then he
is not sure to speed better, but he may get more hurt to himself, or if he be
to strong for the other, yet he hates him more, and watches him a mischief,
and besides he strips himself of Gods protection, he neither can pray for a
blessing, nor have a blessing, because he is out of Gods defense, he promises
no shelter, nor his Angels watch not over him, that is out of his ways;
therefore he is subject either to hurt an other, and so to imbitter him more, or
to be hurt, and then he has no comfort, for he ran into his own danger,
and sought his own hurt. Then he wrongs God most of all, for he takes Gods
office out of his hand, for God has said, vengeance is mine, and I will
revenge. Who made you a Magistrate now to take Gods turn? What commission have
you to lay hands on his image? But if I suffer this, he would always be
meddling and saucie, I should not have any quiet by him. But God says, I will
revenge. Think you God has left governing the world, or is he a sleep trow
you, that he cannot see these troublesome persons, or does he want justice or
power that he cannot or will not punish them sufficiently, but you must needs
rush upon the breach, and pass sentence your self?

Nay, you do God great wrong, he has said he will do and will you presume to
step before him and say I will do it my self. But God is fittest to reward
and revenge injuries for he is not partial, and he tries the hearts and sees
all circumstances, why he hated you, how long, and with what mind he did thus
and thus to you, and he also can and will proportion the punishment to the
fault, whereas commonly if men might carue to themselves here, they would cut a
great deal to deep, or be to sparing the one. But since God can do it in
best time and best measure and manner, and has said he will do it, what
should you do meddling with reueng? unless you will hurt your self, wrong an
other and shoulder God out of his place.

Now for murder. That is either Secret or Open.

Secret as by poison or some cunning device, such as was Ahabs device, he would
not openly murder Naboth, but he lets Iesabell have his ring and concents and
conceales the matter of that cursed and bloody fetch against Naboth. Therefore
the holy Ghost terms Ahab no better then a murderer. In like case David
would not slaye Vriah with his own hands nor by any of his own subjects, but
he puts him a forlorn hope casting him in such peril that he could not
escape, and that with a desire of his death to, and then by this plotte to
cover all, but God discovered both to himself and to the whole world to, that
David was guilty of murder.

But the grossest and most barbarous of all is when one with his own hands
openly does take away the life of a man. This was condemned Genesis 6. and a
reason added, Thou shall not kill a man for he was made in the image of God.

This is therefore to deface Gods image and as it were to raze the princes
picture and broad seal, yea this thing is so hateful unto God that if a beast
slay a man, he must be slain and his flesh must not be eaten. Now if God will
have the beast stoned which has slain a man though he have neither law nor
reason to restrain him, much more those worse the^ beasts, that having Gods
commandment and reafo^ to hold them back, yet by all these bars cannot be kept
in from violating the image of God and the soul of man. Besides they have
seen how ill murderers have sped; as Caine what a curse, what a brande did God
set upon him that he was always a runnagate and vagabound and could find no
rest upon the earth? And in Numb. 35. It is said that the land is polluted and
cannot be made pure but by the death of him that was the murderer. Now this is
so much the more vilde by how much those be nearer bound in any lincke or
bond to him that does this wrong. As a brother the brother, the child the
father, the wife the husband or such like, which makes the sin a great deal
more heinous and odious. But most monstrous and most indigne of all is it for
one to lay violent hands upon himself, to whom he is bound by all bands. For
though one be near to father and mother etc. yet his self his own person is
most dear to himself and he ought to have most care of himself; therefore to
rende his own soul and body a sunder is most horrible and breaks most
bonds of God and nature. And this no beast will do; Sometimes they will tear
and goare one an other, but no beast was ever in such extremity of pain or in
such misery as that he would rage against himself and seek to deprive
himself of life. And this is noted of heinous persons, as of Judas and
Achitophel who were first violent and barbarous to others, and then at length
they turned the point of cruelty upon themselves.

Therefore this should make us pray to God especially from this highest degree
of murder and most heinous and execrable cruelty. For the causes that a man
grows to this beastly rage and cruelty against his own body, is first a
monstrous pride, that one will not be unless he may be as he lust himself;
he will not submit his will to Gods will. Secondly, unbelief, that one has
no faith in God, nor never looks for a good issue out of troubles, Thirdly,
from extreme cruelty to others, as Saul when he had been bloudily minded
against the priests of God, and David he made his conscience so feirce as that
it set upon himself, and wreeked his teene upon his own bowels. And
Achitophel was cruelly bent against David, and carried an earnest thirsting
after his blood, and then at length he fell to be as ill minded to himself,
when he was once crossed of his purpose and desire. Now let us labor to keep
our selves from envy and hatred, and take heed of reueng and God will keep
us from murder; he that makes conscience and prays against the least shall
keep himself safe against falling into the greatest. Thus much for the
things forbidden in this commandment.

The thing commanded is generally to love our neighbors soul and body as our
own. And the particular duties that in it are given in charge are either
inward or outward. The inward are two, Meekness, and Compassion. Meekness
that is a mild and quiet and loving disposition of the heart, and a kind and
courteous affection to our neighbors. This is commanded Ephesians. 4. 32, Be ye
courteous one to an other and tender hearted. This courtesy he opposes to anger
and bitterness of heart, which he had named in the former verse as breaches of
this commandment: And reasons why one should carry a tender and meek
affection toward his neighbor: one may be that which is said in Is. Will thou
be cruel to thy own flesh? we have one God, one father, and be as it were one
body, and must therefore be like affected one to an other as members of one
body. And an other reason is 1. Pet. 3. A woman of a meek spirit is much set
by of God, and that which is particulerly applied to the woman is true. Of the
man that whosoever has a meek and quiet spirit, he is in high account and
favor with God and his Angels; as contrary a froward and contentious person,
be he as conceited of himself as he will, is base and contemptible in the eyes
of God, and of all Gods children. And as Christ says. Matt. 5. Blessed are the
meek for they shall inherit the Earth. Now the branches and parts of this
meekness are, First to forgive one an other. As in the place of the Ephesians.
before be ye courteous forgiving one an other as God for Christ's sake forgave
you. Meeting with an objection that might have been made, why I meek? I am as
ge^ttle affable and quiet as any man in the world can be, so long as you do
not cross me, nor wrong me, nor disgrace me but indeed if you will do me any
injury, or cross me of my will a little then you must pardon me, I am
something passionate I cannot endure it. Can you not endure it? What can you
endure then? Surely no more then a Bear or a Lion or a beast can. But a
christian meekness will forgive and forget injuries and wrongs, it will not
only be kind to the kind and show courtesy for courtesy, for this the
veriest reprobate, and deepest dissembler in the world may do; but it will
overcome evil with good, it will be kind to the unkind, and put up wrongs and
offenses. And as he looks for pardon from God for far greater matters, So he
will not stick easily to give pardon for these lesser things. But he that
cannot bring his heart to this to forgive his enemy and to do good to his
enemy, he has not yet attained to the first step of the duties required in
this commandment Thou shall not kill; and therefore can much less attain to
the latter and greater. A second branch and indeed an effect of this kindness
is to to construe all things in the best part* to take things in the best sense
and meaning we can, not to be suspicious and misdeeming. For this ill
construction and wrong interpretation of things by haling and wresting the^ to
the worse sense we can, is a means to fill our own hearts full of
bitterness, and make us ready upon every occasion to fall to brawling and
contention with other men. When one shall be doubting, perhaps he thinks thus
of me, it may be he had this meaning, or did it in this intent; this will
maruellouslly infect the heart and fill it full of hatred and malice, and
therefore Romans 1. It is set down as a note of a wicked person that he takes
all things in the worst part, and this is a su^e brand of a wicked person.
But a courteous and meeeke man will be sure if a thing may be expounded one way
better then an other, to take it in the best sense, and the best way he can.

A third branch and effect of meekness is to seek after peace, to be a
peace maker, to study to preserve and maintain unity and love, as it is said
in the Psalm. Seek peace and follow it, as if he had said, peace is a Jewel
most precious, that if one labor for it he may find but else he cannot. I but
will some one say, how can I get it? it flies from me I would feign be friends
and he will not, I offer peace and kindness, but he is froward, and I can
find no good entreatie at his hands: well, yet follow after though it run
from you for a while, pursue still and at length you shall find it and that to
your great comfort., Now then a man follows after peace, when he avoids all
things that might breed iarres and minister occasion of offense; now many men
there be, that would seem to have peace and have men think well of them and
deal kindly with them, but they care not how they behave themselves, and what
they do to offend and greiue every one, and to stir them up against them,
but kindness will do every thing that may win peace and avoid all things
that may hinder it, or breed strife, yea he that is truly meet will rather in
matters belonging to himself, part with his right in some part and be content
to want some thing that is due unto him, then he will raise up contention and
strife. And he that does not thus is not truly courteous, and therefore also not
much set by of God.

The second inward duty is compassion and pity* the former belongs and is to
be performed to all men in time of their greatest posterity, but this is
proper to these that are in some affliction and misery; now this compassion
and mercy is to have a fellow feeling of the griefs and afflictions of other
men, to weep with the^ that weep, to mourn with them that mourn to bear
the burdens of those that be weak and so fulfill the law of Christ. This is
commanded Coloss. 3. 13. Now therefore as the elect of God, holy and beloved
put on the bowels of mercy. He wishes them as they would be sure of their
election and have a sound not of their holiness, and that God loved them,
then let them put one the bowels of mercy, let the misery of other men enter
into their hearts, and make their bowels yearne, even as if their own. Now
this compassion and feeling must be both to the souls and bodies. As for the
souls we have an example of Christ Jesus that seeing the people as sheep
without a sheapheard in an hard case for matter of their souls, he had
compassion and mourned in his soul for them, and so he wept over Jerusalem,
when he saw them so stubborn and so to resist the grace of God and the good
means of their peace. And Paul says to the Corinthians that when he heard of
the incestuous man he writ unto them in many tears and sorrow, as if all most
the sin had been his own. But contrary unto this is the merciless and
pitilesse heart and behavior of such, that are so far from weeping and
mourning for the sins of other men and from having any pity upon them as
that they despise them, and contemn and make a jesting talk of it to their
disgrace, rather then pray for them, or greiue for them to their help and
amendment* yea and worse, many be so diuelishly minded and so resembling the
devil their father, as that nothing rejoices them more then to hear of an
other man's fall, especially if he have been a professor and stood for
religion, then if he fall it is such good news and makes them as glade as if
they had gotten a great booty. But little do they know how they sin against
their own soul, and provoke God to let them fall into the same sins, and to
give them up unto worse offenses, that after they may find the same entreatie
and others should rejoice and mock at their fall as they have done at the fall
of an other, and indeed a pitilesse heart and dealing toward an other man's
slip, is the next way both to make themselves fall into the like sin, and shut
up the hearts of men from showing any compassion unto them.

Also for matttes of the body, we must be touched with the greefes of other..
as. Heb. 13. 3. Remember those that are afflicted as if ye were also afflicted.
And we must be as members of one body, now we know that the members be all
pertakers of the grief and pain, if any one yea but the meanest suffer any
thing; and so if we have that love that ought to be in the hearts of
christians, we cannot choose but we shall feel in some part the afflictions of
christians and see that they shall in some part also pertain unto us. And
this the example of Jobs friends Job. 2. 11. shows; it is said that having
heard of the misery whereinto Job was suddenly cast they came to him. What to
do? not as common custom is to bid him be of good cheer, and we hope he
shall do well, and such shittle comforts, for noe man can give sound words
of consolation, until himself have a true spitit of consolation, but they
came to lament with him; they wept with him, rent their cloths and sat down
with him mourning. They hearing their friends woe, would let him know that they
were touched with it, and therefore they show it by crying and sitting on the
dust making his case theirs, so near as might be. And if one be thus sensibly
affected with other men's sorrows this good effect will follow, that they will
be very ready and willing to relieve them and show works of mercy unto them.
As if one part be troubled with a king pain, you need not make a long
oration to stir up the other parts to use the best means they can to ease
and help it, for they are pertakers of the grief. But for want of these
bowels of mercy, it comes to pass that men be so hardly drawn and hailed to
any work of mercy, that it must be pulled from them by maine strenght, and so
many arguments, so many reasons, so many inducements must constrain them to it
before they will yield, and then when all this is done, they drop out with a
thing of nothing, nothing to the purpose, and those that be bountiful and
liberal enough in matters of vanity and lust, be so holdfast, and sparing for
works of mercy, that one can hardly wring a penny from them, by all the
persuasions he can make: and what is the matter* they be so slow and
unwilling? because they have not nor will not have any sense of other men's
misery, but put away all consideration and regard of these things, and give
themselves holy to pleasure. And therefore in these matters they will cost them
many tears, and bring the^ noe good hereafter but much sorrow; they care not
how far they run, and what charges and expenses they be at, but for work
of mercy and duty of compassion that will further their reckoning, and
comfort their souls, and do good to the Church and Saints of God, it comes so
slowly and so heavily, as though it were all lost, that is that way bestowed.
And the cause is, because they have a heart merciless and void of compassion.
Now the outward duties follow. And these are three in number especially to be
regarded.

The first is an amiable and loving behavior of ones self toward others, for
as a sour look, and an auster conte^ptuous gesture breaks this commandment,
in that it alienates men's hearts from us, and is a preparatiue to hatred; so it
is a fruit of love and a part of keeping this commandment, that one should by
all good and gentle carriage of himself show his love and willingness to do
good so near as he can to all. And this is a thing noted in Abraham as a
matter of commendations and a testimony of his humble and loving heart, that
where he came he was very courteous to all men, even infidels, men of a false
religion, and did carry himself, in all good sort unto them who ever. As when
he had to do with the Hittits. First, he bows himself in all courteous sort,
and then his words were gentle and nothing sauouring of a proud commanding, but
with all mild and kind persuasions and entreaty, and then when they wild him
to bury the dead in any of their sepulchers, gives them hearty thanks and
with the like courtesy and good speeches as a fore, propounds his request. And
this gentle dealing did so win the hearts of these heathen people, and made
him so well account and esteemed amongst them, as they say to him thou art a
prince of God amongs us, and would deny him nothing. And so when he met the
Angels, which he took for no other but for common trauailers, he saluted them,
bowing his body in all dutiful sort and gave them good terms and called
them Lords and entreated them to eat a morsel with him. And by this
affability and kind usage of himself he did not only get favor and good
account among those with whom he lived; but has gotten credit till this day
and shall to the worlds end, that being a man of such worth and good desert*
so well graced, and of such place and wealth, all this did not make him sour,
careless or disdainful, but he showed him kind and amiable even to the
meanest. For indeed proud looks hawtie looks and a scornful and a
disdainful eye that is such a thing as God abhorres, he does abhor an hautie
eye and arrogant looks. As he says in the Proverbs.

But we see this is such a thing as many do it for their credit, and think to
get credit by this looking on high. Those among us that be men of no worth,
that have no good quality or property nothing commendable or worth esteem
inward or outward, no grace to praise them, no wealth to set them out, no
parentage to make them had in account, swaggerers, ruffins, profane beasts,
and filthy drunken swine, that make their belly their God. These abject base
persons, the scumme and froth of the whole earth, rude in behavior, wicked in
heart, and careless in life, think if they can look big, and carry a proud
and disdainful face, and ouercrow every man, and care for no man, scorn their
betters, and prefer themselves before all; then forsooth, they be men of some
name, they shall be accounted of, and they be worthy to be looked after, that
think to get credit by contemning every body, and to be had in account by
making no account of any one; this is these courage, this is their valor, and
they have nothing to grace themselves, but this kind of rudeness. But in
truth this disgraceth, this discrediteth, this proclaims their shame, and
shows that they be light, and empty of all goodness, and if they had many other
good parts, yet this would hurie all, and make them contemned in every man's
heart and eye, to be so scorneful and contemptuous to every one. This was
Ismaels kind of life, his hand was against every man he regarded none, nor
cared for none, but set them all at defiance, and at naught, therefore every
man's hand was against him, they made as light of him, and these also have a
just Ismaels reward, every one is their foe, every man speaks of their
shame, and what have they gotten now? For they that will be honored must
honor, and he that will be kindly dealt withal, must deal kindly with
others, and he that looks for an amiable behavior from others, must show an
amiable behavior to others.

The second outward duty is to defend the oppressed, and succor those that
suffer wrong, and ill entreatie: a thing much commended in Job, that he pulde
the pray out of the Lions mouth, and sought out the cause of the poor, he was
a father to the fatherless, and husband to the widow. And this did comfort him
in time of his trouble more then all wealth in the world. This is commanded.
Proverbs. 24. 11. Deliver them that are drawn to death, and will thou not
deliver them that are lead to be slain? If thou say behold I know it not. He
that pondereth the hearts does not he understand it? And he that keeps the
soul knows he not? will he not also recompense every man according to his
works? He shows that if one see those that be unrighteously pulled to death and
oppressed, one must not stand by and say, alas, what a world is this, who
ever saw such dealing? but one must put his hand to, and labor to his power,
and as far as he can to rescue him, and deliver him, for says he, wilt not
thou preserve him? as if he had said, art thou so merciless that thou will not
help the oppressed? But then he meets with our excuses that men are ready to
speak in such cases, alas I knew not, that he had such need of my help, and
if I should meddle, I might bring an old house upon mine own head, and trouble
my self when I needed not. But he cuts of all saying, does not God see thee
and know thy heart, as if he had said. Well these excuses may dazell men's eyes
and make a fair show, with the^ that can see nothing but shows, but God he
looks not so much to the tongue, and what one can say for himself, but he
ponders the heart, does not see it lightly but considers and knows every
particular thing and circumstance; and therefore, it is no shifting and
doubling when he comes to take a trial of us: and he knows, that all these
excuses come from selfeloue, and love of lucre and commodity, that one would
spare cost, and live at case, and rather see an other oppressed with wrong,
then stir himself a little to help him. And last of all he says, you that
be so loath to suffer a little trouble, and at a little charges to help an
other man in his misery: know you not that God recompenceth men according to
their works, that he causes them to reap like for like, and may not you come
to the like misery your self, and then because you had no heart not will to
help an other, you shall see others sit as quietly by you, and not venture to
give you any help.

But now men are come to that selfeloue, and want of other men's wrongs as it
were a thing done in a far country, and in an other age, as though it
nothing pertained to them, they have nothing to do with it. But those that be
of the better sort, will only have a little idle pity, and mercy of the
mouth in a few words; alas I am sorry, and it is pity that honest men
should be thus wronged, but never put to an hand to help, nor stir a finger
to do any good to their relief, neither be at pains nor charges to ease
them, and deliver the oppressed, but most men bear this mind, that they would
take more pains and be at more cost to pull one of their own beasts out of
the ditch, then to pull a poor wronged Christian out of the paws of the
persecutor. But Jonathan was not of this mind, he ventured his own life to
save David's, and delivered him out of the hands of Saul his father, though it
seemed David only stood betwixt him and the crown. And Obadiah when he being
the kings steward had as one would think need to look that he loose not the
kings favor, and Ahab his master raised an hot and sharp persecution, and
would have slain all the Prophets, and he should have escaped but ill in
liklihood, if his master had perceived that he had been a favorite of them;
and above that the famine was so great in the land that no bread and water
almost could be gotten for money, so that it was not only dangerous but
exceeding chargeable to keep an hundredth men now, whom the king sought with
all diligence to put to death, yet notwithstanding all these impediments, he
stood faithfully for God and his Prophets, and kept an hundredth of them with
bread and water sufficiently, in the heat of persecution, and the midst of a
great famine.

Rahab also so soon as she had any spark of religion, and the fear of the
true God, defended the spies, and that with the hazard of her own life; for
when the king would feign have gotten them, and he had a purpose to make them
sure enough, she hid them, and saved their life, and by that means also saved
her self and all her household, and had this privilege, that after Christ
Jesus came of her stock and posterity. But on the contrary, most cursed and
hellish of all are these, that be so far from helping and succouring Gods
afflicted saints, as that they rejoice at their trouble, and recount it one to
another as a very joyful tidings, that makes them merry, and they put an
hand to it, and to their power help it forward; these be cruel wretches
inspirde with the malice of the devil, and unless they repent shall be
miserable wretches hereafter freed with the vengeance of God as a reward of
their cruelty.

The third and last duty here commanded, is to show mercy to the needy,
that want, according to your ability, and their necessity. This Christ
commands, Luke. 12. 33. Sell that you have and make you bags that wax not
old. Where Christ exhorting them to be merciful, meets with a common
objection. Indeed I would willingly bestow something upon Christ, I owe him a
good turn, and could find in my heart to pay him, but alas I have nothing
to give, yet have you nothing to sell? never a strike of corn, never a piece
of land, no spare household stuff, that you can spare for Christ? If you have
sold it, and give it to Christ, and for Christ's sake, even as wicked a man will
rather sell something to serve his lust then that he will have it unserved, so
do you rather sell something for Christ's sake, then let him go unserved. and
show that you love him as well, as they love their lust. O but if I should sell
and give thus, I should be beggerd; nay Christ wills no man to beggar himself,
but make you bags; this is such a treasure, as no other is like it, you should
get a more excellent increase, for no other treasure, but it is of that nature
that either of it self it will corrupt, and the canker and rust will set on and
bring it to naught, or else the thief may meet with it so that one is in
continual danger, to loose it, and become poor. But this is such a kind of
treasure as in it self it is eternal, and it is so surely kept that no man
can deptiue us of it by force or craft, and then another benefit is, Where your
treasure is, there is your heart also. This is a good effect that if you lay up
a treasure in heaven, your hearts will follow also. What is the reason that
many men can come so hardly, and with such difficulty to think or speak of
heaven, that we may as easily make a great millstone ascend up into the skies,
as to draw their thoughts to heauenward? it cannot be, because their treasure
is not their, they have sent nothing before them thither. Worldly men can talk
nimbly and readily of grounds and money and beasts, because they have laid up
their treasure in these things, and let one go whether he will from one end of
the world to the other, his heart will still be there where his treasure lies,
of this he will talk at his table, in the field as he walks, as he lies,
every where, and he is not weary. The treasure draws the heart unto it. But
these have never laid up one penny in heaven, have reposed nothing in Christ's
bosom, and therefore have no mind to think of him, and one may sooner pull
their heart out of their bodies then put any heavenly and constant meditation
of God, and the life to come into them. But if one would let his chief wealth
be with God, and lay up his special good in heaven, his chief thoughts and
special desires and meditations would be of God and of heaven, he would talk
of it as willingly, as nimbly, readily, as constantly, and with as little
tediousness, as the most covetous man of his money, and cattle, and nothing
should be so delightful to him as to confer and meditate of things
pertaining to the life to come. And in the Prouer. it is said, He that is
merciful to the poor rewards his own soul, as if he had said. Every man will
yield that it is a good thing to be beneficial to himself and to do good to
his soul. But this is most certain, that nothing in the world, no purpose, no
bargain, shall bring so much profit unto the soul as a merciful heart and a
liberal hand to bestow his goods upon poor christians the members of Christ
Jesus; so the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 9. He that sowes liberally shall also
reap liberally. It is otherwise in this matter then it is in other haruests;
for let a man sow never so good seed and use all diligence in preparing and
fitting the ground, yet some casualtie may befall which will spoil the harvest,
and a man shall not have the seed again; but here it is certain one shall
have a good harvest, nothing shall mar his crop, if own sow but a cup of
cold water for conscience and in love, it is sown upon Christ Jesus and he is
the ground as in Matt. 25. I was hungry and thiristie. etc. and ye fed and
gave drink to me. Therefore unless we think that Christ will be a barren
ground, it is most certain that he that scatters seed here shall find a large
increase; that which is cast abroad in mercy shall return again in
goodness, the more good any does* the more good he shall receive, and that
certainly because God will restore it, and there is nothing that is more
effectual to continue the good estate and prosperity of any family then that
the governor of the family opens his hand abundantly with all plenty of good
works of mercy. Now that one might do this duty of mercy rightly so as it
may be pleasing unto God, and bring comfort unto his own soul, these rules
must be observed.

First out of Micah. 6. deal justly and love mercy. Justice in getting must
be joined with mercy in bestowing, that must be well go^ten that is liberally
given, or else it is but to rob one to give to an other, to take it from the
right owner to whom God has given it, to bestow it on an other whom we
think good. To do as Samuel says of the ill kings, that they would take away
the peoples vinyards and olives and feildes to give them to his servants and
whom himself pleased; now this is not mercy, nor to be counted liberality,
neither does it deserve any better then theft. As many among us care not how
unjustly they get, whom they pinch, whom they oppress and whom they wrong,
but when the times come that they think to show their liberality, and to let
all the world have a taste of bounty, no man shall be put back but every man
shall have his fill for a time, and now they think they have quit themselves.
Well, and you must account them very liberal and bountiful gentlemen, nay
first let them be just and then they may be merciful, but till then all is
oppression and robbery and spoiling. And may idle ministers that get many
benefices into their hand, and make themselves fat with the peoples blood whom
they sterue and care not for feeding their souls at any time, but that they
may get them a name of bountiful men, once or twice in the year they will
come to the people, and feast them, and great good cheer they must have; thus
robbing their souls to feed their bodies and under pretense of hospitality and
neighborhood to make a pray of the people. But first, they should do as
Zachaeus did first, restore the ill gotten goods, and the^ of the rest that is
their own, they might be merciful and do good, but it is no liberality to be
lavish of another man's.

Secondly, it must be done liberally, without grudging and murmuring, as 2.
Cor. 9. God loves a cheerful giver, it must not be wrested out of one, but
must come willingly and freely, or else the thanks is lost. So Proverbs. 3. 27.
Withhold not the goods from the owner thereof. ande. He makes the Christian
neighbor that is in necessity an owner, one that has good right and title to
our goods according to our ability, for God has given it to them, and it is
their due, therefore he says, withhold it not but give it readily, put him not
back, but let him see that thou art glad to do him good, and that it is a
delight to thy soul to help him in his need. So Christ says that the poor
widows half farthing was more in Gods account the all the^ large offerings
of the richer men, for they did it most of them ambitiously, and some Pharisees
meritoriously to bind God unto them, and make him beholding unto them; but she
did not look to credit, for it was rather a discredit, that when all the rest
came with their great sums, she comes me with a mite among the rest, but she
was not ashamed of that, neither did she think to merit any thing of God, but
desiring to please God, she gave that she had though it was but a little, very
freely, and therefore God accounted it a very free gift. Therefore we must look
that our gifts be freewill offerings, and come voluntary, and then they are
likely to be accepted.

Thirdly, one must look to do good, especially to the household of faith,
though a man should help all mankind, yet his special regard should be to
Christians, that where Gods kindness appears most, their kindness may be
most exercised, and they may do most good where GOD has given most good. For
so Math. 25. that which they did to poor Christians was accounted as done to
him, and that he paid as a debt for his own. Which confutes these, that if
they do any good, and bestow any thing, yet be sure Christians shall have
nothing, but it is done hand over head without any regard to whom it is done,
and every one shall fare better with them then he that is best; there is a
certain secret malice, and hidden inueterate enemy to good men, that they can
bestow nothing but on such that cannot pray for them, but will abuse what ever
they bestow upon them.

And thus much for the things forbidden in this commandment, and also
commanded; that thou do the one, and avoid the other certain things must be
avoided, which are occasions of the breach of it, and hinder one from keeping
it.

And the first of these is Pride; for so much pride as there is in any, so much
matter is there of the bra^ch of this commandment, for so the holy ghost
says, that only from pride contention comes, and he that is proud, is always
ready to stir up strife, for he will do wrong to any, but he will suffer
wrong of none. So secondly, he so spends and ruinates his estate by serving his
proud lust, that he has nothing to bestow in works of mercy, by setting up
himself too high, he brings his estate so low, that he cannot afford to do
any good, he is always in want and need, still shifting, and cast behind
hand, because he is too lavish in spending in needless things to serve
himself.

As the Sodomites though they lived in the most rich and plentiful country
under the sun, and that which was fruitful of all increase, yet they could
show no work of mercy, no good that they could do, why? because they were
proud, and thought all too little that went to themselves, and for their own
delight, and therefore can spare nothing to supply another need. So it is
seen that many poor men, yet are able to do more good, have more to lay out
upon mercy, then many other that have rich revenues, and why? because these
with their revenues have an other thing, that is pride, which drinks them dry,
so that they may truly say they have nothing to give, they are driven to wants
and necessities that they can never get before hand, they have it not, and how
should they give it? But why have they it not? whose is the fault? It is
therefore because they have fed the wasting humor of pride, and that eats up
all which they should bestow on Gods poor Saints. Therefore who ever would
keep this commandment let him strive against pride for that will make him
unable to do good, and make him dry to minister matter for every contention.

Secondly, beware of covetousness, For a covetous man cannot but be cruel; so
Solomon says in Proverb. 1. This is the way of all those that be greadie of
gain, they will take away the life from the owners thereof. He cares not what
mischief an other has so he may have lucre. Who ever stands in the way twixt
him and his lands, he wishes his death unfeignedly. If it be a father he
could rejoice to see him laid in his grave, that he might have his lands, if a
brother, so he may gain by his death you can bring him no more welcome news
then that his brother his dead. Always coueteousnes draws after it a long
tail of craft and cruelty.

Lastly, take heed of riotousnesse and drunkenness, for when drink is in, the
wit is out and grace is out to, then a man is such light stuff that the devil
may toss him about at his pleasure. So in Proverbs. 23. 29. To whom is woe?
to whom is sorrow and stripes without cause? etc. First, it hurts the body it
self, and Secondly, it breeds strife and contention, murmuring, brawling, and
wounds without cause, for when they went good friends (if drunkards can be
good friends) to their pots, all on the sudden upon a mad humor no body
knows, they fall together by the ears and are ready to stab and mischeife
one an other, and two or three hours after ask them why, and then they cannot
tell, but it was a mad humor of theirs. Thirdly, they so spend themselves this
way and drink up all their wealth, as that they have no ability to do any
work of mercy. Therefore pride, covetousness, and drunkenness must be shund
of all those that will keep this commandment; thou shall not kill.

Thus much for the sixth commandment concerning the safety of our neighbors
person, and what duties we do owe unto him. Now follows the seventh
commandment concerning his chastity and how we should that way behave our
selves in these words.

Thou shall not commmit adultery.
THe sum of it is that we should avoid all uncleanness in our selves and
others, and use all means to preserve our own and our neighbors chasiitie.

The things forbidden either Inward in all unclean lusts. Outward 1.
Adultery. 2. Fornication Unnatural with others self.
natural in marriage either entering without parents consent etc.
using out of season and immoderatly.

3. Uncleanness either Wantonness.



In the Things parteyning to body, as apparel, food, sleep. body parts
hand eye and foot.
whole in dancing.


FIrst for filthy lusts and desires of the heart consented unto. Though they
be kept in and neither break forth in word nor deed, yet this very lust and
desire it self makes, one a breaker of this commandment before God. As our
Savior Christ the law maker and therefore also the best expositer of it does
testify Math. 5. 27. I say unto you he that looks upon a woman to lust
after, he has committed adulthrie with her all ready in his heart. They of
old (before he says) meaning the Pharisees had said thou shall not commit
adultery, extending the commandment no further then the gross act and that
they would not have men commit, because it would bring reproach upon their name
and death unto their body* but Christ makes a more narrow meaning, and shows
that the adultery of the heart is odious to God as well as that of the body,
and that men cannot more easily see and perceive that outward filthiness, then
he does the inward; for he has pure eyes that can abide none iniquity, and
he searches the heart and reins. An unclean heart therefore wishing foul
things, and meditating upon vile matters is most hateful to God.

The use of this is to condemn those, that when they hear Gods curse against
the breakers of this commandment concerning adultery, that think if they
have not broken forth into the outward action, they are free and out of
gunshot, it pertaines not unto them. But let them know that if they have an ill
heart, though men cannot charge them with the evil act, yet God can charge
them with the evil thought, and that they are liable to Gods curse as well as
those that offend outwardly. Indeed there be degrees, and the increase of
sin bringes an increase of judgment, and grosser sins shall have more
grievous plagues, but the least thought is sufficient to condemn them. And
those that will not humble themselves, nor care not for inward motions will if
occasion be offered, easily be drawn to the outward practice. For if lust have
conceived it, bringes forth sin, and he that will not refrain it, in the
conception, shall not be able to hinder it in the birth; therefore he that would
not have sin borne, must not let lust conceive but labor earnestly to kill it
in the womb as it were; for howsoever thought be free in respect of the sight
and law of men, yet it is not free from Gods, nor from his law, which was not
only given only to reform and rule the outward manners, but the soul also and
the affections.

Secondly, this serves for the instruction of those which have thus offended,
that they must repent and crave pardon at Gods hands and entreat him of his
mercy to kill this lust and to wash away the filthiness of their heart, that
they may not only be freed from the judgment of God due to the sin, but also
may hinder the birth of so filthy a monster as will proceed of this so ill a
conception; in either conception it is a foul fault after the conception to
take any thing that may disable the increase and birth of it; but in this
conception it is the greatest virtue and safest way to take such a receite as
shall quite kill it, that it may never come forth to light; and this conceit
is only to repent and crave pardon, for else God will bring their secret sin
to open shame and their inward filthy desire to outward public disgrace.

Now the means to purge ones heart and to make it clean and pure from such
filthy affections, is first, to pray to God often and earnestly, to punish the
heart and to sanctify it by his holy spirit. Then secondly, to be faithful
and diligent in some honest and lawful calling that may busy the heart upon
some thing lawful and profitable; for idleness is the mother of foul lusts.
As a standing poole not having any course of running grows filthy of it self
and full of toades and neuts and filthy vermin; so the heart that is not
taken up in some good and honest calling, is a fit place for the devil to
breed and engender all monstrous and filthy lusts, idleness procures lust
nothing more; as what was the reason why the Sodomits grew so filthy and
unclean, that no people ever were so filthy and beastly, but because having
the most fruitful and abundant contrrie in the world (for it was like the
garden of God) that yielded them all commodity and profit, grew rich, and then
like foolish men, as all natural men use, grew idle and to settle themselves
to nothing but there ease and delight, for their nature was no worse then any
of others; but their idleness so corrupted their hearts, as the devil had
leisure to cast in, and they to pursue all monstrous and unclean desires
whatsoever, and that was the cause that they were so outrageous. Also
temperance in meat and drink, and watching and fasting. These means by Gods
blessing will slaye these lusts, and empty the heart of such ill desires,
that one shall have a pure and chaste heart.

But if that all these means being used, notwithstanding these lusts will not
be overcome, but still arise and still ouerburden the heart and set it on fire
with ill desires, and the flesh will not be humbled, then one must seek the
remedy of marriage and pray to God to give him an yokefellow; and then one may
look that God should hear his requests. For when he has done his endeavor
to beat down his flesh, and yet cannot so tame it, but that he stands in need
of an help this ways, then God has called him to the estate of matrimony,
and as he has given him a calling, so will he give him such an one as shall
be a comforter to him, and an helper both in this life and in the life to
come. And so much for the inward breach.

The outward breach of this commandment has many branches. But the chief are
comprehended by the Apostle. Galat. 5. Where he says, the fruits of the flesh
are, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness. These are the chief
outward branches of this commandment. And first for adultery. That is, when
the party offending, is either married or contracted, for if he be eitheir
joined by marriage or contraction, that commits the act, then it is adultery.
This is a very high breach of this commandment. For when they have been
either married or contracted, then they break the covenant of God. For when
they come together in either of these knots, they do make a covenant not only
one with an other, but with God himself, that has appointed the ordinance,
that will faithfully and truly keep their fidelity one to the other, and
therefore if they deal unchastly, it is not only unjustly done one to another,
but they forfeit their bond to God, even their salvation, and provoke his curse
both on their soul and body. And this is a thing peculiar to adulterers, that
having come in the sight of God and before me^ and Angels, to make a covenant,
and there also in the face and by the voice of the congregation craved a
blessing of God upon their proceedings, they abuse god, angels men and all, if
after they break this covenant and polute their bodies.

But how foul and vile a sin this is, The ill effects that follow of it do
declare, the first is set down Proverbs. 5. 11. it consumes the flesh and the
body. It is a fire in the bones, it breeds eating and incurable diseases,
that as the sin makes one loathsome in the sight of God, so the plague may make
him lothsom in the sight of men. If one be so audatious as to break the
covenant of God, though it be a thing much neglected of men, and they will not
cut him of according to Gods law, (for by the law of God the adulterer is as
culpable of death as the wilful murderer) yet God meets with him, and by
filthy diseases brings him to his death. Proverbs. 6. 26. the holy Ghost
says, it bringes one to a morsel of bread, that is, to extremity of
poverty, and so Job in Chap. 31. says of this sin, that had been a fire to
have rooted out all mine increase, this will make spoil and havoc of all a
man has. And it consumes not only the goods and body, but there is a further
consumption then all this, he that does it destroys his own soul; he
forfeits his body and goods, and worse then all this he gets a perpetual
blotte to his name that he shall never be able to put away, unless he do
truly repent, and so get it washed away by the blood of Christ that will make
all clean. But else he shall have a shameful name, an ill report, all the
brave apparel, all the bribing and coloring in the world will not cover this
blotte of the name and estimation, for he is a needelesse thief that does not
steal for necessity, but of presumption and therefore deserves no pity.

We see that if a thief upon necessity, (as it seems to him,) but indeed no
necessity should make a man sin) do prige or steal from his neighbors,
men have some kind of mercy and do not altogether so much abhor it, but
when one has the remedy, and has professed his thankfulness to God for the
help, and his contentedness and rejoicing in it, he is a needelesse thief he
shall find no mercy, but he destroys his soul and makes his name to stink
among men. And he that does commit adultery does not only destroy his own
soul but he does what he can to destroy an other man's soul to, and so to kill
two at once, and in this regard this sin is worse the^ either theft or murder.
For if a thief should strip a man of all he had and besides that take away
his life to, the man were not one whit the worse man for all this, but his
soul might go to heaven as well as if he had died in his bed, but he or she
that inticeth an other to commit adultery robs the party of his soul and
salvation so far as in them lies, for little does he know whether ever they
shall repent or be converted from this sin, for this is such a wound as no
physician can lay his hand to heal it, but the holy Ghost; no medicine can
cure it, but the blood of the son of God; this is not to spoil his body but
the soul, a far more dangerous thing the^ robbing. For though one should make
the blood run about ones ears with many wounds, yet there were hope that one
might find some skillfull surgeon to make all whole again, but he that has
stricken so deeply into the soul and conscience, and has kindled the fire of
Gods vengance in the heart, how knows he whether ever this shall be healed?
And what a fearful thing is it to be an instrument to draw an other into hell
and to an incurable wound for any thing that he knows?

And again an adulterer is a thief for foisting in his child into an other
man's lands or goods, that, that which one has labored for, and taken pains
for, and hoped to leave to his own seed and his posterity after him, he should
bestow upon his most mortal foe. For of all men in the world, he would be most
unwilling if he knew of it to bestow it on him, much rather would he give it to
a stranger whom he never knew before, then unto one that had so shamefully
abused him; and could better find in his heart to leave his goods unto a
vagrant beggar, then to one whom unwittingly now he feeds and cloths, and who
shall enjoy all his labor. This sin of adultery therefore is a most foul
sin in regard of the wrong one does to man, and to God also, who has so
great a regard of marriage, that it be faithfully observed for the comfort each
of other, as that he thought it not sufficient that they shall bind themselves
in promise one to the other, but he will have them also enter into a covenant
with him, to be true one to the other, which if they violate and contemn, it
is a most odious thing in Gods account.

Now the use that we must make of this is; That since it is so foul a sin and
yet our nature is subject to fall into, as David, after many corrections and
humiliations, after many mercies and benefits when he was some thing well in
years, and had the remedy also, yea and as the corruption of those times was,
many wives, yet fell into his foul sin. This lothsomnes of the sin and the
proudnesse of our nature to commit it, should move us to use those means and
preservatives which might keep us from it. For if David did fall into it, to
his great woe and to some blotting also and blemishing of his name, then we
must not be secure and think our selves safe. But the means to make a man
live chastely in marriage, are these. First, if there have been fornication
before marriage that is a secret poison that lurkes within, and if it be not
stayed it will break out to adultery. Therefore that fire must be quenched by
true repentance, and so it shall never flame out into adultery; but else it
will certainly have his vent: an old fornicator shall be an new adulterer, I
mean by an old fornicator, such an one as has committed fornication before
marriage without repentance, for he has a wild fire within, that will not
keep within long, but will make him burn in lust as fast as before. And it
may be said of him as GOD said to Caine, thy sin lies at the door; so his
old sin lies at the door ready to catch him, yea it will let him have no
peace, but lies in wait, dogs and pursues him, and meets him at every turn
till it have brought him to naught, unless he by repentance first bring it to
naught.

This then must be the first care if one have been a fornicator to repent for
that. But if one have not yet, he must keep and observe this second rule.
Every married person must labor for pure and fervent love to his
yoake-fellow. As Prou. 5. He wills men not to follow after the strange woman,
but how shall I choose? he answers in 18. verse. Rejoice in thy wife of thy
youth, and delight in her love continually. If married persons get fervent and
pure love one to another, this will keep them safe, for it is not having of a
wife, but the loving of her that makes a man live chastely, and it is not the
having, but the loving of an husband that preserues a woman from whoredom, but
if she have him, and yet hate him, and despise him, she is in danger every
day, to be defiled. Fervent love then must be sought for. Not such as flesh can
yield; for the nature of flesh is, as to be fond before, so to be ready after
to find occasions and iarres, and dislike, but it is a gift of God, and a
spark that comes from heaven, and has this virtue to make a man live chastely.
But now if one will say, Adultery? Sure I will never be an adulterer, yet for
all that he cares not for his own wife, but contemnes and dispiseth her, he
has no warrant to say so: nay he takes the next way to bring himself into the
snares of adultery, by this first breach of the bond of marriage, in that he
does not love his wife.

An other means to avoid adultery is set down in Proverbs 2. 8. 16. If
knowledge enter into thine heart, and wisdom delight thy soul: Then shall it
keep thee from the strange woman that flattereth with her lips. To delight
and rejoice in the pure word of God, and to embrace it in ones heart, this will
so satisfy the mind, and content the soul with sweet comfort and delight, as
that one shall not need to follow the impure and foul pleasures of the flesh
that are contrary to God and his word. But if wisdom enter not into the
heart, lust will, and if a man find no rejoicing nor pleasure in the word of
God, he is in continual danger to seek at the flesh, for no man can live
without his delight, and though it break not straight to the main sin of
adultery, yet it will begin with other vanities, and not cease till it has
traced one through all the idle and foolish delights, and at length leave him
wallowing in this filthy and loathsome pleasure, for certain where there is
not a pure delight there is an impure.

Thirdly, will we be kept from this foul and monstrous sin we must mark the
rule of Solomon. Eccles. 7. 28. I find more bitter then death, the woman whose
heart is as nets and snares, and her hands as bands. He that is good before God
shall be delivered from her, but the sin shall be taken by her. He shows how
one may escape the lewd woman, and keep himself free from her snares, namely,
be a good man, walk religiously and keep peace with god, else he shall sure be
taught. He shows why God suffers filthy strumpets, and harlots to ly upon the
earth, namely, that they may be as a gaile or prison to keep wicked sinners,
and chains, wherein to ha^per all ungodly persons, they be as fowlers to catch
hypocrites that have not the true fear of God, that those which be hateful to
God for other sins may be made hateful to men also for this sin. For when men
provoke God by sins that he hates as much, but be less subject to disgrace in
the world, then he gives the^ up to those sins that may shame them, and bring
them into contempt before the world. And it not as most men say alas he was an
honest man till he slipped into this fault; no, had he been honest before, God
would not have delivered him up to this vilde sin. But because he was wicked
before, therefore God punishes sin with sin, and makes him more wicked
outwardly, that his inward wickedness might appear to his disgrace; he has
lived irreligiously in the first table, and now God in vengeance gives him over
also to live unrighteously in the second. These be the means to keep one pure,
namely, an upright life that one live in no other sin that breaks off peace
betwixt God and him. And to take delight in the word of God, and use all good
means to get a pure and fervent love to the yoakfellow, and to purge out by
godly sorrow, that venime of sornication, if any have been committed before,
that else would infect the heart with adultery; for marriage cannot kill lust,
only repentance can do that, and marriage is an help to a penitent man to
preserve his chastity.

But now if one have fallen to adultery, and broken the covenant of God, there
is no way for him but only one, even to confess his filthy sin, and to be
grieved and judge himself for it, and then to lay hold on the merits of Christ
Jesus, and to crave Gods mercy, knowing that he can as easily forgive to the
penitent person, and the blood of Christ can as easily wash away adultery in
the highest degree, as the least spot, of wantonness. So much for the first
outward breach, viz. Adultery, the next follows, and that is called
Fornication, that is, when single persons commit the filthy act.

And this howeuer it be not grievous as the former, because it does not break
the covenant of God, and is not punishable with bodily death, yet it is a
fearful sin liable to the curse of God and damnation. For so 1. Cor. 6. No
fornicator shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: It is such a sin as shuts
one out of Gods kingdom, and casts him down headlong to hell, and the
everlasting vengeance of God. And the ill effects of adultery before named,
namely a diseased body, a poor estate, a blemished name, and damned soul,
and the drawing and murdring of an others soul do agree to this sin to. Oh
but they will marry the party, and so all shall be well, and they will make
an amends. But this cannot make an amends, for nothing can wash away the
pollution of the soul, but the blood of Christ. But if you do marry the
party, why will you give the first fruits of your body to the flesh and the
devil, and the refuse to God? it is a shameful thing, to serve sin with the
chief of his strength, and God with the remainder. How can they look for a
blessed proceeding from so foul a beginning?

Why will he do such wrong to his first borne to make him base borne; and his
posterity a bastardly generation? why will they beget a continual sorrow to
themselves, that they should not be able to look upon their child without
blushing, and cannot see the fruit of their body, but they must look on the
fruit of their sin, and behold a witness before them of their own
filthiness and disobedience to God? Or if he purpose not to marry her that
does this, why does he rob her of her virginity, and make her unfit for any
other else? Therefore this is a foul sin and dangerous, for unless it be
repented for soundly, fornication before marriage makes a plain and high way
for adultery after marriage.

The third outward breach of this commandment follows. And that is
uncleanness which is either unnatural or natural; unnatural, as Sodomie
practiced of the Sodomites, condemned Romans 1. when man with man works
wickedness, woman with woman commits villainy, or else that beastly sin, when the
seed of man is mixed with the seed of a beast. These nature abhorres and they be
commonly punishments of some other wickedness, and follow a very profane and
dead heart, and are worse then dulterie. The natural uncleanness is either
alone, one by himself may defile his own body in most filthy sort, which
though it be more secret from man, yet it is most abominable before God, and
often God brings it to light by punishing those which have used it with tears
of conscience, and horrible fears in their mind, or else with frenzy and
franticknesse. These punishments have often fell on the practisers of this
secret sin, and then all goes abroad, then they lay open, and vomit out all
their own shame, and howeuer they seemed chaste and pure before, yet now their
filthiness is brought to light. Also an other kind of natural uncleanness is
between married people, either in their entrance into marriage, or else in
their proceeding and use of marriage. The uncleanness in the entrance is
either if one marry an other of a contrary religion; as a professor, and a
Christian to wed an Atheist or a Papist; their whole life so led till
repentance and conversion, is unclean in the eyes of God, for their marriage
was not lawful before God, and therefore in Ezra; these that had so married
were constrained by God to put away both their wives and children as
illegitimate. Also if those marry together that be within the degrees of
consanguinitie or affinity forbidden, they may cloak and shift as long as
they will, but they shall never shift of the account and estimation of being
unclean persons before God, since they marry without the warrant, yea contrary
to the commandment of God. Also those that marry without consent of parents,
their marriage is lawful, and life unclean, till they be reconciled to God by
repentance, and their parents by submission. These be in the entrance and
taking the estate of marriage. In the use of it uncleanness is committed.

First, in coming together at unseasonable times; this was a cause that made
the land of Canaan vomit out their inhabitants, because they had no regard to
observe times, and this was to be punished with death in both parties in the
old law, because the time and manner of separation was then instituted. Also
in marriage one may deal uncleanly by excess for want of moderation, for as a
man may be drunken with his own drink, and he were a drunkard that would sit
at home and swill till he were overcome: so likewise a man may be unclean in
exercise, though otherwise his marriage be lawful; and this sin though the
hand of the Magistrate cannot punish it yet Gods hand often finds it out, and
the children diverse times prove monstrous and unshapen, or else idiots and
naturals, or else very ungodly and stubborn, and thus Godmeets with these
secret sins when men will not meet with him by repentance.

The last breach of this commandment is in wantonness, which is the
preparation and foundation for all the former, consisting either in things
belonging to the body, or the body it self. In things belonging to the body
as in the costly apparel, not that there should not be things fitting the
estate, and that there were not a diversity of degrees to be had, but in no
estate or degree, may one be so excessive as to hinder him from good works of
mercy and religion, that one should bestow so much time in trimming the body
as he can have no time for trimming his soul, and bestow so much cost in rich
apparel as he can spare nothing to bestow on poor servants.

Secondly, in strange apparel, as in Zephaniah the priest, the kings
children are rebuked, for that having more money and maintenance then their
neighbors; they did not bestow it in doing any Work of mercy to the poor,
or providing any thing of profit for the commonwealth, but only in setting out
themselves by new fashions, that no new trick or odd foolish devise could
come up, but they must have it straight, yea they never thought themselves well
until they were beginners of some new fangled invention concerning their
coats, that other folks might look at them and lust after them, and these
kind of persons howsoever they seem fine in their own eyes, yet they be
filthy in Gods eyes: Also in excessive diet too much meat and drink, for as
one cannot lay on more fuel, but he shall have a greater flame, so stuffing
ones self with meat and drink will make the heart more outrageous in all
evil lusts. As the prophet says, They rise up full, and then they neighed
after their n^^ghbours wives, as a fed horse after a mare; for though this be
an homely comparison, yet the holy Ghost uses it to make the sin more
loathsome.

Also in excessive sleepiness and lazing in bed, that a man lives so, as the
world, nor the place where he lives shall be no whit the better for him, but he
gives himself only to take his ease, to rest his body upon his bed: to do
nothing but eat and drink and sleep, that that time which God has given to
get good and some knowledge of good and some knowledge of God, and assurance of
salvation, a man should abuse to follow his carnal and vain sports, and to
slugging on his bed; such manner persons be wantons, and by the Apostle put in
the number of filthy persons that shall not inherit life.

In the body it self, and that is either in the parts or the whole. In the
parts as an eye full of lust, as Peter says, that cease not to sin, though
thy body sometimes cease for want of occasion, or for weakness, yet the eye
is all busied in unchaste and wanton lusts. And the tongue in unchaste and wanton
songs and reading love books, of daliance and filthiness, which is a kind of
contemplative fornication. They that made them be wantons and those that read
them, and so every other gesture that stirs up ones self, or many an other
purposely to lust, that is wantonness as the wise man says, that a wicked man
makes a sign with his finger, and speaks with his eye.

The whole body is abused to wantonness in dancing, for here every part is
abused to daliance, the eye, the hand, the foot, and all in meeting in
embracing, in tickling, and such like. All the action is nothing but a
profession of an unchaste heart, here is an artificial grace, an artificial
pace, an artificial face, and in every part a wicked art is added to increase
the natural filthiness; and if you call it a sport, it is a very devilish
sport to use the body as an instrument of wantonness and an inducement to
fornication and adultery.

Those also have offended in wantonness that give themselves liberty to be
present, and see such things that be practices of wantonness, as stage plays,
which serve for nothing but to nourish filthiness, and where they are most
used, their filthiness is most practiced: where the man is clothed with
woman's apparel, and that as ordinarily is put in use, which the Lord calls
abomination; this is a way to breed confusion of sexes, and it is a plain
belying of the sex. Those that then have thus hurt themselves or others must
crave pardon, and repent, and those parents, that themselves in youth have
taken liberty this way, must restrain their children: contrary to the common
practice of filthy parents that have themselves been old fornicators and
wantons, now that themselves are spent, it does them good, and makes their
^eart glad to see their young children tread in their steps, and run
madding and skipping up and down with all wanton and unseemly behavior.
This, howeuer men make but a sport of it, yet God will not tolerate, for if he
cannot put up the abuse of one member alone, to wantonness, he will never
endure that the whole body should be thus abused. Thus much of the seventh
commandment concerning preserving our own and an others chastity. The next
is concerning goods, in the eight commandment, which is.

Thou shall not steal.
THe sum if it is that we should not hurt our own or our neighbors estate,
but so far as we can procure the good of both, not using good benefits only
to his glory, but to the good and benefit of all mankind, and of our selves.

The things forbidden are either Inward as the desire of the heart. Outward
either public in Church Commonwealth
private in Illvsing of ones own by wastfulnes as in 1. Excess in any thing.
2. Idleness. 3. Suertiship.
Niggardliness.
Unjust pursuit of other men's goods by Some show or color of law, as crafty
bargaining, etc. Some means without color as by force or prigging or such
like.




FIrst, for the inward breach of this commandment, that is, lusting after
another man's goods in the heart, the secret desire of that which is none of
ours, though one seek not to get it wrongfully. For as in the former
commandment, the filthy concupiscence of the heart was counted adultery
before God, though filthy practices did not break forth: so here he that
inwardly longs after his neighbors goods, is a thief before Gods judgment
seat though he stay his hand from taking of them. So in 2. Pet. 2. 14. He
describing wicked men says, they have hearts exercised in covetousness.
Though they durst give such liberty to their hands, yet it was the occupation
of their hearts to be always stealing, always desiring an other man's goods,
even as the thoughts and desires of a christian are busied in thinking of the
life to come, and of their latter end, and how to glorify God while they live,
so there desires and hearts were always wandering and pursuing after an other
man's goods, this was all the exercise of their heart. So Micha. 2. 2. They
eouet feilds and take them by force.

First the heart falls a lusting, and what then? then there is no stay, the
violence of their lusts carries them headlong, and they cannot be at quiet till
they have undone a man, and spoild him of all his goods.

And this was Acans first beginning of Theuerie. He saw a fair garment and a
wedge of gold, that was no particular man's indeed, but he knew it was none of
his, for God had challe^ged the spoil of all that City to himself, but he
thought that there was enough for God and for him to, and therefore he let his
heart loose to desire it, and then he could not hold his hands of, but took it
to his own destruction and the utter ruin of his whole family, for they were
all put to death, and the first beginning was his coveting heart. So Ahab
looks out of his window upon a time, and sees how commodiously Naboths vinyard
stood to his palace, and thought the might make him a fair garden there, and
he might have a gooly private walk as it were, so close to his, and therefore
he would feign have it. And so sends for Naboth and offers him some
consideration for it, but Naboth knew that he might not alienate his
possenssion from himself, that God had given him, therefore he says him nay,
but his desire was so earnest and importunate that it would take no nay, and
therefore he was even sick with grief and desire of that which was none of
his. And then there was no way left, but Naboth must be slane, and by hook and
crook Ahab must have the vinyarde, and so Naboths life and vinyarde were both
taken away, but so that Ahab destroyed his family and posterity by this evil
covetousness.

The use that we must make of this is, that though we have never done any man
wrong in one penny, yet we must repent for the wrong of the heart and the
secret desire of the soul, or else before God we are culpable of the breach of
this commandment, and liable to the plague of God for it. Secondly, we must
learn to restrain our desires and keep in the wandering lusts of our heart,
for that which it is a sin to take before men, it is a sin to wish before
God, therefore we must bind our minds to the good abearance, Now the way to
expel this wicked and greedy covetousness of wealth is to consider these two
things. First, the small or not good that riches can do unto them that have
them. Secondly, to consider the certain hurt that the desire of them will
bring. For the ground of covetousness is this, that men have a false and
foolish imagination, that wealth will bring some happiness, and if they had
riches in good store; then they should be in good safety and in an happy
case, but that riches can make ones estate no whitte the better, it is proved
in the Psalm. 62. 10. 11. 12. If riches increase set not thine heart upon
them. He would have one let his heart be never a whit set to his wealth, and
deem himself no whit the better for the increase of them; what? is not one
better; nor has he not cause to be more glad when his purse is full of money
then if he had never a farthing? no sure not one jot, and he gives three
reasons.

First, says he God spoke once or twice and I heard it, power belongs unto
God. This is reason, nothing has any power to do a man any good but God,
therefore if he have all the wealth in the world, his wealth cannot help him,
it cannot keep away any judgment, it cannot free him from death nor from
hell, but one may as soon go to hell from weal or woe, Dives may pass into
torment as well as the veriest beggar alive. Nay it cannot bear of any one
stroke of God upon soul or upon body in this life, it cannot keep away
sickness not grief; then if they be such weak things, he that has them is
never a whit the nearer any good, nor further from any evil; why should one
either earnestly desire them, or greatly rejoice when he has them? Secondly,
To thee O Lord belongs mercy. There is no mercy but in God, nor kindness
but from God, and that a man is kindly entreated, it is not from wealth but
from God that puts love into men's hearts for if ones ways be pleasing unto God,
he will make his enemies to become his friends; and contrary, if ones ways
displease him, he will make ones friends his foes, and those that owe him most
duty and have here tofore showed most love unto him, to be his most bitter
enemies and seek his overthrow. As in David when he had sinned against God,
he raised up his son against him who not with standing his wealth and
kingdom, sought his life and would have killed him. Thirdly, thou O Lord
rewardest every man according to his works. That is an other reason, because
God looks, to works, not to wealth when he comes to judgment; as if he had
said, most men dream that it shall go with them according to their goods and
riches that they have heaped up; this were true indeed if their were no God,
or else an idle God as Epicures imagine, that sits a sleep in heaven, and
cares not how things goes with men in the world, but if there be a God that
gouernes the world that is awaken and has the ordering of matters, then the
question shall not be with what a man has? But what he has done; not what
riches? But what grace and goodness he possesses; for sin shall have shame,
and he that is godly and merciful and humble, he shall have glory and he
shall be saved.

Since it is so that riches are so little profitable or availeable, this must
keep out of our hearts this whorish desire of riches that cannot profit.
Secondly, as riches are sure to do us noe good, so we are sure that the desire
of them will do us much hurt, and as there is no help from the having, so
there is certain danger from the coveting. For in Timothy, the Apostle calls
it, the root of all evil. Where this is there is sin enough, no evil that a
man will abstain from, if it may procure his filthy lucre, he will forbear
nothing if it lie in his way to gain, neither will he do any good that
seems contrary to his profit; therefore the danger is great that
accompanies covetousness, namely the rushing into all kind of mischief and
wickedness and the neglecting and omitting of every thing that is good. For
it hinders one from the chief means of salvation and hinders the working of
these means in him. How it keeps men from the word and sacrements, Christ
shows in the parable Luke 14. 18. Some had oxen and could not come, some had
farms and must be held excused; in general every covetous man has some
pulbacke from religion, or if happily sometimes he do overcome that let by
much a do, and step into the Church door and set him down before the
preacher, yet the holy Ghost tells us how he is occupied, speaking to Ezekiel he
says that they sat before him indeed, but though he was a man of rare gifts
and very eloquent yet their hearts went after their covetousness. So that a
covetous man's heart is in continual travail, though his body sit still, for
sometime yet his meditations and thoughts are moyling and rotting into the
earth; so that he can give no attention to the word nor mark nothing that is
spoken.

But yield that sometimes a quame of attention come over him, admit that he
can frame to give ear to that which is spoken unto him, yet all is fruitless,
he gets no good, for these be the cares of this world that like thorns choke
the good seed of the word that no fruit can come up, and thus we see what
mischief a covetous heart bringes, that no means of God can work any good
upon such a man. These things therefore being well weighed and pondered upon,
that will stay one from these vain desires of these vanities, and foolish
doting upon these idle trifles, that a worldly man with so great pain does
hunt after.

And now follows the public and outward breach of this commandment in
Church robbery. First, and that God himself finds fault with all, in Malac 3.
where he charges them to have robbed him, wherein say they? in tithes and
offerings says God, so that to take to ones self those things that God has
appointed to religious uses and for his service; that is to rob and spoil God
himself, of that which he has challenged unto himself. And in the Prouebs.
Solomon says it is an abomination to devour things sanctified. That is, to
convert things sanctified and appointed for holy uses unto ones own private
commodity, this is that which God abhorres. So for things pertaining to the
commonweal, that is an other kind of public robbery; when a man which has
the disposing and ordering of things that pertain to the commonweal and are
to be used for the common good, will take them for themselves and make a private
gain of them. This is a foul fault and an high degree of theft, so much the
more heinous, because it is more general and a greater wrong, by how much it
touches more, and because these be thieves in request, and robbers that are in
credit, which deceive those that trust in them, and deal ill and unfaithfully
with them that put confidence in them, which does much aggrauate the fault. For
other kind of thieves those that take a purse by the way side, or that steal
his sheep or Oxen out of his grounds, or pulle his cloths of the hedge, they
deceive no man's expectation, no man committed any thing in charge to them, nor
looked for better at their hands; but he that is false to those which are his
friends and rely upon, and untrusty to those that trust him, this is a right
Judas a thief in a higher degree. These two are public, now for private
stealth.

First, in the abusing of ones own goods, for a man may be a gross thief in
Gods account, though he never touch penny of man's goods, but only his own
goods. For as in the sixth commandment, he that kills himself and is cruel to
his own person shall not be exempted from the name and account of a murderer,
and in the seventh commandment a man may be a filthy person and a vilde
breaker of that commandment in abusing his body himself alone; so in this
eight commandment he that abuses his own goods and robs himself, is no
better then a thief before God. Now men abuse their own wealth by two ways;
by wastfulnes and niggardlynesse, by unjust spending and unjust sparing. For
lavish spending and wastfulnesse has many branches, first, excess in diet or
in apparaile, in sports or in building, above that, that one is able and can
go through with all. For excess of diet, in meat and drink, the wise man
says, He that loves pastime shall be a poor man and he that loves wine and
oil shall not be rich. When one is given to his appetite, and will too much
please his tooth, when he will fare well above his ability, and so spend all
in summer and keep nothing for winter, this man brings poverty upon him self
and and robs his own family.

These men are among their companions and mates termed good fellows, and
esteemd as the only liberal and kind hearted men in the world, but God calls
them thieves, and infidel thieves, yea worse then infidel thieves, that have
so much cast of civil honesty and humanity, as that they have no regard to
their family. Also in apparel, if one will set out himself to far and spend
more in decking his carcass, then he can well spare, and lay all he can get
upon his back: this man takes his own purse from himself and casts himself
into such arearages, and runs into such debts and danger and brings such a
weight of misery upon his one back, as that a thief could not do him half
the harm by cutting of his purse or taking it from him, then this prodigal
humor of his does, that he cannot be content with such garments as beseemes his
place and calling and ability, but must behang himself with such costly
coats. This brings penury and want where God sends none, therefore such a man
can give no good account of his stewardshippe but must be content to come in
the row of thieves. Also in gamning, for a gamester is a thief whether he
loose or win. He that loves pastime shall be a poor man, he beggars himself
when God requires no such matter at his hands, but would have him husband his
own so thriftily that he might live comfortably of that portion which God gives
him; what need he then put that to the fall of the lot which God has
already put out of doubt, and so to convey his goods to an other by an
unlawful means? Oh, but he is a gainer so^etimes, the^ is a thief, for he
should not covet that which is an other man's money or wealth. Who has appointed
such kind of trafique or exchange where the one party must receive no
competent and answerable recompense for his goods? God has appointed no such
manner of getting, and he that does get by this means God has branded it with
a curse, and no word of God, no man of God, or servant of God will give any
allowance or profess any blessing upon this kind of gain, so that having no
warrant for getting no comfort, in using no promise of blessing in the
possessing of such goods, how can he free himself from unlawful getting and
though a more common and received yet a wicked and condemned theft? So for
spending to much on hawks and hounds, this is to restrain ones own hand from
mercy and to give the childrens bread to dogs, which Christ forbid. And though
they say they have enough for both, yet they cannot but give less to one,
because they bestow so much upon the other, and they should not bestow that
upon beasts, that they might better bestow upon men.

This then will be an ill answer when they shall come before God to answer
for the spending of these things, as certainly every man (let him think what
he will) must give up his reckoning and make his accounts how he has laid out
his wealth that God gave him to glorify him by. I say when they must come to
answer to this question. How have you spent your wealth? This upon my taste,
this to please mine eye, this to delight mine ears, and so much upon an other
delight, and this upon an other sport. But what have you given to God? when I
could have any odd time I gave now and then a penny to Christ; this is to give
the bread to the dogs and crummes to the children, as in truth most men do.
The full stream and freeness of their liberality runs to serving of their
lust, but the sparing gifts and pinching bounty that God must have. And all
these rob and cosen themselves, and though they imagine to get mountains of
pleasure yet the end shall be pain he that loves wine and oil, and he that
loves pastime, what is his verdit, and what sentence has God set down? He
shall be a needly fellow, and live in want, poverty is the best end and easiest
punishment of this wastfullnesse, for want of moderation in meat, drink,
apparaile, and pastime.

An other kind of wastfullnesse is in idleness. An idle person is a thief, he
puts his hand into his bosom and eats up his own flesh. He consumes himself
and is a waster of himself, and an idle person shall be clothed with rags. If
one should have such a companion, as when he came to him, should find him
sufficiently furnished with reasonable store of goods to maintain himself,
but by that time they parted company, should strip him out of all, leave him
nothing, make him go in a ragged coat, and leave nothing behind him but want
and misery; would not one thnke this was but a cousening companion, and a
theeuish fellow? But so it stands with idleness if that it keep one company
a while and he will intertaine this guest into his heart, it will make a
speedy riddance of all, set him bare in apparel and base in account, and fill
an house full of distress and calamity, that is found full of wealth.

And in truth, experience shows this among us daily, that if a man be left
well and be of sufficient wealth to maintain himself in good sort, let him
but give harbor to idleness, and all flies away, it goes to wrack, and by
little and little like a moath it moolters away his great wealth, and makes him
no better then a beggar before it have done with him, unless he shake it of
betime. And true it is that Solomon says, His poverty comes like an armed
man: Idle persons be pouerties prisoners, if they have no calling to settle
themselves in, poverty has a calling to arrest the^, and if they can take up
themselves in no lawful business, poverty comes with a commission to take up
them, and will not be put back neither, it comes armed, it will prevail. So
that an idle man is a thief to himself, he does that to himself, that if
another should do it, all men would take heed of him for a notorious cousener.
And besides 2 Thessalonians. 3. he condemns such as walk inordinately, and bids them
labor with their hands, and not be idle, that they may eat their own bread;
as if he had said, he that does nothing, has right to nothing, he has no
bread of his own to eat, he puts stolen meat into his mouth every bit he
eats, he cannot say, Lord give me this day my daily bread, for it is none of
his, because he never earned it, God will have him do something before he have
any thing. God indeed allows recreation, he will have it to fit us for our
calling not to hinder us from it. And why do we account any man a thief, but
because he is a naughty fellow, he takes his neighbors meat and paies not for
it, he takes his clothes, and gives him nothing in recompense: and why then is
not an idle man a thief, for he takes his meat and his apparel, and what
ever he has from an other without allowance, without doing any thing for them;
they be Gods, and God has made no such bargain that he shall have them
without doing service to him, but when he leaves his calling, he loses his
right and title, he lives of an others goods, and shall answer for it as a
thief.

A third thing wherein one plays the thief in his own goods is by suretiship.
For Solomon names idleness and suretiship as two sins that men make little
account of, but God does mark them, and esteems them as foul faults. For
this suretiship how ever men think it comes from a kind nature, and a loving
disposition, that they would be willing to do good to any; but it is nothing
so, it proceeds from an unwise heart, and a great measure of foolishness for
true kindness at home, and love if it be true love, will do most where it
owes most, but this is a foolish cruelty when one under the show of mercy to
an other, will undo himself and his wife and children. I speak not this, but
that a man may and ought to be surety, and this is a duty to be performed to
a good man with a good calling; and according to ones ability, that he breaks
not his own back with bearing an other man's burden. Therefore in suretiship
keep these two rules, first, look what a kind of man he is that you would
paune your credit for, a man must not do his hand over his head for every one
that will ask, but only for such as he is bound unto by some bond of duty,
either for religion and charity, or else for some knot of friendship or of
kindred; else if one be so careless to be surety for he cares not who,
Solomon takes his coat, pity him not, let him feel the smart of his foolish
and sinful rashness.

Secondly, for whom ever it be, go not above your ability, promise not for so
much as might hurt your family, and impair your estate if it must be taken
from you, for when one is surety, he binds himself to pay if the principal
do not, and if he do not mean to do it, or cannot do, this is a mere
dissembling and plain cousenage of him to whom he makes the bond, and how can
it be counted better then a lie when he promises to do that which he neither
can perform though he would, nor purposes to perform though he could. If any
one therefore have offended this way, let him know and confess that it was his
rashness and folly, and then his best way is to repent and crave pardon of
God, and beseech him to make a supply of his wants. But so long as one
continues these speeches, O I was deceived, and I meant well, and I did it of
good will; and he has dealt ill with me, so long I say as one lays the fault
upon another thus, and posts it of from himfelfe, so long he is far enough
from repentance, and shall be far enough from comfort; the cross and curse
do both remain upon as yet; that is not the way to lay it upon another, it
was long of his unfaithfulness, and ill dealing with me; nay it was long of
your own unfaithfulness and ill dealing with your family, it was long of your
wisdom, that you did not advise upon the matter, crave assistance at Gods
hands, and ask counsel of his word, and of his servants. If you had taken
this course which is the right course, you had been safe, but now that you are
fallen, the best way is not to lie crying and exclaiming against him that was an
occasion of your fall, but seek how to rise up again, take the right
physic, and go to the right physician.

God is the physician, and true repentance, and prayer for help, is the right
medicine, and if one use these means, they shall find help, the hurt is
cured. Thus much for wastfulnesse, the next is niggardliness.

A base covetous, needy, and evil eye, when one cannot find in his heart to
take his part of the things God has bestowed upon him, but will serve and
pinch himself, and rob himself of the use of that which he has in his own
keeping, this is as bad as if he should do the same to an other; all is one to
bring poverty upon an other by wronging him, and to bring a needless need
upon himself by wronging himself. It is a most miserable and base thing for
one to restrain himself of his lawful liberty in meat, drink, apparel,
and honest recreation, where God has not abridged him. This sin the wise man
sets forth, Eccles. 2. 26. Where he speaks of two sorts of people, the one
which God loves, and to those he gives not only riches and abundance of all
things, but also the right and joyful use of the same, that they shall be able
with comfort to use that which God has given them. But there is an other kind
of people whom God hates, and how shall they speed thus? They shall have pain
to gather and heap up wealth which must be bestowed upon those that be holy
and good in Gods sight. God has certain enemies in the world, upon whom he
purposes to be avenged in this life, and how will he plague them? This shall
be their curse, he will appoint them to be slaves and drudges, and lay up
wealth great store, but they shall want a liberal and a good use, they shall
toil and moyle, and tumble and toss, and carke and care, and struggle and
strive for earth, a great deal more then Gods children can do for heaven, and
when they have been at all this labor, and spent themselves thus, they shall
see no good day nor have one hour of comfort, an other must enjoy all.

Likewise in Eccles. 6. 1. Solomon speaks of the same sin, he calls it an
evil sickness, a plague of the soul, and a pestilence of the conscience. And
yet it is very common among men, that a man should have good and wealth
enough, enough to serve the husband and wife to spend to their days merrily
together, and to suffice the parents to rejoice with their children, and
governors, to live quietly among and with their servants, if they had a heart
to take their part, but through the insatiableness of the mind there are such
seares, such cares, such wishing, such desiring, such wrestling such wrangling
with wife, and chafing with servants, that it is a house of disquiet and
vexation, and in the midst of all outward means of comfort, they live all
without comfort.

This is a sick family, this house is infected with the plague of God, and
that upon the soul, this is a most miserable and grievous disease. Therefore
we must all learn to beware of this baseness, which is ordinary with men of
most ability; of all in the parish you shall have them come seldomest to
Church upon the sabbath days, no more then needs they must, but upon the week
day never at all, not once in a twelve month, and if you ask them, why? what
is the reason, you can find no leisure to come to hear Gods word, and to
seek the means your salvation upon the week days? why alas we have such a
deal of buisinesse, so much rrouble, as that we cannot dispatch it in any
time, we must needs follow our calling, and see to our household, and thus
commonly it is seen that those which have most land and living, have most
pains and vexation, all lies upon them* and all must come through their own
hands, they have no servants, none to help themselves, and they must needs
look to it; but who puts them to all this trouble, who lays such a burden
upon them? surely this it is that either they be so miserable, and close fisted
that ye will not lay out any thing to hire help, or else if they do
entertain a servant, they punish him so miserably in his diet, and deal so
deceitfully with him in his wages, or oppress and ouercharge him so cruelly
with labor, as that he that has had experience of them one year, will not be
persuaded to live with them the second, and thus they trouble themselves with
plain nigardise, and no necessity that God has imposed upon them. This men
commonly call good husbandry and thrift, for a man to lay about him so, and
take on, and do all himself; but it is plain theft before God, for one to
spend himself, and pull a want upon himself, when he may live in plenty, Gods
marks be found upon him for a wicked man, and a cursed sinner, when he has
much, but can use nothing. That he which has a very small portion, may live
more comfortably, sleep more quietly, pray more cheerfully, and sing Psalms
with greater joy, then he that has so much abundance as nothing hurts him but
too much.

These therefore that be such miserable bondslaues to lucre and covetousness, as
that they be as much at the command of gain, both for their body and their
sleep and every thing, as the saints of God be unto Christ Jesus, let them
repent of there theeuerie, and not brag of their honesty, and say they will
desie him that will call them thieves, for then they must desie God, for he
will tell them they be thieves that will not thankefully use his benefits, but
pinch and sterue themselves. We would think that it were an ill member in the
body that would not be content that any other member should have any thing,
but would be scraping all to it self, and nothing was well which was not
bestowed upon it. For the body has several parts, and every one has his
proper use that is fittest for it self, and so in the mamilie, the husband and
wife have both their duities, and there is a place for servants to, and those
that one for covetousness will wear himself, and spend himself, and spend
his strength and spirits, that all must go through his hand, and nothing can
be well, unless it be of his own doing; this misdeeming of others, and
ouercharging of himself is a damnable sin, and unless he repent for it, God
will proceed against him at the day of judgment, as against as base a thief
as any under heaven. Thus much for theft in ones own goods. Now for theft of
an other man's goods.

And first, of that which is done with some color of law and semblable show
of equity and right. This is as bad and damnable a sin as the other that is
done more openly, for in other matters art and skill always amends a thing,
and makes it better, only it makes sin far worse, and therefore the devil
is the most abominable sinner of all, because he is the most subtle and
artificial sinner of all. This kind of deceiving one under color of law, and
under show of equal bargaining and covenant, to deal craftily and against
conscience, is horrible theft before God. And this is forbidden. 1 Thessalonians. 6.
That no man defraud or oppress an other, for God is an auenger of all such
things. The Apostle condemns this circumuenting and politic fetching over
ones brother in unequal matches. I but says some man, may not I make the most
of mine own, and seek my best advantage? if he be hurt it is not my fault but
his, he should have had more wit. Well this will not be a good answer to God
says the Apostle, he will tell you, that you should have had more love, he is
an auenger of all these things, and will plague those that will gripe and pinch
their neighbors thus, far otherwise then themselves would be dealt withal in
the like case. So James. 5. 4. he bids such howl and weep, for the cry of
those laborers whose hire they had kept back by fraud, is come into the ears
of God. Else they might have said, what reason have you to threaten us thus, or
they to cry against us, or to hold themselves discontented, what wrong have we
done them? we require no more the^ our bargain and our covenant, we agreed for
all that we ask, and what injury is that? says the Apostle it may be so, but
your agreement was deceitful, you kept it back by fraud, you made a cousening
and crafty bargain, you played upon your neighbors simplicity, and abusd his
plainness, you saw more then he did, and knew the inconvenience better then he
could, you wrapped him by craft, you feared him by great words, that he durst not
yield, or you got him in by fair promises, he looked to be better used, and to
have some recompense in an other thing.

This catching men by fraud, and hunting them with nets, this is a crying
sin, and will let God have no rest till he take vengeance upon those that use
it. And thus Ahab got Naboths vineyard. He would feign have it from him, and
would not take it from him by plain and open violence, for fear of the speech
of people and infamy in the world, but yet he was content to let Iesabel have
his ring, and she indites a very coulerable and holy letter. There was an ill
report of a foul fault done amongst them, that Naboth should be blasphemer of
Gods majesty, and a wicked traitor against his prince, but yet for fear least
men's tongues should be slanderous, and lies should go abroad, a judicial
proceeding must be taken, and least any thing should be done without advice and
good counsel, rashly and headily, a fast must be proclaimed, and the people
must be called together, and there with fasting and prayer the thing must be
tried orderly, and in form of law. For good Ahab and good Iesabel were loath
to do any wrong, or to judge one upon a false surmise and rumor; therefore
that the truth might appear, let the elders of the city search out the
matter, and find the truth in all equal manner, let the accusers come face to
face, and so let them according as they saw in conscience they were bound,
proceed to pass to sentence. And so they did, and there were men at hand to
forswear themselves, and now since that all things were so plain and evident,
and matters went so clear against him, alas they were sorry but they could
not chose but deal indifferently, and according to law Naboth must have that
punishment that his foul fact deserved, he must forfait his life and goods to
the King. And thus Ahab got the vineyard. Here we see was dawbing and painting
with fair shows and goodly words, equity, conscience, and religion, and all
to carry out murder and theft; but did this make it a whit the better? nay
this made it far more abominable in Gods sight.

So among us, cruel enclosers that set themselves to unpeople the land, and
weaken the strength of the country, by joining house to house, and land to
land, indeed for houses they do not so much delight in joining house to
house as in pulling down houses, but all the land they would by their good will
get into their own hand. These caterpillars what do they? what say they?
goodly words and fair pretenses you shall have. O this will be for the good of
the co^monweale and of the inhabitants, this will prevent much strife and
contention, when things be parted, and every man knows his own, and they lie
not in common thus, and beside it will nourish wood, and I know not what; and
thus under pretense of a common good seek to get all to themselves, and sweep
out men from of the earth. These commonly be great thieves, but there is a
great judge that will proceed against them, his word has passed sentence
already, and it shall not be long before the execution come upon such as do
harm by color of doing good. The like may be said of those that having the
goods of men deceased put into their hands by will, deal unfaithfully, and put
them from the right owners into their own purse; this is plain theft, and yet
it goes for current often among men, because it takes some show of warrant from
the law of men, but Gods law will allow it no color. So Solomon speaks of
theft by buying and selling, it is naught, it is naught says the buyer, but
after he boasts, such as will depresse a thing above measure, and against
their conscince and knowledge if they be to buy, but if they be to sell will
extol and praise the same thing far beyond that they know and persuaded it
is worth.

These and such like practices, are close and colorable that man's law does not
take so much hold upon, but Gods law does forbid and condemn. An other and
the last kind of stealth is with out all color of law, when one will have it,
because he will, though he can allege no shadow of right or title to it. As by
violence and strong hand to take away that belongs not to one. This was the
sin of Ophni and Phineas, that when God had commanded them to take sodden
meat they would have it raw, and if the people said, nay I pray you let God be
served, and let things be done according to the custom, nay would they say,
but if you will not give it us, we will take it whether you will or no. Here
they could plead no manner of intrest, and therefore it is said the sin of
the young man was great in the sight of God. So to steal by the high way side,
and to take may men's cattle, or any such like dealing. This is a known sin,
and because such commonly have nothing to say for themselves, but must needs
plead guilty straight; They are soonest brought to repentance and amendment.

An other kind of lawful stealing which is done without color of right is
more privy and closse, the former was violent and open, and that is either by
taking or retaining. By taking when one lays theeuish hands on that thing
which his conscience tells him, he has no right unto it, but it belongs
altogether to an other man; of this theft the Prophet speaks. Zachar. 5. That
the curse of God like a flying book comes upon the house of the thief in the
2. 3. 4. verse. I see a flying book the length thereof is 20. cubits and the
breadth of it 10. Then said he unto me, this is the curse that goes through
the whole earth, for every one that steals shall be cut of, as well on this
side as on that. And in the fourth verse. I will bring it forth says the Lord
of hosts and it shall enter into the house of the thief and him that swears
falsely by my name, and it shall remain in the midst of his house and it shall
consume it with the timber of it, and the stones of it. The Prophet shows that
the curse of God follows such as steal, and be thieves; swiftly it flies
after them and God himself will bring it into their houses, and when it is
there, it is like the most pestilent fretting leprosy that was not only
infectious to men but would consume the howses and enter into the timber and
stones. So Gods curse does not rest upon the body and soul only of thieves
and those that will steal, but it will bring all to naught, unless he purge
it away by true repentance; A man were as good put a cole of fire in the thatch
of his house or in the barn as bring any stolen goods among his stuff. First,
he says, the man that steals shall be cut of, he prouokes God to deal with
his person first, and to cut him of, to kill his body and damn his soul; why
but though I be dead and gone, yet I hope my family and my children after me
shall fare the better for me; No, they shall fare the worse for it, for Gods
curse that shall pursue them is such a deuourer and co^sumer, that though there
should be no man or least no living thing left for it to work upon, yet it
would not rest but show it upon the dumb things upon the very thatch and the
timber and the stones of the houses of such as have provoked God to lay it upon
them, as the Prophet Abacuc says. 2. chap. 9. He that coueteth an evil
covetousness to his house, not to himself only. Men think when they can
bring home those stolen goods, that this is a good thing, and shall do them
and theirs good, but indeed it is an ill covetousness, it brings a mischief
upon him and his house, so many things as a man gets by stealth from his
neighbor, so many curses he gets to his soul, and so many plagues he wraps
and rowles together to come upon his posterity. So that to be prigging and
pilfering of that belonges not to him, nor is not his due, is a foul sin
against this commandment. Yet men have excuses for this prigging.

As first, alas what should you speak of this it is a small thing and one
should not make such a do about so little a matter. Is' it a small thing? Then
ye more base and abject companion you that will corrupt your self for so small
a thing, he that will rack his conscience for a triffle, he will never stick
to do five times worse for a matter of weight. If a man be not faithful in a
little, you may be sure he will never be faithful in much; he that will
venture damnation for a matter of two pence, he will do ten times more if it
come to a pound, he that cares not to break Gods commandment for a piece of
bread, let him have hope of a greater booty, and he will not care for any
commandment. If one will do the Devil such good service for so simple and
small wages, let the devil mende his wages, and he will certainly mende his
work. So that this excuse shows a man to be more wicked. Oh but I trust this
is not to be blamed, why he can spare it well enough, twill do him no harm,
and twill do me good, I hope this is no such matter. But first, who made you a
deuider of goods, who gave you authority to make any such partition? Has not
God given him that which is his, and you that which is yours, and will you have
God alter it, and not contented with Gods distributions, take that which
belongs not to you? and for that you say he can spare it, it will do him no
harm; suppose one should go to the Kings exchequer and break open his
treasure, and take out, though it were but twenty shillings or forty
shillings, and say, alas I am a poor man and this is not so much, the King
is rich enough, he may well spare twice so much, I trust he will not be much
offended, though I have ventured a little in my need. But for all your need
and the princes wealth, he that would do thus, were like to be counted a fool
and be hanged for his pains, the excuse would not serve the turn; but now god
he has forbidden you to take any man's goods without any such cause of
exception unless he can spare it; that is not the question, whether it will
hurt him or not, it offends God, he has forbidden it and therefore you must
not do it.

And where as you say, it will do you good, and help you, that is not true,
it will hinder you rather and brings a further curse on you then before. I but
what course would you have a man take? the world has forsaken me, I have no
friend to help me, what would you have me do? what? why rather any thing then
this. Have men forsaken you, and will you make God forsake you to? you can have
no help in the world, and will you therefore shut up heaven against your
selves to? if one were helpless and freindlesse here and knew not which way
to turn himself for relief and succor, yet if he could turn to god and run
to heaven, and have hearing there and comfort from thence, that God did hear
his prayers and give peace unto his soul, his case is good, and he is well so
long. But now when one is quite out of hope among men, and destitute of all
outward comfort, then for him to make God his utter foe, and fill him self
with inward evils and greefes to, this is a fair mending of the matter
indeed, this is a wise kind of help.

Therefore above all, then a man had most need to keep peace and league with
God when the world has cast him of, and if God does chastise him with want, it
were a far better course to repent, and entreat God to help him, and turn
away his heavy hand, then to add more to his sin, and so cause God, to add
more strokes and correctio^s, to those that he has already laid upon him. So
that whether the thing be little or great, what ever a man's estate be, or who
ever he be whom he wrongs, he must always take heed of this privy stealth,
of this prigging and close conueying an other man's goods to himself. Now as
this is fault to any, so especially if the person to whom the wrong be done,
be more nearer joined and tied in any bonds to us or we to them, contrary to
the dealing of a number, that indeed will let their neighbors goods alone for
some outward respect, they will not steal from them, but for their parents or
masters, there you must give them leave they hope they may borrow law a little,
and be some thing bolder with their goods, then with an others. But do they
not know what the holy Ghost says in the proverbs, he that robs his father and
mother, and says it is noe sin, is a shameful and a lewd son. For this is
so far from lessening the fault, that in truth before God it makes it far
more heinous and abominable. For as he that kills his father or his master, does
commit a far greater sin, then if he were a stranger or one further of, so
here to, he that robs his father or his master, is in an higher degree a
sinner, then if it were a person nothing so near unto him, to whom he did not
owe so much duty.

Therefore as one must labor, not to let his hands have liberty to take in
any thing that belongs to any man, be he never so far distante from him, so
especially he must restrain them from that which belongs to his father or
master, or some such to whom he was bound with a more strong and near bond
then to other men; for it is a more wicked stelth, that is done against a
freinde, then that against a stranger. And thus much for stealth by taking.

Now an other kind of theeuerie there follows nothing inferior to this, by
unlawful retaining and keeping in ones hand that which is none of his. Whether
it be with holding of things found or lent, or of wages or things that way due
unto an other. For though a man keep himself unspotted in this respect that
no man can charge him to have taken away one penny from his neighbor either
privily or violently, yet if he going by the way side find a thing that he
knows not whose it is, then when he takes it up, and after hears who is the
right owner of it, and does not restore his own goods to him again, all his
former good dealing in other things will not excuse him from being accounted a
thief, and stealing from his neighbor. For God has commanded to bring back
the thing that goes astray, and to make restitution of that which is lost; and
if he did not so, before his offering could be accepted, he was to restore the
principal and add the fifth part more unto it.

For indeed his conscience will accuse him and the very law of nature will
condemn him. Because there is no man so ignorant, but if he has lost his
purse or any thing by the way side or any other way, would think it right and
equal that he who found it, should bring it to him again if he knew him to
be the owner of it, and would say he had not done the duty of a neighbor if
he should keep it back from him. Now, God commands to do as we would be done
by, and therefore this that he would be so dealt with all, binds him to deal
so, and if he do not he sins against his own conscience, and that shall be
sufficient to condemn him. So for wages, he that does not pay his servants or
the hireling his due wages, in due time, without shifting and putting of from
time to time, he is giulty of theft, and this is a gross kind of stealing,
breaking this commandment, Thou shall not steal. This delay is theeuerie,
though one do purpose to pay the^ all, and that rather with the most to, then,
to keep any back, if he be poor and not able to forbear this protracting
from time to time is no better then plain theft. This is forbidden, Leuit. 19.
13. Thou shall not rob thy neighbor, says God. But one might say I do not
rob him, nor I will not, for he shall have his goods safe enough by me, I will
take nothing from him that is his, then says he again. Let not the hirelings
wages rest with thee till morning, as if he had said though you do not take
his money, yet if you keep it from him. I account it robbeerie, for the end of
his work should be the beginning and performing of his wages; therefore after
the work is done, let not the wages tarry one day in your purse, for it is
none of yours, it is your hirelings. So Deuteronomy, 24. 14. Thou shall not oppress
an hired servant that is needy. Thou shall give him his hire for the day,
neither shall the sun go down upon it, for he is poor, and therewith
sustaineth he his life. If one be poor and in distress, and he cannot bear
with this delay but is put to his shifts, and made to endure hunger and cold,
and to go from him with an heavy heart when he is not paid, and with a Sighe
not knowing what to do for relief; this is both cruelty in that he keeps
that from him that should maintain his life, and it is theft also in that it
is an unjust detaining of that which is done to the hindrance of him to whom
it appertains. So that this kind of shifting and putting of the hireling with
such delays, is a fault that makes the man guilty of theft, before God. Thus
much for the things forbidden in this commandment.

The things commanded, are EitherInwarde or Outward

The inward duty, is contentedness with ones own estate, with that portion
whatsouer that God has allotted unto us. To like so well of Gods deuisio^, as
that we believe in our hearts that that measure is best and most profitable for
us, that God our most merciful father has appointed for us. This quietness
with that part that falls to his share, is the duty commanded to every man,
and is is the inward keeping of this commandment. This is commanded. Heb. 13.
5. Let your conversation be without covetousness. This is the commandeme^nt.
Why might some men say, I am not covetous, that you may try soon, and be
content with those things that ye have; certainly so far as a man is void
of covetousness, so far he is well content with that which he has, and he
that does not think his own enough for himself, it is sure he is covetous
after an other man's, I but how is it possible that one can be contented? I
have so many wants and can see no means to supply them, how would you have one
content now, and has not enough maintenance, nor cannot tell how to get it?
Nay if one be a christian he has enough to maintain him, for he has the
promise of God not to leave him nor forsake him, and is Gods promise nothing?
is not his word sufficient assurance of all things needful? if God have bid
one be content, and given him cause to be content, why should not he be
content, is not his truth pawn good enough? what is to be believed, and
whereupon may one depend, if not upon the word and promise of God?

For man's life consists not in the greatness of his portion or the multitude
of his wealth, but in the blessing of god which will make a little go far,
and do more good then a great deal with out it, and he that has this, what
ever outward wants seem to be, he is well. Indeed if the promise were* your
wealth shall not fail and friends shall not forsake you, this were no great
cause of comfort, here a man could not but fear when his saftie consisted in
the constancy of such unconstant things. But if God has promised to be with
us what should we fear, what any creature can do against us? So Paul speaks
of himself, that he had learnd in all things to be content, Philip. 4. This
is a point of great learning, and he is a good scholar in Christ's schole that
has gone so far, as that he can like well of Gods doings whatsoever. This
is a thing that only Gods spirit can teach one to be so well apaide with his
own, as that he do neither envy at this, that an other has more, nor
repine, and grudge that himself has less.

But if this be such a point of learning how should man come to it? That Paul
shows in. 1. Tim. 6. Godliness is great gain, if he a man be contented with
that he has. First, because it makes man contented with that he has. So far
as any man is godly, so far is he content with his outward estate, though he
have but a little he is not much troubled, for he knows Gods hand is not
shortened, and if he had nothing, he would not be out of heart, and dismayed,
because he persuades himself Gods blessing can sustain him as well without
means as with means. And this was that, that made Paul so quiet and settled in
all cases. For before Godliness had calmed his heart he was as unquiet as the
sea, and troubled all the world with his raging and discontendnesse, none more
boystrous then: But so soon as he grew godly, all these storms were
quieted, none more quiet and contented then he, if they imprisoned him, if
they whipped him, if they stond him; hunger, cold, nakedness, what ever came,
all is one to him, it was no great trouble to him, he knew all came from God,
and for his good, and therefore he never stormd nor took on for the matter,
but possessed his soul in patience, and knew how to bear all things quietly.

Therefore whoeuer would be patient let him labor to get godliness into his
heart, many there be that be willing, and will take pains enough to store
their purses and their grounds, and their houses, but few there be that will
take pains where it were most behouefull, to store there hearts with
godliness, which would bring contentedness, and a sufficiency to, for we have
the promise of God, that if we seek the kingdom of God, we shall have all
other things cast upon us as a vantage, And the cause why God does restrain
us, is not because he wants love and cannot find in his heart to bestow them,
but because they would be ill for us and we could not them bear, he would have
us be good within, before we seek good without, and know how to use riches,
before we have them to abuse. Therefore as we would not be counted thieves
and breakers of this commandment, so let us, be content to live at Gods
finding, and to rest upon him, so good a God, that though we have but a little,
yet he has enough, and though he give us nothing before hand, yet he loves
us before hand, and will give us comfort in all distresses, and these outward
things so far as we have need and can digest. Thus much for the inward
obedience, now the outward follows and this is the right use of our own, and
the righteous dealing toward others.

The right use of our own is seen in frugalitie and liberality. Frugalitie
that stands in getting and keeping: getting things must be by some faithful
labor in an honest calling, and by honest dealing in the calling: As Ephesians. 4.
28. Let him that stole, steal no more, but labor with his hands that thing
that is good. To theeuerie which is a breach of this commandment, and
idleness which is a kind of theft, he opposes labor, and the keeping of the
commandment, but then he shows what kind of labor it must be, namely in
the thing good, in some lawful and christian calling. For many labor all day,
and all night, but that is in dicing and carding, and gamning, and
unthriftiness which will neither make them have an heart to do good, nor
ability to do good, but brings a curse upon heart and estate, the one is
wicked, and the other commonly weak as is to be seen in stage players and
such like that draw the people away to vanity, which take pains indeed, but
is is no profitable pains, and therefore it brings no profit, either to their
soul or body, but brings them an hard heart and a wicked hand, and a
miserable estate, that of all men they are the most profane and lewd.
Therefore as a man must not be idle, for an idle man cannot be an honest man,
so this must always be provided, that, he labor in an honest and lawful thing
else one may toil and spend his body in toyling, and be never a whit the
honester man, if he serve not God, but serve his lust and filthy flesh. Esau
could take pains, and that eagerly till he was almost dead with labor, but it
was in hunting, in following his foolish sport, in this he would spend
himself, for he says, I am almost dead, and he was so faint that he would
sell his birth right for a mess of pottage to refresh him, all this while he
was as bad as idle, because he was ill occupied, and and this was a cursed
labor. For God would have one labor in such a calling as should humble his
flesh, and pull down and tame his pride, and make him fit for death, and as
would bring some increase unto his outward estate, and better him in his
wealth, so that he might have where-withall to show mercy as have a merciful
affection. This God has appointed, and these will be the effects of a godly
labor. But this wearying ones self in slavery to his lusts, and serving
himself, it humbles one not a whit, nay it makes one more proud, more surly,
and more associable that one neither knows God nor himself, it does not
prepare him to die, but it makes him forget his latter end, and never think
of death, it makes not the heart pitiful and merciful, but it hardens the
heart, and infects it with cruelty, and such an one as is not made by his
labor able and willing to give more, but able and willing to give nothing at
all. So that every man must labor, no man has any warrant or privilege to be
idle, that is to be a Sodomite. And furthermore, every man must look that his
vocation be honest and lawful, or else he shall do himself more harm then
good by his labor.

The second point of liberality is in keeping that prudently and discreetly,
which was honestly gotten, for if labor in getting be not joined with wisdom
in preferring and saving, that is no good thrift, neither must this be a
niggardly and miserable sparing, but an orderly and wise disposing and
husbanding of that which God has put into our hands, that he may be better
able to do good, and to relieve others. In this many fail, and by failing in
it, are faulty in a good duty as necessary as the former; yea labor indeed,
and that with great diligence and carfulness, till they have gotten
something, but let it go as fast, either by drinking or gamning, or else by
good cheer and dainty fair above their ability, and by this immoderate
indiscreet lavishness, they undo whatsoever they did before by following
their calling, and keep themselves always in want and penury, whereas if
they would be as careful to keep thriftily, as they be painful to get, they
might live of their labors comfortably and joyfully, and besides might be much
beneficial to other that stood in need, and have wherewithal to open their
hand liberally in works of mercy.

So Proverb. 21. 20. In the house of a wise man is a pleasant treasure and
oil, but a fool deuowreth it. A wise man that is a godly man, does not only
seek and bring into his house, but will also keep in his house, a pleasant
treasure, delightful riches, such as being gotten without any stain of
injustice, he has delight and comfort, and a blessing in the use of them, and
he has not for necessity only, but also for delight even oil and things for
refreshing and recreation. But a fool that is a wicked and an ungodly man, he
deuoures all, what ever it be left him by his parents, given him by his
friends, or gotten by his labor, all goes one way, all is devoured, all is
spent idly, and without any discretion, for he serves such a chargeable
master as will leave him nothing at the years end. Other masters use to give
their servants wages for their work, but the devil and lust whom wicked men
serve, be both costly and hard masters, they will take all; and so long as
there remains any thing to be had, they cease not calling for it, but all this
hard and chargeable pains shall be rewarded with nothing but want and
necessity at the last. So that a good man must be as well a keeper as a
gayner, he must know how to bring in lawfully, and how to lay out with such
discretion, and to dispose things in that good order, that he do not bring
himself into unnecessary wantes and troubles, but that he may have both to
comfort himself, and also to refresh others. Thus much for thriftinesse.

The other thing required in the right use of ones own goods is liberality,
without which there is no true obedience to this commandment. Now this
liberality must spread it self in two branches toward one self, and
toward others. A liberal man must be liberal to himfelfe, for all goodness
begins at home, and shows it self first where it was first bred. And so
Eccles. 5. 17. This is good he says, to eat, and drink, and take pleasure in
ones labor, and this he says is the gift of God. To have meat and drink, and
apparel, is a thing common to reprobates, but to have these things, and the
right use of them also in joy and comfort, and thankfulness, this is a
special favor, and a thrift not common to many.

Therefore it is our duty to take a part of those things that God has given us,
and with a thankful and a cheerful heart to enjoy his kindness, and not to
make our case worse then we need, as the foolish Israelites did, that when God
in goodness had provided sufficient food for them, that they might have
enough, and gone to bed cheerfully after a good and competent supper, they
were so fearful and doubtful least they should have had nothing for morning,
that they pinched themselves of Gods allowance, and would needs reserve
something until the morning. But what came of it, did not God send worms
amongst it, so that it stanke and was good for nothing? and so it is still,
this is a thing perpetual to the end of the world, that he which will be a
more niggardly then God would have him, and spares more then God has laid
necessity upon him, the curse of God will fall upon the goods thus saved,
that it were as good as they had been spent, for they shall corrupt and
vanish away to nothing, he that spares thus, shall never have any good by them,
that is most sure. And indeed if one do not first show mercy to himself, how
is it possible he should show mercy to an other? he that will sterue and
pine himself, when he needs not, no man will trust him to feed and relieve
his neighbor when he needs, this is most certain he that will be cruel to
his own flesh can never have any true pity to an other.

Therefore first a man must have an open hand to minister unto his own
necessity, and to help himself, first see that himself be the better for
his own goodness and liberality. And yet that is not enough neither, a man
must not spend all his kindness within doors, and keep so spare a fire that
can vvarme no body but himself, but after he must stretch out his hand to be
bountiful to others, whose want requires his help, and whose penury calls
for some thing of his abundance. So 1: Timoth. 6. 17. Charge those that be
rich in this world, that they be not high minded etc. That they do good, and
be rich in good works. He would have rich men not to trust in riches but in
God, for riches be uncertain, and what greater folly can be then for a man to
put his confidence in that which must away he knows not how soon? God will
call for him, and he must leave his riches behind him, and come naked before
the judgment seat of God. But if they would know how to use riches well, let
it not be in putting trust in them, or in looking big, and proud, and sour,
for this will make them hateful to God and man, but let them be merciful, let
them do good and distribute, and this will be a sure foundation for
themselves, by so doing they shall be loved both of God and man, no better
treasure against an evil day then that which has been laid up in works of
mercy. So in Proverbs. 11. 17. He that is merciful rewards his own soul.
This is the benefit of mercy that one does two good things at one time, he
stops two gaps with one bush, he both helps and comforts his distressed, which
is his own flesh, and more then that, he furthers his own reckoning against
the time of account. For when God shall come to take a view, and search how
every man has ordered the goods committed to his hand, as certainly he will
one day, let foolish men promise to themselves what liberty they will, and
flatter themselves that all is their own, and every one may do with his own
what he will; yet they shall find it is Gods, and to be used and disposed
according to his will, and when such an inquiry comes, this will bring most
unspeakable comfort to a man's soul, when upon his deathbed and when he is now
to leave his wealth, he can with a good conscience repeat to God how he used
his wealth, and can hold up his head before God and say, Lord, thine it was,
and I did know I was but a steward, and therefore I disposed of it according to
my masters will, I spent it not in serving my lusts and mad desires, but in
the service, and to the glory of God, I was more willing and ready to lay out
twelve pence to Gods glory, and the releeuing of a poote member of Christ that
stood in need, then one penny in setting up my flesh, and pleasing the vain
and foolish affections of my flesh: when one can thus speak to God, and make
such a reckoning, he shall then well perceive and feel, to the exceeding joy
of his heart, what reward he gets to himself, that gives an alms, and shows
mercy liberally to an other.

And the Apostle Paul says, that he that sows plentifully shall reap
plentifully, comparing liberality in works of mercy to sowing, and so it is
indeed and shall yield a better and more plentiful crop, by how much the seed
it self, and the ground on which it is sowed is better then any other. So Ose.
37. The righteous is merciful and lends, and his seed inioyeth the blessing:
meeting with an objection that seems to arise indeed, I would feign be
merciful and do good, I know it is a good thing, but alas I have charge, I
must provide for my children, the father must lay up for the children, and he
is worse then an infidel that prouides not something for his family But God will
have one lay up and provide, and store something for his posterity, and
therefore he bids him be merciful, for he will never bequeath a better portion,
and a richer legacy to his seed, then when he does many works of mercy, even
for their sakes, for God promises they shall enjoy the blessing of their
goodness.

He says not they shall be rich and have the world at will, for a man may live
in as much ease and wealth, and pleasure as Dives did, and yet go to hell when
he dies; but they shall have the blessing which imports thus much, they shall
have Gods favor to bring them to heaven, he will bless their soul and
conscience, and they shall have beside so much wealth as may stand with this
blessing. Not so much as to make them proud and idle, for that were the way to
make them cursed, but so much as shall have Gods favor to bring them to heaven,
he would bless their soul and conscience, and they shall have beside so much
as may stand with this blessing, not so much as to make proud and idle, for
that were the way to make them cursed, but so much as shall suffice to make
them thankful, and profitable in the Church. And this blessing they shall
have not as a guest to salute them and away, but as an inheritance that shall
abide with them, and help them for ever. Thus much for the right use of ones
own.

Now follows the next point in the right carriage of our selves toward our
neighbors, and that is called Justice, which consists in two things, in
getting and restoring. Justice in getting is when one gets by lawful means in
a lawful calling.

Not by gamning and such means, without any sufficient consideration and
exchange; for this is theft, these be cursed means, that bring a curse with
the unlawful gain, and such a man makes himself excommunicate in the hearts
of Gods people, and brings hardness of heart upon himself, and much mischief
beside. But if the calling wherein a man exercises himself, be warranted and
sanctified of God to this use, then care must be had, and that as much that the
means which one uses in his calling be agreeable, if it be by dissembling,
and lying by false weights or false measures, by false commending or
discommending above measure, or by any such like unconscionable ways, this is
injustice and a breach of this commandment. Therefore let the calling be
good, and the means good, and then a man may with a good conscience take the
blessing. And this is justice in getting: now for restoring. This must also be
observed, that if any have in former time been crafty and deceitful, and
dealt injuriously with his neighbor, though happily it be hidden from men, and
the world cannot lay it to his charge, yet his own heart knows it, and his
own conscience will not pass it over so, but he must hear of it. If I say
ones soul tell him that he has thus wrongfully entreated his neighbor, if he
will be accounted a just man, and have the former offense blotted out, and the
mouth and clamor of his conscience stopped from those fierce and bitter
accusations whereby it vexes and disquieteth unrepentant sinners, he must see
that he make restitution; let the servant go to the master and the goods
return home to the owner who has the right title unto them. This is
commanded. Leuit. 6. 2. If any sin and committ a trespass against the Lord,
and deny unto his neighbor that which was taken him to trust, etc. then in
the first verse he shall both restore it in the whole sum, and add the fifth
part more thereto. Where the holy Ghost appoints that if a man have been any
way injurious to his neighbor, either by denying that which was lent him, or
having found a thing lost, and knowing the owner, by retayning it, or by any
other such like dealing, if ever he will have God hear his prayer, and receive
his sacrifice, before his offering he must make recompense, the enterest and
the fifth part, etc. I but he is gone, I know him not, or cannot tell where to
have him, I but do you know none of his kindred, has he no son, or nephew,
or brother, is there none near unto him that you know? not one. Yet it must be
restored, it is none of yours, you must not keep it, you of necessity must
part with it if you will have the sin pardoned. Therefore you must give it to
the Lord, the Church must have it. Numb. 5. 8. So that this is the law of
restitution. He that has gotten any thing unlawfully must not only say indeed
I have done amiss, I cry God mercy for that that is past, and I will do so
no more, but for this I hope GOD will pardon me, I purpose now to leave of
doing wrong to any. No this is not enough, a man must reconcile himself to
GOD, before he can reconcile his conscience to himself, God will not be
answered with such a weak amendment, there can be pardon, or perseverance
unless there be true repentance, and true repentance never goes before, but
soon after you shall see restitution follow. Therefore let a man deal more
soundly in such cases, that pertain to the peace of his conscience; this
hollow heartedness and hypocrisy in such matters will bring no peace,
therefore let not a man hearken to the devil and his own flesh for his hurt,
and restore that which he has defrauded any man of by ill means. If not, let
him know for a surety, who ever he be, that there is no thriuing by such
dealing, sin is a poison infecting both the soul and body and estate, and
unless it be purged out in time, will bring all to ruin.

But yet some objections seem to arise; first, the thing is of some price and
the person is wicked, and would be willing to take the advantage and follow the
occasion to put me to death.

Therefore here danger seems to stop ones mouth, and it were better to live
in saftie then to make restitution with peril of his life. But though the case
shall fall out thus, yet the law of restitution admits no such exception, one
must restore, yet wisdom must be used in this case, that both the party
offended may be satiffied and the party which has offended may be in saftie.
Therefore some other third person of wisdom and gravity, a man of good
account for religion and honesty, must be chosen, to whom the secret may be
without peril revealed, and by whose means the wrong done may be fully
answered; and he must restore it in the name of the other concealing his name
and particular fault, as thus he may speak. There is a man that in time of his
ignorance has wronged and endamaged you, and now that God has touched his
heart with true repentance, he is willing to satisfy you to the full, and
therefore has by me sent you so much as will fully recommpence your loss, yet
he desires to conceal his name because of peril that might ensue.

By some such wise and godly course, amends might be fully made to the party
that sustaind the wrong and he that did the wrong be nothing at al enda^gered,
for by Gods blessing no man is so malicious, but by the wisdom and godly
counsel of the man that is employed in this thing, and the full satifaction
and good dealing of the man that did wrong him, would have held himself
contented without any further prosecuting of reuengment. But there comes yet a
further doubt. I am not able to restore, I have not where withal. Then where
nothing is to be had, (it is a common proverb,) the prince must loose his
right. But yet so that a man must plainly and fully confess his fault if there
be not ability for restitution; yet a man must not neglect confession, and
this further, a man must covenant with himself, that if ever it please god to
give him ability, he will be answerable to the full to all such wrongs, and
then as we are in affection, so God will account us indeed. If one can say in
truth of heart, O Lord I confess my fault to thee, and have confessed it also
to the person whom I have offended, and though I be not able to recompense
him, yet I resolve with my self and make a covenant with mine own conscience,
That if ever I have it, I will pay him, and if I had it now, I would differ
no longer, he should have it now, in mean time I will not cease to supply
that by my prayers, which by reason of poverty is wanting in my payment, that
mine humble suite to God for him, may as much profit him as my sin against
God, and against him has endamaged him.

Thus if a man do, God will accept him, and esteem of this as a sufficient
recompense, and will himself reward the party, and make up his loss. And
thus much for this eight commandment.

Thou shall not steal:

Now follows the ninth commandment. Thou shall not bear false witness
against thy neighbor.
This commandment is broken either Inwardly by caulesse suspicion and
surmises. outwardly or Without speech in Gesture Silence.
With speech by speaking or receiving By speaking. Truly but to an ill purpose
without discretion or good affection Ones self by Boasting Execusing Accusing
falsely.
An other either Public when a Judge a witness or Iurer does it in a public
cause and assembly or a lawyer defends an ill cause. Private by unjust accusing
defe^ding.


Falsely concerning.



By receiving concerning An other Ones self in receiving Flattery of other
False accusations of other.


HEre should have followed the sum of this commandment, and the handling of
inward suspicion and rash judging, and the two causes thereof vz. Foolishness
and uncharitableness; which notes the party that took the former copy, as
then came to short to set down, and since by no means could come by them. The
third follows,

The third cause of this unjust suspicion and misdeeming is an evil
conscience; for when one is himself infected with any sin and lies in it
without repentance, he is ready to measure all me^ by himself, and thinks no
man can go upright, now himself halts, And this is exceeding plain in Saul.
He was a wicked murderer and purposed fully, if by any means he might effect
his purpose to kill David, and therefore we see how he goes about craftily to
bring him in danger, under a show of friendship, and forsooth did bear such a
good mind to David that worthy man and faithful captain, that had ventured
his life for Gods cause and in the defense of his people; as that he would
freely and willingly admit him to so near a place as to be the Kings son
in law. And therefore if David were as willing to accept of his offer in
kindness and duty, as he was desirous kindly to grant it, and offer it, there
should be no let but David should without delay espouse his daughter, and
become his son in law, therefore he willed all his servants to commend his
good will unto David and to show him how highly he was in the Kings favor;
when all this while GOD knows and has made the world to know, that this was
but to entrap him and bring him into a snare, that by her means he might the
sooner privily dispatch him. But when David in modesty was unwilling to take
so high a place and therefore excused himself for his poverty and inabilitie
to give a dowry befitting the greatness of such a personage; Saul very glad
of so good an occasion as he thought would not let it slip; but as he made
show, in great kindness tells him; what is the dowry all that you stand upon?
if that be all the impediment, I will soon remove this let, and the matter
shall be effected. Let not David think but that his nature will afford a
dowry good enoughe for a princes daughter, and let him not imagine that Saul
is so far in love with money as that he will look for so great a sum of
him, who^ he hopes to find a valiant and courageous son; no David, thy valor
is a treasure and some of this courage, is that which my soul desires, and
which shall fully accomplish this marriage we desire* let me but see here 100.
foreskins of the Philistines, those enemies of God, and Gods people by whose
means we have sustained much loss and danger. Do then I say take revenge of
these my deadly foes, which thy valor I know can do without delay, and these
shall be to me in stead of so many masses of gold and silver, this shall be a
price for which and in recompense whereof I will bestow my daughter upon thee,
which I do not ask, doubting of thy valor and courage, but that a further
experience, may more amply prove that of which we have had continual trial in
thy self, that thou will be a valiant son unto me This was a colorable speech
and pretended great good will, when in the mean while, all Saul's mind burned
with malice and desire of David's death and he hoped by this means to make him
fall by the hand of the Philistians. Now Saul well knowing his own falsehood
and double dealing, was hereby brought into a vehement, but a most false and
injurious suspicion of David's infidelity and treachery toward him.

So those that have poluted their own souls and body with most filthy facts,
and are the most vncleannest and wicked persons in a country, will soonest
imagine and suspect an other to be most filthy and are ready to judge all men
sore where their sores runs. An other cause of this is hypocrisy when one
never examineth his own heart, then he is most ready to pry into an other
man's life, and he that spares himself will lay load upon an other.

Thus the Scribes and Pharisees were dissembling hipocrites, and never meddled
with their own hearts to condemn any sin there, and therefore Christ and
his disciples could have no peace by them, but they were continually misdeeming
and suspecting and ready to censure hardly of them without a cause, for if they
would have bestowed but some time, in truth to have entered unto their own
souls, and made a narrow search of themselves, they would have found so much
business there as other men might have lived quietly enough by them. So Saint
James says, 3. Chap. 17. verse. That true wisdom which is from above, is
without judging without hypocrisy. He shows the cause why the best men be
never the rashest iudgers, never so hasty to pass sentence upon other men,
because they having true hearts and desiring to be as good as they seem to be,
have so much to do in fighting and striving with their own corruptions, as
that they cannot spend so much time, to be examining other men's dealings, and
marking what other men do amiss.

So on the other side take me an hipocrite that cares for nothing but to make a
show before men, that never labors to approve his heart to God and never
strives against his own secret sins, you shall have him so nimble and so
quick in searching out other men that he cannot see a fault where it is, but
he has such sharp sight that he can see a fault where none is in an other
because he cannot see a fault where it is in himself. They thought that the
cause why they could so quickly condemn other men, was because they were more
holy the^ other men, and therefore took a privilege to themselves, to give
what verdit they thought good on every man's actions, but Saint James tells them
an other tale and brings the true cause indeed, what made their hearts so
ready to conceive amiss and to think wrongfully of an other, because they
had not as yet learnd to think aright of themselves, for more hypocrisy
always breeds more rash judging and misprision.

Thus we see what be the causes of this evil suspicion, namely at the lest
foolishness and uncharitableness, or else an ill conscience and deep
hypocrisy and the one of these is always a cause. Now the effects are even as
bad, for if the heart be infected thus it makes one apt and ready to speak
and do evil, if one allow himself to think evil, he cannot withhold his
tongue to speak it, and his hand to practice ill if occasion serve, for what
ever is within in the thought that will show it self openly, it will bewray it
self in the mouth, in the hand, in all ones actions. As appears in Daniels
enemies that having conceived an ill opinion of him, that he kept them from
honor, did nothing else but practice and lay diuilish plots till they had
brought him into danger of death and found him within the compass of a law.
All this malice arose from hence, that they falsely suspected Daniel to
forestall them of honor and to have kept them from that high place, that they
thought themselves as worthy of, and every way as fit for it as he.

The use of this is that if we would not be found culpable of the breach of
this commandment, and trangressing against the name and fame of our christian
brother, then must we not give ourselves allowance to conceive any ill opinion
of them without sufficient warrant, and due ground for the same, for though the
thing which we suspect be so indeed, that is not the question, if we have no
warrant, nor noe good proof and foundation for our suspicion, we are guilty
of the hurting the fame of our neighbor, for what though it may he so, in
matters of our neighbors credit, we must not take such light conjectures as a
sufficient cause to move a suspicion; we must do as we would be done by, and I
pray you what man alive almost is there that would not in his heart judge this
an uncharitable thing that because his neighbor should see I know not what
weak probability, or rather surmises that had no probability in them of some
fault, therefore he should presently think and conclude that it was even so,
and bear such an opinion of him as of a trangressor in that kind, what ever
fault it be, and so give his name such a wound in his conscience by this
deeming as could hardly be healed again* no man would count this good dealing
to himself and therefore every man must look to himself that he do not
build a suspicion against his neighbor upon weak and idle props, never think
ill of one, till he has deserved and given sufficient cause of it. But now
this must be known by the way, that though love will not allow suspicion, yet it
does not thrust out discretion, it judges not rashly, but it judges justly,
it is not so sharp sighted as to see a little moath where none is, nor so
purblind, but it can discern a beam, therefore rashness must be condemned
and avoided, but there is an holy wisdom to be had, as not to misdeeme without
sufficient warrant, so when there is evident proof, and plain appearance of a
sin to take notice of it to, which must be observed against many men that by
this doctrine, and indeed wresting it as evil men do all scripture, take
occasion to thrust admonition out of doors, and think all men should be
blind, because God will have all men charitable. For so when they have broken
forth openly into gross signs of wickedness, and all their life shows them
to be profane, ungodly, covetous, and deceitful, and without the fear of
God, come now and admonish that certainly they be wicked persons and have no
true faith nor repentance, presently you shall have this first defense, Oh, GOD
knows mine heart you must not judge, you must not scearch into a man's heart.

But a christian must judge wisely though not rashly, he may judge by the
fruit, though not by the sap; if ones wickedness be hidden, then God would not
have men censure, but if it break forth he would have men take heed and
reprove also. As for example if one see a man that delights in ill company, is
never well and as he would be, but when he is among drunkards and swearers, and
blasphemers and such like vermin, one may justly and upon good ground without
any sin suspect such an one, and say, suerely, this man is a bad fellow,
such as his mates are, such is he, for surely good men would be glad of the
society of good men, and lambs will rejoice to be with lambs, and now he that
does take all his pleasure to be among ungodly persons, he has pronounced
sentence against himself, like company, like man that keeps the company. So
if one hear any vomit out filthy and unchaste speeches, and his tongue be
full of uncleanness, his mouth is never empty of lewd and lustful words, now
this is an infallible note and sure brand of a filthy, unchaste, unclean
person, for out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks; look what
ware comes into the shop, such is surely kept in the warehouse, and he that
thinks thus of such a person does him no wrong at all.

So others have a good hope and a good faith, they hope to be saved as well as
the best, if one will believe them, and if you will not believe them, they take
as a great injury done to them. But what reason can they give of their hope,
what sound cause can they allege why they should be saved rather then Judas,
and not go to hell as well as Cayne, surely, for a reason they can yield no
reason of their faith, they be not learned, but they have a good heart, and a
good hope, that God will save them. Nay they neither have good heart nor good
hope, for a good hope is always vpheld by good reasons and a strong faith, by
strong grounds out of Gods word, else a man may talk of hope and faith, and a
good heart, and be far enough from any, least he can show upon what ground he
builds his hope, it is but presumption, and when sin and death shall
encounter such an one, he shall fall away without any strength at all. So for
the Sacrament, it is common custom of men, a day or two before they come to
the communion, to wrap up many reckonings and foul matters among themselves,
and to rake up the coals of their malice under the ashes, so closely, as that
one would hope there were no spark left, to kindle contention again. But a
day or two after, they be as crafty, as brawling, as full of cousening; and
deceitfulness as ever before then one may boldly say, you have polluted the
holy Sacrament, you have defiled the table of the lord, you came to it without
faith or repentance, oh but you must not judge. Yes now the case is so clear a
man may judge, for certainly if one come with repentance to the Sacrament he
shall go with repentance from the Sacrament, and if one come a good man
thither, it will make him better then he was; for God will always keep his
promise, and if one come as he commands, he shall find his sin killed, and
he would not have fallen to his old course so soon again, nor returned to his
filthy vomit, if he had fed of the holy and pure bread of life Jesus Christ
with an heart purged by faith and repentance. And therefore though no man must
suspect without good ground, yet a man where there is just cause ought to
pronounce just judgment. Thus much for the first which is the most secret and
inward breach of this commandment.

Now the outward follows, which is either without speech or with speech.
Without speech either by gesture or silence. By gesture, when one carries
himself reprochfully to his brother, and uses such a kind of behavior as
tends to vilify mock and disgrace him. This Psalm. 22. is condemned by a
prophecy of Christ Jesus. That they nodded their heads at him and made mowes
as indeed they did after, and this was as great an indignity, and does often
times as much disgrace one, and make him contemptible in the eyes of the
beholders, as if one should rail upon him, with vilde and slaundrous words.
This then is a wrong to ones name, though one do not slander and rail, yet
if he use his hand or his tongue or head or any part of his body in such a
carriage and gesture as does tend to mock his neighbor, he sins against his
name and credit. The next kind is by silence, when one houlds his peace when he
hears his neighbor slaundred, he stands by and can testify of his own
knowledge that the things spoken be false and lying and yet either in
flattery or fear of displeasing lets all alone, and does not speak that he
knows to defend his neighbors innocence and credit, he comes within the
compass of bearing false witness, and by silence makes himself guilty of the
slander. For he suffers his neighbors innocence to be suppressed and his name
defamde when it lay in his power to defend him. And even the law of nature will
confute such a man and strike him down dead that he shall have nothing to say
for himself. For does not nature teach us that this is equal to do as we
would be done by?

And which of us is there that if one should be in company where he were
charged with false accusations and that his neighbor knew well enough but yet
would not stir his tongue to clear him or show the truth of the matter, and
speak in his neighbors defense, whom he knew to be far from all such ill
practices; every own would that this silence were a betraying of his
neighbor, and a great wrong as indeed it were. Then if we think others
should not be silent when our name is wronged, let us measure and open our
mouths to maintain our neighbors purity and good credit against any
slaunderers, which if we do, we shall keep this commandment, in some
measure, and God will stir up others that in the like case shall defend us,
and speak boldly to clear our innocence. And thus this commandment is
broken without speech.

Now by speech it is broken either by giving or receiving. By giving out speech
either true or false, for one may be an enemy and as much break this
commandment in speaking nothing but the truth, in some cases, as in other
cases if he speak false and lying things, and this truth if it be put in the
other end of the balance of Gods judgment will weigh as heavy as falsehood.
If one speak the truth without discretion, unseasonable, out of time and out
of place, if his words be true, but his end false and wicked, and his purpose
naught, he is as cruel and malicious an enemy to the name and credit of his
neighbor, and as vilde a slander in the sight of God, as if he spoke that
which were false. This was the fault of Doeg, that cursed enemy of David. When
he sees Saul have an ill opinion of David, and all his friends, and comes in a
chafe to his men saying, what will none of you tell me that my son and my
servant have conspired against me? And Doeg knew full well by Saul's behavior,
that his end was mischievous, and he would make a dispatch of all David's
friends, he steps me out now in this unseasonable time, and there shows what
he had seen; that the priest had given David bread and a sword, and counseled
with God for him. This was so indeed as he said, but this was a most devilish
and wicked part, and a foul fault; for hence arose that cruel persecution,
and the murdering of so many innocent servants of God. So in the enemies of
Daniel, they did indeed catch him as busy at prayer as before, and it was
true that he had broken the kings edict, but in the mean space they were most
wicked and vilde persons that would bring this accusation against Daniel with
such a malicious purpose, and hence they bewrayed all their former malice in
inuenting such an ungodly decree, because they knew Daniel could be caught in
nothing but in matters of God and religion. And there he would not yield an
inch to them, but sooner leave his life, then his God in the least thing.

So the Ziphims David had done them great good, and defended them against the
Philistines, but now because they saw this was only the way to carry favor in
the court, to bring some tales concerning David, therefore they come to Saul
and tell him David is in such a place, this was no lie. But it was most
slanderously and wickedly done to blab out the truth to such an ill end, and
with so little discretion, when so ill a thing must needs ensue upon it as at
the least the persecution, if not the destruction of an harmless man. So now
a days some men there be, that if they know any private fault, or particular
and secret sin by any man, then without any regard of time and place, they
proclaim their neihgbours infirmities to the wide world, and care not before
what company, among what persons, they blaze out ones weakness, and then if
they be reproved, they exult and say, this is true I tell no lie, and I will
not be ashamed of the truth* yet a wise man would be ashamed to speak the truth
foolishly and unwisely when it should do harm, and no good, and he would
consider that a man might often sin more in foolish and untimely pouring out
these things that he knows to be true, with an ill intent, then if through
infirmity they should speak an untruth with desire and purpose to God. As the
Ziphims and Doeg were greater breakers of this commanndement, and more foul
and shameless liars then Rahab that told an untruth to save the spies, because
her end was good though she failed in the manner of it, but their end was
altogether naught and sinful.

Those then are here to be confuted that will not do as God commands them,
tell their neighbor plainly of his fault, and not hate him in their hearts,
but if they know a fault by him be far enough of from telling him of it
plainly which were a duty and an argument of love: But straight set him on
the stage, make him known to all men, never leave talking of it, which shows
plainly that in truth they hate their neighbor, for if they would as God bids,
tell the party, this would heal the soul, and cover his sin, and make him
amend. But now to clamor in this wise, and raise up an evil report and brute
can do no good but much mischief. Oh but I speak the truth: I but a fool
speaks all that he knows, a wise man will keep it in till afterward. Let a
wise man hear of a thing, he will consider the time and place, and persons,
and temper his speech in wisdom according to these circumstances, but let a
fool get a thing by the end once, and it must al out he cannot keep it, he is
with child, and in pain till he be delivered what ever dishonor come to God,
or discredit to his neighbor, or hurt to his own soul. Therefore one must not
only be careful that he speak no lying thing, but he must look that he
speak not the truth also to an ill end, after an ill manner when it may may
do more hurt then good. So much for that breach, now follows the next in
speaking that which is false, either concerning himself or an other.
Concerning himself first in boasting and bragging, which is a most base and
abject thing contrary to that which the holy Ghost says, Let an other praise
thee, and not thine own mouth: as in Romans 1. among the rabble of wicked men,
men are reckoned boasters, those that because there is no true matter of
praises to be seen in them, will get praise by speaking great things for
themselves. So Saul whereas he had saved the king, and all the best of the
cattle, he comes bragging to Samuel, blessed be thou of the Lord says he, I
have fulfilled the word of the Lord, when it was nothing so, he had done
nothing less then fulfilled the word of the Lord. Here he lied now in
bragging of himself. And all in excusing ones fault more then one should. The
thing wherein Saul sinned in the same matter, for when his lie would not go
for current, but Samuel caught him; why? have thou done the work of God, that
he commanded? then all should be dead, how comes it to pass then I hear
bleating and lowing? Make these two agree that all be dead, and yet I hear
some bleat, when this was a plain case now, he had not done his duty, then
he shifts it thus; indeed, a few of the best of them we have kept for
sacrifice, but I hope that is no harm. But when this would not serve the
turn neither, but Samuel follows him close, O says he, has God as much
delight in sacrifice as when his word is obeyed? then he falls to an other
excuse, and castes it on the people. I feared the people says he, as who
should say it was their fault and none of mine, thus if any credit had been
to be gotten, he would have had that to himself alone, but now that no credit
could be had, he leaves it for the people to divide among themselves. And this
excusing is a common thing amongst all men. Ye shall not have the most simple
person, the most ignorant and silly body in a whole town, that has the
most shallow capacity and dull wit that can be, but he is very sharp and
witty to find an excuse, he can scamble and vvinde, and will make hard
shift to wring his neck out of the collar, that hardly can any reproof be
fastened upon him. And men think by so doing to lessen their fault, but in
truth it is nothing so. For what have they gotten, but that now a man may say
yonder is a liar, that is ill accounted of both before God, and also before men,
he was ill before, but now he is far worse.

It is a very ill thing when one has vvounded himself by sin to go to
the devil for a medicine, he is the vvorst physician that can be, and his
physic is the vvorst physic in the world, for he will sure enough give
them that, that shall make them worse and not better. One may think that
these excusings be plasters, but in truth they be but poisons that venime the
soul a great deal more then before.

Thirdly, a man lies against himself by excusing, as when men in a kind of
proud humility will deny their gifts, with an intent to get more credit; oh
alas I have no gifts, no wit, no learning, a simple scholar and vveake
memory, and such like, contrary to that one knows and thinks; now this
depresing ones self falsely is not humility but iniquity, for one should
make himself neither better nor worse the^ God has made him, but if he have
good calling to speak of himself plainly as the matter is in truth. And now
if when they lie of themselves, and say they have no wit, no learning, no good
parts etc. and one says why in truth it is true, you say well, it is right you
have none of all these things. Indeed they would think such a man did them
great wrong, and scarce take him for their friend. For his desire is that
others should cross him and say, nay say not so you are an excellent man
worthy to be regarded etc. and so he will discommend himself long enough, if
he hear an other commend him, for this is it which he delights to hear.

But a man must neither wrong God nor himself in diminishing and concealing
the things that God in goodness has given him, not to deny them, but to use
them to his glory. So for matters of this life, come to men for work of
mercy, and and then there is such a whining, how poor they be, what a great
charge they have, what losses they have sustained, and I know not what, then
they will needs be poor, whereas their own soul bears them witness that
they are vvealthie, and have much more then many men that do a great deal
more good then themselves. Therefore, though a man do not slander his
neighbor, yet if he slander himself he is to be reproved as a liar. Herein
diverse of Gods children fail much in time of contemplation. Those that have
been, and are sound and true hearted Christians if they have lost their
feeling a while, and cannot find that rejoicing in God and comfort in good
things that in former times they have, then comes the accuser of the brethren
Satan that old and subtle serpent, and he strives to make them accuse
themselves falsely. On says he, if you had been good indeed, and had had a
true heart to God, he would never have forsaken you thus, and given you over
to such a deadness, and then through weakness, Gods children are ready to
join with the devil against themselves and to think; it is true, sure I
was but an hypocrite, and hollow hearted, my former comforts were but
delusions and presumptions, if they had be been true, I should not have lost
them. But this ought not to be, never yield to Satan, but if he strive to
accuse* do you strive to excuse, and if he would cast you down, by so much the
more lift up your self by reasons out of Gods word, and by former experience
in your self and other Christians. For that is no good reason, because you
have no feeling, therefore you have no faith, and because you have lost the
sense of your comfort, therefore it was no true comfort; this is no true
conclusion, for those whom God once loved, he loved to the end, and will never
forsake them.

Take heed of making such conclusions, for a man may want the feeling of his
faith, and cry and call again and again for it, and feel nothing all this
while, yet nevertheless have true and sound faith, if he feel not faith; but
he feels the want of faith, and the desire of it, this is an infallible sign
that he has true faith. But do not agree with the devil to persecute your
self, fight against him not with him, against your self, you shall find he is
strong enough alone, you had not need join with him, but rather set to resist
him: if one be once the child of God in truth he is so for ever, if once in the
favor of God, for ever in the favor of God. If God loved once, he loves ever,
for though our feeling alter, yet there is no change in him. Thus much for
breaking this commandment, by speaking that which is false concerning
themselves.

Now it follows concerning others, and that is either public or private.
Public first, when the magistrate or judge passes a false sentence in any
cause that comes to be hard before them. This is a most heavy sin and is as
much as in them is to make God a liar, for he stands in the place and is his
substitute and vicegerent here one earth; now then for him to bear men in
hand that that judgment which he gives is the judgment of God that sets him
there, when yet he knows it is false and corrupt, this is even to draw God to
be the author of a lie, so much as he can. And this is not only a wrong against
Gods own Majesty, and the place wherein God has set him, but it is an
injury to the person thus condemned, in that he brings a blotte unto his name
and makes him ill accounted of, and that wrongfully, and depriues him also
commonly, of some commodity and benefit that by right did pertain unto him.
So for lawyers to speak in an ill cause for their fee, though the cause be
never so bad, yet let the fee be good, and you shall have one or other likely
will pollish his tongue and whet his wit and sharpen his face, to cover a foul
matter with a many fair words, and make that good in uttering, which in doing
was altogether wicked; this is commonly counted wit, and he a wise man that
knows how to gloze thus and set a good face and good colors upon a cause but
it is in truth a lying and a public slander, and that branded with a curse,
for in Is. 5. The Lord said cursed be he that speaks good of evil, and evil
of good. And so long as a man will set himself to stand for an evil thing,
his conscience will excuse him of two foul breaches of Gods law, that he has
hindered justice, and furthered unrighteousness to the utmost of his power.

But here be some sorry shifts. Alas I speak as I think I take the cause to
be good, I must stand for my client. But I pray you what is the cause that you
have so ill eyes and such a simple capacity to perceive the vniustnesse of the
cause that are so quick witted to invent clokes for the injustice? Why cannot
your wit see one as well as the other? How comes it about, that other men of
far less skill in law, and wit by nature, after to or three of your bouts
can soon see the double dealing and how hollow matters are, and yet the
fairest side is put outward to? But you cannot fee, what is the cause of this
blindness, is it not because the gift blinds the eyes of the wise, is not that
which wanted in the goodness of the cause supplied in the greatness of the
fee and that is the cause you cannot see? But suppose this were true, and grant
that you were as you say ignorant of the matter, is it not a foul shame to be
ve^trous to speak so much in a matter before you know whether it be good or
not to come in the face of the world, and pawn your credit for a cause that
you never tried nor examined nor searched into it, to see whether it were right
or wrong. Job would not do so, but those causes that he knew he would enquire
and search out the matter, and not open his mouth to speak, before he had
prepared what and upon what good ground to speak in the defense of anyone.
This will not serve the turn, when one has abused his place, and abused his
hearers, and abused himself by maintaining wickedness, to say alas I knew it
not, it is foolish and shameful this for own to venture and hazard his soul
and his name, and then bear himself in hand that this will salve all because
he knew it not, as if ignorance were a plaster good enough to heal the
vvounds he has made in his conscience and credit. But why had not he known
that it was a sin to be ignorant, wise men should work by knowledge. It is
a most notorious fault when one willingly and vvittingly stands in defense of
an evil cause but is a fault to rashly, and unadvisedly to slip into it.
Further also false vvitnesses do publicly offend against this commandment
as in nisi prius, and such like cases; When one will come before the Judges
and give a false and lying testimony.

This is often spoken against in the Proverbs, a false witness shall not
escape; these be most pestilent and hurtful vipers and these sting and do
mischief on every side, these pervert the iurers, delude the judge, do
vvrong to the cause, and are hurtful on every side, put all out of order and
turn all vpside down, by their falshoode; this therefore shall be first and
greatest in the punishment, because they have been first and greatest in the
sin.

And this God abhorres when men be so audatious and so injurious, as publicly
to sin against God, and to chose rather to please men in sinning, the^ please
God in a good cause. When the false love or fear of man shall do more with
them to make them sin, then the fear and love of God can prevail to keep
them from sinning. All these do publicly offend. Now private offense false
and that is either in unjust accusing or unjust defending, That unjust accusing
privately is called slaundering and backebiting, when one vvil speak evil of
his neighbor that is free from that evil. This backebiting is a great breach
of this commandment and the backbiter offends in an high degree.

And the fault is so much the worse because it always hurts three at once,
this blow always makes three vvounds at one time, he wounds the soul of him
to whom he tells the false tale, for as we shall hear after, the receiver is in
a great fault therefore he has one deadly blow. The second stroke lights on
the name and reputation of the party thus slandered and backebitten, for his
name has a scarre in the account of the hearer. The last and worst and
greatest blow he gives his own soul when he infects it with slander, and
makes his conscience guilty of a lie. These three mortal wounds this lying
tongue like a percing sword makes at one time. Indeed he scapes best who is
falsely slaundered for he being innocent God will heal his name and bring
forth his, but the other two wounds are more dangerous because they light upon
the soul, and more hard to be cured because they are altogether sin.

Therefore it stands every man upon, that he raise up no unjust report against
any man. Now the best way to keep himself against slaundering, is to make a
covenant with his own foul and to vow in himsele not to speak often of
others men's faults, for he that gives his tongue liberty to be busied about this
subject, it cannot be avoided but that he shall slip to far and speak worse
then in christianity and equity he should; he that will speak to often of
other men's infirmities, cannot keep himself from speaking to much sometimes,
therefore the best way is to be sparing in this kind of talk. Speak seldom
first. Then secondly, when one has a good calling and just cause to speak,
let him speak discreetly in due time and due place, that some good may come by
his speech that either the party may be brought to the sight and amendment of
his fault, or else others may be edified, and helped against such faults,
speak in good affection, and with good discretion, that some or other may be
the better for it. Ever more if one will speak of an others faults, let him be
able to say I speak it to this, and this good end, this and this good use I
hope will ensue of my speech, or if he can see no profit that will come by his
uttering it, let him keep it till an other time, let him lay his hand upon his
mouth and say he has gone far enough allreadie.

For if there can be no good use seen in speaking of it, certainly there is
much sin in speaking of it. And for raising of an ill and false report against
ones neighbor, it appears what a fault it is in that God has appointed and
decreed in his law, that those which do slander an other shall themselves
undergo the punishment which such a fault had deserved, and such a person have
suffered if the thing had been true, as he that wrongefully accuses an other
of theft, he himself should be dealt withal, as with a thief, and he that
reports that another has committed adultery, if it be proved false, himself
must feel the smart that an adulterer should. This the righteous God has
ordained, for what can be more just, then that he which digs a pit for his
neighbor without a cause, should himself fall into the pit, and he that
seeks to take away his neighbors fame and life by a lie, should loose his
own credit and life for a lie. And this though the Magistrate neglect his
duty, God will not neglect, but as he made the law so he will see it put in
execution, (for he is not unjust) unless one first punish himself by true
repentance.

Thus this law is broken by unjust accusing. It is next broken by unjust
defending of wicked men and bad causes, when one will use his name and credit
and praise to uphold such a man, whose name soul and body and all are
worthy to fall into hell. This is condemned 17* 15. Where speaking of this
kind of men that be liars in request and false witnesses in favor, that be of
so good a nature as that they will heal all things, make up all gaps and make
a gloss for any matter, they will condemn no man, nor find fault with
nothing, of such he says, he that Justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the just men, they both are abomination unto God. He shows that
this dealing which men call a good nature is even as abominable to God as if
they should condemn goodness and good men. And therefore such men get but a
little, they carry away the credit with men, but they are as much out of
credit with God, as they with credit with man; and God will bring about that
they shall have a spot in themselves of that wickedness which they allow in an
other, for at length God causes both the sin and the shame to break out, and
then their former honor is all dashed.

So he says in an other place, he that prayseth the wicked the people will
curse him. To that he makes such a good bargain for himself as both God and
the people of God hate him and abhor him. And in truth justly to, for he is
worthy to be hated because he keeps men from repentance; for there is no
better medicine in the world to heal the soul, and kill the sin, then to
let the sinner sustain the shame and the pain that is due for his sin, for
this is a medicine of Gods making. And if all the physicians in the world lay
their heads together they cannot invent a better, and therefore if they had any
true love they would let them have it, and not dawbe over the sore so as it
should fester and ranckle to death. So that no greater enemy can be found to
the souls of men, then such that will smoth all things over with colorable
shifts. Then also they do much hurt to others, for now when sinners are gotten
in credit, and crept into some account they are less suspected and can with
more ease do hurt and mischief; for if darkness might be called darkness,
and sin go under the name of sin and the devil come in his own colors, it
would be so open that no man would trust, and so odious that all men would hate
it. But now when the devil will call evil good and come like an Angel of
light, then men give him some entertainment and he does hurt them before they
suspect him, and when evil men be garnished with some false commendations,
they can closely convey their wicked intents to do more hurt a great deal,
because they are less doubted. As in one example may appear in ungodly and
sufficient ministers, if they can get some commendation to commend them, and
some great man's letter to speak for the^, the^ those that else would never have
come to so much credit are admitted without any further inquiry and to the
place and office of the ministry, and when by lying they have entered, their
whole dealing is agreeable to such a beginning, and they prove very wolves that
sterue and devour the Lords flock.

And all this mischief came from a false witness that commended them with a
lie. And so for matters of commonwealth when places of charge and importance
are through false commendations, committed to naughty and wicked persons, often
these prove vilde and wicked, doing much hurt in the place, so that these
faulse and foolish praises are but to get some credit to the wolf that he may
the more freely devour and wast the flock. So that as one must not speak of
his neighbors faults, but in love and discretion and upon good proof, so
neither must he speak in his commendations. But in wisdom, and when the
commendation is grounded on knowledge and judgment. And thus much for giving out
false speeches.

Now follows for receiving; which is a fault no less heinous before God then
the former, for he is not only in fault that inuents lies of his own head but
he also that receives them and gives credit to them, and is bold to ground his
report to an other upon them. And that both concerning others and also
concerning himsefe. To give ear to a false report concerning an other is
forbidden, as bewraying of a great want of love, and good affection to the name
of ones brother, and an ill disposition also in himself, for Proverbs. 17. 4.
The wicked gives heed to false lips and a liar hearkens to the naughty
tongue. Here the holy Ghost notes a tale-receiuer with two woeful brands, he
calls him a wicked person and a liar to, that is glad to here false tales of
other men, he is a naughty person himself, and he himself has a false and a
lying heart, for if he had not, he would never intertaine and approve and
hearken unto lies; and in the Psalm. 15. The holy Ghost sets down this as a
difference betwixt an hipocrite that is hollow-hearted, and a true and sound
saint of God; that an upright man will not receive a false report of his
neighbor. Many bad men that have no goodness in them will not for their own
credit sake, and to save their honesty as we say, invent slanders and be the
first makers and brochers of lies. But if some vilde and impudent person will
but come and buzze in their ears some odd tale against professors, they will
straight embrace it, it goes for a warrant, tell it as confidently as if
nothing could be more sure, and are as glad of it, as if it were some very
gainefull and profitable thing unto them; this man now though he will carry
the name of honest man, is a wicked person, and if the holy Ghost speaks true
a liar. So in Revel. 22. he says, that without are all those that make and
loves lies.

There he notes two kinds of liars that must both go to hell. There be two
broods and as it were two litters of these monstrous liars. Some be so
shamlesse and so graceless and so impudent and the devil has taken so far
possession in their hearts, as they delight to be coining lies and busy their
heads in inuenting and beginning slanders. Others be not so rude and so gross
as that they will be the authors of a lie, but if an other man will bring it to
them, they will not stand, to entertain it, and approve it, It shall have
there good words and liking.

So the Pharisees and high priests, would not themselves come before Pilate and
forswear themselves and bear false witness against our Savior, their faces
were not so hardened yet they had not so far cast of all fear of men and
regard of their own estimation. But if they could meet with on that had so
bold a face and so wicked a mind, if they could get him for love or money, by
hiring and entreating, or flattering, they were very well content and rejoiced,
they had found men so fit for their purpose, that would father a lie in the
face of the world, and they be abetters of it to. So Ahab and Iesabel would not
so much debase themselves, as to swear falsely against Naboth; but if they
could get any lewd fellows, that would become periurd for the matter, they
would not refuse the offer, but took the advantage against Naboth to put him
to death. This serves to confute such as have open ears, and will let in any
lie that comes from the tale bearers mouth and give it harbor to, and if
occation serve, set it forth again, and rehearse it to others, upon so bare
a proof, making noe other trial of it.

But come to them and tell them of it, why would you speak so false a thing
to dif^ame your brother, this is the answer presently; why, I did not bring it
up, I am not the first that spoake it, I heard it, it was told me, and I had
reason to believe it, and I thought it to be true. Did you hear it, and did
you believe it upon the bare hearing, then you show what you are, such an one
of whom Solomon speaks, A fool believes every thing. First, every ill
thing, for so it must be understood else of all men they are most hard of
belief. Tell him of that will do him good, that will save his soul, and
help him against his sin, he will not believe it, one must keep such a
stir in persuading, and bring reason upon reason, and never the near, you
can by no means persuade him, but bring foolish ware to a fool such as hurts
his own soul and his brothers name, and dishonours God, and makes himself a
liar this is fit for him, this bargain is made without many words, he is very
easily brought to credit such matters, and why? because he is a wicked fool,
lies are a bait for a fool, and lay these in his way and he is taken without
doubting.

For as the spirit of God is a spirit of truth, and those that have it, it
leads them into all truth, and they are easily brought to give ear to the
truth, so the devil is a lying spirit, he is the father of lies, and those
that he possesses he will make the^ believe every lie.

And therefore this excuse will not hold out, I was told so and how can I tell
but it is true, it may be it is so, and it may be it is not so, if the ground
of your belief be no stronger, it is a foolish belief.

Very nature will convince such persons of want of charity; for would any man
be content, that an other should take every flying report, and uncertain rumor
that went about the country, concerning him, and give credit to it, and such
credit as he would think ill, and speak ill of him upon this alone
foundation? would one think he had wrong, you should have tried out the matter
before you had been carried away with it, you should have searched whether it
were so or no, talked and conferd with those that could tell you the certainty
of it before you had so far trusted it, as to rehearse it, and report it your
self. Why? is an other bound to deal so with you, and is it not your duty to
do so to others? Must not we do as we would be done by, and have that care of
an others name and credit, that we desire an other should have of ours.
Therefore this is plainly injurious and wrongful dealing, and those that have
this way fallen, must repent for it, and ask pardon.

Secondly, hence we learn, to drive away such as be such reporters of other
men's dealings such tale-tellers, as the holy ghost speaked. As the North wind
drives away rain, so does an angry countenance a slaundering tongue. When the
air is thick and the clouds look black, and there is a show as if they fill
the country with rain, the North wind it rises and purges the air makes
the coast clear, and dispels the clouds, and all vanishes; so must a wise man
bear such gravity in his face, as that he may blow away flattring slanderers,
when they come full fraught with lies, he must dispell them by his very
looks, and not suffer them to unload their naughty and lying stuff in his
ears. Therefore if the master perceive any of his servants to delight in
secret telling tales in whispering against others, and bringing news to
traduce his neighbor, that they may get more credit unto themselves, he must
look frowningly upon such clawbackes, and drive them from him, give them no
hearing, nor show them no jot of allowance, when they will be ready to bring
such light stuff to ones ears, as they dare to and affirm.

This is a foul fault in him that cannot occupy himself in any beter
business then traducing his neighbors, and it is as naught in the receiver,
when he receives them with kind looks, and gives them some countenance, and
maintains them in this wicked course, it is the part of a fool to believe
every thing, one must not be so light of credit. Indeed in matters pertaining
to our good that God has set down in his word, the quicklier, and the easier
one can believe them, the better it is, but for these idle tales, that tend to
nothing but to breed uncharitable conceits against our brethren, let them have
no enterteinment, unless they come guarded with sound and good reasons, and
proofs, for we say of theft, the receiver makes the thief, so is it in lying
to, the receiver makes the liar, for if the liars could have no utterance of
his ware, and no man would deal with him in such traffic, but shake him up
with a sharp reproof, he would soon be a weary of his trade, but now
because his ware goes away so fast, and he can have good sale for them, he is
in very good liking with his old occupation, and falls to coining again.
Thus this commandment is broken in receiving lies concerning an other.

It is broken also when one receives lies concerning himself. whether in
flattery, or accusing. For receiving and embracing the fawning flattery of
others. This was Herod's fault. Act. 12. The foolish people, hearing his
eloquent oration, and seeing his pomp and glory, would needs make a God of
him, and they give him an applause, the voice of God and not of man: now he
sits down by it, and was very well content it should be so spoken. It was a
base and abject thing for them to go so far in flattering, and it was as
great a madness in him to take it to himself, and be glad of it. They played
the fools too much in giving such a false and blasphemous applause, and he
plaide the fool far more in receiving it. So for Felix the governor, comes
Tertullus, and because he would currie favor with him, and have him serve his
turn, he reckons up virtues good store, and will set him up high enough; says
he: Seeing that we have obtained great quietness through thee, and that many
worthy things are done unto this nation through thy providence we acknowledge
it most noble Felix with all thanks. And thus he sets in commending him in the
beginning to win him to serve his own turn. This was a servile and
contemptible thing for him to lie thus openly, for it was well known, and he
was not ignorant, that Felix was a most cruel, unjust, and filthy person. Now
Felix sits by, is guilty in his conscience, that he had been a very wolf,
and a tyrant, and an ungodly person, knows all this is false therefore, yet
the foolish man swallows all, and was very willing to hear a long catalogue
of false praises. In this doing now he sinned grievously. Therefore a man must
be content with that praise which Gods word and his own works do give, and
neither seek for nor receive any more. That which Solomon says of a virtuous
woman, every man must obseru^ of himself, Let her works praise her, says
Solomon. Proverbs. 31. 31. So must every man be content with that praise that
he deserves, and not so much look what other men speak, as what himself has
done.

Therefore this condemns the foolishness of those, that will bring up
flatterers, and keep company with such slavish persons, as will be always
giving them false and undeserved commendations, and that before their face to:
And then let such a sinful person come and fawn upon him, and cast forth a
many lies, Oh you deal wisely, you take a good course, you play the good
husband, and you provide for your self. Then let Gods ministers reprove them
as long as they will, and their faithful friends admonish them, they bear of
all with this, and they will follow their own ways, and why so? you reprehend
me, and found fault, but I cannot see it is such a fault as you speak of, for
I know there be that commend you, flattering sycophants, and dissembling
clawbackes, that will speak any thing for advantage, and any thing is good, if
they hope to get by it. And why will you be so foolish to believe those that
speak for your hurt, in that thing that your conscience either does know, or
may know to be altogether false. This is that which hardens the heart, this
keeps from repentance, this makes one obstinate, that he will go on, and
nothing shall turn him, when he harkens to such as will sooth him up in any
thing, care not what they speak, so they may please, and so suffers himself
rather to be deceived and seduced by them then admonished and led in the right
way by God.

And this shows a uerie ignorant and foolish mind, that one is not acquainted
with his own estate, nor does not cast over his accounts that hang betwixt God
and himself. For if some foolish fellow to some banquerupt that knew the
particlars, and had often reckoned over his debts, and saw plainly that he
owed more then he was worth, if some companion as beggarly as himself would
come and tell him, you are a very rich man, you have great wealth, you are
able to buy lands, and purchase fair lordships, and such other idle talk,
would he be persuaded by him, would he leave this, and brag of his wealth,
and take himself for some great personage? it were impossible, he would
count him for a mad man that would say thus, but he would be never a whit
the prouder for all his tales. So if a man would often rifle his conscience,
go over his affections, and see how they be disordered, consider his actions,
how far square from Gods law they be, and thus use to see into himself, and
make account of his debtes, and arrerages, wherein he had cast himself.

Then let a thousand smothtongud dissemblers come and persuade him, you have
lived honestly, you have behaved your self well and like a christian you are a
very virtuous man; all of them could not drive it into his heart, he would
never receive their false testimony, but would say, no, I see how much and how
often I fail in my duty, how much, I how often I run over into sin
against Gods commandments, I know my self, it is nothing so, and then he
would quiukly discover their flattery, and perceive their treachery. But now
because men be so careless that they will not cast over their their own
account themselves, and make a right reckoning that they might know their own
estate, therefore others come and bring in false reckonings, and make false
accounts, and so they be deceived, and think themselves in a very good
plight, when in truth they are most wicked and miserable. Therefore a man must
not take any more praise or commendation, then that he can approve to be true
by the testimony of Gods word, and the witness of his own works and life,
beware of that, that puffes up, and hardens, let no man persuade us that we be
better, or our sins less then they be. And thus much for receiving of those
false testimonies concerning ones self that they come in the way of praise,
and extolling. Now for those that come in the way of accusing and depressing.

For as one must not yield to the flatteries of other, so neither must he yield
to their false accusations concerning himself, that tend to make him think
worse of himself then indeed he ought, and so to disable him to do that good
he should, and also has liberty to do. So Job would not accord to the
sayings of his friends in this case, let them say as often as they pleased that
he was an hypocrite, and had not an upright heart before God, Job would not for
all that consent that it was so, he would not while he lived forsake his
innocence, and let let go the purity of his cause, nor would think a whit
the worse of his former life or of his present estate for all their proofs and
reasons that they did falsely allege against him, for he knew that he had many
days and times before, made all even betwixt God and himself, he had many a
time cast over his accounts, and found himself acquitted of all before God,
that no debt remained to be laid to his charge. For howsoever no manwhiles his
life endures shall be freed from the dregs of sin, and the spots of
corruption, yet when he in a sight of his faults, comes to repent, and be
sorry for them, and to pray to God for pardon for them, and to believe that
God for Christ's sake will forgive them, he is as free then from the guilt and
punishment of all his sins, as if he had been ever from the action of them,

Now Job knew that he had often after this sort set all reckonings right
betwixt God and himself, and that no fault hung upon the score unrepented and
vnforgiuen. Therefore all their persuasions could not withdraw him from his
faith, and from clearing himself of hypocrisy, for what ever they said, his
own works which he had in remembrance, God and his own conscience with which he
was well acquainted said, that he was true sincere upright, and guiltless of
that crime which they so sharply charged upon him. Wherefore he set them all at
defiance that would offer to make challenge to his innocence. Though his
wealth was gone, his children dead, his cattle stolen and killed, his servants
slain, and his friends all gone back from him, yet his innocence stuck to
him, and his assurance that he served God in the truth of his heart, and the
uprightness of his soul abode by him and this neither his friends nor foes,
nor all the devils in hell could wrest from him, but he held it fast in spite
of them all, and that was the cause he bore his affliction so patiently, and
with so great comfort. But now if he had embraced this false testimony and
accusation even of good men, and said alas, indeed this is true that you say,
I never had an upright heart to God, I did all in hypocrisy and al in
dissembling, nothing in synceritie, nothing in truth, it is even so, I am, I am
an hypocrite, he might and could not chose, but have held down his head with
shame, and he had been wholly oppressed with grief and vexation, all his good
actions, would have afforded him no jot of comfort, no consolation or peace,
for if they had been done in hypocrisy, they had been all sins, and he
would have had no heart, nor could not have endured to come to God, nor lift up
any prayer to him, for so he says, can the hypocrite pray to God at all times?
and thus having deprived himself, of these stays and supportes, he must needs
have sunk down in despair and anguish.

This serves to confute those that when as they be in truth sound Christians,
and many infallible works of true Christianity have appeared, and do now
appear in them, yet if the devil either do himself or else move some
wicked, some filthy sinner to roar in their ears that they be hypocrites,
and that they have no truth in them, do all in dissembling, and to be seen of
men; straight way they are ready to join hands with Satan, and use their own
strength against their own soul, and will seek out reasons to confirm the
devils false and slanderous blasphemies, but in truth to weaken their own
faith, and bring much needless trouble, and many gripes upon their soul, that
if they had withstood these lies, they might have escaped. Nay (say ye) surely
it is as they say, wretch that I am, God has met with me now, they should not
have had power to say so, had it not been so, I am false all that I have done
is in vain, it was but glosing and dissembling.

And why so? Is not the devil a liar, and will you so easily give him credit,
and that at the first? But this is not well, for as one should not yield to the
unjust and false praises of another, so neither must he condemn himself, upon
so slender a ground as the devils or devilish men's words: nay one must not so
easily rob God of his praise, and himself of his comfort. And as the former
persons, were so easily seduced in matter of their comendation, because they
seldom or never look over their sins, so these are so quickly put in doubt of
their uprightness, because they do not use to mark what good works they
do, and to consider what graces God has bestowed upon them. For if one would
not be always looking into their infirmities, and searching into their
infirmities, but sometimes lift up their eyes to the mercies of God, to that
strength which he has given them against sin, and power to do some good
things, and make as diligent a rehearsal of Gods benefits, as of their
afflictions and miseries, they would not be so easily driven from their hope,
and put out of comfort. The devils slanders would not daunt them so much, but
they would take faster hold of Gods mercy. Thus much, for the breach of this
commandment.

The things commanded are either Inward, contrary to suspipition a charitable
opinion and good hope of our neighbor which must be showed by Taking doubtful
things in the best part. By defending his name if we hear him slaundered. By
being grieved when we hear true report of his ill deeds
Outward, or General to speak the truth from ones heart, and that with a good
affection to a good end.
Special to Others to speak of their Faults before them. Praise behind them.
Our selves to speak sparingly either of our faults. our good deeds.




First, for the inward duty* here every man is bound to have a charitable
opinion, and good conceit of his neighbor, with a desire of his good name and
credit. This loving persuasion of the heart, is contrary to the former
instructing and misdeeming. For as suspicion allowed makes one lie open to all
the sins that follow in speaking or receiving ill reports, so this being
observed that our hearts be well seasoned with this charitable opinion and
desire of his credit, one is sure not to slander himself, and he can nothing
so easily be tainted by receiving the venim of false slanders from other men's
mouths. Therefore to mound our selves against all other breaches of this
commaundment, First, get our hearts to give our neighbors that good allowance,
that wisdom and charity will afforde him. Now whether one have this maine and
principal virtue of this commandment or no, It must be tried, and every one
may know his own heart by these three rules. First, in doubtful things where
the matter is not plain, always take things in the best part if any sense
can be found better then other, let that be had, If matters be not to evidently
ill, always a heart that is charitable disposed to his neighbors credit, will
seek the best interpretation and as near as he can make the best of every
thing.

But if one construe things in the worst sense and wrest every thing to some
ill meaning or intent, this man shows planely that malice lurkes in his heart,
and that he neither desires the estimation of his neighbor, nor wishes any
good thought and persuasion of him in his heart. Therefore Paul. Romans 1. Sets
this down in the midst of many other gross sins, that take all things in the
worse part, because this is a plain proof and testimony that the heart is
poisoned with the gall of suspicion and that there is a malicious and
slaundrous mind. Let this be the first trial then, construe things that be
uncertain and will bear two constructions, after the most favorable manner
one can.

Secondly, a loving heart and a good affection to an other man's credit will
show it self in the tongue by defending him and taking his part if we hear
any slanders spoken against. For silence is a betraying his innocence, and
therefore if an other in hatred will show his malice by speaking lies in his
disgrace, then we must in love open our mouth and show our good will by
relating the truth in his defense. Thus Jonathan knowing David to be a virtuous
man and worthy, and that all those things were altogether false that Saul
imagined concerning him; But that the King was misinformed and mislead by
pickethanke slaunderers. Though it was to his father and that as he had seen
with danger of his life, he will not hold his tongue but discharge a good
conscience and declare the innocence of an innocent against whosoever would
come to slander him. Therefore this serves to confute those that will bear
one in hand that they bear a very good mind and a great good will to
professors and to christians that be the servants of God. But you shall never
hear a word come from them to defend them, if they be in place where they may
be rayled on and unjustly slaundred. They think they have quit themselves if
they can say say thus. I have been in such a place and there were such a
company of vilde and wicked persons that rayled at professors and vilified
them with all the indignity they could, and spared not to speak most
intolerable lies against such and such honest men. And what did you all this
while? why surely, I was sorry but I could not help it, I did not join with
them but I even held my tongue, and let them go on and spoke never a word. Did
you say nothing you may say that with shame enough, what did you there the^?
But there were more noble and more learned, and men that had more authority
there then I at the same time, and what reason had I to speak before them,
they should have spoken in the defense of those that were abused. Should they
and did they not? And why did not you then? Suppose your self had been the
party slaundred, what would you then have done? What? why I had good reason to
speak in mine own cause and to stand for my self, had I not? who would stand
by as though he were tongue tied, and hear his credit trodden unto foot and
speak never a word in his own defense? he were a beast that would do it. And
have you so quickly forgotten that rule and principal of nature to love your
neighbor as your self, to do to him as you would be done by? Could you have
found words to have spoken for your self, and are dumb for an other, where is
your love, where your goodwill, what mind now bear you to his good name? Here
now one must needs confess in his heart that he wanted that good affection to
his neighbors reputation that he should have had, for if the disgrace of our
neighbor would hinder him from doing that good that he might otherwise do in
his calling, and so darken Gods graces that are in him, and diminish the fruit
that might proceed of them, a man is bound in such case to stand as earnestly
and as stiffly for his neighbor, as for himself. Thus we may try our heart by
a second rule, if we can find a tongue to maintain his name against
backebiters, and do not for slauishnesse or fear or any respect suffer him to
be disgraced without gainsaying.

Thirdly, we shall easily discern what affection we bear to our brothers
credit, by our grief and sorrow which we conceive when we hear a true report
made of any fault or sin that has indeed blotted him and ruinated his good
account. If one be agreeued and sorrowful for his neighbors faults, whereby
he has deserved discredit and diminished his reputation, then it is sure he
was well persuaded of him, so far as was lawful and had that good desire
that is here commanded. Thus Ezra showed how dear the names of Gods people were
unto him, for he having heard of that foul and reproachful sin that they had
taken strange wives and mingled the holy seed with the profane, he wept and
mourned, he hangs down his head, and confesses that he was ashamed and could
not lift up his head toward heaven. But what had he done, he was clear, one
would have thought he had no cause to be ashamed, he had not offended in this
point, a natural man would rather have said, you be rude people and base, you
be a company of naughty persons what are not you ashamed to forget God thus?
and to go clean contrary to his commandment in this sort? and so fallen
straight to rating and reuiling them, no he was not of that mind he loved his
neighbors name better then so, and therefore he pitied them, and was careful
to heal their fault, as he would have been dealt with all in the like case.

So that if one have pity and compassion of his neighbors faults, and pray
for him and admonish him, and use all means to bring him to repentance, he
loves his neighbors credit, and he that can thus convert his brother from
going astray he has done the part of a good man and loving friend, for he
has healed the soul and cleared the name and covered a multitude of sins.
And thus much for this inward duty, and the three notes and trials of it.

Now follows the outward duties which are either general or special. And
first, for the general. That is to speak the truth from ones heart as David
in the 15. Psalm. Not to speak the truth alone but from our heart neither
after a flattering and dissembling manner nor after a railing and reproachful
manner, not for hope or fear, or that so it be wrested from one by any
sinister affection, but heartily to speak just as the cause is, without
serving ones self. This is one commendation of Christ and a chief
commendation that no guile was found in his mouth. But yet these two rules must
be kept in speaking the truth. First, that one speak with a good affection,
for if one speak the truth in wrath and passion, in a distempered mind, the
words indeed are not sinful, but the manner is wicked, and breaks the
commandment. Many will have a care to speak nothing but that which they ca^
justify and prove to be true, but for their affection it is altogether
disordered, for in a reuengfull mind, to ease themselves, what ever evil they
know by a man, out it shall go without any regard of edifying others, or
converting the persons, only in a rage they care not how they discredit their
neighbor. Now this rude and ungodly speaking of the truth is sin against our
neighbors name, as well as to lie and backebite. So that always truth must be
bounded with a loving heart with a quiet and well tempered mind, if one speak
unseasonably to hurt his neighbor he offe^ds in speaking the truth. So for the
end that is the second rule that one must look his end be good, that one do
aim at Gods glory, and the edification of men, for so the Apostle says
Colloss. 4. What ever you do let all be done to the glory of God. If one be
about to speak any thing let him first look what glory he may bring to God
by speaking it. Secondly, see what profit may redowne either to those to whom
we speak or to the party of whom, else never speak of other men's faults, or
of any thing else, but when we can say this profit will come, either to give
warning to others that they may take heed, or that out selves may learn more
to hate the sin, or that the party of whom the speech is may be brought to
a sight of his fault, and to amendment. If one cannot see some good or other
that will arise by his speech, it is sure it was sin and at the least an idle
word. So that one must speak the truth from his heart with a good affection,
and in good discretion, so that God may have his due praise, and man his due
edification. Thus much for the general duty. Now the special concerns
either others or our selves. In speaking of others, these rules must be
observed. In praising, to speak in ones commendation, rather in his absence
because if one be commending before ones face, though his commendations be
true, yet it savors rather of flattery then liking of the graces and besides,
through our infirmity it is not without danger of making one proud and
conceited. But in ones absence, speak the truth as much as we can to the
praise of Gods children, that so we may win more credit to their graces, and
they may be able to do more good with them; and thus as time and place
requires, it is duty to give due and true commendations to Gods servants. But
for reproof and speaking of others men's faults, do that always before their
faces, the time and season of commending is in absence, but the time and season
of reprehending is when either the party alone is present, or he is one that
is present, or at least the thing may be brought to him whom it concerns.
For so the holy Ghost commands. Hate not thy neighbor, but tell him plainly
of his fault. Till it not an other. Be as plain and as round with him as one
can, so that it be in good terms and that one know his betters and
superiors. This is contrary in many that never speak so much to magnify
ones good parts as when the man himself is within the hearing, and never so
much of ones faults, and frailties as when he is far enough of, this shows
that the one comes from a fawning disposition to currie favor, rather then in
acknowledgment of the graces, and the other rather from malice and revenge,
more then from love and desite of the parties good. For one should not in
modesty, make a rehearsal of ones good things before his face, unless it be
when he is dejected and to much depressed to comfort him and to raise him up.
And this we must observe in speaking concerning others. Now concerning our
selves; this must be kept, that one speak as sparingly as may be either of his
infirmities, least it give a suspicion of pride, or else disgrace himself so
much that he be made less able to do the good he might otherwise do, or else
of his good things, and matters of advancement, for fear least he should grow
at the length to wax proud and big, in his imagination. Now these things no
man in the world is able perfectly to fulfill, for almost in every branch
we are ready to offend continually, but the use that we must make is first to
see our wants, then to confess them and acknowledge them in humility before
God, and lastly to pray for assistance, and to beseech God, that has given us
an holy heart that we may keep them and yield obedience to them in some
measure of uprightness.

And thus much for the first five commandments, which extend them to all
outward actions, and all inward thoughts with consent. Now follows the tenth
and last commandment.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house nor his wife nor his servant nor his
Ox nor his Ass nor any thing that is his:
THis forbids the least thoughts, and motions of the heart against our neighbor
through any consent or yielding of the will. And commands such a contentednes
with our own estate as that we never have the smallest motion te^ding to the
hurt of our neighbor in any sort, yea that we have such a love to our
neighbor, as we never think of him or any thing belonging to him, but with
desire of his good every way, to covet, signifies to have a motion of the heart
without consent of will.

From this then that God forbids coveting we learn that the first motion and
inclination of the heart to any sin though a man never yield to it, or plot and
cast about how to bring it to pass, is a sin. And the reasons are plain;
first, because God has forbidden it, as in Rom 7. Paul says, he had not known
lust to be a sin, but that the law says, thou shall not lust. He knew, and
many heathen me^ that never heard of Gods law, did confess that the inward
thoughts, joined with consent and full purpose to do them if occasion served,
were sins; but for those that did but as it were pass through the heart and
stayed not there, had noe place of abode yielded to them, but were shut out so
soon as they entered, he could never be persuaded that these were faults, and
provoked Gods wrath, but that by the law he knew God had said and then he
believed it. Secondly, if one examine these by that general rule, do as you
would be done by, he shall see that they agree not with it. For no man would be
willing to have an other man, conceive the least flying conceit or thought that
might hurt him, though he never went about to put in practice; and therefore
also must be driven to confess that it is a sin in him to have such thoughts
toward an other. 3, if we consider the cause it will appear what they be.
They are fruits of original sin and proceed from natural corruption; now
who can draw a clean thing out of an unclean thing, who can pull good fruit
out of a bad tree? (being then effects of our natural pollution that we
received from Adam, for if we had continued in innocence we should have been
perfect without any such motion of the inward heart,) they are naught; for what
ever coms from sin is sin. Lastly, if the effects be marked they shall appear
to be evil. Now Saint James. 1. 14. sets down the effects of these evil
thoughts and motions, every man says he is tempted when he is drawn away by
his own concupiscence and is enticed. This Saint James shows that let one make
as little account of these thoughts as he please and count them small mattters,
yet the work that they do is not small; for they draw on a side from
beholding God, they turn the heart from considering God, to marking those
things, that he should not, and then when he is pulled from looking unto God, he
falls to according and practicing, and then sin brings death. So that these are
like a little spark of fire lighting upon tinder or toe, and such like, that
if they be not quickly quenched will grow to a great flame. So the danger is
great that co^es from every one of these, that we so little regard; for there
is not the least but it hardens the heart, and withdraws it from God, and maks
it more unfit to pray or hear, or do any thing that is good, but more easily
to be drawn to any sin. And therefore it is not slightly to be passed over. So
that because they break Gods commandment, and are against the law of charity
and ca^e from an evil cause, and bring with them such evil effects, therefore
the least imagination, arising in the heart without any agreeing of the mind
to put it in practice, is sin and deserves death.

The use that we should make of this is for our continual humiliation, that
our nature, and the whole frame of our soul and body is such as no minute
almost goes over our head but some sin, some evil and vain motion or other,
goes through our heart and arises from the puddle of our flesh; our nature is
like some great fireband, that if it be never so little stird, sends forth many
sparks on every side. Therefore we must learn in this regard to deny
ourselves and to fall down before god beseeching him to heal our nature, and to
wash and cleanse it more and more by his holy spirit. Then one has made one
good use of the law when he is so touched with the sight of his sins as that he
goes quite out of himself, when the law has so stopped his mouth as that he can
alledg nothing in himself, wherefore he should not be damned but relies and
casts himself only on the mercies of God in the merits of Christ. Again this
teaches to use all good means to keep our heart from these ill motions, and
hinder this firebrand from sparking. First, make a cournanant with our eyes to
look upon nothing, and our ears to hear nothing, and all our senses to admit
nothing into the heart, that may stir up and provoke the naughtines of it.
Secondly, take down the flesh often by fasting and prayer and hearing and such
spiritual exercises, for this is the cause why it grows so strong because we
do not set ourselves to resist it and fight against it. For if we would
beseech God to give a blessing, and use all the good means that he has
appointed to kill and crucify it, it would be a good help to us, and we
should prevail more against it. Thirdly, learn to set our mind on work
always with some good meditation, and holy desires and thoughts. for man's
heart is restless, like the watch of a clock, that while the poyses hang at
it, if it be not set right, will go wrong, so while we live, if we do not by
grace set our heart aright toward God and man, corruption will draw it
wrong. Therefore it is, that many are so troubled with ill motions, and
continual boiling of ill thoughts, because the heart is not busied and taken
up with some good thing, for if grace cease working, corruption will straight be
doing. Thus much for that, that the barethoughts are condemned, if the
consenting be evil, the conceiving is so to, if the proceeding were wicked,
the beginning is wicked also.

House.) The house is put in the first place, not because the house is more
dear and near then the wife, but because this injury in desiring the house,
extends it self to the husband, to the wife, to the children, and servants,
yea to the beasts also and cattle, every one has a part in it, it is more
general then the rest, in hurting, therefore it is placed in the first place.
In that this breach is set in the first place that is hurtful to more, We
learn that those sins, which are injurious to more men, are more hurtful to
ones self, and most hated of God, and for this cause coveting other men's
houses is set in the first rank, and in the chief place of it, and most
abhorde. So in Esaias, the Lord pronounces an especial woe and curse against
those that join house to house, that they may dwell alone in the land. So in
Job. 20. he shows the curse and vengeance of God that light upon those which
are spoylers of houses. He pulled down houses which he built not. This is the
sin. It were a foul fault for one to begin well, and end ill, to build
houses for the harbor, and help of mankind, at the first, and after to
destroy and pull down those which he has built. But when finds he the world
in a good temper, and there was room enough for his neighbors to dwell by
him, before he came, then for him to come and pull down houses, and unpeople
the land, and waste the country, this is a most horrible and indigne thing,
such as God has provided a condign punishment for it. Therefore God will
rain upon his meat, and make him vomit his sweet morsels, and the arrows of
his vengeance shall pierce through him. Solomon also shows what kind of people
they be in the commonwealth, for they are ready to excuse themselves, that
they meddle with base follows, and mean companions, that must not be compared
with men of such worth as themselves are, better a thousand such vermin want
say they, then a gentleman of place and worship be withithout his delights. But
they do not only meddle with men of the lower sort, but they give a stroke at
the prince, and at the whole land, for Solomon says, that the strength of a
prince is in the multitude of people, and the brood of mankind; they weaken the
state of the prince, and the stay of the land, and by consequence are traitors,
and in truth the most secret underminers of a commonwealth that can be. These
are most wicked persons such as the Apostle speaks, of, that desolation and
destruction are in their paths, and their footsteps, that whereby you may
tracke them and follow them is wasting, spoiling, and pulling down of houses.

This is to proclaim to all the world that one has no fear of God before his
eyes. This then to covet another man's house is a great fault. Now the means
whereby we may keep our selves from coveting, and much more from taking away
his neighbors house, are first to consider, that the house he has already is
better far then he deserves. There is not any that dwells in so simple a
cottage, but he dwells in a better house then his merits could purchase, yea if
he were in a dungeon, for he has deserved to be in hell. Then again it does
not seem good to God, to give him a better yet, and therefore he should
content himself with that, and confess that God is wiser and knows what is
good for him better then himself. Thirdly, consider the deceitfulness of our
own hearts. One thinks now that if he had a fairer house he should be more at
quiet, but may not this be a false persuasion? may not God cross him with
sickness and diseases? and then the walls will not comfort him; the roof and
the covering will not bring him any ease or help, it is not the dwelling that
brings quietness, nor the change of the house that can settle the heart,
unless one change his covetousness and wickedness, and entertain
contentednes and goodness, he shall have great grief and vexation in a great
deal, but if his heart be good and reformed, he shall live quietly, and die
blessedly, in what ever house or place he dies or lives. Nor his wife.

This is added as the next chief thing, and a thing in desiring whereof one is
next wronged, and indeed especially though the house be set first for the
generalnesse of the hurt. So that hence we may gather that the wife ought to be
more dear to one then all his substance. So Proverbs. 19. 9. House and riches
are the inheritance of the fathers, but a wife is the gift of God. House and
lands are the gift of God too, but he means a good wife is a more special
immediate and excellent gift. And Proverbs. 31. A virtuous woman is more
precious then pearls. And so it is noted that Adam was not in his full
happiness till God had given him Euah, she was given as the special outward
comfort and vpshot of the rest. Men therefore must hence learn to make account
of their wifes more then of any earthly thing besides, for she is flesh of his
flesh, a part of him, and a member of his body which cannot be said of parent
or child, or brother, or any kindred. And she may be well valued above the
pearls. For no Jewels can do that good that a good wife can and does. For if
he have grief within, or business and troubles in his outward estate, Other
things be dumb, and cannot help him, but she can refresh his soul with good
counsel, ouersee his business in wisdom, help his body against
incontinencie, and encourage him in his calling, and be a stay and succor to
him in all things. Therefore also those be most miserable and base men that set
their desire so much upon the outward things of the world, that if their wife
and their wealth were laid in the balance together, they would sooner part
with ten wives one after another, then loose any parcel of their commodity.
They would think it an injury in the wife if she should choose rather to have
her husband die, then her wealth be taken from her. And why then do they bear
this affection in themselves? Therefore one must pray God to give him that
affection which is due to his wife. For if he love not at home, he will lust
abroad, and if she have not her allowance, others shall have more then their
allowance. And it confutes those that make it so light a thing to wrong an
other in his wife the most precious thing. Many that would count it a base
thing to steal ones horse, or pick his purse, yet think it no great thing to
abuse the wife, which of all other is the worst, all the rest are to a good
husband, but as dust and chafe in comparison. And it would more grieve him,
and be a greater indignity to have her defiled, then if all the goods were on
a light fire before his face. Wives also must learn that they carry
themselves, that they may be worthy this place and account. For howsoever her
ill dealing must not free him from his duty, yet he shall be so much the more
faulty, and worthy of punishent, if being appointed for so great an help,
and to receive so great love, she be rather a discomfort and hinderance, then
an help and comfort unto him. Now it follows. Nor his man servant, nor his
maid servant.

In the next place God sets down the servants before the cattle or the beasts.
Whence we learn that a man ought to make more account of his servants then of
any other goods. Because God always makes more account of mankind then any
thing else, and we must esteem things according as God values them. Now in the
old law, those that should steal any other thing were not to suffer death for
it, but to restore fourefold according to the law, but he that should steal a
servant, (as then some wicked men would, because they sold servants in the
market as cattle,) he was to die for it. So that we see that God preferres a
servant before a beast, therefore also our judgment and estimation ought to be
conformable unto his. So Job says that he would hear his servant, and gives a
reason which serves for his point to. He that made him in the womb, did he not
make me, so that both were made in the womb, and were equally men, both had
one creator, the servant and the master equally in respect of creation, and
then also in respect of redemption there is no difference bond or free. The
servant if he be an elect servant, has as much right in the blood of Christ
and shall have as good part of the glory of Christ in heaven as the master.
And therefore he is far more excellent, and to be set far above all other
goods. Likewise they are the most profitable goods, and in that regard, to be
more highly esteemed of, for if one had never so many cattle, and no servants
to look to them and attend, they would yield him no commodity. If one had in
his possession never so much land and ground, and had none to manure and
husband it orderly, it would bring him no fruit, nor turn to no profit unto
him. Therefore masters must learn to have a greater care of them, and set more
by them then by the beasts, and not be injurious unto them though they seem
never so base, for the most contemptible servant in the world is of more worth
in his nature then the most excellent brute beast, and the most abject
handmaid more excellent in herself, then the most precious gold or silver, or
such like treasure. Therefore these serve to confute the cruelty and
covetousness of such that do show more love and good usage to the beast, then
unto men made after Gods Image committed to their charge. For when their cattle
take pains, they provide, thy shall have their diet suitable, and if the
cattle be sick and diseased, they seek all means to have them cured, and
recovered. But let their servants labor and travail, though they rise up
hungry, and go to bed cold, and have no due attendance or looking to, they
make no matter of it. And though they be sick and weak in their house, and
lie hard by them, they will not so much as go to them with any care or
diligence, but rather which is the devilish and cruel greediness, make a
pray of them, and rob and spoil them of their wages, if they can make their
bargain so. This is a most vilde beastly savageness, and in truth God paies
them for it accordingly, for either he lets them have unfaithful servants, or
else, lets them be in such note, as no servants will abide with them, but they
have all the toil to themselves, and indeed it is most just, that since they
prize beasts above men, they and their beasts should try it out together,
and since they bear a greater affection to their goods then to the image of God
and man, their goods should be turned to a burden and vexation unto them. Then
this serves also for the instruction unto servants, that since God does prefer
them before all other goods, therefore they should so behave themselves, as they
may answer to their place, for there where God gives more wages he does
require more work, or else he will lay on more punishment, and therefore it
serves utterly to condemn such as be idle and wicked, that if ye look into
them, you can see them good for nothing but swaggering, swilling, and
disguising themselves in their behavior and apparel, filthy persons and
unchaste, that do nothing but fill the house full of sin, and pollute it
with unchastity and other like disorders. These it is just they should be
less made of then the beasts, because they make themselves worse then the
beasts, For the ox and the ass or the horse do till the ground, and carry
burdens, and so return some commodity to the masters, but those that will
neither do any good, nor learn any good, but set themselves in their carriage,
and cross God and his word, and his servants, are more base, and more
unprofitable then the earth, and not worthy so much honor, unless they
amend, as the ox or ass.

Nor any thing that is his.
Seeing he had before touched the matters of greatest weight in their kind,
and under them comprehended the rest, now he generally touches things of
less worth, any thing little or great, worth much or worth little, that is not
the question, but if it be thy neighbors, thou shall not have any motion to
hurt thy neighbor in it.

So that we must observe hence, that the least motion after the least thing of
our neighbors is sin; men will (it may be) yield that the coveting of a
neighbors house, wife, servant is naught for these be matters of some wait,
but for a little corn, a little grass, an apple a point etc. These they say
be trifles not to be stood upon; nay there is nothing so small, but it is some
thing and being comprehended under the word any thing must not be coueted.
Therefore God to meet with these obiectors, as in the fourth commandment, so
hear has brauncht out so many particulers and at length comprehended all
other things not named in a general term, that men might have no shift or
evasion, but since God forbiddes all coveting in trifles or weighty matters
might confess that all is sin.

This confutes those that for weighty matters, of some moment, they will hold
their hands at least; but for small things that they think a man shall not be
much the worse for, they give liberty not to their hearts only but also to
their hands, and then they say, Oh, this is nothing pray God we may never do
worse indeed it were well that we should never do worse, but it is not well
that one does so ill, for if he do no worse but do this still, this brings
him under the curse and will certainly bring him to greater matters; for if a
spark be long vnquencht it will bring a fla^e, and he that will disobey God
for a little, will disobey him more for a great deal, and he that makes no
bones of corrupting his conscience for a penny or half penny, he will be more
audacious for a pound. And though the matter be small, in which one offends,
yet it is not a small matter, nor a little thing to offend against God, it is a
small thing, but it is some thing, and God will not allow it in any thing. He
can spare it, but god will not spare it, so that thou should take it with
sin against his law. Therefore the use that we must make, is to pray God to
give us such a contented heart, and so to like our one estate, as that we may
covet nothing that belongs not to us. That we shall obtain if we get a firm
and true faith in Gods prouidencence, and his promises. For if one be persuaded
firmly that God has appointed him this house, this wife, this servant, then
we shall be content, for we must needs yield that Gods ways be better then
ours, that his decree is most just in it self and also best for us if we be
his. Also one must have faith in Gods promises, for when one sees no help for
him in any but himself, and is not resolved that God will provide for him, and
see that he shall lack nothing then original sin will lay about it, and seek
to provide for it self, and lay about with wishng and desiring Oh, that this,
or that, or the other thing, etc. Then I should be well. But if one rest on
Gods promises, that has promised he shall want no good thing that fears him,
and that he will be a sun and a sheilde unto the righteous man; this will
breed such contentment, and such resting on Gods provision as that one shall
not be troubled, with these idle thoughts and wishes, for that is none of ours.
And thus much for the negative part of this commandment. Now the affirmative
part is, that we should have such a charitable affection, to our neighbor as
that we should never have any motion but to his good in himself and every
thing that belongs to him and every thought concerning him, that te^deth not
to his good, is sin; and thus much for the exposition of the law. Which must
serve to this end that seeing our own unrighteousness and insufficiency, we
should fly to Christ to be our righteousness and sufficiency and then to make
this the rule of our life, and a lantern to our feet, that though we cannot
attain to the perfection which the law requires, yet we may have that
uprightness, with which the Gospel is content:

FINIS.

