THE DROVSIE DISEASE; OR, AN ALARM TO AWAKE Church-sleepers.

Wherein not only the dangers hereof are described, but remedies also
prescribed for this sleeping evil*

MAT. 26. 40. What, could ye not watch with me one hour? LONDON, Printed by
I. D. for Michael Spark junior, and are to be sold at the blew Bible in green
Arbor. 1638.

THE DROVSIE DISEASE. Or, An Alarm to awake Church-sleepers.
CHAP. I. The several kinds of sleep: and what kind is here treated of.
Sleep (as it is referred The several kinds of sleep.
to man) is used in Scripture, either properly, or figuratively.

Properly, for that natural The proper acception thereof.
rest which God has appointed for the continuing and moistening of natural
heat; the refreshing of the wearied spirits; the quickening and strengthening
of the weak members, and the preservation of wearied Nature.

It is occasioned by vapors Whence it comes.
and fumes rising from the stomach to the head, where through coldness of the
brain they become congealed, and so stop the conduits and ways of the senses,
that they become unable to execute their office, and may seem for a time to be
tied and bound up, which is therefore not without cause termed of some: The
bond of Arist. de some. and vig.
the senses.

Hereof the Lord is the Author The Author thereof. Iam. 1. 17. (...), Homer.
Mat. 5. 45.
(even the Father of lights, from whom every good gift, and every perfect gift
comes down) who (as he makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on the
good, and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust) equally communicated
this blessing to good and bad, yet is it not more common then necessary, for,
It helps and perfecteth digestion, recovereth How needful it is.
strength, refreshes the body, reviveth the mind, pacifieth anger, drives
away sorrow, and brings the whole man to good state and temperature,
according to that of the Poet;

Thou rest of things, most meek Somne, quies rerum, ^^^idissime Somne Deorum,
etc. Ovid. metam. lib. 11. Translated by Mt. G. Sandys.
of all the Gods:
O sleep, the peace of minds, from whose abods
Care ever flies: restoring the decay
Of toyle-tir'd limbs to labour-burdening day.
Yea, as without this man could not consist, (for

There is no creature that can Quod caret alternandacirc; requie durabile non
est, Ovid. Epist. 4.
always last,
Which wholly of his sleep is dispossessed.)
So for the fruition thereof, he has in a manner no less time allotted unto
him, then for the works of his calling (for this Psalm. 104: 23
craveth the night, as those the day) yea as it is used, or rather abused, it
is the better part of Pars humanae melior vitae, Senec.
man's life, during the continuance whereof (which is at the least the one half
of man's life) there is no difference between masters and servants, kings and
beggars; Craesus and Codrus, Dimidio vitae nihil differunt foelices ab
infoelicibus. Eras. Chil.
as well those as these entertaining the same; or rather with a kind of willing
unwillingnesse, nill they, will they, subjecting themselves hereunto. Hereof
another Poet speaking to, and of sleep.

Thou charm to all our cares, Tuque o domitor, somne malorum, requies animi,
etc. Senec. Her. fur. act. 4. translated by Master G. Sandys.
that art
Of human life the better part:
Winged issue of a peaceful mother,
Of rigid death, the elder brother:
Father of things, the life of port:
The days repose, and nights consort.
To Kings and vassals equal free,
The labour-tir'd refresht by thee.
Who man (whom death does terrify)
Inur'st continually to die.
This is either ordinary, or The kinds of sleep properly taken. Sleep, when
lawful.
extraordinary.

Ordinary, lawful, or unlawful.

Lawful, when

Seasonable, as in the night, implied in that of the Psalmist. Man goes forth
to his work, Psalm. 104 23 1 Thessalonians. 5. 7
and to his labor until the evening. And, in that of the Apostle, They that
sleep, sleep in the night. So in the time of weakness, sickness, and such
other bodily infirmities, whether it be by day, or night.

Moderate: Not so short, as that thereupon our health is endangered, or so
long, as that thereby we are hindered from the duties of our Calling.

Sanctified by prayer, without which no creature of God 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5.
is to be received.

Occasioned by the works of our Calling. Eccles. 5: 12.


Our souls are awake in the meditation of heavenly Isa. 26. 9. Genesis 28. 12.
Cant. 5. 2.
things; as it was with Jacob, and the Spouse in the Canticles, if that may be
understood of bodily rest.

We are thereby the more fitted for the works of our calling. When un^^wfull.


Unlawful, when.

Unseasonable, as at prayer, and the preaching of the Word, for we are to
watch in Col. 4. 2. ^am. 1. 19.
the one, and be swift to hear the other.

Immoderate, as the sluggards in the Proverbs; Yet a ^rov. 6. 10.
little steep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep.

No blessing of God is craved thereupon, which is too too usual with most.

Following upon the Commission of sin, as theirs, of Prove. 4. 16.
whom Solomon, They sleep not, except they have done mischief, and their
sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall.

Our souls during the continuance thereof satiate themselves with the seeming
pleasures of sin, whereof our usual dreams may sufficiently inform us.

We become thereby the more strengthened to continue in sin, and to commit the
same.

Extraordinary, occasioned Natural means occasioning extraordinary sleep.
either through natural, or through supernatural means.

Natural, through

Care, and grief, as was that of the Disciples. Luke 22. 45.


Weariness, as was that of Sisera's. Judge. 4. 21.


Long watching, as was that of Eutychus. Act. 20. 9.


Intemperance, as was that of Noah's. Genesis 9. 24.


Labor, according to that of the Preacher; The sleep of Eccles. 5. 12.
a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much.

Heat, as was that of Ishbosheth. 2 Samuel 4. 5.


Artificial Potions made of Poppy, Lettuce, etc. which is brought to pass,
sometimes for a good end, as when means are used to bring sick, weak, and
aged persons into a sleep; Sometimes for a bad, as when Dalilah made Sampson
sleep, Judge 16. 19.
that she might betray him into the hands of his enemies.

Supernatural, as which comes immediately of God, and that sometimes on the
godly, as on Adam, when Hevah was Genesis 2. 21. Genesis 15. 12.
formed; and on Abraham when God confirmed his promise to him by a vision;
Sometimes on the ungodly, as on Saul, when David took his 1 Samuel 26. 12
Spear, and the cruise of water which stood at his bolster.

Figuratively, and that as well The accepti^ns of sleep figuratively taken in
respect of the godly.
in respect of the godly, and the ungodly severally, as in respect of both
jointly considered, Severally,

In respect of the godly.

For abundant prosperity, tranquillity, peace of conscience; quietness, and
rest of mind, void of carking care, and free from such distractions, as
during the state of Nature disquiet the whole man; I laid Psalm. 3. 5.
me down and slept, said David. And again, He gives his beloved Psalm. 1 27.
2^
sleep. Agreeable hereunto is that of Ezekiel, They Ezech. 34. 2^
shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.

For a spiritual slumber, and drowsinesse in the mind and heart touching
heavenly things, occasioned through abundance of peace and pleasures, wherewith
a Christian may be at sometimes so overtaken; as that (though bodily awake)
with David he falls into the 2 Samuel 11. 4^
sleep of sin. Such was the Spouses slumber. I sleep (says ^ant. 5. 2.
she) but my heart waketh. Such also the slumber, even of the five wise
virgins. When the ^at. 25. 5.
Soul (either through carelessness, or by reason of some temptation) ceased
from good, then does it thus sleep. Hereof what one is there, which may not
justly complain? How often does man seem unto himself, wise, just, humble,
rich in grace? how often goes he on in his vanity glorying in the multitude
of his spiritual riches, and saying in the pride of his heart, I shall Rev. 3.
17.
not be moved for ever, I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing? but when he shall awake, he will be ashamed of such fancies and
dreams.

In respect of the ungodly, The ungodly for sin, considered in general.
and that as well for sin, as the effects of sin.

Sin, considered both in general, and in particular.

In General. As in that of the Apostle. Now it is high Romans 13. 11.
time to awake out of sleep. And again; Awake thou that Ephesians. 5. 14: 1 These.
5, 6.
sleep. And again, let us not sleep as do others. Neither is it without
especial cause that sin is thus expressed, there Resemblances between
sleep and sin.
being indeed between sin and sleep, no small resemblance as may thus
appear.

Sleep is natural to the body: so is sin to the Soul. Naturally, every
imagination Genesis 6. 5.
of the thoughts of our hearts is only evil continually. We leave the paths
of uprightness Prove. 2. 13. 14. Isa. 5. 18.
to walk in the ways of darkness: we rejoice to do evil, and delight in
the frowardness of the wicked, we draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and
sin as it were with a cartrope.

Sleep steals upon man as it were by degrees, so in like manner does sin.
Suggestion produces delight. Delight, consent; Consent, act; Act, the habit
thereof.

sleep, fears no danger, be it never so near, never so great, as the
examples of Ishbosheth, 2. Sam. 4. 6.
and Jonah witness; so sin drives into security. We have Jonah 1. 5.
made a covenant with death (said some in the days of Esaias) Isa. 28. 15.
and with hell, are we at an agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall
pass through, it shall not come unto us. Agreeable here unto is that of the
Lord by Amos, All the sinners Amos 9. 10*
of my people shall die by the sword, which say the evil shall not overtake,
nor prevent us, of whom Zephaniah; They ^eph. 1. 12. ^uk. 17. 27, 28.
say in their heart: The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil. Of
this sort were the old world, and Sodomites.

sleep, does for the most part retire himself from the company, society, and
fellowship of others, to some one corner or other, that so neither himself may
be perceived, nor his rest disturbed. Such a one also neither Lycost. Thee
vitae human*
affects light, nor noise, as Sibertus, who banished dogs, and tradesmen
from the place of his residence, lest thereby his sleep should be broke,
agreeable unto the Poets description of sleep in these words;

Near the Cimmerians, lurkes Est prope^ Cimmerios longo Spe^ca recessu, ^mons
cavu^ etc. Ovid Met. 11. Translate^ by Maste^ G. Sandys.
a cave, in steep
And hollow hills; the mansion of dull sleep.
Not seen by Phoebus, when he mounts the skies
At height, nor stouping: glooming mists arise
From humide earth; which still a twilight make
No crested fowls shrill crowing here awake
The cheerful morn, no barking sentinel
Here guards, nor geese, who wakefull dogs excel.
Beasts tame, nor savage: no wind-shaken boughs,
Nor strife of jarring tongues, with noises rouse.
Secured ease, etc.
So sinners (if not past shame) ^zech. 8. 10.
do especially in secret commit their villainies. Cain gets his ^en. 4. 8.
brother out into the fields, and then slays him. Achan hides ^sh. 7. 21:
his stolen goods. Gehezi without the knowledge of his Master (as he
conceived) takes money and raiment of Naaman, and they that are drunk (says
the Apostle) are ^ing. 5. 24.
drunk in the night. And lest they should not thus sleep ^hes. 5. 7.
long enough, and safe enough, they stop the light of the Word, put out the
light of their own consciences, and forbid even those whose office it is to
awake them out of sleep, to awake them till they please. As for the word which
thou ^4. 16.
have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken Amos 7. 12, 13.
to thee, said the people unto Jeremiah, O thou Seer (said Amaziah unto Amos)
go flee thee away into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophecy
there, but prophecy not again any more in Bethel, for it is the kings
Chapel, and it is the Kings Court. Yea, as a man being asleep, does for the
most part take it ill, when he is awaked; so a sinner when he is called upon
to forsake his sins; yet a little sleep (says Prove. 6. 10.
he) a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep. The time is not
come, the time that Hag. 1: 2.
the Lords house should be built, said the people unto Haggai. Have thou found
me, O mine 1 King. 21. 20.
enemy, said Ahab unto Elijah. If John the Baptist say unto Herod, It is not
lawful for thee Math. 14, 3^
to have thy brother Philips wife; he will lay hold on him, and put him in
prison. If Paul reason of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come;
Felix will tremble, and answer, Go thy way for this Act. 24. 25.
time, when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee. If Micaiah detect
the forgery and falsehood of Zedekiah, Zedekiah will smite him on the 1 King.
22. 24.
cheek, saying, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto
thee?

Sleep, during its continuance, hinders and lets men, even from the
Performance of civil offices, as the Soldier from fighting, the Labourer from
working, the Carpenter and Mason from building, and the like; so cannot we by
reason of sin perform any thing which is acceptable to God (though the same
be in it self lawful and warrantable) till we be raised therefrom. What
have thou ^al. 50. 16, 17.
to do (says God unto the wicked) to declare my statutes, or that thou
should take my Covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hate instruction, and
castest my words behind thee. To what purpose is the multitude Jsa. 1. 11.
of your sacrifices unto me? (says the Lord, unto his people) I am full of
the burnt offering 15.
of rams, etc. your hands are full of blood. As Cain Genesis 4. 5.
could not offer up an acceptable sacrifice unto God, being asleep in sin;
so whilst it goes over our souls, binding up the faculties of the same, and
bringing an heaviness, or rather deadness into all the powers thereof, we are
altogether unfit to go about the actions of an holy life. Hence comes it to
pass, that the mind never thinks seriously of God: the conscience never or
seldom accuses for sins committed: the will never or seldom wills that
which is truly good: the affections seldom or never are moved at Gods word or
works, yea, so long as it bears sway over us, we can neither pray aright,
hear the Word aright, nor rightly perform any other duty.

sleep we do often conceive our condition to be better, then indeed it is.
The poor man dreameth of riches, the sick of health, the imprisoned of
liberty, the hungerstarved of dainty fare, delighting themselves with a kind of
content, in the (imaginary) fruition of these things. So does a sinner bless
himself in his course. I am (says Babylon) and none else beside me: I ^^. 47.
8.
shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss of children. ^^k. 12.
19.
Soul (said the rich man in the Gospel, to his own soul) thou have much
goods laid up for many years, take ^^k. 18. 11.
thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. God I thank thee (said the
vainglorious, selfeconceited, hypocritical Pharisee) that I am not as other
men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican.

In Particular In particular.


carelessness. Sloth and negligence whether in Pastors, or people. His
watchmen Isa. 56. 10.
are blind (says Esaias) they are all ignorant: they are all dumb dogs, they
cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Their baker sleeps
Hos. 7. 6.
all the night, says Hosea. But while men slept (says our Savior) his enemy
came, and Mat. 13. 25.
sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way. How long Prove. 6. 9.
will thou sleep, O sluggard? (says the Wise man) when will thou arise out of
thy sleep?

whoredom or uncleanness. Come (said Lots eldest daughter unto her sister)
Let us make our father drink Genesis 19. 32*
wine, and we will lie (or sleep) with him, that we may preserve seed of our
father. The effects of sin.


The effects of sin.

Soul (even in this life) a spiritual lethargy or Ephesians. 4. 19.
deadness of heart by the custom of sin, when as the heart is made past
feeling, and altogether senseless, through continuance, therein. Whereof
Isaiah, For the Lord has poured Isa. 29. 10.
out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes.

destruction, whereof the ^al. 76. 5. ^sal. 13. 3.
Psalmist, The stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep. And
again, lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death. So the Lord by
Jeremiah, ^er. 51. 39.
In their heat I will make their feasts, and I will make them drunken, that
they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, says the Lord.

Jointly, in respect both of ^he godly ^d ungodly ^yntly con^ered.
the godly and ungodly, either death being by sleep significantly expressed.

The godlies, as David slept ^ King. 2. 10
with his fathers. Our friend Ioh. 11. 11. Mat. 27. 52.
Lazarus sleeps, and the graves were opened, and many bodies of saints which
slept arose. The ungodlies, as Jeroboam slept 1 King. 14 20 1 King. 15. 8 1
King. 16. 6.
with his fathers. Abiam slept with his fathers. Baasha slept with his fathers,
etc.

Quest. But as David of Abner, (died Abner as a fool 2 Samuel 3. 33.
dies?) Is there no difference between those, and these, (the godly and the
ungodly) in death?

Ans. In some respect there Solomon; How dies Eccles. 2. 16.
the wise man? as the fool. But in others very great, according to that of the
same Author. The Prove. 14. 32
wicked is driven away in his wickedness, but the righteous has hope in his
death.

Their agreement consists in Wherein the death of the^ godly and ^ wicked
agre^
these particulars.

beds represent our graves: the sheets wherein we lie our winding-sheets,
wherein we shall be wrapped. The clothes that lie on us, the clods of earth
that shall be cast upon us, when we are laid in our graves, yea as they that
are asleep are for the time void of care, and insensible either of joy or
pain, neither being affected with the miseries of others to mourn with them,
nor with their prosperity to rejoice with them, but (having their eyes bound up
from seeing, their ears from hearing, as their other senses from the execution
of their several functions) are wholly ignorant of things done about them, so
is it with those that are dead. To this purpose Job, Why did the ^ob 3. 12, 13.
knees prevent me? or why the breasts that I should suck? for now should I
have lain still, and been quiet, I should have slept, then had I been at
rest. And Isaiah tells us, that now ^a. 63. 16.
Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel does not acknowledge us. Hence it is,
that as a Job 7. 2.
servant earnestly desires the shadow, and as an hireling looks for the
reward of his work, so not a few do daily gape for death, that thereby they
may be freed from their troubles. It is now enough, O Lord, (said 1 King. 19. 4
Elijah) take away my life, for I am no better then my fathers. Take I beseech
thee my life Jonah 4. 3.
from me (said Jonah) for it is better for me to die, then to live. And in
those days (says Rev. 9. 6.
S. John, namely when unto the locusts, that came out of the bottomless pit,
power was given to torment those men which have not the seal of God on their
foreheads) shall men seek death, and shall not find it, and shall desire to
die, and death shall fly from them. Agreeable hereunto is that of Philo; who
being asked what Anton. and Max. ser. de somno. Aelian. lib. 2*
sleep was, answered, The image of death, and rest of the senses; and that of
Gorgias, who being very aged, and feeling deadly sleep or death to creep on
him, unto a friend, who asked him how he did, answered, Sleep now begins
^ras. lib. 6. ^ap. 8.
to commend me unto his brother, and that of Epaminondas who having slain one
of the watch whom he found sleeping, thus justified his fact, Such a one, as I
found him (says he) I have left him. To ^uslat. ad ^om. Ibid. ^ertull. de
a^ma, Chrysostom. ^^ pop. ant. ^mil. 5. ^rist. lib. 19. ^nimal.
this purpose is it, that of some sleep and death are said to be brethren or
cousin-Germans, Sleep Deaths looking-glass, death a sleep longer then
usual, yea sleep a kind of middle thing between death and life.

Sleep as it is common to all men, and cannot be driven away or avoided of
any, how sparing soever, or well-spenders of time, so it is ^eb. 9. 27. ^om. 5.
12.
appointed unto him once to die: Death passes upon all men, and ^al. 89. 48.
what man is he that shall not see death?

3. Sleep, though usually it comes by degrees, as after labor, meat,
weariness, watching, and the like; yet does it often steal on men at
unawares; So death though usually, and by course of nature it 1 King. 13. 24.
follows sickness as the forerunner thereof, yet seazeth it often on men
both good and bad on the very sudden. So did it on the man of God that came
Act. 5. 5. 10:
unto Bethel, so on Ananias and Luke 12. 19, 20.
Sapphira, Then said God unto the rich man; Thou fool, this night shall thy
soul be required of thee, when he had said unto his soul; Soul, thou have
much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.

Sleep is proper to the body, not the soul, (for even Cord vigilamus, etiam
cum corpore dormimus, Aug. de verb. dom. Ser. 22. Isa. 26. 19.
then are we to be awake in soul, when we sleep in body) so dies man in
respect of his body, not his soul. Though the body rests and dwells in the
dust of the earth, yet does not the soul so rest. The dust (that is the body)
returns to the earth, as it was, and the Eccles. 12. 7.
spirit returns unto God, who gave it; yea, if the soul do Anima quieti
nunquam succedit. Tertul. de anima.
not now sleep, whilst it is in the prison of the body, much less shall it,
being freed therefrom. As the souls of the godly are carried into heaven, so
Luke 16. 22.
are the souls of the ungodly into hell, eithers bodies in the mean time
remaining in their graves. As Cosimo the Florentine Hist. Florent. lib. 7.
to some Rebels that sent him word they slept not, answered, that he believed
the same, because their sleep was taken from them. So may it be affirmed of
men's souls, that as here they cannot sleep, so hereafter they cannot die.

Sleep, though it be of longer continuance with some, then with others, yet
lasts it not always with any; even the sluggard being at the length awaked,
or awaking therefrom, so death must at the last restore her dead, how long
soever they have been under the power, and in the possession thereof, For the
trumpet shall 1 Cor. 15. 5
sound (says the Apostle) and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we
shall be changed. Agreeable hereunto is that of S, John; And the sea gave Rev.
20. 13.
up the dead which were in it, and death and hell delivered up the dead which
were in them.

The difference between them Wherein the differ.
in these.

Pharaohs Butler was restored, and his Baker hanged, according to Joseph's
interpretation of their dreams.) So both the ungodly and the godly die, yet
does not eithers death prove advantageous. The hour is coming Ioh. 5. 28.
in the which all that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of
man, and shall come forth, they that have done good unto the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation, Says
our Savior himself; All the ten virgins which slumbered (as well the wise as
the foolish) arose, but ^at. 25. 7. ^^. 12.
the wise only went in with the Bridegroom unto the marriage, the others being
excluded; Depart from me ye cursed, shall ^at. 25. 34. ^^.
it be said unto the wicked on the day of judgment; but unto the godly, Come
ye blessed of my Father. Unto these death is not as death (as having the Cor.
15. 56. (...). Chrysostom. ^^ Heb. (...), ^rist.
sting thereof removed, which is sin) but as a sweet sleep, unto those it is
otherwise: even of fearful things the most fearful. Those lose, but these
gain thereby, a palace for a prison, rest for labor, liberty for bondage, God
for men, the company of Angels for the company of sinners, and finally, heaven
for earth.

sleep proves unto many fatal, wherein they die, and from which they never
rise; so unto the ungodly the death of the body is a forerunner of that second
death, the death both of body and soul; under which they shall lie world
without end. But it is not so unto Gods children. Thereby is put an end unto
all their miseries, for they rest from Rev. 14. 13
their labors, neither do they hunger any more, or thirst any more, and all
tears are wiped from their eyes. Thereby are they freed from all sorts of Romans
6. 7.
sins: (for he that is dead is freed from sin) thereby from the being of
sin: from the infection of sin: from the guilt of sin: from temptations
unto sin: from the authority, dominion, and rule of sin: from the
imputation of sin: from the reward or dangerous effect and consequents of
sin, and that wholly, fully, perpetually. Thereby from all sorts of crosses.
Thereby from all sorts of fears. Thereby from all sorts of cares; In a word,
thereby freed from all sorts of evil, past, present, and to come. They lie
down in (...). 57. 1^
sure and certain hope of resurrection to eternal life. Their ^ Cor. 15. 42
^, 44.
bodies are sown in corruption, but raised in incorruption, sown in
dishonor, but raised in glory; sown in weakness, but raised in power; sown
natural bodies, (as many go heavily to bed) but raised spiritual bodies,
when through the glorious beams of the Sun of righteousness shining on
them, they shall fully recollect both their spirits and strength, in all which
respects that of Solomon may be applied unto them, that Their day of death is
better, then the day wherein they were borne.

All the Job 7. 14.
days of my appointed time will I wait (says Job) till my change Job 14. 14.
come; yea, with the Apostle desire to be dissolved, and to be Phil. 1. 23.
Heb. 9. 27.
with Christ, But the ungodly whose consciences tell them that after death
comes judgment, Act. 24. 25.
do with Foelix tremble at the very mentioning thereof: yet (how loath soever
to undergo it, what pains or charges soever they are at, when they feel it
or fear it approaching to remove it and put it off) do most of them even
willingly (as it were) through intemperancie, incontinencie, carking cares, and
such like courses bring it upon themselves.

sleep they that are in misery are fitted and enabled to undergo more misery,
and they that are in a good condition become capable of more happiness, so
through death are the ungodly, as it were fitted for hell, the godly for
heaven; those for unconceivable misery, these for unspeakable happiness.

Take we it in this Treatise Sleep how taken in this Treatise.
in its proper signification, but for such a sleep as is altogether unlawful,
howsoever ordinary and common, for then to sleep, when we ought to be swift
to hear, and then to be drowsy, when it concerns us to be most vigilant (as
at the preaching of the word, and prayer) who will not judge the same
unreasonable, and so neither lawful nor warrantable.

Be this then, this unreasonable, unlawful, unwarrantable kind of sleep, or
rather sleeping evil (sleeping at Church) this inordinate, ordinary bodily
drowsiness, I say, whereby the Word read or preached becomes wholly
ineffectuall, and no blessing from God, but rather an undoubted curse can be
expected thereupon, the subject of this discourse.

CHAP. II. How convenient and necessary it is to handle this Argument.
NEither needs any to Reasons showing the utility, and necessity of this
Treatise.
wonder that this should be meddled withal, or conceive him to have little to
do, unless to keep himself awake, which busieth himself about such a
sleepy subject. These with the like warrantable reasons will (questionless)
justify our proceeding.

this is by most no otherwise (if at all) meddled withal, then by a bare
cursory speaking against it, and that not of set purpose, but occasionally upon
the view of some one or other sleeping; yea, and that but in general terms,
which how fruitless and ineffectuall it proves to reclaim any therefrom
daily experience shows. As therefore for the subduing of other vices, there
must be both Precept upon ^sa, 28. 10.
precept, and line upon line, so must there be for the subduing of this.

there are so many which offend herein, and yet think, that either they have
not at all, or but a little offended. Those standing upon their justification;
These going about to excuse their practice. Such had need to be wrought on,
brought on, to see the greatness of this sin, and that (as Lot of Zoar) they
^en. 19. 20.
may not conceit, that it is but a little one. Before those must the evils
hereof be laid open, Reasons dissuading from the same be propounded, as in
like manner, their several objections to the contrary, plainly and solidly
dissolved.

there are so many, which being customarily addicted hereunto (yet exceedingly
desirous and willing to leave the same) are notwithstanding wholly ignorant how
to effect it. Those must be made acquainted as well with the Causes hereof, as
Remedies how to be rid of the same.

there are but a few, which do truly take notice of the danger ensuing hereby,
or consider the wrongs occasioned through the same. The ignorant therefore and
careless are to be showed, that hereby they wrong the blessed Trinity,
hereby are stumbling blocks unto others, which through their evil example in
this kind prove no less wicked then themselves. Hereby the Word becomes
ineffectuall, and the Ministers thereof discouraged: yea, that this is one
maine cause, why they do so long continue in their sins, to the grief and
hurt of their own souls.

Because this sin cannot be so well met withal by speaking against it, as by
writing. For if a Minister should in his Sermon, when an occasion is presented
unto him (as when is there not?) inveigh against the same, he might happily
through weakness or want of memory forget himself, neither be able again
without much ado to come to his matter, or rather be forced by new objects of
drowsinesse to renew his reproves, and continually to go on in that argument;
yea, though there were no fear of such destruction, yet in as much as a
Minister is not to nominate any of his auditors in particular. Neither happily
(if it were lawful for him to name them) knows he his Auditors by name,
though he should observe them to be asleep, his reproves must be general,
which (as in other things) who does not almost put from himself, as if they
did not at-all concern him, or the Minister therein had no aim at him? Our
Savior Mat. 26. 21*
having informed his Disciples in general terms (not particularizing the
name of any) that one of them should betray Verse. 25.
him; Judas thereupon (who indeed was (the villain, the man aimed at) could
say notwithstanding; Is it I Master? so do too too many in the case we have in
hand.

Because there are no lawful means (who will judge this unlawful?) which
Christians Deuteronomy. 22. 2, 3.
are not to use for the good one of another; Yea, if the Lord require of us the
manifestation of brotherly love, even in such things as concern our ^eut. 22.
1, ^3.
neighbors (our enemies) e-estate, much more does he it in such things as
concern the welfare of their bodies, and if of their bodies, much more of
their souls. Now what can be more advantageous unto their souls, then their
careful and conscionable hearing of the Word? and how can they thus hear it,
if they sleep thereat? and sleep they will if means be not used to keep
them awake. As therefore one of the Persian kings Chamberlaines was every
morning to come unto his Masters bedside, and to awake him with these words;
Arise O King, and be (...),
careful of the businesses, whereof Mesoromasdes willed thee to take care; So
may every Christian (must every Christian) carefully use means whereby as well
to withold themselves, as withdraw others from this sleeping evil. May it be
lawful in the words of Solomon to rowse up the sluggard? Prove. 6. 9.
How long will thou sleep O sluggard? when will thou arise out of thy sleep?
And will any judge this unlawful? yea, should we not thus endeavor our selves
according to our abilities to prevent, or to amend the same, we might as well be
truly reputed as justly punished for partaking with others in sin, which
(according to S. Paul's caveat) who 1 Timothy 5. 2:
is not bound carefully to avoid?

7. Because, this is a breach Canon 18.
of one of our Church-Constitutions, which requires, that None, either man,
woman, or child, of what calling soever shall be otherwise busied (in time of
Service or Sermon) then in quiet attendance to hear, mark and understand that
which is read, preached, or ministered; And that They shall not disturb the
Service or Sermon by walking and talking, or any other way.

Tabernacle, Exodus 35. 22.
some brought bracelets, and earnings, and rings, and tablets, Verse 23.
all jewels of gold, and the Rulers brought Onix-stones, and Verse 24:
stones to be set for the Ephod, and for the breast plate; So others brought
goats hair, and red skins of rams, and badgers skins; neither of which
were rejected, but the offerings of either accepted (yea, and our Savior did
more commend the poor widow, for her two mites which she cast into ^uk. 21. 3.
the treasury, then the rich for their liberal offerings, inasmuch as they out
of their abundance ^erse. 4.
cast into the offerings of God, but she of her penury cast in all the living
she had.) So if toward the increase of the kingdom of Christ, and building up
one another in our most holy faith; Some with the Captain of the Aramites 1
King. 22: 32.
meddled only with the king of Israel, that is, great sins, as swearing,
adultery, murder, and the like, (as some worthily and profitably have done) or
detect and confute heresies, resolve cases of conscience; set forth large
commentaries on the Scriptures, and handle controversies (which are as gold,
silver, and precious stones) and all to the singular good of Gods people, why
may not others bring their goats hair? I mean, discover and oppose, even the
pettiest offenses. As there must be meat for men, (of which kind are the
Fathers, Councels, Schoolmen, large Commentaries on the Scriptures, etc.) So
must there milk for babes, of which kind are Catechismes, plain Sermons,
Prayer books, books of Meditations, and such like short godly discourses,
whereof questionless no small benefit daily arises, as their often
impressions clearly witness. Nay, even the greatest scholars, and most
learned men have not thought their time ^ll bestowed in writing on such low
discourses (as Solomon spoke of the hysope that springs out ^ King. 4. 33.
of the wall) to the capacity of the meanest.

CHAP. III. Whence it is, that Church-sleeping is so ordinary, and usual.
THE causes hereof (not to mention Gods justice on the contemners of his Word,
who for the most part being come to Church are cast into such a deepesleepe,
that though they have both eyes and ears, yet (for the time) they are deprived
of the use of either, neither seeing with the one, nor ^earing with the other,
of whom it may be said as of Saul and his troops, a deep sleep of 1 Samuel 26.
12
God is upon them that they do not awake;) The causes I say hereof may be
reduced especially into these three;

The first arising from Satan. The causes of Church-sleeping.


The second arising from our selves.

The third arising from others, both Preachers and people.

Sect. 1. Satan. From Satan.

As Dalilah made Sampson Judge. 16. 19.
sleep on her lap to the loss as well of his liberty, as life: so does Satan
rock us asleep at Church, that he may lead us captive at his pleasure, to
the utter and everlasting ruin both of bodies, and souls. Hereof took
Machetes (of whom Lorinus in Acta Apost. page 591.
Cassianus makes mention) good notice, for observing his fellow-Monkes when
he began to speak unto them of heavenly things suddenly thereupon to fall
asleep, but when of other matters, to lend their attentive ears, he informed
them that the same came of Satan; yea, how many are there found, which if they
had no mind nor inclination to sleep a day or two before, will notwithstanding
sleep at Service and Sermon? whence comes it to pass? assuredly from Satan
who is ready and busy enough to besprinkle their temples with his spiritual
opium of evil motions and suggestions, and having maliciously inclined them to
drowsinesse, diligently rocketh the cradle, that they may sleep the more
soundly. This he brings Who brings to pass.
diversely to pass, as

working with outward means occasioning sleep, such as heat, weakness,
grief, long watching, and the like.

keeping men and women in ignorance, or without the knowledge of the Word.

persuading, that the Preacher is not worth the hearing, and so that his words
are not to be regarded, or that in his Sermons he venteth his own spleen and
malice.

propounding, that though the Minister should preach never so well, and they
should give never so diligent heed thereunto, yet that it will be to no
purpose, they being unable to conceive any thing by him delivered, which for
the most part through his means in most proves too too true.

working a general dislike of the Word preached, in respect of its opposition
unto those things, which are with most, in most request.

drawing the attention, and intention another way.

Sect. 2. Our selves. From our selves in sundry particulars.

Through sloathfulnesse, according to that of Solomon, Pro. 19. 15.
Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep, which may be no less appointed
unto this, then unto any other. He that is sloathfull cannot but sleep
wheresoever he is. Neither the fear of danger, nor hope of reward will keep
him awake; we Languido sumus ingenio, and in somnum ituro. Senec. de Provid.
cap. 5.
are all naturally of a very dull and drowsy disposition, by reason of that
lumpish flesh of ours, that abides much even in the best, by means whereof it
comes to pass, that we do oftentimes sleep and slumber, be we never so
careful and diligent, much more being sloathfull. As it is with drowsy
persons, if they sit still and do nothing, they will soon fall asleep, so if
we give our selves over to slothfulness, we shall soon be overtaken with
this dismal sleep.

Through carelessness, or want of attention, when the mind is not set on its
right object, the preaching and reading of the Word, but roveth on by-matters,
neither are the eyes fixed on the Preacher, but walk hither and thither, then
is it no wonder but that sleep by degrees creeps on. Therefore have we
caveats and warnings propounded. He that Rev. 2. 7.
has ears to hear, let him hear. Take heed how ye hear. Mar. 4. 24. Jam.
1. 19.
Be swift to hear, and the like.

Through intemperancie; When the stomach is full, how can the eyes be but
heavy? Thereby the senses are so oppressed, that during the same they cannot
execute their office; and experience shows that we do oftener and more
readily sleep at Church in the afternoon, then in the forenoone. Yea, if this
shuts out the Spirit, (according to that of the Apostle, and be not Ephesians. 5.
18. 2 Pet. 2. 5. Genesis 9. 21. 2 Pet. 2. 8.
drunk with wine wherein is excess, but be filled with the Spirit) made Noah
(a Preacher of righteousness) discover his nakedness: occasioned just Lot
(who dwelling among the Sodomites, in seeing and hearing Genesis 19. 33, 34, etc.
vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds) in
beastly manner to abuse himself (by filthy incest) with those that came out of
his own loins, and through the same the day of judgment shall take men at
unawares (as is implied in that of our Savior; And take heed ^uk. 21. 34.
to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting
and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you
unawares.) How can it but in like manner occasion this? Sound sleep (says the
son of Sirach) ^cclus. 31. 20
comes of moderate eating, but this for the most part of immoderate.

Through hatred of the Preacher, when we cannot abide him, as Ahab could not
endure Micaiah, when we are so affected toward him, as the Jews toward Paul
and Steven, will we attentively hear what he delivers? Many indeed (even
thus affected) afford the Preacher their bodily presence, but like images,
having eyes, they see not, having Psalm. 115. 5.
ears, they hear not; or if they afford them their eyes and ears it is to a
sinistrous end, even that they may have some ground or other from his carriage,
or from what he delivers to bring him into trouble and molestation.

Through disesteeme of the Word read or preached. Too too many think that
there is no more wisdom therein, then their Teachers show out of it, which in
their conceit being very small, or none at all, they neither watch thereat, nor
thereunto. As no man cares for grace, but he that knows its worth; so none
cares for the Word, but he that has it in high esteem for its unspeakeable
excellency. Those prize it above thousands of gold and silver; Psalm. 119. 72.
78. 148. Psalm. 19. 10.
and unto them (as unto David, who meditated therein day and night) it is
sweeter then the honey and the honey comb. They that have drunk of this water
of life, do more and more thirst after it, and (as Peter being informed how
necessary it was that our Savior should wash his feet, said unto him, Lord,
not my feet only, Joh. 13. 8, 9.
but also my hands and my head) rest not satisfied with sipping or tasting
hereof, but long as it were (as David to drink of the water of the well of
Bethleem 2 Samuel 23. 15
which is by the gate) even to be drunk therewith. Where this desire is, there
is watchfulness, where it is wanting, drowsinesse.

Through disobedience unto the admonitions and reproves of the Word, when
being admonished of our drowsinesse, we notwithstanding do not amend, but
rather grow worse and worse, as the people in the days of Jeremy; As for the
Ier. 44. 16.
word which thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not
hearken unto thee: When I say being again and again admonished, we
notwithstanding amend not, do we not as it were through our obstinacy, put
out the light that we may sleep the more securely?

Through shamelesnes. When we become so impudent, that though we be detected,
noted, pointed at, spoken of, spoken against, spoken to, as common sleepers at
Church, and so consequently contemners of the Word; yea, and certainly
informed, that thereby we make our selves as gazing stocks, or common objects
of laughter, yet having as it were an whores forehead, we are not ashamed, but
do the more go on in the same. Of us may it be said; The show of their
countenance Isa. 3. 9.
does witness against them, and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide
it not; Yea, (as drowsy sluggards which love to sleep) how loath are we, how
unwilling to be awaked? how froward? how angry when we are awaked.

Through inconsideratnesse, or want of consideration, as well of the
excellency of the Word, and necessity of hearing the same, as of our own
pronenesse unto drowsinesse: Satan's endeavors to lull us asleep, and our own
weakness to resist the same; Were we affected with those, we could not but
be more watchful.

Through the want of Gods fear. As Abraham unto Abimelech Genesis 20. 11.
(enquiring of him, why he had said of Sarah, that she was his sister)
because I thought, surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they will
slay me for my wives sake. So may we of Church-sleepers, that wanting Gods
fear, they will make no conscience of sin. Yea, as David Psalm. 36. 1, 2, 3,
4.
lays down the want of Gods fear to be the ground of the ungodlies, ungodly
both works, words, and thoughts, so may we no less confidently affirm, that
it is the ground of this wickedness, and as Solomon, The fear of the Lord is
Prove. 1. 7.
the beginning of knowledge, so we, The want of it, is the beginning of this
particular folly. Judge. 16. 20.
Sampson not being afraid of the Philistims, slept to the destruction of his
body, as too too many being void of Gods fear sleep at Church, to the
destruction both of soul and

10. Through custom and willingness. For when being come to Church, and no
sooner set, but we set our selves to sleep (so with the dog returning to
our vomit) holding down our heads, and leaning them on our elbowes, as on
pillowes, pulling our hats over our eyes lest we should see (an unreverent
thing in Gods house) and stopping our ears as it were, lest the noise or voice
of the Preacher should awake us, or hinder us from our sleep, do not we
willingly bring the same upon us? and does not this willingness occasion the
same?

Sect. 3. Others.
Preachers. From Preachers.


they do not at any time, or upon any occasion reprove this sin, or dissuade
their Auditors from the same.

they take no pains in their ministry, neither study to any purpose, for what
they do deliver.

they do either preach their own inventions, Ezekiel. 22. 2^
men's traditions, or lies and errors in the name of the Lord.

they do not suit and fit their doctrine to the capacity of their hearers.

they do not what in them lies to bring their people unto a love and liking of
the Word.

they continue too long in their Sermons.

they lead a scandalous life, walk inordinatly, and their conversation is such
as becomes not the Gospel of Christ, like unto those of whom the Prophet
makes mention. His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant: they are all
Isa. 56. 1
dumb dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber, yea
they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are shepherds
which cannot understand; they all look to their own way, every one for gain
from his quarter, etc. and of whom the Apostle; All seek their own, ^hil. 2.
21.
not the things which are Jesus Christ's. And again, many ^hil. 3. 18.
walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they
are the enemies of the cross of Christ, ^rse. 19.
whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in
their shame, who mind earthly things. Through the sin of Eli his sons men
^am. ^. 17.
abhorred the sacrifice of the Lord; So by reason of the ^ariage of such
Pastors, their ministry becomes odious and loathsome, and not a few (even of
the best) sleep thereat.

People, both by doing and ^^ people ^^gh ^mission.
leaving undone.

Doing, namely by giving themselves over hereunto, whereby they become
stumbling blocks unto others, inviting them as it were to follow their course,
and as readily to embrace sleep as themselves do.

Leaving undone; namely to Omission.
awake those, whom they shall observe to be asleep. Hereby do they wrong both
themselves and them that sleep; as who by letting them alone communicate with
them in their sin, and so shall be punished for their sleeping, they
themselves in the mean time being awake.

CHAP. IIII. Reasons dissuading from Church-sleeping, they are of diverse sorts,
and may be reduced into these eleven.
The 1. may be taken from God. The 2. from The word of God. The 3. from The
Preacher. The 4. from The Congregation. The 5. from The place of meeting.
Arguments against Church-sleeping from
The 6. from The end of coming. The 7. from The time. The 8. from Satan. The
9. from Our selves. The 10. from Sleep. The 11. from Sleepers at Church.
Sect. 1.
God: The Father. Son. God.
Holy Ghost.

precept and command to attend, and give ear unto his Word; Hear instruction,
and be wise, Prove. 8. 33. Eccles. 5. 1.
and refuse it not. Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, and be
more ready to hear, then to give the sacrifice of fools. He that has ears
Math. 11. 1
to hear, let him hear, let every Iam. 1. 19.
man be swift to hear.

promises which he has made unto them which are hearers indeed. Blessed is
the man that Pro. 8. 34. Pro. 15. 31* Ioh. 5. 24.
hears me. The ear that hears the reproof of life abides among the wise.
He that hears my Word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life.
He that is Ioh. 8. 47*
of God hears Gods word.

presence about us, and with us, the knowledge which he has of us, and notice
which he takes (though of us unperceived) whether we wake or sleep. The
ways of a man are before ^rov. 5. 21.
the eyes of the Lord (says the wise man) and he pondereth all his paths; Yea,
not his ways alone (those which are most conspicuous) but the secret motions
of the mind, and the inward intentions of his heart, they are all naked and
^eb. 4. 13. (...).
opened (as the inwards of a beast that is cut up, and quartered, as the
original word signifies) unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do. And
is God present in the Church so fearful and glorious a majesty, of so sharp
sight, and deep understanding, who dares sleep at Church? As hereby Solomon
disswadeth ^ro. 5. 20. 21
from lewd and licentious courses, and hereby Elihu deterreth (...) 34. 21, 22
men from wicked practices, so by the same may we be withdrawn from
Church-sleeping.

it is God which speaks unto us in his Word. So thought the Thessalonians;
When ye received the word of God, which ye heard of 1. These. 2. 13.
us (says S. Paul) ye received it not as the word of men, but (as it is in
truth) the word of God, which effectually works also in you that believe.
Would a subject sleep in the presence of his Prince, advising him for his
good: threatening him for some evil committed by him: offering him preferment
for the performance of this or that noble enterprise, and the like? he would
not. Care, fear, hope, joy, would keep him awake. And will any sleep, whilst
God offers, promises, rewards, threateneth, instructs, and the like?
When Samuel was instructed 1 Samuel 3. 9. ^
by Eli, that it was the Lord which spoke to him, sleep did then depart from
his eyes; So should not we sleep, if we would but persuade our selves of Gods
presence.

power, not only to bless his Word Romans 15. 4.
that it may be profitable unto us, for comfort, for doctrine, for 2 Timothy 3.
16.
reproof, for correction, and for instruction in righteousness (whereof out
of his love toward us, and willingness to do us good, he is most desirous,
and without whose blessing, though Paul plant, and ^ Cor. 3. 6.
Apollos water,) it brings not increase, but in justice, to inflict grievous
judgments on them which do not, or will not hear, judgments I say, both
corporal, as on Eutichus, and spiritual, as on the contemners ^ct. 20. 9.
of wisdom, Prove. 1. 24, 25, etc. And those obstinate ones, of whom the Lord
speaks to his Prophet; Make the heart of ^^a. 6. 10.
this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they
see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their
heart, and convert, and be healed.

Sect. 2. The Word of God. The Word its

its dignity, which is from the Author Dignity evidenced by it*
thereof: the Nature thereof: the Matter therein contained, together with the
Antiquity and perpetuity of the same, may be clearly evidenced.

The Author thereof, God, Author.
which is therefore termed Gods ways: the speech of Gods Psalm, 25. 5. and 29.
9. and 33. 6. Isa. 2. 3. and 26. 19. Luke 11. 49* Heb. 4. 12* Luke 1. 70*
glory: the breath of Gods mouth: Gods paths: the dew of the Lord: the wisdom
of God: the sword of the Spirit. As he spoke of old by the mouth of his holy
Prophets, which have been since the world began; So does he now speak by his
Ministers, whom as his Ambassadors, he has raised up in their rooms.

The Nature thereof, both as The nature thereof.
it is in it self, and as it is unto us.

As it is in it self, it is perfect, As it is in it self. Psalm. 19. 7. Psa.
119. 160
eternal, immortal, most pure and precious. A most true, right, certain,
infallible, simple, faithful, absolute, sincere, unspotted, and undeniable
Word, always constant, one and the same for ever, wherein there is no error,
no falsehood; no defect, no imperfection.

As it is unto us. It is wine to ^s it is unto ^^.
comfort us; bread to feed us: drink to quench our thirst: fire to purge us:
an hammer to beat upon our hardened hearts: a staff to uphold us: a treasure
to enrich us: a lant horn to direct us: a guide to conduct us: a weapon to
defend us: seed to beget us: meat for men: milk for babes. Yea, as the Sun
is to the world, so is it to us, the light of our lives, and the life of our
souls.

The Matter therein contained, The matter therein contained.
such as may give content unto all, the same so far exceeding all other
subjects, as the Creator (whose works and will it principally sets forth)
does the creatures. It reveals unto us the blessed Trinity. It makes known
unto us Christ, and him crucified. It points out unto us the virtue of his
death and resurrection. It sets forth the excellencies of a better life,
which for the present are wholly hid from the ungodly, and but in part revealed
unto the godly. Does any loath it for its plainness? It is milk for babes:
Eccles. 11. 10.
It is pleasant, affording unto each Christian heart more sweetness then is in
the honey, and the honey comb. It is upright, as being void of error. It is
a word of truth, pure wheat without chafe: pure gold without dross. It is a
word of wisdom, whereby alone we become wise. It is as a goad, whereby being
pricked, whilst we sleep in sin, we do thereupon awake. It is as a nail,
whereby indeed we are fastened and confirmed. Is any delighted with history,
prophecies, Rener. Clavis Script.
parables, laws, moral, judicial, and Ceremonial, Geographie, Cosmographie,
Astronomy, Arithmeticke, Logic, Rhetoric, Music, and whatsoever else?
Yea, who so longs after news, from heaven above, from the earth beneath,
from the waters which are under the earth; News of wars, peace, plenty,
famine, and the like. Hereby may he in each receive satisfaction.

The Antiquity and perpotuitie The Antiquity and perpetuity thereof.
thereof. As it yet continues, so has it done, even from the very beginning,
and even the Word written is more ancient, of greater antiquity, then all other
writings now extant in the world.

its necessity, which may appear by considering; Necessity, from
first the estate wherein we are. 2. The estate wherein we should be. 3. The
estate of such as are altogether deprived thereof.

The estate wherein naturally The estate wherein we are,
we are, dead in trespasses and sin; wanderers from God: preyes unto the
devil, poor and blind, unregenerate: polluted with sin both in soul and
body: stony-hearted; unfruitful and barren, guilty of death and damnation,
etc. It is not then needful? a trumpet to awake us: a guide to conduct us: a
buckler to shield us: a treasure to enrich us: eye salve to anoint us: seed to
beget us: a fountain to wash us: rain, both to mollify us, and make us
fruitful.

The estate wherein we should The estate wherein we should be.
be, Alive unto God: the soldiers and servants of Christ: temples of the holy
Ghost: fruitful in good works, and the like* and hereunto do we attain
through Gods word.

The estate of such as are altogether The estate ^f such as are without it.
deprived thereof, wretched and miserable. No judgment greater then famine, no
famine so grievous, as this of the Word.

of its utilitie, which may appear, 1. By the ^mos 8. 12. ^^s utility
ap^^aring by
similitudes whereby it is expressed. 2. By the effects which are thereby
produced. 3. By the duties which are thereto of us required. 4. By the means
which for the suppressing and hindering thereof have been at all times by
Satan and his instruments used.

The similitudes whereby it is ^^^ilitudes.
expressed are diverse, as Manna, bread, water, light, a rod of strength, wine,
fire, silver, a precious stone, a new garment, a banner, a sharp sword, a
glass, a staff, etc. This being no less (or rather much more) profitable for
the soul then those (and the like) for the body.

The effects which are thereby effects.
produced, are such as concern either this, or the life to come. This. It
cleanses us. It inlighteneth us. It regenerateth us. It changes us. It makes
us fruitful. It makes us wise to Salvation. It gladdeth our hearts with
spiritual joy. It begets faith in us. We are hereby informed of the duties
which we owe one toward another. It tells the Magistrate how he should rule,
who else might be either too severe, or too mild. As Machetes appealed Eras.
apoph^^ lib. 4.
from Philip asleep (for whilst his cause was pleading he was asleep) to
Philip awake, so sends it them from their ungodly government, unto that which
is lawful. It tells Judges, that with Festus they Act. 24. 26.
must not look for bribes. It tells Subjects, that with Sheba, 2 Samuel 20. ^
they must not be rebellious. It tells husbands, that they must Col. 3. 19.
love their wives, and not be bitter to them. It tells wives that they must not
be taunting Peninnaes, painted Jezabels, whorish Dalilaes, scolding Zipporaes.
It informs Ministers to be instant (in preaching the ^ Tim. 4. 2.
Word) in season, and out of season. It tells Lawyers, how and for whom they
are to plead: It directs the Merchant 1 These. 4. 6.
and tradesman, how to buy and sell, etc. Now if it were not for the Word,
would any of those perform their duties? nay, by it (as Socrates from his ^ic.
de fat^.
natural constitution by the study of Philosophy) they are bettered both in
their judgment and practice. Through it do the covetous forsake their Mammon;
the drunkard his wine; the adulterer his lust, which (till it thus work) are
unto them no less precious then their lives. Would Herod have heard John
Baptist; and Eli his sons their Father, either might have learned their duty;
and escaped the judgments Rev. 16. 15.
which befell them. By hearing this and watching Luke 16. 29. Mat. 26. 41.
hereat we are blessed; hereby are saved from hell, and hereby avoid
temptations. If hereat we be informed of the malice of Gods enemies, shall we
not hereupon profit the Church by calling upon God, in the words of the
Psalmist, Awake, Psalm. 44. 23.
why sleep thou O Lord? arise, cast us not off for ever. And as when
Ahasuerus could not Ester 6. 3.
sleep, he had his Chronicles brought unto him, and thereupon came to know
what Mordecay had done for him, so if we would awake at the reading and
preaching of the Word, we should hear what deliverance the Lord has wrought
for our poor souls. The life to come. The Word Joh. 12. 48.
must judge us.

The Duties required of us. The duties required of us
To write it in the tables of our heart. To keep it as the apple of in respect
of it. Prove. 3. 3. Prove. 7. 2. Col. 3. 16: Iam. 1. 19. 21
our eye. To let it dwell in us plenteously. To be swift to hear. To have it
ingrafted in us, and receive it with meekness; Yea, not only to be hearers,
but doers thereof, prizing it above Rubies, and accounting it sweeter then the
honey and the honey comb, even as the words of eternal life. The opposition
which by Satan and his instruments has been made against the same from time
to time. Some have been brought to dislike it, others not to believe it,
others to fall from the hearing of it, others to deprave it, by mangling,
mingling, perverting and misapplying the same. Others to prohibit the reading
and hearing thereof, and diver^ the like, which might particularly be
instanced. Every of which implies the utilitie of the same.

Sect. 3. The Preacher. The Preacher.

discouraged.

disturbed.

contempt of him.

lose his pains, as if one should preach to a deaf man, or wash an Ethiopian.

Gods steed, as his ambassador, and 2 Cor. 5. 20.
who brings the glad tidings of salvation, whom if we shall Romans 10. 1^.
not hear, we hear not Christ himself, they being Wisdoms his maidens.

Sect. 4. The Congregation. The Congregation.

best are hereby offended, and their attention hindered.

ignorant either come not to Church, or if they come, slight the Word, as not
worth the hearing. Yea, as those which did eat in Idols temples, occasioned 1
Cor. 8. 9.
others also there to eat by their example, and as the very sight of those
that yawne, is wont to set others on yawning; so the very sight of others
sleeping, may make a man sleepie, that were otherwise wakefull, much more shall
one slothful man infect another, and the rather, because we are prone enough
of our selves to take infection without help, our inbred and inward corruption
being as flax, easy enough by the least sparkle to be set on fire.

Sect. 5. The place of meeting. The place of meeting.

Bethel, Gods house. As Jacob when he had the vision of the ladder, could say,
how dreadful is this place? Genesis 28. 17.
This is none other but the house of God; and this is the gate of heaven. So
(the Lord being here present in his own ordinances) are we to conceive of this.

Bethesda, where the blind, lame, paralyticke, and Joh. 5. 3.
such other soule-diseased creatures may have comfort; and are not we such?
We think we see, but we are indeed blind; think we know, but do not
indeed understand.

storehouse of all needful commodities. Here are Gods stewards, his almners,
his Jsa. 55. 1.
Physicians? lackest thou meat, drink, money, raiment, or whatsoever else?
here is for thee. Ho! every one that thirsts, come; and who so hungereth,
come, etc.

Athens, where news were to be heard; and Ephesus where shows were to Isa.
9. 6.
be seen. What news? that unto us a child is borne; that he is the
propitiation for our sins; that God is reconciled 2 Cor. 5. 18.
unto us through Christ, etc. What shows? God resisting 1 Pet. 5. 5.
the proud, but giving grace unto the humble. God breaking the horns of the
ungodly. Little David, vanquishing great Goliath, with store both of Comedies
and Tragedies.

Sect. 6. The end of coming. The end of coming.

Not to gaze, laugh, chide, prate, neither yet to sleep, as once one who had
not slept well the night before, and in the morning hearing the bell toll to
Church, willed her maid to make ready, for she would go to Church to take a
nap, but to hear, pray, and sing, and why Luke 21. 38. and 22. 46.
then will thou sleep? Thou must rouse up thy self, till which time thou must
often hear, rise and pray, and hear, and sing.

Sect. 7. The Time. The Time.

It is time now to awake. As when the Sun shines we Romans 13. 11.
are to make hay, and we must strike whilst the iron is hot. The Pismire
follows her business Prove. 10. 5.
in the Summer, and prepares meat for Winter.

It is Gods harvest; Now he that sleeps in harvest is a son that causes
shame.

They that sleep, sleep in the night, and the night comes 1 These. 5. 5.
wherein no man can work.

The time is but short, could ye not watch with me one Mat. 24. 42.
hour?

We must give an account for the same; and at what hour we shall be called
to an account we know not. It is required of us to number our days, which
assuredly whilst Psalm. 90. 12
we sleep we cannot do.

No time but should be well spent; how much more this? Titus conceived that he
had lost Hist. of the Church.
that day, wherein he had not done some good, and so do thou the profit
which comes of the Word, by sleeping thereat.

Sect. 8. Satan. ^atan.

Isreal's enemies) ^^. 5. 27.
sleep not. Philip said, he might safely sleep, for Antipater ^as. apophth.
was awake; but we contrarily, must awake, for the devil (an Anti-pater
indeed) is not asleep. Be sober and ^et. 5. 8.
watch (says the Apostle) for your adversary the devil, goes about
continually, like aroaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. Shall men watch
(says the heathen man) to slay and destroy others, and wilt not thou ^ugulent
^ines, etc. ^at. lib. 1. ^st. 2.
watch to save thy self? So say I, shall Satan be more vigilant to do us a
shrewd turn, or a mischief, then we in watching to keep our selves safe from
his malice? Those that would Simile:
tame Dear, keep them from sleep, but the devil to make us wild, sets us
to sleep. As he watches continually to assault us, especially when we are
at Church, we must then especially awake to resist him.

As a kingdom Mar. 3. 24.
divided cannot stand; So could he divide us from the Word, we were undone.

a thief; The Scribes and Pharisees set a watch, lest Mat. 27. 66.
Christ should be stolen, and so must we, lest being asleep all goodness be
taken from us: and as the Soldiers, of Christ, though untruly, whilst we slept
Mat. 28. 13. 15.
his disciples came and stole him away. We may say truly, whilst we have
slept, the devil came and deprived us of much good; yea, as whilst Sampson
Judge. 16. 20.
was asleep his strength was gone, which to his unspeakable misery he quickly
felt being awake, so through thy Churchsleeping have thou not experimentally
found decay of spiritual strength?

envious man, who sows tares whilst Math. 13. 25.
we are asleep.

Sect. 9. Our selves. Our selves.

Our Religion and honesty will be called into question; yea, hereupon shall we
be suspected (and that not without cause) that we did spend the night before
in riot, wantonness, or doing some other mischief.

Our profession. We are of the day, and they that sleep, These. 5. 5.
sleep in the night. In this regard, as unto Peter, Simon sleep Mar. 14. 37.
thou: So may it be unto us. It is unseemly that the Sun August.
should at any time find us asleep, but much more at Church.

The thankfulness which we owe unto God for our bodily Eccles. 8. 16: Prove.
3. 28. Job 7. 4. 14.
rest. God gives us quiet rest and sleep (whereas others happily have it but
seldom, and therein are much terrified by dreams) and should we not then
employ on God the whole man, when we come to his house.

The uncertainty of our death. Watch therefore (says Mat. 24. 42.
our Savior again and again) for you know not in what hour your master will
come. So Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 7^.
The end of all things is at hand, be sober therefore and watch unto prayer.
Though we be neither weak, nor sick, nor old, yet may death seize on us, and
our Sun may even set at noone. How many have risen well in the morning that
never went to bed* again? Some have died whilst they were a preaching the
Word; Some in hearing the same; why may not others in sleeping thereat? and
that in justice, but who would willingly so die? Did thou think that when
thou set thy self to sleep at Church, thou should never sleep more,
thou should die upon the doing thereof, and be presently called to give an
account, and make answer to God for it, would thou so do? would thou that
thy master should find thee thus ^ar. 13: 36.
doing? thou would not. If thou lookst not to it, who can tell but that thou
may be taken away in this act of iniquity? oh that they were wise, that
Deuteronomy. 32: 29.
they understood this, that they would consider their latter end!

Our ignorance in points of Christianity, and of such things as tend unto our
souls salvati^n. How few are there which 1 Cor. 14. 20.
^re indeed men and women of knowledge, or rather are not ^hildren in
understanding? unto ^ow many is not the Scripture, as a book sealed up? who is
Jsa. 29. 11.
able to tell the meaning almost of any place of Scripture? how many take such
things literally, which are to be understood figuratively, and such things
figuratively, which are literally to be taken? where is the fault? when by the
Word they might receive instruction, and wisdoms maidens are offering Prove. 9.
4.
them understanding, they are asleep.

6. We watch about our callings, Non principem solidam dormire noctem. Eras.
chil. Luc. 2. 8.
and in respect of temporal businesses, Captains, Mariners, Soldiers,
Shepherds, etc. watch in their places, and servants must not sleep when their
Masters speak to them.

We would be angry, if when we speak, others would not handeacute;are us,
or sleep thereat.

We can wake, if a tale be told us. We sleep not, when we are informed of
our worldly businesses, we sleep not, if one tell us of some great estate
befallen us, or some great good procured for us, as pardon being rebels, riches
being poor, happiness being miserable, and the like; every of which the
Scripture reveals unto us.

Our care to do good. The wicked sleep not before they Prove. 4. 16.
have done some mischief, neither should we before we have done some good,
which we do not, if with Lydia, we attend Act. 16. 14.
not on the things delivered.

Sect. 10. Sleep. Sleep.

It is a Publican, A Culler, Quantum ad debitum continui profectus, nihil ita
deperit de vita nostra, qua^ quod somn^ deputatur. ^ Bernard.
or rather devourer of time, it neither does any part of time waste to less
purpose, then that which is spent in sleep, and what then is to be thought of
that, which is spent in sleep at Church?

Sect. 11. Sleepers. Sleepers.

Such as are given hereunto are of bad report. 1 These. 5^


Such as will not hearken are given over. Psalm. 81.


Their prayer is abomination. Pro. 28.


Doing the work of the Lord negligently they are accursed.

They are in danger of Gods judgments, and so continuing shall not escape
them. What befell Noah, Sisera, Sampson, being asleep, who knows not? Theirs
might be lawful after a sort, yet were then met withal, but how much more
this, being wholly unlawful? The mother being asleep, had 1 Ki^
her live child taken away, and a dead child put in the room; If thou be
not watchful, in stead of a living, thou may be possessed of a dead heart.
As the Disciples unto Christ being ^. 8. 24.
asleep, Master we perish; so may it unto us thus sleeping, if thou do not
awake, thou perishest, there being prepared (as once one which crying fire,
fire, and being demanded where, answered in hell for sleepers at Church.)
Prepared (I say) for such, fearful judgments.

6. They are for the present as dead.

7. They are as Images, having ears, but not hearing ^ 15. 5.
therewith.

8. They lose the comfort or admonition intended for them.

9. They shall be clothed with rags. As he that loves sleep ^ 21. ^ 18.
comes to poverty; So he that loves to sleep at Church cannot but be poor
in grace, and seeing the abundance of the rich ^ 12.
will not suffer him to sleep, thy sleep bewrayes thy poverty.

10. They receive no benefit by the Word preached, the same being unto them
wholly unfruitful.

CHAP. V. Objections for Church-sleeping answered.
THey are of diverse sorts, (some justifying it, others extenuating it, others
translating the fault thereof on others) all which may be reduced into these
five;

Whereof the 1. may be taken The sin it self.

The 2. from The person committing it.

The 3. from The Preacher.

The 4. from The matter delivered.

The 5. The persons reproving it.

Sect. 1. The sin it self. From the sin itself.

It is no great sin. It is at the most but one of the little ones, and so not
worth the regarding. thoughts, Ier. 4. 14. Isa. 3. 16.
disdainful and proud looks, wanton eyes, walking with stretched-forth necks,
and such other unseemly gestures, and of every idle word that men ^at. 12. 36.
shall speak, they shall give an account on the day of judgment; how much
more then takes he notice of this sin? How much more shall we be called to
an account for the same? ^utta cavat ^pidem non ^, sed saepe dendo.
continued in, and unrepented of, becoming at the length sins of custom are
most dangerous. A drop of water by falling on the hardest stone makes it at
the length hollow, and the smallest sin continued in, does at the length no
less wound the conscience then the greatest; yea, those which at the length
prove heinous crimes, were but (as we may so speak) petty offenses. Did not
Mariners daily pumpe out the water, that by little and little (unperceived)
enters the ship, it would be thereby no less endangered, then by some sudden
great leake; so did not Gods children daily mortify their smallest
corruptions, they could not but at one time or other, make shipwreck of Faith
and of a good conscience. David do but 1 Samuel 24. 5^
cut off the lap of Saul's garment, his heart smites him for it. As Moses
would have the Exodus 10. 26.
cattle to go with them, and not an hoof to be left behind for Pharaoh,
that thereof they might take to serve the Lord their God in the wilderness, so
must not we employ any one member on the service of Satan, but our whole man in
Romans 12. 1.
every part and faculty thereof on the service of God at all times. Genesis 20.
2. 6. 18.
God inflicted fearful judgments, as on the family of Abimelech, who had
taken (but not touched) Sarai Abraham's wife: On the men of Bethshemesh for
looking into the Sam. 6. 19. Sam. 6. 7.
Arc, and on Vzza for putting his hand thereon, when the oxen shaked it. David
for the sins of his youth) so even ^sal. 1. 25. 7.
the least occasioned the death of Christ.

It is an ordinary usual thing, and so the less to be regarded. 1 Pet. 3. 20:
of National sins. Was not disobedience the common sin of the old world?
yet was not it left unpunished. God spared 2 Pet. 2. 5.
not the old world (says S. Peter) but saved Noah the eight person a Preacher
of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly, were
Ezekiel. 16. 49.
not pride, fullness of bread, abundance of idleness, and unmercifulness to
the poor the common sins of Sodom? yet 2 Pet. 2. 6.
^urned he it into ashes, and condemned it with an overthrow. Agreeable
hereunto is that of ^he Prophet touching Israel; The Lord has a controversy
Hos. 4. 1.
^ith the inhabitants of the and, because there is no truth ^or mercy, nor
knowledge of ^od in the land. By swearing Verse 2.
and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing of adultery, they break
out, and blood coucheth blood. Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one
Verse 3.
that dwells therein shall languish. The Benjamites (one Judge. 20. 14.
and all) took part with those wicked men in Gibeah, and did they not
(notwithstanding) smart for it? Though then Church-sleeping be common, it
follows not, that therefore it is warrantable. The rifer any evil is in the
places or ages we live in, the more careful should we be to shun and avoid
the same. See then (says the Apostle) that ye walk Ephesians. 5. 15, 16
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time because the
days are evil. Are the times then we live in, or the places we abide in
more then ordinarily evil in this kind? That gives us no liberty, but should
make so much the more wary, lest we be taken napping. Noah was a just Genesis 6.
9.
man in his generation, even in that generation, wherein the whole world was
overgrown with wickedness; so should we watch at Church, though others be
thereat taken with the sleeping evil.

To sleep at Church is not hurtful or prejudicial unto others. But what good
is Malum est non fecisse bonum, Chrysde virt. and vit.
To do no good, is in effect, the same with to do evil; yea, thus doing,
thou do both hurt thy self and others. Thy self as being hereby deprived of
the sincere milk of the Word. Others, as being unto them through thy evil
example, a stone of offense.

To sleep at Church is not so bad, as then and there to have thoughts of
covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. 31*
eyes of adultery, revenge, disdain, and the like by being awake. lesser
evil, this, or that. 2. If thou did seriously consider in whose presence
thou art, (even in his who is a God clothed with majesty and honor, a Heb.
12. 29.
consuming fire, and an everlasting burning, who cannot away with sin (the
least sin) in any) and to what end thou did come into Gods house, thou
would neither sin, so nor so. Incline mine heart Psalm. 119. 36.
unto thy Testimonies, and not to covetousness. And, Turn away Verse 37.
mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way, thou should
have no such cause to object.

It is not done of set purpose.

A. Of set purpose leave it undone. Let it be thy steadfast resolution whilst
thou art at Church, not to give sleep to thine eyes, norslumber to rhine eye
lids.

Sleep there is but napping; asmall time, a shutting of the eyes, a wink and
away.

Sect. 2. The persons committing The persons committing it.
it.
I am accustomed hereunto, that either I must stay at home, or (notwithstanding
of mine unwillingnesse to sleep, and pains which I take to shake it off)
sleep, when I come to Church. Mr. Latimers Sermon.
Latimer once said) thou may be there taken napping. it, and strivest against
it, it is not thy sin, neither shall it be laid unto thy charge.

I am old and weak, and so am to be borne withal. Whatsoever it is in
others, in me I hope it is no great sin to sleep at Church. Simeon was as
old as thou art, yet when he came into the Temple, did he not thus behave Luke
2. 28.
himself, and Anna the Prophetess, who was a widow Verse 36.
about fourscore years departed not from the temple, but served God with
fastings and Ioh. 3. 2^
prayers, night and day: yea, and Nicodemus to enjoy Christ's company came by
night unto him, when he should have slept.

I watch on the other days of the week, and labor hardly. Eras. apophth.
lib. 4.
thy neighbors good (as Parmenio excused Philip of Macedon unto the Grecians
which complained one time that he slept by day, wonder not (says he) that
Philip now sleeps, for when ye slept (and seemed careless of your own
affairs) he was awake) was it not rather for his good, or to work him some
mischief? The murderer rising with the light Job 24. 14, 15, 16, 17.
(says Job) kills the poor, and needy, etc. for the morning is to them,
even as the shadow of death. To the same purpose is that of the Poet, The eves
rise Horat.
by night, that they may slay men, as has been already alleged. If thou have
thus watched unto villainy, whilst others were at their rest, thou shall find
one day, that better it had been for thee, that thou had been asleep. the
weeke-dayes, as thereby to make thy self unfit for the sanctifying of the
Lords day. Psalm. 134. 1.
more then by day, and on Psalm. 119. 55.
Gods day.

I rose very early. that have been any let unto this, nay rather, prayer,
reading, meditation, and conference preceding it, would be especial
furtherances thereunto.

I have far to Church, sit far from the pulpit, am thick of hearing, and
the Preachers voice is weak. Mar. 7. 37.
thee ears (and both can and has made the deaf to hear) so may be pleased
to bestow on them their proper office of hearing; yea, though thou can not
hear, and so profit thy self, yet thou must not sleep lest thou offend
others, which may and would hear.

I know my duty already, as well as they that give best attention. do, yet
should thou know it much better by thy watchfulness, neither does the Word
only teach thee to know Gods will, but calls upon thee to be a doer thereof.
Be Iam. 1. 22.
ye doers (says S. James) and not hearers only.

What I shall lose at one time by sleeping at Church, I can get up, either when
I come home, or at another time when I go to Church. At home, either by
reading as good a Sermon, or one on the same subject, if not the very same
words, or by hearing the same repeated by some one in my family which writes
the Sermon. At Church, by giving attendance, unto what shall be then and there
delivered. To the former and 1. branch ther^ of. Mal. 2. 7.
1. Experience teaches that the lively voice is more effectual then ocular
reading. the Priests lips are to preserve knowledge; So art thou required to
hear it at his mouth. Mal. 2. 7. etc.
The second branch.
To the second branch. ^o the lat^er.
duty. To the latter. sleep at Church.

Even the precisest sleep at Church. them.

Sect. 3. The Preacher. The Preacher.

He is no scholar; He is not read in humane Writers. He is no Logician,
Historian, linguist. He is not acquainted with the Schoolmen. He cites not
the Testimonies of the Fathers, and Doctors of the Church. Welsh in stead of
any of those, were thou able to detect him? nay, rather would thou not
applaud his learning? sell his shoes, but he must needs sell or show his
Scultet. meth. concionandi, Artis est celare artem.
lasts, whereby he makes them? It is art to conceal art. 3. There is none so
learned, but he may learn something from the very meanest, even from those
that be far his inferiors in gifts, as Apollos did of Act. 18. 26.
Aquila and Priscilla, a learned Teacher, and well read in the Word, of a silly
Tentmaker, and weak woman. None forbids to speak with tongues, if it be to
edification. 1 Cor. 14. 3^ 1 Cor. 14. 1^ 19.
8. S. Paul a learned scholar thus says, I thank my God, I speak with
tongues more then you all, yet in the Church I had rather speak five words
with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, then ten
thousand words in an unknown tongue. Jsa. 28. 11.
which in the law is written, with men of other tongues, and 1 Cor. 14. 21.
with other lips will I speak unto this people, yet for all that would thou
not hear. Act. 12. 21, etc.
unto himself with Herod. What has Horace to do with the Psalter, Hier. ad
Eust. ^e custod. Vir.
Virgil with the Gospel, or Tully with the Epistles? as S. Hierom says.

His life is not answerable to his doctrine. The Scribes and the Mat. 23. 2, 3.
Pharisees sit in Moses seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe,
that observe and do, but do not ye after their works, for they say, and do
not.

He has done me wrong. the Physician, and will thou not let him rip up thy
wounds? Complainest thou of the disease of sin, and will thou take no purge
to remove it? Thou complainest that the Minister has wronged thee in thy name
and reputation, and will thou wrong thine own soul?

He continues long in his Sermons, and wearieth his hearers. Paul, that upon
occasion offered, he did at one time continue his speech Act. 20. 7. and 28.
23.
until midnight, and at another, from morning till evening. Lorin. in Acta,
page 591.
to exceed his hour, yet are no hearers so to tie Gods word, Sed and Auditor
meminerit non esse alligandum verbum Dei. etc*
or stint his Spirit, as if it were not lawful at some times upon special
occasions to exceed that time.

Sect. 4. The matter delivered. The matter delivered.

1. It is not worth the hearing. delivers nothing worth the hearing? surely
thou conceitest it, or fainest it (as the soldiers which watched the Sepulcher
gave out, that the Mat. 28. 13.
Disciples came by night, and stole Christ away while they slept) for know that
thou can not. But thou will say, thou have often heard him so preach, let it
be granted, what then? Philip ^ras. apophth. ^b. 4.
of Macedon being asleep whilst Machetes his cause was pleaded before him, and
therefore having against equity determined against him upon his appeal to him
being awake, and better notice taken thereof, repealed his sentence,) so
whereas thou condemnest thy Preacher being asleep, thou would justify him
being awake. Ahab hated Micaiah (for that he did not ^ing. 22. 8.
prophecy good concerning him but evil) do thou not hate thy Minister?
bear thou him no grudge? If it be for welldoing, neither shall thou escape
punishment, nor he lose his reward.

It is the very same before insisted on. Paul the like (and that at the earnest
entreaty even of those which heard him before.) So Christ himself, the Act.
13. 42:
Apostles Peter and John, and before them the Prophets? catechetically by way
of question and answer, at another, by way of common place, at another by way
of doctrine, and Use, at another by-way of paraphrase, and the like. 3. Have
thou indeed amended by that which thou have formerly heard? Thou have not. Thou
should then be content, yea, willing and desirous to hear the same things
again and again, until they shall work on thee, that for which they were at
the first intended and delivered. Being addicted to whoredom, thou should
especially affect such Sermons (though often repeated, and long insisted upon)
which may withdraw thee therefrom. The like may be said of every other sin.
Iehojakim had burnt the roll which Jeremiah had written, the Lord commanded ^r.
36. 32.
his Prophet, to write it anew, whereunto were added many of the like words.
hour long) in penning it, it will take thee far more to conceive or remember
it.

It is invective, most times in the general, sometimes in particular. In
general. A man cannot be a little joviall with his friends, or swear an
oath, but it is brought up in the pulpit, and takes up a good part of the
Sermon. In particular; There is scarce a Sermon preached, wherein the Preacher
to my great discredit aymeth not at me. To the general.
sin is to be spoken against, how small soever the same seems unto many,
if any at all. divides between the marrow Heb. 4. 12.
and the bones, and takes notice as well of the smallest as of the greatest
sins. 4. Can we not use Gods creatures (as Gat. spirit. watch. page 46
one says) unless we abuse them, and make that the baine and poison of our
souls, that was given us to be the food and stay of our bodies? or can we not
be merry, unless we make the devil our play-fellow? Is there no mirth at
all but in swearing and swaggering, and in blaspheming of Gods blessed name? Is
our mirth nothing worth if it be not mixed with profaneness? far be it from
us to be thus merry. To the To the particular.
particular. person, etc. are there not others as bad as thy self? There are.
Why then may not the Preacher be conceived to speak against them, not against
thee?

It is frequently of hell and damnation, and so enough to drive a man into
desperation. The law is a schoolmasters to bring us to Christ, neither can any
be raised up by Gal. 3. 26.
evangelicall consolations, who is not first thrown down by legal
comminations. First must Preachers be Boanerges, sons of thunder, then
Barnabasses, sons of consolation. Prophets. So Isa. 30. 27. etc. Luke 11. 42.
etc. 2 These. 1. 8. Rev. 15. 6, 7.
Christ and his Apostles. This seems figured in that vision of John; The
seven Angels which came out of the Temple, though clothed in pure and white
linen, and having their breasts girded with golden girdles, yet had the seven
plagues, and to them one of the four beasts gave seven golden vialls full of
the wrath of God, to pour them out upon the earth.

It is often erroneous and heretical, wherewith (were I awake) I could not but
be in danger to be infected, or otherwise forced to present the broacher
thereof to his utter undoing.

It is that wherewith I am already very well acquainted. that thou know
nothing yet as thou ought to know.

It is such, as whereby I have not profited all this while, though I have been
an hearer thereof these many years; yea, and have been so watchful, as that
I have not given leave unto mine eyes to sleep, nor my eyelids to slumber
thereat. I am no less sinful, then before; no less covetous, malicious,
lascivious, and the like. twelve years, yet at the length cured. The woman
which had the spirit of infirmity for Mat. 9. 20.
the space of 18. years, and was Luke 13. 16.
bowed together, and could in no wise lift up her self, yet was at the length
loosed from her bonds. The man of the palsy was diseased for the Joh. 5. 9.
space of 38. years, and yet at length at Christ's command, and by his power,
rose, took up his bed and walked. The wind blows where it lists, and thou
hear the sound Joh. 3. 8.
thereof, but can not tell, whence it comes, and whither it goes; So is
every one that is borne of the Spirit. Abide an hearer, wait Gods good
leisure, for assuredly if thou belongest to God, thou shall hear something at
the length which will do thee good.

Sect. 5. The Persons reproving The persons ^eproving it.
it.
They have little to do that meddle herewith.

Such oftentimes as are most faulty herein do most find fault hereat. them
thus to sin, yet art not thou thus to sin, because thy reprovers may be
justly reproved for the same.

CHAP. VI. Remedies for the cure of this sleeping evil.
IT is observed that those grounds do bear most corn, and are freest from
weeds, which before they are sown, are duly prepared, and after the seed is
^owne, are carefully harrowed, What is to be done to avoid Church-sleeping.
^ell fenced in, and diligently ^ooked unto; So those which would profit by the
Word, and ^e free from this dowsie di^ease, must both before they ^ome to
Church, when they are ^ome to Church, and when they ^re returned home set
themselves on work.

Sect. I. Before we come to Church we must, Before we come to Church.

Take notice of Gods great goodness toward us, in affording his Word unto us;
the same being so needful, as without which our condition could not be but
indeed miserable, the same being so profitable, as Amos 8. 11. Rev. 2. 5.
that no greater judgment can befall a land, then the remevall thereof
therefrom, no greater happiness then its continuance.

Examine our own hearts thoroughly, for what cause, and to what end it is, that
we go to Church; as whether it be not more, for fear, then love; out of
custom, then conscience; to see and to be seen, then in obedience unto Gods
Commandment. This is to ponder the path of our feet: and surely Prove. 4. 26.
Prove. 14. 15.
the prudent man looks well to his going.

Observe our natural constitution, and by what means it comes to pass,
that sleep at Church seazeth upon us, as whether it comes not, through long
waking; excessive eating and drinking, distracting cares of the world (for as
Abraham Genesis 22. 5.
when he went to sacrifice his son upon the Mount, left his ass and
servants at the foot of the hill; So when we come to the holy hill of God, with
the Congregation, we must abandon all by businesses) prejudice against the
person of the Teacher. Pride for some measure of knowledge received, Amputemus
causas morbi, ut morbus pariter auferatur. Hier.
carnal security, or the like; for the cause being known and taken away, the
effect will of it self cease. Upon this discovery will ensure an holy
jealousy, whereby we shall be made so wary, as that we shall not trust our
selves, but use means to prevent this evil; for as they that know themselves
to have a weak stomach are very chary of their diet, so he that is
suspicious of himself, and jealous of his own drowsinesse and pronenesse
thereto will be careful to avoid the same. And as they that have gunpowder
in their houses, are careful that fire come not near it, so finding our
corruption as gunpowder, and the forementioned causes of drowsinesse, as fire,
we shall endeavor that they may not meet together; yea, hereupon (if we shall
at any time be stirred up to a dislike of the Teacher, to an admiration of our
own knowledge, and the like) we shall thus argue. If I shall give way unto
this suggestion, then will sleep seize on me, then shall I lose the benefit
of the Word, etc.

Labor for a true hatred, and detestation of this sin. Romans 12. 9.
Never shall we closely cleave unto that which is good, till we have brought
our hearts to detest and abhor that which is evil, were this thoroughly
wrought, there needed no rhetoric to dissuade us from Church-sleeping. As
Amnon loathing Thamar thrust her 1 Samuel 13. 16
out of doors, so (it being the Pro. 8. 13.
fear of God to hate evil) would we drive it away. And as a man cannot endure
the sent or savor of the meat which he loatheth, our very hearts would rise
against the same.

Hunger after the Word. Bodily hunger may occasion sleep, or sleep may seize
even on the hungry (according to the Proverb, Sleep comes Vulpiesurient
somnus obrepit. Eras. chi^
upon the hungry fox) but this hunger drives away sleep, for as the stomach
hungering for meat, cannot be contented without it, so neither can our souls
without the Word, being once taken with an earnest desire thereof. Great was
David's longing for a little water 2 Samuel 23. 1
of the Well of Bethleem; Oh! (says he) that one would give me drink of the
water of the Well of Bethleem, which is by the gate) but much more vehement was
it for the Word. My soul (says he) thirsts Psalm. 42. 2.
for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God? And
again, My Psalm. 84, 2.
soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of the Lord. (Assuredly had
David had leave at this time to have come to the hearing of the Word, he would
not have slept thereat.) And who will not hunger after the Word, if he do but
1. Take a taste thereof in private By what means an aunger after the Word may
be wrought ^n us.
by reading and meditation. Hereby the soul cannot but get much both
instruction and consolation. 2. Consider the excellency, necessity, and
utilitie of the same, whereof I have already spoken at large: and wereof both
David and Psalm. 19. 10. Prove. 3. 15. and 8. 10.
Solomon did make so much acaccount, that they esteemed it above gold, silver,
rubies, and what not?

Resolve to attend unto, and make conscience of the sacred ordinance of
preaching there delivered. As Job, I have made Job 31. 1.
a covenant with my eyes, why then should I think upon a maid? So do we make
a covenant, as with our ears to hear, so with our eyes not to sleep at
Church. Such was David's religious care for the Arc, that he would not give
Psalm. 132. 4.
sleep to his eyes, nor slumber to his eyelids, until he found out a place
for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob; And such must ours be
at the Word, if we would have any communion with God in that sacred ordinance.
Jacob being Labans shepherd, Gen: 31. 40.
and making conscience of his duty, his sleep (by night) departed from his
eyes, and assuredly so would sleep depart from ours, (especially by day) if we
made conscience of hearing the Word.

Use the creatures sparingly, both sleep (for what is said of drinking water,
may be said of this, the more it is taken, Quo plus sunt po^ae, plus sitiu^tur
aquae.
the more it is desired) and meat and drink; for when men have over-liberally
eat and drunk, they are wont to be heavy and drowsy, ready to slumber as
they sit, fit for nothing, but for sleep. Such excess, as it is a means even
to drown the mind, and by casting reason and understanding into a deep and
deadly sleep, to make men unable to watch against the motions of sin, to
shut the door of the heart against all virtues, and to set it open to all
vices, so much more stupifieth it the body. Contrarily, Sobriety is an
especial These. 5. 6.
help to vigilancie, which therefore the Apostles Pet. 4. 7.
are usually wont to join together.

Consider whither we are going, before whom, to what end, and who we are? To
Gods house, into the presence of the God of heaven, to be made partakers of
the Word for the good of our souls, we being (as of our selves) of all others
the most unworthy.

Pray, as for the Preacher (that his lips may preserve Mal. 2. 7.
knowlede; he may be faithful in delivering the whole Counsel Act. 20. 27.
of God unto us, and he may powerfully and wisely speak to our consciences)
and the Word read or preached Romans 1. 16.
(that it may be unto us the power of God unto our salvation, 2 Cor. 2. 16.
the savor of life unto life, and as good seed sown in a good ground) so for
our selves and others, that our ears may be attentive, our eyes fixed on the
Preacher, our minds be opened to understand, and our hearts and affections
sanctified to obey the holy Word.

I cannot possibly spare so much time from my Calling, as to think on these
things, or be thus prepared.

A. Martha; Martha, Martha, thou art careful, and troubled Luke 10. 41: 42.
about many things, but one thing is needful; and Mary has chosen that good
part which shall not be taken away from her, so may I unto thee. The soul is
to be preferred unto the body, and thou art more careful of this, then that.

Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable unto all
things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.
Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
and all these things shall be added unto you. omit not our bodily recreation
notwithstanding the works of our calling, and why should we this?

Sect. 2. When we come to When we come to Church.
Church we must
In General; In general.


Take heed unto our affections (which the Preacher signifies by these words)
Keep Eccles. 5. 1^.
thy foot when thou go to the house of God, and be more ready to hear, then
to give the sacrifice of fools.

Get our eyes to be anointed with eye salve, that we may see, and our ears
open that we Rev. 3. 18.
may hear. Remembering that as God has bestowed upon us eyes and ears, so
when we are come into his house, both must be set on work. As our eyes must
be seeing, so must our ears be hearing, and obedient, as we our selves swift
to Iam. 1. 19.
hear. To this purpose is that so often reiterated phrase, He that has ears
to hear, let him Mat. 11. 15.
hear. Yea, as it is usual for one that is drowsy to wash and rub his eyes,
or that feels any impediments in his ears to pick them; so when we
perceive drowsinesse to creep on us at Church, we must then rouse up our
selves.

Be possessed with Gods fear, that we may tremble at ^sa. 66. 2. Sam. 4. 13.
the Word. As Eli whilst he sat on a stool by the way side, watched, because
his heart trembled for the Ark of God; So if when we are at Church, our
hearts shall tremble in respect of our present danger through Satan, we shall
be kept waking. Nebuchadnezzar ^^n. 2. 1.
being troubled, his sleep went from him, so were we troubled for sin, or
did stand in awe of God, because of the same, it would not fall on us. Grief
and sorrow occasion Luke 22. 44. Vigilabis, si ti^mebis. August^ Timor domin^
janitor animi^ Ber. formido facit solicitudinem. Ter. Psalm. 4. 4. Pro. 16. 6.
sleep, but fear and care make vigilant and watchful. This is as a Porter
set at the door of our soul; and will also keep our eyes waking. There is no
affection more watchful then this. Stand in awe and sin not; yea, as by this
men depart from evil, so shall we through it, from this of sleeping at
Church. This being kept fresh in our hearts, will make us careful to shun,
and fearful to do ought that may offend him whom we fear. In fear of
invasion men are wont to keep due watch and ward, but when there is no such
danger misdoubted, like the men of Lachish, they are the more Judge. 18. 7.
careless and secure, and thereupon are often upon the sudden oppressed. At
the hearing of the Word, we are at all times in danger of the assaults of
Satan, there is then neither time nor place to sleep thereat. The Crane which
is by the rest Franc. Senens. de Ex^^ub. and vigil.
appointed for Sentinel, holds in its foot a small stone, whereby it may be
kept awake; and Alexander the Great, held in the night a silver ball, over a
brazen basin, that if he should sleep, by the sound thereof he might be
awaked, such a stone, such a ball, will Gods fear prove unto us, to keep us
from Church-sleeping.

Be persuaded that the Scriptures to be read, or the Sermon ready to be
uttered, may do us more good, then all those we have yet heard. Yea, that they
may be the last which we shall ever hear, as that very hour, the last of our
lives. As Miltiades his triumph hindered ^^tar.
Themistocles from sleeping; So did we consider the benefit of the Word, and
duly weigh what good God may thereby convey into our souls, (as he has done
to others) we would questionless not sleep thereat. The care of riches
Ecclus. 31. 1.
drives away sleep, says the son of Sirach. So did we care for the
durable riches which the Word affords, we would not sleep thereat.

Consider, that as God sleeps not for our good, and Psalm. 121. 4.
the devil sleeps not for our hurt; So if we should sleep at Church, God
would leave us, and the devil would make a prey of us.

Call to mind, that there will be store of witnesses to rise up against us on
the day of judgment, if we shall thus sin. Then will the Lord say, I spoke
unto them, but they would not hear me; I was present with mine own ordinance,
but they would not look upon me. Then will Christ say; I offered, my self
unto them, but they would none of me; I called upon them, but they would not
answer me; I would have showed them what I had done for them, but they did not
regard me. Then will the Holy Ghost say, I would have entered into their
hearts, I would have there lodged; I would have made the Word to take root in
them, but by their sleeping thereat they grieved me. Then will the Word say;
They despised me. The Saints say, They offended us. The ungodly say, They
hardened us in our sins, and occasioned our contempt of the Word.

It were not amiss, that (as ^an. 5. 5, 6.
Belshazar was driven from his carnal mirth by viewing the handwriting which
appeared on the wall) they that are accustomed to sleep at Church, would
imagine at least, that it were written over their Pewes, Awake thou that
sleep. ^h. 5. 14.


In particular, in hearing we ^ particular
must use,

Attention, which is when the whole body, especially the ^ention.
ear and the eye, are reverently composed about hearing the Word. The ear; as
Cornelius Act. 10. 33.
and his household were already, waiting for Peter to hear the Word. The eye;
as the Luke 4 28.
eyes of all that were in the Synagogue were fastened on him; that is, on
Christ when he began to teach them; we must with Mary sit at Jesus feet, Luke
10. 39.
and hear his Word. Does not the hungry stomach watch for meat? and should not
we watch for the food of our souls?

Intention, which is of the mind, when we diligently Intention.
mark those things which we are taught; We see by experience, that in a deep
meditation, though our eyes be fixed on some certain object, yet we smally
regard it, so if the mind be not present as well as the body, all is to no
purpose. To this purpose is that of Solomon, Prove. 2. 2:
Cause thine ear to hearken, and incline thine heart to wisdom and
understanding.

Retention, which is of the memory, when we lay up Retention. Luke 2. 52.
the word of God in the heart, as the Virgin Mary, the sayings concerning
Christ. He that makes conscience hereof will hardly sleep hereat.

Devotion, which calls for an heart truly religious. A Devotion.
devout soul, never hears of mercy but with comfort; of Gods justice but with
fear; of his truth without assenting to it, of his works without admiration,
and where devotion dwells, drowsinesse is shut out.

Subjection. God speaks, and must not we hear? yea, ^ubjection.
yield obedience thereunto, how repugnant soever the same seems unto our
corrupt nature? now how can there be obedience, when there is no subjection?
how subjection, where knowledge wants? how knowledge be had without
instruction? how receive instruction without hearing it? how hear it if sleep
be entertained?

Discretion. The ear is to Discretion.
the soul, as the mouth is to the body; The mouth refuses unsavory meat,
that may be hurtful to the body, so must our ears reject erroneous and
heretical doctrine. But if the mouth be out of taste, what food will it not
receive, how noisome soever? so if the ears be dull and heavy, will not
falsehood be embraced for truth? men's traditions, as Gods commandments?

Those that we may the better Means whereby to perform those.
perform, we must

Remember that we are in Gods presence; at Bethel, Gods house, and that he
both sees Psalm. 16. 8: 1 Cor. 11. 1^
us, and speaks to us, we must set the Lord always before our eyes,
especially at this time. If Paul will have women reverently to behave
themselves in the congregation, because of the Angels; much more ought all both
men and women, to behave themselves reverently, because of the presence of God,
who is the Lord both of men and Angels. This was that which kept David in
compass; Psa. 119. 168
I have kept (says he) thy Precepts and Testimonies, for all my ways are in
thy sight. Do we at any time begin to find our selves drowsy at Church?
speak we thus unto our own souls, Should I thus do in Gods presence? yea,
as the Lord called Samuel; Samuel, 1 Samuel: 3. 10.
Samuel, and the shipmaster unto Jonah, What meanest Jonah 1. 6.
thou, O sleeper? So do we imagine that the Lord speaks unto every one of us
in particular; Why sleep thou, O sluggard? awake thou that sleep.

Stand up. It is very memorable, which is reported of Eusebius. de vita Constant.
lib. 4 ^ap. 33.
Constantine the Great by Eusebius. Being requested by Divines that disputed
before him, that after long standing he would sit down and take his ease,
answered; It is an impious thing to hear negligently disputations concerning
God.

Rouse up our selves ever and anon; as the cock clappeth his wings, that he
may the more cheerfully crow, we must stir up the grace of God 2 Timothy 1. 6.
in us; yea, we must check our selves when we perceive our drowsinesse. How
long wilt Prove. 6. 9.
thou sleep, O sluggard? when will thou arise out of thy sleep? We must say
unto our selves, art thou in a way to heaven? will the Lord be pleased
herewith?

Use now and then short and sudden ejaculations, as in Psalm. 13. 5.
the words of the Psalmist, lighten mine eyes lest I sleep the sleep of death.

Go along with the Preacher from point to point, applying the Word in
particular to the part affected, as the stomach conveieth nourishment to each
member. Hear we comfort? we are to apply it to our fear, as Gods promises
against distrust; So if we hear threatenings against sin, whether whoredom,
covetousness, pride, or any else, and know our selves guilty thereof, we are
to apply it to our selves for our humiliation, saying of both upon occasion;
This is for me; This promise; This comfort; This threatening.

Sect. 3. After we are come from Church we must After we are come from Church,
use

Call our selves to an account how we behaved our Examination.
selves at Church, as about Church-sleeping, whether we be guilty thereof, or
not, that upon our not guilty we may express our thankfulness, as See Gatak.
spirit. Watch ^ag. 81.
upon guilty remorse and humiliation.

Recall and revolve in our minds such gracious instructions, Meditation.
as the Word afforded us; thus bringing into out remembrance, what we heard
formerly delivered, as the Bereans who as they received the Word with all
readiness of mind, searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things (which
they heard) were so. Whereupon will arise such profit and pleasure, as that we
shall endeavor thereafter, not to deprive our selves through unseasonable
sleeping, of the good which may be gained by the Word. This is the very life
of hearing, neither can we without meditation bring the Word into practice.

Impart unto others by repetition, what the Lord in his Repetition.
Word has communicated to us, not doing the same at some one time, but
constantly (as a duty whereunto we are tied) upon our hearing the Word.

Confer of such things at home, as have been delivered Conference.
at Church, and that especially by way of Catechizing, or by question and
answer.

Put in practice such gracious things, as the Word has Practice.
revealed unto us. If thou did profit by one Sermon (as assuredly thou
might, if thou did practice, what thou art therein prescribed) thou would
not sleep at the next. A certain ^rompt sap. ^efor. page 456
Lady having asked her servants, whether the Sermon was done, to whom affirming
that it was; she answered, It was said, not yet done; implying that though the
Minister had performed his part, they had not yet done theirs; that is, though
he had taught them, yet they had not yet followed all his instructions.

CHAP. VII.
The Application of the foregoing discourse for
Reprehension. Use of Reprehension unto Preachers.
Exhortation.
Sect. 1.
Reprehension of Preachers. People.

Preachers,

Which do any way occasion this evil, Whether by taking no pains in their
Ministry, by aiming more at applause unto themselves then at Gods glory
therein; by delivering erroneous and heretical doctrine; by wearying their
auditors; by leading their lives scandalously, and the like.

Which do not what in them lies to remove this evil. Should they not at
sometimes fall into a commendation of Gods word, to bring their people into a
liking thereof? should they not at other times set forth the misery of such as
are without it? should they not now and then inveigh against those, which do
negligently hear it, or sleep thereat? should they not be as Boanerges, even
filled with zeal against those that thus despise it? Must not their voices be
lift up as a trumpet, and upon occasions sound these words of the ship-master,
unto Jonah, What meanest thou, O sleeper? Jonah 1. 6.
and that of Solomon to the sluggard? When will thou arise out Prove. 6. 9.
of thy sleep? how long will thou sleep, O sluggard? And those of the Spirit,
awake thou Ephesians. 5. 14.
that sleep?

People, People*


Which (whilst the Word is taught) laugh, talk, read, gaze up and down in
every corner, and the like, every of which (through the just judgment of God,)
does (for the most part) end in sleeping, when the senses are wearied with
those, then do they retire unto sleep for their recreation.

Which make a jest of it; as if that which does so much displease God; so much
wrong Gods word; so much prejudice Gods people; so much advantage Satan's
kingdom, and has been so severely punished, were indeed to be laughed at.
Unto such I say, Be Iam. 4. 9.
afflicted, and mourn, and weep, let your laughter be turned to mourning,
and your joy to heaviness.

Which do what in them lies to continue in it; yea, do so love to sleep, as
that they will further their inclination hereunto, through intemperancie,
worldly cares, selfeconceit, prejudicate opinions, and the like; thus
entertaining such things as may make them more drowsy.

Which are angry with those that do awake them; They come to Church against
their will; They there stay against their will; and if they there hear any
thing, it is against their will. They love Ecclus. 22. 7.
sleep, set themselves to sleep, and cannot abide to be awaked. Their
untoward faces, froward words (Let me alone, what have ye to do with me?
meddle with your selves, etc.) and uncivil behavior toward those that do
awake them, were worth the observation. Would thou when thou come to
Church sleep all the while? far be it from thee. As the Disciples unto our
Savior Christ being asleep, Master, Mar. 4. 38:
carest thou not that we perish? So may it be said unto thee that affectest
drowsinesse; Carest thou not though thou perishest? Do thou already Mar. 4.
24.
know too much? or have thou already heard too much? would thou hear, more
should be given unto thee.

Which being guilty hereof, do notwithstanding use one Non fenestra nunc, non
fames, non somnus interturbat; (ait Chrysostomus) attamen non audimus, non
angustia loci, non aliquid horum. Lorin, in Acta. p. 591.
or other excuse for their justification. What can thou pretend? long
preaching, much crowding, heat, hard labor; and the like? Beware lest in
pleading not guilty unto one sin, thou be not guilty of lying, and so
punished for both.

Which will not by any means be reclaimed therefrom. God calls thee, as he
did Samuel, and will thou not 1 Samuel 3. 3.
hear? He would acquaint thee with his will, and shall thine eyes be always
heavy? How long will thou sleep, O sluggard? Prove. 6. 9. 10.
yet a little sleep, a little slumber, and a little folding of the hands to
sleep. Know thou not that many littles make a great, and that but a nappe at
a time comes in time, to a good deal of time? Of old, they that slept, slept
in the night, as they 1 These. 5. 7.
that were drunk, were drunk in the night; and will thou now sleep in the
day, and that in Gods house? Art thou an Image? or will thou make thy self
one? having eyes, see thou not? and having ears, Mar. 8. 18.
why will thou not hear? would thou die, whilst thou sleep at Church?
were that the way unto heaven? Not any thing the devil more hinders, then
hearing the Word, Mar. 9. 25.
and should thou be possessed with a deaf devil? As it was Homer.
Ulysses his chiefest care for his own preservation to deprive Polyphemus of
his eyesight, so is it Satan's to deprive thee both of seeing and hearing at
Church, for thy destruction. As Christ came the second and Mat. 26. 43.
third time, and found his Disciples asleep; So when shall one observe thee,
but asleep at Church? He that being often Pro. 29: 1:
reproved hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy (says Solomon.) And have not thou been often reproved for this fault,
and yet art never the better? As both Moses and the Deuteronomy. 32: 1.
Prophets directed their speech, unto the heavens, earth, and Isa. 1* 2.
mountains; so might we well do, considering the general drowsinesse, which
has taken hold on most men and women. As the Prophet of old, Who Isa. 53. 1.
has believed (so may we now, who has heard) our report? How many like the
dormouse, sleep all Winter, that it may live the better in Summer; So do they
sleep at Church, that they may wake about their worldly businesses. Alexander
the Great knew Eras. Apophth.
himself to be a man by sleep, so may thou know thy self to be a sinful
man by sleeping at Church. What a shame is it, that when for the time ye ought
Heb. 5. 12.
to be Teachers, ye have need that one teach you again, which be the first
Principles of the Oracles of God, and are become such as have need of milk,
and not of strong meat. What is the reason? how comes this to pass after so
Prompt. sap. ^eformat. page 456.
many Sermons? Even because ye are dull of hearing, either hear not at all,
or to no purpose.

7. Which when the Sermon is done, will not stick to cut the points delivered
into question, and dispute about the same, themselves notwithstanding for the
most part having been asleep thereat; or when they are come from Church will
commend the Preacher, and his Sermon, telling how zealous, how learned. how
eloquent it was, etc. when as happily they hear but a little thereof. Thou
commendest it. It is well (so may a sick person commend a physician, whose
Physic he never tried) but what profit have thou gained thereby? what fruit
has it produced on thee? If none, thou were no otherwise an hearer, but in
imagination.

Sect. 2.
Exhortation to Preachers. Use of exhortation unto Preachers.
People.

Preachers.

Be we careful as well to prevent this evil, as to remove it, when it
seazeth on our Auditors. As we are not to have Iam. 2. 1.
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of
persons. So let not our Sermons be with respect of persons, but so study, and
so preach at all times, that thereby we may enforce hearing ears, and the
eyes of all may be set on us. Lift we up our voices like trumpets, especially
when we shall observe our people drowsy; So shall we, nill they, will they,
rowse them up. Endeavor we also that our Auditors may truly love us, as
children their parents (for where the man is despised, how is it possible that
his doctrine should be regarded?) which they will do, through our love of
them, and their souls salvation. Whatsoever may bring our ministry into
contempt, be we careful to avoid, being assured that such as shall loath our
doctrine, (though happily they come to Church, that thereby they may avoid the
danger of the law) will rather set themselves to sleep, then give ear
thereunto. Such indeed will take exceptions at our doctrine, as being either
too harsh, or too mild, too vehement, or too cold, at our utterance, as being
either too slow, or too quick, at our voice, as either being too high, or too
low, and at our conversation, as being either too loose, or too austere, but
we must not be discouraged. But why should. I offer to instruct you, both
knowing what you should do, and doing what you know?

People. People.


When thou come unto Gods house, give not sleep unto Prove. 6. 4.
thine eyes, nor slumber unto thine eyelids; Here must thou keep the watch of
the 2 Chro. 23. 6*
Lord; yea, lest sleep should assault thee to thy prejudice, thou must set a
watch against the same, as the Israelites did against Sanballat and Tobijah.
Neh. 4. 9. Psalm. 123. 2*
Behold as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as
the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress: So here especially should
our ears and eyes wait upon the Lord our God. If thou sleep at Church, thou
shall assuredly find that Gods judgments sleep not; yea, if Rev. 3. 3.
thou shall not watch, he will come on thee as a thief, we are all children
of the light, and children of the day, we are not of the night, nor of
darkness, 1 These. 5. 5. Ephesians. 5. 14.
therefore let us not sleep as do others; but let us watch. Sleep thou?
Oh! awake thou that sleep. The eyes of all wait on the Lord; oh! let Psalm.
145. 15.
thine also wait on him, love not Pro. 20. 13.
sleep, lest thou come to poverty; sleep not at Church, lest thou be poor in
grace. As Abraham Genesis 15. 11.
drove away the fowls from his sacrifice, so must thou drowsinesse, or what
else may bring thee to sleep at Church. A wake here, as thou would ^ro. 6.
22.
have the Word to keep thee, when thou sleep elsewhere. Did thou
consider how Satan has entangled thee, from which thou can not be loosed but
by the Word, thou would not give sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine
eyelids, ^rov. 6. 4, 5.
till (by heating the Word) thou went delivered as a Roe ^erse 6.
from the hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler. Go to the Ant
thou sluggard, consider her ways and be wise. The sleep of a laboring man
Eccles. 5. 12.
is sweet, whether he eat little, or much, but such will not be thine at
Church. Lydia heard Act. 16. 14.
attentively, and profited wonderfully (for, hearing is the sense of learning)
so if thou would learn, thou must needs hear. Here especially let not thine
eye be satisfied with seeing, Eccles. 1. 8.
nor thine ear with hearing. Yea (attention being the forerunner which
prepares the way to the Preacher, as the plough-share cutteth up the ground,
that it may receive the seed) do thou carefully attend unto the Word preached,
neither let Satan who labors either to stay thee from coming to Church, or
coming from hearing, or hearing from marking, or marking from liking, or
liking from practicing, prevail against thee either way. Resist him and he
will fly from Iam. 4. 7. Jonah 1. 5.
thee. Jonah was fast asleep when the boat was ready to perish; assuredly now
there is no time for us to sleep, considering Gods judgments hanging over our
heads. The Prophet said of Baal, unto ^ King 18. 17
Baals Priests by way of ironie, peradventure he sleeps. I would that
touching us there were a peradventure, and not rather, that we do indeed
Turkish. hist. ^ag. 654. He was murhered slee^ing, because Solomon ^ whilst he
^as in fa^our) had worn to ^im, that he ^ould never ^ill him ^hilst he
li^ed, whom ^^w being a^^epe he did ^pute as ^ad, and so ^ used him to ^e
murthe^^d.
sleep at Church; and (as Baal) do not hear at all. Abraham the Turkish
Basha would not have so carelessly laid himself down to slumber, if he had
known that then the angry Sultan would inflict on him the fury of his wrath to
his destruction; and thou would not at Church, if thou did conceive that
the Lord would then cut thee off by his destroying angel. What means does not
the Lord use to awake us; mercies, judgments, promises, and what not? Oh that
some of them, or all of them would awake us thoroughly! Thou have heretofore
slept at Church, but happily (as Sampson forgot belike, that the Philistines Judge.
16. 19.
had once and again bound him, whilst he was asleep, and so still ventured
on Dalilah to his destruction) thou have not taken notice of the hurt which
has come through the same. Had thou remembered it, thou would be more
vigilant, whereunto also, if thou would consider thine heavy constitution and
drowsy disposition, thou could not but be stirred up. The Disciples said of
Lazarus, If he Ioh. 11. 12.
sleep, he shall do well. But contrarily, if thou sleep at Church, thou
shall do ill. Christ would awake thee, Christ calls upon thee, do thou
therefore awake and hear, lest as unto his Disciples, he say unto thee in
justice, Sleep on now. There is that Eccles. 8. 16.
neither day nor night sees sleep with his eyes, says the Preacher; So let
it, so may it be said of thee, whilst thou art at Church, The Spirit truly
Mar. 14. 38.
is ready, but the flesh is weak, watch ye therefore and pray, lest ye enter
into temptation; And what I say unto you, I say unto all, in one word Mar. 13.
37.
of our Savior; Watch.

FINIS.

