A DECLARATION OF THE REASONS WHICH MOVED MARCUS ANTONIUS DE DOMINIS,
ARCHBISHOP OF SPALATO OR SALONAS, PRIMATE OF DALMATIA AND CROATIA, to depart
from the ROMISH Religion and his Country.

WRITTEN BY HIMSELF IN LATIN, and now for the Populare use translated.

EDINBVRGH, PRINTED BY ANDRO HEART, 1617.

TEMPUS



THE TRANSLATER imparteth his observation to the READER.
RECEIVE (CHRISTIAN READER) a proof of the force of Truth, and a praesage of
the end of that work God is about to do in these last Ages: A man brought up
in the Learning of Egypt, and inchaunted with the Sorceries of Babel: without
the help or counsel of any Protestant, by occasion of Popish tyranny,
searching the truth, finds out their error in Doctrine, and abuses in
Discipline: and convinced of both, first in his mind forsakes their opinions,
and now in his body flees from their society. This is not like to the change
of Apollinaris and Arrius of old, or of Carier in our time, whose miscontented
humor, for hopes disappointed, made them alter their opinion: But more like to
that of Paulus Vergerius, Bishop of Iustinople, whom unjust suspicions at the
first burdened with a secret favor of Lutheranisme: for purging whereof he
intended a refutation of Luthers doctrine: But while he wrangled with the
Truth, to overcome it, he was taken captive of it: and leaving his Place and
Dignities, rendered himself at Tubing to our Profession.

The ground of our praesage is GODS Truth in Times accomplishment, wherein
Providence goes on with remarkable degrees of persons and places, not without
some respect to the periods of time. He raised Wickleff from their Schools,
John Husse from their Pulpits, Martin Luther from their Cloisters, and now
Mark Antonie from their Arch-episcopall Chair. The places have the like
gradation: Great Britain seems too fair from Rome, to waken them by
Wickleffs cry: Therefore it sounded nearer in Germany. And now Dalmatia
looking over the Venetian Gulffe, assures Italy that her next Aduertiser
shall be within her bowels. It was more than a Poetical license to apply
Sybillas Oracles of CHRIST to Saloninus the son of Pollio, for keeping in
memory his victory in taking in Salonas: But this our Saloninus makes large
restitution, and applies the Oracles of GOD to the own purpose: As the
Clergy has gone before, so Princes do follow: The King of Great Britain,
with most of the Princes of Germany, stand out already against Rome: The
ambiguitie of France will resolve in end in an open departure: And the
temporizing of Venice imports more the want of occasion, than of will and
resolution. The Roman Empire did stretch out it self by degrees, proceeding
from the mids to the extremities, as circles go out from the Center: And at
the extremities again their ruin began, and went back to the heart. The fall
of their Spiritual Monarchy shall keep the same course.

The periods of time have their own observation. The Jewish solemnity of
Iubilee, not brought in the Church till the thirteenth Age, was then tied to
the Centenarie number: and that their joye has since proved to be like the
song of the Marmaide before a storm: for soon after, Wickleff began to
trouble their mirth: and in the end of that Age John Husse made them some more
business: till in the 1415. year, the holy Fathers, at Constance by a Punicke
Faith, brought him to the fire. An hundredth years after him Luther renewed his
song with greater boldness, and in the 1517, year gave out his Propositions
against the Pope: from which time they have persuaded themselves, and cuen to
this day assure their followers, that Luthers doctrine can stand no longer
than an hundredth years. This present year closes that period: and while they
look for an euanishing of that Doctrine, behold, even from themselves it
receives again a new light, anewetestimonie. We hold with Plato the
fatalitie of Periods, but Pythagoras numbers are too weak a ground for such a
necessity: Or if we shall take any numbers, it must be these of sin; and
in sin, more the degrees than the numbers. The Amorites sins must come to
the height, and the Jews must fill their cup before their punishment. The
Pharisees of our time do mightily to fill out their measure. The pride and
filthiness of Sodom, the whordomes of Babell are now multiplied exceedingly,
and the greatest sin, even that to death, is become an epidemicke disease
among their Clergy. Pope John the 22. can deny the truth, Leo the tenth can
scoff at it, Gardinerus can confess it at his death, but with this addition,
That it must rather still be impugned, than the state of Rome decay: All their
wits run upon this one poinct, but all their means turn upon them: The
cruelty of their Inquisition, The tyranny of their Prohibitions, Their
impudency in falsifying words and writs, give them but a moments advantage:
But even from these shall come their rnine. Alye has no more strength than for
the time it is spoken, and credulously embraced: but the eternal force of
Truth has more than a momentanie prevailing. What then rests for them, but
that they give place to the fatality of their estate, since they will not give
place to the Truth. And for us, while Rome is renting in it self, take heed
that we be not divided. Whosoever now casts in the apple of strife in the
Reformed Church, proves an enemy to GOD, and an improfitable friend to
Antichrist. Let us stand still, and behold the work of the LORD, and be
sure while we imagine we have left Babel, that we have first forsaken Egypt.

W.S.

MARCUS ANTONIUS DE DOMINIS, Archbishop of SPALATA, expounds the purpose and
reasons of his departing.
LEst this my departing, sudden and unexpected of all others, but to my
self, by a long and more than ten years aduising resolved upon, and by
exquisite deliberation brought to ripeness, should cause wondering among these
of our Profession, and should produce some badde effects, through my default,
in these who are ignorant of the proceeding: I thought it necessary by a
timous praeoccupation, to expound the reasons of this my not-hastie, but
well-aduised departing.

For surely I do foresee, there shall not be lacking many traducers, who
according to the custom will take occasion of this my departing, to revile,
and burden me with calumnies: Which thing I confess before GOD, does not much
trouble me: For with the Apostle PAVL I count little to be judged of men: Let
me be a Fool for CHRIST'S cause: let me be vile, buffetted, rayled upon,
persecuted, blasphemed, and counted the offscouring of the world: yea, and
accursed, so that I may satisfy the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and profit my brethren
in the Ministry of CHRIST, I should contemn all these things. For ont
glory is the testimony of a good conscience, that in simplicity of heart,
and sincerity of GOD, and not in fleshly wisdom: but by the grace of GOD I
have changed my place. It is my part indeed as the Minister of GOD, to show
my self in much patience, in tribulation, in necessities, in straites, in
labors, through glory and shame, through infamy and good fame: for I seek
not my self, nor mine own, but those things which are JESUS CHRIST'S, That
rather does grieve me, if I do not obviate calumnies, it may easily come to
pass, that in the minds of the Godly a great fruit of aedification shall be
stayed, which they might take of my counsel, and that many ignorant of the
reasons of my departing, in place of aedification shall unwittingly offend at
me, by unjust calumnies which they will hear. To these I will open the reasons
of my departing, and make them manifest to all men, that I may profit them.

That this my change of place is of GOD, and not of man, neither may I, neither
ought I to call in question: I know we should not easily trust every Spirit,
but should try them, if they be of GOD, as we are well admonished by JOHN the
beloved Disciple of CHRIST. Therefore in these trials, beside the often
access to the Father of Lights, which I learued of CHRIST, in these ten
years before named: it is most certain (as GOD and my Conscience bears me
record) that no man's persuasion of whatsoever sort came to my ears: in this
purpose I had none to stir me up, none to persuade me: I had use of no man's
counsel, nor did co^municat it to any creature: Neither yet let any suspect,
that I did draw my reasons ont of the Books (of Protestants) which are
contrary to the doctrine of ROME: for GOD is my witness, I did vehemently
abhor those Books discharged by ROMAN Inquisition: which indeed if any
Praelate addicted to the Court of ROME did detest, I did it out of measure,
being possessed from my childhood with foolish fears: and since now I am not
a child, but near unto threescore years of age, let any, who lists, assay
whereinto he can persuade me, without weighty reasons. I did ever sway the
inclinations and thoughts of my heart after the rules which the Holy Spirit in
Sacred Scripture did praescribe to the whole Church: and by whose direction the
holy and reverend Fathers ever much esteemed by the Catholic Church, did
instruct the Faithful: which holy Fathers also, beside the inward motions of
the Holy Spirit, were the only and chief authors of this my purpose. Why
then should I suspect this work to be of an evil spirit? From which
suspicion that also makes me free, that before GOD, who tries the heart and
reins, I know that in my deliberation I did never direct my mind to humane or
worldly respects: not unto Ecclesiastical dignities, which might beseem
mine estate, for I was already a Bishop, and that not of the basest sort, but
the chiefest in my native Province, to wit, The Archbishop of Spalato, the
Primate of two Kingdoms, Dalmatia and Croatia, of as great aestimation in our
Churches and Provinces (I am not ashamed to confess the truth) as any other.
And if the dignities of Rome had been pleasant to me, I had ever an easy
access to them. But the manners of the Court of Rome, which I ever disliked,
made me ever to abhor it: Yet not the less, in great and public affairs,
the Sea of Rome did use my labors to the Emperor and Archdukes, as is
manifest by the Popes Brieues, and the Letters of the Emperor and Archdukes,
which I yet keep My well-deseruing also at the hand of the State of Venice, my
native Sovereign, did procure unto me their great favor: whereby I might both
hope for, and expect the benefit of a better fortune, if the desire of greater
Grandour had possessed me. I looked not to worldly commodities, which I had in
that abundance as might more than suffice a moderate spirit, such as I ever
had, which I do ascribe to the grace of GOD. In this change of my place I do
gladly embrace the loss of all my dignities and riches, because (as I have
said) I seek not mine, but the things of JESUS CHRIST: Therefore neither the
counsels of men, nor the undaunted affection, nor worldly necessity, nor
event: neither any miserable accident, which uses to ranuerse men, and their
estate, moved me to depart: but whence it was, I will ingeniously declare,
without faining or dissimulation.

For the most part, from my childhood, I was brought up among the Jesuits, in
holy study, according to the common doctrine of the Schoolmen, and the
received opinions of the Church of Rome: for which opinions, proper to Rome
imprinted and fixed in my mind, more by authority than by reason: with the
miserable captiuing of my understanding, I was, for a long space, most resolved
to die: for I counted it execrable about these opinions to admit the smallest
doubt or ambiguitie of mind or thought, let be of speeches: and being bound up
in this common reverence of them, if at any time any thought had crept in
against them, or my studies had suggested any doubt, I resolved to use violence
against mine own reason (as the custom is in matters of Faith) and to turn
my mind and thoughts another way, rather than I should admit the least doubt
against these articles of Faith, which I took for certain, and were set out
to us by our teachers, to be most certain. I confess I did feel
continually some sparks of the inward Spirit, which nevertheless I resisted,
yet I could never freely acquiesc, neither free my self of a great suspicion,
which held me in perplexity, after I had made some progress in the studies of
Divinity: Which suspicion was greatly augmented in me by so exact, so
rigorous, and intestine business of Rome: whereby I perceived they did most
narrowly take heed, that no book, written against our doctrine, should be
held or read by any of us: for I supposed, that these books were justly
discharged the common sort, lest the people, who are destitute of judgment and
discretion, should be exposed by reading of them, to the danger of drinking in
of Haeresie. But in that they were altogether discharged Students, and men of
great learning, and well affected to the Catholic Religion, I did ever judge
(as reason will teach every man) that matter was greatly to be suspected:
especially seeing the Court of Rome suffered us not to have any use of these
books: even after we had compleet our course in the study of Divinity, and
taken degrees therein: yea, and after our promotion to Bisshoprickes. This
suspicion did yet more increase, where I saw our Masters and Professors in
their public handling of the controversies, by word or writ, claim this
authority to themselves, to be trusted in all that they said: that those
words and sentences which they did repeat, were the words and sentences of
the adversaries: and in the mean time, the hearers were discharged, under the
fearful pain of Excommunication, to read the writings of the Adversaries:
In ryding, suppressing, and destroying whereof, they make so great business,
as justly it is to be suspected, some thing lurketh in them which our
doctrine is not able to confute.

From the first years wherein I rendered my self to be a Clergy man, I
fostered an in-borne desire to see the union of all the Churches of Christ: and
could never patiently think upon the division of the Western and Eastern
Churches, the South and North in matters of faith. I desired earnestly to know
the causes of so many and so great Schisms: and to search, if possibly any way
could be found out to bind up again all the Churches of Christ in the true and
ancient union. I was also tormented with heavy dolor which I conceived at the
dissentions of Professors of Christian Religion, and the coat of Christ so
miserably rent asunder: which dolor and too great heaviness did wonderfully
afflict me, and yet more and more vexes me daily.

Thereafter, now some twenty years ago, I was promoued to the government of
the Church, and made Bishop of Segnat which thing my Fathers, the Jesuits,
took heavily, because they knew by experience, that I was not idle, not
improfitable for their society (but that their account I do not much regard,
for I contemn all humane aestimation, unless it make some furtherance to
divine obedience) they had found me (I say) profitable for them: for in the
time of my trial, when I was but young, they praeferred me to a public
profession of HVMANITIE in the Colleges of VERONA. And before I was a Priest,
they placed me in the Public Chair, for the profession of the MATHEMATICKES
at PADVA, with great concourse of hearers. They made me Professor of
RHETORIC first, and then of the LOGIC and PHILOSOPHY, in the Public
Schools of BRESCIA, and often on the Festuall days would needs have me
making Sermon in their Churches: They enjoined me the dispatch both of private
and weighty Affairs: And in all the services of their society, they found my
diligence: Why then should they not have taken heavily my promouing to a
Bishopric? which was unto me the first occasion to come down to the earth,
from the subtle and airie, or improfitable disputations of the Schoolmen, and
to turn my contemplation in wholesome practice of the cure of souls, and of
the Church. And because I did acknowledge the proper task of a Bishop was to
preach the Word, I set my self to read Sermons, and such Books as are
appointed for Lent: which did soon beget in me a loathing and detestation:
for I saw in them, and that easily, a filthy abuse of Scripture, while it is
thrown to vain, improfitable, impertinent, yea, and a pernicious sense: I saw
Examples and Miracles propounded, either false and fained, or at least
ridiculous, and not worthy of credit: I saw the people miserably deceived,
and the inventions of avarice and ambition superstitiouslie forced upon them,
under color of articles of Faith. These things I was astonished to consider:
and therefore I resolved to leave these troubled Streams, and to take my self
to the Fountains of the Fathers: in reading of whose works I began to
delight, for Sermons and holy Canons, and Church Government.

From this course now and then some beams of new light did shine unto me, as
yet unwilling and repining: for on the one part I did observe the sayings of
the Fathers in very many things, contrary to the common Doctrine which I
had learned in the Schools: and I did perceive, that they were either passed
by in silence by my Masters, or not faithfully alleged, or not sufficiently,
or which is worse, sinistrously expounded: On the other part, I did see, and
that not without great wondering, that the Rule of Church Discipline, and
Spiritual Government, of our time, was exceeding far different from the
ancient practice whereby my forenamed suspicions were greatly augmented: and I
perceived, a far off, that we did not faithfully handle the Doctrine and
Affairs of CHRIST and his Church, but sluffed our THEOLOGY rather with the
quick inventions of humane speculations and Philosophy, than with the
wholesome words of holy Scripture, exactly considered and expounded, whereof
there is a gross ignorance amongst us.

From a Bishopric I was advanced to an Archbishopric, whereby a new and more
urgent occasion grew unto me, to renew my studies, and to labor in them more
earnestly: for whereas the troubles of the Suffragane Bishops of my Province,
but much more the excessive power of the Court of Rome, encroching upon my
Metropolitan Jurisdiction, began to injure me, I proponed to my self to
search out, and thoroughly to know the Root and Fountain of Church degrees,
Jurisdictions, callings, offices, and dignities; and chiefly of the Papal
greatness. A little after the State of VENICE was by the Pope put under
Interdiction: and scoffing Pamphlets, sent daily from Rome, ceased not to
oppress, vex, and slander all of us, who were Bishops of the SEIGNORIE of
VENICE, as Beasts, Dolts, Ignorantes, and men of evil Conscience. Whereof,
for the better instructing our lawful defenses, and for the better knowledge
of the quaestion debated betwixt the Venetians and the Pope, new occasions were
given to me of a new and more earnest study. The holy ancient Canons, the
Orthodox Councels, the Discipline of the Fathers, and the ancient customs of
the Church were often and again turned over by me. Whereto shall I say more? I
found abundantly in these only all that I sought, and a great deal more than
I sought. Then it was easy with opened eyes to observe that the doctrine of
these Reformed Churches, which in great numbers Rome makes enemies to her
self, and which are bitterly reproved and impugned by our THEOLOGS, did in
little, or nothing at all, differ from the true and ancient doctrine of the
pure Church. I did also perceive that their doctrine, both at Rome and among
us, is abhorred and repelled, rather than lawfully impugned: not for that it is
indeed Haereticall and false: but only because it is contrary to the corrupt
sense and manners of the Court of Rome, and to her fleshly plottes and
inventions, which is now turned into a temporal estate. I saw also, and
perceived most clearly, that at Rome, without any lawful ground, yea, by
extreme violence, innumerable new articles of faith were daily coined, and
forced upon us: and that in such things as not only appertain nothing to
divine faith, but also contain in themselves manifest falsehood: Which
articles that corrupt Court will neither suffer to be discussed by any, nor be
brought in a due consultation of the Church: but pursues even to the death all
those who dare whisper against them. They have now for a long time smoothered
the sacred Councels, and so have put out the eyes of the Church of CHRIST, that
now unhappy she, as another Sampson, made blind, and deprived of her own
strength, captiued and made vile, is able only to groan. It was sometimes an
article of Faith, that the universal Church, dispersed throughout the whole
world, is that Catholic Church of CHRIST, whereunto CHRIST himself does
promise his perpetual assistance, which PAVL calls the Pillar and ground of
Verity. But now our Romanistes have drawn this article of Faith in lesser
bounds, That the Catholic Church now is to be taken for none other than the
Court of Rome: and it is propounded to be believed by a firm Faith, that in it
only, yea, and in the Pope alone, the whole Spirit of CHRIST makes residence:
and whatsoever of old time has been said for the honor of ye universal
Church of CHRIST, with great injury to the Church, is wholly applied to the
Court of Rome: and many things are reduced to the articles of Faith, whereof we
never had any institution of CHRIST: whereby the souls of the Faithful are
miserably deceived: and so the Blind with their blind leaders rush headlongs
in ye gulf of perdition. These things among many other, have grieved me
exceedingly, and do yet stir up in my spirit an incredible dolor.

But I will cease now particularly to recount the innumerable novelties of the
Court of Rome, and these most pernicious erroures whereby a Boucherie of
souls is wrought: the vigor of Church Discipline is broken: the propagation
and purging of Religion is hindered, and innumerable offenses are brought in
the Church: the civil peace of Christians is troubled, and bloody wars
stirred up amongst them, kingdoms are ouerthrown, and horrible schisms are
made in the Churches, and most grievous calameties do arise (which all I have
exactly observed) I will cease now (I say) to recount them, because I have
fully treated of all these matters in my large work, Of the Ecclesiasticke
Republicke, which I have in readiness, and shall give to be Printed in
Germany, as first commodioufly occurreth to me in this my journey: all that
work Of the Ecclesiasticke Republicke, I comprehend in ten Books: In the
first whereof I search out the form of this Republicke: and do determine,
that the Church under CHRIST appertains to a most perfect Monarchy: and that
not the less the Ministers of CHRIST on earth, by CHRIST'S own institution, are
most far from an earthly Monarchy, and do govern ye Church with an
Aristocratie or choice government: not without some mixture of a democratie or
popular government: and consequently I show that the Primacie of Peter is
contrary to the Euangel and institution of Christ. In the second book I
consider the gouerners and Ministers of the Ecclesiasticke Republic, who they
are, and what succession can be given to the holy Apostles: what is the
institution of Bishops: wherein they differ from Presbyters: who are the
inferior Ministers, and what force holy Order have in this Republicke. In the
third I do expound what is the Hierarchy to be found among the Bishops and
Gouernoures of this Republic: and I do teach, that there is no praeheminence
nor subjection among Bishops, by divine right, but that degrees of places among
them are distinguished by the constitutions of the Church only. And
consequently I do treat of the Election, Confirmation, Consecration or
Ordination of Bishops, and of the power of Metropolitanes, Primates, and
Patriarchs. In the fourth I examine the Privileges of the Church of ROME: and
do prove, that neither in her self, nor in her Bishop nor Clergy, she has
any praeheminence given her of CHRIST above other Churches: but if any she
has had, or now has, she has taken it from the helps and furtherances of
men. In the fifth I do undertake to search out the proper power of the CHVRCH:
and do prove, that it is meerelie Spiritual: and so I remove, far from
the CHVRCH, all (Earthly) IVRISDICTION: And then consequently I dispute of the
force and operation of Sacraments, and of Ecclesiastical Censures. In the
sixth I compare the power of the Laity, and of the Church; that the difference
betwixt the Ecclesiasticke and Temporal Republicke may appear; and I do
show that Christian temporal Princes may do many things in the Church: but
the Church in temporal things, and especially toward Kings, may do nothing
at all. I treat also of the temporal Kingdom of CHRIST, of the power of the
Laity whence it is, and of how large extent: of the Immunities of the Church
and Churchmen: of Inuestitures, of the Monarchy of SICILL, and such like. In
the seventh I consider the inward direction of the Ecclesiasticke Republicke,
which is by faith: and I inquire for the true rule of faith: and so I dispute
of the Word of GOD, of the authority of the Church, and of the Pope over it:
of Councels, of Haeresie, of Schism, and such like. In the eight I consider
the external government of the Church, by Laws, Canons, and Iudicatories.
Thereafter I discuss how far Canons do oblish: of dispensations, of
commandes, enjoining fasting, prayer, and such like. In the ninth I come to the
temporal goods of the Church, and I expound at length how sparing the
sustentation of the Ministers should be: whence it should be taken: and how
Church goods should be guided. I treat also of Tithes, of Benefices, of
dominion over Church-goods: of the use and abuse of Church-rents: of Pensions,
of Commendas, and Testaments of the Clergy. In the tenth and last I undertake
to expound the liberty of the Church, that we may see what way this
Republicke is free. And consequently I treat of Privileges, and persons
privileged: of the abuse of privileges: of exemptions, and persons exempted:
of the subjection of Moncks, and such like. This was the fruit of my painful
studies: for while upon the occasions before named I did griedily read holy
Scripture, the Orthodox Fathers, the holy Canons, and Volumes of Councels, mine
eyes being opened, and I inflamed with a zeal to explain the truth to
others, and to my self, I could not but write those things I observed: and
this my much writing has begotten this work, the sum whereof I have
rehearsed. I saw therefore plainly, and did perceive, that in our Churches we
had gone far astray from the right path both in Doctrine and Discipline.

What then should I do more in the mids of a wicked and froward nation? If (as
reason craves) I would have governed mine own Church according to the ancient
discipline of ye Catholic Church, and propone true and Catholic doctrine, I
should by that means hasten upon mine head great storms and horrible tempests
from Rome: for eue^ already at Rome great hatred was hatched and fostered
against me, because they had vnder-smelled my labors in writing against their
opinions: for which I was often admonished and rebuked by the Popes Nuncio,
lying at Venice: it was therefore much better to take the wings of a dove, and
to withdraw my self, and fly away to the wilderness, where I might wait upon
him who will deliver me from the weakness of spirit, and from the tempest:
rather than remaining among the blind, willingly blinding my self, I should
lead the blind to perdition. What are the Bishops under the Roman Popedom?
In temporal things indeed, where the benefices are fat, they shine in wordly
dignity, they are great, and conspicuous, and Princes: but Bishops they are
not, but by aequiuocation: all their Bishoply administration is perished: for
the government of all Churches is drawn to Rome, and the Bishops themselves are
scarsely Vicars and servants to the Lord Pope: they are vile, co^temptible,
oppressed, and trodden under foot miserably: subjected not to the Pope only, but
to Cardinals and to so many Co^gregations as are institute at Rome against
them: Legates from his Holiness side, Apostolic Nunces, Inquisitors, Visitors,
and in end to innumerable Orders of Regulars, and their brethren, who now by
their Apostolic privileges are uot only aequalled to Bishops, but also
ouermatcheth them, and stays their proceedinges in their government,
swallowing up their power. The Church under the Bishop of Rome is no more a
Church, but a certain humane Commonwealth, all of it under the Popes temporal
Monarchy: It is a Vineyard only to make Noe drunk: it is a Flock, which the
Shepherds do sheare and clip even to the blood: yea, to excoriate and flaye
them. Why then should I not flee, lest I should see these evils any longer, and
lest I should be a fellow-worker of such things, and a partaker with them.
CHRIST has set me as a dog among his flock: I should not be dumb any
longer, as now all the other Bishops under the Roman pope are dumb dogs: who
on the one part allured with large ^^pes, and on the other terrified with great
fear, are altogether silent: and choose by base flattery to hasten to
perdition with their Chiftane. And because (according to the Proverb) Flattery
begets friends, and truth begets hatred: seeing I neither could, nor
ought to desert the truth, I behooved of necessity to flee noisome hatred, and
poison, and daggers, the ordinary effects of hatred among us: for in these our
times matters are come to this poinct, that at Rome, or elsewhere by commission
from Rome, the defense of Controversies of Religion is not committed to
Theologs or Councels, but to Torturers, Burrios, Cut-throates, and bloody
Murderers.

And albeit all these things did ever and earnestly persuade me to flee yet I
do confess I fonnd the handmaide Agar, with her child Jsmael, for a long
time troublesome to me: I mean I heard my flesh rebelling against my spirit, and
reasoning after this manner: And whither, I pray thee, will thou go? Thou art
come to great dignities, and wealth, under the Bishop of Rome, with hope also
to attain further. These things thou do possess: these are certain, but
thou know not what shall befall thee in other places. Shall it be even so,
that thou will leave thy Country, and Consignes, and Alliance, and friends,
never any more to see them again? Wherefore make thou thy self wiser than
innumerable other Bishops, who comporteth with all things, tolerateh and
excuses them? why wilt not thou in like manner comport with, tolerate and
excuse them? Art thou only the wise man among such an innumerable multitude?
Are all the rest foolish? Do thou not know, that immediately after thy
departing, first at Rome, and then every where, thou shall be burdened with
great reproaches, and noted with the infamous name of an Haereticke? These and
more such like speeches my fleshly Agar did often whisper in mine ears, not
without a great combat betwixt her and mine inward spirit, and my Conscience
now already overcome with the truth: But that divine Spirit, with a more
vehement force, suffered me not any longer to make delays, but with an
effectual voice he called me to himself, as he did Abraham, saying Come out
of thy Country, and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house, and come unto
the Land which I will show unto thee. And he forced me to put in execution
that notable saying of the wise men, FOLLOW GOD: even as blessed Abraham indeed
obeyed it, according to the consideration of holy Ambrose (de Abraham. lib. 1.
cap. 2.) Which fact of the holy Patriarch after a wonderful sort, augmented
both my courage and strength, while I perceived, that GOD did first reward his
ready obedience, by keeping disgrace and infamy far from him: for he
praeserued the chastity of his beautiful wife Sara, when it was in liazard by a
licentious Tyrant. Ambrose also did much comfort me in this case, while he
says, Because Abraham contemned all things for GODS calling, therefore he
receives al things again abundantly multiplied: and first of all he gave him
the safety of Saras chastity, which he knew was dear to the husband. That
same holy Father adds moreover, Whosoever follows the LORD is ever in
surety: and therefore (says he) we should not be called back from the
obedience of heavenly commandments, neither for respect to our country, or
parents, or children, or wife, because GOD gives all these gifts to us, and is
able to preserve them all. These things give me full assurance, that for this
my following of his calling, though it be somewhat too late, GOD will give me
this remuneration, even the praeseruation of my fame and aestimation: that of
whatsoever account it be, it shall suffer no disgrace amongst Barbarians, but
shall be kept found and undefiled for the aedification of some, and avoiding of
offenses. Being therefore encouraged with this confidence, and moved with this
holy calling and admonished by these dangers, I have most chearefully
undertaken this my flight.

But yet the love of CHRIST constrains me, for I might be counted of a vile
and base spirit, if laying aside all lawful striving, I should rot in sluggish
idleness in some corner, and so flee for mine own ease. The cause of CHRIST
is in hand, which calls me to it self, and I hear that voice continually
thundering in mine ears [CRYE] and admonishing me to go up to some high
mountain, to the end that my voice, joined with their voice, who have not
bowed their knee to Baal, may be better heard in preaching the Gospel to Sion.
That voice now I follow, and I go into some mountain, where the Catholic
Church has lifted up her head in a free profession, from whence, according to
the oblishment of my calling, so far as in me lies, I may proclaim the
truth to the world: and may open and show the ways for taking away all
divisions, and binding up again of peace in the Church. The Church shall
shortly hear my cries, and I will speak to the heart of Jerusalem, and call
unto her: For I cannot in any case be lacking to my calling, because I am a
Bishop in the Church of CHRIST. and to every Bishop his own particular Church
is so committed, that he must in the mean time understand, where there is any
necessity of his help, the universal Church is recommended to him by JESUS
CHRIST. To all of us who are Bishops the Apostle Paul has said, Take heed to
your selves, and to the whole flock over which the Spirit of God has made you
ouer-sieers, to rule the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood. These words also are given out in the name of Eleutherius an ancient
Bishop of Rome, writing unto other Bishops, For this cause Christ has
committed unto you the universal Church, that ye labor for all men: and
neglect not to help all, according to necessity. Cyprian also affirms
(epist. 13. lib. 3) that jointly with Stephanus, Bishop of Rome, he did hold
the level of governing the Church. And then he adds, The body of the
Priesthood is exceeding large, and is coupled together with the glue of mutual
concord, and the band of unity: therefore if any of our fellowship shall prasume
to forge an haeresie, or to rent and destroy the Church of Christ, let all the
rest make convenient help. And that same Cyprian in very deed often helped
troubled Churches: even such as were without the bounds of Afric: yea and the
Church of Rome it self. So Polycarpus, Irenaeus, Osius of Corduba, Athanasius,
Basilius, the two Eusebii, one of Samosata, and the other of Vercels, Lucifer
of Calarie, Hilarie of Poitiers, Theophilus and Cyrillus of Alexandria,
Aurelius of Carthage, and many other Bishops, did painfully labor, by virtue
of their Episcopal office, to help ye necssities of the universal Church: and
leaving, for a space, their own Churches, well appointed, reco^mending them to
the oversight of others, they went unto other afflicted and troubled Churches.
Therefore it is most proper to my calling, and not without the compass of it,
with all my might, as Cyprian exhorts, to help the Court of Rome, which
factionously makes a Sect, and dividing it self from the Church, renteth and
destroys the Church of CHRIST: and yet mine help must not be by approaching
to it, because that is not sure: but by a bodily departing from it. I would
indeed most gladly have retained mine own Church of Spalate as Osius, Basilius,
the two Eusebii, Hilarious, and others above named, retained their own Churches,
and returned unto them after they had ended the public business of the
universal Church. But because that my Church, with many others, groaneth under
the tyranny of the Pope, who hates and abhors Reformation; and by all his
power and the forces of his adhaerent Princes, makes impediment to it: And
having power of life and death over these who suit and urge reformation,
suffers none of them alive. Therefore, I could not choose, but leave my
Church, that I my self, having cast off these bands, and set at liberty, might
be the more ready to proclaim the truth, and with greater safety might
deplore ye desolation of the holy Church, which she suffers of the Court of
Rome.

True it is, the majesty of an earthly king is dreadful, because (as
Tertullian says) he is next unto God, and lesser than God only: above whom (as
Optatus Milevitanus says) there is none save God alone. Therefore when k.
David was to be reproved for his adultery and murder, neither the high Priest,
nor any other of the Priesthood, nor any Leuit, or friend or familiar durst
praesume to take that charge upon him: but God used his own proper and peculiar
messenger, and appointed the Prophet Nathan to rebuke him. But there is not now
such necessity: neither need we expect, that God will raise up extraordinary
Prophets, and appoint peculiar messengers to deal with ye Bishop of Rome, who
is now troubling, scandalizing, spoiling, and oppressing the whole Church. The
majesty of our Romans Pope is not so great as to affray us, that his temporal
and hauty majesty is fained, usurped, and is none at all, he is but our Brother
and Colleague, and a Bishop with us, and a Fellow-seruant in ye work: and a
brother who is helped of a brother, is as a fenced city, as Solomon says in
the Proverbs. Wherefore then do we snort? wherefore do we sleep? a Brother
perishes, and draws the Churches away with him to perdition, and we his
Brethren neglect the danger and do not occur. Let all be silent, let all be
quiet, and contemn as they will, yet I ye least Whelpe among them all, with
such barking as I can, shall wake^ those great mastius, who are asleep, and
made drowsy by a wonderful policy of the Popedom: that according to their
charge they may hold back the Wolves, and save the flock of Jesus Christ. I
shall not use mine own voice, but the voice of God, in wakening the good Dogs:
and I shall double upon them the Cry of holy Fathers, and Councels, and holy
Catholic Church. As for these ten Books, Of the Ecclesiastic Republic,
which I am shortly to put to light, I shall specially endeavor, that the
errors of the Church of Rome may be detected, the truth and wholsomnes of the
Catholic doctrine and discipline may be opened, and these many (reformed)
Churches, which by our Roman Church are proudly casten off and divorced, may
be retained in a Catholic sense, and that the way of union of all the Churches,
if not clearly demonstrat, may be at least pointed out: if by any means we can
be brought to that estate, all of us to think one thing, and to say one thing:
that Schisms may be remedied, and all occasions taken away from Christian
Princes, of plotting the overthrow one of another, and of troubling the common
peace of Christian people, with vntimous and ungodly wars, and that under the
praetence of Faith and Religion: but rather that all their forces may be so
directed, as the Catholic Church of Christ, groaning under the tyranny of
those who are Infideles indeed, may be restored to her ancient liberty.

This my departing from my Country, or rather my going out and flight from
Babel, I will that it want all suspicion of Schism: for I flee from errors, I
flee from abuses, and that lest I be partaker of Babels sins, and receive of
her plagues: yet will I never sever my self from the love which I owe to the
holy Catholic Church, and to all and every one who communicate with her: but
so far as in me lies, I shall ever be ready to communicate with them all, so
long as we agree in the essential articles of our Faith, and the Creedes of
the ancient Church of Christ, if in the mean time we derest and abhor all
new articles of Faith, which are contrary to holy Scripture, or repugnant to
the forenamed Creedes: and that we admit not, in any case, articles
indifferent in themselves, as articles of Faith, which have never been
sufficiently discussed, established and determined by the Church, except first
they be fully determined, or be shown to have been determined of before:
neither yet that we condemn those articles as haereticall, unless we have
sufficient notice that they have been condemned by the Church. In things
therefore indifferent, let liberty of opinion and action be permitted to every
Church: and let every of them abound in their own judgment, until the Church
it self, instructed and governed by the Spirit of Christ, shall put an end to
controversies, and sever the Chafe from the true Corn.

In the mean time, let us remember that notable saying of worthy Cyprian,
which he used in the Council of Carthage, We judge no man (says he) neither
debar we any man from the Communion, albeit he have an opinion diverse from us:
for none of us all has made himself Bishop of Bisshops, or compels his
colleagues, by a tyrannical force, to the necessity of obedience: because
every Bishop, according to liberty and power, has his own arbitriment: as
though he might not be judged by others, neither he himself may judge
another: but let us all await upon the judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
one, and alone, has power to prafer us to the government of his Church, and to
take an account of all our proceedings. At that time Cyprian disassented from
the Church of Rome, and almost from the universal Church, about the Baptism of
Haeretickes: and being confirmed in his own opinion, he judged Stephanus,
Bishop of Rome, who mightily resisted him therein, and all other, to be in a
manifest error: yet he never suffered the band of union and Ecclesiastic
Charity betwixt them, to be broken, lest a Schism, the most noisome pest of
the Church, should atise among them. And in this, Cypr. to his great
commendation, did overcome the not-all-wise-discrete zeal of Stephanus: for
while as Steph. by his exco^munications, did rush headlongs to the
inconvenience of a Schism, Cyprian by his patience and charity, and excellent
wisdom, eschewed a separation. Therefore S. Augustine did often commend
Cyprian, and propounded his actions as a rule and examplar of Imitation to all
the Churches.

And among other things which Augustine considers of this proceeding and
strife betwixt Cyprian and Stephanus, he says (in his fifth book against the
Donatists, chap. 25.) Yet the peace of Christ did so praeuaile in their hearts,
that in such a quaestion no Schism did arise betwixt them: for Cyprian had
surely concluded with himself, that Steph. did grossly err, while he received
poenitent Haereticks, returning to ye Church, without rebaptizing: yet he
choosed to communicate not only with Stephanus himself, who thought and did
contrary to him: but also with those whom he judged to be altogether unclean:
and that only because Steph. had received them to the Communion, rather than to
rent the Church with a Schism. And this example Augustine propounds to the
Donatists, and us all, to be followed.

Therefore, most holy Father, and you Fathers and Brethren, and holy Colleagues,
let us imitate Cyprian, and follow the counsel of Augustine, that above all
things, Schisms be removed: for (as August. observes) Cyprian replenished,
with the bowels of charity aestimed, that even they who have diverse opinions,
should abide in unity. Let us also among us have diverse opinions, of things
not as yet determined, till they be fully determined: And in the mean time let
us abide in unity: for albeit that you think otherwise, yet (as The Apostle
admonishes) God will reveal that to you. Make not greater divisions than are
already. Take heed also that with Stephanus ye break not the band of charity,
by vntimous excommunications, lest by such contentions, that great ill of
division arise, which August. did fore-eschew: Restore peace and charity to all
the Churches of CHRIST, who according to the Tenor of the ancient Creedes do
profess JESUS CHRIST, and be assured of this, that Schism in the Church is a
far more grievous evil than Haeresie. Have your Communion ready for all,
without praejudice of the liberty of opinions: removing in the mean time all
falsehoods in doctrine. Leave the examinations of the Truth to those lawful
and accustomed forms of the holy Church: for so I hope, through the assisting
grace of CHRIST, who uses not to deny himself to them who seek him
sincerely, that full peace and concord, and a necessary union of the holy
Churches shall follow, that we all think one thing, and abide all in one rule.
Let vt not stir up amongst us the fire of hatred and secret grudges, but of
Religion and Catholic instruction. Let the Word of GOD be a Lantern to our
feet, and let us follow the footsteps of our holy Ancestors, who have been
excellent Lights in the Church of CHRIST. Let us break asunder, without
pertinacie, the darkness of error and falsehood, by the light of the truth
of the Gospel: and let us depart far from Novelties, which have almost quite
exstinguished the Doctrine and Discipline of the holy Church: that the Church
of CHRIST on earth may be one coupled together with the glue of concord:
wherein to let us all with one spirit and one mouth praise our GOD, and the
Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, AMEN,

Given at VENICE, the xv, of September. ANNO 1616.

