A DISCOVRSE OF THE medicine called Mithridatium, declaring the first
beginning, the temperament, the noble virtues, and the true use of the same:
Compiled rather for those which are to use it, then for the learned.

1585.

A BRIEF DISCOVRSE OF THE MEDICINE called Mithridatium.
We do read in ye Roman histories, that Mithridates a Puisante king of
Pontus and Bithinia, for causing all ye Romans in Asia to be slain, and the
Proconsul Oppius to be cast in prison, was assaulted by Silla, discomfited by
Lucullus, and lastly utterly vanquished by Pompey the great: and when this
valiaunte king perceived himself to be overcome, and that he was to be taken
of his enemies: first he destroyde his wife and daughters with poison, and then
took the same poison, desiring rather so to dye, then as a captive to fall into
ye hands of his enemies: But having dronken much of the poison, could not dye
therewith, and then caused his servant Bistocus a frenchman (as it is written)
to kill him with a sword. Such was the magnanimity of this mighty king to
escape the hands of the Romans, yt he might not be carried to Rome, and in
captive manner be showed in triumph. For this noble king was not only valiante
in war, but also in physical matters very expert, had the knowledge of many
herbs, and making trial of sundry simples that do resist poison in men
condemned to dye, as Galen writes in his first book de Antidotis, and finding
some to remedy ye poison of Spiders, some of Scorpions, some to do good
against the biting of Vipers, others of mad Dogs, many to remedy the poison of
herbs, and so sundry others to help the venime of sundry poisons: he
endeavored to make a mixture of diverse simples, hoping thereby to have a ready
remedy against all kinds of poison, and the same was termed after his name
Mithridatium: wherein he was nothing deceived. For this noble king in his life
time used much and often ye medicine. And (as it is written) being subdued by
the Romans, and making choice rather to dye then to be led captive to Rome,
attempting to kill him self with poison, and taking of it great quantity,
took no harm thereof, for that his body (as ye history says) by use of ye
medicine altered, and resisted the action of the poison. Notwithstanding his
wife and two daughters dyed before his face which the same poison. Since that
time, the efficacy and strength of ye medicine, has in all ages (even unto
these our days) been confirmed. For after that Pompey the great had conquered
this valiante king, search made in his Closets, amongst sundry Iuels, many
secret medicines to expel diverse poisons, and to cure other internal
diseases, were found: where also was the description of this medicine. And
albeit Pompey, as a martial man, had greatest care of other matters, yet
advertised what goodness might come by such secret medicines, commanded one
Pompeius Lineus his libertine, well seen in sciences, to convert all those
medicines written in the Pontike tongue, into latin. And it does appear by
the history, that many volumes of physical matters were there found, which
perused and considered of by Asclepiades, in those days a famous physician in
Rome, were by him commended, and at his petition translated into latin,
whereof Pliny writes in his 25. book. Of so many excellent medicines left by
Mithridates, none was so highly esteemed, and so well accounted of in all
respects, as that termed Mithridatium: whose excellent virtues against poison
were first approved in Mithridates own body, and after confirmed by ye
Romans.

In truth a man may justly blame the historyographers, which in describing the
noble acts of Pompey the great, do so slenderly pass over this his fact, in
translating of this medicine experienced of this noble king. For in my
judgment things justly weighed, none of all Pompeyes valiante feats of arms,
no not the royal triumph made at Rome to declare the victory in co^quering
king Mithridates, has so largely advanced his name, as the making known to
the world of this medicine. For the profit of yt victory came only to Rome, and
the triumph and praise for ye same done at yt time in Rome: But the profit of
this medicine has been by his means imparted to ye whole world, and the
commendation and praise for the same, is justly to be yielded from all the
world in all ages and times: So that as all the world is greater then Rome, and
all times more then one age, so doubtless more renown is due unto Pompey for
diuulging of this medicine, then by the conquering of this king, or by the
triumph for the same. Although in the Emperor Nero his time, succeeded a
learned physician called Andromachus, who to the imitation of this medicine
compounded an other, adding to the description of Mithridatium the flesh of
Vipers, and some other simples, which medicine he called Theriaca, of the
Greek word (...), which does signify a wild and venomous beast, whereof the
Viper is one. Yet this ought not to imbase any praise due to Mithridates for
compounding of Mithridatium. For all men do know that it is easier to add to
a thing done, then to find out the same, and greatest praise is to be given to
the first inuentor. So that the dishonor yt came to Mithridates by Pompey his
victory was not so great, as the praise and commendation for the inuenting and
compounding of Mithridatium. And his calamity to be overthrown is greatly
easied, his ignomy to be conquered after a sort advanced, that by the same
this medicine was diuulged, which happily would not have been performed, at ye
least so generally, had he dyed otherwise, and not been by Pompey ouercommed.
For had not Mithridates in him felfe approved the excellency of the medicine,
purposing to have killed him self rather then to come into the hands of the
Romans, surely the notable virtues of the medicine would not so well have
been believed. And had not this king in that his miserable estate made trial
in his own body, who would have believed that a man's body might by any means
be brought so strongly to resist poison? Who but one in so desperate a case,
would attempt to take strong poison upon the credit of any medicine? Great good
therefore to the whole world this overthrow of Mithridates did breed: And
great renoume thereby came, not to the conqueroure only, but to the conquered:
to the one for inuenting, to the other for diuulging of so great a medicine,
which for these two thousand years has been of all men in all ages had in
great estimation, not in Pontus only and Bithinia, and Greece adjoining to the
same, but in all other nations and countries where any learning is, commended
by all writers, Grecians, Arabians, and Latinists. And what greater assurance
can there be of the notable virtues of this medicine, then the confirmation of
the same from Mithridates to this our time, then that all physicians of the
world in all ages, times, and places, in Greece, in Arabia, in Italia, in all
parts of Germany, in France, in Spayn, in Portingal, in Hungaria, in England,
in Scotland, Moscouia, Tartaria, Sueuia, ye in all parts of Asia, Aphrica,
and Europa, even amongst the saluage and barbarous nations, has and does
greatly esteem of Mithridatium, and so of Theriacle, and seek and provide for
them to serve their countries in cases of need. How carefully all princes and
rulers, has and does take order for the well co^pounding of these medicines.
Doubtless had not experience confirmed their excellent qualyties, the estimation
would not have so many years continued: but long before this our age, would
have been diminished, and by this time come to nothing. Great therefore are
these medicines, and in a heigh degree to be esteemed. And albeit great praise
and commendation is due to both medicines (I mean Mithridatium and Theriacle)
yet greatest praise is to be given to Mithridatium. First because of his
antiquytie, which was of Mithridates invented, and approved many years before
Theriacle was compounded. For long after Mithridates was overthrown*
Andromachus physician to Nero ye Emperor, and very expert in co^fecting of
medicines) as Galen writes in his first book de Antid.) with diligence
considering the composition of Mithridatium, changed some of the simples, took
out some, and added others, supposinge by that alteration to make the medicine
more perfect, and of mightyer force against poison. In which consideration he
added the flesh of vipers to the composition of Mithridatium, and leaving out
some simples used of Mithridates, added others, in number more, and (as he
thought) of greater power against poison. Whereby it may reasonably be
gathered, yt Andromachus not fully satisfied with the composition set down by
Mithridates, supposing some defect in it, by that his alteration, endeavored to
make an other medicine in all degrees more perfect, in which no want might be
found, and so he addressed the same, and called it Theriaca. Whereby no doubt
some good time after, Mithridatium was less esteemed, and the credit thereof
much imbased, until time by long experience had sufficiently declared,
wherein Theriacle does excel Mithridatium, and in what points Mithridatiu^ is
not only not inferior to Theriacle, but of more efficacy then it.

So Galen in his first book de Antidot. writes. Because of the flesh of
Vipers in Theriacle, it is much better in the biting of the Viper then
Mithridatium. But in all other effects, Theriacle can not only not do more
then Mithridatium, but is inferior. The same Galen in 2. de Antidot. writes
in like sort. We will begin (says he) with the description of Mithridatium,
for it is stronger against many poisons then Theriacle, though this be better
against the biting of the Viper. Whereby we may gather yt where Andromachus
endeavoring to make a more perfect medicine, then yt left of Mithridates, did
in some part accomplish his purpose, leaving a medicine excelling the other in
one particular thing, but not of like efficacy generally. It happened therefore
in this case (if a man may compare natures actions to art) as in ye framing of
man, who does in all actions exceed all creatures, yet not so generally, but
yt in some one action some one beast does excel man, as we read yt the Aegle
has perfiter sight then man, the Dog does pass man in smelling, the Ape in
agility, the Tiger in swiftness. But whosoever will with reason confer all
actions, he shall find in all together, that man passes all creatures, for
such is his constitution and temperature, that more and perfiter actions do
proceed from man the^ any one creature. So it came to pass, that Andromachus
indeuoring to make a medicine of greater perfection then Mithridatium, obtained
that in one thing his medicine excelled, but in many other was inferior to
Mithridatium. For a man may gather the virtues of these two medicines, at large
displaied in Galens works, into three orders. First that they are good against
the biting and stinging of venomous beasts, be they Serpents, Scorpions, mad
Dogs, or others. Secondly they serve to cure all kind of poisons taken into
the body. Thirdly to remedy other inward diseases. Now it is certain, and
long experience has confirmed, that both these medicines have strong and
mighty virtues to remedy al three kinds of effects: yet no doubt one of them
is in some effects of more power then the other. As Galen writes that
Theriacle for ye biting of Vipers, is stronger then Mithridatium: In other it
does exceed Theriacle. So we may justly conclude with Galen, that against the
biting and stinging of beasts, Theriacle has more force: But for inward
poisons and inward diseases, truly Mithridatium is of more might. Wherefore
albeit both medicines are noble, and greatly to be desired, yet Mithridatium is
to be accounted of greater price, as having more generally stronger virtues,
and serving to more purposes.

And it may be objected, that in Theriacle co^piled by Andromachus are many
simples added, which have great virtue against diverse kinds of poisons, and
happily are therein of more efficacy, then those in Mithridatium, left out by
Andromachus in his Theriacle. Whereby it may be coniectured, that Andromachus
making choice of the simples, selected such as were of greatest force to remedy
poisons, and omitted the weaker, adding in their place, some other of more
strength: so it is probable, yt Theriacle so compiled, is of greater might in
all kind of poisons. But Galen in his works declares, that experience in his
time did show the contrary, and reason confirms the same. For let the
simples in Theriacle be in number more, and in qualytie of greater efficacy, yet
it must be remembered, that it is certain, that when in compositions some one
simple is set as the base and ground of that medicine, that that simple does
draw the force and strength of all ye rest to his property and action, and so
every such compound is specially good in that one thing for which it was
devised. Now when Andromachus did make the flesh of vipers as the base and
ground of his Theriacle, it follows that the same does draw to it the
qualities and virtues of all the simples in Theriacle: so it does come to
pass, that Theriacle is far better the^ Mithridatium, against the bytinge of
vipers and such venomous beasts. And for that all other simples in it, are
carried by the flesh of the vipers, to exercise their force strongly therein,
they have the less power to remedy other poisons. When no such thing was
intended in the composition of Mithridatium, it is agreeable to reason that the
simples in it every one retayneth his own power and property, and so one such
quality or form does resulte by the myxture, of great strength against all
poisons. Moreover it is certain that in the composition of Mithridatium, are
fewer simples in number then are in the confection of Theriacle, then it
follows that when like quantity of both is taken, as for example, j, surely a
greater portion of every one simple is taken in Mithridatium, and lesser in
Theriacle, the lesser quantity must needs have lesser strength in remedyinge
other poisons, save that, to the which the base or ground does call them. So
it remains fyrme that Galen writes, as observed in his time, that Theriacle
is in deed better then Mithridatium in bytinge of vypers and like beasts, and
that Mithridatium exceadeth the other in remedying all other poisons taken into
the body and inward diseases. Wherefore in this our country where no such
peril and danger is of vipers, Mithridatium by good reason ought to be reputed
of greater estunation then Theriacle.

Of the composition of Mithridatium.
IT shall not be amiss in this place, to declare the composition of this
medicine. And it is to be noted, that where all writers do greatly commend
it, yet certain it is, that they do not in one sort describe the making of
the same. But almost every authore has a several description, differinge in
the number of the simples, and also in ye proportions and quantities. In time
past ye Apothecaries in making of Mithridatium, followed most the description of
Nicolaus Praepositus, of Auicenna, and of Nicolaus Mirepsicus, some of Aetius,
some of Paulus. The former descriptions contayninge above one hundred simples,
were long and laborious, and required many supplies, for simples unknown.
Wherefore in these our later days, in which learned men have examined every
thing perfitly, the most part have commended one of ye three compositions
expressed by Galen in 2. de Antid. of the which, two were taken (as Galen
writes) out of the books of Andromachus. The first found without name is
attributed to Andromachus, as compounded by him, of others supposed the very
same, which was found in the closets of king Mithridates, and after
transcribed in the works of Andromachus. The second description is also
recyted out of Andromachus books, under the names of Antipater and
Cleophantes. The third is referred to Damocrates: It does not appear by any
thing written by Galen, which of these three compositions is best to be
followed. And so of ye learned men of our time, some has used the one, and some
the other. Many do best like of the first description attributed to
Andromachus, both for that Andromachus by the opinion of Galen and of all other
ancient writers, was adjudged very skillful in co^pounding of medicines, and
therein did far excel all physicians of his time, and also because it may
be justly gathered, that that description is the very same, which Mithridates
used. For in ye Andromachus was physician to Nero the Emperor of Rome, it
appears that he obtained to see and to consider, of all the books which
found in Mithridates closet, were translated into latin by Lineus the
grammarian, and brought to Rome. And it is not agreeable to reason, that
Andromachus studying to make a more perfect medicine then that which came under
the name of Mithridatium, would also invent an other under the same name. But
it is very probable that Andromachus with diligence perusinge the recept of
Mithridatium, used of Mithridates, would leave it in such form as Mithridates
compou^ded it, and devise an other by the same, which he meant to make more
perfect. Andromachus therefore not alteringe the description of Mithridatium,
but leaving it in the same form as it was found, confected an other, which he
called Theriaca. And where we do read in ye 2. de Antid. of Galen, an other
recept set down under the name of Theriaca Mithridatis, with assertion that
the king used the same: yet it seems not to be yt Mithridatium which was
found in the closet of that king. For all writers do confess, that
Andromachus long after added to that recept of Mithridates, the flesh of
vipers: so that Mithridatium compounded by Mithridates had not in it the flesh
of vipers, and that Theriacle which Galen in that place calls Theriaca
Mithridatis, does receive the flesh of vipers, so it follows that it is not
the Mithridatium used of Mithridates. And he that will with diligence peruse
that recept mentioned of Galen, by the name of Theriaca Mithridatis, shall
find it in ye simples not much differing from Theriaca Andromachi, and many
things repeated twyse in diverse clauses does argue an imperfection: that Galen
may be thought in yt place to speak after ye common opinion, when he
affirms it to be the same which Mithridates used, being in deed far
different from that medicine. Wherefore we may reasonably conclude, that the
first recept transcribed by Galen in 2. de Antid. out of Andromachus works, is
in truth the self same that Mithridates used, and in mine opinion, in that
respect the better to be liked, and the rather to be followed. For what better
assurance can we have of the true and perfect confection of this medicine, then
that which was delivered by Mithridates? and what description can more assure
us of the effects of this medicine, then yt composition which Mithridates
followed, who first gave so notable proof of the medicine, and thereby the
first credit to the same? So that if by discourse of reason it may be proved,
that an other description is more artificial and more agreeable to the rules of
confection of medicines: yet in mine opinion this description, being the same
that Mithridates used, set down happily by the king, more according to
experience then art, is rather to be followed then any other, thought more
cunningly addressed. Nevertheless it is not to be deemed that king
Mithridates was altogether unskillful, when many volumes concerning phisike
were found in his closet, and translated into latin, brought to Rome. And it
appears that he taking delight in medicinal matters, had about him diverse
physicians, who might artificially dispense the simples in Mithridatium. And
Galen in the said book de Antid. commends the description of Mithridatium
attributed to Andromachus: whereby it appears, that this description of
Mithridatium is not addressed altogether without art. For which cause, ye
learned of our time, have great reason to prefer that description of
Mithridatium before others. Albeit some do more esteem the composition of
Damocrates, as with more art and more cunning dispensed. Notwithstanding
because it is very likely yt the precept attributed to Andromachus, as found in
his books, is the self same that Mithridates used, and has of many, in this
our country, of late years been followed: I thought best in this place to
express ye same, as I do find it in Galen, in 2. de Antid. and is in many
antidotary books allowed, which is as follows.

Rec. glicirrizae vij. ob. iiij. Spicae nardi vij. ob. iij. Croci, cinnamomi,
Zinziberis. ana. vij. ob. ij. Galbani. vij. Castorei, costi, ana. vj. ob. ij.
Scordij, iunci odorati, Opoponacis, Terebinthinae. Seminis dauci. vj. ob. iij.
Opobalsami, ana. vj. ob. iiij. Thlaspios. Thuris, myrrhae, ana. vj. Succi
hyppocistidis. Polij, Se^elios, ana. v. ob. ij. Cypheos, Casiae. Stiracis v ob.
iiij. Petroselini iiij. ob. iij. Opij. iiij. ob. ij. Nardi gallicae, anae. i^^.
Seminis feniculi, Nardi indicae, Gentianae, Mei athamantici, Rosarum siccarum,
Cardamomi, Folij. Anisi,. iij Acori, Hiperici, ana ij Gummi Acaciae, Phu
pontici. Scinci, ij. ob. ij Vini choi, and mellis Attici desoumati, ana q. s.

BEcause many learned men of this age do best allow the description of
Mithridatium, delivered by Damocrates, as more artificially done, in which the
rules of compounding of medicines are more exactly followed, and is in truth
easier to be made of the Apothecaries, better digested in orders, not having so
small divisions in the proportions, as this attributed to Andromachus, and so
may better be made of the Apothecary in what quantity shall seem good to him:
therefore I do think it not amiss in this place to recite that description
also of Mithridatium of Damocrates, as the same is expressed in the second
book of Galen de Antidot. that such as shall think better to follow the same,
may by this pamphlet know the ingredience, which is this.

Rec. Mirrhae, croci, ana.. x Agarici, Zinziberis, Cinnamomi, thuris, Spicae,
Nardi, Thlaspios, Seselis, stechados, ana.. viij Opobalsami, costi, Iunci
odorati, styracis, Galbani, terebinthinae, Piperis longi, castorei, Sucoi
hypocistidis, Opoponacis, Folij malabathri rece^tis, Cassiae ligneae, ana.. vij
Polij, scordij, Seminis dauci, bdellij, Piperis albi, cypheos, Carpobalsami,
Nardi celticae, Gu^mi, ana.. i^ boni ponderis. Petroselini, Opij, Cardamomi,
gentianae, Seminis feniculi, dicta^ni, Foliorum rosarum, Anisi, asari, acori,
ana.. iij Phu, sagapeni, Succi glicirrizae, Mei Athamantici, ana.. ij ^
Acaciae, Ventris scinci, Sem. hiperici, Vini and mellis q. s.

PLiny in his 22. makes mention of a kind of Mithridatium made of two dry
Walnuts, two Figs, xx. leaves of Rhue, one grain of falte: Aetius and other
writers die recite the same. And they greatly commend it against poison, and
other pestilentiall diseases.

Of the quality and temperament of Mithridatium.
IT is of all men of our age confessed, and taken for a truth, that medicines
compounded have their virtues, and do their effects according to the nature
of the simples whereof they are compounded. So it must needs follow, that
Mithridatium compounded of many simples, has diverse and sundry properties, and
those agreeable to the ingredience. And whereas in Mithridatium are simples
differing in quality, some having power to heat, some other to cool, yet the
greatest number are in quality whot and dry. And albeit these being contrary,
and repugnant, do make alteration the one with the other: notwithstanding it
must needs follow, that those reactions not being infinite, at the last one
form and quality must result in the compound, agreeable to the natures of those
simples, which do bear and carry dominion. Now whereas in Mithri^atium ye most
simples have quality to heat and dry: it follows that Mithridatium has a
whot and dryinge power. And as compounds must have a time of fermentation, and
rypening (for the reactions of the simples are not perfited in a moment) So the
quality or form which does arise by the workinge of one simple with an other,
has not his perfection presently after ye mixture, but a certain space of
time must be given before we can justly expect the true action of the medicine
compounded, as proceeding from the form of the medicine, which does resulte by
fermentation of the working of the simples in ye compound. So that before ye
due time, we may not look for the virtues aunswerable to the composition, but
that some one simple above the rest may show his quality, that the compound
medicine may do an effect aunswerable to that simple, and not as proceeding
from the whole composition. In which respect, Galen writes that Theriacle
newly made, does greatly provoke sleep, by reason that Opium (that is the
joyce of Poppy prepared) myngled in it, being of greater force then other
simples, before fermentation does exercise his quality more then the rest: and
after that his quality is by fermentation with other simples broken, he can not
so strongly do his operation. So Theriacle after the just time of fermentation
does not so mightily provoke sleep, as new Theriacle does. The same is
observed in Mithridatium, and all other compounds, that immediately after
myxture, the qualities of the simples are strongest, and show their powers
best. But certain it is, that after due time of working, when the compound is
fully ripe, no one simple does work in it according to his own nature, but by
the reactions one common nature does result, which cannot be attributed to any
one or more simples, but may be truly said a common nature arysinge out of all
the ingredience, and from that form the actions of the compound do proceed.
Which form is to us not certainly known, ye effects are best learned by
experience. Wherefore it is very wisely written of Ioannes de sancto Amando in
his exposition upon the antitodary of Nicolaus, that it is better always to use
a medicine compound exercised, then one lately inverted whereof we have no
experience. For although we may by discourse of reason gather that ye compound,
as Mithridatium, is whot, and dry, because ye simples whereof it is made, are
the most part whot and dry, and then experience does confirm this conjecture:
yet other qualities of Mithridatium and of other compounds are not so easily
known by any discourse or method, but chiefly learned by experience. For the
common form from whence many secret virtues do proceed, is not known by any
learning or method. So it must needs follow, that the actions of ye same
form are not learned by method or doctrine, but chiefly by experience. In
which respect also, we have reason to retain the description delivered by
Mithridates, before any other, for yt that noble king gave better proof in
himself of the virtues of the medicine, then any other has of it by any other
composition.

That Mithridatium is not so whote as Theriacle, compounded after Andromachus
description, which is in these days most followed: and that it may more safely
be used.
Some learned men of our time, by reason go about to discourse, and prove, yt
Theriacle is not in quantity so whot as Mithridatium, and in that respect do
infer, that it may more safely be used. Which they do gather, for that in
Theriacle a greater quantity of Opium (that is the joyce of Poppy prepared) is,
then in Mithridatium, whose cooling power does much abate the heating qualities
of other medicines. This argument in these two medicines newly made, before
ferme^tation is perfect, may take place. For then in deed every simple
retayning his own virtue, Opium may remitte the whot qualities of the rest: at
what time neither of these medicines is generally to be used, but for some
special point, as Galen to provoke sleep, does counsel new Theriacle. But
after fermentation is perfited, all the simples one altering the other, every
one has qualities so broken, that not one retayneth his own nature: then
surely the common form resulting, does follow the simples which do bear
dominion, and they in both these medicines are whot and dry, and ye whot and
dry simples in Theriacle are more in number, and of greater force, then in
Mithridalium: as may appear to him that will compare both confections. Whereby
it follows that the common quality arysinge in Theriacle, does heat more
then that in Mithridatium. Neither the increase of Opium does in proportion
answer the strength of heating in it: neither has it any such force so
greatly to contemper the simples, as these men do imagine. For although Opium
has special property above other medicines to induce sleep, yet his cooling
quality (of many writers) is not accounted so great, for it has so strong
bitterness: that many do suppose that it has a myxt nature, consisting of many
whot parts: if it be true that Galen writes in his 5. book of simples, that
all bitter things are whot, and being certain yt Opium does stupefy, and
strongly cause sleep, it is of some inferred yt that power does rather
proceed of a property of substance, then altogether depend of his cooling
quality. Wherefore it is not without reason affyrmed by learned men writing
hereof, that Mithridatium does not so strongly heat as Theriacle: and
experience does also confirm the same. For who so uses these medicines,
doubtless he shall find that Theriacle rightly compounded after Andromachus
description (which is in all this treatise to be understood, and is in these
days of the Apothecaries most commonly made, and so of the wyser sort in most
vulgar use) does heat more then Mithridatium, which is confessed of the
writers, commenting upon the antidotary of Nicolaus, and in this our age of
many learned men affyrmed. For which cause, many in these days without danger
do use Mithridatium when need requires. In so^mer time, and whot seasons,
very few and seldom Theriacle. And Galen does expressly forbid to gieue
Theriacle to children. More safe therefore is the use of Mithridatium then of
Theriacle, not only in respect of the heating quality, which seems less,
and more gentle in Mithridatium: but also in respect that a greater quantity of
Opiu^ is in Theriacle. For admit that Opium by fermentation sustayneth great
alteration, notwithstanding ye common form of Theriacle takes some infection
of Opium, yt some effect declining to his nature, does also proceed, and the
more, if that stupefying and dormitory power in Opium, does depend rather of
property of substance, the^ of manifest cooling quality, as some do argue. For
the properties of substance in medicines, have not like alteration by
fermentation, as the manifest qualities have by reaction: we may therefore
fear the common and often use of Theriacle for ye quantity of Opium in it. For
like reason, often use of Theriacle may be suspected, because of the flesh of
vipers added to it, as the base and ground of the medicine. For notwithstanding
ye great care of the place, of the time, of the kind observed in taking and
choosing of the viper, the diligence in preparing, the care of myxture with
other things, for the better correction of the malignity of ye beast, which
hapely might remain in the flesh: yet a man may doubt of some error
committed* in so dangerous a case. And though all things therein be ryghtely
done, yet some little quality of the nature of ye beast will remain, that a
man may suspect often to use the medicine. And where king Mithridates was
expert in physical matters, it is not to be adjudged but that he did as well
know the nature of the flesh of vipers, as he knew the venime of the beast:
so it is very likely that he purposing to compounde a medycine to be often
taken for his safty against poison, did of purpose make it without the flesh
of vipers, knowing that if he should have added that, he might not with like
safty have daily used ye same. And what learned men do so often in these days
counsel Theriacle, as do Mithridatium? and we do in this our time with less
danger and more security, for the measels, the small pockes, the worms, and
for internal diseases in children, give Mithridatium* then Theriacle. We may
therefore in mine opinion justly conclude, that Mithridatium is a medicine more
generally to be used, and may oftener and with more safty be geauen then
Theriacle.

Of the age and keeping of Mithridatium.
Wwhere we have sufficiently declared that compounde medicines must have a time
of fermentatio^ before they be brought to use: this place requires that we do
declare the time, when Mithridatium is sufficiently fermented and come to his
perfection. Galen in his books de Theriaca does write exactly of the time of
fermentation of Theriacle, affirming that it is thoroughly concocted in xii
years, not denying but yt it has concoction in shorter time, as in 5. and in
7. years, so that we are to judge that Theriacle is not sufficiently ripe to
be used before five years, and in 7 years is better digested, and in xij
years has his full fermentation, and perfect concoctio^. Yet Aetius and
Paulus Aegineta do measure the concoction of Theriacle in shorter time. For
Aetius says that Theriacle is fermented in xij months, and that it may be
used after one month in some cases, and so affirms that it endures to
thirty years. Where Paulus appoints ye age of Theriacle to be twenty years,
therein he does not greatly differ from Aetius: for he making the term of
Theriacle to be 30 years, does also say that then it is good in light
diseases. So that by Aetius, Theriacle may be used after xij months, and
continues in good perfection to 20. years, and after declineth, that at 30.
years it is aged, yet may it be used in deseases which are not very great. Our
later writers do generally better allow of Aetius and Paulus opinion for the
age of Theriacle, then of Galens: and some suppose an error or fault in yt
place in Galen: and so they do affirm yt Theriacle is fully concocted in the
space of xij months, and then may be sold of the Apothecary: and that the
same being well kept, will continue in good strength 20. years, and after
does decline and wax weaker, and yet may be used when it is 30. years old,
but it is then as an old man decayed, and weak of strength.

Of Mithridatium the former writers have set down no time of concoction,
leaving to a wise man to determyne of yt, which is written accordingly of
Theriacle. For because these two medicines are confected of many simples, not
greatly differring, they have many things common: so as yt which is of ye one
affirmed, may be applied to the other. Notwithstanding as in the number and
nature of ye simples, they do not in all points agree: so no doubt in ye age
of these medicines some difference is to be allotted: yet such, as a man
exercised in these matters, may easily supplye. For in that Theriacle has in
it the flesh of vipers, and a greater portion of Opium, then is in
Mithridatium, it is certain that Theriacle requires a longer time to his
concoction: for the flesh of vipers must have perfect fermentation with the
simples for his correction. In like sort Opium does ask a long time of
fermentation, and for yt cause Galen. 12. de Method. Medend. says, yt
Philonium is not to be used in a year after it is compounded, and that the
use of it after ij. iij. or iiij. years, is more without danger. Whereby he
gives us to understand, that medicines which do receive Opium, require long
time of fermentation: so that Theriacle receiving a greater portion of Opium
then Mithridatium, ought to have a larger space to be concocted, then it. Now
if Theriacle has his perfection in one year, surely Mithridatium is thoroughly
fermented in six months, and may be kept in good strength, not only as some
have written to three, or fours years, but to x or xij years: and except we
shall to such time proroge his old age, there will be no proportion in ye
times. For if Theriacle being cocted in one year, does last to 20. years
before it does wax old, suerly by the like proportion, Mithridatium not well
fermented under six months, may justly be said to continue in good efficacy
to 10. or 12. years. And as Theriacle after 20. years waxes old and feeble:
so Mithridatium after 10. or 12. years does decline, that being 20. years
old, is then decayed and of little force. As we may probably determine these
times, so there can be no certainty set to lead us to the time. For if the
simples be not in good perfection, or the same orderly and well according to
art compou^ded, or otherwise the medicine not well kept: then it will sooner
wax old, and lose his strength. But as Galen writes, to these great medicines,
great care must be had of the choice of ye simples, that they may be had in ye
readiest perfection. And like diligence must be gieuen, that the confectioner
may in all points do his duty, not in making only, but also in keeping ye
medicine. And therefore princes are greatly to be commended, which do by
their authority provide, that these medicines might be well ordered. And for
that many do in these days procure Mithridatium, to have it in their houses
ready to use, it is good to know yt it is best kept in vessels of glass, of
silver, and of gold, and that it is not so good to keep ye same in Tin
vessels, for that they are often corrupted with led, and gather a ceruse
matter, as Galen writes in his first book de Antid. I wish therefore that the
marchaunts may hereof be admonished, which do commonly bring Theriacle from
Venice, in vessels of led, whereby no small danger may grow in so noble a
medicine, and so greatly esteemed. So we must not fill the vessel to the
top, as we say brime full, but leave some reasonable space, for the medicine
to work, to exhale, and breath: and for that cause, Galen counsayleth to open
the vessel somtymes.

How to know good Mithridatium.
We do read in ye book of Galen de Theriaca ad Pisonem, and in his books de
Antidot. how diligently he labored to gieue certain notes and rules, how a man
might know the goodness of Theriacle, and when the same was perfect: and so did
in those his works set down both rules and proofs thereof. So careful in
old time writers were, that we might be assured of the goodness of these noble
medicines, serving in so great affectes, and in such common use. But such is y^
malice of many which seek gain, that of the greater price a thing is, the
more sophistication they use in it: yt if means were not declared, to discern
the good from the bad, the sophisticated from ye true: no man might assure
himself of the certainty of any thing in estimation. It is therefore very
necessary, to show how men may know when Mithridatium is good and perfect, and
when the same is naught and corrupted. And for y^ Galen in his foresaid books,
has labored to declare this in Theriacle, we will apply the same to ye
examination of Mithridatium. For in yt these medicines have a great affinity,
they do in most things so concur, that ye same which is said of ye one, may
be applied to ye other. First therefore in consistence of substance, if
Mithridatium be well and artificially compounded, it ought to have an equality
of substance, not dry nor over liquide, and moist, not to arise in clots and
lumpes, but it must be in substance coherent, equal, and smooth. In smell it
must rese^ble the simples whereof it is made, and yet not to offer to the nose,
the smell of any one simple above the rest, but to yield a common odoure
arising by fermentation of all the simples, not peculier to any one, nor
ungrateful, but answerable to the ingredience, resembling no rottennes, nor
mustines.

In like sort, the taste must not express any one simple, but be as a common
sapore, resulting of all the simples: so that if in tasting of Mithridatium you
may manifestly discern or discry any one simple in it, surely that
Mithridatium is not well confected. Therefore it may not have in it any excess
of ungrateful bitterness, which does sometimes happen, when the confectioner
does either take honey ouerold, or boil ye same overmuch. So it may not show to
the taste any sowrenes, which happens if the wine used be not well chosen, or
not well handled in the compounding.

It seems that Andromachus in his Theriacle had a great care of the color
of it, and for that cause only (as some do write) did add vitreoll prepared,
to yield to it an exact blackness. But Mithridates attending rather the
goodness, then by color to please ye eye, had no such care of the color, and
so is thought to put nothing into Mithridatium to gieue it any fresher color
then the simples would yield. Notwithstanding Mithridatium truly made, has
his color convenient arising of the simples, which ought to be a little
rednes declining to yealownesse, which color, after due fermentation, does
appear with some freshenes, and by time in keeping, the same does decline to
an obscure darkness. Although at ye first it may be thought hard to judge of
Mithridatium by these signs, yet after a man is exercised in often vewing,
tasting, and smelling of Mithridatium, his sauoure, color, and taste will be
so familiar, that a man shall quickly discern the true from the mingled, the
sophisticated from the right compou^ded. A man therefore that will judge herein,
must often see, taste, and smell to Mithridatium, until his senses be thoroughly
acquainted with the qualities of the medicine, and then he shall not be
easily deceived.

For better certainty of the perfection and goodness of Theriacle, Galen does
mention of certain experiments to be made for trial thereof: as to gieue the
same to such as have been either hurt externally by some venomous beast, or
have taken inwardly some poison. Whereof princes have made trial in condemned
persons, casting the^ to vipers, or gieuing unto them some strong poison, and
after causing them to take of Theriacle the quantity of a nutte: and experience
declared, that such as took Theriacle escaped the venime of the poison, and
they which took it not, dyed. Which proof experienced in Theriacle, may also
be applied to the trial of Mithridatium, and in that by all ancient writers
Mithridatium is reputed of greater force then Theriacle, in curing all poisons
inwardly taken: It follows, that if it be good and truly made, it must remedy
such as have taken poison into the body. And because common persons have not
like opportunity to make this experiment in men condemned, as princes have:
therefore we may in other beasts (as in dogs, in cokes and hens, being
domestical creatures) experience the same, giving to these beasts some poison,
and after Mithridatium: and if the beast do take no harm by the poison, we
may be assured of the goodness of the medicine. And ye like is to be expected,
if you gieue the remedy before the poison be taken. For the medicine does not
only defend the body from the venime of the poison, after it is taken: but
also preserve, if it be first used: as we read of king Mithridates. In like
manner Aetius bids us to gieue to a dove, to a hen, or to a dog, the
quantity of two scruples of Opium, and straight after to minister to the same,
Mithridatium, dissolved in some liquore, and if it be good and pure, the beast
shall sustain no harm by the Opium.

Galen delivers as a certain sign of the perfect goodness of Theriacle, to
gieue it to one that has taken a purgative medicine. For (says he) if it be
perfect good, the medicine will not purge at all: if after the taking of
Theriacle, ye medicine does his operation, and purge nevertheless: surely then
yt Theriacle is imperfect, and not good. We do not read this sign applied to
Mithridatium: yet I see no cause but yt we may proceed in like manner to try ye
goodness of it. For it is certain yt no one simple is in ye composition of
Theriacle (which may be said to stay ye working of ye purgative medicine) which
is not in Mitrhridatiu^. For where Theriacle does abou^d with ye flesh of
vipers, put as the base of the medicine, no writer has attributed to yt
parcel any such property. The like may be said, if you discourse through all
the simples added to this confection of Theriacle, and not in Mithridatium.
Therefore it seems most agreeable to reason, that the property to stay the
working of a purgation, does proceed from the common form of Theriacle: and
so we may with like reason expect the same effect in Mithridatidatium, and
rather in Mithridatium, because all writers do confess that it is of greater
force for inward poisons, and inward affects, then Theriacle. Therefore I may
conclude, that Mithridatium gieuen after a purgative medicine, will better stay
or diminish ye working thereof, then Theriacle: and our experience in common
practice, does confirm the same. For in this our age, who does after purgative
medicines (to bridle their ouerworking) so often gieue Theriacle, as
Mithridatium? Wherefore no doubt we may make trial of ye perfection and goodness
of Mithridatium, in like sort as Galen writes of Theriacle, that is to say,
to minister to one a purgative medicine, and after to gieue to the same man a
reasonable quantity of Mithridatium: and if the medicine does not work
according to his nature, or that his operation be less the^ it ought to be,
surely that Mithridatium is very perfect and good. Otherwise, if ye medicine
does proceed in his action to purge, and the same appears not diminished by
the taking of Mithridatium, then we may greatly doubt of the goodness of the
Mithridatium.

How we may make good Mithridatium, in these days.
I am not ignorant that diverse later writers do constantly affirm that in this
our time we cannot make either good Theriacle or good Mithridatium, for that
they say we do lack many simples going into their compositions, and must use
others to supply, and so may justly doubt whether ye supplies do in all points
answer the true simples, and they which we have are brought from far
cou^tryes, long iournies, some by la^d, some by sea, especially, to us in
England, whereby they may be thought greatly weakened, and to loose much of
their strength and virtues, before we have them. So they conclude, that we
cannot by any diligent means, make these medicines in that perfection as the
ancient writers did, and so we may not so exactly look for the effects of
these medicines promised by the old writers. Whereto it may be said, that in
part this allegation is true, and in deed a few years past, when this fault
was found, it was more truer then now it is. For in truth when good learning
began to spring after barbarism, the^ in deed great was ye want of true
simples, not in these two medicines only, but in many other more. But now in
this our time all things are called to a better examination, and it is certain
that few simples are now sacking, namely to ye making of Mithridatium: and it
is also evident yt the care of physicians and of ye Apothecaries (I mean of ye
better sort) is so honest and so great, yt they do not only diligently procure
from ye places (where the simples which go to the compositions of these
medicines do grow) the very true: but also provide that the same may in those
countries be gathered out of convenient places, in due times and seasons. And
ye help of so many and great nauigations into foreign dominions (more in these
our days used, then of long time before us) do gieue so good opportunity to
have true and good simples, yt to say truly what I do think of this our age, I
do verily believe that we have as true and as good simples, as Galen had in
his time: especially such as are requisite to the making of Mithridatium. For
we do read what a do Galen made to have pure and good Cinnamum, and made it
an Emperoures work to procure the same, and in lack of Cinnamum did sometimes
substitute double quantity of Casia. Whosoever will with diligence examine the
sackes of Canella, brought from the new found countries in great plenty in
these days, may easily find the perfect kinds of Cinnamum, agreeable to the
description of ye old writers: and also the true Casia. We may also understand,
how in old time things were sophisticated by the momuments of old writers. And
who does not now perceive and acknowledge many errors in Di^scorides books, in
delivering the descriptions of simples, not so well known in his time, as now
by these nauigatio^s made manifest? Many things written by the ancient
authors, by hearesay, are now to the eye made evident and known. Wherefore it
is true yt now in this age things are so exactly examined, and so diligently
sought for, and so painfully cared for: that in truth I do suppose we may make
in this time Mithridatium, in very good perfection: and the simples wanting,
are few in number: y^ substitutes for the same, by learned men so well
considered of, and so aptly appointed: that we need not so greatly to doubt
thereof, but may justly expect the effects attributed to the medicine, if not in
so large manner as the ancient writers have delivered, yet in such reasonable
sort, yt we may esteem of the medicine, as of a precious jewel, as of a thing
good against some drie-poisons, and diverse internal and pestilentiall diseases.

Mithridatium made in England is rather to be chosen, then that which is
brought from Venice and other countries beyond the Sea.
SOme have been of opinion, that Theriacle and Mithridatium may better be made
in other countries, (as namely at Venice, and Constantinople) then in England:
affirming that more and better simples are growing there, which we do lack:
and that such simples which are found neither in these countries, nor in
England, but are procured from ye east and west Indians, do sooner and in
better perfection come to those places, then to us. Surely if things be rightly
weighed, this allegation is not true. For the parts of Italy, and the
territories about Constantinople, have very few or no simples growing in their
soyles, which do not spring in England, required to the composition of
Mithridatium, and many are found in England in better perfection the^ there.
As namely, who does not grant the best saffron to be in England, and all
trauelers which come into England, do confess that our soil does produce very
good plants (as namely Scordium) in better kind than other countries: and
some strangers do send into England often for some of our simples, which do go
into the composition of Mithridatium. It is also well known, that strange
herbs transplanted hither, and some of seeds sown, do very kindly spring
in England, which is also confessed of some later writers in their Herballes.
And where few simples requisite to make Mithridatium are wanting (as not
growing in England) it seems most true, that they which do grow here, are
most kindly for us (for native things are best aggreable to our constitutions.)
So yt whereas the most simples in number required to the composition of
Mithridatium, are found naturally to spring in England: I see no cause why we
should not best allow of it made here: neither ought ye paucitie which we do
lack, to draw us better to esteem of a forrayne medicine made of all foreign
things. And as I dare affirm that in this country we do lack as few simples
which go to the making of Mithridatium, as any of the forenamed places: so I
may justly pronounce, that such which are wanting to them, and to us also, may
and are as easily, and in as short time transported to us, as to them. For in
these days, the spices and other things brought from ye Indians by navigations
to Lishburn, and thence to other countries of Europe, may as soon be
transported to us as to Venice. Where in times past such merchandise were
carried from the east Indians to Alexandria by land upon Camels, that trade is
now decayed, and for ye most part such drugges are imported by sea, and ye
ships do commonly light in some part of Portingal: so that it is easy to see
that our Apothecaries in England, may with as good conueniency procure the^
from those places, and in as good perfection, as the marchau^ts of Venice or of
Constantinople. Nevertheless if any thing lacking with us, do come to Venice:
it is soon transported thence to Antuerp (as in the space of 24. days) and so
to us. Wherefore I do not conceive, why any man should think yt our
Apothecaries in England, cannot make Mithridatiu^ in as good perfection as
other countries do: but rather we ought to adiudge ye contrary, that it made
here, is in as good perfection, and more agreeable to our natures and
constitutions, then yt which is co^pounded in other countries, as altogether
made of strange simples, which have no affinity with our bodies. And if we do
with judgment consider how uncertain we are of the true confection, when it
is done in places so far from us: it may make us greatly to fear, least they
which do co^pound ye medicine, having more care to gain, then truly to
dispense ye same, will neither make choice of the best simples, neither use
diligence in the mixture. And if the princes of the countries with careful
laws provide, that the confectioners shall do their duties truly, in
compou^ding and observing the things needeful to the well handling of so noble
a medicine: who can assure himself of the truth of the merchant* in
transporting ye same? whose profession is by his marchaundize to gain, and so
no doubt will use means every way to increase his profit, that we may justly
suspect, that they do very seldom bring into England from Venice or
Constantinople, any Theriacle or Mithridatium unmingled: and the better skill
they have in their trade, with more art they can sophisticate their wares, to
deceive the judgment of the buyer, that I greatly do doubt yt little or none
at all of these medicines are brought true and sincere unmixed: as has been
tried when strangers in England have purposly examined both Theriacle and
Mithridatium compounded in London, with other brought from the said countries,
and have gieuen praise to that made in London: as master Hughe Morgane her
Majesty's Apothecary can witness, whose confections have been better commended
by strangers, then any of other places. Farther whereas of Mithridatium there
are diverse descriptio^s, not all of like goodness (as I have before declared)
how can we tell what compositions the confectioner followed? hereof ye
merchant not having care, can not inform us: so we remain uncertain of the
true knowledge of the medicine, not having knowledge of the simples used in that
we buy: and as we know not assuredly what kind of Mithridatium we do buy:
so we remain uncertain of the medicine. And where we have declared yt
Theriacle and Mithridatium have their times of fermentation, of their duraunce,
and that after a certain age they decline, wax old, and feeble: we cannot
know the time of that which is foreign made: so we have uncertain medicine,
and shall be uncertain how long we may keep the same. All which circumstances
may be easly known, in that which is made in England. Galen in his books does
not allow of Theriacle kept in Tin vessels, affirming that they are
corrupted with led, the cer^se whereof does corrupt ye medicine. What shall
we then say to our merchants, which do bring Mithridatium and Theriacle from
other countries in vessels of led? do not these medicines take of ye vessels
great corruption, and notwithstanding are sold to the great annoyance of the
Queens subjects? Wherefore if we do truly weigh in the balance of reason,
that which I have here written) and yet much more may in this matter be said)
surely we shall not only confess that none of these medicines, specially
Mithridatium, made in foreign places, are, or ought to be so greatly esteemed,
as those which are made at home in England. And we may truly confess that we
are lustly punished in expending our money upon foreign things, when we have
and may have better at home. And it is very lamentable to consider, yt
strangers do daily send into England a false and naughty kind of
Mithridatium, and Threacle, in great barrelles, more then a thousand weight in
a year, and utter ye same at a low price, for iij. d. or iiij. d. a pound, to
ye great hurt of Her Majesty's subjects, and no small gain to strangers
purses. Wherefore to conclude, I do counsel all English men rather to buy
Mithridatium truly made in England, then that which is brought from other
cou^tryes. And here it is to be wished, that our most gracious Sovereign
thereof informed, may by Her magistrates do, as in old time Emperoures of
Rome did, that is, by her edict take order, that our Apothecaries may with care
and diligence select the simples which do go to the making of this medicine,
that the true may be gotten in their best perfections, and the same truly
chosen may be rightly dispensed, and in all points according to art well
ordered, the time of fermentation duly observed, the manner of keeping, in good
sort performed: and so all things rightly administered by her Majesty's
careful ordinances, I do not doubt, but yt we shall in this our country
have both Mithridatium and Theriacle in good perfection, that we may find the
great effects and noble virtues of both, so largely delivered by the ancient
writers in their monuments.

Of the virtues and propertyes of Mithridatium.
GALEN in his books de Antidot. does not particulerly express the properties
of this medicine: but generally enunceth, that it does good against all
poisons, and is strong to remedy many inward diseases. It does appear by
so^dry places in Galen, that Mithridatium has all the virtues which Theriacle
has, and is inferior to it only in the curing of the biting of vipers, and
such other venomous beasts: in other things it does excel Theriacle. Then
where Galen at large displayeth ye faculties and virtues of Theriacle in his
books De Theriaca ad Pisonem, and ad Pamphilianu^, he needed not particularly
to set down ye properties of Mithridatium. For it does suffice for us to look
into ye qualities and powers of Theriacle to learn the faculties of
Mithridatiu^. But ye latter writers in all their antidatories do express ye
same at large. In which books we do read thus.

Mithridatium is next in qualitye and virtue to Theriacle, and does little
differ from it, save that Theriacle is in temperament hoatter, and stronger
against ye biting of serpents. Concerning other properties of Mithridatium
confuesly numbered in these books, it will not be amysse to reduce them to a
method and order: So we may affirm that the effects and virtues of
Mithridatium do consist in two special points. First to preserve from
infirmities, then to cure diseases. For as Galen writes, this medicine does
not only cure affects which are engendered, and help to remedy poison taken:
but used before, does so defend, yt poison gieuen after shall do no harm, as
happened to king Mithridates, when he would have poisoned himself, Who so
uses Mithridatium in health, shall in such sort make his body strong, yt
neither poiso^, nor other disease shall easily harm him. And as man consists
of body and soul, so Mithridatiu^ does in both exercise his virtues. His
properties are such, that it quickens the senses, clears the mind, and
sharpeneth the wit. Which actiones it perfourmeth by clensing the
instruments which do serve to these fu^ctions, from gross and thick vapors.
And where oftentimes many fumes do ascend, by the which the animal spirits are
obscured, the use of Mithridatium does dissipate, extenuate, and consume the
same: whereby these animal facultyes and powers are cleared, and so a perfect
mind is preserved in a whole body. For Mithridatium makes strong all parts
which do serve for nutrition, increases natural heat, opens obstructions,
expels superfluity, whereby the natural faculties of the body do perfectly
perform their functions, the stomach in good order desires and digesteth
alimentes, the liver makes good and perfect blood, and each part puts from
him his excrementes in convenient order and time. So the heart receiving pure
blood, makes good spirits fit for his actions, which he orderly sends to the
animal parts, and to other members of ye body. Whereby all the principal
parts being in their perfections, do every way well dispense through the
body, that it remains in good order to perform all actions. And whereas man
is subject to many casualties, Mithridatium used as is said, so defends the
body, that no poison shall easily harm it. Whereof Mithridates gave proof,
w^^ by long use of this medicine. so altered the constitution of his body,
that no poison could annoye it.

In pestilentiall seasons, it preserves such as do use it: where of we have
examples, not only in ancient writers, but also in our daily experience.

Now concerning ye part curatiue, though the same may be gathered by that
which is already written in preservation: yet it is better for order sake to
repeat one thing often, then to be thought insufficient by omitting any thing.
Wherefore we may say with the old authors (which proof also confirms) that
Mithridatium remedyeth diseases of the mind, takes away strange
imaginations, helps melancholy fantasies and passions, which draw men often
to desperation. This it performs by altering the blood, opening the spleen,
by changing and dissipating the vapores arrising of the melancholy humore, and
yielding to the animal spirits pure and good exhalations, and by comforting
the heart. And where oftentimes cold and gross fumes do ascend so plentifully,
that the wits are dulled, the senses and discourse of reason either greatly
impaired or clean taken away, the judgment and memory hurt or abolished:
Mithridatium by his sweet brethings quickens the same, reduces the brain
to his temperament, alters, consumes, and spends those vapoures, and
brings man to his natural state, and when it is new, it induces sleep,
and remedieth the furyousnes of many madmen.

No man needs to doubt of the mighty power of Mithridatium, in curing all
kind of poisons either outwardly received or inwardly taken, being to that
purpose chefly devised, and of long time experienced to be therein of great
force. Although for the biting and stinging of venomous beasts, it is supposed
of less might then Theriacle: yet it is of all men confessed much stronger to
cure poisons, taken into the body by potion, or otherwayse. So his might is
great to heal all pestilent (all and malignante diseases, cures the plage,
feauers which depend of naughty and malignant causes, helps the french pocks,
the small pocks, the measels: and in all other inward diseases which are great,
and such as other medicines can not remedy, Mithridatium is found to have a
special grace to cure them. And in such desperate diseases and cases, when
other remedies will not serve, then we ought to fly to Mithridatium, as Galen
writes of Theriacle.) For being a noble medicine of great power, it is not to
be used in every affect of little moment.

Wherefore it is written that Mithridatium cures all infermities of the head
in men, and women, if the same do come of a cold cause: namely it helps the
melancholy madness, the Falilng sickness, ye Hemicrane or meagrame, ye pains in
the eyelids and brows, the watring of the eyes, the pains of the ears, of
the teeth, of the mouth, of the jaws, the squinancy, the appoplexy, the
litargie, and such other cold diseases of ye head: in which cases it is
inwardly dronken, and also outwardly applied, sprede in the form of an
emplastre: it comfort ye heart, and does good in the passions of the same.

It helps the diseased of the breast, cures the cough, shortness of breath,
spitting of blood, the pleurisy and stiches of the side, the phthisike and
other inward diseases of the breast and lou^gs. In these later causes,
especially for stiches, it is applied outwardly, spread emplastre ways, and in
the chough and such other diseases, it is inwardly ministered with some
convenient liquor: for so it cutteth the grosnes of the phlegm, and makes it
easy to be auoydid, opens the pipes, and enlarges all those parts which do
serve for breathing.

To proceed to the affects of the stomach, it provoke appetite, remedieth
over much desire to eat, termed Canina appetentia: for it dries superfluous,
and resolves and corrects corrupt humores: it helps concoctio^, by
increasing of natural heat, cures evil belks, and inflation of the
stomach: for it breaks wind, and will not suffer any thing to corrupt in ye
stomach: it stays vomiting by strengthening the stomach: by keeping the
stomach clean from wind, superfluous, and evil humores, it takes away the
abhorring of meat.

It does great good in all diseases of the belly, pains in ye guts, called the
Iliaca passio, the bluddy flix, and all other fluxes gieuen with the decoction
of the flowers of the pomegranate called Balaustia. In the colike of the belly
it is very good, and to ease the pains of the belly after a purgative
medicine, it has a special virtue. For it takes away the malignitie of the
medicine, breaks wind, and does strengthen parts wekened by the purgative
medicine. It nourishes diseases and pains in the sides and about the
mydriffe, it helps the infirmities of ye kidnes, and of the bladder, breaks
the stone, remedieth the passions of the matrix, provoke the natural courses
in women, and stops the same if they do abound. For it opens the passages
by extenuating that which by grosnes does stop the ways: and by making
nature strong, staieth fluxes, which commonly do grow immoderate by weakness.
It diminishes ye swellings and hardness of ye matrix, and of other parts, it
does remedy ye barrennes in women, and makes them fertile. Mithridatiu^ is
accounted a special good remedy against the pain of the joints, to cure the
gout and the Sciatica, for that it dries superfluous humores, stays the
reume, and makes all parts strong. But it must be gieuen, not at the first,
when the pain begins, but ater: when the rage of the pain is past, and the
body ought first to be purged before you gieue Mithridatium. And it used before
the fits of the goutes, makes greatly for preservation, to keep one from
often accessio^s of ye gout. It helps ye diseases of the sineues, ye
resolution, yt paulsye, the crampe, ye diseases called Tetanos Ambrostotonos,
and Opistetanos: for it augmenteth natural heat, dissolueth, by euaporatio^,
humores soken into ye syneues, and restores the spirits and strength. It
helps the shaking fits of feauers, and geauen twyse or thrice half an hour
before the fit, oftentimes it does cure the fever quartan and the quotidian.

Of the use of Mithridatium.
THe better to know the use of Mithridatium, we are to consider the time most
convenient to gieue it, the quantity, and the manner of gieuing. For the time,
we may with Galen counsel to minister the same in no wise upon a full
stomach, but after concoction is perfect. The usual time and best to take it,
is in the morning fasting, it is not so good to gieue it when the stomach and
first veins are full of crude and raw humors. And before it be gieuen, it
is good to procure the belly to be loose, according to Galens counsel in
ministering of Theriacle, in his book ad Pamphilianum.

Of the quantity.
AS Galen writes in his book de Theriaca ad Pisonem, so we may affirm that
one quantity of Mithridatium is not to be gieuen to all men, in all times* and
in all diseases. And the better to find out the just quantity, we are to
remember, that Galen in the said book mentions of two quantityes gieuen of
Theriacle, the one referred to a hasell nut, the other to a bean of Egypt.
And for that he also affirms, yt in strong diseases the greater quantity is
to be gieuen, and the lesser in light* diseases, and so in great infirmities
he ministers the quantity of an hasell nut, and in diseases of less force,
uses the portion of the bean of Egypt: it is evident that the hasell nut
imports the greater quantity, and the bean the lesser. So that by Galen the
greatest quantity to be gieuen of Theriacle, is measured by an hasell nut, and
the least by a bean of Egypt. And the form of speech which Galen uses to
express these quantities, in my judgment does importe the bigness, and not
the weight of the things. For Galen in every place writes ad magnitudinem
fabae aegyptiae, and so ad magnitudinem nucis auellanae, to the michelty or
bigness of a bean of Egypt, the bigness of an hasel nut. Which manner of spech
has relation to the bigness and not ye weight. We are therefore to construe
Galen, that in great diseases Theriacle is to be ministered, that his bulk may
be equal with the bigness of an hasell nut, and in other diseases, of a bean
of Egypt. Massarius in his book de ponderibus reducing these things to
weight, says that Paba Aegyptia imports a scruple and a half, that is,
half a drachine: and that nux auellana signifies a drachine. So if we will by
weight measure the quantities, the greatest which is to be given of Theriacle
is a drachine, and the least is half a drachine.

In that Mithridatium is like to Theriacl^, it may be gieuen in like quantity.
And because it is more gentle, and not in quality so whot as Theriacle, and not
receiving the flesh of vipers, nor so great quantity of Opium, it is a more
safe medicine* and so may be gieue^ in greater quantity, that we need not be
bound to an hasell nut, nor to a bean of Egypt, but may as cause shall
require exceed both. For which cause the writers of our antidatory books, not
without reason do affirm, that Mithridatium may be ministered to four
Drachines, that is half an ownce. And Durastantes in his co^mentary upon
Luminare Maius bringing the quantity of a nut, and of a bean to ye weight,
says that an hasell nut signifies an ounce, and ye bean of Egypt half a
scruple, and because the one proportion is very great, the other over little:
therefore he puts his sensure, that an hasell nut contains ij. Drachines,
or iiij. Drachines at ye most. And the bean of Egypt one Drachine, or ij.
Drachines at the most. So that by his opinion we may minister Theriacle to ij.
or iij. Drachines, when the disease and the case so requires. Wherefore we
need not greatly to fear to gieue Mithridatium in so large a quantity as is
prescribed in our antidotaryes, that is, to minister it to half an ounce.
Nevertheless in these days we do very seldom minister Mithridatium so
largely: for most commonly we follow the prescript of Galen, and gieue of it
the quantity of a bean, or of an hasell nut. In measure we prescribe the
half a drachine and two scruples, and in mighty diseases, and urgent causes we
offerre one drachine, and very seldom do proceed to a greater quantity: which
proportions in my judgment are most usually to be kept. Yet by this discourse
it appears, yt we are not so to be restrained to these quantities, but that we
may upon occasions gieue a greater quantity, if the patient, the disease, and
other circumstances do so require. And hereby also it appears, that we
cannot so determine the quantity of this medicine, nor of any other, that the
same may always be observed: but the certain appointment of the same must be
left to the discretion of him which does minister the medicine, to prescribe
the quantity according to the circumstances of the present case. And therefore
it shall not be amiss here to consider more particularly of the circumstances,
whereby we may the better attain to conjecture the just quantity to be gieuen
in the present case. First therefore we are to consider the country where the
party which is to take the medicine, does inhabit, and here also the time of
year. And as Galen writes of Theriacle, that in the East parts and in hoate
cou^tryes, in summer and hoate seasons it is not to be ministered: so we may
affirm of Mithridatiu^, yt in hoate cou^tryes and seasons we ought to refrain
from much geiuing of it. Wherefore when occasion is to gieue in summer, we must
prescribe a lesser quantity then in winter, and in the spring time. So we may
gieue a bigger quantity in these north parts, then in hoater countries. The
like respect is to be had of the liquore in which we gieue it, that in hoate
places and seasons it be mingled with a cold liquor, as with water: and in cold
countries and times with a whot liquore, as with wine.

The like consideration is to be had of the temperament of the body, and of
the age. In which respect Galen does forbid cholerike and hoate constitutions
to take Theriacle. And such must with more wariness use Mithridatium, and in
lesser quantity and mingled with some convenient liquore, moderate the heat of
the medicine.

Concerning age, Galen does forbid the gieuing of Theriacle to children, for
(says he) the mightines of the medicine does exceed the strength of children,
and dissolueth their bodies: and tells an history of a child destroide by
taking of Theriacle. We may therefore admonish physicians of these days,
which do often and boldly gieue Theriacle to young children for the worms:
let them consider what warrant they have so to do: it is to be feared lest
they endaunger thereby so tender bodies. And we are to be circumspect in
gieuing Mithridatium to children, and to be very wary in ye ministering of it,
lest we do harm therein. And yet I do think we may with more safety minister
Mithridatium then Theriacle. To young men and such as have much natural heat,
we may gieue this medicine: but neither often, nor in great quantity, and in
water rather then wine. To me^ of years which are in ye declining age, in
greater quantity, and in wine. In respect of the disease we are so to measure
the quantity of the medicine, that in a mighty and a strong disease, we gieue a
greater quantity. Therefore as Galen writes of Theriacle, so we may determine
of Mithridatium. In strong poison, and to such as are bitten and stinged with
virulent beasts or mad dogs, we gieue a greater quantity: in other diseases
the quantity of the medicine ought to be according to the greatness of the
sickness. So when there is time to digest the medicine, we may appoint a greater
quantity: when little time is for concoction, then lesser quantity serves. The
like consideration is to be made in all these circumstances of ye liquore, in
which the medicine is to be dissolved, the same to be of a greater or lesser
measure, according to ye circumstances: whereof we are to speak more
particularly in the manner of gieuing.

Of the manner of gieuing of Mithridatium.
By that we do read in Galen in his books de Theriaca and de Antidot. yt
appears that thauncient physician did seldom, or not at all gieue either
Theriacle or Mithridatium dry, and not dissolved in some liquor* and the reason
may be, for that they gave it most commonly before or after poison, or to
preserve or cure some pestilentall sickness, which depended of a malignant
cause. In which respect, it seems requisite to minister the medicine in
lyquid form, that it might have the speedy passage through the body, and come
to the heart, that the spirits comforted, might the better exsist and the
sooner expel the venyme, and the malignity of the affect. For not only
Mithridatiu^ and Theriacle, but all other medicines taken in a solid and dry
consistence, do stay in the stomach long, and sustain greater alteration,
than when the same is gieuen in a liquid form. For which cause when we have
intent to comfort the stomach, to help digestio^, to break wyn^e in the
stomach and belly, then it is convenient to gieue Mithridatium in dry
substance. When intention is to remedy diseases in more inward parts of the
body, in all venomous, pestilential and malignant causes, we gieue the medicine
dissolved with some liquore. And as we read in Galen, that he used not always
one liquore, so he makes mention of these, of water of Mulsa, that is water
and honey, which we do call meade or mead, of mulsum, that is wine and honey
mingled, of acetum mulsum, that is wine, honey and vinegar, of posca, that is
water and vinegar, of certain decoctions made of herbs, roots, and seeds.
And it is to be seen by Galens discourse, that he made choice of the
liquores by indication taken of the country, of the time of the year, of the
age and complexion of the patient, and of the nature and disposition of the
disease. So that he gave a hot liquore, as wine or wine or wine and honey in
cold countries and times, in aged men, and such as were not of hoate
complexions, and had not much natural heat, and in diseases not over hoate,
and in strong poisons. Contrariwise in hoate regions, in summer time, in such
as were in the flower of their age, and had cholerike and hot constitutions,
dry bodies, and did abound with natural heat, in hoate cholerike siknesses,
in great feauers, he made choice of a cold liquore having regard that the
liquore might contemper and mitigate in some part the quality of the medicine.
Which inte^tions applied to ye gieuing of Mithridatium, it will be easy to
choose a fit liquore* when we are to minister the same in it. For the same
circumstances will soon induce us to make choice of a convenient liquore* we
may also learn by Galen, that as the circumstnunces are to lead us to
appoyncte the quality of the liquore, as is aforesaid: So the disposition of
the disease will teach us to apt a convenient liquore in substance: for it is
agreeable to reason, that such a liquore be gieuen, which may not only mitigate
the quality of the medicine, but with having also property to do good in that
disease, may further the action of the medicine. So by good reason in
pestilentiall agues, in malignant diseases, the pockes, ye measels, we do
gieue Mithridatium with the dissolved water of Dragon, or of Carduus
benedictus, or in some like decoction, and we do in such cases many times
mingle with ye syrup de acetositat^ citri syrup acetosus, which things do
not only mitigate the heat of the medicine, but also help and further his
action. In ye cough, and diseases of the breaste and side, we may with Galen
choose wine and water called mulsum when ye patient is without a fever: in a
fever with water and honey called mulsa. In such a^ are short breathed, it is
best gieuen with vinegar compou^ded with scilla, to them which spit blood, at
the beginning, with water and honey, which we call meade, after, with water
only, but the medicine will be more effectual, if you do boil the roots of
Comfry in it. In diseases and pain of the belly, with water. In stoppages of
the liver, they yealew Ieaundes, the Dropsy, with an opening decoction, as the
decoction of the roots of Asara bacca. And in respect of the drouth in the
Dropsy, it may be gieuen in meade. In diseases of the kidnes and bladder, with
the decoction of persley, and in ulcers of the kidnes, with wine and water, in
excoriation of the guts, with a decoction of Sumach: to those which have the
falling sickness, if they be leave, with meade, and it were two long, and to
little purpose thus perticularly to run thorough all diseases. we may easily
appoint a convenient liquore, and prescribe ye quantity of ye medicine, and of
the liquore, by yt which is written, and thought I have for example sake (for
examples do best teach) discoursed in many diseases, appointing such liquores
which Galen does use and best allow of, yet I doubt not but an expert man will
for the present case, divise much better, by indication taken of the
circumstaunces before mentioned, That a man well weighing these things, may
quickly know the true use of Mithridatium, and so not err in the
ministration thereof, but gieue the same to the great good of those, which
shall take it, and to the honor of God, whose goodness gieueth success to al
medicines, to work health where and when it pleases his holy wisdom.


