

The Preface to the Reader.
GENTLE READER, WE may see with deep considerations the merciful work of
the Lord from time to time, showing unto us many strange Signs and tokens,
forewarning us unto repe^ta^ce: But such is the corruption and hardness of this
our age, that we contemn and neclect all tokens in the Heavens, by respecting
our own security for the time present, and yet if any man would reckon the
course of this life past, he should see in himself great cause to tremble
at these things: And also if we do consider what great route of evils does
beset us, and how many has been destroyed, or what hurtes has been by
Lightnings, Earthquakes, Ground-openings, Fluddes, Tempests of the Sea, great
Winds, Infections, Air, Wars, Mortalities, Plagues, strange disseases and
such like, which things, Commets does commonly Prognosticate to ensue. I
suppose that the remembrance of such dangers, should make us not to be
altogether careless of these tokens, threatening unto us calamities for our
unthankfulness, and therefore whosoever does make light accoumpt of Earthquakes
and gleaming Stars: and is not moved with the sight thereof with the fear of
Gods heavy displeasure: the same people do also as lightly and as little
regard their own consciences and amendment of life. And now let us bear in
mind the fourth Star, that was seen in Calabria, which signifies great
alteration this year. 1587. and that the world will not long endure, God make
us all ready against the day of the Lord. This Star Master John Doleta, a
learned Astronomer does write, and with him also do agree, in writing all the
learned men in Grecia, Alexandria, Spain, and Italy, That is to say, in the
year aforesaid, the Sun shall be covered with a Dragon, in the Morning from
five a Clock until nine, and will show forth as fire, and in this year is
thought to be great Fluds, Winds; Tempests and Earthquakes. I pray God defend
and keep us from the same, and give us grace to repent, and bear in mind the
fearful signs and tokens. For as before the destruction of the first World,
like signs and tokens appeared, and yet they would not turn from their
wickedness, and so were drowned in the Flood. And as before the destructions
of Sodom and Gomorra, appeared like wonders, but they would not call to God
for mercy, and so were consumed with Fire and Brimstone. And that goodly City
Jerusalem, for their abomination was made desolate, and not one stone left
upon an other. Yet now let all these signs and tokens cause speedy
repentance, and amendment of life, and then no doubt the wrath of God, which
is now kindled against thee, will be turned to his wonted mercy: and the^
possess that place of felicity, which is prepared for all those that fear
and tremble at the threatening of our GOD: to which place of perfect rest, I
beseech God to grant his Spirit of lively repentance, in the hearts of all
true believers. Amen.

Strange News out of Calabria: Prognosticated in the year 1586. upon the year
87. and what shall happen in the said year: Praying the Lord to be merciful
unto us.
The Interpretation of the fourth Star which was seen in Calabria: being
written for a warning unto all faithful Christians, as follows.
BE it known unto all men, that in ye year 87. when as the Moon is in the
watrie sign, the world is like to be in great danger: For a learned man,
named master John Doleta, who is very well seen in Astronomy, does write,
and with him also does agree in writing the chiefest men in Grecia, Alexandria,
Spain, and Italy: that is to say, that in the foresaid year, the Sun shall
be covered with the Dragon, in the morning from five a clock until nine, and
will appear like fire: therefore it is not good that any man do behold the
same: for by the beholding thereof you may lose your sight.

SEcondly, there shall come a marvelous great water Flood upon our Lady day in
Lent, being upon the 25. day of March, and by reason of the fearfulness
thereof many people may dye.

THirdly, there shall arise a marvelous great wind, and for great fear
thereof many people shall be consumed, or distraughted of their wits.

FOurthly, the same year, upon the 12. day of May, will arise an other
wonderful great water Flood, and so great as no man has seen, since Noyes
Flood, and will continue three days and three nights, and many Cities and
Towns which stands upon sandy ground will be in great danger.

Fifthly, Infidels and Heretics through great fear and dread, will fly and
gather together, and a great part of Christindome, shall be in danger to be
overthrown, which God defend.

Sixthly, in the said year, after the great waters be past. upon S. Margarets
day, being in the Dog days, will be a great and fearful Death: for the
Pestilence will be in such force that it is to be feared that few places in
Christendom, will be free: which the Lord defend and preserve us from the
same.

SEauently, there will be throughout the world great change, and alteration in
Religion, and wonderful strange news unto all people as conserning the same.

Eighthly, the Turk with his God Mahomet shall lose his Scepter, and a great
change and alteration; in his Regement, through hunger and wars, so that the
most part of them will rather seek for relief by the Christians then at his
hands.

NInthly, there will also arise great Earthquakes, and the fruit of Trees will
be very strange to be seen, and hollow within.

LAstly, upon S. Bartholmewe day will be great mouings of the earth, both on Hills
and Valleys, so that for fear thereof, few people will remain alive, God be
merciful unto us. Therefore it behooves all good Christians, for to call
earnestly unto almighty God in hearty prayer, to turn all these Plagues
from us, which he through his wrath will lay upon us for our wicked living.

He which has no misfortune in the year 85.
And in Anno. 86. Does remain alive.
He being in 87. unhurt and unslain,
And in 88. Alive does remain.
And living until the year 89.
He may then speak of a joyful time.

