Anwick his MEDITATIONS upon Gods Monarchy, and the Devil his Kingdom.

AND Of the knowledge that Man in this life may obtain of the almighty,
eternal, and most glorious Godhed:

WITH other things not only worth the reading but also the marking and the
retayning.

Wherein

If Patience knowledge read, And Charity give ear:
Then slander nor envy, I shall not need to fear.
But if furious ignorance, join with auctority:
Then truth must be silent, and suffer the injury.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON BY Gerred Dewes, dwelling in Powles Churchard, at the
sign of the Swan.

1587.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable Sir Fraunces Walsingham Knight, one of her Majesty's
principal Secretaries and of her Highness most Honorable privy counsel: I. A.
wishes the everlasting blessing of God through Jesus Christ.
MOST HVMBLIE BEseeching your Honor, that you take it hot for presumption, that
I have dedicated unto your Honor these my studious meditations upon Gods
Monarchy, and the Deuilles Kingdom: for it is holy and true doctrine grounded
on the word of God, which you have loved and exercised even from your youth,
especially sythens your Honors being in that honorable estate and office, it is
manifest and famously spread abroad that you have been, not only a^e bolds
favorer, but also an earnest furderer both of holy religion, and of al other
good actions for profit of the common weal. Moreover considering your
favorable courtesy toward me of so many years continuance, I could not find
so fit a Patron as your honor, under whose shade I might shield my self and
my little Book from commune cauillers, and such dayntie readers as look more
for Method and ornaments of art, then for the goodness in substance: whereas
the truth and goodness of the matter, have no need of such curiosities: For
truth deliteth to be clothed with pure simplicity, and sincere playnnes to
please God, and not man's vanity. Humbly desiring your Honor to accept them in
good part, for the debt which I owe unto your Honor, for your accustomed
goodness and courteous favor always toward me.

Thus wishing your Honors health and happiness in the Lord Jesus, and long
continuance of life amongst us, to the commodity of the Church and Common Weal:
I rest, humbly at your Honors good pleasure and diuotion. And with my
continual prayer, I commit your Honor, and all yours to the mercy and
tuition of the Almighty Monarch, through Christ Jesus our Lord, who ever keep
your Honor from evil: and with his holy Spirit govern your life and doings:
increase and establish your faith, that your soul may cheerfully depart in his
peace, and be received into his Heavenly joy when your natural days shall
end.

The often changing of the time,
Is a sure witnessing:
That of Earthly matter,
Age alters all thing
I. Anwick.

THE PREFACE TO the Reader.
FOr a while after the Gospel was freely preached in England there were but
two sorts of people not (...) known, those were Papists and Protestants,
which diversity of names were devised to put different (...) true Christians
and false. Because all that were once under the Popes usurped auctoririe, were
called Christians without distinction, althou^h neither in the manners of their
life, nor in the matter of their belief they deserved so honorable a title.
But the loosenes of the times sithence has been such, for want of correction
of manners, that there are now diverse sects, whereof I will touch one
especially, a third sort which are of no religion, named Atheistes. A people
without God having no feeling of God, nor knowledge of their own horrible
state. * Neither here nor cold; neither feeling their Revel. 3. 15
own misery nor regarding their own shame. Of which wicked sort the number is
now greatter in diverse lands then both of Papists and Protestants. And they
are so much worse and more pestiferous then the Papists, as they feign to be
of all religions, as occasion and company may serve their turn. And yet
indeed are of no religion at all.

But because the Papists religion is more pleasing unto the carnal senses of
man, then the strait rules of the Gospel* There is no doubt but they will
join with the Papists against the Protestants when any stir happens for
religion: Which God forbid if it be his holv will.

Therefore if such monsterous clouds of Satan's sleightes did not presently
hang over our heads, and therewithal such stinking mistes of horrible iniquity
enclose us round about: even ready to choke all our senses. (Satan thereby
endeavoring to separate us from God and his holy word) it might seem too too
curious a question to ask: is there a God or no? Seeing that there has not bin
nether yet is heard of so tude a Nation under the Sun, that has not ^n every
age imagined to themselves one thing or other, of whom to crave help, and
woorship for a God.

Saving this pestiferous kind of Devils incarnat these Atheistes * who are the
fools that David speaks of, that say Psalm. 14. ^. Ephesians. 2
in their hearts there is no God. * They are without Christ, they are aliantes
from the common weal of Israel, they are strangers from the covenant, they
have no hope because they think there is no God: and unless order were taken
and put in ure for correction of manners, they would shortly become so brutish
as to utter it in speech.

Therefore seeing this generation of vipero^ Atheistes that say in their hearts
there is no God: do daily increase by the pestileut policy of Satan their
father, it is now most necessary in this dangerous time, to declare unto the^,
that they shall find at last an almighty and everlasting God, even he that is
the only Monarch of Heaven earth, and Hell as holy Revel. 1. 1^
Scriptures teach: which if they believe not, the labor is lost on them. For
without faith it is impossible to please God.

Therefore they that will come to God, must first believe that God is: and that
he is a most bountiful rewarder of them that seek him, and to all others a
consuming fire.

It is the want of correction of manners that encourages the wicked to do
almost what they list. The Papists hope Papists
that they shall yet have a day for their purpose. And to that end there have
bin great nombers of papisticall books from beyond the Sea, brought into the
Realm, whereof though a few were taken, no doubt very many have bin
distributed among their sect. Their confederacy must needs be great, for
they have had a long and a quiet time to consult, and lay their plot together
with many and sundry mighty f^endes, etc.

The Atheistes and all other erroneous sects are careless, setting their part
at hazard: for it is all one to them concerning Religion which end go
forward, so they may be quiet by dissimulation, But the Protestants of this
realm Protestants
of all degrees, I mean such as are true Christians indeed, (which are percel
of Christ his little flock dispersed and fewest in number) they wait in
fearful patience what God is about to do. Some of them not well resolved in
this sentence of the Son of God, * Many are called, and few are Mat 29. 16.
Luc. 12. 49.
chosen. For they are greatly amassed to see the true fervent zeal of Gods holy
service, (even the fire that the Son of God brought into the World, and
wil^ed that it should burn in men's hearts) to be now almost quenched, or at
the least the substance wherein it should work ^o consumed, that there
rests but only embers raked in the ashes.

And therefore seeing men regard not to maintain that fire of true zeal which
the Lord himself willed to burn in men's hearts. There are great likelihodes
by many conjectures, that God will shortly kindle the fire of disturbance, and
in the end consume his enemies. For even now the angel of God speaks unto
the diverse states, as he did unto the congregations of the Laodicians, saying:
* let him that has an ear hear what the spirit says unto the churches A men
the true and faithful witness, even the beginning of the Creatures of God, says
these things: I know your works that ye are neither cold nor hot, I would
ye were cold or hot: so then because ye are lukewarm end neither cold nor
hot, I will spew you out of my mouth: because ye say, I am rich and increased
with goods and need nothing, and you know not that ye are wretched, miserable,
poor, blind, and naked.

Therefore I counsel you to buy of me Gold tried in the fire, that ye may
be rich, and white raiment that ye may be clothed that your filthy nakedness
do not appear. And anoint your eyes with eye salve that ye may see. As many
as I love I rebuke and chasten, be fervent therefore, and repent says the Lord.

Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the
door: I will come in unto him, and suppe with him, and he with me: To him
that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne, as I have overcome
and sit with my Father in his throne.

By this let them that have ears hear what the Spirit says to the
congregations. They are monstrous may med bodies, that want ears to hear the
word of God, and yet have ears doing their office in hearing all other
things.

Now where the fault lies of this wavering zeal, this dulnes in hearing, this
lukewarmnes in following, this slownes in believing and exercising the word of
God, or who deserves the blame thereof I leave that in question.

For to be an accuser of crimes is perilous, namely where the Judges want
upright hearing, there it is not only a lost labor and thankles office: but
also obtains unworthy blame and hatred for good will.

Notwithstanding I say an accusation may be made in Christian charity for the
amendment of such as walk inordinatly, whereupon I say (prove it as I can)
that every person is bound by duty to be an eye and an ear to the maiestrate
to declare unto him in christian charity the enormities which he sees among
the people, because he can see no further then a man except god do inspire some
man with more virtue that way the^ commonly is in men. Therefore when falts be
told the magistrates for charity sake and duty to god, those persons have
discharged the duty of good Christians: And then if the maiestrates do not try
out the truth and execute justice, the sin is upon him. Therefore in prayer I
humbly beseech the almighty God for his dear sons sake to send his holy Spirit
into the hearts of all, that even from the highest that sittes in the royal
throne, unto the lowest and simplest in whole kingdoms and dominions, that
every one may remember, that the end of their creation both in body and soul
is to glorify God.

And therefore let every one that desires salvation endeavor now themselves to
walk uprightly and deal truly, honestly and faithfully in their vocation:
and pray heartily to God in this time of urgent necessity, that the fervent
zeal of Gods most sacred service, according to his own word may be surely
engrafted in the hearts of all, and most chiefly in Princes, counselors,
Nobility magistrates and officers. That the same true zeal, and the virtue
thereof may descend from them by degrees in good example into the hearts of the
commons, even to the poorest and basest subjects. That all with one found
mind may praise the holy and dreadful name of Iehoua; the most glorious,
almighty, and eternal God; the only Monarch of Heaven and Earth, and that in
the name of Christ Jesus, for whose sake our prayers are pleasant and
acceptable unto him, for otherwise he can not abide nor brook them.

As King David was moved and solicited doubtless by holy motions which were in
him the work of the holy 2 Samuel 7. 1 Chronicles. 17 and 22.
Ghost, to build a Temple unto the mighty God of Israel, which when he had
purposed to do, and prepared much costly stuff for the building: Nathan the
Prophet warned him to the contrary, God would not have it of his doing* And
why? Even because of his bloody hands. Therefore he commanded to leave it to
his son Solomon: by whose innocent hands, God would have that most famous and
glorious figure wrought, before Satan should corrupt his understanding and
lead him captive for a time: as afterward he did in most shameful wife: as
in the 11. of 2. book of Kings. Even so I by like motions from time to time,
have bin and am continually solicited to meditate upon Gods Monarchy; and
the Devils Kingdom: But whether the Lord work in me to the end I may rightly
frame and perform it, and time to finish the same to the benefit of his
Church, because of my bloody hands and sins of my youth, the Lord Jesus
knows and not I.

Yet through his grace woorking in me (for my self I can not think a good
thought) I have gatherd together good and sound stuff, for some other that
labor in Gods vineyard, to frame the same or like piece of work.

Men ought to examine al doctrines by the word of God and chiefly consider what
is spoken or written, and not so much regard the speaker or writer. For it is
a gross error to think, and more blockish to be spoken: That the true
interpretation of holy Scriptures should rest only in ^^ole men. Whereas we
find by daily experience, that many of them are enemies to the glad tidinge,
of Christ Jesus.

Now if any man object or take exceptions against the auctority of the books
called Apocripha, out of which I have hear and there alleged somewhat, I
answer thus, that in all points wherein they do agree with the Canonical
Scriptures, they are in my opinion to be preferred to all other men's
writings, Doctors what or who soever: which canonical Scriptures God has
most miraculously preserved even in the hands of the enemies of the truth
therein contained: And that in the dangerous times of dark ignorance and
cruel persecution, and albeit Satan woorking in some of the enemies, have
sought and endeavored to corrupt some part thereof by false translations and
wicked gloses. Yet notwithstanding God has evermore appointed some by working
of his holy Spirit to restrain the wicked from utter currupting and
destroying them: And likewise have wrought in some of his elect in all ages, to
preserve some true copies thereof undefiled with their wicked leuin, even
through all the ages of Papists and other enemies* The holy, glorious and
dreadful name of almighty Iehoua the only Monarch of Heaven and Earth be ever
more praised and magnifyed, for that and all other benefits done unto mankind
in general, but especially for his mercies in Christ Jesus on his elect only.

THE CONTENTS of this Book.
Chap. 1. A Declaration what God is, and that he is the only Monarch of Heaven
and Earth, and of Satan, who has his power from God. Fol. 1. 2 A description
of the name and nature of Satan, and what power it has pleased god to give him
over mankind as well the godly as godless, viz. the elect and the reprobate.
Fol. 6. 3 Of the knowledge that man may have of the God^ed in this bodily life.
Fol. 14 4 Of Angels together with their service which they do unto mankind as
messengers from God. Fol. 19. 5 How it has pleased God by the contrary actions
and operations of his creatures to manifest his own glory as well in justice as
in mercy. Fol. 25 6 Of Gods eternal purpose of choosing and refusing of
mankind, and of the annoyance that it receaueth by Satan and his angels. Fol.
31. 7 Gods eternal purpose proved by the holy Scriptures and how by his will
each thing is brought to his forepeinted end. Fol. 52 8 The fulfilling of Gods
threatninges in afflicting K. David and his posterity. Fol. 79. 9 How the most
part of mankind serves Satan, and of his reward for their service. Fol. 85. 10
Of the broad and narrow ways, of the wide and the strait Gates, and of the
little infinite flock which God has chosen to salvation: little infinite in
compa^ison of the great infinite multitudes which God has left vnchosen, which
are his refused people reprobate. Fol. 98 11 Of the flock which God has
chosen. Fol. 104 12 Concerning nature laws for all creatures visible and
invisible, reasonable and unreasonable, sensible and incensible. Fol. 108 13
Concerning the variety of Spirits that work diverse effects in mankind. Fol.
115
The end of the Table.
A DECLARATION Chap. 1.
what God is, and that he is the only Monarch of Heaven, and Earth, and of
Satan, who has his power from God.
IF ANY MAN BE DEsirous to know what God is, let him search the holy
Scriptures, and he shall si^de it thus. God is the only Monarch of Heaven, and
Earth, he is the most glorious invisible spirit, omnipotent, of him self,
who has created, set in order, conserueth and rules all things in Heaven,
Earth and Hell, being the right Master of all indeed, of everlasting being,
had no beginning shall have no ending, without emparing or alteration through
time, there is nothing new unto him, neither can he wax old. For to him there
can be no time past nor time to come, but from everlasting to everlasting, one
and the same time is ever present with him. Therefore the distinction of time
is for Angels, Devils, mankind and other creatures which had beginning, and
not for God, which had no beginning. Vnus est ille Deus and semper idem.

The same God is that almighty power which the Philosophers of old time found
out to be the first mouer, that causes all moving and springing things, to
move and spring, to increase and diminishe, as well sencible as insencible, as
well reasonable as unreasonable creatures. Also they found him to be the cause
of all other causes, wherein they differ not much as touching the property of
the diety from the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 23. Colos. 3. 11.
who says * that Christ Jesus as God is all in all.

Other knowledge they had not of him to give him his right name, because it
pleased God not to open him self further unto them.

Therefore the notable wise men of the famous City of Act. 17. 23
Athens, worshipped him among the rest of their Gods * by the name of the
unknown God: by which their doings it appears, that man's wisdom and
learning how excellent so ever it is of it self, is not able to reatch to the
right knowledge of the true God, * except he be drawn thereunto by ^^tt. 11.
John. 1.
the spirit of God, and taught to know the Father by the So^ur^.

This first mouer in the only Monarch of al power and dominion, who has
created and set in order all things visible and invisible, by whose
incomprehensible power, will and direction every thing has his being in
Heaven, Earth and Hell. Therefore of necessity it must follow, that
whatsoever, or to what end soever, things are by him created, moved, increased
or diminished, or by Angels or men, in deed or word committed, or in thought
conceived, yea even by Satan and his Angels: they all have their moving, and
disposition of working by his forepointment and direction only.

This conclusion cannot justly be denied: except another power be imagined,
that of it self can be, move, work, dispose and direct things besides and
contrary to the power and will of this Almighty and eternal Monarch of all
power and dominion, by which false and vile imagination the almightines of our
one eternal God to be creator, and director of all things visible and
invisible should be utterly denied. Therefore let all people beware and
eschew the wading in that bottomless gulf, of damnable imagination, unless
they care Revel. 20. 3 Mar. 9. 46.
not to be drowned * in the bottomless pit: where the worm dies not nor the
fire ever goes out.

This is that Almighty Monarch and eternal God, who (after the Heavens and the
Earth with their contents were set in order) created Adam the first man,
placed him in Paradise, a most delicate place for pleasure with all commodious
things: and gave him in commandment what to do, and what to leave undone:
which commandment man wilfully brake: he had also forepointed in his
everlasting and eternal counsel both the means and the matter to bring his
holy and glorious purpose to his forepointed end. Therefore by his sacred law
* he has concluded all under sin, whereby his Gal. 3. 2^. Exo. 33. 19.
takes just occasion, to show mercy in Christ Jesus on whom it pleases him:
and to do justice on the rest, to the miraculous admiration as well of the holy
Angels and his elect people: as of all the reprobate wicked people, with the
Devil himself and his cursed Angels.

For if he had showed mercy on all: then had he hidden in himself, half his
glory: for every thing is best discerned by his contrary: Therefore the
eternal virtue, the infinite comfort, and the most pleasant fruicte of Gods
mercy, could never have been so precious and comfortable to Gods elect: except
it had been matched with a contrary virtue, as infinite, great, as excellent,
and as much to be praised as it self: even Gods justice in general: but
especially on the wicked reprobate.

Thus it appears how it pleased God to make for his own purpose, to show
forth his wonderful power, a Theater or stage, for the inhabitaunts of
Heaven* Earth and Hell, to behold his unspeakable works, and ordained the
means and matter to work on, how every thing should come to his forepointed
end: And that was and is, some to salvation, and some to damnation, and all
both for to show forth his own glory purposed in himself before the world
was, and to show himself unto all three regiments, Heaven, Earth, Hell, to
Angels, Devils and mankind, to be the almighty, eternal, and most glorious
God of mercy and justice.

Oh that men would therefore fear him and submit their wills to his will,
because he is the chief Monarch, of all in all, will they, nill they.

This is that very true God, whom all the holy and noble Patriarchs, from the
beginning did serve and honor before the general flood, with such sacrifices as
were then allowed of, until wickedness did so abound, (as in these our days)
that God was (as it were) compelled to destroy by water: and seemed to begin
the world anew.

This is that most leuing God, that cannot forget such as love and fear him. *
For when he was to execute justice upon Genes. 6.
the universal world, he provided for his servant Noah, commanding him 120.
years before to make the Arc in readiness for safeguard of him and his: whereas
all others for infidelity, pride, and disobedience with other horrible and
filthy sins perished by water.

The like kindness he showed unto his servant Lot, when he by fire and brimstone
from Heaven destroyed Sodom and Gomorah, with other Cities. And to all the
Godly from age to age he has showed like grace and mercy: and greater to
some, by so much as the Gospel surmounteth the law in goodness toward Gods
elect.

This is that God * that those Abraham for a chief servant, Genes. 12.
made him of counsel what he would do to Sodom and Gomorah: he made him
also his friend and chief member of his visible Church on Earth: and gave him
this honorable title: the father of believers, of whose seed the promised
Messiah by a lineall descent, came into the world in his appointed time, to
save so many of the damned seed of Adam, as God before the world was, had
elected to be saved by the death and rising again * of that unspotted Lamb
Christ Jesus stain from the beginning in his own person by Gods Revel. 13. 8.
eternal decree and forepointment, and also * in his elect members.

This is the same glorious majesty, that has created the Heaven, and the
Heaven of Heavens, with all the heavenly bodies. And also hell with fiery
torments, the Sky, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Sea, and the Earth,
with all their contents: and last of all man according to his own image, and
for his own purpose and eternal glory.

Everlasting praises be unto this most holy and glorious Psalm. 1^5 16
God, * that possesses the Heavens, and has given the Earth to the children
of men, therein to stay and breath a while, and so to pass away, some to
Heaven, and some to Hell.

Therefore we ought to learn of David to answer the wicked, when in skorne
they ask where is God: we may say our God is in Heaven, and does every where
what pleases him. He is there accompanied with his holy Angels and souls of
his elect, in such pleasant rest and quiet felicity: as no fleshly eye has or
can see, no ear has hard it told, because no tongue is sufficient to express
it, nor learning disribe it, no cunning with pen or pensel able to paint it
out, no thought strong enough to imagine, nor fleshly heart worthy to conceive
it. Saint John in his revelation has said so much to blaze and declare the
glorious joy of this almighty and eternal God (which he will give to his
elect in the world to come) as is possible for man to speak, write, or
understand, and yet far of from that it is indeed. * For we 1 Cor. 13 12.
see in this world, as it were but through a glass, nothing perfectly, but the
time will come when we shall see God face to face. This everlasting Monarch
and almighty Iehoua is all in all, and only may be said to be: For none but
he can justly say without addition: I am: and why? Even because he only, I
mean God, has his being in, of, and by himself, and all other creatures in,
of, for, from, and by him alone. There was never none of Adams line (except the
holy Ghost wrought in him to that end) that could attain to the true knowledge
of this almighty and only Monarch.

The heathen Philosophers saw a far of an unknown thing, which they very well
perceived, to be the cause of all other causes, and first moouer of all that
moves: further knowledge they could not get by all the wisdom and cunning of
men.

Therefore it is most true * that the wisdom of this world 1 Cor. 1 20.
is foolishnes with God: And contrariwise, worldly wise men, not yet newborn
by the holy Ghost, esteem the simplicity of the Gospel very foolishnes in
comparison of their own wisdom.

Therefore they cannot attain to the true knowledge and wisdom of God: And
why? Even because * no man can John 6. 44. 14. 6.
come to the Father but by the Son: And again * no man can come to the Son
except the Father draw him. Therefore those Philosophers and mighty wise men
could not attain to the true knowledge and wisdom of God: neither can the
mighty and wise men in these days reach unto it, because they are not drawn
thereunto by the holy Ghost proceeding both from the Father and the Son: and
the means to be drawn, is to submit our selves to the government of Gods
word: wherein by seeking we shall find the supply of al our want. And set us *
exalt and praise the name of the Lord that only woorketh woonders: * for who so
takes on Esai. 25. 1. Eccle. 18.
him to tell out his woonderful woorks, when he has done all that he can, he
is new to begin again: for it is an impossible enterprise.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE NAME and nature of Satan, and what power it has pleased
God to give him over mankind, as well the Godly as godless, viz. the elect and
the reprobate. CAP. 2.
NOw that which has been said of God, cannot be sufficient except mention
likewise be made of Satan the devil, the capital enemy to God and all
godliness: Neither can Satan be described without declaration of Gods almighty
power.

These words (Satan and devil) signify welnigh one thing: that is to say, an
adversary, enemy, or an accuser, which was once the good creature of God, as
^an was at the first, but through infidelity pride, and disobedience, an
infinite number of Angels and mankind, became everlasting Gods enemies: And yet
not unawares to God, neither without his forepointm^nt.

And all that notwithstanding, God has given to Satan, such an unspeakable
power to impugn and resist his own works and goodness every way: as is not
fully to be conceived by the wisdom and reason of man: and therefore
impossible to be expressed of any, albeit God has given eloquence to some men
abundantly. For as God is a spirit, even so satan is a spirit. And as * God
has his invisible holy spirits Mat*. 25. 31
called his Angels: even so satan has his invisible unholy spirits * called
his angels But as God is the most holy invisible 25. 41.
Spirit, and omnipotent, of him self able to do all things: even so
contrary wise Satan the devil, is the most unholy, filthy, invisible spirit,
and utterly impotent of him self, unable to do any thing. For albeit he has
free will in his natural wickedness: yet he has no power of him self to
execute his mischievous lust, except where, when, and upon whom God alone has
forepointed him.

This accuser Satan, as Captain of an army, with an infinite number of his
adherentes, called his angels (being then in equal state for the time, with
the holy Angels:) through infidelity, pride, and disobedience, became rebels:
which was that * iniquity that God found among his Angels. Job 4. 18. and 15.
15. 1 Pet. 24. Jude. 1 9.
* And therefore God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down
into hell, and delivered them into the chains of darkness to be kept unto
damnation. Again, * the Angels that kept not their first estate etc. God has
reserved them in everlasting chains of darkness, unto the judgment of the
great day.

Thus it appears how some of Gods Angels became his enemies, and devils:
whereof there are infinite nombers. For * if one mad man had a hole leg^on
(which by some men's Mar. 3. 9.
account is 125^0. by others. 6732. etc.) the question is, what unspeakable
infinite nombers are dispersed among so many innumerable nombers of mad people
as are presently in the world which pass their lives indeuelish madness as
though there were no God. Romans 11. 32. etc.

Therefore we may cry with Paul: Oh the unspeakable and passing wonderful
deipnes of the secrets of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out.

Now of this infinite number of wicked spirits there is one that seems to be
principal, and all the rest are his Angels, for whom * everlasting hell fire
was prepared. He is called Mart. 25 41. 12. 24. 2 Reg. 1. 2. and 9. 11. Revel.
12. 1.
by diverse names, as * Beelzebub prince of the Devils.

Beelzebub * was the God of Ecron, In the history of Tobias is mentioned a devil
called Asmodeus. * He is called Abaddon King of Locusts, Hornets and such like
horrible flies. Also he is named the Angel of the bottomless pit, and the
great dragon which with his Angels fought against Michaell and his Angels: But
that Michaell Christ Jesus was to strong for him, for this dragon even this
old serpent called the devil and Satan, which deceaueth all the world, had no
more place in heaven, but was cast out. * And the son of God Luke 10. 18.
him self says. I saw Satan fall from Heaven like lightning. It suffices
that Christ Jesus saw him fall, though he tell not what year and day. * He is
also called the God of this world. And did take upon him like a God, * when
he would 2 Corin. Mart. 4. 9. Ephesians. 2. 2.
have had Christ Jesus fall down and worship him. He is called ye * Prince that
rules the air: even the spirit that ever has, does now, and ever shall work
in the children of disobedience.

Thus we see, that as God is the imperial Monarch of all power and dominion:
Even so has he given a kingdom (for the accomplishment of his eternal
purpose) to his enemy and hangman Satan. For * if Satan be divided against
himself Luke 11. 10.
how shall his kingdom stand? ergo Satan has a kingdom for a time. And as God,
indeed, has given him an unspeakable power: Even so according to his lying
nature, he would have all the world believe that all is his: And therefore in
reproach of the reprobate whom God has refused, he is called the Prince and God
of this world.

And this must stand of necessity, that the creation of Angels, and fall of
Satan and his train, was before the creation of mankind: for otherwise, this
enemy, this natural murderer, could not have been so ready in the serpent
doing his office to bring mankind to confusion imediatly after his creation, as
to me seems ^y the text. * The devil is the father of all John. 8 44.
the wicked repro^ate, and his luste^ they do: the deui^ an: his adherentes
but^ bodily and ghostly have bene^^ats and murderers from the beginning, for
he is the father of those qualities, and of all other evils. * When in the
mount he had Luke 4. 56.
showed Christ Jesus the glory of the world he promised to give him all that
glory, if Christ would fall down and worship him: for says he, they are
delivered unto me, and to whom I will I give them. This promise was like
himself: for all his promises are to a false end: And yet the most part of
mankind, (as both high, low, and ambitious tyraunts, necromancers, sorcerers,
enchaunters, witches, Idolaters, blasphemers, murderers, adulterers,
fornicators, unlawful covetous ^^zers, and al other filthy wicked persons) do
believe all such false promises: and have no grace to believe the truth to
their salvation: but do fall down daily to woorship Satan, by obeying their
filthy fleshly lusts, and sinful covetous desires, to obtain the riches and
glory of this world.

Yea, God has given to this forepointed adversary, such power* to be
transformed into an Angel of light: as once he 2 Co. 11. 14 Mar. 13, 22.
was: and thereby to work such woonders: * as should deceive the very elect
of their salvation: if it were possible.

Therefore let all that feel the mercies of God through Christ Jesus, give
humble thanks for their election, because it can not fa(...)*

Moreover the reprobate and rejected sort of mankind are as devils incarnat*
being lead with wicked spirits: for our Savior said * I have chosen twelve of
you, and one of you is John. 6. 70.
a devil* an accuser, a traitor, Judas. And yet until the time appointed that
his wickedness should appear, be did the office of an Apostle, and seemed as
honest and holy as the rest: Even so are all the wicked reprobate Gods enemies,
as devils incarnate, being lead with unclean spirits, subtle spirits,
dissembling spirits, that can make them feem honest and godly, and use as
great civility, as they that are most Godly: but God only knows their
secrets.

Thus by circumstances we may understand, wherefore God ordained satan for his
everlasting enemy and every way to resist God and al his goodness: even to the
same end, y^ he raised up and hardened Pharoes heart, against the Israelites, to
set out his own glory, which is his chief scope in all his words and
deeds. And yet is it not lawful for any man to seek his own glory: for
mankind only was made to seek and set forth the glory of God, by words and
writing which only appertain to men: but God himself is under no law,
therefore he alone and none but he, may lawfully seek his own glory he
being the Lord of all laws and subject to none.

And Satan is ignorant that God has ordained him to the off^ce to resist him,
yea he is so far from seeking the glory of God, that by his will, he would
have all the glory himself: as when he would have had the son of God, fall
down and woorship him. For God has made Satan (in comparison of his own godly
knowledge wisdom and power) more inferior then a dog to a godly wise man.
And in effect he is indeed, but Gods bandogge, which he uses to let flip to
punish and torment his lawles swine, which are godles and disordred people.
Diaboli semper est iniqua voluntas nunquam Grego.
est iniusta potestas, quia voluntatem habet a se potestatem autem a Domino.

For Satan's chiefe-industrie and natural inclination is to seek man's
confusion: so says saint Peter, he goes about like a roaring Lion seeking
whom he may be (...): even forepointed of God to the same purpose. That he
should not only tempt and ^ntice the rejected of God to their utter damnation,
but also trouble, ^^xt and torment the ^ery elect of God (...) and out(...)
part of them to the committing of shameful and most horrible things, (...),
blasphemy, murder, adultery, fornication, etc. And by those means makes
some of them in a manner to despair of their salvation: which thing king David
had felt when he Psalm 86. 13.
said, * great is thy mercy toward me o Lord, for thou have delivered my
soul from the nethermost bell, that is to say, from damnation into the which
mankind fell by Adams rebellion or disobedience.

If any man deny, God to have created, all those spirits good, which afterward
of them selves became evil. If any man deny, God to have forepoynted Satan and
his Angels to be his adversaries, and consequently enemies to him and his
elect. Let him or them first grant and confess all the artiles of the true
catholic faith, and ground his or their arguments on the holy scriptures:
and say what they can to the contrary.

For I believe in the father, the son and the holy ghost, three persons but
one God creator of heaven and earth and of all things visible and invisible
contained in them. For he is the only Monarch of all, himself is all in all,
he works all in all, and yet can do no evil at all, for he is the
sovereign goodness it self and no point of evil in him, therefore no evil can
proceed from him.

All things without exception, are his own in eternal posession: Therefore he
only and none but he, can or may justly without addition of other words, say
thus, I will do with mine own as I list.

Let such as deny those things, answer to these questions.

1 First how had those spirits their life and being, if they were not first
the good creatures of God? as man was at the first and of himself became
evil. Neither could the elect Angels nor mankind yet rest of them selves in
the favor of God, except they were sustained in the same by his almighty
power love and infinite mercy.

2 How became Satan and his train, everlasting enemies to God and his elect,
without Gods forepoyntment, does any thing happen unawares to God? so to say
were blasphemy.

3 How came Satan and his angels by y^ natural disposition, to go about like
roaring Lions seking who^ they may de^our?

4 How could Gods angels fall from heaven without Gods will and forepointment,
seeing * a sparrow falls not to the Matthew. 6.
ground, nor a hair from ones head without the fathers will?

5 Whether or no has Satan power of him self, or does he receive it from
God, or is he so st^^^g that God can not rule him, or is God ^^oubles with
Satan's pestiferouse stu^bernes and most cruel rages, or does he suffer him or
any of his adherents either bodily or ghostly, to work any thing against his
almighty power and irresistable will. Let these be answered yea or nay. For I
hold the Lords will to be an everlasting law, passing the * law of the Medes
Dan. 6. 12. 15.
and Persians, which might not be altered.

For if any of those foresaid things have been, be now or shall be hereafter,
then where is our faith of Gods almightines? for if there be either fortune,
misfortune, chance, mischaunce, soden fall or working of any thing, whereby
good or bad might or can be done unawares of God or against his will, then were
he not almighty as all true Christians does know and believe him to be.

It is a known thing to every one, that in a great house there must be
officers for every office, and servants of each 2. Tim. 2. ^0
degree, and vessels for all purposes. Heaven, Earth, and Hell have many
mansions, and yet but one great house for Gods use and purpose: Therefore I
conclude as before mentioned, God has ordained officers and ministers
throughout all his dominions: And Satan among the rest to be his eternal
hangman, namely in this world by him and his adherents Gods executioners; to
punish, ve^e, and torment as well the elect as the reprobate, as pleases God to
appoint, both by the ministry of Satan: and yet the one in mercy, the other in
justice. For Satan can not do what he desires, nor so much as he wills: For
then he would confound al: But God has appointed his limits which he cannot
pass, nor do one lot more or less then he is forepointed, ^or so much as
touch any creatures except God command. For * he and his train Mar. 5. 9.
Luke 8. 20.
could not enter in the Swine; but by li(...) and commandment: Neither could
he have asked leave except the secret power of God had constrained him so to
do, thereby to confess himself subject to the power of God: in such sort as
it is not in himself to move ^^ther ^^ (...), but by Gods appointment: For ^
God sent or evil spirit to vex king Saul. Sam. 16. 14 2 Par. 18. 19 Job 1. 12,
2. 6.
And * God sent an evil spirit to (...) king Ahab^ and God sent Satan to
pla^ue Job: he could (...) touch him before he was sent to that end, as
hereafter shall appear by a short recital of their histories. For evil
spirits move not, neither do they seize upon any thing except only by Gods
commandment, and woorking of his secret power.

Thus it appears how Angels became Devils, because they kept not their first
estate, as says Saint Jude as likewise man kept not his first estate, and
therefore the whole mass of mankind was utterly damned, as the wicked angels
were. which was the secret that God had purposed in himself before the world
was that he would bring to pass by the fall of Angels and men that Christ
Jesus the seed of the woman should redeem again so many of the damned seed of
Adam as he had everlastingly forechose^ and forepoynted to life, which secret
was not opened to many men in the former ages.

But now says Saint Paul, * God has opened unto us Ephe. 1. 9. 11. Tim. 1. 9.
the secret of his will according to his good pleasure purpoposed in him
self: who works all things after the counsel of his own will, * who has
saved us and called us, with an holy calling, not according to our works: but
according to his own purpose and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus
before the world was. * This mystery and secret was Col. 1. 26.
hidden from the beginning from all ages (except here and there one) until our
Lord Jesus made it manifest unto his saints: to such as were forepointed to
receive and distribute the same to others: even to such as God has forepointed
to receive it, and make their profit of it. * To some it Mar. 4. 11, 12.
is given to un(...) the (...) of the kingdom of God, but Mar. 4. 11. 12. Luke
8. 10. Mat. 13. 14. 15. John. 12. 40.
unto them that not without all things are done in parables: to the (...) they
should se(...) not discern: they should hear and not understand: least they
should turn and have their sins forgiven And (...) * God has blinded the
eyes and hardened the hearts (of the wilful wicked) to the end they shall
neithe^ (...) understand, nor be converted, to be saved by Christ Jesus: those
are plain speeches against the which none (...) (...)ng God ^are reply.

OF THE KNOVLEDGE OF THAT MAN may have of the Godhead in this bodily life. CAP.
3.
THere are two ways to know the almighty majesty of the eternal God as
much as he may be known of mankind in this transitory life, the one way is
general, and the other is special. The general way is the consideration of
his works from the beginning, by muzing on their creation, and of the
infinite variety of nature in creatures, of their continual course and
conservation, wrought by the most instant and incomprehensible power of this
almighty Monarch that works all in all things. And is the first mouer of
whatsoever moves in Heaven Earth, and hell.

Thus by observation of the natural courses, of the treatures, diverse
Philosophers obtained wonderful and great worldly wisdom and m^tuallous
knowledge in the nature and course of things, and by such means came to this
general knowledge of God: even such as Turks, Ethiopians, Barbarians,
Tartaryans, Catayans, and many other nations of infidels have at this day, and
ever have had. And yet there are other some that cannot reach so high: but some
imagine to themselves the Sun, some the Moon, some other one of the Romans 1.
23. 6. 9. 7.
Stars, others some earthly creature, * as men, four footed beasts, birds,
creeping things, even vile woormes which they have and do woorship for Gods.

The special man to know God, is preaching, waiting, reading, hearing,
believing and exercising his holy word with the consideration of his infinite
works as aforesaid, every one according to the gift which he has received.

And this special way, is professed outwardly of all that are called and to
account themselves Christians, whereof there are two sorts, as has been of
marckin^ from the beginning, as (...) and Abel (...)nely of those which God
made a peculiar people ^^th himself, as the offspring of Abraham the sons of
Issack, Esa^ and Jacob, and their posterity from age to age: who albeit they
were all of the natural seed of Abraham, (...) according to the law, * yet
they are not th(...) all (...) alites, ^be^ause they came of Israel: No (...)
all they love Christians because the a^e: baptized in (...) of Christ Jesus.

And this article of two sorts of people is neither new nor strange, but
professed, confessed, expressed, and taught by M^ses and the Prophets, of whom
Jesus (...)ach (...)her ^o i^ and held the (...) for an infallible truth, who
was a man most excellent b^c^ in heavenly Divinity, and worldly Philosophy,
(...) a certain (...). Egip^ in the reign of king E(...) (...) unto him (...)
any age before Christ Jesus th^^ (...) so much Godly wisdom, holes(...) (...)
as hy^, the (...) of canonical Scripture (...), the same (...) most earnestly
taught, most streng(...) (...) into and undoubtedly (...) by the * (...) If
(...) Christ Jesus himself, and his apostles, of Mat. 24. 31 Mar. 13. 30. Luke
18. 7. 8
(...) O(...)tors, (...), and ^^eachers in the holy Church (...) until these
o^^: days I have lear(...) (...) ((...) tir(...) of the Pope) and taught (...)
with (...) of life.

And now most sincerely taught unto us, by writing, printing, and preaching,
for the infallible truth of God the Father, even the mystery, the secret
hidden since the world began, from all ages, but now is opened unto his
Saints. First by his natural Son, after wards by his Disciples (...)
consequently by ^^^heir (...) followers in every age (...) ^^yes.

S^ that (...) and so many as their had, been ^aw, or hereafter shall have
Gods favor and gift to believe Moses and the Prophets, Christ Jesus and his
disciples: to them Isay there can be no doubt nor contradiction, against this
infallible truth: that God has (...)ided mankind into two sorts, ^^ ordained
the one sort to salvation, and the other does damnition. The causes why he has
so done, are declared i^ this (...)tice, so far forth as is probable, and
allowed by holy scripture, and no further.

God is to be known (...) said in general by consideration of his works.
(...) way, (...) salvation, except by true within Christ Jesus, ^^rong^
^^aring, believing and exercising his body word, which conceiueth two things
especially to (...). The first is good promises of of (...) for well (...). The
second is (...) threatninges of (...) and as it is written. (For the
incomprehensible Deuteronomy. 28.
(...) of God (...), (...)there be seen with freshly (...), (...) with fleshly
hearts, nor with tongue o^ (...) thus says the Lord, * Heaven Esai. 66. 1.
is (...), (...) is (...), what house will ye build for (...) wherewil ye
(...) the place to rest in, 2. Chron. 6. 18.
ha(...) I (...) things, Behold, (...) Heaven and the Heaven of Hea^^ns (...)
to (...) him, how (...) the (...) of (...)! (...) of the (...) says (...).
Therefore no John. 1. 18.
man (...) son which is in the bosom of (...) that he has declared unto us
what God (^ayes (...) and (...) to men in this life. For * while we(...) this
world wet (...) 1 Cor. 13. 12.
but as it were through a glass and not perfectly. The Apostles were as
desirousto have seen and known it, as some are now. For * Philip said, Lord
show us the Father, and John. 14. 8.
it suffiseth, but our Savior Christ answered: He that has seen me has
seen the Father: For I am in the Father, and the Father in me. Therefore who
so is desirous to know the majesty of the Godhead in: three distinct persons,
let him first learn perfectly to know Christ Jesus, and then shall the holy
Ghost inspire him with sufficient knowledge, etc. For seeing the Apostles that
waited on Christ Jesus, and had familiar conversation with him, could not
attain the knowledge of the majesty of the Godhead, while they were in this
transitory life, what marvel is it, if all other remain ignorant thereof.
And yet let none dream or imagine that the Godhead has man's likeness in bodily
shape, because Christ Jesus was very man every way sin except. But let him
learn every day more and more to know, to fear, to believe, to love and obey
this almighty, eternal, most loving, most patient, most merciful and just God:
who for very love to mankind, has as it were clothed or covered himself with
manhed in Christ Jesus: * in whom dwells al John. 1. 14. Colos. 2 9.
the fulness of the Godhed bodily, that is to say, in Christ Jesus dwells all
the unspeakable power, the euerlastingnes, the almightines, the justice, the
mercy, and the infinite goodness of the glorious God, the only Monarch of
heaven, and earth, * as king David and Athanasius have most excel^e^tly
discribed. Psalm. 139.


And it is no wonder at all though man cannot attain to know the form and
shape of God so far above his reach invisible to flesh eyes, and hidden from
the eyes of the soul of man, seeing it passes man's conceit to Imagine the
shape of his own soul, enclosed in his own body, and was created to the Image
of God: which so remained until Adam by his offense defaced it, (so ugly as if
some traitor in dispite might deface the goodly picture of her Majesty with a
sponge dipped in ink) so ill fauoredly that God could not suffer him to dwell in
Paradise: And he so affrayde to hear the voice of God, that he fled from him
and would never have returned, if God had not drawn him again by his holy
spirit through Christ Jesus the Lamb of God ordained to take away the sins
of the world, that is, of those in the world which the father had given him,
whom he so loved * that he washed away their Revel. 1. 5. 7. 14.
sins by sheeding his own blood, and so reformed again in them the true
Image of God in such sort, as, when they shall appear in judgment at ye
general resurrection, they shall be more glorious, then the soul was in the
creation. For Gods elect have gotten more by the death of Christ Jesus, then
they lost by the fall of Adam. For by Christ Jesus they are suerly settled from
falling away again: For it is impossible that Gods election should fail,
because their * names are Luke 10. 21. Phil. 1. 3.
written in heaven in the book of life: whereof Christ Jesus biddes them
rejoice above al things, with promise that their joy shall not be taken from
them.

Now if Gods terrible threatenings move not the wicked to fear him, nor his
infal^ible and most comfortable promises allure them to love: what is more to
be said, then their blood on their own heads, for they are wilfully
guilty of their own just damnation. And to that end was the law ordained,
even to condenme the wicked, and not to Heb. 7. 19. Romans 3. 20. John. 1. 17.
make them good. * For the law made nothing perfect. And by the works of the
law no flesh shall be justified. For the law was given by Moses, but grace and
truth came by Christ Jesus.

OF ANGELS TOGETHER WITH Chap. 4. their service which they do unto mankind as
messengers from God. CAP. 4.
THis almighty Monarch creator of all things visible and invisible, created
the spirits called Angels perfectly good in their kind of another substance
then of the four elements, such substance as of mankind can neither be seen,
nor imagined: and therefore are called spirits. I speak of angels both good
and evil: that move and work inuisibly, not what they list: but as the
almighty has forepointed them: working always inuisibly, except when it
pleases God he can make them appear to men in men's likeness, and use men's
speech. * Three angels came to Abraham, did rate and drink in his tent, one of
them had much speech with Abraham about Sodom and Gomorrah, and promised him
his son Isaake. The other two went to Sodom and used sp^ach unto Lot, and
saved him from the violence of the filthy Genes. 18.
Sodomites.

And when Abraham cast out * the bond woman and her 21. 17.
son, the child being in peril of death, an angel spoke from heaven in man's
voice, * Likewise when Abraham's hand was 22
lifted up to kill for sacrifice his son Isaac, an angel spoke from heaven
to stay him. * An angel invisible without speech Genesis 24. 7.
assisted Abraham's servant in his journey from Canaan to Mesopetamia.

* The Angel of the Lord went before and behind the Israelites Exo. 14. 19.
through the red Sea, in a most miraculous cloud: which gave light to the
Israelites in the night season, and amazed the Egyptians with darkness in the
day time.

* The Angel of the Lord was sent before the Israelites to 23. 20. 23. 2. etc.
Number. 22. 23
drive out the seven nations, Cananites etc. but no mention of likeness nor
speech * An Angel of the Lord stood in Balaams way with a ^aked sword in his
hand, to stay Balaam from going to get his g^ayne of the King of the Moabites.
* ^n angel Judges 2. 1.
of the lord came up from Gilgal to Bochun speaking in the person of man, as
did he that spoke to Abraham * an angel of 13. 3.
the Lord appeared unto Sampsons mother as a man from God fearful to behold,
gave precepts touching Sampson, and assended in the flame of the burnt
sacrafice. * King David 2 Samuel 24. 17. 1 Kings. 14 5. 7. 43. Luke 1. 11. 26.
saw the angel of the Lord smite the people and there died ^xx in three days
at the pestilence. * The angel touched Elias and a voice spoke twice unto him.
* The angel foretells ^achary of his son Ihon the foregoer of Christ
Jesus. The angel Gabrell was sent from God to the Virgin Mary to forewarne her
of her conception of Christ Jesus. * An angel of God warned Joseph not to go
from his Matt. 1. 20 2. 13.
wife, commanded him to take the child and his mother and go into Egypt, and
called him home again, when Herod was dead. * An Angel of God appeared unto
the sheperdes and with Luke 2. 9. Of Angels and men.
him a multitude of angels singing praises at y^ birth of Gods anoy^ted and our
savior, the tidings whereof was great.

* After Satan had tempted our Lord Jesus, the holy Mat. 4. 10. 11 John. 5. 4.
Luke 22. 42 etc. Act: 1. 10.
angels came and ministered unto him. * At a certain season an angel went
down and moved the water of the poole Bethesday alias Siloe and whosoever went
next into the water was healed of whatsoever disease: an Angel from heaven,
appeared to comfort Christ in his agony and fear of death. * Two angels stood
in men's lykenes by the Apostles while they looked steadfastly after Christ Jesus
when he was taken up into heaven, and told them that he should come again in
like manner as he ascended. * And against his coming to give judgment, Mat.
24. 30 etc.
he shall send his angels with sounding the trompet, togather together his
chosen people from the four wyndes, that is to say the whole world. For of
all the nations of the world some must be blessed according to the * promise
made Genesis 22, 18
to the most honorable mere man that ever was, Abraham the father of all the
faithful.

* The law was given by the ministry of angels, but grace Act. 1. 53.
and truth came by Christ Jesus. which to that Michaell which with his Angels
fights full against the dragon Satan and his angels, for whom and for the
damned seed of Adam. * hell tire was prepared, in which they shall be ever
tormented Ecul. 23. 10. Amos 3. 6. Esai. 4, 5, 6. 7
and never rest, But * an angels voice was hard from Heaven saying, write:
Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors:
so shall not the high minded, bent to wickedness, that dye without repentance.

I have omitted many and many places of holy scriptures concerning, the
ministry of Angels. to avoid tediosnes. But these I have recited to the end
that no man may doubt but every man assure himself: that God works some time
in this world by Angels both good and badde. For thus it is written of the holy
angels. * Are they not all ministering Hebr. 1. 14.
spirits sent forth to minister for their sakes, which shall be heirs of
salvation? Yes doubtless, and to that end they cocker and flatter the wicked
reprobate and prefer them in this world. For albeit that God loved and choose
Jacob and ^ated and refused Esau, yet Esau by following the suggestions of
Satan and his angels, became of greater power and auctoryty, then Jacob during
their lives in this world.

* Therefore God is called the father of spirits, which were Hebr. 12. 9.
created, and some of them fallen from blessed state, before he created man,
for neither angels nor men, can keep themselves from falling, if God keep
them not. And as the same God is almighty eternal and without beginning or
ending: so has he purposed in himself before the world was, that he would
make both angels and men, * some to honor and some Romans 11. 21
to dishonor, to show himself to be the glorious God of mercy and Justice.
The Lord has made all things for his Prou. 16. 4.
own cause: yea even the wicked for the day of destruction. For his election
and reiection, his choosing and refusing both of angels and men, are most
euedently proved in holy scriptures.

For angels thus, Saint Paul prescribing orders in the Election and reiection
of Angels.
Church has these words to Tymothy. * I charge thee before God and the Lord
Jesus Christ and his elect angels, that thou observe these things without
partialitye^. Now it follows of necessity, that where and when Angels were
elected, there also and the^ angels were rejected. For of contraries there is
ever a contrary reason, and therefore where chosing is, there is also refusing
of them that be not chosen: But God elected some angels, the consequent is,
he rejected other some angels, for if he had preserved all and let none fall
from him, then had there been no election at all, neither any devil: but some
he chose and some he refused. And iniquity (whereof Job
* Job speaks) was found in those which he had refused: by which fall of
angels it is manifest that they had a law or precept which they transgressed,
otherwise they could not have committed iniquity: It is Saint Paul his
argument: To. 14. 15. 2 Pet. 2. 4.
* where no law is, there is no transgression. But Saint Peter says. * God
spared not the angels that sinned: Ergo they had a law or precept, which they
brake: otherwise they could not have sinned.

Thus it appears that God has dealt with angels as with men, concerning
creation, election and reiection, saving that all angels sinned not, as all
mankind sinned in Adam, for we read not of the redemption of angels as of
the redemption of mankind, so many as it pleased God to choose were redeemed.

So then, he created both angels and men as the chief part of his works,
purposed in him self to set forth his eternal power, honor and glory. He^ made
the angels of invisible substance, and man of both invisible and visible, and
all both kinds in perfect purity, in holiness and fredome of will: it pleased
God to make them in such sort, as he put it in their own choice to obey or
disobay, they had power in themselves to keep or change their blessed state
wheri^ they were created.

For if they had not had that choice in themselves (with reverence be it said)
God could not with justice have punished their disobedience: But God can do
nothing unjustly, therefore he had most justly punished the^, having fore
poynted which and how many should by his grace stand to serve him in their
first purity: the rest he left to them selves, which through infidelity, pride
and disobedience, fell from their blessed state, and became his everlasting
enemies.

Thus it pleased God to make just matter unto himself to exercise both mercy
and justice, which two most excellent virtues do chiefly magnify and extol his
eternal power and glory, which to have known and praised is his chief scope.
And who dare say unto him, why have thou dealt thus with angels and men? *
shall the pot say to the potter, why have thou made Romans 9. 20*
me thus? has not the potter power over the cley, of one and the same lump
to make one vessel to honor and another to dishonor.

For as he has wrought all things for his own purpose, as visible things to
man, of invisible substance: Even so he sustayneth and conserueth them, by an
invisible strength, and incomparable power: And as Job says: if he destroy
al again, who shall call him to account: shall the creature say to the creator
why have thou made me thus? Such rebellion sour mo^^ceth in evil all the
high treason that worldly subjects do to their Princes, the reward whereof is
death of body. * But God condemns both body and soul into hell Mat. 10 28.
Luke 12. 5. Moses a figure of Christ Jesus.
fire. * Therefore fear him.

We read of Moses as a figure of Christ Jesus: And of Pharao as a figure of
Satan. For as Pharao held the children of Israel under him in a slavish
subjection until God delivered them by his servant Moses: Even so does Satan
hold all mankind while we are in this Egypt, this vale of misery, in his
filthy slavery, until God deliver his elect out of Satan's power by his son
Christ Jesus working by power of his spirit, and by service of his holy Angels.

God promised Moses before he sent him back into Egypt, Exodus 4. 21.
saying: * I will harden Pharaos heart, that he shall not let my people go.
That is to say, I will blind all his senses, that he shall neither believe,
understand, nor regard the wonderful signs and horrible plagues, which I will
bring upon him and his people, to their forepointed destruction. * For God
Exodus 9. 19. Romans 9. 17.
says, to this end have I raised thee up, and appointed thee, that I may show
my power in thee to make my name known through all the world: Even so without
all contradiction, God before the world was did or^eine. Satan and his
adherentes both bodily and ghostly to be his adversaries, as he raised up
Pharao and harde^ned his heart: And gave Satan and his Angels, such an
unspeakable power, as should evermore impugn and resist all the good works
of God, and yet all the glory redoundeth to God himself. For God works all
to the end that his almighty power, his infinite goodness, his loving kindness,
his mercy and justice, might be the more magnifyed and praised, of his elect
both Angels and men. For as the benefit of light is best discerned by his
contrary which is darkness: Even so the almighty and most wonderful power of the
infinite God appears the more glorious and admirable, when the inferior
power which God him self has given to Satan is compared with it.

If any list to argue why God has so dealt with Angels and men, if the notes
of holy Scripture herein coated do not satisfy him, I leave him to dispute with
God himself upon whose ordinance, providence and power, every thing depends
without exception, for all th^nges have of him their being, moving, working and
power to dispose and distribute. And then it follows of necessity that Satan
dependes on him as sure as all the rest.

HOW IT HAS PLEASED GOD by the contrary actions and operations of his
creatures to manifest his own glory as well in justice as in mercy. CAP. 5.
THese things are manifest or may easily be made plain, to every one of mean
wisdom: so they be not utterly ignorant in holy Scriptures and void of the
grace of God. And it is not a new opinion to speak of two sorts of men,
whereof God has forepointed the one to salvation, and the other to damnation.
Eccl. 33. 10
For Jesus Sirach says. * All men are of the ground, For Adam was created of
the Earth, but the Lord has divided them by great knowledge, and made their
ways diverse: some of them he has blessed, exalted and made them his own:
And some of them he has cursed and cast down from the blessed state. For as
the Cley is in the hand of the Potter, so are men (and Angels) in the hand of
their Creator, he may do with them as he list. And he has set evil against
good: the unbeliever against the faithful, death against life, etc. So that in
the infinite miraculous works of the most high, we may see, that there are
ever two things the one contrary to the other, of insencible things it is
proved by Physic one thing binds, another loses, one thing comfort man's
nature, and another destroys it. We find by experience falshod against
truth, ignorance against knowledge, fleshly love against spiritual love, love
in adultery and fornication against love in marriage and godliness: false and
feigned friendship against true and honest friendship: false and idle faith
against true and working faith: flattery, dissimulation, and hypocrisy,
against plainnes, faithfulness, and true zeal of Gods service.

And whatsoever virtue there is: there is also a vice, his contrary and so of
every thing from the beginning: First of Angels, the good against the evil:
secondly of men, the elect against the reject, the wicked against the godly,
brother against brother, Cain against Abell, Ismael against Isaac, Esau
against Jacob, Pharao against Moses, a false God against the true God, a false
Christ against the true Christ. For all virtues and vices are contrary.

And we see that God in creating all things, has made each creature in their
kinds, and one mortal enemy and deuourer of another: for what thing soever
drives fear into an other thing: is enemy to the thing that conceaueth the
fear. Example

The Wolf to the Sheep, the Firret and Wezell to the silly Conny, the Cat to
the Mouse, the Spider to the Fly, are natural deuourers. And likewise of al
manner beasts and worms on Earth: And whatsoever of them: the same of the
fowls of the air, and fishes in the waters both salt and fresh. Finally the
same in effect is Satan and his adherents both bodily and ghostly to Gods elect
while they remain on Earth.

So that every creature living, has by natures ordinance, as some speak,
which is in deed Gods providence, a mortal enemy and deuourer: for as the
Wolf is to the Sheep: even so in efect is Satan to mankind: And all these
has this almighty God of nature wrought to set forth his own glory to Angels
and men, namely to show him self to be, the wonderful God of mercy and
Justice.

For Amos the Prophet says, * is there any evil in the Amos. 3. 6.
City which the Lord has not done? that is to say is there any plague or
other punishment, which men call evil that God has not forepoynted and does
command to be done. * I Esai. 45. 67
am Jehovah says God, and beside me there is no God: I make peace and create
evil, (that is to say all manner of plagues which man call evil, for all is
good to God his justice and mercy are equal in him) For even I the Lord says
he, do all these things.

The text is plain, that whatsoever is done good or evil to men, even when
one wicked murdreth an other: it is the Lords work by the ministry of Satan,
to punish the sins of men by their heaping sin upon sin. And yet God can
do none evil, whatsoever he does, for he is under no law, and he to whom no
law is cannot do amiss. For God made his law (by which good and evil is
discerned) for mankind: And not for himself to observe, no, no: but the
brea^h of Gods law is sin, death, and damnation: therefore who so is subject to
Gods law, and breaks the same, comitteth sin: but al mankind is subject to
his law and breaks the same: Therefore all mankind comitteth sin, and by
the law are damned for the same, out of which compass God and his son Christ
Jesus must needs be exempted because he fulfilled the Law for Gods elect
(for) himself had no need of it.

For albeit that * he put all things in subjection unto man: Psalm. 8. 6. Cor.
15. 27. Hebr. 2. 8.
it is worse then madness to think, much more to speak, that God himself is
included: this word al, is some time particular and sometime general in diverse
places of holy scripture.

The almighty Monarch of Heaven, and earth, is not only the creator of all
creatures but also the high law geuer, for every kind of creature, in those
regiments: So as before I conclude, God himself is not subject to any law,
and therefore cannot do evil. And why? Even because he owes neither homage
nor odedience to any to whom offense might be made, himself being the best and
the greatest, to whom all honor, glory and obedience is due.

All men ought to know that Satan is the auctor and solliciter of evil and
ordained of God to the same end. For he works in the hearts of Emperors,
Kings, Princes, Governors, Counselors, Nobilities, Magistrates, Officers and
Subjects: as King Pharao and his people, all the nations of Canaan with their
Kings, the Philistines, the Assirians, the Babilonians, the Romans and others:
by whom it pleased God to punish his people Israel: and at lenth (for their
infidelity, pride, disobedience, and neglecting the holy law) to plague them
with confusion: that they should no more dwell to geather, as a nation in one
Country but skattered abroad amongst many nations.

And Satan the instrument and solliciter of all their wickedness: and also the
executioner of all their pains and misery. And such business has God wrought
by Satan's ministry from the beginning from age to age, and that notably in
these our days. * For as it is written of old: Even so the nations Hct. 4. 28.
(in our days) have raged in madness, the people have devised innumerable
vanities, the Princes of the Earth have set them selves against the Lord and
his anointed, as they did of old: And as they did then, so have they done now,
and so shall do to the worlds end. What? * Even what soever the secret Psalm.
2. 1.
counsel of God had forepoynted to be done: so did they then do, so do they
now, so shall they do hereafter, neither more nor less, yt is Satan's office,
thereunto forepoynted of God, to entice mankind to all kind of vices: working
by his adherents both bodily and ghostly as it is written * he works by
falce preachers, and other wicked people, to Deuteronomy. 13. 1. etc.
disceaue others, and God deals so, even to try his people whether they do
love the Lord their God or no: For God wills his people to trust in him, to
obey him, to hear him and rest on him.

And Satan is not only the auctor of sin, and the solliciter and entiser of
mankind to sin: but also Gods executioner to punish sin by sin making
the wicked to heap sin upon sin: as King Saul, King Ahab, Judas etc.

Moreover he does not only tempt and entice the wicked sort (which God has
refused) to their damnation: but also cruelly vex and torment the very elect of
God, tempting and entising them to the comitting of most horrible sins, as
Idolatry, Blasphemy, Murder, Adultry, and all other filthy vices, and
thereupon makes some of them to despair of their salvation: for when the
conscience is wounded with the gnawing of sin, and despair of Gods mercy,
then is the soul for the time, as it were in Hell: And yet because they are
Gods elect, he draws them again through repentance and his mercy in Christ
Jesus: as he did David who confesses, saying * Thou, O Lord have made my
soul come up Psalm. 30. 4.
from Hell. And in all these works Satan does but his kind as every living
thing in his kind does as nature compels them.

* Great is the Lords, and most worthy to be praised: for 145. 3. 17.
his greatness is incomprehensible: he is righteouse in all his ways and holy
in all his works. * He has done all things Mark. 2. 37
well. Yea God has done passing well for the accomplishment of his eternal
purpose, in ordayning Satan and his train, with the greatest part of mankind
to damnation: because he is the only Monarch of Heaven and Earth, therefore he
only and none but he, may rightly say, I will do with mine own as I list.

As the Potter with his earthen pots may break and new make at his pleasure:
Even so may do our wonderful God, neither is it lawful for any, to call his
doings in question, further then holy scriptues does alowe^. Subjects are not
allowed to prace against their Princes doings: but every fool may say what they
list against Gods doings without reproach Wherein God is greatly beholding to
some Princes of the Earth: for so they may take their pleasures, and live as
they list like little Gods: they have no care how the great God is served.

Whereas the consideration of those his passing wonderful works ought to
breed an horrible fear in the hearts of the^ and their subjects. And all,
those shall be found happy and for ever blessed that can join unto this tear,
faith to believe his holy word containing the sweet promises of reward for
weldoing, and horrible punishment for ill doing: Hope to receive the rewards
promised through free mercy in Christ Faith. Hope. Love.
Jesus. And love with humble obedience to render thanks in his name, in whom
we are made acceptable in the sight of God, for whose sake we are dearly
beloved, for whose sake our prayers are received as a sweet smelling
sacrafice: for whose sake our sins are not only remitted: but also shall
never be imputed unto us, not unto us I say, which do submit our selves to
Gods holy ordinance, and use the means by him appointed in his holy word, by
which we are to receive his gifts and spiritual graces, which lie hidden in
many people, for want of Godly exercises wherein we ought to be occupied.

Therefore * we must stir up the gifts of God that are in us, as Paul
admonished Timothy, the means are, hearing, 2 Timothy 1. 6.
reading and folloing the holy scriptures and holy wrytings and preachings
grounded thereon. For as God is the sovereign goodness it self: even so all
goodness comes from him, * every good gift and every perfect gift comes down
Iam. 1.
from the father of light, and his holy spirit moving us, we think good
thoughts, speak good words, and do good deeds and not otherwise: For when
soever we think, speak or do: if it be good * it is God that works in us
both the will and Phil. 2. 13. 1 Cor. 3. 6.
the deed. * For of our selves we cannot think a good thought.

And contrariwise Satan is the capital evil and the extreme evil it self, *
for he is the tempter, which by his Angels and worldly adherents* puts all
evil thoughts into men's Matt. 4. 3. Genesis 3. 1. 2. John. 13. 2.
hearts. * Thus he delte with Eve, and so disceaued Adam, * he put in the
heart of Judas Iscariote to betray his master. Therefore all wicked motions
and filthy thoughts are stirred up by the Devil in our corrupt nature we
being his subjects. For by Adams fall we are all in Satan's possession. And it
is the battle of man's life to strive against his temptations, against
infidelity, pride of the mind and lusts of the flesh. Therefore our savior
has taught us to pray to be delivered from evil, from which we cannot keep
our selves without God his especial grace governing us by his Spirit.

OF GODS ETERNAL PVRPOSE of chosing and refusing of mankind and of the
anoiance that it receives by Satan and his angels. CAP. 6.
NOw to prove Gods eternal purpose of election and reiection of man Male and
Female * we know that all things work for the Romans 8. 28. 9 11. Genesis 25. 23.
Exo. 33. 19. Malac. 1. 2.
best to them that love God: even to them that are called of purpose * And of
the children not yet borne, having done neither good nor evil: it is written I
have loved Jacob, and have hated Esaw: that the promise of God might stand
according to the election, and not by works, but by him that calls, what
shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid. For he says
to Moses I will show mercy to whom I will show mercy, and have compassion on
whom I will have compassion. So then election is not in him that wills, nor in
him that ronneth: But in God that shows mercy on whom it pleases him. Psalm.
107, 8. 15. Rom 9 16. Exo. 9. 16.


* Oh that men would therefore fear the Lord, and declare the woonders that
he does amongst men. * For he says unto Pharao, for this purpose have I
raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee* that my name might be
declared through all the Earth. Behold to what end God hardened Pharaos heart:
even to the same end as he before the world was, had ordained the fall of
Angels and of men, to shewefoorth his glory, and himself to be the
wonderful God of mercy and justice.

Then thou will say, why does he yet complain, who can resist his will* Saint
Paul corrects that question, saying Romans 9. 20.
* Oh man what art thou that disputest against God? Shall the thing formed say
unto him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? has not the potter power
over the clay: even of one and the same lump, to make one vessel to honor and
another to dishonor? What if it please God, to show his wrath to make his power
known: in suffering with long patience, the vessels of wrath ordained and
prepared to destruction and damnation? and that he might declare the riches
of his mercy upon the vessels of mercy prepared unto glory.

The text is plain enough, that some are ordained and prepared to salvation
and other some to damnation. And our Savior Christ says of the reprobate whom
God has refused: * that God has blinded their eyes, and hardened their John.
12. 40
hearts, least they should see, understand, and believe, and be converted that
he might heal them. Moreover * God did Ephe. 1. 4.
elect whom pleased him, even before the foundation of the World was laid, and
those he did forepoint to be adopted in Christ Jesus unto himself, according
to the good pleasure of his will, that they might love him. For * all things
work for the best to them that love God: even to them that are called Behold
the purpose of God. Romans 8. 33.
of purpose. And those whom he knew before he did forepoint, and called them
effectually, and those he justified, and those he also glorified. * Who shall
then lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen, who^he does justify. And that
which the Lord has decreed, who shall make it void. Thus it is manifest Esai.
14. 27 46. 10.
by the holy Scriptures, that God did elect and reiecte whom it pleased him
as well of Angels as of men: even before the world was: And al for his own
purpose to show forth his own glory, and himself to be the glorious God of
mercy and justice. For God is glorified and magnifyed as much in his justice as
in his mercy, for if both Angels and men had not sinned, and by sin fallen
from their blessed state the mercy and justice of God had never been f^lonor
spoken of amongst men. But so it pleased God to deal with his own. And what
shall any man get to reason why or wherefore he has done this or that. It
behooves men rather to fear him and praise his holy name, in beholding his
wonderful and passing terrible works. For he being Monarch of all power and
dominion, has all things in everlasting possession: therefore he only and
none but he, may do with his own what he list.

No man can justly say that any thing which he possesses is properly his
own, because God has but lent it him for a time. And yet there are few so ill
mannered as to control any man, for using that which God has lent him, because
it is called his own: and shall we use less reverence to God the^ we do to
men?

God says by his prophet * the son does honor his father, Malac. 1. 6.
the servant does fear his Lord: If I be then your father, where is then mine
honor? If I be your Lord where is the fear ye ought to have of me, our
Savior Christ teaches us by the example of the * murmuring laborers, who
were Mat. 20. 11
sharply rebuked, for grudging against the liberality of the Lord of the
vineyard: which is this almighty Monarch and bountiful God: that deals so
frankly and lovingly with all creatures, namely men both good and bad.
Therefore let all people fear, to reason why God has dealt so or so with
Angels and men, further then is probable and allowable by holy Scripture.

In holy scriptures I find certain aunswers to those curious How to answer
the wicked.
questions, why God does this or that, namely in this hard matter of choosing
and refusing commonly called predestination. First he has done it for the
full accomplishment of his eternal purpose, decreed in him self before the
world was. * To the end that his glorious name might be known, Exodus 9. 13.
33. 19.
and his almighty power magnifyed all over the Earth * To the end he might
have compassion and show mercy on whom it pleased him. * To the end that his
ways might be known Psalm. 67. 2
upon the whole Earth, and his saving health among all Nations. * For when he
hardened the hearts of Pharao and his Exodus 14. 7
subjects, to follow the Israelites through the red Sea: he did it to that
end to be glorified in their destruction: for God said, I will get me honor
upon Pharao and his ho^st, his chariots and horsemen, (by confounding them)
that the Egyptians may know that I am the Lord. * He has done it To. 9. 22. 23
to the end to show his wrath and make his power known, on the vessels of
wrath prepared to destruction. And to declare the riches of his glory upon the
vessels of mercy prepared unto glory. To the end we might know the faith of
Gods elect: and have the knowledge of the truth which is according to godliness;
under hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie has promised to his
elect before the world began and has declared it in his word through preaching
and writing.

The final end of his eternal purpose inchosing and refusing both Angels and
men: and in ordayning the matter and the means to bring every thing to his
forepointed end: ever was, is now, and ever shall be, to show himself to be
the wonderful and glorious God of mercy and justice. For if man had not fallen
from his first blessed estate into sin: there should have been no declaration
as now is for mercy and justice.

Nevertheless fantastical wits demand freuolous and Curious questions.
curious questions: as this, with what equity and justice could God condemn
such infinite nombers of multitudes of people for the offense of one? and y^
for so sleyght a ma^ter as tasting the fruicte of a tree. I grant that in man's
judgment the offense seems small: And the punishment most severe and
horrible. But what remedy get we by disputing against him, whose will is an
everlasting law neither is any able to resist his decrees, dispute with him
who list, for I will no more, I have done to much already. From hence forth this
sentence shall satisfy me: So it pleased him to deal with his own: to make
just matter unto himself to execute both mercy and justice.

Indeed by man's corrupt reason and defiled conscience, ever favoring himself
in his sin: the value of the offense was little: but to Gods elect the wayght
of the precept, was of great importance, the infidelyty most horrible: the
pride and disobedience out of measure sinful: Because it was against the most
mighty Monarch of all power and dominion in Heaven Earth and Hell.

So infidelity, pride, disobedience, and negligence, by the w^ God his holy
precepts are not only lightly esteemed, but also wilfully despised and
stubbernly broken are the things where with Gods majesty is so greatly
offended, and takes it most unkindly: to be so unthankfully dealt withal of
his principal workmanshippe his own image, for whom he has made and
prepared so many good and precious things.

And when the matter shall be examined we shall find all the right on his side:
For which of us of the basest degree, can take it well to have our precepts
broken or to be disobayed and unthankfully used, of our underlings, when we
command but in trifles: especially of those that depend upon us for cloth and
food.

Behold the poorest man or woman will not endure quietly such disobedience and
unthankfulness: And every one has great reason not to suffer it, so far forth
as nothing be commanded but lawful and honest things. Because disobedience,
proceeds of infidelity and pride: in which enormicies are included all other
vices. Yea they are the very roots of all the evils done under the Sun what
soever. How much more then may our good God be justly offended with us his
creaturs wholly depending upon him, (albeit few confess it as they ought to do)
not only for cloth and food, but for creation, life, and all other benefits:
namely the soul, the image of God, and the most precious Jewel given every
one to keep and to look well to it, so commanded of God. Take heed to thy
self and keep thy soul diligently etc. that thou forget not Gods infinite
benefits. * And keep his comaundementes Deuteronomy. 4. 9. 40.
that it may go well with thee and thy children after thee. Example if one of
us commit a precious Jewel of great vallew into the keeping of one who is
bound unto us for benefits received of us: if the party trusted neglect that
precious Jewel, so that by his default it perish: will not every one utterly
dis^ike of such beastly dealing: how much more then may our good God dislyke of
such, as by wilful stubbernes, disdaynfully blot out his glorious image in
themselves by shamfull disobedience, breaking his holy law.

Behold we can do nothing to please God, except we believe and obey his word. *
Obedience is better then Sacrifice, and disobedience is as the sin of
Witchcrafte. Here may be 1 King. 15. 22. The dffere^ce between the elect and
reject concerning the law
a cauell because to obey and keep the law is not in man's power and that is
most true. But whosoever has the grace to examine the one by the other, shall find
such difference as between light and darkness. I mean thus: Gods elect whom
he has chosen, being led and guided, by the holy Ghost and his holy Angels,
loves the law and has a continual desire in his soul to observe it: sorry
when he breaks any jot thereof: more sorry that he cannot do all things, as
it requires: And therewithal he seeks for refuge in craving mercy in the
name of Christ Jesus: who has satisfied the rigor and strayghtnes of that
law in his own person being very man, every way sin except: And therefore
not for his own soul but for all that truly trust to receive salvation only
through his deserts: which are only all those, that God choose and separated,
to that end, before the world was made.

The other sort the reprobate which God has refused, being led and guided by
Satan his Angels, and their own corrupt nature they hate the law they have no
desire in their souls to observe it, no sorrow for breaking it, and although
the threatening of the law sounding in their ears make the^ sometime afraid:
yet they seek not the right way to be helped: because they follow the
suggestions of Satan and their own lusts. Therefore I call this blessed law
the balance of man's life, for by examination of his life how it agrees with
this law every one may see, weygh and know himself, whether he be in tht
right or in the wrong, in favor or out of favor with God.

For whosoever regards not the law, * God casts them of into Romans 1.
a reprobate sense, that is into Sata^s government to work most filthy and most
horrible evils, as are recited in the first to the Romans.

And no marvel for the stubberne wicked do wilfully disobey, and break the
law, as it were in dispite of his almighty majesty, which with one blast of
wind, might consume all enemies: And all are Gods enemies great and small, so
long as they walk not in faith fear and love, and obedience of his holy law.

And although the whole world is altogether set on wickedness, 1 Ioh. 5.
yet Gods Majesty is neither endomaged nor trobled thereby. For what detriment
sustained God, by Adams eating the forbidden fruicce? what damage or hindraunce
has God by all the filthy villenyes and horrible beastlines, committed by
mankind on Earth: As Idolatry, Blasphemy, Murder, Adultry, Fornication,
Perjury, Theft etc. I say none at all, for the godhead is not moved with
passions, neither troubled with all the vprors and confusions, done by Satan
and his adhetents in the world: but most lovingly exersiseth mercy on his
elect: and most quietly his justice on his reject people which he has not
chosen.

And albeit he has ordained rewards for weldoing, and punishment for il doing:
yet man by weldoing brings God no profit nor hindraunce by ill doing. For the
good and evil that man does, redoundeth to himself, for the good that man does
he deserves nothing, because it comes not of himself: but the holy Ghost
works it in him: And yet by grace he Luc. 17. 10.
receives the reward, as though it came of himself. * For when we have done
all the good that is possible for us to do, we shall yet be found
unprofitable servants toward God, because we do not that which the law
comaundeth. Contrariwise for the evil that man does, he justly deserves
damnation, for it is his own work by yelding to the motions of Satan through
infidelity, pride and disobedience, and such like vices which are the causes of
strife betwixt God and man.

And for these causes, God did execute his forethreatened sentence upon Adam
and his posterity. For Adam had then before his fall, freewill, (as many
falsely affirm that all men have yet) that is to say, he had free choice in
himself, to keep or break* the holy commandment, wherein he wilfully
refused God and rashly chose the Devil: neglected Gods truth and embraced the
lies of the Devil, whereof he is the father * and the only tempter of mankind
to all evil and mischief. John. 8. 38.
For he persuaded Eve that the punishment which God had threatened should not
be performed, whereupon she enticed Adam, And so committed the offense,
whereby he lost his freewil, from him and his posterity for ever. 1 Timothy 2.


And yet Satan told them truth in one thing, as is the common use of his
ministers in this World, to mix truth with falshed, the rather to make his
lies take place. For in eating the forbidden fruicte, they knew evil: whereas
before they knew but good only. Satan's promise was, they should be as Gods
knowing good and evil, the last point was true in in some sense, but the
chief point was altogether false, that was, how y^ punishment which God had
threatened should not be performed, and that they should be as Gods: But they
were sone ashamed of that credit, which they had yielded unto Satan's Suggestion
and of the breach of that obedience which was commanded them by their Creator.

As then it was, so is it manifest, that now Satan and his worldly adherentes
his instruments wicked people by whom he works amongst the multitudes,
(namely such as preach false doctrine) do many times speak the truth, and
rightly recite sentences of holy Scripture: never to the good end, but either
to their own gain, or to some other wicked purpose: such is their nature,
they can do none otherwise, then upon recital of true and holy sentences make
false conclusions. And who can resist nat^r^, except such as are lead by the
holy Ghost. And yet though man's reason cannot blame them in following nature.
Nevertheless God by his law has ordained death for such natural offenders:
which law Kings, Princes, and rulers of Nations Countries and Provinces ought
to obey and execute, as God commands in his Law, how justice from him ought
to be executed, Deuteronomy. 13. 7 Read the Chapter. Mat. 5. 17. 18. Luc. 16. 17.
saying. * Thine Eye shall not pity a false Prophet, Preacher or teacher, thou
shall not keep secret his false doctrine: but accuse him by order that he may
dye the death: thou may show him no mercy: * Christ Jesus came not to break
one jot of this Law of Justice: but to fulfill for his elect, that which was
not in man's power to do, and so to make an end of the ceremonies of the Law, *
which were shadows Col. 2. 15.
of good things to come, even figures of the coming of the Messiah, who came
to do his forepointed office, to redeem the miserable state of mankind in
his elect * whom God saw Ezec. 16. 6.
ly weltring in their own blood past recovery by his own strength, which was
the fall of Adam whereby all mankind was damned body and soul. * And then God
had compassion Exo. 33. 15. Romans 9. 19.
and showed mercy on whom it pleased him, that is to say, on those whom he had
forechosen and forepointed. For it was Gods pleasure to make Adam of such
miraculous complexion, quality and freedom of will, as he put it freely in
his own power and choice, to keep or leave his blessed state: to obey or
disobay the holy commandment. And further of a fatherly love God forewarned
him by a terrible threatening, to fear him from offending: And then seeing Adam
would and did wilfully offend: God could do no less of his justice having
spoken the word, then executed his terrible forethreatned sentence, once for
all upon Adam and his posterity for ever.

* The holy Scripture the word of God, which is as Galat. 3. 22.
true as God himself, has concluded all under sin, which conclusion was
decreed in his eternal counsel before this world began. And all to bring the
rest of his eternal purpose to his forepointed end: to have just matter for
himself to show mercy and execute justice.

Behold the profit that Adam got by knowing good and evil, which two words
among others, are too too much abused. Albeit written * woe be to them that
speak good of Esai. 5. 20.
evil, and evil of Good, as the Papists do praise and exalt the Popes
religion, and disprayse the holy service of God and true preaching of the
Gospel: They ymagin darknns to be light, and light to be darkness: therefore
woe to them and all other wicked ^ectes. For good and evil shall remain until
the worlds end: and shall be rewarded in everlasting life or death either with
ease in joy, or else with pain in sorrow for ever. As for the abuse of those
words good and evil. I will only name them, as a good man, a good horse, a
good dog, and il man, etc. whatsoever pleases our fantafie^ we call good and
the contrary we call evil. So that as our affections us move and lead us:
even so we use or abuse those words, good and evil, with all other
benefits of God. But my definition of good and eull before God is the keeping
and breaking of his holy commandments.

For whatsoever God wills and commands man to do the same is good to be
done in thought word and deed* And the contrary is evil: that is to say sin
or wickedness. Good and evil are otherwise expressed by these words virtue
which commonly is whatsoever is good: I liken to a fair tree having many
b^aunches, ladan not only with pleasant and sweet smelling leaves, but also
with most dilicate and Contrariwise, vice which signifies whatsoever is evil:
I liken also to an il favored tree having as many branches as virtue and
heuier laden: but both the leaves and fruict are full of deadly poison: most
horrible to behold, and loathsome to the taste, of all that truly fear God: And
yet to the ungodly as pleasant and delicate to their sense, as the fruict of
virtue to the godly: because gods elect which are the godly, are either holden
up, or r^ysed when they have fallen by the ministry of the word woorking by
the power of the holy Spirit given unto them from the Father and the Son. ^
Tim. 2. 26 Iam. 4. 7.
And the reprobate which are the ungodly, are thrown down and kept under, by
the ministry of Satan and their own lusts, to whom they * are captives. And
yet we are exorted * to resist the Diuill and he shall flee from us: resist
him by committing our selves carefuly and har^ely, into Gods ^uition in the
name of his well-beloved son, by (...) faith in his word and promises: by
humble obedience to his holy law, precepts, and ordinance: by prayer,
fasting, alm^sse deeds, Phili. 2. 12. 1 Pet. 4. 18.
and charity to all. For by those means we are willed, * to work out our
salvation, with fear and (...)ing* * For if the righteous be scarsely saved,
where shall y^ ungodly appear.

Not that our doing the forenamed works, should any way deserve our
salvation: but being done of us, they are the fruicts of our faith and love
toward God and our Neighebours, which are the things commanded by our savior
Mat. 5. 1^. John. 14. 2^
Christ, when he said, * Let your light so shine before men that they may see
your good woorks and glorifye your Father which is in heaven. And yet must we
not do those works to the intent to be seen and praised of men, but chiefly for
the love and obedience we owe to God, and to give good example to others.

And whereas Saint Peter says if the righteous be scarsely saved etc. he
means not that Gods elect are in his sight at any time in hazard of their
salvation: but in their own consciences to themselves, it seems y^ they are
saved with great difficulty: they considering their manifold sins, and often
wavering in their faith, when they see what is in themselves:

And no merueile though they stacker at the assaults of Satan, for he
presumes sawcily, * without bidding, as it Job 1. 7. 2. ^
seems among the holy Angels into the presens of God: much more dare he enter
into the corrupt silly minds of mankind, to dispute with their souls for
life and death: charging them, with those things which their consciences cannot
deny: As Idolatry, Blasphemy, Perjury, Murder, Adultery, Fornication, Theft,
False witness, Pride, Disobedience, and whatsoever vice else.

Now it is most true that Satan does challenge every soul of mankind by the
severe justice of God (because no man lives without sin) every soul by
Adams fall is condemned. Now if the soul of man reply confessing his sins
and in repentance alleging the merits of Christ Jesus thereby to be saved:
Satan will reioce and say, nay that cannot be, for thou have so little esteemed
of him and his precepts that he cares not for thee, * for thou cryest and he
answers not thy soul, James 1. Psalm. 77. Haba. 1. 2.
* Behold thou art tossed like a wave of the Sea, thy faith is between hope and
^read: therefore thou can receive no pardon at the Lords hand. And with
infinite nombers of such disputations, and assaults, Satan has, does now and
ever shall in this life vex the very elect of God. * Therefore put Ephesians. 6. 1.
1
^n all the armor of God, that you may be able to stand against Satan, for
we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against the world and the Devil,
into whose power God gives the wicked and disobeient.

Saint Paul tells the causes at large: * The wrath of Romans 1.
God is reaueled from Heaven against al ungodliness of men, which with hold the
truth in unrighteousness. For as much as that which may be known of God is
showed unto them even the invisible things, that is, his eternal power and
Godhead, are seen, by the creation of the world, being considered in his
work, to the end that men should be without excuse: because when they know
God, they did not glorifye him as God neither were thankful: but became vain
in Ephesians. 4.
their ymaginations, their foolish hearts were blinded, full of darkness: when
they professed themselves wise, they became fools: As men do in these days,
as often as they do any things of themselves without the counsel of Gods
word, without the which there cannot be any thing well done.

So were they blinded, that they turned the glory of the incorruptible God,
into images, not only of corruptible men: but also of birds and four footed
beasts, and of cr^aping things, even vile worms, wherefore God gave them
over, into their own lusts, (that is into the power of Satan) to all
uncleanness: to defyle their own bodies between themselves, turning the truth
of God into a lie, worshipping and serving creatures, forsaking the creator,
which is most holy and blessed for ever Amen.

For these causes God gave them into vile affections, so that the weomen did
change their natural use into that which is against nature: and the men
likewise left the natural use of the women, and burned in their lusts one
toward another, so that man with man wrought filthynes, and received within
themselves such recompense of their errors, as was meet: for as they regarded
not the word of God: even so he gave them up into a reprobate mind: for a
further punishment of their disobedience: even still proceeding from evil to
worse: to be full of all Unrighteousness, Infidelity, Pride, Idolatry,
Blasphemy, Adultery, Fornication, Murder, Theft, Malice, Envy, Coueteousenes,
Debate, Deceipte, taking all things in all part. Backbiters, Haters of God,
Doers of wrong, Proud bosters, Inuenters of evil things, without natural
affection, merciles, never appeased, which men though they knew the law of
God: that they which commit such things are worthy of death, yet not only do
the same themselves, but also favor those others that do them.

Behold it is a doble fault, not only to do evil, but also to favor them
that do evil. Yet suerly that is the nature of wicked folks of what degree so
ever: even to favor such vices in others, as are in themselves. For if
Maiestrates were verteous and zealous of Gods holy religion, such horrible vices
as a foresaid, could not escape unpunished.

Therefore Maiestrates and al officers, ought to take heed, how they favor,
pitye, and help offenders against Gods law.

For it is very probable that they are infected with the same vices, which they
favor in others, I mean specially those vices, for which Gods law commands
death: which should not pass without some kind of punishment where Christian
governors live, unless it do evidently appear unto them that favor showed
unto the offender would make more to the glory of God, and common benefit then
the punishment which the offendour should sustain: By this recital of the
first to the Romans, it appears at large, for what causes God forsakes
such as fear not him: and wherefore he casts them of into a reprobate mind,
into the power of Satan, as captives to be ledd of him, from evil to worse,
Even till they come to their utter destruction.

Oh that men would therefore fear the Lord, and show forth his wonders among
the children of men done by his almighty power. * Who ever has, does now, and
ever shall Eccle. 3. 14.
do his manifold and wonderful works: purposly that men should fear him. For
he punishes sin by sin, and mankind ly his own invention and
abomination: As when some by weltring in their own sin and filthynes,
proceeding still from evil to worse, even that is Gods just punishment to give
them over to Satan, to harden their hearts by thei^e infidelity, pride and
disobededience, to set their affections so gredely one some wicked purpose,
that no counsel may persuade them nor argument remove them from comitting such
wickedness as shall be to their own confusion whereutto Satan does shooue and
pushe them forwards, by such intricate subtilties of pleasant enticementes: or
by such frantic fumes of cankred malice, that they shall have no power to
foresee, their imminent dangerous mischief nor believe it, though it be
foretold them, by their dearest friends: And albeit perhaps that by a dyme
foresight they be moved to mistrust the sequel and so to fear the peril, yet
shall they not avoid it. So incomprehencible are the intricate and secret
means wrought in the^ by secret working of wicked spirits: by which God
punishes sin by sin: Even by man's own inuen^ions and abominations.
Sapiens. 12. 13.

As for example, when King Saul had committed that horrible sin of
disobedience against God: (not of malicious, presumption, as diverse of the
wicked do, but of a sottish devotion such as papists call good intent) he tell
daily from evil to worse, until the spirit of the Lord departed from him, ^
and he left to the counsel of his own will: then the which plague none can be
greater. For * man is a beast in his own knowledge Iere. 10. 14
being in honor, and abounding in wealth and casting of the fear of God, *
David compares them to beasts that Psalm. 49. 21.
perish, for indeed they are in worse case, then any brute beast when they
want the fear of God.

Mark what follows, * the spirit of the Lord came upon Sam. 16. 13. 14.
Dau^d etc. And the spirit of the Lord departed from Saul: and the Lord sent
an evil spirit to vex him. Note it well. the evil spirit went at Gods
commandment. God Examples how God sends both good and evil Spirits.
sent him, by which it is evident, that God sometime so deals with such as
give themselves over to follow their own lusts namely that for their iniquity,
he takes away that portion of his spirit that he had given them and sends
an evil spirit to vex them: to avoid that heavy judgment we must continually
fight against Satan and his adherents spiritual and Heb. 12. 1. 2
carnal: looking unto Christ Jesus our captain and finisher of our faith by
whom only we overcome.

For * without him we can do nothing, we are not able to John. 15 5.
resist Satan exept the holy Ghost strengthen us, neither can we do any other
good thing not so much as * to think a good 2 Cor. 3. 5.
thought*

Also this example proves that God moves, appoynteth, and directs some time
the evil spirits to seize upon such as neglect to fear, love and to obey him:
to punish their former sins, by making them afterwares to commit greater
evils: As King Saul did afterward in asking counsel, and seeking help of
Witches, Enchaunters, and Sorcerers, when the spirit of the good Lord was gone
from him.

Thus we see, when man forsakes God by disobedience: God forsakes him and
leaves him to his own corrupt will: And then forthwith * they are in the
snare of the Diuil holden 2 Timothy 26.
at this will. Oh that men would therefore, with reuerente love and humble
obedience, fear this almighty Jehovah and passing wonderful God, and pray to
him heartily in the name of Christ Jesus to give them a fervent desire of
weldoin, ^ according to his word and grace, to be sorry when they do the
contrary: which fervent desire of weldoing and hearty repentance for ill doing,
sincerely exercised without Hypocrycie joined with true faith in Christ Jesus,
is sufficient to salvation.

* For he is not only the fulfilling of the law, for all Romans 10. 4. John.
1. 19.
that truly trust in him: but also the very * lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world. That is to say, the sins of worldly people, such and so
many as God before he made the world did choose and forepoynt to be saved by
Christ Jesus.

Thus we see by that which was done to king Saul, king Ahab and others
mentioned in holy Scriptures, that men are moved, led, and governed often by
evil spirits. And albeit there appears a certain feeble desire of weldoing
in some men: yet doubtless the same never comes to perfection of true
godliness, except the holy ghost work it: yea there be many that seek * to
enter in at the strait gate, and Math. 7. 14
yet but few that find it.

Because * mankind (flesh and blood by sin corrupt) is Genesis 6. 5. 8. 21.
naturally altogether inclined to evil, not able of himself to think a good
thought. In such wretched state was mankind wrapped by the fall of Adam.
Nevertheless so many as heretofore have had, have now, or hereafter shall have
grace to follow effectually in Christ Jesus: they no doubt have are, and shall
be renewed by him, and made again the pure image of God, children of
Salvation, more perfect then in their first creation. And that by reason of
election, whereby they are established never to fall again into damnation,
into sin they fall daily, * yet though they fall they shall not be Psalm. 37.
24.
cast away: for the Lord in mercy recouereth them. But all the rest whom God
has not chosen remain still in the pollution of Adam in Satan's captivity, how
high and mighty on Earth soever they be.

Behold here the reason why * every creature of mankind ought to fear and
tremble, in the presence (which is every where) of our eternal and almighty
Monarch of Heaven, Earth and hell: to crave his favor to fight under his main
standerd (armed with his grace) which is his holy law.

And although it is impossible for mankind of his own strength to observe the
law as it requires: yet it is a special note of Gods favor (upon whom
soever) to have a zealous desire to keep it, and a sorrowful mind in breaking
it.

Therefore.
Let curious heads and tatling tongues,
leave of their iangling talk
And humbly stoop unto the Law,
wherein God bids them walk:
For although faith does justify,
and not deeds of the Law,
Yet he that will not do the deeds
Shall cough himself a daw.
For we are bound to love under the law, and yet not to trust that we are
saved by the Law. For it is plain that by * the works of the Law no flesh
shall be justified. Indeed, Galat. 2. 16.
the promise of God preuenteth the Law: for if the Law could give life to
Salvation, then no doubt it should save those 3. 21. 22.
that could keep it, and put their trust in their deeds, but all was concluded
under sin: that the promise by faith in Christ Jesus might be performed to
them that believe.

Every one by nature has faith to believe, such things as 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9 10.*
12.
they read, hear, and like. Yea * Satan shall work lying signs and wonders,
and God shall send on the reprobate strong dilusion, that they shall believe
lies. But to have this special faith in Christ Jesus to salvation, is only
incident to those whom God has chosen in Christ Jesus to himself.

Now because none but God only, knows whom he has chosen to have this
special faith: Therefore it is every one of mankind their part and duty, with
reverend fear, to crave it of the Lord. And let none be in despair, to
obtain: for our Lord Jesus has promised that what soever good thing is asked
in his name, his heavenly Father for his sake will grant it. * Ask and ye
shall receive, seek and ye shall find: knock and it shall be opened unto
you, etc. * If any lack Matt. 7. 7. Iam. 1. 5.
wisdom, let them ask it of God, and waver not, for he that doubts to
receive that he prays for, shall receive no goodness at the Lords hands. For
the promise is made on that condition: * what soever ye ask in prayer in my
name: if ye Mat. 21. 22 Fides est: donu^ Dei.
believe ye shall receive it. Herein let every one examine themselves, whether
they have in themselves such steadfast faith as does assure them to enjoy that
they pray for, so that of necessity we must believe or be damned.

For our Savior says, * if you abide in me and my words John. 15. 7.
abide in you: ask what you will and it shall be done for you.

The contrary is, if we believe not, if we abide not in him, and his word
abide not in us, we can receive no Heavenly grace, at the Lords hand: saving
such as he gives in common to all without asking: And Saint James tells the
cause why? for that we ask amiss, good things, and receive them not for want
of faith, or else things to consume upon our lusts: And therefore not meet for
God to grant nor fyt for us to receive.

The consideration of these things, are to put us in memory of our fond
ignorance or slouthful negligence, or beastly wantonness, and especially of our
passing urgent necessity to crave Gods favor and holy spirit to direct us
from time to time. And then our hearts shall understand, what good reason King
David had to pray, * Lord take not thy holy spirit from Psalm. 51. 11.
me.

For as long as there is in us any desire of weldoing, as a wishing to keep the
law: a lothsomnes of ildoing, and a sorrow for our offenses: by those tokens
let us assure our selves, that the spirit of the Lord is in us, and is loath to
depart from us, but strives still to get the greater place in our mind and
put Satan to the lesser: For of this, let us assure our selves: temptations of
the flesh and the Diuill will ever have place in our minds, while we are in
this life: And at our death will not depart, until * he be thrust out by a
stronger who Luke 11. 21. 16. 22.
even by Christ who works in us by the holy Ghost.

Satan is the strong man that possesses the houses of men's minds, and Christ
our Savior is the stronger, which delivers the souls of his elect out of
Satan's power, and puts Satan from his possession.

So let us pray that God take not his holy spirit from us, when * Nathan the
prophet reproved K. David, thereby calling Sam. 11. 9.
him to repentance he perceived very well that the spirit of the Lord by the
corrupt nature of man was kept under while he followed his fleshly lusts and
adultry, and his (...) ^^ulses, to cover his filt (...) by murder.

For when folks of purpose to serve their lusts, cast of the fear of God*
then their lusts with the evil that governs them, leads al the^ on from
evil to worse and makes them to heap sin upon sin to their utter
destruction, except Gods mercy reclaim them. Into these temptations they fall
not by chance, fortune, at al adventures, nor yet al^ue by Satan's own will*
For God has him so much at his beck, that neither he nor his angels, can go
when, where and to whom they list: but when, where and to whom they are sent.
For * y^ 1 Samuel 16. 14 1 Reg. 22. 21. 22.
Lord sent an evil spirit to vex king Saul. And the Lord sent an evil, spirit
to deceive king Ahab: even a lying spirit into the mouths of his iiii. ^.
prophets, whose persus;ion he followed (in despite of Mich^as to his own
destruction, and so it was forepointed of God.

By those and such like examples of holy Scriptures, it is evident that God
sindeth the spirits both good and bad, to whom it pleases him, in whom is no
partiality, Princes and Sap. 6. 1. 10. 9.
Subjects are equal in his fight. * The Lord eareth for all alyke: saving
they that abuse auctority shall have the greatter punishment.

Moreover we read in holy Scriptures of many evil and unclean spirits, that
in every age have diversely vexed many people by sundry qualities. Some to
commit blasphemy, idolatry, per^^y: sow murder, adultery, fornication, theft,
some draknesse, frenzy, and utter madness. And some to despair of their
salvation, and so destroy themselves: and of these and such like we have
examples by daily experience. All which miseries, with other infinite wicked
and carnal motions * are not strange: but even such as by Gods ordinance,
Cor. 10. 13.
follow the corrupt nature of man, as punishments for his infidelity, pride and
disobedience: even by sin to punish sin through man's own inventions and
abominations.

Therefore Gods predestination his forepointment of some to salvation and some
to damnation, ought to be familiar to all men, (...) ^^th come to, (...) or
(...) because it is an infallible truth, declare (...) by the word of God;
from (...) wh(...) disc^nes^ of his holy scriptures (...) by the (...) of the
law and the prophets, of the new Testament; by Christ Jesus himself* the
doctrine thereof (...)firmed by miracles, and sealed with his precious blood,
and (...) by the (...) and blood of his Apostles and Disciples, and (...) the^
sithence, by an infinite number of God (...), (...) death by diverse torments
for the confirmation of the same.

And it is n^ small (...) nor (...) part of the glad tidings which the Lord did
(...) be preached to all none excepted by ^^sse such as of (...) will do
refuse it, and for a witness (...)* The Apostles well commanded Matthew. Mark.
6. 11. Luke
to shake the dust of the in(...) (...) depart from them, because it shall be
harder with such stubberne malicious, in the day of judgment* th(...) (...) me
had Gomor^^h.

Therefore it (...) be not t^ he kept in silence, but freely preached every
where: for by that means the prayer of king David, and all he^ (...) of God is
to be (...)yned. That his Psalm. 67. 2.
way may be know^ (...) the (...); and his saving health among all nations.
This forepoyntment of God is a Luke 10.
secret: * which God has (...) the most part of the wise and learned of the
World; and has opened them unto the poor and simple souls* * This is the
secret which in other Ephesians. 3.
ages was not opened to (...) as it is not revealed unto his holy (...) and
Prophets, (...). The secret that God Romans 16. 25 26. 2 Timothy 1. 9
had chosen the Gentiles before the World began was kep^ close until it was
revealed by the Gospel preached: Then called ^ee the Gentiles with an holy
calling, not according to their works, but according to his own purpose and
grace which was given the^ through Christ Jesus before the world was: given to
them is not to all ingenerall, but especially to 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2 Heb. 11. 6.
those that rightly believe in Christ Jesus. * For all men have not faith. * And
without faith it is impossible to please God. Natural faith (as some speak)
is in all men: but faith to* salvation is special to Gods elect. ^ Every good
gift is from Iam. 1. 17. 1 Co. 4. 7. John, 14. 6. John. 6. 44.
God. * What have thou that thou have not received* have thou faith to
salvation? Then thou have received it of God, for all men have it not. For * no
man can come to the Father but by the Son. * And no man can come to the
Son, except the Father draw him.

It is given to some of Gods elect (though not to all) to Mat. 13. 11
know the secrets of the kingdom of Heaven, but it is not given to any of the
reprobate to know them rightly. * Their Esai. 6. 9. 11
hearts be hardened and their eyes be blinded: how does God blind the Eyes of
his refused people? even by the ministry of Satan called the God of this World.

Therefore if the Gospel be yet hidden. * it is hidden from 2 Cor. 4. 3.
wicked questions.
them that perish: of whom the God of this World has blinded the eyes of their
minds: so far as they dispite God most horrible saying, if Gods
predestination be such, as every man is elected or rejected before the world
began, then if I be elected I shall be saved: If I be rejected, I shall be
damned: what skils it what I do? why should I not do what I list, and take my
pleasure in all things while I am here: or why should I fast, pray, give
alms, observe the Law, or do any goodness, seeing it helps not to salvation?
These are motions of the Spirit: what Spirit? of Satan, not of God.

For these and such blasphemous arguments, proceed not from a corrupt mouth
only as from a mere man, but as from one possessed by the diuill, which holds
him captive from believing and obeying the truth. In such the spirit of God is
not for a time, while they commit wickedness: as it was in King David while he
committed Adultery and Murder: but through repentance wrought in such by Gods
grace, the holy spirit over comes and shows it self: And then such se
themselves as King David did, what they were while the spirit of the Lord was
as it were absent, or stayed his woorking to direct them.

Now if such lewd people as before mentioned could believe the holy scriptures,
and conten^ themselves with the true interpretation there of the (...) they
should find this treatis by Gods true experience to be the infallible truth
of the eternal almighty and most glorious God the only Monarch of Heaven and
Earth.

GODS ETERNAL PVRPOSE Proved by the holy Scriptures, and how by his will each
thing is brought to his forepointed end. CAP. 7.
FIrst that God has chosen and blessed, al y^ Ephesians. 1. 4. 5. 11. 2 Timothy 1. 9.
Titus 1. 2. 3.
faithful in Christ Jesus, before the foundations of the world vere laid: and
did forepoynte them, to be his children adopted in Christ Jesus, in whom and by
whom, he has opened unto us the secret of his will according to his good
pleasure, purposed in him self, before he began to frame the world. And it
is plain, that God deuideth, if I may so speak his will, in respect of us one
part thereof is reveled in his word by holy scriptures: whereof (with reverence
under correction of the same, we may boldly speak.

The other part of his will, is secret to himself, by which he purposed in
himself, to have matter to work on, to exercise both mercy and justice * even
to prepare some vessels to Romans 9. 22.
honor and glory, and other some to dishonor and destruction the depthe of this
secret passes man's reason to find out: Therefore we must leave it to God and
say, his will be done. For indeed he is the right * Lord of the vin^ard, that
may give Matthew. 20. 13. 14. etc.
great wages for little service: And small reward for long attendance and hard
labor. For he only and none but he, is the righteous Lord, that may justly
say: I will do with mine own as I list.

Examp^^ touching his predestination. As a perfect workman, pretending to
build an house, has conce^^ed in his mind before hand, the Idea or perfect
image of the whole plot which he pretends, which every corner, member and
ioynte, as it were already wrought in perfection: Even so, this eternal and
almighty Monarch of all power and dominion: the geuer of knowledge, coming
arts, sciences and perfection of the same: ever had, has and ever shall have,
all the plots of Heaven, Earth, and Hell with all their contents the very
beginning, midst and ending, of all and every thing, that ever was, is, or
shall be done, from everlasting to everlasting always present in his sight. For
with him there is no distinction of time; past nor to come: but the time
present only, distinction of times are for Angels, Deuilles, mankind and other
creatures which had beginning, but not for God without beginning or ending.

Therefore it is most true, that God did foresee, forepointe and from
everlasting ordain, the beginning, midst, and ending of all whatsoever, was,
is, or shall be done, in Heaven, Earth, and Hell, from everlasting to
everlasting. Who so denies this, does not only deny his almightines: but also
affirms that God has less knowledge, less foresight, less invention,
less power and less providence, then he has given to mortal man whom he
has made.

But these things following are manifest and true, by holy scriptures: that
God for the accomplishment of his eternal purpose, * made by his word the
first Adam to rise out of the Genesis 1. 17. 5. 7.
Earth and become flesh and blood, in all purity and innocence* endowed him
with discretion, wisdom, and understanding and a reasonable soul in freedom
of will, for otherwise he could not have been the image of God. And it pleased
God to create him of such miraculous complexion, and innocent state in such
fredome of will to bring the rest his eternal purpose to his forepoynted end.
And therefore he lest Adam alone to him self at his own free choice, to
keep or leave his blessed state.

Therefore the punishment which (...) if he should offend was justly executed
upon him and his posteriety for ever.

Because he did unworthily esteem, and in w^nt(...) (...)fully break Gods holy
precept. Yet, we may neither say nor think that the fall of Adam (...)ened by
cha(...), t^ (...)wares to God least we deny his almightines: for seeing a
sparrowe falls not to the ground without his will, much more Adam could not
fall wither this will, * man is of more value Luke 12. 7.
then many sparrowes. Therefore Adam could not been fallen, namely so terrible
a fall, except God had de^r^de it, for nothing is don which he could not let if
it pleased him. Therefore it was his will and forepoyntment to accomplish the
rest of his most holy purpose, Satan being his instrument* who before was
ordained and fallen to the same end.

And yet was Adams fall, wholly through his own fault, Romans 8. 28. 29. 1 Cor.
15. 45. Romans 8. 3.
and all to the end that God might perform the rest of his * eternal purpose,
* to redeem again of the damned seed of Earthly Adam those whom he, before
the world was, had chosen, and forepoynted to salvation. And to that end, * he
sent the second. Adam his only son from Heaven of his own substance and
nature to take upon him our flesh, to condemn sin in the flesh for them whom
he had forepoynted. * to be John. 3. 3. 4
new borne again by faith in the second Adam Christ Jesus.

Secondly God has ordained, before the world was, the means and the matter,
how every thing should come to his forepoynted end, and how many should be
saved and damned, and which they be is only known to himself above: And to
that end he subjected all mankind, under his royal law, saying to all * do
this and live. Which law is not in man's Luke 10. 25. Leuit. 18. 5 Hebr. 7. 19.
power above to observe as it requires.

Therefore * the law brings nothing to perfection. For it was given to Mose
and by him to the people to keep them in civil order and honesty of life: it
was not given to justify to salvation, because none can observe it as it
requires.

Therefore by very justice * into (...) concludes* (...)e, (...). And (...)
come Christ: Jesus with grace and Gal. 3. 22. John. 1. 17. 1 Timothy 2. 5. 6. Romans
4. 25.
truth and satisfied the rigor and strayghtnes of the law, (...) read the
(...) between God and man: even for these so many as he had chosen and
forepoynted before the world was to ^ee his (...) adopted in Christ Jesus, who
is the elder brother of all, the (...) of God, (...) by nature to the whole
Monarchy of Heaven; and Church*

Thirdly we see* feels and understand, that our good God has made this work^
with all the re^^ences for man's use, and * prepared it in re(...) before his
creation, as P(...)ces of the Earth and every man to his powe(...) for their
children yet (...). And albeit God gave man all necessaries before he was able
to ask: yet was* it his good pleasure also to command man to c^a^e it of him:
as though it seems that * he Sap. 6. 7. Eccl. 9. 1. 2.
cares for all alike: because * no man can know by any thing that happens in
this life* whom God has chosen to salvation, for it falls to the Godly as to
the ungodly: And so it seems he loves all alike* But certainly it is not so.
For he has Luke 18. 7.
a speciell care for his elect: * whose wrongs he will revenge upon the wicked
worldlings.

And commonly he keeps whom he has chosen to salvation, 1 Cor. 11. 32.
under correction in this world: * because they should not be condemned with
the wicked of the world. Therefore he endueth them with his holy spirit;
helping them in his faith, fear, love, and obedience, by his ^otherly
correction, by exercising them in trobles and afflictions, which h^s does to
them of special love and favor, albeit flesh and blood cannot so take i^ yet
^er^enly* whom the* Lord loves he castneth: and Heb. 12. 6. read all the
Chapter.
scourges every son that he receives, therefore if we live without
correction, whereof all are pertakers, then are we ^astardes, and not sons.

And although salvation is not given by observation of the law: And although
God ordained all necessaries for mankind before he was able to ask it: yet
seeing it is his good pleasure, to command mankind to love and desire to keep
the law, and (...) we should (...) prayed (...) good things ^s his hands ^^
the name of Christ Jesus* what (...) monsters and (...) we should dispute the
(...), or think it (...) to live (...) the (...) or ^e^dlesse to pray for these
things which commonly mankind receives, (...) in general which neither pray
at all: (...) knows the right way (...) to pray^:

As though they that have (...) ^^^ches, whereby they (...), (...) need to
pray for their daily bread because they have it alway^^ and though (...)? were
needles ^y the lord prayer to say, thy (...), (...) it is (...) to all; and
most certainly true, (...) his (...) will i^ all thing (...) all (...), in all
(...), (...) all his purposes shall thoroughly be (...) all his enemies*

Therefore they that (...), the true faith, fear and sone of God and seek
their salvation in Christ Jesus, will never be so folish thy to ^^ble of Gods
secret works, and to demand why he has done this ^^ that but they will
(...) all the devises of their wits, (...) and understanding, unto his most
holy will and crau^ his mercy in Christ Jesus: in whose name he has promised
whatsoever is necessary for mankind to whatsoever shall ask i^ (...) faith:
which none can do without his special gra^e.

Therefore it is not (...) gods reason: but also every man's (...) duty, to
(...) all (...) necessaries of Gods Majesty, if there were (...) the^^ pro^eth
us (...) doing: but only to show our (...): even that were a ^all and
sufficient argument.

For who knows the mind of the Lord, which shall be saved Romans 9. 34.
or (...): that (...) is (...) himself: so that neither man co(...) and know
that of another. Howbeit every man ought not only to know it in, and of
himself: but also is be assured of his salvation by the more mercy of God in
Christ Jesus, which necessity we must believe or else be vani^^ed.

Therefore be your dispayr. For that is blasphemy against the mercy of God,
that in the name of Christ Jesus let him crave true repentance and hope suerly
to find that he seeks, to receive that he asks, and at his knocking to
have the door of mercy opened, that in mercy he may receue his salvation, not
for his keeping of the law, nor for his own good works, but for the mere
merits of Christ Jesus, even the Lamb of God appointed before the world was,
to take away the sins of the woorlde in Gods elect, let us rest upon that
which is opened unto us by the holy scriptures. For it is passing folly, worse
then stark madness, to endeavor to know that, which the Lord will not have
known, vidz. who shall be saved or damned.

For God who works upon his own foundation, which ever remains and has
this sentence for a seal. * The Lord knows 2 Timothy 2. 19.
who are his.

Therefore let all that call one the Lord Jesus depart from iniquity: and lay
hold one mercy only walk he never so holyly.

Furthermore the eternal God in the law and the prophets has set down
sufficient doctrine how he would be served in the congregations of people:
according to his own prescription, and not after man's invention, for Moses
says, * you Deuteronomy. 12. 8 12. 8. 32.
shall not do every man what seems good in his own eyes: * But whatsoever I
command says the Lord, that take heed to do: and nothing, diminish nothing.
* For you shall Ezec. 20. 28
not walk after the ordinances of your forefathers nor observe their manners,
* ye be my friends says Christ Jesus: John. 25. 14.
If you do whatsoever I command you: who so can do that needs do no more,
yet the Monks etc. had their works of supererrogation. In all controversies
says the Lord ye Ezec. 44. 24
shall judge according to my judgments, and keep my Laws do ^o statutes in
all my assemblies. * when ye appear Esai. 1. 12.
before me (that ^^ when y^e (...) together to the Church to serve (...) who
requires these things at your hands: what have I to do wi^h the multitude of
your sacrifyces: your insence is abomination: I can not away with your new
Moons and solemn Days, it is iniquity, my soul hates them. Mark this
well. If the incomprehencible majesty of God (which is here termed his Soul)
did hate the Jewish ceremonies erected by himself, because they were corrupted
by man's fantastical inventions: How much more does he hate yt service under
the tyranny of the Pope which is pretended to be done unto God, being
repugnant unto his holy will expressed in his word.

And yet meaning the Kings, Princes, and rulers of Nations, and even such as
profess Christianity do neglect * and Matt. 7.
break Gods holy commandments, and fatherly counsels, for to establish those
humayn traditions and inventions, wherewith Satan is well pleased, and lulleth
them to sleep soundly in their errors, until God see his time, to punish
their disobedience with wars, pestilent sicknesses, and contra(...)nding
their own devises among themselves through the malice of their own malicious
minds by Satan's woorking in them.

For Satan is not only the enticer of mankind to sin: but also Gods hangman
ready to execute his plagues and punishment for sin, whenever it pleases
God to send him to any Nation, State, or Person of his eternal purpose and
execution of his just judgments. For satan and his angels are Spirits created
for vengeance: which in time of destruction shall show forth the power and
wrath of him that made them. Satan and his train were created good, and of
themselves became evil, and was the cause of Adams fall: and yet not without
Gods forepoyntment by their own wilful disobedience. And in that God serves
his purpose by the ministration of those spirits treated for vengeance, the
same work in God is both good and holy, because he is the soueraygne goodness
itself, and cannot do amiss whatsoever he does: neither can he^ be the
au^tor of some in others, because it is not his nature to sin, neither
tempts he any man.

Moreover he is not bound under my statute, whereby he Iam. 1. 3.
might offend, for if he should do amiss the offense were to be answered to
a greater then himself* but seeing their is none so great and omnipotent as
he: but he only above all and all in all, as well in almightines, in tender
mercy, and upright justice: as in rigteous judgments and due executions of
the same, therefore he cannot do amiss: For he made his law for his
creatures to observe, and not for himself, he is without compass of Law,
that is his prerogative, and he that is not under the Law, can not break the
Law.

And were it not more then madness to ymagine that this almighty and dreadful
God of al power and dominion should not have out of his own power such libety
as worms on earth, I mean Kings, Princes, etc. challenge to themselves above
the people, for some will not be bound as in the second Psalm, they break the
bands and cast of the yoke of Gods Law: yet none of their subjects dare prate
in their presence, to call their doings in question.

But such is the apish quality of man's corrupt nature, to be more saucy and
malapert with the eternal, almighty and most terrible God: then with silly
mortal men: woormes in comparison of God.

And as touching Satan and his children, whom God has refused the things done
by them, are not done without Gods appointment to serve Gods holy purpose, and
therefore in respect of God, those things are good: but in themselves they are
extreme evil, as they themselves are.

And whatsoever Satan in his natural malice woorketh against mankind, he does
it as the executioner of Gods just vengeance unknown to himself, and
therefore it is the good work of God by satan's ministry: not that any
goodness can be in Satan, neither that he can desire to serve Gods holy
purpose: for he has neither will nor knowledge thereunto, otherwise then in
exercising his natural malice as well on Gods elect as on the reprobat. By
which his malicious exercice God serves his holy purpose unknown to Satan, as
a man serves his purpose by the natural service of a dog in killing a con^y,
or such like by the deadly malice of his n^^uer against the silly ^east to whom
the God of nature has made him mortal enemy and deuourer: and such like
malice (not without Gods forepointment) is naturally inst ne^ed in Satan
against mankind.

Example, A man set his own Mastiffe at his own Swine being in his own
corn: t^ ^^gge does his nature in bying the swine; but knows not that in so
doing he serves the man's purpose, which is to fear the swine from the corn:
Even so, God (...)teth flip Satan and his Angels, his foul monsterous mastiffe
dogs at such his lawles (...), as neither regard his rigord^s threats of
punishments, nor his fatherly promises of rewards, but exercise them natural
beastly lusts like filthy swine. And then Satan more furious then also evil
beasts having such lawelesse swine in his power, he leads them from evil
to worse for their further punishment. Satan not knowing that in so doing he
serves Gods purpose (which is to punish such as will not obey his word) no
more then the dog knows man's intent. Ier. 10. 14.
How know ye that? Thus Jeremy says, * man in his own knowledge is but a
beast in the sight of God, for that he knows no more of Gods secrets, then it
pleased God to open unto him neither is it in man to guide himself in the
right way, whereupon I argue thus, no man in his own nature is but a visible
beast: knowing no more of Gods secrets then it pleseth God to open unto him ^r
Even so Satan is but an invisible beast, and following his own nature, knows
no more of Gods secrets, then a beast does of man's secrets. For proof hereof.
Satan and his train feared the presens of Christ, Matt. 8. 28. Luke 8. 28.
Jesus, least be were come to vewe them before the time: ergo they know (...)
the time when Christ Jesus shall come again to gr^^ the general and last
sentence.

And as man has power from God, by the general wisdom and governance which
God has given him, to use the service of dogs or other beasts: Even so God
by his unspeakable power and wisdom does use the service of Satan and his
Angels to punish sin in general from the highest to the lowest of mankind.

Therefore whatsoever is done by Satan and his Angels is their natural office:
for as much as nothing is by them done otherwise then God has forewilled and
forepoynted to punish sin upon all mankind, both chosen and refused: The
same therefore is the good work of God by Satan's ministry: a (...) in
himself in his Angels, and in the reprobate of mankind, all their doings be,
as themselves are, most detestable evil. Example* To kill a man is a damnable
thing: yet to kill a man as the hang man does by order of Gods law after true
judgment given, is a right lawdable thing: albeit the hangman were the veriest
rascal, the evilest slave, and the most horrible villiane in the world: and ad
thereto that he had in doing his office a passing pleasure; and a singular
desire to stead man's blood, as the Diuill himself has indeed: yet were his
fact in that case both right and lau^able before God and man, because it is the
execution of Gods justice: Even so is that execution which satan does to any
creature for punishment of sin, because he neither does nor can do any thing
more or less, then that which God has forepoynted him as his hangman: And to
that end God has given him such power and auctority as passes the conceit of
man's wit. Therefore he is called the God of this world and so he took upon
him when he * would have had Christ Jesus fall Luke 4. 5.
down and worship him for the glory and vanity of this world which (according
to his lying nature) he called his own, because says he it is delivered unto
me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it, he is not right heir and Lord of
these things but some time God his minister in faith matters, for that he
uses him to give them unto such as will fall down and worship him, by obaying
his enticementes and fulfilling; their own unlawful and filthy lusts.

* In that respect also he is called the Prince that rules in Ephesians. 2. 2.
the air, even the spirit that ever has, does now and ever shall work in
the children of disobedience. And notwithstanding all his power and vayneglory:
he is but Gods hangman to execute his secret will, his forepoynted and just
judgment: And in the end shall be cast out. But in the mean John. 12. 31
time he must exercise his natural office, which is chiefly to tempte folks
for he cannot of himself hurt any creature, And why? Because God by his
unspeakable power holds him as it were in a chain: as a mastiffe dog that
can neither run at Bear, bull, horse nor swine, unless he be let slip. And so
if God let Satan slip, his rage passes the fury of all wild or mad beasts,
entending to devour all that he finds for the which he seeks as a roaring
Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8.


But our good God for his sons sake does lymit Satan his bounds which he
cannot pass, he is forepointed how, where when, and upon whom, he shall
extend his horrible cruelty. For God being Monarch of Heaven, Earth, and Hell
does govern all creatures: even Satan and his train with a thought: Therefore
some he tempts only, and can do no more because God co(...)ermaundeth him, by
his grace of resistance in some of those ^y him tempted.

Some he over comes in tempting, to the committing of vile, filthy, horrible,
me^stious and most unnatural factes: as are recited in To. as murdring of
parents, blaspheming and utter forsaking of God, worshipping vile creatures
insteede of the only creator, which above all things is blessed for ever.

Of all which abominations, Satan is the only auctor, the enticer, prouoker,
mayntayner and supporter: And also by Gods holy ordinance and forepoyntment:
he is by himself, his Angels and worldly adherentes the executioner of Gods
sacred iusti^e or punishment of all sin whereof he is the prouoker.

Satan meaning no more to execute Gods justice, then a dog in biting the
swine, means to ^eare them from the corn. For Satan's greedy and vnlatiable
malice is to distroy devour, and confound^ all by all means: And to that end
says S. Peter he goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour,
and has his greatest spite at Gods elect against who^ he exercises his
subtility and cruelty in this world by him and his adherents both bodily and
Ghostly by such intricate iuglings as passes man's skill: working such wonders
as should deceive (if it were possible, y^ very elect of their salvation: for
by his pestiferous enticementes he has and does lead many of the very elect
blindsom to the committing of most filthy and horrible factes, as among the
ancient fathers, Aron, David, etc. And the like is done now, etc.

And yet because they are Gods elect, he calls them again by true
repentance, through his mercy in Christ Jesus, otherwise they could never
return.

Thus God uses his own power by the minister^ of Satan woorking for his own
purpose, as well upon the elect as the reprobate, to punish sin upon both: and
sometime on the elect very severely, for trial of their faith, as Abraham,
Isaac, Joseph, Sidrack, Misaak, and Abednego, Daniel, Job, and many others.
And sometimes God sends lying spirits into men to dream dreams, and
prophecy lies instead of Gods truth, of purpose to deceive such as wilfully
neglect Gods word: and as Beasts void of reason fulfill their filthy lusts.
Of such it is written the time will come 2 Timothy 4. 3.
when men for their lusts will get preachers to their fancies, and not suffer
true doctrine, but delight in fables.

It is God that sends the false Prophets: and Moses tells the cause why.
For by such means. * The Lord your Deuteronomy. 13. 7.
God does prove you: whether you love him with all your hearts, and with all
your fowls: For you shall walk after the Lord your God fear him, do his
commandments, harken to his voice, serve him, and cleeue unto him: but the
false Prophets shall be slain.

Thus by the ministry of Satan God corrects all, but yet diversely an(...)
sundery sorts in this life. For Satan is Gods executioner to whippe, to
scourge, and torment all such as regard not his holy word: in such ordinary
or extraordinary manner as he has forepoynted. For by his almightye power and
invisible woorking, Satan and his train visible and invisible have their
being, moving, disposition and woorking: for otherwise they could either be,
move, dispose, nor work any thing.

For ^^ the unspeakable power of the almighty Monarch Satan and his angel are
pricked and push forward to fulfill Gods secret determinations in the World:
much like as me^ with Bridles and spurs make brutish horses gallop, turning and
tossing too and froe almost at their own pleasure, but God altoge^ther at his
own pleasure.

Moreover Satan has power at God his appoyntmentes send his messengers into
all men, so that no man ever was, is or ever shall be exempted from his
a(...)es and deceitful allurementes* Christ Jesus himself was assaulted by him.
Saint Paul confesses that he was buffered by the messenger of satan: 2 Cor.
11. 7
and that God did it to the end that he should (...) glory in himself.

We read that the Apostles were ^^^ers ways tempted, some with vain glory,
some with d^str^ of reuengement, * ever with fire and brimstone from heaven.
Sometimes with ambition to sit in the highest seats. * Sometimes Luke 9. 54.
Mat. 20. 21. 26. 34
to deny Christ Jesus. Thus we see God gives his elect grace sometime to
resist satan, sometime he makes satan give them the foil, that they a^^ay
known they stand h^t of themselves, but by his grace only.

We read of Abraham and other ancient Fathers how they have erred by the
subtle deceiptes of Satan, whom God does send of purpose both for royal of
faith and punishment of sin. Present sat(...): Job for trial of his faith,
and constancy, he sent an evil spirit to vex king Saul for his former
wickedness. He sent lying spirits into the mouths of four hundredth of
Kings, Ahabs prophets to the (...) Para. 18. 21. 1 Re. 22. 22.
that through their lying prophesies, he should greedely go to war against
R(...) in (...): A thing forepoynted of God for his destruction in revenge of
his former sins: and all by Satan's ministry, and his hellish adherentes,
visible, and invisible, to execute his just vengeance upon all in general:
namely on such as known the will of God by hearing and reading his holy word,
and ye^ regard it not: such lazy lobbers * shall be beaten with many stripes:
And at Luke. 12. 4
such laws swine, God lecteth slip his Satanicall ^and^^s, Oh it is a most
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the everliving Hebr. 10. 31
God: And yet as often as we break any of the ten commandments, we fall
into the hands of the almighty God, who for our former sins gives us over
into the hands of Satan, who makes us to heap sin upon sin, so
punishing syn by syn: and yet it is said, we fall into the hands of God: which
is most true: for as much as Sa^a^ does nothing besides Gods forepoyntment: as
when he was to execute his malice upon Job, he said to God, lay thine hand
upon him: that is, ^end me to do mine office on him: so that Satan is the
hand, the scourge of God, to punish whom it pleases him, either for sin or
trial of faith. So their if we had the true fear of God settled in our minds,
and our faith, hope and love, fixed in Christ Jesus as he wills: we should
not need to fear Cerberus, nor any other Bug, feigned by false dre^^nes, nor
any of the furyes of Hell, nor any worldly power, how mighty or tyrann^call
soever it were.

Therefore it is not without great causes and many necessary considerations,
that the true fear of God to salvation, is so carefully, and most excellently
set down, with such con^^endation in so many places of holy Scriptures: for it
is not only the beginning of wisdom, appertayning to the elect of God: but
it is also the total sum and full perfection thereof. Therefore when people
through infidelity, pride, and disobedience cast of this holy fear of God,
then God gives such folks over into * a reprobate mind into Romans 1. 28. 29.
Satan's power to work all manner of euilles, even with pleasant greedines:
And that is the sorest punishment and heauiest burden, that God uses
ordinarily to cast on folks in this life: even to withdraw his holy Spirit
from the disobedient, and leave them to their own hearts lusts, then the
which plague none can be greater. For immediately the Devil, as it were
possesses them even by Gods appointment for he sends evil Spirits to such
as cast off the fear of God (as he did to king Saul) to lead such wicked from
evil to worse, by that mean to punish their former sins: for in this life
God punishes sin by sin, and man by his own inventions and abominations,
whereunto he is naturally inclyned.

And this is most true, that all the euilles committed in thoughts, words
and deeds, being most filthye and execrable, before God and his elect, as well
Angels as men: done by Satan and his adherentes bodily and ghostly they have
nevertheless, their being, moving, disposition, and woorking from the power
of God, and are forepoynted, and limited by him, for the accomplishment of his
eternal purpose. And of necessity it must be so, because he is all in all,
and yet in him none evil at all.

For if God did not forepoint, hold and govern Satan, and his members visible
and invisible within certain limittes: all the evils pretended by Satan's
woorking in and by wicked people would be accomplished. The contrary whereof
is found by daily experience: that wicked folk can not bring all their
deuilish devises to their desired end.

And this is most true, that unless it were Gods forepointment, it were
impossible for any evil to have either being, moving or working: for neither
good nor evil may be said to be unawares of God, or against his secret will,
seeing he is all in all, and can do none evil whatsoever he does, and is
every way good. and none good but he, and those whom he makes, and allows
for good. And because there is none other chief workman then only this
almighty Monarch that works all in all things, of necessity it must stand,
that he has forepoynted all that ever was, is or shall be done, for the
accomplishment of his eternal purpose, with the matter the means, and the
manner, how every thing should proceed, succeed, and come to his forepoynted
end: and all to make just matter for himself, whereon to execute justice, *
and to Exodus 33 19 Romans 9.
have compassion and show mercy on whom it pleased him. Then for as much as
Satan has his being, moving, and his power of working from the almighty God,
it follows of necessity that he is limited, by him from whom he receives
his power, and cannot do any thing, otherwise then he is forepoynted for the
execution and accomplishment of his eternal purpose: which no man ought or may
call in question, further then is truly to be gathered upon the right
understanding of holy scriptures. And it ought to be so, because his
almightynes has created, set in order, conserueth, and continually governs
all things, in Heaven and Earth, by his almightye power, and his holy law
unwritten: which some call the law of nature incomprehensible to any creature
vesible or invisible. Nevertheless he has subjected mankind during this life
under his written law to be observed of them upon pain of damnation. From
which damnation no one is exempted: Except that one which in no wise can be
subject, and that is God himself. Therefore whatsoever that one God works by
the service of Satan and his train visible and invisible, and in man's
judgment contrary to the written law: the same in God cannot be evil but
every way good, because it is the performance of his most holy will which ought
to stop all men's mouths, and it is also the execution of his most righteous
judgments which all people in the end shall obey, will they* nill they. For
his holy will and just judgment are out of the compass of man's understanding,
and every way beyond his ability: except the man Christ Jesus.

Neither can Satan exercise his tyranny until God give the hippocriticall
beleuers and other beastly infidels into his power: whom then Satan * holds
captive at his will, they 2 Timothy 2. 26
falling into his snare by following their own lusts and affections by which
means they are by Satan enticed not only to sin but also to percist therein,
so then are they snared indede and driven by Satan to heap sin upon sin:
so proceeding always from evil to worse until their utter destruction, I
mean only those whom God has not chosen to salvation. As Judas for example,
who having long time and many ways used his him (...) for his further
punishment * was solicited by Satan to (...) is Lord and (...)ster Christ
Jesus: Luke 22. 3. John. 13. 2. 2^. Mat. 27. 5. John. 17. 12
and for a small plague; Satan made him despair and hang himself for a
(...)ewarde of al his filthynes and horible treason the consideration of these
things ought to drive mankind in to the true fear and humble obedience of
God.

Thus it is manifest how God punishes sin by sin and man by his own
abominations: let al people beware therefore of Satan's fleyghts, and subtle
enticementes: and of heaping sin upon sin: And let them pray to God in the
name of Christ Jesus, to be guyded by his holy spirit, for otherwise it is
impossible for man to think a good thought: much less to do good deeds and
keep himself from evil. For as good thoughts are raised in us, by the spirit
of God: even so are our evil thoughts * by the messenger of Satan and man's 2
Cor. 12. 7
own corrupt nature, and yet both by Gods own forepoyntment.

For as God being a spirit and the sovereign goodness it self has holy spirits
and Angels: whose ministry he uses to ye salvation of his elect, even so
Satan is aspirit, and the extreme ^uil^es it self, has his cursed angels,
whose service he uses to the condenmation of the wicked when it pleases God:
to suffer him:

It is a thing too well known, that some wicked scoffers, All are of the
spirit as well as of the flesh.
at God: holy peligion, do Ieare and Iybe at such simple ones, as are zealous
in the gospel, calling them all of the spirit. Yet I say that those Iearing
Iesters may also righely be called, all of the spirit. For as the elect of God
are led and governed by the Spirit of God and his holy Angels: And yet in such
sort, as God lets them fall often times, by the pest^ient ^^^icementes of
Satan and his Angels, to the end they may know that they stand not of
themselves: Even so the reprobate whom God has not chosen, are led and
governed by satan and his angels: and yet in such sort as God does very often
put them in mind by his holy Spirit, admonishing them to turn from their
wicked ways: to the end that every one may be without excuse the autour of
his own damnation.

Thus all in general are of the Spirit, ^yther good or bad: but the reprobate
follow the lusts of the flesh, and suggestions of satan without resistance. In
the elect the flesh strives against the Spirit, and the Spirit resists the
flesh: so that the Soul as all amazed, is pulled now on the one side, then on
the other side, stackering too and free, yelding sometimes to the good motions:
and many times to the evil motions and filthy lusts: Now in a little hope, and
then in great despair, and all by ignorance of holy Scriptures, and neglecting
the knowledge and grace which God already had or has given them.

Therefore let us labor in good works of charity with fasting and faithful
prayer to God * to obtayn the blessing of Luke 11. 28.
hearing, believing, obeying, and exercysing his holy word, that thereby we
may obtain wisdom from God to discern between good and evil: and that
most excellent knowledge, and precious gift of God * to try the Spirits that
work 1 John 4. 3.
in us, whether they be of God or no. For this is certain that the least
thought that r^seth in man's mind is styrred either by the flesh or by the
spirit, and in the same moment tends to good or evil in Gods sight. And to
choose the good and reject the evil, is the full some of al virtuous wisdom:
even the precious gift of God which no creature ca^ obtayn of himself: for it
must come by the free grace and mercy of God through Christ Jesus, being asked
in true faith as he commands. * Ask and it shall be given you, etc. Matthew.
7. 7. 21. 22


Man's natural state as descended from Adam after his fall was most miserable,
and utterly damned body and Soul, the nombers of mankind only known to God,
to man's wit incomprehencible, and to reason more then infinite, out of which
greater infinite number the Lord of mercy has chosen and forepointed a lesser
infinite number, which he has elected by grace in Christ Jesus * And
forepointed them to be Ephesians. 1. 4 10. 13.
adopted in him before the foundations of the World were laid.

And are sealed to salvation by the holy Spirit of promise, which is the
earnest of our inheritance purchased by Christ Jesus: even the same that king
David meant when he said: * I should utterly have faynted, except I had
believed, to see Psalm 27. 13.
the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. And so should now the elect
of God faint daily by reason of the afflictions and miseries which they suffer
of the wicked worldlinges in this life: if it were not for the hope they have
to enjoy the sweet promises of God by Christ Jesus in the world to come in
Heaven, which David calls the land of the living. And ^o marvel though Gods
elect suffer horrible miseries in this World. For * Satan can transform
himself 2 Cor. 11. 13.
into an Angel of light as once he was: Also his captives the subjects and
wicked folks by their hypocrisy can seem in the sight of men: as sober, as
honest, as virtuous, and holy as the very elect of God.

As Judas for example being of the twelve Apostles, he Mark. 3. 14
did his office, he preached the gospel, he wrought miracles, he seemed
outwardly as honest, as faithful, and as holy as the rest, * yea and more
zealous then his fellows, and yet a John. 12. 5.
very hipocrite, which argues that even now among those that preach the
gospel and minister the holy sacraments there may be such Hipocrites as
Judas was. Saint Paul confirms 1 Cor. 9. 26.
the same in saying, * I run not as at an uncertain mark, I fight not as
one that beats the wind, but I bring my body in subjection, least by any
means after preaching to others, I my self should be reproved, which
argues that there has been ever, are now and ever shall be such Preachers
and Ministers as are not as they would seem to be.

And by those Hipocrites as well of the Spiritualty as of the Laity many of the
very elect are abused and enticed to the committing of horrible Crimes
manifested unto men. God serving therein his eternal secret purpose by the
ministry of Satan to the end that none should be able to judge of his secrets
(in the matter of election and reprobation) who should be saved or damned
further then he has given scoape by the holy Scriptures. * No man can judge
of another by any Eccles. 9. 1. etc.
thing that happens unto men in this life who is loved or hated of God, for
he makes the Sun to Shine on all alyke. And as the wicked most commonly
live in greatest prosperity, even so among the poorer sort bursteth out the
greatest villainy: and what secret God has in that, I leave to him.

Moreover this pestilent vice of Hipocrisy, is such a canker in the nature of
mankind as cannot be shunned nor avoided. And by it both the elect and the
reject cover their sins from the knowledge of man (but not from God) and
privily and inwardly abuse themselves in body mind and Soul. And some carry
close their filthiness but short time. Some keep it long unseen of man, Yet in
some at length it breaks forth to their utter shame, whereof some by Gods
grace return by repentance and receive salvation because they are the elect of
God. Some through hardness of heart cast aside all shame and fear of God, and so
run headlong into destruction, and damnation. Some enjoy * the blessing to
have their sins Psalm. 32. 1 etc.
covered and forgiven, yea a special blessedness have they to whom the Lord
imputes not sin.

Is not this a most special grace of God, to cover some men's sins that they
never come to light? have they not great and just cause to be thankful,
seeing no creature can accuse them, but God and their own conscience. So it
pleases God to deal with some, and unhappy are they that envy the happy state
of others, For by the ministry of his holy Spirit he woorketh reformation in
the minds and souls of some, leading them by true repentance to amendment of
life, without being openly detected: * for no man lives and sins 1 John 1.
8.
not.

Oh that men would therefore praise, magnify, and extol by faith, good words
and deeds, the almighty majesty of this incomprehencible Monarch of Heaven and
Earth, and tell forth the woonders that he does and has done among the
children of men.

And let those whose sins God does cover from the knowledge of men, ^^ very
thankful for it: for it is a sure taken of Gods grace, ^o lead the^ to
repentance. And let those which ^t pleases God to preserve: from doing such
beastlines, as i^ others are manifested to the world: Let th^se I say
especially give humble thank* in the name of Christ Jesus, because it is a
singular token of grace and election.

For let all men assure themselves of this, that they which no^ and take least
evil: should do and take as much as they which do and take most evil if God
* did not set his holy Angels about them, and steard his holy Spirit into them
to preserve them ^oth from doing and taking evil.

The conclusion hereof is; that ^od is all in all, and consequently does all in
all: otherwise he cannot be almighty: Col. 3. 11. Ephesians. 1. 23 1 Co. 15. 28
which almightines in God no man will d^^ye, being in his right wits: unless
an Atheist which believes no God at all. And the same God is a Spirit which by
the ministry of his Spirit, k^epeth whom to please him from great offenses,
and he pardonneth whom it pleases him; of all their offenses.

On the contrary part the foul Spirit Satan and his Angels do not only
entice and provoke folks to sin: but are also Gods instruments (call the^
(...)men if you will, for they have the same off^ce) to punish folks for sin*

As when King Daiud by Satan's enticeme^^e had committed Example of Gods justice
on David 2 Samuel 12. 1 etc.
both adultry and (...)there: Nathan pronounced Gods just sentence against him:
that the sword should never be from his house: A terrible sentence (mark it
will) it was not the plague of pestilence or other sickness which commonly endure
but for certain W^^kes or Mo^thes etc. but it was a most horrible, most
pestiferous and continual plague, of rape, murder inc^stious whordome,
withdome (...) and foreign wars, during the rest of his life: And on his
house after his death, by succession, until after the death of Christ Jesus:
even to the utter dissoluing of David's house in this world. And who were Gods
instruments to execute his i^st vengeance so long in continuance as above.
mxl. years, no one mortal creature could live so long, neither then nor now,
who then I say but Satan and his Angels, woorking in his members the children
of disobedience: in whom * he being Ephesians. 22.
Prince ruling in the air, works his will according as God has forepointed
and limited him* What mean^ God uses. etc.


Now mark the means, circumstances, and instruments both bodily and ghostly,
which God uses for performance of his promise, and for the due execution of
his judicial sentence, pronounced by Nathan the Prophet.

First he gives Anmon king David's Son into the power of Satan to be led
into temptation, who stirred up in him an horrible stinking lust of the flesh,
falsely called love: such love as Horses have to Mares, and consequently each
male beast to his kind. This beastly lust was to ravish his Sister Thamar the
daughter of his Father. And Satan did so inflame him, prick him foreward, and
torment him with desire to accomplish this lust, that very anguish for want
thereof made him sick and pine away: he was in the deep dungeon of Satan's
prison, * holden captive at his will. 2 Timothy 2. 2. 2 Samuel 13. ^ etc.


Then another of Satan's impes one Ionadab a flattering ^awde, such as seek
their gain by such filthy practices as well in Princes courts as else where: he
devised a fine hipocriticall mean to accomplish his filthy lust: saying art
not thou a Kings son? (as though a Kings son were lawles) and
therewithal gave him this pestilent counsel, to feign himself yet more sick,
to the end he might have had some color, to crave of the king some meat
dreast of his sisters hand to comfort him in his sickness: meaning nothing else,
but as all the wicked do: even by false policy, treason and tyranny, to
accomplish their covetous desires and filthy lusts, as he did in ra^ishing
his sister ^h^mar.

And thus God began to plague David according to hi^ promise by the Prophet
Nathan, first by the death of the Child gotten* in adultery, secondly by
rauishing of his Daughter by his own Son.

And it pleased God to call for these villainies and filthiness (which Satan
wrought in David's children) his own works: And why? even because Satan does
nothing more or less the^ God forepoynteth him. * For God said, I will stir
^ Sam. 12. 11
up evil against thee, even out of thine own house: I will take thy wives
and give them to another to be abused, behold God says, it is his own
doing: even his justice upon David.

Who being overcome by the suggestions of Satan woorking in himself and others
that favored Ammon, through foolish affection of fatherly pity, neglected to
do justice on his ungracious son for committing so fylthy a fact in Israel:
the which notwithstanding God would not leave unpunished, and that by an
extraordinary mean: because King David neglected Gods ordinary justice which
he puts into Princes hands to be executed of them in righteousness. Mark
the consequence.

Absalon king David's darling son, void also of the fear of God, and
therefore captive to Satan, by Gods forepoyntment, was by Satan moved to
revenge the rauishing of his Sister Thamar, upon Ammon his unhappy brother:
which wicked purpose he performed by treason, for at a pretended friendly
Banquet he caused him to be cruelly slain, contrary to the right order of
justice, which the king ought to have done by order. Thus we may see how God
punishes sin by sin, and men by their own inventions and abominations.
As it is written * let men know, that by such Sap. 11. 13. Luke 6. 38.
means as men offend by such like they are punished. * And such measure as
they meat to others: the like they shall receive again.

Then Absalon fearing justice for his murtherous fact, fled to save his life,
as nature teaches in danger to seek surcour to Talmay king of G^^hure, his
mothers father* And being in exile Satan wrought still in him, and in those
that favored him by famed repentance, to seek reconciliation to the king his
Father: which thing was brought to pass by Satan's woorking in him, in Ioab
the Kings chieftayne in wars, in a woman and others appointed by Ioab for
that purpose, to bring Absolon again from exile, to be a further plague unto
the King his Father. It is unlike that Ioabs meaning was so ill toward the
King. And yet so was Gods purpose he being the instrument not knowing the
sequel of his own labor. For afterward Absalon became a rebel and
assayed to put his father from his royal dignity. All which things were done
by Gods forepointment to plague David for his secret adultery with Vrias Wife,
and murdering of him being his faithful servant.

Therefore God by Satan's service made his Son Ammon to ravish his Sister
Thamar, and his dearest beloved Son Absalon, to kill his brother Amnon: and
after to rebel against the King his Father, made him f^^e to save his life:
abused his fathers Wives and Concubynes, and shamed not in all the peoples
sight in the day time, to show his going 2 Sa^. 16. 2^
in to satisfy his beastly lust on them, * thinking thereby the better to
establish himself in the royal seat: therein following the advice of the
chiefest and most honorable counselor that King David had, Achitophel by name:
whose counsel was esteemed with David and Absalon as an oracle from God.

And that all these things were done by the service of satan, 2 Samuel 12. 9
the text is plain. * Wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the
Lord to do evil in his sight? Thou have killed Vryas and taken his Wife:
Therefore the Sword shall never depart from thy house, because thou have
despised me, says the Lord: behold I will raise up evil against thee out of
thine own honse, I will give thy Wives to another that shall lie with them
openly: thou did it secretly, but I will do the thing openly before all
Israel. And albeit there was never but one such David: yet by histories we
see that in every age, there has been infinite nombers of such villanyes, the
Father with the Daughter, the Mother with the Son, the Brother with the
Sister have committed horible factes, and all by the suggestion of Satan, by
whom God according to his promise * punishes the sins of the Exodus 20. 5.
perentes upon the children unto the third and fourth gen^ration: And that by
such secret and intrieate woorking, that the greatest, the wisest, and b^st
learned, and who soever has most experience: shall not be able to foresee and
avoid that which God has once determined. For all that he has purposed shall
be performed, either in rewarding in his elect y^ good works which he
himself causes them to work, or else punishing in the reprobate the evil
works of the world the flesh and the Devil

For whatsoever God spoke was immediately extant or in full A little digression
declaring how first God esta blished a suc cessiue course in all his promises,
works and ordinances from the beginning, which can never fail in performance.
Ephe. 4. 10. ^3.
effect done, as after the creation of all things, by his word which
immediately was done: he promised that the seed of the woman, should break the
head of the Serpent, which in his purpose and knowledge was likewise done. For
Christ Jesus being the seed of the woman, has, does, and shall wreast
forceably out of Satan's power (into whose captivity all mankind fell by the
sin of Adam * all such as he had forechosen and forepoynted, from among the
rest: and the same purposed in himself before the foundations of the world were
laid: so that all the promises of God are in him, yea and amen for ever.

That is to say, Christ Jesus was then borne in respect of God his purpose, the
word being spoken for our joy and comfort. He did then preach the gospel for
our instruction. He did then work miracles* for confirmation of our faith.
He was then tormented on the Cross, suffered pains equal to the torment of
Hell and death of body, and laid in grave, for the sins of the world, that
is to say, for the sins of his elect committed in the world. He was then
risen again for our justification. He was then ascended into heaven again for
our sanctification. He was then comen again to judge the quick and the dead
for our full redemption and glorification. Al was the^ done in Gods sight, for
with him is time past nor to come, but only the present time. * God spoke and
it was done, he Psalm. 33. 9
commanded and every thing had his being. Therefore all the promises of God
are in him, yea and amen forever.

Christ Jesus * is the Lamb slain from the beginning in Revel. 13. 8
every age, in this present age, and shall be slain in every age yet to come
of this corrupt world, in his members his elect, * his little flock, to whom
the wicked worldlinges have Luke 12. 32.
ever done, presently do, and ever shall do always wrong and violence: And
the poor little flock are allotted to suffer it during this wretched life.

The multitude are slow to believe the promises of God, therefore if holy
scripture confirmed by Christ Jesus his bitter passions and wonderful
miracles, be not sufficient witness: if the holy Prophets, Apostles and
infinite number of Martirs will not cause people to believe the promises of God
and obey the almighty Monarch. Then hear what women Genesis 3. 16.
can say, and truly affirm by daily experience. * God promised Eua for
punishment of her infidelity, pride and disobedience that in pain and with
sorrow she (and consequently and by nature her posterity) should bring forth
her children. This promise has been found true from the beginning and shall
continue to the ending: as all Women of this present age bringing forth
Children, must needs confess: And I dare say they will affirm the same. But
the word of God needs no witness to all true believers. And they, that
cannot believe, let them do as holy Scripture teaches. Ask of God the Father
in the name of Christ Jesus, and it shall be given the^, it is his promise that
can never fail in performance.

THE FVLFILLING OF GODS threatninges in afflicting King David and his
posterity. CAP. 8.
AND to the end we may the better Psalm. 146.
assure our selves that * the Lord keeps his promise for ever, both in
rewarding of Virtue, and punishing of vice: Let us mark well how God
proceeds in prosecuting his punishments upon David and his posteritye. God
gave unto Solomon the King such excellency of wisdom, riches and glory, as
never King of any Nation was comparable unto him. And notwithstanding those
heroical gifts, he toward his end, when by course of natural life he
should have been best: he so beastly neglected the fear of Cod, that he
became a monster in Idolatry, in Adultery and Fornication: and having those
could not be free from any other vice, and so became an vglye and most
misshapen image of God: so by his filthiness he turned al his worldly glory into
shame. And whereas for David's evil dealing, God promised his Sword should never
depart from his house. Now for Salomons beastlines God recites his promise
saying: * I will for this affliet the seed of David, 1 Re. 11. 39 12. 15.
Revel. 5. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 14 15. Reave. 17. 14 and 19. 16 1 Re. 11. 14 31.
but not for ever: * for Christ Jesus the Lion of the trybe of Iehudah, shall
come and sit one the spiritual seat of his father David for ever, * for he
is Lord of Lords and King of Kings everlasting. So that the seed of David was
afflicted until Christ Jesus by his death tryumphed over all his enemies. * For
God raised adversaries against Solomon, and threatened to rent his kingdom in
pieces, which he performed as it is written in the twelft Chapter, and al to
punish his beastly life. But for king David's sake God did not rent the kingdom
while Solomon lived.

But he being dead, and Roboham his Son beginning to reign: al Israel came
to Sechem to make him king as it were to the coronation. And then and there the
people having chosen them a Captain, and secretly conspired before hand: that
if the king would not grant their necessary request, by way of humble
petition, to make lighter the heavy burdens which Solomon his Father, by
impostes and taxes had laid upon them: That then they would be quite out his
government, and revolt clean from him.

Which conspiracy was hidden from king Roboham, who in asking counsel to
answer the people, refused the good and those the evil.

And who was Gods instrument to cause him so to do? even Satan that old
subtle Serpent, that so sl^ely deceived Adam, Noy, Aron, David, Solomon, and
all the people of the World, from age to age, no one has escaped his clutches,
but his pestilent enticementes have made them err: except that only one Christ
Jesus the Son of the living God, who was forepoynted and promised to break
the Serpents head.

So this Serpent Satan woorking in the mind of King Roboham and his young
counselors caused him to refuse the aduyce of the Counselors to his Father
that gave him good and sober counsel, to rule with lenity and upright justice:
And followed the evil counsel of the young men with whom he had been ^rayned
up: to rule with rigor and tyranny. Whereupon he answered the people thus: *
Whereas ^ Reg. 12. 13
my Father did burden you with an heavy yoke I will make it heavier: my father
did chasten you with rods, but I will correct you with scourges. Here let us
consider what spirit wrought in the King and his counsel to cause him make
this ^^uell answer: it was not the Spirit of meeknes which is of God: it was
the Spirit of pr^de which is of the Devil.

Upon which dispiteful answer: The twelve trybes revolted quite from him with
the like dispitful words: * what portion have we with David, or inheritance
with the son 1 Reg. 12. 16 11. 29. 12. 15.
of Isha: * Jeroboam being their Captain, who became king of those ten Tribes,
and was called king of Israel, and Roboham king of Iehuda.

Thus the Lord performed his promise in renting his kingdom as well for the
sins of Roboham as of his father and grandfather.

Then king Roboham began to make war against his rebels purpos^^g to conquer
them again by force. The lykelihood of his enterprise therein, have been to
have lost y^ rest, for he had but 2 against 10. But God had forepoynted it
otherwise, that one should sit on David's seat, until the coming of Messiah:
And to that end * he sent his Prophet to 1 Reg. 12. 12.
warn him and all his people not to deal that way: but return every man to
his own house says God, for the thing is done by me. Mark it well, it was
Gods work, who works all in all, and yet in him no evil at all. Satan and
his Angels, are Gods instruments doing their natural office, when, where, and
upon whom it pleased him to forepoint before the World began to bring each
thing to his forepoynted end, for the accomplishme^t of his eternal purpose: so
wrought they in king Roboham, and in those whose counsel he followed: and
also in Ieroboham and the ten Trybes to rebel against their Prince.

For who puts evil conceiptes in peoples minds? who prouokes them to perform
the evil conceived? who persuades Princes and their Counselors to ^^fuse the
good and choose the evil? who I say but Satan that old enemy.

For he put into the heart of Iehudas to betray his master John. 13. 3.
Christ Jesus. Even so whatsoever, has, is, or shall be (...) Gods
forepoyntment, it is of necess^ty also that he forepoint the means, the
matter and the manner to bring each thing to ^^ forepoynted (...) * for if the
Sparr^^ fall not Mat. 10. 29 Luke 11. 6. 7 Act. 27. 34.
on the ground without his will, neither is one of them forgotten with God, if
the hayres of the heads of Gods elect are nombred, neither can an hair fall
from their h^a^s without his will: th^se being as small things as may be
devised. And yet not forgotten with God, then how can these great things be
without his will and appointment.

Unless some mad man would say, that perhaps some thing done unknown or
unawares to God, which were to diminish his almightines: but all things are
possible with God, and of him every thing has being, moving, power, and
disposition of woorking, be it good or evil in respect of man, for in regard
that all that is comes from God, all is good: even that which evil spirits
work toward mankind, for as much as they work not otherwise then God has
forepoynted, for the accomplishment of his eternal purpose.

Therefore whatsoever God does by the working of spirits good or ill, is every
way good, and no degree to be termed evil. For although he command man not
to kill man: yet may God destroy millions of millions without check of any, and
give life again at his pleasure: But why he does this or that, or what he
means by these or those his secret works, there ought no questions be made
further then is limited by holy Scriptures: but with all humble obedience, let
us submit our selves to his blessed will revealed in his word: and with all
reverence let us honor the secrets of his will unrevealed: And here withal let
us live in all dutiful obedience to his holy law, for otherwise we hope for
mercy in vain. And yet I say * that by the works of the Law no flesh Gal. 2.
16.
shall be justified.

The justice of God which he executes by the ministry of Satan and his
angels, as good, as holy, as much to be praised and magnifyed, as his sweet
mercy in Christ Jesus, in God they are equal: Therefore it pleased God in the
secret counsel of his own will, for his eternal purpose decreed before the
world was: to forepoint matter whereon to bestow justice and mercy: And all
to magnify his holy name and show forth his own glory. Yet is it not lawful
for Emperors, Kings and Princes over nations to seek their own glory: for as
they are commanded in general to seek and set forth the glory of God, but
how they do he best knows, that is forepoynted to audice their accomptes.

And although Satan and his train both bodily and ghostly do evermore devise
mischief as is their nature for they can not do otherwise: yet God as often
as pleases him, turns their wicked purposes the contrary way. As when Joseph
his brethren, by Satan's working in some of them, did seek to kill the poor
Innocent, the holy ghost wrought in other some of them, to withstand that
wicked purpose: and when some of them had executed their malice, by selling him
into Egypt for a slave, because he was so dearly beloved of his father they
hated him, their malicious intent was never to have seen him again. And yet
it pleased God to turn their malice and spiteful wicked intent to goodness
upon themselves: Genesis 45. 5. 8
* as Joseph told them when he made himself known unto them, yea Joseph
denied it to be their deed and said plainly it was the work of God and not
theirs. And yet it is most true, they did it in hatred by Satan's working in
the^. If we mark the course of holy Scriptures and devour men's writings on
the same, we shall find it manifest that even from the beginning, the holy
ghost has ever wrought in those whom God has chosen to their salvation. And
Satan and his Angels in those whom God has left vnchosen, ever works to
their damnation: And the same several working shall continue unto the end of
this world: for as in every kingdom virtuous or vicious folks are in
auctority: the common weal for religion frames accordingly. If we note well
the succession of the kings of Iehudah, among two or three and twenty kings:
even from the first king unto the captivity of Babylon, there are scant five
praised for truth, honesty, and zeal in holy religion Gods true service. And
likewise of the nobility, counselors and maiestrates: not one among twenty y^
rightly and zelously favored holy religion, which notwithstanding was their
profession: as now it is ours: they bragging still of the temple of the Lord:
and we of the Gospel.

And yet indeed they did neither rightly esteem of Gods holy Law, nor yet of
his holy service in his temple.

The Princes and states of Israel were reproved for their Ier. 7. 1. 10. 5. 1
Cor. 1. ^ 6 Mat. 20. ^6
negligence in Gods service. * And Saint Paul tells us, that not many rich,
not many noble, not many of high degree are called to salvation much less
chosen: For * many are called, but few are chosen of mankind in general. And
this I say, that the greatest punishment that God casts on mankind in this
life, is to withdraw his holy spirit from him, and turn him loose to follow
his own lusts, wherein Satan dandles him like a poppit: and none are sooner
trapt in Satan's sna^e, then some mighty by reason of nobility and wealth being
often so affected that none may admonish them without their displeasure.

But such as can flatter, lie, and use pleasant speech, suffering them to
follow their lusts and desires, such they have in great estimation: Example,
When the forepoynted time of Ahabs confusion drew near: Satan put an ambitious
toy in his head, to conquer Ramoth in Gilead, and when he sought counsel
concerning his enterprise, * God sent lying 1 Reg. 22. 20.
spirits into the mouths of four himdreth of his Prophets to encourage him
in his purpose, whose counsel he followed to his destruction, he went on
greedily thinking to have returned a conqueror, and was brought home a dead
carcas. Micheas the prophet of God told him the truth only, and he was beaten
for his labor and put in prison.

Thus as * all things work for the best to them that love Romans 8. 28.
God: even so to them that love him not all things work to the contrary.
Experience teaches that the Eliments water air, earth, fire, all the planets
and signs, as Sun, Moan, and Stars, blustering winds, tempests, venomous
worms, wild and cruel beasts, are Gods instruments which he gives in to
satan's power sometimes to execute Gods forepointme^t upon the reprobate always
to their confusion: sometime upon the elect for punishment of their sins, God
thereby calling the^ to repentance as he did David, etc. The text is plain,
satan was y^ executioner of gods holy work upon. Job and other his servants.

Therefore let us note the discourse by what means Satan The means and
instruments by which God works. Ephesians. 22.
wrought and what instruments he used to afflict Job. * First he stirred up
ye Sheba^s on the one side which slew his servants, and drove away his Oxen.
Secondly Satan brought fire from Heaven (* he being the Prince that rules in
the air, and burnt up his Sheep and servants. Thirdly he stirred up the
Caldeans, who came with violence on the other part and both slew his servants,
and drove away his camels.

Fourthly, with a mighty blast of wind, he threw down the house upon his
Sons and Daughters, and killed them all: so much as God gave into his power, so
much he utterly devoured according to his tyrannous nature. And yet very ill
content that he could not touch Jobs person: which at length he gave into his
power saving his life.

And what says the Text? Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord, and
smote Job with sore byles from the soale of the foot unto the crown of the
head. Note it well, he went forth from the presence of the Lord to do those
things.

For by this history of Job it appears that deadly enemies, Thieves, the
fire, and the tempestious winds were Satan's instruments by God his sufferance
to afflict Job and to try his faith: whom nevertheless God himself commends
for an upright just man fearing God and eschewing evil: whose witness is very
sufficient to approve the honesty of man.

Now if the opinions of Heathen Philosophers, and some called Christians be
true, that the corruption of the air, commes by concurrences and influences of
the planets and signs, and of their distemperature commes murrians,
pestilences, botches, blaynes, burning fevers, and other diseases: then it
should seem by their opinion, that those insencible creatures work of
themselves, and cast forth their effects at a venture here and there, without
Gods forepointment: which to grant is a great absurdity and derogation of Gods
almightines.

Yea there are very many men that have their wits so entangled with fancies
of Astrology and Astronomy (that they will take on them to give a natural
reason for the secret works of God, as though they were subject to man's
corrupt senses. Or as though the Elements, planets and signs could break
their natural courses without Gods forepointment? But in this matter of Job
there is no mention of planets nor signs, albeit I confess them to be Gods
creatures made to his glory and use of mankind and instruments by whom he
woorketh his good pleasure for the accomplishme^t of his eternal purpose.

By the story it appears that satan the God of this world, and Prince that
rules in the air, has the handling at God his appointment of all those
things to execute Gods justice: so has he likewise of the sword with all
engines and munitions for wars whenever they are abused in any evil cause: For
in every controversy right stryueth against wrong, and wrong against right. So
has it been from the beginning, is now, and shall continue to the end of the
world: And whosoever mayntayneth the wrong cause, is led and guyded by Satan,
yea though he win the field.

So that whenever any thing is done such as men call mischaunce, misfortune,
ill luck, mischief or what soever: whereby any of mankind is hurt in body
or goods, either by wars, by fire, water, storm or tempest, heat of the
Sun, cold of the Moon, constellation of the Stars, opposition of the
Planets, corruption of the air, dampe of the Earth, the abundance of Snow, the
extremity of frost, the want of Rain, or too much wet, the fury of beasts,
the venim of Serpents, or what soever else: whereby God punishes a people or
nations in general, or some in particular, for sin or other cause only
known to himself: all is done by Gods almighty power and forepoyntment, Satan
being his instrument and executioner, when it pleases God to use him.

Thus appears that Satan and his angels are Gods instruments to execute his
justice, where, when, and upon who^ it pleases God to appoint.

Not that Satan can desire to serve God, or has any zeal to do justice, for
he is as natural an enemy to mankind, as the Wolf to the Sheep, the Catte
to the Mouse, etc. But God uses his natural malice unknown to him, to
execute his justice. And although that Satan is called the God of this World,
and Prince that rules in the air, yet he has not the Elimentes planets and
signs to use otherwise then God has forepoynted.

Neither does he know that he serves Gods holy purpose: for these as
incencible, and ignorant of Gods secrets as a dog of man's secrets. And as the
water spaniel watches the shot to fetch the foul being stricken: or as the
Iaylers watch at the judgment seats, and the hang man for the days of
excution, to do their offices: Even so does Satan and his angels wayt
incessantly on the majesty of God to be set a work in their natural offices,
which is to seek whom they may devour. For further proof hereof, we need
not seek of Histories, seeing it is manifest in holy Scriptures, and proved by
daily experience in our knowledge, as well among our selves, as other nations,
both near and far of: how the wicked do abuse the Godly, some by privy
deceit, some by theft and robbery, some by open extortions, some by culler of
Law and authority, spoil the goods, and sometime kill the bodies of godly and
quiet people.

And for a recompense of their pestiferons wickedness against the godly and
quiet people, we see also how God makes the wicked devour one another among
themselves: And al by the ministry of satan working and ruling as a king among
them his subjects and children to whom they obey as unto their king and
father: for so does Christ Jesus call the wicked, saying, * ye are of your
father the Devil, and ye do the John. 8. 44.
lusts of your father, who is a murderer from the beginning, and shall be to
the ending, in Cain he murdered Abell, he abode not in the truth, there is
no truth in him, he speaks lies by nature, for he is the father of lying,
and of liars while they continue and delight in lying.

God deals with Satan, his angels, and worldly adherentes, as a Father
dea^eth with a rod, the which after he has corrected his Children therewith)
he casts into the fire, or elsewhere careless what becoms of it: even so
does almighty God deal with Satan his angels, and all the reprobate people of
the World: for when he has used them as scourges to punish other in this
life, (whereof some were as wicked as themselves, so he reyseth up wicked after
wicked to punish one another, that one may be the end of another, which
cruelty and tyranny, as they have dealt with others,) and so by course one
after another, as worn rods he casts them into hell fire, * which before
the World was begone: Mat. 25. 41
was prepared for the Devil and his angels and consequently for the reprobate
seed of Adam.

HOW THE MOST PART OF mankind serves Satan, and of his rewards for their
service. CAP. 9.
IT is an old saying, the Devil is good to his Children, for commonly they
triumph in the world* and bear the greatest sway, both of high and low
degree: some continue long in their wickedness and some are cut of in short
time. And all both by the appointment of God * who has appointed the water* of
the Seas their ba^ndes which they shall not pass, * Who has nombred Psalm.
104. 9.
the Stars, and calls them all by their names.

Then must he also (o^r none but he can do it) appoint the number of days
that every one of mankind (both elected and rejected, chosen, and refused) has
to live in this world, which Eccles. 3. 1. etc.
none can ouerpasse. * For God has appointed to every thing his convenient
time, a time to be borne, and a time to dye, both by his forepointment.

And touching the wicked reprobate that tryumphe in this World, * they have
their portions in this life, they leave y^ Psalm. 17. 4. 23. 2. etc.
rest of their substance unto their Children. * David erred with grief, to
see the wicked excel in prosperity to what they list: to corrupt others, to
speak blasphamie without correction or adversity: And when he sought to know
the cause he could not reach it: until the holy ghost wrought in him to the
end, * who revealed unto him (by comparing virtue 1 Cor. 2. 10
with vice, which he calls the going into the sanctuary of the Lord,) the
end of those men, whom God does set in slippery places to cast them down to a
fearful end.

Thus the reprobate serve Satan their father and God of John. 8. 24.
this World, * and his lusts they obey, to obtain their fleshly desires, the
riches, the honor, and glory of this world, which is the kneeling down to *
worship Satan, that he required Matt. 4. 9.
of Christ, Jesus. But the reprobate whom God has not chosen do daily kneel
and woorship Satan to obtain their filthy lusts and covetous desires. Yea
they do it with ten times more diligence, then the elect children of God do
the will of their good father: Yea and very many of Gods elect, do often times,
yea too to often kneel and woorship satan and come after him, by obaying their
wicked lusts in covering the riches, pleasures and glory of this world.

* And as Gehezy servant to Elizeus ran privily against 2 Reg. 5. 21
his masters will after Naaman the Sirian for a bribe: even so do many of Gods
elect run after Satan against their fathers known will as privily as they
can, but all in vayue for they can not go unspied of him. And the best reason
of their excuse is a false opinion of fortune, as though some thing did chance
or fall without Gods will and forepointment which is a most gross error. For *
if a Sparrow fall not on the Mat. 10. 29 30. Luc. 12. 6. 7 21. 28.
ground, nor an hair perish* (which are of the least things) without Gods will
and appointment: then of necessity it must follow, that the greatest things
that concern men, cannot happen or chance without the same will and
forepointment, * for men are of more value then Sparrowes. And when the Luc.
12. 7.
effect of Satan's attempt to have Christ Jesus fall down to worship him is
considered, it shall appear that Satan took him but for a mere man, but when
Christ Jesus rebuked him, he felt that he was more then a man. For few men
refuse riches, and glory of the world, if they may attain them by easy means
of craft, deceit, or other sinful devise especially if they may do it privily.

And it is most certain, that whatsoever is gottten by violente wrong as
extortion, robbery, theft, murder, by adultry, fornication, or by any other
sinful mean. I say it is nevertheless the gift of God indirectly. For God
does distribute, some time the riches, honor, authority, and glory of this
world, by the ministry of Satan into whose power at his pleasure gives those
things to bestow on such as will not re^use to do any sin or villanye what
soever, when they do perceive a likelihood to obtain their sinful purposes:
which is the honor that Satan requires of all sort of men: and not material
fawlling down as Idolaters do to Images.

Examples of such worshipping of Satan, the times past and present do set
forth innumerable. First for the obteyning of Monarchies, Kingdoms,
principalityes, and other states of nobility, auctor^ty, by office and such
like: historyes of diverse countries make mention of multitudes, that have
wrought most pestiferous conspiracies * by deui^ish and subtle treason, by open
and privy murder, as well by private violence, as open and bloody battayles, by
brybery, one wicked corrupting another with money, by ignorancy, enchauntment,
witchcraft, empoysoning, and by such wicked ways have gotten Kingdoms, and
other states of nobilities* and governed the same by cruelty and tyranny. All
which obtain their desires by sinful deeds, so woorshipping Satan who by
Gods sufferance fills their humors.

Moreover such as are in high place may by neglecting their duties toward God
and his people, over whom they govern in fulfilling their fleshly appetytes,
by favoring unworthy persons, exalting such to high auctority suffering them
selves to be abused through flatterye and disceipt of such by following their
wicked counsel to oppress the people as did Solomon and Roboham, by taxes,
impositions, and extortions, thereby encurring the hatred of the people over
whom they govern to their own confusion. Such by obaying their own unlawful
lusts woorship Satan unto their own destruction, as witnesses Boccas of the
fall of Princes.

Furthermore histories witness and daily experience verifyeth, that many have
and do obey riches, woorship, honor, and aspire to great auctority in
woorshipping Satan: Some by adultry and fornication, some by being bawdes, some
by flattery, and lying have defaced others and brought themselves into credit
and favor, some by abusing the judgment seats, some by brybe taking to
support false cases, to the hindra^ce of justice, some by buying, selling and
abusing the Princes offices, some by abusing Princes commissions, and lycences,
thereby deceauing both the Princes privily by false accomptes, and pilling and
polling the subjects by extortions, some by monapolis engrosing the chief
commodities of countries into their hands: some bydisceiptfull buying and
selling, etc.

Great nombers by some of these sundry ways of woorshipping Satan, have gotten
and purchased such abundaunce of riches and lands, as have made their houses
woorshipfull in this world, and left the same by succession to their
posterities, and by the same means as in time it was heaped together: even so
in time it has been scattered abroad again, and in three or four generations
their names clean forgotten, as though they had never been, saving that their
names may remain in memory, as his that burnt the Temple of Diana. Such have
walked in vain shadows, heaping up riches for they know not whom. Psalm. 40.


And some of those, yea very many for their filthiness in worshipping of satan,
have of him received his rewards, which are Gods just punishments in this
life: Some by pride, riot, and prodigality have and do come to extreme
beggary, some for treason hanged drawn and quartered, some for treachery
banished their countries, some for murder and theft hanged: some for their
wicked lives stricken with horrible diseases: as the pockes, some with leprosy,
some eaten with Woormes, so ending their lives in those or other horrible
miseryes.

Yea mighty Emperoures, Kings, Princes, and many other great estates have
received of those rewards for their service in woorshipping of Satan: for with
such does he recompense the service of his dilligent servants, and obedient
subjects, some in short time, and some after long service. Deu. 13. etc
* For as he is Gods instrument to prove his elect, by temptations, and
allurementes to sin, his woorking in false Prophets, Preachers, flatterers,
bawdes, and brokers to all kinds of abominations: Even so he is Gods hangman
What soever is falsely* gotten, is never theles the gift of God but not
immediately from God.
to punish the same as God has forpointed by what means soever: And as is
aforesaid, whatsoever is falsely or wrongfully gotten, the same is nevertheless
the gift of God to them that get it* but not ymmediatly from God: for God
gives on the right hand and on the left hand: on the right hand immediately
through Christ Jesus: He gives unto his elect all Worldly benefytes for
sustentation of this life: and in the resurrection and life everlasting,
eternal joy and felicitye: On the left hand I do call it indirectly from
God, because he makes Satan his Instruments, who by himself and his cursed
angels, distributeth when God suffers him the precious things of this World
to such as woorship him by committing all kinds of sin.

For the wicked want patience, and cannot tarry the Lords leisure to get
things by truth and honesty, but spedily they give dangerous attemptes and
that by sinister means, to get worldly riches, estimation and authority, which
is the glory of this World: And possessing them, confess them to be the gifts
of God, wherein they say truly: for they are indeed temporal blessings
proceeding from Gods left hand to the reprobate, which they esteem for the
greatest happiness, because they want right judgment: and grace to discern
between good and evil. For as to get riches is doubtless a worldly blessing
of God: even so it behooves mankind to consider by what means they are gotten.

For they consider not the difference how God has made two sorts * of men,
whereof he has called many: and chosen Mat. 20. 19 Mat. 25. 21. etc.
but few, and that few * shall be on his right hand, and many on the left hand:
on whom he bestows these temporal blessings, which his elect in Christ use
to his glory and their own salvation, the other abuse these benefytes to
their own condemnation. But yet God is good unto all * he makes Mat. 5. 4h
his Sun to shine, and rain to rain on the good and bad, on the just and
unjust. Therefore no man can tell whether himself, or this man, or that man
be in the favor of God to salvation or no* by any outward thing pleasant or
noisome, that chance to any person in this life. * For it happens Eccle. 9.
1.
alyke, unto the Godly as to the ungodly, to the clean as to the unclean, to
the virtuous as to the sinner, to him that for swears himself, as unto him
that is afraid to be forswo^ne.

Therefore this life is vile and wretched, because it happens to all alyke to
man's judgment. For the hearts of me^ are ful^ of wickedness and mad folishnes,
because they consider not, or else the forget, that all is vanity and shall
perish. And although men know (when they think on it) that they shall dye,
and have no more part of any thing that is done under the Sun, yet they care
not for those things, but wilfully neglect them: and as blind men grope in the
dark, even so they as in a waking dream run amazd, worshipping satan and
his adherentes for the things of this world: not regarding Job 9. 24.
what Job says, * that the earth is given over into the hands of the wicked,
whose faces God does cover, even the Judges of the land: but not all for a few
are chosen from among many that are called. For S. Paul speaking of the
effectual calling of Gods elect says that * not many worldly 1 Cor. 1. 26
wise men, not many noble, not many mighty are called: meaning effectually
called to the dignity of Gods election to salvation: Psalm. 11. 6.
Therefore they take their portion in this life. * But upon them in the life to
come, shall r^yne snares, fire, brimstone, stormy tempests, those things then
shall be their portion.

Example of the ritche glutton, and poor Lazarus, y^ rich was answered thus:
* remember that thou in thy life time Luc. 16. 19. 19.
had thy pleasures, and Lazarus pains: Therefore now he is comforted and
thou tormented.

Although it cannot be known by any thing that happens in this life, who
God loves or hates, neither which they be that shall be saved or damned:
neither ought men to be curious to search further the secrets thereof then holy
scripture teaches. And so far men ought to know by commandment, * search
the Scriptures, etc, For to some of the elect John. 5. 39. Luke. 8. 10.
is given to know the secrets of the kingdom of God, but to the reprobate they
are spoken in parables, that hearing they should not understand, Therefore
Christ Jesus was sent into the world, not only to redeem such as were
forepointed to possess the joys of heaven: but also to open and declare the
same secret which was hidden since the world began: (except Col. 1. 26.
here and there one of the fathers and prophets which spoke now and then but
darkely of it) until Christ Jesus revealed clearly the same in his preaching:
And wrought the true belief thereof in the minds of his disciples, who most
clearly and faithfully, committing the same to writing. * And whatsoever is
written by them is written for our learning.

That we (which are allotted to godly life in Christ Jesus, to suffer
persecution) through patience and comfort of holy Scriptures might have hope in
God: and be like minded one to another, as Christ Jesus is toward them that
surely believe and trust in him.

Notwithstanding all these circumstances, God has subjected every reasonable
creature, and bound them to the observation of his holy Law, wherein Adam
failed at the beginning, which is so strayt, that it is not in man's power of
himself to keep and fulfill it: the cause why he made it so strayt is
evident Even to the end that al mankind * should be shut up under sin, which is
their damnation: and therefore he has Gal. 2 22. Exo. 33. 19. Romans 6^. 18
mercy on whom he will and whom he will, he hardneth their hearts. When the
Israelites through iniquity and ingratitude had forgotten God, then he by
taking his holy spirit from them, * made them to err, and hardened their hearts
from Esai. 63. 17.
fearing him.

Oh that al people would fear this incomprehensible Monarch, that rules,
commands, and woorketh all in all whatsoever is done in Heaven and earth,
and has al things at his beeke even at the twinkling of an eye. Therefore he
may have mercy on whom he will, and at his pleasure do justice on all the rest.
He made all, if he destroy all, who can let him? * If God take from any man
that which he has Job 9. 12.
given him, who can make him restore it? And what soever has been done from
the beginning, or shall be unto the ending of the world, is done by Gods
forepointment be it good or bad unto mankind, for all is good unto God: For
although the breach of his commandments is evil in Gods sight because it is
the sin of man: yet it is not God, nor in God, for he Psalm. 91. 10. etc.
is the soueraygne goodness it self. Who * appoints his holy angels that no
evil should come near to his elect, much less near himself.

Therefore I say, whatsoever things are wrought or done by the ministration of
good or evil spirits, or angels, all are done by his almighty power, and the
same forepointed in the eternal counsel before the world was.

Now although it is not in man's power to observe this holy law, yet whosoever
does not love the law, and endeavor themselves to frame their lives thereby.
Whosoever does not believe and confess the same to be full of al holy wisdom
every way tending to the preservation of man's life in purity and holiness, to
sustain the society of mankind on earth in honesty of life: civil policy,
upright judgment and dew execution of justice. Those I say do not show them
selves the children of God: but seem to be his enemies and children of the
Devil.

I liken this dangerous law to a Kings standerd in the field, under which his
subjects of necessity must fight: I call it dangerous, for that is the cause of
death and not life: and yet it is ordained of God purposely for mankind to
fight under during this transitory life, especially such as will live godly and
honestly must fight mightily. For who so leaves this law and yields to his
lust, stands for the present in state of damnation, from the which by grace
and repentance in this life, he may be recovered: but not after this corporal
death, for in Hell is no redemption.

Therefore let all that believe the word of God, know by 1 These. 4. 7
the same, * That God has not called us that be true Christians to uncleanness,
but unto holiness. That is, not only to believe in Christ Jesus, but also to
walk in Gods holy law * whereof he came not to break one iott. Matt. 5. 17.
18.


But we must not trust to be saved by the observation thereof, nor by our
good works: For in that behalf we shall find the same holy law no better or
surer unto us then a broken staff, wherewith a man thinks to leap over a
brook, and it lettes him fall in the midst: For the law was not given to
iustifye, but to condemn *. For if there had Gal. 3. 21.
been a law given which could have given life: then righteousness had come by
the Law. But seeing it is not so * as many as seek justification by the deeds
of the Law are cursed, because they continue not in all the things written in
the Book of the Law.

* Therefore by the dredes of the Law no flesh shall be justified. Romans 3. 20.


This seems a very hard matter: and to meare natural wisdom more then
strange, that men are bound to keep a Law that is not in their power to keep,
and damned for breaking it: And yet it helps not to salvation if they could
keep it * Few Masters thank their servants for doing their bounden Luke 17.
9. 10.
service: yea though we could do all that is commanded, yet we must say we
are unprofitable servants.

To what end then should we strive to keep the Law, by which we are damned
for breaking it, and nothing helped toward salvation for keeping it, if it
were in our power to fulfill it? If there were none other reason but that God
for his pleasure has commanded it: even that to al people fearing God, is a
sufficient reason. But yet this is more, by endeavoring of our selves to the
uttermost of our power to keep the Law: and being sorry for breaking it, we
show our selves willing in all that we may, we show our love and obedience
toward our heavenly father* Who although it were his pleasure to command us
more then now we are able to fulfill: yet we cease not with care, study
prayer, fasting alms deeds of charity and all that we can to come as near
the mark as is possible. And so doing we show our selves thankful to God for
sending his only Son Christ Jesus no^ only to observe and fulfill the
straytnes of the said Law for us to the uttermost iotte that could be laid to
our charge: But also he paid the penalty for us which we could never have
satisfied. For he suffered the very extremity of Gods justice in his agony
being nailed on the Cross: which the damned souls have suffered, since they
left their bodies in earth: and after the resurrection shall take their bodies
again, and suffer everlasting torment.

Thus though we walk never so careful* (...) ^^igently in keeping the Law:
yet let us rest upon (...) offering of the body of Christ Jesus, which in the
(...)all counsel was ^^ ^yned and forepoynted for the sam^ purpose to be a
lively sacrifyce once for all, by the which he deserved salvation, (not for
him self, but for all that should truly believe and trust in him. Therefore
of right salvation appertains unto us that so believe, as duly and justly as
though we could or had deserved it our selves. These great benefytes considered
it is both good, reason and right, that we should not only offer but also
endeavor our selves with all reverence of heart, hand, body, soul, and all that
is within us, to do whatsoever he commands without grudging or vain
disputation: namely to endeavor and pain our selves to keep his holy law,
only because he does command the same. So shall all those with whom we are
conversant, be witness of the love we bear to God in Christ Jesus, who
says, * if ye love me John 14. 15 John. 13. 34* Mat. 22. 37 10. 40. Romans 13.
10 1 John. 4. 8. 16.
keep my commandments. * For when he gave that new commandment, he brake
no iott of the old: But gave the sum of all saying * to love God above all
things, and thy neighbor as thy self * is the fulfilling of the Law. For God
is love, therefore he that dwells in love, dwells in God and God in him.

OF THE BROAD AND NARROW ways, of the wide and the strait gates, and of the
little infinite flock which God has chosen to salvation: little infinite in
comparison of the great infinite multitudes which God has left vnchosen which
are his refused people reprobate. CAP. 10.
IT is no marvel though there be an infinite number of sects of heresies
fond religions and false opinions touching God and godliness, among so
innumerable and passing infinite nombers of multitudes of people which by
multiplication of generation from Adam and Eve, have increased, lived,
a(...)died from age to age, and yet are living upon the sundry soyles of the
Earth: For God has made them all, and ordained some to salvation, and some to
damnation.

And therefore there are also two ways appointed: a broad and evil way,
likewise a narrow and good way. The broad and evil way is so plain and easy
to keep, that who soever is in it, cannot of himself go out of the way though
he would, which point of the compass soever he turn himself unto: unless
God by his holy Spirit lead him out. Contrariwise, the narrow and good way is
so streyte and difficult to keep, that man of him self cannot walk uprightly
in it, without swaruing and stackering like a dronkard every minute, unless
God by his holy spirit sustain him.

Likewise of the strayte and wide gates, The strayt gate is ordained for the *
little flock to enter in, which God has chosen Luc. 12. 32. Mat. 5. 3. 10
to himself * such as are pore in spirit, such as mourn, wanting comfort, such
as are humble and meek in heart, such as hunger and thirst for righteousness,
such as are merciful and have good conscience, peace makers, such as suffer
persecution for Gods holy religion, finally in such as believe truly in God the
Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, the wide gate is for the high and proud
minded, Idolaters, blasphe^mers, extortioners, doers of wrong, murderers,
adulterers, fornicators, such as are worldly wise, and think the preaching of
the Gospel foolishnes.

For thus it is written by way of exhortation: * Strive to Mat. 7. 13. Luc. 13.
24.
enter in at the strayt gate: For wide is the gate and broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many go in thereat: but strayte is the gate and
narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there be that find it. Few
in comparison of all the world: * For many are called few are chosen. And as
Mat. 20. 16.
of the broad and narrow ways, and of the wide and strayte gates: even so of
the opinions and conceiptes of men's minds in general which are more then
infinite: And yet al erroneous and false concerning God and godliness,
whatsoever is conceived and uttered by any of mankind: except such as are
guided by the spirit of God. For if a good thought come to mind we fetch it
not of our own power: for there is no ability in us * to think a good
thought. For when any man thinks and 2 Cor. 3. ^
does any thing well in godliness, it is God that woorketh in him both the will
and the deed.

Now is there none righteous but those whom God has elected to salvation in
Christ Jesus, by whom they are made righteous. And yet those righteous fall so
often into the danger of Satan by sin: that they have great cause to fear
and tremble at the fierce assaults of the enemies of their souls, Satan and
his adherentes both bodily and ghostly: who do work by such intricate
flattering, allurementes, and perilous pleasant enti ementes, or else by such
furious and fumes, of anger, malice, hatred, and reuengement as should deceive
(if it were possible) the very elect of their salvation.

But holy Scriptures do affirm, avouch, and confirm, that Gods election
cannot fail. What though many doubt of the stability thereof, and would if
they might for shame say there were no such thing. But because it is so plainly
set down in holy Scriptures, and in so many places that it cannot be denied:
The Papists are constrained to gloze upon the text and wrest it as follows,
God does choose daily such, Papists gloss upon the text.
as he knows will be faithful and do good works. Lo, they imagine God to
know by calculation at their birth as Astronomers take on them to do: As
though man could become good of him self, or any goodness fall into him by any
other mean then from God only, which to think is a shameful gross error.

Others object that if his election fail not, and that his choice was before
the world began: then say they, how could Gods elect in Adam be subject to his
offense and change their blessed estate before their being in the world.

This may seem a curious question * which S. Paul did Titus 3. 9.
will to be stayed, for that the impaciency of men is such, as not to reason
thereof without being angry, and thinking evil one of another. And yet the
matter easy to be decided, being handled with reverence in the fear of God.

True it is that Gods elect did offend in Adam before their being in the World.
For Adam purchased to himself, and to his posterity, (by his infidelity,
pride, and disobedience) damnation both of soul and body: therefore all his
corrupt posterity, by nature, of nece^^ity must be pertakers of y^ cursed
purchase and damnable inheritance. And albeit Gods elect in Adam did change
their blessed state, and were utterly damned: Yet for all that Gods election
failed not. For by that offense of Adam it was forepointed, * that all should
be Gal. 3. 22. Exo. 33. 19 Romans 9. 13.
shut up under sin: to the end that God might show mercy on all whom it
pleased him.

It is most true, that all mankind both elected and rejected, chosen and
refused, were damned in Adam by his disobedience. And yet the forepointed by
election which he had forechosen in Christ Jesus were even then by his death
redeemed again the promise being made, * that the seed of the woman Genesis 3. 15.
should break the head of the serpent, and pull out of satan's power and
possession such as pleased him. So that the elect the redeemed and sanctified
in Christ Jesus by his merits and righteousness only are made righteous: and
therefore though * they fall, they shall not be cast away. For God Psalm 38. 24.
shall give them grace and power to rise again by repentance: and so cannot
the rejected do, because it pleased not God to give them that grace and power.
* For none can come John. 6. 44. 14. 6.
to the Son except the Father draw him: * and none can come to the Father but
by the Son.

Thus it is evident that the fall of mankind into condemnation, 2 Timothy 2. 19
was no hindrance to Gods election: * For the foundation of God remains, and
has these words for a seal, The Lord knows who are his. Therefore let
every one that calls on the name of the Lord Jesus depart from iniquity: and
not follow their sinful lusts, and flatter themselves with faith only
iustifyeth: For albeit I confess the sentence to be most true: yet I wish
none to stand in their own conceiptes, to think they have that they have not.
For there is great difference between the shadow and the body, false and true
faith. For true faith can be no more without good works, then the Sun
without light, or the fire without heat.

Thus we see that mankind is divided in two sorts, some to salvation, some to
damnation: the reprobate are damned through their own default for their just
deserts: the elect are saved through Gods mere mercy in Christ Jesus, not for
their own deserts. So was his good pleasure to do with his own: And it is
more then mere madness to argue why he has done this or that. * There is
written sufficiently to answer Exo. 33. 19. Romans 9. 10. etc.
all curious questions whatsoever.

Now if these things seem strange, hard, rigorous, cruel and against reason
in some men's judgments: let them never trouble their heads with musing on the
matter, for it will not help: but rather with all humility, let them return
unto the true obedience of this incomprehensible, this everlasting, this
almighty, and passing wonderful Godhed.

And although men cannot observe the Law, yet let them confess it to be most
righteous: let them love it, let them put all their care and desire to observe
and keep it: let them be sorry when they break it: thereunto let them add,
true and holy obedience to God the Father: steadfast and true faith, fear and
love in Christ Jesus* craving always the governance of the holy ghost, not
trusting any thing in their own strength or good works. And they that are
thus affected may certainly and without doubt assure themselves that God has
chosen them to salvation, and made them joint heirs of his kingdom, in and
with his Son Christ Jesus, the right heir thereof, and elder Brother of all
the children of God.

And those whom God has forechosen and forepoynted to be saved, can not
perish by any means, neither shall they live caresse in the world, for they
shall fear to do evil secretly, they shall not dare in hope of forgiveness, so
to tempt God as do the reprobate: for the holy Spirit which is appointed to
guide them * shall check their consciences continually by Psalm. 18. 16. 9. 1.
1. 11. Mat. 1. 21
secret thoughts to restrain their wickedness. * And Christ Jesus came to
save his people from their sins: woorking in the minds of his elect by his
holy spirit and power, wherewith he has promised to be with his unto the
end of the World.

* And all the promises of God are in him, yea and amen for 2 Cor. 1. 20. Psalm.
146. 6. James 1. 17.
ever. * For he that made all things of nothing, keeps his promise for
ever. * For with God is no variablenes, nor shadow by turning: he changes not
purpose as man does: he does not build and pull down to mende the fashion as
men do, * And although it is written that God repented that he Genesis 6. 6. 7
had made man, because wickedness did so abound in men: in in all such phrases
of holy Scriptures, God abaseth and conformeth his words to man's capacity and
conceipte, as nurses do with young children: who some time with cheerful
countinance and lisping voice, some time with frowning looks, and boisterous
voice, give the ancient children to understand when they please or displease:
even so deals God with mankind, for otherwise they are not to understand his
will.

Not that God can repent, or be sorry as men are when things come contrary to
their wills: For what soever is done by Satan, and by him in mankind, God
might let if it were his will: to mankind happens many things unaware: it is
not so to God: For he does not only foreknowe, and foresee all whatsoever,
but also all things have ever been, are now, and ever shall be ruled and
governed by his everlasting forepoyntment. Neither does he at any time, that
which he remembered not before, he uses no after wits, there is not in him
any imperfections, he has no defectes, no passions, no forgetfulness, no
change of divise, no intention of alteration. For albeit that by the general
flood he destroyed all things (except the arc and all that was in it) yet
he made not any thing new in the World which was not made before.

For he excels man in wisdom, goodness and power: further then Man being a
Potter can exceed his Earthen Pottes: who as a Creator of such Pottes, may
break and destroy a number, and make as many new of another fashion: Even so
is God to man if it please him.

OF THE FLOCK WHICH GOD has chosen. CAP. 11.
WE are taught * to love our enemies, Matt. 5. 44. etc.
to bless them that curse us, to do good to them that hate us, and pray for
those that persecute and hurt us. Such is the goodness of God in norishing all
things, who makes his Sun to shine, and his rain to fall on the good and
badde. * And as he Sapien. 6. 7
has made the great and the small, even so concerning this world he cares for
all alyke.

But for the world to come he has a more special care for those whom he has
chosen to salvation, whom our Savior Christ calls his little flock, and
says unto them: * fear Luc. 12. 32.
not little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom.
Those are they for whose sakes * the seed of the Genesis 3. 15.
woman was promised to break the head of the serpent. This little flock of the
seed of Abraham, * the Father of all true Genesis 12. 3. 18. 18. 22. 18 26. 4.
Gal. 3. 8. Heb. 6. 13. Mar. 13. 20.
believers, to and to whom the promises were made, when God said unto him, in
thy seed which is Christ Jesus, all the Nations of the earth shall be blessed.
* For the favor that God bears to this little flock the evil days shall be
shortened without altering his eternal purpose.

This little flock are those whom Christ Jesus calls saying: * Come unto me
all ye that labor and are heavy laden Mat. 11. 28 Lut. 17. 34. Mat. 24. 40
and I will refresh you. Of this little flock are those that at the sudden
coming of the Lord in the clouds, of two in a bed, two in the field, two at
a Mill, whereof one shall be taken that is chosen, and the other forsaken, that
is refused. * Of Revel.
this little flock are those that have the mark of God in their foreheads,
whom Satan and his angels cannot hurt: for they are commanded to the contrary.
* This little flock is Matt. 13. 3. 10. 9.
noted to be the good ground that receaueth the precious seed the word of God
into their souls, and brings forth fruit, 30. 60. and 100. fold: that is to
say, the fruit of true belief in Christ Jesus, the fruit of humble obedience
to God, and his most holy Law, the fruit of holy fasting, praying, alms
deeds, and godly life, the fruit of loving God above all things and our
neighbor as our selves.

The precious fruit of sure hope in the mere mercy of God, to receive our
salvation through the merits of Jesus Christ only, and nothing for our own
deserts, nor for popish good intentes, such fruits show this little flock to
be good ground.

Whereas all other people of the world in general are noted to be stony,
thorny, barrany, and evil ground: over whose souls Satan has full power
either to take from the^ Gods word that was sown in their minds, or else to
choke it in them by unlawful covetousness, cares of this life, and filthy
lusts of the flesh whatsoever: And therefore can bring out no godly fruit to
salvation.

This little flock are the sheep of whom Christ Jesus is the true and good
Shepeheard, who gave his life for the sheep. John. 10. ^. Mat. 25. 34.
* This little flock are the sheep which Christ Jesus shall divide from the
Goats. * And which the Angels shall gather together from the fowr winds, to
meet the Lord in the clouds, Lec. 14. 37.
at his coming to judge the quick and the dead, to whom he shall say, come
ye blessed of my Father possess my kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world. The contrary shall be said to the Goats, all wicked
people whom God has not chosen to salvation: go away from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels.

This little chosen flock only * have ears to hear the Matt. 13. 9.
word of God to their comfort in this life, and to their salvation in the life
to come: Whereas al other people of the world, no state or degree excepted, have
no ears to hear, * because Marc. 4. 11
to this little flock it is given to know the secrets of the kingdom of God,
but unto them that are without, all things are done in parables, that they may
see and not discern, hear and not understand, etc. Neither will they * come to
the Lords Luc. 14. 16. 10 24. Psalm. 115. 5. etc. Esai. 6. 9. Mat. 13. 14. Mark.
4. 12 Luc. 8. 10. John 12. 40 Act. 28. 26. Romans 11. 8.
Supper when he calls. * Therefore they are as dead images, they have mouths
and speak not (any thing to Gods honor, and their own salvation, therefore
they speak not at all) For it is written. * Ye shall see indeed, but not
perceive, ye shall hear but not understand, make their Hearts fat, their
ears heavy, and shut their Eyes: least they should s^e with their eyes, hear
with their ears, and understand with their hearts and be converted, that
Christ Jesus might heal them.

Read all those places coated in the margent. Believe and repent, which if ye
cannot do, ask faithfully of God, ye may have it for the asking: if a man
may have meat at his request, and will sterue rather then demand it: he is
worthy to die of hunger and none to bewail him.

Saint Peter wrote * unto the elect according to the foreknowledge 1 Pet. 1. 2.
10. 18. read all*
of God, that we were not redeemed with gold and such corruptible things,
nor by traditions of the fathers: but by the precious blood of Christ Jesus,
which was ornained to y^ end, before the foundations of the world. * we are
called 2* 20. Iud. 1. 4. 6.
to follow him in suffering afflictions. * Saint Jude says the ungodly turn
the grace of God into wantonness, even ordained to damnation: so were the angels
that kept not their Ephesians. 1. 4. 5.
first estate. * But God has chosen us in Christ Jesus, before the foundations
of the world, to the end we should be holy and without blam^, before him in
love, he forepointed us to be adopted in Christ Jesus according to the good
pleasure of his will. * He has saved us and called us with an holy calling, 2 Timothy 1. 9.
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace which
was given unto us in Christ Jesus before the world was. Paul the servant of
God, and Apostle of Christ Jesus according to the faith of Gods elect in
knowl^dge of the truth in god ^iues, under the hope of eternal life which God
that can not lie, has promised before the world began. * Which forepointment
of God as a secret was kept Romans 16. 25 26. Colos. 1. 26
closse from the beginning (except here and there one in every age) but now is
opened and published by the holy Scriptures, at the commandment of the ever
living God, that thereunto faith might give obedience. * For in Christ Jesus
we Ephesians. 1. 16 2. 10
were chosen when we were predestinat according to the purpose of him that
woorketh all things after the counsel of his own will, * and we are his
woorkmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained
for us to exercise our selves in them. And what soever God has forepointed and
established shall never be altered: for it is written. * My counsel shall
stand, and I will do whatsoever Esai 26. 10. Romans 15. 4.
I will. * Seeing all holy Scriptures are written for our learning: then ought
we to seek and know all the secrets therein contained, and make our profit of
them, for so is our John. 5. 39.
masters will and commandment. * Search the scriptures which testify of me.
This foresaid little flock chosen of God were forepoynted to suffer all kinds
of injuries and afflictions of the wicked people (which God has not chosen)
during this life in every age from the beginning to the ending of the Mat. 23.
3^
World. That upon all the wicked may come the gyltinesse of all the innocent
blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, spilt between the temple
and the altar: But likewise the giltines of all the innocent blood which has
bin is now, or shall be shed from the first to the last in the world. Luc. 18.
7.
* For shall not God revenge his elect, that cry unto him day and night: yes
though he suffer long for them, I tell you, he will revenge them quickly that
is to say, ^ffectually, even with the twinkling of an eye.

Those four rehearsed sentences, are notes of the true plain song of Gods holy
and eternal forepoyntment, pricked down in holy Scriptures, by Moses, by the
holy Prophets, and by Christ Jesus himself: upon which most pleasant and
infallible ground: the concord of Divine Musitions, the Apostles, and their
most true followers sithence their time, have song pleasant and sweet descant,
each one according to the measu^e of this gift received of God, and prononuced
as the holy Ghost wrought in them, and gave them utterance, not varying a note
from the firm ground.

If men would fall into consideration of this doctrine, that God is all in all,
and works all in all, and that there proceeds from him both right justice
and tender mercy: surely they would fear him for his justice: and they would
love and obey him for his mercy, yea they would magnify his eternal and
almighty power, * and declare the wonders that he does among Psam. 107.
the children of men.

CONCERNING NATVRES LAWS for all creatures visible and invisible, reasonable,
and unreasonable sencible and incensible. CAP. 12.
THat there be angels which are spirits both good and evil, and that they are
the invisible messengers of God, and woorkers of his will both secret and
manifest: it is not for any man to doubt thereof, seeing holy Scriptures do so
largely testify of the same. As for their beginning, they are the creatures of
God, as man male and female are. And they live under Gods holy laws and
ordinances each in their kind, as mankind ought to do. There is a law for
holy Angels in their kind or nature: A law for evil angels in their kind or
corrupt nature. A law for man male and female contrary to their kind and
corrupt nature. Natures law in the firmament, in the elements, in the
creatures that live and move in the waters, in creatures that go and creep on
earth, and with feathers fly in the air. Each of these according to their
kinds, have laws established in them by nature.

This word, all creatures, are to follow the Law of nature move and to do, as
God in the creation did forepoint to each thing in his kind to keep their
natural courses, wherein they are bound, and can not err except monsters come
forth. Example. The honny Be sucketh the juice of sweet flowers which turns
into his own substance, that is poison. The like smell is of Gods elect and
the reprobate.

The holy Scriptures are most precious and sweet flowers, out of which his
chosen people suck juice to their salvation: and his refused people to their
damnation.

So is Gods eternal decree that each thing shall keep his own course, and
have his natural being. * for thorns can not Mat. 7. 16.
bring forth grapes, nor thistles figs.

Natures laws in the firmament in the planets, in the signs in the elimentes,
in the trees and fruits, in the herbs and flowers, and what soever springs
of the earth: each thing yeeldes forth his virtue to man's use as God did first
decree, for the blessed spirits holy angels work Gods will in heaven and in
this world: A law of such humility, obedience, and willingness to please God, as
they have neither will nor motion to the contrary: which law is so naturally
engraffed in them that they cannot err by any means. Therefore our Lord Jesus
taught us to pray that our heavenly fathers will may be done in earth as it is
in Heaven.

Natures law in cursed spirits the Devil and his angels in Hell, and
dispersed in the air, and working some times in the minds of men doing their
natural offices, seeking whom they may devour, and are most noisome to Gods
elect, who by reason of their corrupt nature can not choose but sin. And yet
G^d by his grace through the ministry of his holy Spirit does restrain his
chosen calling them back to repentance. And sometime they are tempted by Satan
for trial of their faith and constancy toward God: as was Job Daniel and
others: But Gods refused people are still possessed by wicked spirits* and
carried on continually from evil to worse to their utter destruction.

And that their cursed exercise is to them a law engrafted so deeply in their
nature by their fall, as they cannot break it: But in Gods elect that wicked
nature by the ministry of his holy Spirit by his mercy and grace is altered,
yet can not be taken clean away during this life. * But when ye elect moorn 2
Cor. 1^. 8. 9.
under the burden of sin, and pray to be released, then is the grace of God
sufficient for them.

Natures law in all kind of beasts and creeping things on earth, fethered
fowls, and fish in the waters salt and fresh: God has insinuated (by his
word in the creation) into the vital spirits of each creature in his kind,
to keep his course by natures laws: And it is a monster in nature, whom any
do contrary to their kinds.

By natures law God from the beginning has, does now, and ever shall govern
ordinarily all creatures in Heaven and and Earth, mankind only excepted, while
he lives in this world, whom he ^ath divided in two sorts: as he had
^^uided the angels: and al for the accomplish meant of his eternal purpose and
endless glory. So is mankind only exempted from this law of Nature, by
commandment during this mortal life. For whereas God insinuated and
ingrafted into the vital spirits of each living thing in his kind to keep
the law of Nature which among them is very seldom broken. Contrariwise God
has put upon mankind a law utterly disagreeing and most contrary to the
corrupt nature of man: a law of commandments in words plainly written for
man's understanding, precepts so hard as it is impossible for man by his own
power to observe them. If it had pleased God he was also able to have given
power to fulfill it, and so should mankind have lived as the holy Angels: but
then his mercy and justice should not have been so manifestly set forth unto
his glory as now they are, and as was most meet they should be.

Yet God to set forth his love toward man and the dignity and excellency of
mankind by his mere mercy offered upon our nature, he did forepoynt that the
nature of man should be personally united unto the deity.

In respect of this conjunction especially some think it is written. * that
God made man little inferior to the Angels: it Psalm. 8. 6.
is most true, that God preferred Christ Jesus unto the Angels, * For unto
which of the Angels said he at any time, sit Heb. 1. 4. 5. 13.
thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy foot stool. And by
virtue of the said holy conjunction, all Gods elect are made so worthy and
dear in his sight, that all the holy Angels are ministering spirits sent
forth to serve for their sakes, which shall be heirs of salvation: and then of
necessity it must needs follow (because every thing has his contrary) that the
Devil and his angels are also ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for
their sakes which shall be heirs of damnation. * For they go about like
roaring Lions 1. Pet. 5. 8.
seeking whom they may devour.

The consideration of this wonderful division ought to move all people to
fear and tremble in presence, which is every where of this only Monarke of
Heaven and Earth, * and Psalm. 107. 8. 8. 15.
tell forth the wonders that he does among the children of me^.

It is before proved that God has dealt with Angels as with men, chosing some,
and refusing other some, the chosen remain in their first blessed state, they
refused for their infidelity, pride and disobedience, were cast out of Heaven
with their thief Captain or King * Abadon the angel of the bottomless Revel.
9. 11. 12. 9.
pit * which deceaueth all the World, and those infinite nombers of
multitudes of disobedient spirits that fell with Mat. 25. 41
him are called his angels, * for whom Hell fire was prepared. And it stands
with reason that he and his train became enemies, and fell from Heaven before
God made man on earth: otherwise he could not have but so ready in the crafty
serpent * to seek man's confusion, immediately after his creation, as Genesis 3. 1.
to me seems in and by the text. Man male and female were ^eceaued through
their own infidelity and negligence: in not believing Gods holy word: and for
co^iting contrary to Gods word, they were desirous to be like Gods in knowing
good and evil. And so it fell out that

In groping after glory,
They found eternal follye.
In seeking glorification,
They found their own damnation.
And that not to themselves only,
but to all their corrupt posterity.
For then and there Satan over came them, and from that time, there was never
any conceived of a woman by the seed of man, gotten and borne, but by that
wound which the Devil gave mankind was wrapped in iniquity. * in sin
mothers Psalm. 51. 41.
conceive their children. All the elect of God from the beginning have been,
are and shall be so conceived to the end * And how can that be clean which
comes of an unclean Job. 14. 4. Esai. 61. 6. Psalm. 58. 3
thing. * All man's righteousness is like a filthy clout,

The ungodly whom God has not chosen, * are strangers from God, they are
froward, they speak lies, they are full of Satan's poison, even from their
mothers womb. Esau before his birth was refused, and froward from his mothers
Genesis 25. Mal. 1. 2. Romans 9. 11.
womb, when he came to discretion, he furiously rejected the blessing of
God, which afterward he could not recover, though he sought it with tears.

It is an ancient opinion that every man had his good and evil angel, which
albeit it wants sufficient warrant of holy Scripture: yet most true it is
that God by his holy spirit does govern his elect, who also have by God his
appointment holy angels to minister unto them, when it pleases God to his
glory and their own salvation.

There are few of the reprobate that live to years of discretion, that have
bard by any means of the Law and the Gospel, but they are some time put in
mind by the mations of God his Spirit, to leave their wickedness, to the which
because they do not obey, their own consciences shall condemn the^,

And because they yield no obedience unto the motions of the spirit of God,
therefore he gives them over unto their own lusts and temptations of the
Devil: To his temptations God his chosen are some time subject.

* To the end that the light of Gods elect in honesty of life Matt. 5. 16.
and good works may shine amongst men to the good ensample of others, and
glory of their father which is in heaven,

* That the trial of their faith much more precious then 1 Pet. 1. 7.
Gold: might be to their praise at the coming of the Lord Jesus to judge the
quick and the dead: Great are their troubles, and their temptations very
grievous: but God delivers them out of all.

Oh that men would therefore fear the Lord Jehovah that almighty Monarch of
Heaven, Earth, and Hell, and show forth the wonders that he does among the
children of men

Whereas the * Apostle says, that flesh lusts contrary to Gal. 5. 17.
the spirit: he means contrary to the spirit of God. For otherwise the
flesh lusts very agreeable to the spirit that is, the mind, and soul of
Man, until the holy Ghost (which is the same spirit that Paul means) work
in man: * so does Eze. 36. 28
God put his spirit in man according to his promise, and then begins the
battle between the spirit and the flesh which is the whole man: and which is
compact of body, spirit of life, mind and soul etc. And all that rest on
Christ Jesus 2 Gor. 5. 17.
are willed to become new creatures, * which is that new and second birth,
without the which none shall inherit the kingdom of God.

* Satan is the strong man which possesses the house of Mat. 12. 29.
man's mind, and the holy Ghost is the stronger man that drives Satan from his
possession. And when an unclean spirit is displaced, he wandreth about a
while and returns to prove if he can enter again, which if he do, then he
brings in with him seven worse then himself, so is his end worse then the
beginning, except he be the chosen of God to whom Satan gives many foyles.

And when they have fallen into sin by Satan's slightes, they can not rise,
they cannot repent, they cannot return to God of their own power * For no man
can come the Son John 6. 44. 14. 6
except the Father draw him, * Christ Jesus his Son is the way, the truth and
the life, and no man can come to the Father but by him.

Many are called but few are chosen. But all those that Mat. 20. 16
are and shall be enh^ritours of the kingdom of heaven, were chosen thereunto
before the world began, and after birth coming to years of discrecion, they
are called so effectually that they cannot chose but come to the Lord,
notwithstanding the pestiferous malice of Satan and his ympes both bodily and
ghostly.

The means of calling are commen to all in places where the truth is
professed, as rea^ing and hearing the holy Scriptures preached, taught, or
talked of the chosen receive it by faith to their salvation.

The refused of God are called by y^ same means, but they are so effectually
holden back by Satan and his impes bodily and ghostly, that when they have
believed, they (...) no power to hold it, but let it slip again in the end to
their damnation.

Concerning such as live not to years of discretion, and such as are not
called by the means aforesaid: I leave them to the secret means, which God
at his pleasure may use. Romans 11. 36


For * of him, through him, and for him, are all things, to him be all honor
forever. Amen.

For he is all in all, he woorketh all in all, and is not tied under any law
by his own decrees, neither can any other ympose statutes unto him: and
therefore he cannot do evil what soever he does, because all is his own:
and he only, and none but he, may do with his own as he list.

CONCERNING THE VARIETY of Spirits that work diverse effects in mankind.
CAP. 13.
IT shall eskape me very much against my will, if I put down any thing that
is not to be found in holy Scriptures, or gathered of the same by true
interpretation or sound argument, grounded on the holy text, Genesis, chapter
41. verse. 14 Joseph had the Spirit of interpretation of Dreams. Daniell 2,
19. the interpretation of Nabuchadnezers dream was opened unto Daniell in a
vision. Exodus 28. 31. 2. 6. God fills men with the suirites of conning in
arts, sciences, handy occupations and all worldly wisdom. Nombers, 5. 14. 15
the spirit of Ielousy, 27. 18. eod. libro the spirit of government in Joshua.
Judges 6. 34. the spirit of boldness and hardines in Gedion. Judges 9. 23. God
sent an evil spirit between the King and his Subjects. And 11. 29. The
Spirit of hardines in Iephta. and 13. 25. the Spirit of strength in Sampson.
1 Samuel 10. 6. Spirits of prophecy. and 16. 13. a good Spirit came upon
David. 14. the good Spirit departed from Saul, and the Lord sent an evil
spirit to vex him. 1 Kings 22. 21. to 28. Spirits of enticementes and lying.

In Esai 19. 3 Spirits of divination 28. 6. 29. 10. Spirits of slumber and
amasednes. Ecclesiastious 39. 28. Spirits created for vengeance etc. Math. 10.
1. unclean spirits and 12. blind and dumb spirits. Mar. 9. 17. to 29 dumb
and deaf Spirits.

Acts 23. 8. 9. Spirits, and Angels have some time spoken unto men. The
Saduces say, there is no resur rection, nor Angel, nor Spirit: the Pharisees
confess both. 1 Timothy 4 1. Spirits of error and Deuilish doctrine. 2 Timothy 1. 7.
Spirits of fear and love.

And as there are dreamers of dreams, and seers of visions: so are there
spirits both good and evil, to move dreams, to show visions, and stir up
fantasies in folks minds, some to good and some to evil.

* One man as we read, had a legion of Devils in him, Marc. 5. 9.
(which by some men's account is 12500. and by other some 6000. footmen. 732.
horsemen) what an infinite number of legions, (let every man think) are among
so many mad men, as presently live in the world of all degrees, high and low,
rich and poor: I grant many are worldly wise, but few have right wits in
Godliness. * For many are called but few are Mat. 20. 16.
chosen. Another reason, they esteem not of Gods word, they have no desire to
obey it nor to refrain their covetous desires and wicked lusts, they have no
will to pray, to fast, nor give alms to show their love and obedience to God
who has ordained those things to exercise all such as will be his.

Our Savior Christ says, it is the spirit that quickenneth, John. 6. 63.
the flesh profits nothing: who knows not, that the body without the
spirit is dead, and can do neither good nor evil. But while the Spirit of
life, the mind and y^ immortal soul are joined with the body, the man is
continually woorking, speaking, or thinking good or evil.

So that it is the Spirit that quickens both ways, yet not one and the same
spirit, but a good or evil spirit.

Among the diversity of Spirits, there are none more perilous then the
spirits of hipocrisy, dissimulation and flattery. For by the allurementes of
those pestiferous and subtl^ spirits: Satan who by those means (* does seem
an angel 2 Cor 11. 14
of light) can so finely frame his worldly ministers by whom he woorketh: as
Gods elect: even they that walk most severely, can not make a fayrer show of
Godliness then they: And all to disceaue such as will not warely walk in the
fear of God.

Yea such pernicious and wicked spirits shall work in some that shall avouch
falshed for truth: * And therefore called false Christ's and false Prophets,
which shall show signs and wonders Mar. 13. 22
to disceaue, if it were possible the very elect, of their salvation. Therefore
we must wat^h and pray, and take heed because we know not the moment of the
Lords coming, nor the day of our death.

Certain creatures on earth have the Spirits of life, the mind and bodily
senses, as seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting feeling, knowledge, memory, and
agility of body common with mankind. If man had received no more, he had
differed but in shape only, from other seemly beasts: but unto unto man only
was given a reasonable, and an immortal Spirit, even a reasonable soul,
whereby he exceeds all other earthly creatures. Therefore to mankind only
it is said: * Be not like horse and mule, which have no understanding, whose
mouths must be holden with bit and bridle. Psalm. 32. 9.


Therefore most happy and for ever blessed are they, to whom God has given
true understanding, godly wisdom, right judgment, and grace to follow the
motions of God his most holy spirit, by whose assistance we are made able to
eschew evil and do good to seek peace and keep our souls in pa^ience,
walking in holiness and righteousness till we receive the reward of our faith
even the salvation of our souls and bodies for ever.


