FOUR GODLY AND FRUITFUL SERMONS: TWO PREACHED AT DRAITON IN OXFORDSHIRE, At
a Fast, enjoined by authority, by occasion of the pestilence then dangerously
dispearsed.

Likewise

TWO OTHER SERMONS ON the twelfth Psalm.

Whereunto is annexed a brief Tract of Zeal.

By
I. Dod. R. Cleauer.
The second Edition enlarged.

LONDON Printed by TC. for WILLIAM WELBIE, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Swan. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ANNE, LADY WAINTVVORTH, increase of all true honor
and happiness, etc.
RIght Honorable, may it please you to take in good worth my bold attempt, in
presuming to recommend unto your favorable patronage these Sermons following.
Your honors undeserved respect of me, made me desirous to testify my unfeigned
thankfulness: which I could not imagine how with greater conueniencie to
express and manifest, then by taking hold of this present occasion; especially
considering that your constant and more then ordinary pains-taking to hear
such holy instructions, is a sufficient argument to euince your love and liking
of the matter therein comprised: and your good regard of the authors (well
known unto me) gave me occasion to think that their labors, in this sort
offering themselves unto your eye, would be no less welcome than formerly they
have been, being in another manner presented unto your ear.

Concerning the Tract of Zeal annexed to these Sermons, it is a collection of
diverse rules which I heard and read touching that subject, principally of such
as were scattered here and there in Master R. Greenhams Works: which being
exceeding useful, I thought good to gather them into one (with an addition of
sundry proofs of Scripture) for the ease and help of those that are well
affected, especially of such whose ability will not reach to the price of that
great volume of M. Greenhams labors.

And thus humbly beseeching your Honor to pardon my boldness, and to bear
with my manifold defects which shall be found in the penning of these Sermons,
I recommend you to the gracious protection of the Almighty.

Your Honors according to my poor ability ready to be commanded, JOHN
WINSTON.

THE POINTS OF DOCTRINE HANDLED IN THE SERMONS following.
SERMON I.
DOCT. I.
THe first step to true and sound repentance, is, to be wounded and
disquieted in our hearts for sin.

2 Lawful things must be done lawfully, and good things in a good manner.

3 With confession of sin, must be joined earnest requests for pardon thereof.

4 The more sinful any one is, the more foolish he is.

5 It is a wonderful hard thing, to take down the pride of man's heart.

6 The more speedily we judge our selves, the more mercifully the Lord will
deal with us.

SERMON II.
DOCT. I.
Sin brings men into marvelous straits.

2. Gods servants never find so great favor as with God himself.

3 God makes his judgments, suitable to our sins.

4 When God sets in with his judgments they shall be far dispersed in a
short time.

5 As God appoints judgments to be inflicted on his people, so he himself
will see execution done.

6 A good man will lay a greater burden on himself then on another.

SERMON III.
DOCT. I.
ALthough humane helps and earthly friends do fail Gods-people, yet they are
not helpelesse, nor hopeless.

2 No outward thing comes nearer the hearts of Gods children, then the decay of
good men.

3 Deceitful friends, are worse then open foes.

SERMON IIII.
DOCT. I.
THe more skilfully and artificially any contriues his ill purposes, the more
fearful destruction shall fall upon him.

2 The more wicked men boast of their mischievous intents, the nearer mischief
is unto them.

3 No man has the royalty of his own tongue, nor the ordering of his own
speech.

FINIS.
The first Sermon.
2. SAMVEL. 24. 10. 11. 12. Verse 10. Then David's heart smote him after that
he had numbered the people: and David said unto the Lord, I have sinned
exceedingly in that I have dove: therefore now Lord I beseech thee, take away
the trespass of thy servant, for I have done very foolishly.

11. And when David was up in the morning, the word of the Lord came unto the
Prophet Gad, etc.


IN these words is set forth the repentance of David, for his sin committed
in numbering the people, wherein the holy Prophet shows: I. What means he
used to be reconciled unto God, Namely;

1. First, that he was touched with inward remorse and hearty grief for his
offense: [ Then David's heart smote him after that he had numbered the people.]

2 Secondly, that he made a particular and very earnest confession of his
fault:] I have sinned exceedingly, in that I have done.

3 Thirdly, that having bewailed and acknowledged his sin, he instantly
craved pardon for the same: [ therefore now Lord I beseech thee, take away the
trespass of thy servant, etc: as if he should have said, I have sinned very
hainouslie, I cannot deny it: yet I am thy servant, and one of thy family,
and therefore Lord cast me not off for one fault, but take notice of my sorrow,
and pardon my sin: for I have dealt very foolishly.

viz: that he sent unto him the Prophet Gad, a worthy man of God, and David's
Seer, who had been ready from time to time to lay open the will of God unto
him, and in that regard was more reverend in his eyes, and he threatens and
denou^ceth judgment against him, that seeing his heart had been lifted up
with pride, in regard of the multitude and strength of his people, God would
meet with him in his own sin, and make his punishment to be suitable to his
fact: and seeing he begun to be humbled for it already, and yet needed still
further humaliation, he tells him, that [ the sword, or the famine, or the
pestilence] must pursue his subjects, and make wonderful havoc among them,
and therefore bids him make his choice which of them he would have to come
upon the land: for one of them he must needs undergo, to further him in the
work of humiliation, as also to bring the whole Church unto the like, who then
had incensed the Lords anger against them.

Then David's heart smote him] In that setting down the repentance of David the
holy Ghost takes notice of this in the first place, Verse. 10.
that [ his heart smote him] the Doctrine is, that.

The first step to true and sound repentance is to be wounded and disquieted
in our hearts for sin, Sound sorrow the first step to repentance.
until our souls be pierced, and as it were struck through with the feeling
of our corruptions, and of Gods displeasure, due unto us for the same, we have
not made any entrance into the ways of godliness, nor laid the very
foundation of the works of conversion, therefore the Prophet Joel exhorting the
Israelites to repentance, Joel. 2. 13.
bids them, rent their hearts: that is, the first stone that must be laid in
this building: their hearts must be crushed and broken, Note,
for the wickedness committed against the Majesty of God; till then there is
no turning unto him: one may as well bid a prisoner that is in strong hold, and
has bolts and fetters upon his heels, walk abroad and take the fresh air,
and not remain any longer in that dark and loathsome dungeon, as bid one that
has not his heart crushed and humbled to turn unto the Lord: alas he is held
fast in the chains of Satan, and cannot stir one foot to Godward;
therefore is it noted in those conuerts, Acts. 2.
Act. 2. 37. that They were pricked in their hearts] when they began the work
of repentance, the rebukes of God had wakened their drowsy consciences, so
that they saw their sins and Gods vengeance due unto them, Psalm. 45.
and the words of Peter had gone through their hearts, even as a two edged
sword, and then they were fit to be soundly healed and comforted, when they
had been pierced, and thoroughly wounded by the Arrows of God.

1 First, Reasons.
till the heart be broken for sin, there can be no plain confession of
sin, and therefore no repentance. Men naturally are like wild Asse-Colts,
Job. 11.
nothing will work upon them, nor bring them unto any good frame or order;
though they hear often of their faults, they will not acknowledge them, but be
still unruly and untamed, as Paul was before his conversion; so long as he was
heart-whole in his own conceit, though he had heard many excellent Sermons (no
doubt,) yet he was like a beast still, never bewailing nor confessing his
grievous offenses, Romans 7.
till the Lord had taken him down, Act. 9.
and thoroughly mastered him.

2 Nay further, men are so far from taking pains delivered from them, nor
make any reckoning of Gods mercy for the pardoning of them: till such time as
they become mourners for sin, they cannot possibly hunger and thirst after
righteousness. Math. 5. 4. 6.
And indeed what reason is there that they should esteem of that medicine
which will cure, when they do not feel themselves to be sick? they think it
a matter worth the looking after, to be freed from poverty, from infamy, from
the pestilence, etc. but as for the corruptions of their nature, and the
sinfulness of their ways, they were never much troubled with them, and
therefore they make little account to be delivered from them. See this point
more at large in M. Dods Sermon on Isa. 1 Doct. 1.

Seeing therefore that inward contrition for sin is the first step to
repentance, and that which kills the root of sin, and sets us free from
the power and dominion of it, and erecteth in our hearts a throne for Christ
Jesus; the use of this point is,

First for reproof of those that persuade themselves, Use. 1.
and bear others in hard that they have truly repented, and do continually
confess their faults, and ask pardon for them: but what grief and pain have
they had in their hearts for their sins? nay, they thank God, they were
never terrified nor troubled in their consciences. Do you thank God for this?
it is in effect to thank him for that you want the first and principal note
of true conversion: if your hearts have never been pricked and slung with the
sense of your vileness and wretchedness, it is because you are senseless:
for there is cause sufficient why you should be grieved; and the less you have
had, Luke. 6.
the more you are likely to have, if not here, Revel. 6. 16.
yet in the world to come, and at that day when you shall be most unwilling of
it.

Secondly, Use. 2.
here are those to be reproved that run into far greater excess of sinning
than ever David did, breaking forth into gross and foul evils, that every
body sees and knows, and condemns, and yet they pass them over slightly,
and carelessly, as if they were matters of nothing. When David did but cut off
the lap of Saul's coat, his heart smote him, and was grieved within him, in that
he was so near unto sin: what then shall we think of these that do not cut
off the lap of the coat of an enemy, but are injurious to their friends,
and cruel against their brethren, that break covenant and promise, sin
against God, blaspheme his name, profane his Sabbaths, and the like, and yet
none of all these do soundly work upon them, nor much trouble them? surely
such men are not of David's spirit, and therefore not being broken hearted
here, they shall be broken and crushed in pieces with the unsupportable weight
of Gods vengeance hereafter.

Thirdly, Use. 3.
since this inward touch for sin is a thing so necessary, let us hence learn
to labor for it, and to keep tenderness of heart when we have obtained it: for
that sorrow which breaks the heart, does withal break the neck of sin:
and therefore when the Lord does check and control our consciences, let us
esteem it as a great mercy, and not let such strokes pass without their
right use, but let us go to God and to his children for help and direction,
and them that little spark of the fire of God in our souls, being fed and
nourished, will grow in the end to a great flame. Now that our hearts may be
kept always tender and sensible of those checks which Gods spirit gives us,
let us use these means that follow.

First, Means to get tenderness of heart.
let us lay up in our hearts the weapon of God, even the sword of the spirit,
whereby our hearts may be wounded, as often as need requires: for unregenerate
persons wanting that weapon, will rather defend, then smite themselves when
they have offended, and every child of God has somewhat of old Adam in him,
in which regard he must be more careful to use the sword of the spirit, for
the piercing of his heart when any sin is committed by him: John. 16. 8.
withal praying for the spirit of grace which will convince the conscience
when it is guilty, so that it shall have nothing to say in defense of it
self, but very much for the condemnation of it self: as is evident Ezec. 36.
27. Ezeck. 36.
whereby we may observe, that when God has given his spirit unto his elect,
and (as it is in Jeremy. 31. 33.) Ier. 31.
withal written his laws in their hearts, then they shall remember their own
wicked ways, and their deeds that were not good, and shall judge themselves
worthy to have been destroyed for their iniquities, and for their
abominations. What is the reason they should pass such a heavy sentence upon
themselves? one would think they should rather rejoice now, and allow of
themselves and of their works? so they do rejoice at, and approve of
themselves and their works, so far as they are spiritual: but they
proclaim war against themselves and their works so far as either they are or
have been carnal and sinful, and that because the word of God, and the
spirit of God do bear sway in their hearts: they are at utter defiance with
their pride and hypocrisy, and all wretched lusts that fight against their
souls: being never so much tormented with those sins, as when they have
attained to a great measure of humility, and of sincerity. He that is most
lowly is ever most vexed with his pride, and he that is most upright and true
hearted, is most of all troubled with the guilefulnes and deceitfulnes of his
own heart, because the word and the spirit working together do cause him both
more clearly to see, and more thoroughly to hate those corruptions, than ever
he did before he had attained to that measure of grace.

Secondly, we must not content our selves when once we have gotten the word and
spirit of God within us, but we must still strive to keep our hearts humble
and lowly: for otherwise we shall not feel the strokes of the word and spirit
of God; Isa. 30.
therefore it is said Isay. 30. 20 21.) that when the Lord had dieted his
people a while [ giving them the bread of adversity, and the water of
affliction] and thereby taken down the pride and stubbornenesse of their
hearts, that then [ their ears should hear a word behind them, saying, this
is the way walk in it, etc. that is when they were thus humbled, as soon as
ever they had committed any offense, they should presently have a blow upon
their hearts for it, and be full of fear and anguish: though no man in the
world tell them of it, yet the word in their hearts will be like a good guide
that is still following a little child, and telling him, this is not the right
way, leave it; there is the right way, walk in it: but many have hearts
pestered with pride, and lust, and covetousness, and yet go a whole month,
nay, many months and years together, and never feel any rebuke in their
consciences. How comes this to pass that others are full of grief and full of
tears for their sins, and they are never troubled for them? is it beause
there is greater vprightnes in them, then there is in others? No surely it is
because they have a more blind mind, and a more proud and senseless heart then
others have: for the more humble any one is, the more often shall he hear the
voice of the spirit, checking him when he goes out of the way, and moving
him to turn again into the right way.

Thirdly, we must especially beware of presu^ptuous sins: for if we live
therein our hearts will cease to smite us, or at least we shall be senseless
of these strokes: as may be seen in the case of David: when he had cut off the
lap of Saul's garment and numbered the people (which were but infirmities)
forthwith his conscience rebuked him, and he was humbled before the Lord: but
when he had committed adultery, and murder, either the checkes of his
conscience were none at all, or else they were so weak, 2. Sam. 12.
that he had no sense nor feeling thereof: so that Nathan was driven to fetch
about (as it were) and to use all the art that might be, to make him see his
offenses, and pass sentence against himself for the same. Let us therefore by
his example learn to beware how we presumptuously sin against our
consciences, especially in palpable and gross offenses, least our minds being
by degrees blinded, and our affections, by little and little corrupted, we
become in the end very blocks and stones, and have our consciences so darkened,
that they will not accuse us, or our hearts so benumbed, that they will not be
moved with the strokes of God, and with the checks of his holy spirit.

After that he had numbered the people.] Here is his special sin, that he
numbered his subjects, which may seem to be no such great matter, for which God
should so plague the land: and if there had been that measure of hypocrisy in
David, as there is in many of us, he would have pleaded thus for himself: What
need I to be so troubled for this? and what reason is there why God should
proceed so severely against me for the same? did not Moses and Joshua, holy
men of God, number the people in their days, and that warrantably? and why
then may not I do the like, having more absolute authority over them then
they had? but his heart stayed him from all such reasoning of the matter; and
told him, that though he did the same action which they did, yet the manner of
doing thereof was diverse; he performed it not in obedience to God (as they did)
but in pride and hautines of mind, in regard of the multitude and strength of
his subjects: before he esteemed Gods name a strong tower for his defense, but
now what need he run crying unto God? he had so many soldiers and valiant
warriors in his dominion, that he could make his part good against any foreign
power whatsoever. Thus was his heart lifted up unto vanity, when it should
have been lifted up to God in thankfulness: and therefore was he so humbled,
because he had an ill affection, Doct. 2. God looks into the manner of our
doing.
and a wrong end in a good action. Whence arises this doctrine, That it is not
enough for to forbear things that are evil, and to make conscience of gross
sins, but men must do lawful things lawfully, and perform good works in a
good manner: otherwise the Lord may and will punish them for doing lawful
things, as well as for unlawful things. This may be seen in that great
enditement which Christ brings against the old world: Mat. 24. 38.
They did eat, and drink, marry, and give in marriage. A natural man would
have thought there could be no hurt in these: if they had been charged with
whoredom, murder, blasphemy, or the like, they had been matters of some
moment: but for those before named, what fault can be found with them? Indeed
the things in themselves are very warrantable, but the manner of performing
them, does either make or mar them: Jude. 12. 1. Tim. 445.
to eat and drink without fear, without prayer, and thanksgiving, as if the
creatures were our own, and not the Lords, to abuse the blessings of God to
surfeiting and drunkenness, etc: these and the like corruptions, do turn
eating and drinking into sin, which in themselves are not only allowable,
but also necessary. The like may be said concerning marriage, Heb. 13.
it is a sanctified ordinance of God unto those that use it holily: but then it
becomes very sinful and hateful unto the Lord, Genesis 6. 2.
when the Sons of God do join with the daughters of men, and professors are
yoaked with Infidels, for beauty, or commodity, or any such carnal respect:
yet that is a horrible sin, too too common among such as profess
Christianity, that they make no scruple of matching their children with those,
whom they know by their works to be as yet the children of the devil; and so
in other matters, if they can prove them once to be in themselves lawful, they
make no conscience of the means they use, nor of the end they propose in
accomplishing of them.

The like is alleged by our Savior against the Sodomites, Luke 17. 28.
as against those of the old world, viz: that they bought and sold, and built
in covetousness, pride and vanity, as if they had been ever to dwell upon the
earth, not caring what craft and fraud they used, nor what snares and grins
they laid for men, if they might satisfy their covetous and ambitious desires.
See M. Dods Sermon on Isa. 10. Doct. 1. Use. 1.
More might be said concerning this point, both for proofs and reasons, but
that it has been handled at large elsewhere.

This serves. First for terror unto those that satisfy themselves with this,
that no body can charge them with gross sins, and therefore they imagine
their case to be good, and that they need not trouble themselves in regard of
their offenses.

But was it not thus with David? who could now accuse him of any notorious ill
fact? surely none in the world: and yet he having grace in his heart, accuses
and condemns himself, for that he had done a good action in an ill manner,
and with an ambitious and vain glorious mind, and for the same is much abased
and confounded in himself: and therefore those are in a miserable estate, that
never disquiet their souls for their hidden corruptions, but think that all
goes well with them, when men's eyes can discern nothing amiss in them: as
they on the other side are in happy case, that do often take themselves
apart, and beseech the Lord to be merciful unto them in regard of their
failings, even in the most spiritual duties that they perform: such judge
themselves, and therefore shall not be judged of the Lord.

Secondly, Use. 2.
this is for instruction, that we carefully look unto the manner of all our
actions, and in particular, of the exercise of fasting, which is now in hand:
let us consider wherefore we are come together, and what is required of every
one that is present this day, to wit, that we should put wickedness out of our
hearts, and out of our hands: and for that purpose, come with true humiliatio^
on our part, that there may be a perfect reconciliation granted us on Gods part.

This was practiced by the Ninevites, who hearing Gods judgments denounced
against them for their sins, Jonah. 3. 8. 9.
that within forty days Niniue should be destroyed, except they repented,
what did they? All of them, both King and people, humbled themselves in
fasting, bewailing their evil and sinful ways and works, and crying
mightily unto the Lord for pardon, and resolving to turn from the wickedness
that was in their hands, that so God might turn away from his fierce wrath.
Yet they had enjoyed but little teaching: they had heard only one Sermon from
Jonah, who was a man unknown unto them, and did not bring such testimonies of
Scripture to convince their consciences as are now alleged unto us, etc: and
therefore we should be much ashamed to come short of them in this holy
exercise, especially seeing we have not one Jonah, but many; not a judgment
threatened, but executed, and the sword of the Lord still drawn against us, and
devouring by hundreds and thousands in many quarters of our land. Let us then
search and examine our hearts, and grieve, and judge our selves for all our
former transgressions; and covenant with the Lord to avoid them hereafter,
craving strength from him for that purpose, that we may be enabled to subdue
and keep under all our corruptions: and then our hearts being broken with
godly sorrow, they shall be healed with godly joy; and being truly cast down
before the Lord, he will raise us up in due season, and make it known by good
effect, that he is appeased toward us.

Thirdly, Use: 3.
here is matter of exceeding great terror unto those that spend their days in
the continual practice of gross and presumptuous sins: for if David were so
grieved and punished for that corruption which no man living could touch him
for, even for doing a good thing in an ill manner, how then shall they be
able to stand, that have heaped iniquity upon iniquity, and for many years
together added one foul evil unto another; and not only done good things in
an ill manner, but ill things in the worst manner, having many crying sins
still to call for vengeance against them? If David were brought to such a
strait, that he was even at his wits end, and in exceeding great anguish for
doing one thing, which in man's reason might seem very lawful; Oh what
horrible terrors shall seize on their souls, who do continually rush upon a
multitude of heinous offenses, which all the world cries out against!
especially when they shall be called to answer, not before Gad, as David was,
but before the Majesty of the great Lord of heaven and earth; not for one
sin, but for all their sins: not to endure three days punishment in
mercy, but everlasting woe and misery, and that in judgment and heavy
displeasure! David had great sorrow indeed for the offenses which he committed;
yet no more then he should have: how then do they think to escape, that are
not wrought upon at all with any remorse for their grievous transgressions, but
are even as a lump of dead flesh, altogether insensible of any stroke of God,
that is threatened, or inflicted upon themselves, or others?

Verse 10. Doct. 3. Confession of sin, must follow grief for sin.
I have sinned exceedingly] Now follows the second step unto sound
repentance, namely, a true, full, particular, and hearty confession of his
sin that so wounded his heart: which all that would obtain remission of
their sins, must be careful to bring before the Lord as David did. But this
point has been more largely handled elsewhere [in M. Dods Sermon. Prou. 28.
Doct. 2.

I beseech thee take away the trespass of thy servant, etc.

This is the third work of repentance, viz: that he craves pardon for his
fault; and that is the next point; that, Doct. 4. Asking pardon must be joined
with confession. Luke 18. 13. Daniel. 9. 19. Nehem. 9.
with confession of our sins, we must always join requests unto God for the
pardoning of the same: so does David in this place, as also Psalm. 51. so does
the Publican, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner: and in a word, so does
Daniel, Nehemia, and the rest of Gods servants, as may be seen in their
several confessions. And for encouragement unto the performance of this duty,
we have,

1 First, Exodus 34.
the name of God, which is to pardon iniquity, transgression, and sin: even
all without exception, great or small, if we repent for them, they shall be
pardoned: if we acknowledge our misery, we shall assuredly find Gods mercy.

2 Secondly, Ezeck. 36.
we have the covenant of God, that he will wash us from all our filthiness, by
pouring the blood of his son upon our sinful souls.

3 Thirdly, Mat. ^.
we have the name of Christ to incite and move us to become suitors for a
pardon: for he is called Jesus, because it is his office to save his people
from their sins.

This Doctrine serves,

First, Use. 1.
for the confutation of the Papists, who clog men's consciences, and lay on them
heavy and yet unnecessary burdens, enioyning them, if they would get
termission of their sins, to go in pilgrimage to this or that place, to pray
to this or that Saint, to make some satisfaction to God, etc: as if they should
find mercy any where, rather then by seeking it at Gods hands: and they speed
accordingly: for whereas David went unto the Lord for favor, and obtained it,
they have still unsettled hearts, and restles consciences: or hard hearts, and
benumbed consciences, never getting any true peace, or sound comfort in the
assurance of their reconciliation with the Lord.

2 Secondly, Use. 2.
for reproof of those, whose offenses are very many, and very grievous, and
they see and acknowledge so much: and yet will they not be so presumptuous (as
they term it) to expect pardon for the same: indeed they think it fit for
such holy men as David was, to ask and look for mercy from the Lord, but for
themselves, they are such heinous offenders, that they dare not do so, neither
can they conceive any hope to speed well if they should do so. But why should
we put in conditions where God does not, and as it were interline Gods
covenant? does not he promise without any exception, 1. Ioh. 1. 9.
that if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness? It is therefore a great
fault, to think that any has more abundance of sin, then God has of mercy
to forgive it.

Thirdly, Use. 3.
here is an use of instruction, that we should be very importunate for the
obtaining of Gods favor in the pardoning of our sins: which earnestnes that
we may attain unto, let us use these two helps following, which David's
example directs us unto: How we may attain to earnestness in asking pardon.
First, let us labor that our hearts may thoroughly smite us, and that our
consciences may evermore check us when we do offend: for wheresoever there is
the check of heart, and after break forth into some horrible sin, which
ouerwhelmeth them with shame and confusion. Let us therefore observe when the
Lord smites our hearts, and with Peter get out of company speedily, and lament
bitterly, that so we may turn the rebukes of our souls into holy requests,
that the Lord would forgive us, and not enter into judgment with us for our
grievous prouocations against his Majesty.

Secondly, when sin is so odious unto us, that our hearts do condemn us for
it, then let us strive to be persuaded that it is pardonable, yea and that it
shall be pardoned unto us: that though we deserve to be thrown out of service,
because we have dealt so foolishly, yet seeing we are Gods servants, he will
not go to extremities with us, but deal as a father with his own children,
this ancor of hope we had need still to hold fast by: for if we be not in some
good measure resolved, that we shall find the Lord gracious, and that we our
selves are not hypocrites, but such as to whom mercy belongs, we shall
presently give over prayer: for who would seek unto a Surgeon to cure him,
of whom he is afraid lest he should wound him, in that he has cause and
ability so to do? Therefore hold this for a firm ground, once Gods child,
and ever: once his servant, and never his enemy: in which regard we may come
with confidence unto him, and say, Lord, I am unworthy to be called thy son;
yet art thou my merciful Father: I have done thee ill service, yet am I thy
poor servant still: and though I be bad now, yet time has been when I have
bin better, and done better: when I have prayed in secret, and humbled my
soul; and shed tears for my sins in private; and have had an utter
detestation of those evils, which now through the corruption of my nature I
have fallen into, and therefore Lord be pacified toward me, and put out of thy
remembrance the trespass of thy servant. If any one want these testimonies of
Gods love toward him, and of his love toward God, when affliction ouertaketh
him for his sins, he will either flee from the Lords presence, as Adam did,
or if he adventure to come unto him, his prayers will descend as plummets of
lead upon him, and Satan and his own conscience will be ready to accuse him,
and to say, what have thou to do with God? he hears not sinners: thou shall
rather provoke his vengeance, then obtain his favor by thy petitions; and
because thou have been his enemy heretofore, he will show himself to be thine
now: and because thou have cast his word behind thy back, he will shut out thy
cries, that they shall not have any access unto him. Which uncomfortable
news, will be as a dart to strike through the liver of an hypocrite, and as a
two edged sword to pearse his soul: and therefore let us all labor to be
strongly settled in this point, that we are Gods servants, that so we may be
fervent and fiery in our prayers, and not be so daunted as sinners are when the
hand of God is upon them.

I have dealt very foolishly] This he speaks to make this sin more odious
unto himself: for by nature we are so proud, that we cannot abide that any
body should say, we have dealt foolishly and absurdly: therefore does he lay
lode upon himself, the more to beat down his pride, confessing that he had
dealt very foolishly, because he had dealt very sinfully: whence note this
doctrine, That the more sinful any one is, the more foolish he is.

Eve did eat of the forbidden fruit, Doct. 5. The greatest sinners are the
veriest fools.
thinking she had dealt very wisely and prouidently for her self: but did she
get any thing by sinning against her makers commandment? No surely: when she
had a conceit that she should deal most wisely, she dealt most foolishly of
any that ever was in the world: for thereby she brought sorrow and misery, yea
eternal damnation of soul and body, not only upon her self (had not God
given her repentance and mercy) but upon many hundred thousands of her
posterity. So Achan thought it a part of wisdom to take up the Babylonish
garment and the wedge of gold that lay in his way: Joshua. 7.
he might thereby (as he imagined) enrich himself, and the matter never be
known: but was not that the ruin of himself and his household? In like manner
Jeroboam esteemed it a wise and safe way for him to set up the Calves, that the
people might worship at Dan and Bethel, and so not fall from him, to join
again to the house of David: he accounted this a surer course to establish his
throne, then for him to rest on Gods promise: but did he not get exceeding
dishonor and utter ruin hereby? in so much that when the Lord will set
forth a notable reprobate and firebrand of hell, he does describe him by this,
that he was like Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin: and
whereas he hoped by this means to set up himself and his seed for ever, he
caused them through his sins to be swept away as dung from the face of the
earth. The like may be said of Ahab in taking away Naboths vineyard. And this
must needs be so, Reason.
that the greatest sinners are the veriest fools, because in sinning they
forsake the wisdom of God, and follow the direction of flesh and blood. It is
noted as a point of great folly and indiscretion in Rehoboam, that he would
forsake the good counsel of the old men, and follow the rash advise of young
men: and are not they then egregious fools indeed, that leave the counsel of
the wise God, and follow the advice of Satan, his and their utter enemy? We
would esteem it a great madness, if we should see a man, his barnes being
full of corn, to set fire on the thatch, and to sit by and laugh to behold all
turned into a flame: and yet certainly this is not so great a madness as for
one to fire his soul with sin: for all the friends and means that the world
affords cannot quench this flame, nor recover this loss, as they may the
other: and therefore they are the fools of the world, that are the sinners of
the world: and there is no such frenfie, as for a man to provoke his Creator:
and whatsoever applause wicked persons have for a season, yet at length all the
world shall see, and they themselves shall feel, that they have been
notorious fools: Ier. 17. 11.

This serves for instruction, Use. 1.
that if we would not be branded with the name of fools and Idiots, we be
careful to eschew all manner of sins: and on the contrary, if we would be
truly wise, let us cleave unto the Lord in constant and faithful obedience:
that was the reason why David was wiser then his enemies, Psalm. 119. 93.
then his teachers, then the aged, because he kept Gods statutes. What made
those in the Gospel to be foolish Virgins, but this, that they made not
provision for eternal life? And what made the other five to be indeed wise,
but that their hearts and lives were adorned and beautified with grace and
goodness? Achitophel was a deep politician; yet because he was destitute of
heavenly wisdom, he showed himself to be but a miserable base fool: for
when he had no means to help himself, he went and hanged himself: if one
had studied an hundred years, he could hardly have found out a readier way to
manifest his notable folly, then he took in that horrible murdering of
himself.

2 Secondly, is it so that the greatest sinners are the veriest fools? then
here is matter of singular consolation for Gods servants, that are vilified and
contemned, and accounted silly and simple, even for this, that they carefully
decline from the ways of sinners, though in show never so pleasant and
profitable: and conscionably, walk in the paths of righteousness, though
never so rough and dangerous: let vain men speak their pleasure of them, and
count and call them the fools of the world, yet God esteems and speaks
otherwise of them. It is no marvel that the world judges them fools, for
with them the doctrine of the Gospel (unto which the godly endeavor to
conform themselves and their courses) is accounted foolishnes. But as wisdom
is justified of her children, whatsoever men think or speak of it, so are the
children of wisdom justified by the infinitely wise God, whatsoever
slanderous and reproachful imputations carnal men do lay upon them: he says
that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. Prou. 1. 7. and that
those that obey his commandments are the only wise people under the Sun.
Deuteronomy. 46.

Verse. 13. Will thou that seven years famine come upon the Lands etc.

Here comes an objection to be answered. Object.
It is said, 1. Cor. 11. 31. that if we judge our selves, we shall not be
judged of the Lord: how comes it to pass then in this place, that David
confessing his fault, aggravating it, and asking pardon for it, has
notwithstanding such a heavy judgment denounced against him, as the famine,
or the sword, or the pestilence?

1 Though such as judge themselves, Answer.
shall not be judged, yet must they be cured: and that was David's case here:
this stroke was not laid upon him in wrath, but in favor: he had set upon a
good work, even the pulling down of his pride, and by this means the Lord
furthered him in ye good work, and made a speedier way for abu^da^ce of grace,
which was after bestowed upon him.

2 Again, the people were not so reformed as they should be at this time, and
therefore God in this plague does aim at their humbling, thrusting David out
of the gappe (as it were) who had formerly by his prayers and tears stood in
the breach, to keep of the Lords wrath from them, so that all this while being
entangled with his own matters, he could not so freely deal for them.

Now in that David must have such a sharp corasiue to consume that proud flesh
that had grown about his heart, by reason of his mighty forces, and the
largeness of his dominions, Doct. 6. It is hard to be at down man's pride.
the Doctrine is, that it is a wonderful hard thing to take down the pride of
man's heart: it is no small affliction that will do it, as is plain Job 33.
14. etc: where is at large showed, that God uses all means, and that again
and again, and yet men will not profit thereby: then he finds out the cause
of it to be pride, verse. 17. and so lays corrections upon them suitable
thereunto, smiting them with sorrow upon their beds, so that the grief of
their bones is sore: pinching them with grievous sicknesses and diseases, and
making their bones to clater, so that their souls draw near to the grave, and
their life to the buriers. Now when these or the like woeful distresses have
tamed and maistered their unruly affections, then do they begin to be somewhat
more tractable: and whereas neither dreams, nor visions, nor any of Gods
ordinances would do any good upon them before, after that, if God send unto
them a messenger or Interpreter one of a thousand, they will begin to hearken
unto them, and to learn how they may obtain mercy and reconciliation with
God, that they descend not into the pit of destruction. Further, we may observe
what a great deal of woe David sustained by reason of the hautinesse of his
heart, and his earthly confidence (which is a sign thereof) when he thought
his mountain so strong, that he should never be moved: Psalm. 30. 6. 7.
for God turned away his face from him, and he was troubled, and even ready to
go down into the pit, Verse. 9.
and to descend unto the dust, etc. Neither did God minister unto him a
stronger purgation then he needed: but his pride required full as much
affliction as the Lord laid upon him, this was also the case of vzziah, who
being in a moderate estate, did exceeding much good both for the Church and the
common wealth: but when he was grown mighty and strong, his heart was lifted
up, and then he could not content himself with his kingly dignity, but he
would needs take upon him the office of the High Priest also, and so went into
the Temple of the Lord, to burn incense upon the Altar of incense; but what
came of this presumptuous fact of his? When the admonition of the Priests of
the Lord would not prevail with him, but he grew wroth with those that
withstoode him, the Lord loving him, did forthwith smite him with Leprosy, and
so he was driven to live apart all his life long, that so the hautinesse of his
heart might be thoroughly cured. 2. Chron. 26. 2. Cor. 12.
The like may be seen in Paul; who albeit he were a man of wonderful graces,
and had been continually exercised with many and great afflictions, so that he
had no great need of further humbling, as we would have thought, yet had he
Satan turned loose upon him, to buffet him, and to beat him black and blew as
it were, that so he might not be lifted up with the multitude and excellency
of the revelations that he had received. He had been in the third heaven, and
was endued with exceeding rare gifts: and the Lord knew, that if he were not
taken down, he would be very conceited of himself, and then all had been
lost: he would be unfit to receive or do good, altogether unprofitable and
unfruitful, and rob God of his honor, and men of their due: and therefore
to prevent this, he gives Satan liberty to work upon his original
corruption, and to exercise him with strange temptations, which was a special
preservative against pride, and loftiness of mind.

Lastly, we may note in the 8. chap. of Deuteronomie, verse 2. what a great
ado the Lord had with his people, the children of Israel; to help them,
against this vile corruption that was in them: he was driven to keep them
forty years in the wilderness, and there to exercise them with many and
grievous crosses and judgments, and all to humble them, as there it is said:
and certainly, if fewer and easier afflictions would have done it, the Lord
would never have handled them so roughly and sharply; for mercy pleases
him, neither does he afflict willingly. Micah. 7. Lament. 3.


Now the reason why the pride of men's hearts cannot easily be removed, is,

First, because it does wonderfully harden them, and makes them even like a
Flinte: so that they are very hardly wrought upon, either by instructions, or
by afflictions. This is evident in Nebuchadnezzar, who notwithstanding that
divine dream that God had sent unto him, Dan. 4. 24.
and the holy instructions and exhortations that Daniel had given him, after
his interpretation thereof; yet continued in his arrogancy still, and was full
of boasting and bragging: in so much that the Lord was feign to strippe him of
his wits, of his kingdom, of his food, of his apparel, and of the society
of mankind, and to cause him, even for seven years together, to live as a
beast, among the beasts of the field: and all little enough to take down the
stoutnes and loftines of his sinful heart. Dan. 5. 20.


Secondly, as pride makes men unteachable, and incapable of good by any means
that others can use, so does it make them unable to use any means themselves,
for the humbling of their souls: for proud men cannot examine, and judge
themselves, because they are wise in their own eyes, and have an high conceit
of their own doings: they cannot pray, because they have no promise to build
upon, nor any heart to humble their souls before the Lord, as all that will
speed well with him must do: they cannot labor in a calling for conscience
sake; 2. Chron. 11. Iam. 4. 8.
because they only seek and serve themselves in whatsoever they do: in a
word, they cannot apply themselves to use any of those holy remedies that God
has ordained, for the subduing and mastering of the pride, and haughtiness of
their wicked hearts; and therefore it must needs be concluded, that this
dangerous sickness is very hardly cured. And if we have yet any doubt hereof,
let experience teach us the truth of this point: for if we observe it in our
selves or others, we shall find, that those that have had most heartbreakings,
and shed most bitter tears, and gone through most fearful temptations, and
most grievous distresses, have yet still a great deal of pride in them, which
is ready upon every occasion to manifest it self, unto their grief and the
offense of others.

Which makes first of all for the terror of all proud and arrogant men, Use.
who may look for a great deal of woe and misery, for the expelling of this
poisoned humor out of their souls. Let such therefore remember what is said
concerning them, Prou. 16. 5. 18.
to wit, that all the proud in heart are an abomination unto the Lord: though
hand join in hand, they shall not be unpunished. And again, Pride goes
before destruction, and an high mind before the fall. And in the 119. Psalm:
Psalm. 119.
thou have destroyed the cursed proud: and in the Epistle of James, God
resists the proud. Pet. 3. Iam. 4.
Let these and the like terrible sentences fright their drowsy consciences,
and unless they would have the Lord to abhor them, to curse them, to fight
against them, and utterly to destroy them, let them sue unto him, who alone is
able to heal them of this loathsome corruption: otherwise their case is very
woeful, and lamentable, and the more account they make of themselves, the more
clearly will God manifest his heavy displeasure against them, as he did
against Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, and such other lostie spirits as they
were.

Secondly, let this be an instruction unto the children times that they are
afflicted every morning; that they are exercised with wants, with sicknesses,
with disgraces and the like: but better is it to undergo some of these, or all
of these, though it be all our life long, so we be made more lowly thereby,
than to ouerflowe with great plenty and variety of outward things, and in the
mean time to be pestered with that venomous humor of pride and self-conceit.
Therefore was it that Paul does profess that he would rejoice in
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, etc: 2. Cor. 12.
10. 7.
because he knew they were excellent preservatives against his sin.

Now because men are ready to think that there is not in them such store of
pride, as that they greatly need Gods medicines to cure them of it, or if they
do see their pride, they are ready to sit down discouraged, as if it were
impossible to get the better of it, therefore will it not be amiss to set
down some fruits and effects of pride, whereby it may be discerned, and some
remedies and helps against it, by virtue whereof it may be cured.

Concerning the first point, it were an infinite work to reckon up all the
effects of pride, Fruits of pride.
and therefore I will Prou. 13. 10.
And the first of them shall be that where of Solomon speaks, saying, Only
by pride does man make contention: many there are that do ignorantly imagine
they were never proud in all their life; but let them consider better of the
matter; did they never brawle nor contend with any in all their life? if they
did, certain it is that they were proud: for look how much contention there
is, so much pride there is in every man. Which may be an evident argument to
prove that this sin does greatly sway every where: for if we look into most
families, and even into those of the purest sort (who think themselves most
free from pride) shall we not find many iarres betwixt husband and wife;
betwixt master and servants, betwixt brethren and sisters, betwixt neighbor
and neighbor? this is so palpable that none can deny it; and therefore let
not men deceive themselves, but see and acknowledge and bewail the wretched
hautines of their hearts.

Another fruit of pride is, impatiencie under crosses,

Again, this is an evident token that men are proud, David was otherwise
affected, 2. Sam. 12. 13.
when the Prophet Nathan came unto him with a sharp reprehension, Psalm. 51.
and when Abigall met him with a wise admonition. And Job brings this as an
argument of his uprightness, 1. Sam. 25. 32.
that he durst not contemn the judgment of his servant. No, not of his Maid
servant, Job. 31. 13.
if they had any matter to object against him: and therefore let such as are
enraged, or imbittetered against their reproouers or admonishers, know, that
they are far from that modesty and meekness of spirit that was in these
holy men of God.

Lastly, this is a sure note of pride, when men do 1. Tim. 6. 17.
in which regard the Apostle wills Timothy to charge rich men that they be
not high minded, and that they do not trust in uncertain riches: Implying
thereby, that so much confidence as there is in wordlie substance, so much
high-mindednes there is in the parties so addicted. The more men trust in God,
the more humble they will be, but the more they trust in their wealth, the more
high-minded they will be. If men would try themselves by this touchstone,
they should easily discern abundance of pride in themselves: for who almost is
there but does think himself the better and safer for the very having of
earthly things? and who does not judge his case more miserable, merely for the
want of these deceitful vanities?

Let us therefore sifte our own hearts, and by these and the like fruits of
pride, learn to judge what abundance of this poisoned sap there is within
us. And then perceiving how liable we are unto many fearful strokes of God
by reason thereof, let us carefully use these remedies following against the
same.

First, let us often search and try our own hearts, and works by the right
rule, Remedies against Pride.
that is, by the holy law of God: for none are lifted up, but such as do not
know themselves: for if we rightly considered what we are, and what our
actions are, it would take down all that foolish conceitednes, that is
naturally ingrafted in us, and cause us to say with the Publican, Lord be
merciful to me a sinner: and with Paul, Miserable man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death! Luke, 18. 13.
he was alive; Romans 7. 24.
that is, thought himself alive, and in very good case, before the law came,
and co^uinced him of his wretched corruptions, he was even as a blind man
that fears nothing, though a man came running upon him with a sharp sword, or
he were ready to fall down violently from an high and dangerous rock, he would
never be daunted at the matter, nor one whit moved, because he sees not that
he is in any danger: such was Paul's case, and such is the state of every
unregenerate man: but when Gods law is once pressed upon the conscience, by the
lively working of the holy Ghost, it inlightens the mind, and makes men see
their own sinfulnes, as Paul did, which is an excellent means to kill all
proud and lofty conceits. If therefore we desire to be rid of this hateful
and hurtful companion, I mean pride, let us often and earnestly examine our
selves by this straight rule of Gods law: we are given to try our selves often
by examining whether we be not better than such a man, or such a woman, but
this is a false and a deceitful rule: for a man may be better than such and
such, and yet be stark naught.

But the proud flesh will be ready to object, Object.
and say, I do not only go beyond these and these wicked ones, but I am
better than diverse that are esteemed godly and religious.

Are you so? Answer.
you may easily be deceived; and the better conceit you have of your self, the
worse you are likely to be: but grant for the time that you excel others in
some things, do not they go before you in some other? you have a better
government of your tongue than many of your neighbors; but are you not more
grossly tainted with covetousness than they are? You have a better gift of
chastity than another, but does not he less offend in violent distempered
passions than you do? and the like might be said in other particulars. If you
consider your own goodness and others badnes, you may easily grow to think
better of your self than of others: but if you would withal set before your
eyes their goodness and your own badnes, it would happily make you to have a
better opinion of them than of your self, and cause you to conclude that (all
things considered) their graces are more excellent than yours. But let that be
yielded, that you are indeed beyond many others in piety and godliness, do you
not yet come far short of that which the law requires? and for those gifts
that you have, whence proceeded they? are they not bestowed upon you out of the
Lords mere bounty? and if you have received them, why are you puffed up as if
you had not received them? If you did aright consider that you are no more
worthy of the least blessing of God than the vilest creature in the world, and
that not your goodness, but Gods goodness is the cause that you excel others,
there would be no place left for ouer-weening co^ceits of your self, but you
would conclude (as the truth is) that the better you are gifted, Romans 1. 14.
the more you are indebted, and the more talents you have, the more thanks you
owe unto God, Math. 25.
and the more service unto his people. And thus much for the first remedy
against pride, which is, to try our selves and our actions by the true
touchstone of Gods word.

Abraham the father of Believers, and the most excellent of all the Patriarks,
Genesis 18. 27.
to confess, that he was but dust and ashes: this was it that caused Isaiah, a
marvelous holy prophet, Isa. 42. 6.
to cry out, that he was a man of polluted lips; and this was it that made Job
that worthy and renowned servant of God, Job. 42. 6.
even to abhor himself, and to repent in dust, and ashes. And assuredly if
we constantly and zealously accustom our selves to come before Gods glorious
throane, it will make us much ashamed to stand upon our own worth, and frame
us to a very lowly conceit of our selves. And on the contrary, we may boldly
conclude, that they that do not use reverently and faithfully to call upon the
Lord, are proud and hautie, and arrogant persons, and never yet knew what true
lowlines meant, where there are many and fervent prayers, there is much
humility: where there are few and weak prayers, there is little humility:
where there are no faithful prayers at all, there is no humility at all.

A third help against pride is, diligence in some lawful Eccl. 1. 13.
for labor and travel (as the wise man says) are appointed unto the sons
of men to humble them thereby. As for idle persons, they are always proud and
conceited: Prou.
A sluggard is wiser in his own eyes, then ten men that can render a reason,
for such kind of people having nothing to busy their heads about, are very
ready (Satan helping them forward) to think of their own worth, to imagine
high things of themselves, and so to build castles in the air: besides that,
idleness nourishes in them all manner of vile lusts, and the more sinful any
one is, the more proud he is; and therefore is the devil more proud than any,
because he is more sinful than any. If then we would not be in bondage unto
this vile sin of pride, let us apply ourselves diligently unto the works of
our several vocations; and that for conscience sake and in obedience unto God;
not for filthy lucre sake, or for envy, or the like, for if we labor and toil
never so much for worldly respects, we shall not be rightly humbled thereby,
but rather puffed up in our fleshly minds.

A fourth remedy is, often to meditate of the hurts viz, that it causes the
Lord to abhor us, to resist us, to curse us, and to plague us, yea and to
deprive us of those things whereof we are most proud and conceited: besides
that, it causes us to pine away with envy: to consume with malice, to fret and
vex with anger and coffeehouse, and upon every slight occasion to brabble
and wrangle, to fall out with this body and that, and in a word, to be very
unquiet in our selves, and very troublesome and hateful unto others; and who
then would not be freed from this hurtful sin, which has so many badde
effects arising from it?

Then on the other side, the benefits issuing from the pure fountain of
humility, are very many and great: for besides the avoiding of the forenamed
mischifes, Isa. 61. 1.
lowlines will give us an interest in all the promises of God: Luke 4. 18.
meek men shall inherit the earth; they shall have God to dwell with them,
Psalm. 37. 11.
and grace to remain in them while they live, Isa. 57. 15.
and glory to inuest them, Iam. 4. 6.
and to make them eternally happy when they die. Math. 5. 3.


These remedies of often examination, frequent prayer, diligence in our
vocation, and serious consideration of the hurts that come by pride, and of the
benefits that proceed of humility, we must constantly and conscionably use for
the humbling of our hearts.

David found upon the prophet Nathans coming unto him; 2. Sam. 12.
and therefore does he so earnestly pray for it, Psalm. 141. 5.
saying: Let the righteous smite me for that is a benefit, and let him reprove
me, and it shall be a precious oil, etc. And whosoever they be that do not
thus desire the admonitions of Gods servants, they carry too little hatred
against sin, and do not with any great earnestnes and indignation control
and check their consciences for it: and therefore they are likely to live and
die in their pride, and may justly fear those punishments that do belong unto
proud persons.

Verse 12. I offer thee three things: choose thee which of them I shall do unto
thee.

In that the Lord puts him to this choice when he began in good earnest to
humble himself, the doctrine is, that

The more speedily we judge our selves, Doct. 7. Speedy judging of our selves
procures favor.
the more mercifully the Lord will deal with us.

This we see proved in this text, where God deals with David as a father with
his own son: First, letting him choose his own rod, when of necessity he
must be corrected: The time being expired, this point was briefly handled.
Secondly, he gives him warning before hand, that the plague might not
overtake him on a sudden, which would wonderfully have discomforted him:
Thirdly, he tells him how long it should continue, so that he was sure three
days would be the longest. Which serves first for singular comfort unto Gods
children that do bewail their sins, Use. 1.
and pass sentence upon themselves as well as they can: if they go through
with that work, the Lord will give them a comfortable and speedy deliverance:
or if it be requisite that they should feel Gods hand upon them or theirs in
any more grievous manner, yet the Lord will deal with them in some sort as he
did here with David: for first they shall have warning thereof before hand,
and so be better prepared and armed for it. And further, if they strive to
humble their hearts before the Lord, though they have not the choice of their
particular scourge, yet it shall be as well with them in effect: for although
at first they think the rod very smart, and every blow two, yet when they are
grown to be stronger men in Christ, they shall be driven to confess, that if
they had chosen their own rods, there could have been none in the world so
fit for them as those wherewith the Lord has scourged them: So that they shall
be able not only to say with the Prophet, It is good for me that I have been
afflicted; but good for me that I was whipped with these and these rods, yea
and that I received thus many strokes from the Lords merciful hand, No cross
could have been invented to do me more good, then poverty, or disgrace, or
ill neighbors, or any the like, according as Gods servants are severally
tried. If God should have put it to Abraham's and Jacobs choice, they would
rather have parted with any outward thing, then with their children, that were
as dear unto them as their life: but when they saw Gods end in trying them
that way, when Isaac was spared, and Joseph advanced, and made an instrument of
humbling his boisterous brethren, and of releeuing his father and all his
family, besides many others, then they must needs acknowledge that it was
fittest for them to be crossed in their children, and that Cods ways are the
best, whatsoever we may judge of them for a while.

Secondly, se. 2.
here is matter of terror unto all ungodly men that will not be persuaded to
judge themselves: look what judgment will most vex, and sting, and torment,
and even kill their souls, that let them make account of. If Haman might have
been the chuser, of all other miseries he would not have chosen that which
befell him: to wit, that Mordecai his enemy should be advanced and honored
and that by himself, who did bear him such deadly hatred for that he could
not obtain honor and reverence from him: what an horrible torment must this
needs be unto his heart, that Mordecai now should ride, and he go by him on
foot? that now he must bow the knee to Mordecai, that would so feign have had
Mordecai to do it to him? that the gallows that was by him prepared for
Mordecai, must now serve for himself: etc. This must needs be an exceeding
torture unto him: and this shall befall all impenitent sinners: What they are
most loath to undergo, that shall light upon them, and that at unawares when
they least think of it, and shall continue with them, and never leave them
till it have either turned them unto God, or brought them unto hell, the place
of all such rebrobate sinners. And that we may apply this to the present
occasion, are there not many that are horribly afraid of the pestilence? yea
far more then they are of sin which brings it: in so much that they
absent themselves from Sermons, and from public prayers, lest they should be
infected. Are there not very many (I say) that are possessed with such fears?
Let them look to it: for of all other strokes the pestilence is likely to fall
upon them: if it were a sword in the hand of the Pope, or of Satan, then it
stood them upon to beware of Gods ordinances: but seeing none but Atheists will
deny but it is ordered by Gods ouerruling hand, they take a bad course to
escape his stroke: for where can they hide themselves, but he will find them
out? And whither can they flee from his all-seeing presence?

He can take away the infection where it is, and bring it even in a moment
where it is not: and therefore go where they can, they go in continual
danger: for where is the sword of God most likely to smite, but where he is
most displeased, and where there is most profaneness, and greatest contempt
of the means of salvation? therefore if they would escape, let them fall down
before the Lord, and humble themselves as David did: and not be so much afraid
of their neighbors that have the plague, as of sin that brings the plague:
and run not so much from the occasion of this sickness (though all good care
must be had that way) as from the cause: which if we can do, then either God
will spare us, and exempt us from this stroke, or else give us comfort under
it, and deliverance from it by life or death: making it a means utterly to
kill original sin, which all his ordinances could but only weaken: and who
would be afraid of such a cure? what child of God would not be more glad to sit
on a throne in heaven (though he be called thereto by a boisterous messenger)
than to be in a prison here on earth? to be where he shall be quite freed from
sin and sorrow and temptation, and have all happiness above that which his
heart can desire, rather than to be continually turmoyled here in the world,
and every day to taste of new tribulations.

The end of the first Sermon.
The second Sermon.
2. SAMVEL. 24. 14. etc. Verse 14: And David said unto Gad, I am in a
wonderful strait: let us fall now into the hand of the Lord, (for his mercies
are great) and let me not fall into the hand of man.

Verse 15. So the Lord sent a Pestilence in Israel, from the morning, even to
the time appointed: and there died of the people from Dan to Beer-sheba seventy
thousand men.

Verse 16. And when the Angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem, the Lord
repented of the evil; and said to the Angel that destroyed the people, It is
sufficient, hold now thy hand, etc.

Verse 17. And David spoke unto the Lord, etc.


YE have already heard of David's sin in numbering of the people, of his
humiliation, confession, and craving of pardon for the same: also of the
message that was brought unto him by Gad; what offer the Lord made him, Namely,
that he should have the choice of his own rod: the sentence was already
past, and some one of the three judgments mentioned Verse 13. must needs light
upon the land: yet would God use as much mildnes as might be, and therefore
he referres the matter unto him, and bids him consider, and determine which
of them he would most willingly undergo.

Now follow the events that ensued both upon the sin that David committed,
and the message that God for the same directed unto him.

The first whereof, was the great distress wherewith he was perplexed, which
he bemoned to the Prophet, telling him that he was in a wonderful strait.

The second was the choice that he made, Verse 14.
absolutely passing over the famine, without so much as speaking of it, as
knowing it to be incomparably the sharpest scourge of the three: (for the
Scripture says, that they that are slain by the sword, are better then they
which are killed with hunger) and rather also submitting himself to the
Pestilence, Lament. 9.
which was more immediately the sword of God, from whom he expected mercy and
savor, then to the violence and sword of man: in whom what else in such a
case is to be found, but cruelty and fierceness?

The third was the execution of that plague of the pestilence, Verse 15.
which he had yielded himself unto: which is declared as well by the manner,
as the minister of it: it being in so short a time, as in three days space,
dispersed thorough the whole Land, from North to South, and (though not
affirmed, yet implied) from East to West, Jerusalem only excepted, as may
appear by the circumstance of the Text: and in this time seventy thousand
being destroyed; which stroke was inflicted by the hand of an Angel, whom God
had thereunto appointed, as minister and executioner of the same.

The last was, the ceasing and stay of this plague, Verse 16.
even then when the stroke was lighting upon Jerusalem, to have destroyed it.
And hereof are assigned two causes: the one, and that the principal, was the
Commandment of God: to whom (for our better apprehension of his providence) is
ascribed an humane passion of repentance: which properly befalls not him,
because he cannot but do every thing absolutely well, nor possibly at any
time be weary of well-doing: neither is he subject to perturbations, because
he is free from all manner of corruptions. But he is said to repent, when he
withholdeth that which he condicionallie promises, or threatens, or desisteth
from that which he had begun to do, sithence men many times break off their
proceedings, with dislike of the beginnings thereof, and their not doing of
that which they said, argues commonly that they are sorry, for saying that
which now they mind not to do.

The other cause, yet of an inferior nature, and mouent (as we call it) was
the prayer of David, Verse 17.
whereby he obtained the preservation of Jerusalem, and the rest of the
people, and herein he offers himself to be smitten, that they might be
spared, with acknowledgement that he was the offender, and they in this matter
altogether innocent.

Verse 14. And David said, I am in a wonderful strait] The Doctrine that hence
arises, is plain: viz. that Sin brings men into great distresses, and into
marvelous straits.

It is the proper nature of wickedness, Doct. 1. Sin brings men into straits.
to encomber and cast men into perplexities: neither will God spare his own
people, when they take liberty in provoking his majesty; but either they
shall be straited in their own hearts, or else in regard of outward
calamities, or both: and though the Lord will not condemn them, yet will he
afflict them. Iehoshaphat was so foolish, that he would make affinity with
Ahab: and lest he should break off that league of friendship that was between
them, he would adventure (contrary to the express word of the Lord) to go
against Ramoth Gilead to battle with him: now was not he in an exceeding great
straight, when the maine force of the battle was bent against him, being
supposed to be the King of Israel, concerning whom a command was given to the
Captains by the King of Aram, 1. King. 22. 31. 32.
that they should fight against none, neither small nor great, but only
against the King of Israel? Yet would not Iehoshaphat take warning by this: but
after that he had been rebuked by Iehu the Prophet, for helping the wicked, 2.
King. 3.
and loving them that hated the Lord, he yet joined with Iehoram the King of
Israel, against the King of Moab: but was his success any better then before?
No surely: for howsoever they had the victory over the Moabites with much
difficulty, yet before that was effected, he was in a greater straight, then
when he went against Ramoth Gilead: for there his own person only was
endangerd: but here both he and his people, together with two Kings and their
armies besides, were like to perish for want of water. A further proof of this
point we have in Jonah, who discoursing with his own reason, thought it would
be to no purpose, but very dangerous for him to go to preach at Niniue, and
therefore refused to yield to the Commandment of the Lord. But what woeful
distress did this disobedience bring him into, when being in that sore
tempest, the sea did roar, his conscience accuse him, men were against him,
God was against him, and there was no way for him, but to be thrown into the
sea, and there to remain three days and three nights in the belly of a whale?
Judges. 16.
The like may be seen in Sampson, who being carried with boisterous lusts, and
immoderately and sinfully affecting that vile strumpet Dalilah, could hide
nothing from her, but discovered unto her very foolishly wherein his great
strength lay, namely in his hair: and so that being cut off, as a recompense
of his folly and sinful dealing, he was betrayed into the hands of his most
deadly enemies the Philistims, who pulled out both his eyes, bound him in
fetters, made him grind in the prison house, and besides made him a laughing
stock unto those into whom he had formerly stricken a great terror and
amazement by his admirable valor, and the strange enterprises achieved by
him. Thus we may in part perceive into what narrow straits sin does bring
Gods own children: but this is especially verified in wicked men, of whom it
is said, that thorns and snares are in the way of the froward: Prou. 22. 5.
they are hedged in with thorns, and all their walk is upon brakes: they run
to hell with great vexation: they are entangled in snares continually, and are
never out of them: they are caught in Satan's net, and held fast by hardness
of heart, which never leaves them till either conversion, or utter confusion
do befall them.

But this will more fully appear in particular sins, as first to give
instance in drunkards, whose appetite does provoke them unto that beastly abuse
of Gods good creatures: the wine delights their eye, and pleases their taste,
and goes down merrily: Pro. 13. 32. 29. 30.
but in the end it will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a cockatrice: for to
whom is woe? to whom is sorrow? etc. Even to them that tarry long at the wine,
to them that go and seek mixed wine: for they ruinate and overthrow their
estate, they blemish and stain their names, make their wives to fall out with
them, their children to contemn them, their companions to quarrel with them:
their best friends to loath them: and after all this, they are a burden unto
themselves, having their wits cracked, and their bodies diseased, and being
fit for no place, but only for hell.

The same may be said of proud men: does not their sin throw them into great
misery? Let us consider a little of Hamans fall, which was procured by his
insolency. God knew what cross would most vex his proud heart, and that he
sent him: for whereas all Hamans honor could do him no good, unless Mordecai
would rise up before him, and do him reverence, that was a thorn unto him,
when he could not make him do it: but when he must honor Mordecai, and be
as a servant unto him, that was a snare unto his soul, and therein was he
held fast, with horrible vexation and monstrous shame, till death and
damnation seized upon him.

The like may be seen in riotous and voluptuous persons, who are wholly
addicted to follow sporting, and gaming, and surfeiting, and chambering, and
wantonness, with such like sinful delights of the flesh: the world thinks
that such live a merry life: but judge not too well of them; they have not
paid all their shot as yet: they have misery enough behind, that still
pursues them, and at length will overtake them: for he that loves pastime,
shall be a poor man; and he that loves wine and oil shall not be rich:
Prou. 21. 17.
and a Whore will bring a man to a morsel of bread: poverty shall follow at
the heels of such, Prou. 6. 26.
as a swift Post, and shall set upon them as a strong armed man: they shall be
overcome and vanquished, and down shall their estate go, even to the ground.

Another instance may be in covetous persons, who have wealth in wonderful
admiration, so that it is made the common god, and most usual Idol of the
world: and when they have gotten it, they, and many others think they shall
have great credit with it: and many times it so falls out, that they are men
of great place, because they are of great substance: they have many to attend
upon them, many to flatter them, and to crouch unto them, and by their riches
they may procure almost what they list: does not this now seem to be an easy,
a pleasant, and happy life? Yet the Apostle tells us, 1. Tim. 6. 19.
that they that will be rich, fall into tentation, and snares, and into many
foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction: so
that when wealth (together with the love of it) flows in on every side, men
are as it were cast headlong into a sea of misery: and therefore it is added,
that the desire of money is the root of all evil: for it does not only poison
men's hearts, make them err from the faith, and bring them into the snares of
the devil, to be lead by him according to his will; but it pearseth them
through with many sorrows: for greedy wordlings are ever disconted and froward,
falling out with one, and chafing with another: so that those things which
seem to glad their hearts, do not indeed bring them any sound contentment,
because their desires can never be satisfied, but especially because they are
often times much crossed: as when their sheep or cattle miscarry, their
grounds prove unfruitful, their servants untrusty, thieves set upon them by
violence to spoil them of their goods, or subtle adversaries by craft seek
to defraud them of the same, with many such like occurrences, which will
neither let them rest quietly in the night, nor live comfortably in the day:
and the hearts of such covetous persons can tell them, that many times all
other things do them no good, sithence they cannot have some one thing which
they would, as the case stood with wicked Ahab in the matter of Naboths
vineyard.

But suppose, that these and the like sins should not bring men into snares
in their lifetime, yet at the time of their death when they must go out of the
world, they will: Job. 27. 8.
for what hope has the hypocrite when God shall take away his life? though he
have heaped up riches as the dust, yet when God shall vnsheath his soul, and
put it violently from his body as a rustie sword out of the scabberd, what good
will all his substance do him then? It was his hope while he lived, that he
should still get more wealth: but when death sets upon him, he is past that
hope, and for better hopes he has none, and therefore must needs be full of
woe, and full of perplexity. Then though he call upon God, he will not answer:
Pro. 1. 26. ^^.
and though he seek him early, he shall not find him: but God will laugh at
his destruction, and mock when his fear comes. Because God called, and he
refused; he stretched out his hand, and he would not regard; therefore when he
cries, the Lord will shut out his prayer.

But set the case they be not in such perplexity at the time of their death,
but that they die securely, and go suddenly down to the grave as senseless
blocks, or stones, yet must they come before the judgment seat of Christ, and
then they shall be paid home for all. Ordinarily they meet with extremity of
anguish while they live, or when they die: but if they do not, they shall not
miss of it when they appear before the Judge of heaven and earth, Romans 2.
but tribulation and anguish shall be upon every soul that has offended, of
what estate and degree soever he has been. Then their distress and honor
shall be such, that when they arise out of their graves, they shall wish to
return thither again: yea they shall desire that the mountains and rocks
might fall upon them, and cover them from him that sits on the throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb. Then they would think no pains nor torment too
much so they might perish everlastingly: they could rather desire that an huge
rock or great mountain might crush them in pieces, and that they might perish
as beasts, than to appear before Christ Jesus to receive that fearful
sentence, Go ye cursed, etc: This is the proper wages of sin: and of
disobedience against the Lord: it castes the committers of it into a woeful
Labyrinth of distresses and miseries: and good reason is there that it should
be so, because otherwise the hatefulnes of it, and the hatred of God against it
would not clearly appear, and so men would like better of the broad way, than
of the narrow, and choose to be rebels against the Lord, rather than obedient
subjects unto him: even the best would do this as well as the worst. Which
serves

First, Use. 1.
for instruction: that we should beware of all kinds of sin, and consider
what will come of it, before we presume to rush upon it: let us look before we
leap, lest afterward we repent us when it is too late. Sin will make goodly
shows of delight, and preferment, and commodity that it will bring unto us:
that if we will give entertainment thereunto, it will never be a means of any
disgrace unto us, but will hide it self from the view of the world. But what
does the Lord say of it? Does not he tell us that it will break out, and fly
abroad at length? The adulterer would have his wretched pleasure, but not the
just reproach of his filthiness. But what says Job? Job. 31. 3.
Are there not strange punishments for such workers of iniquity? And though
they may hide it from the eyes of men, Verse. 4.
does not God behold their ways, and tell all their steps? If Adam and Eve had
considered what mischief would have ensued on their eating of the forbidden
fruit, they would never have tasted thereof: but when they would believe the
serpent rather then God, did not they, and shall not their posterity for ever
smart for it?

The Prophet Micaiah bid Abab take heed of his journey to Ramoth Gilead: yet
he would have his own mind, let the prophet say what he would: but when the
arrow was shot into his side, then he saw that Micaiahs counsel had been
worth the following: but then it was too late, and such is the folly and
madness of most men; they must have their own wills* and their own ways, and
will never hearken to those instructions that are given them, either by God, or
by godly men, till misery have overwhelmed their souls, and they be past
recovery. But let their folly teach us to be wiser, and let us take heed of
Satan's baits, and of his sugared poison: Math. 4.
he will make us profers (as he did unto our Savior) of marvelous great
honor, and pleasure, and gain that may be gotten by such and suel, sinful
courses: John. 8.
but let us never give credit unto him, for he is a liar from the beginning:
but,

Secondly, Use. 2.
if we have harkned too far unto him already, and have fallen by our iniquity,
let us withal possible speed get out of that which holds us in bondage, and
wrappeth us in milerie, and chaineth us in many sorrows and calamities; let us
get sound repentance for it, and strive for a reformation of it: let not sin
keep possession in us, and then judgments shall not long continue upon us He
that has committed any gross sin, is as it were a prisoner: according to
that of Solomon, Prou. 5. 22.
His own wickedness shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden
with the cords of his own sin. There is a judicial proceeding against him:
sin comes as an officer, and charge the party to stand: then it
apprehends him, and binds him hand and foot as a malefactor: (it spares
not the mightiest Monarch in the world, that is found guilty before the Lord)
after there is a proceeding unto arraignment and execution, if there be not
means used to stay the same: therefore let us get off the fetters of iniquity
as soon as we can: and if we find terrors upon our hearts for our
covetousness and cruelty, for our pride and insolency, for our filthiness
and impuritie, etc: let us labor with God for the obtaining of a pardon: and
then though we be plagued for our foolishness, and brought very low, yet
crying unto the Lord, he will deliver us out of our distress: Psalm. 107.
yea he will bring us out of darkness, and out of the shadow of death, and
break our bands asunder.

Here is also matter of comfort to them that proceed in the ways of the Lord
with a good conscience, Use. 3.
whose works do testify for them that they are upright and sincere, and that
though they be clogged with many infirmities, yet they give entertainment to no
sin at all: though they have many troubles and slanders raised against them,
and many temptations, wants and necessities lying upon them, yet let them be of
good cheer: for albeit they be afflicted on every side, yet shall they not be
in distress, 2. Cor. 4. 8.
they are not straightened, but have elbow room enough, and do enjoy the best
freedom and liberty. For they may come into Gods privy chamber (as it were)
and into his presence when they will: they are not strained in their souls,
but have liberty to power out their hearts before their heavenly father, who
knows and pittieth their distressed estate, and will work out their freedom
and comfort in due time: and in the mean while his hand shall defend and
uphold them: his spirit shall comfort and strengthen them: his word shall
revive and refresh them, and (in a word) his grace shall be every way sufficient
for them, so that such as are not chained and fettered with their own
iniquities, and reigning sins, are of all other the best freemen, and the
most happy and blessed people: they walk at liberty, and they keep the
precepts.

Let us fall now into the hand of the Lord] That is, Let God proceed with the
pestilence according to his pleasure: which is called Gods sword and Gods hand,
because this pestil^ece proceeded immediately from him, without any second
causes, whereas many other judgments do not so. In that he makes choice to
fall into Gods hand, Doct. 2. The godly find greatest favor with God.
the Doctrine is, that Gods servants never find so great favor as with God
himself.

None can deal so favorably with Gods children as their heavenly Father.

He goes as far beyond earthly parents, as God is better then man. They,
when they are provoked, do oftentimes cease to be merciful: but God, when he
is most incensed, is perfectly favorable; and when he is driven to chastise
his children, he is exceeding moderate. Which is lively expressed, Hos. 11. 8.
where the Lord speaks in this manner: Hos. 11.
How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I
make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? As if he should have told
them, You have deserved to be utterly destroyed, as Sedome and Gomorrah, and
the Cities near adioining: but my compassion that I bear toward you will not
suffer me to do it: Mine heart is turned within me: my repentings are rowied
together. Man repents after he has done amiss, but God before, so that he
can never do amiss: and therefore to manifest his infinite goodness, and care
for their preservation, he adds, verse 9. I will not execute the fierceness
of my wrath: I will not return to destroy Ephraim; and the reason is added,
for I am God, and not man: and therefore though a man (if he were so
provoked,) would have done his best utterly to have spoiled them, yet the Lord
would not enter into their City, viz. for that end, but deal graciously with
them, notwithstanding all their offenses.

Moreover, earthly parents, when they set upon correction with best
staidness, do want knowledge and discretion, and therefore give their
children too little or too much: 1. Pett. 6. Isa. 27. 9.
but the Lord is of such infinite wisdom, that he ever proportioneth his
chastisements to the need of the party, and the nature of the fault.

Again, earthly parents, when they have laid on stripes, cannot take them off
again: when they see their children weeping, and grieuing, and humbling
themselves in good earnest for their offenses, they wish (but all in vain)
that their pain were over, and the smart removed: but as the Lord wounds,
so can he heal; as he cast Job down, Hos. 6. 1.
so could he raise him vpagaine: and whatsoever our distresses be, if we can
humble our selves, and cry unto the Lord, he is able and ready to relieve
and to deliuervs. In which regard, we should be most willing, if we must needs
he corrected, to yield up our selves into his hands. For there is no comparison
betwixt the compassions of men, which are finite, and of Gods, who is infinite.

Which may serve to discover unto us their folly that are so far from
submitting themselves to Gods chastisements, that they cannot endure his
rebukes. Let any man of God admonish them, and they are ready to fly in his
face. What has he to do with me? (say they) let him meddle with his own
matters. I will not take it at his hands: with many bitter speeches of that
kind, which argue in them great distemper and vexation of mind. And let a man
tell them in never so great love, that if they do not amend, their sins will
abroad to their disgrace: their friends will grieve at them, their adversaries
will reproach them, and all cry shame upon them; yet they will be no whit
pacified, but rather enraged against the admonisher, not caring what be thought
or spoken against them, so Christians may not reprove them.

Hence is it that men are so loath to be under any Christian government, Use. 1.
where they must be instructed how to do well, and rebuked if they do not
well: they will none of it: to live in such a family or congregation where they
shall be catechized, and restrained from the breach of the Sabbath, and other
leaud courses, they will never endure it; but will choose rather to be under the
government of Antichrist, and of Satan himself, then of Christ Jesus: Let
their masters be Papists, cruel oppressors, as savage tyrants as Pharaoh was,
they will rather dwell with them, then with godly and religious governors,
that would use them most kindly, and reward them most liberally for their
service. Such were the Israelites. Moses (as the Lord testifies of him) was
the meekest man upon the earth, and withal a most wise and courageous Ruler:
yet would they rather have been every day under the whip in Egypt, then under
Gods gracious government which was executed by Moses, And as these are here to
be condemned of great want of wisdom, that will not submit themselves to be
admonished and ordered by the Lord; so are they also which are unwilling to
come under Gods correcting hand, which is indeed of al other most desirable.

And because the present occasion requires it, it will not be amiss to show
that the pestilence, wherewith the Lord has now visired this Nation, is a
favorable and gentle correction, and that this sword of the Lord is nothing so
terrible as the sword of man would be if he should cause that to be drawn out
against us: and that for these reasons:

First, Reasons why the pestilence is a more favorable stroke then the sword.
because herein we may more immediately and clearly behold Gods hand, which
is a means to draw us to more speedy and earnest humiliation: whereas if we
were pursued by the sword of men, we should be more distracted, sometimes with
fears of and greese,

Secondly, in the time of the pestilence the adversaries

Thirdly, this is a marvelous great mercy, that there does still remain the
face of a Church, that the Gospel

Besides, now there is a continuance of the state of the commonwealth: whereas
when the sword rages Lamen. 5.
the face of the honorable is not respected, the Magistrates authority is
reckoned a matter of nothing, and all laws must give place to the wills of
violent men.

Again, in the times of war, there is an utter subversion

And as for our estate, so even for our lives and for our souls, the case is
better with us in the time of pestilence then in the time of wars: for then
all our families, wives, children, servants, and all may be barbarously
slain, or worse used before our eyes, or we before theirs: and if not so, yet
they must be left to Idolaters, and in danger to be vassalls of sin and
Satan: but now if death come, it is nothing so lamentable: if life be
granted, it is nothing so dangerous: for though we be taken away, yet our
friends shall remain with the Saints and servants of God; and they that have
been our Christian friends, will be theirs, at least there is very great hope
of their happiness, both here, and hereafter, in regard of that liberty of the
Gospel which through Gods goodness is still maintained. And therefore great
cause have we to magnify the name of God, that when our late gracious Queen
was taken away, and the Land must needs be exercised with some heavy stroke
or other, that he then miraculouslie delivered us from the violence of the
sword of man, and smote our Nation with his own sword.

Now when this is said to be a favorable stroke, we must understand that it
is so only unto Gods children, not to the wicked: concerning whose departure
out of this world, it is said, that Hell follows death. If they be not
reconciled unto God, but live and die in their sins, Revel. 6. 8.
their case is fearful. And therefore is it a just hand of God upon
impenitent sinners, that they should be horribly afraid of that sickness. No
sin, nor Satan himself, is so much feared of them as the pestilence, nay
nor Gods wrath it self: and therefore they care not what foul sin they
commit, whereby they are sure to incur the Lords displeasure, so their bodies
may escape this plague of God. But suppose they do escape it, if they be as
full of impiety, and injustice, and impurity, as they were wont to be, the Lord
has seven times greater plagues behind, Leuit. 26.
and his revenging hand will be stretched out against them still. Therefore let
them labor to make a good use of this, to humble themselves, and turn from
their evil ways: otherwise assuredly some greater punishment will light on
their souls, or bodies, or both.

Verse 15. The time allotted being welneere spent, the points following were
but briefly touched.
So the Lord sent a pestilence in Israel, etc. and there died of the people,
from Dan to Beer-sheba, seventy thousand men.] Ye heard the cause of this
before; to wit, because David, partly through pride, and partly through vain
confidence, had numbered the people: whence this point may be gathered, that

God makes his judgments suitable to our sins. Doct. 3. Gods punishments are
answerable to men's sins, Joel. 1. 5.


David was lifted up, because he had so many strong and valient men: therefore
does God lessen the number of them. So ( Joel, 1. 5.) it is said, Weep and
houle ye drinkers of wine, for the new wine shall be pulled from your mouth. This
was a most just correction, that they should be punished with scarcity of
drink, seeing they had before time so wretchedly abused the same. In like sort
does the Lord meet with proud men, turning their glory into shame, as we may
observe in Tyrus. Isa. 23. 8. where the question is made, Isa. 23.
Who has decreed this against Tyrus (that crowns men,) whose Merchants are
Princes? whose Chapmen are the Nobles of the world? And the answer is made,
verse. 9. The Lord of Hosts has decreed this, to stain the pride of all
glory, and to bring to contempt all them that be glorious in the earth. So for
covetous men, they are many times brought to beggarie, according to that of the
wise man, Prou.
He that makes have to be rich, shall surely come to poverty. Albeit they
use wonderful diligence, and be exceeding painful, and have an excellent
capacity, and a deep reach for worldly things, and seem to want nothing that
may make them prosper, yet because God is displeased with them, he brings them
down, both stripping them of their wealth, which they most affected; and
plaguing them with poverty, which they most detested.

And a cause hereof is, Reason.
that he gives men thereby to understand, that he takes knowledge of their
ways, to the end they should take knowledge of his judgments, when they see
them directed so just against their faults, and affections. And by this means
as reprobates are left without excuse, the elect are much furthered to
repentance, when their corrupt wills, their unlawful desires, and sinful
delights are crossed: when they behold Gods visible hand, and righteous hand:
when he shows them the nature and quality of their offenses, by the manner
and proceeding of his corrections: and that was the true cause why the Lord
laid this stroke on David at this time, rather than any other, viz: that he
might more speedily and evidently see his fault, and more soundly and heartily
repent for the same. Which makes for our instruction, Use.
if we would have comfort in any thing that we possess, let us use it well:
neither let our hearts deceine us; whether it be honor, or goods, or children,
if we dote upon them, and make Gods of them, we are likely to be deprived of
them: the Lord can take from us our power, Ezekiel. 24. 35.
the joy of our honor, the pleasure of our eyes, and the desire of our hearts,
even our sons, and our daughters. When men love to be commanders, God can
take their authority from them: if they stand upon their honor and
reputation, he can soon make it wither and vanish: if the delights of their
eyes do content them, he can quickly remove those from them: finally, if they
set their affections immoderately upon their children, and lift up their souls
unto them, (as the words are in the original) that is, make them the desire of
their hearts, God can suddenly bereave them of their children, or so bring it
to pass, that they shall have little comfort in them.

Would we then have our houses and our children free from Gods strokes, and in
particular from the pestilence (as that many pretend that they are more
careful for their children, then for themselves;) then let us never commit any
sin to set them up, for that is the next way to deprive us of them: when we
carry more affection to them then to the Lord himself, we endanger our selves
and them both. The Lords will is, that you should in the first place serve him,
and so doing, you shall make your children, not Lords but kings, not of an
earthly, but of an heavenly kingdom.

The next thing here briefly to be considered is [the space] in which these
seventy thousand men died, namely in three days: Doctrine, that

When God sets in with his judgments they shall be far dispersed in a short
time. Doct. 4. Gods judgments very swift.
He can cause his plagues to fly fast, and make great speed. This is proved
in the Psalm, where speaking of any decree of God, it is said, He sends
forth his commandment upon earth, Psalm. 147. 15.
and his word runs very swiftly. What God determines to do, he can do it
out of hand, when it stands with his good pleasure. Exodus 12.
So we see how he could cause one Angel to go through the whole land of Egypt
in one night, and to slay the first borne in every house: Zach. 5. 2.
and in this regard Gods curse is compared to a flying book, to note the
swiftness of it, that it comes as it were with two wings: but withal it is
likened to a talent of lead, that sticks fast where it falls: it makes speed
unto the place that God appoints, and tarrieth there where once it lights.

Furthermore we see, how quickly Gods curse was scattered over the whole earth,
when our first parents had sinned: Genesis 3. 17. 18.
the deformity came not upon the creatures by degrees, but it ouertooke them
presently and out of hand. And so at the last day Christ shall come in the
twinkling of an eye, as to call the godly forthwith unto glory, 1. Cor. 15. 52.
so to draw the wicked immediately before Gods judgment seat, to receive
present and everlasting punishment and torment.

And the reason of this is, Reason.
because God at all times is in all places, and of equal power in every place,
and therefore what should hinder him from doing that every where in the same
moment, if it stand with his justice and will, which he does any where? The
great deluge in the time of Noe, covered not one Nation one year, and an other
the next, and a long time after the rest which were far separated asunder,
but he in his wrath was present in every country, and so were they all
overwhelmed in few days: and who knows whether it seized not upon each of
them in one day? which makes,

For reproof of them that think, Use.
if they escape one place of infection, they are safe enough. But cannot God or
his Angel reach them wheresoever they be? Though no infected person come near
them, cannot the Lords hand find them out? Yes certainly, let them climb up
unto heaven, Psalm. 1 39.
or go down into hell, or hide themselves at the center of the earth, Gods
eye is still upon them, and his hand near unto them: so that they can go safe
no where without Gods favor. If the pestilence were only in India, we should
as easily be infected in England, if God had a quarrel against us, and a
purpose to plague us that way, as if we were in the midst of ye infected
persons. Who would have thought the Gehazi should have been smitten with the
leprosy when his master and he were together? The like may be said of Miriam
when Aaron was with her. Nay who would have thought that King Vzziah should
have been plagued with that stroke in such an holy place as the Temple was,
where God would have no unclean thing to enter? Yet when he presumptuously
usurped the high Priests office, he was not spared, no not in the Sanctuary.
So that this may be surely concluded, that no place can shelter a man from
misery, if sin be harbored and entertained in his heart.

Verse 16. It is sufficient: hold thy hand.] Doctrine, that

As God appoints judgments to be inflicted on his people, so he himself
will see execution done. Doct. 5. God is present at the execution of his
indgements.


He stands by in this place, and directs the Angel how far to proceed, and
where to make an end, God would have Jacob humbled, and therefore he sent him
to his uncle Laban: but withal he assures him of good success, and for that
purpose shows him a ladder, whereupon the Angels of God went up and down,
Genesis 28. 12.
to signify, that they should guide him forth, and bring him back in
safety: but (for the present purpose) withal the Lord promises, that he
would be with him, and keep him. Verse. 15.
So Psalm. 34. 15. it is set down as a great consolation unto the Saints, that
the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous.

Instruction, that we should labor not only to be in Jerusalem, Use.
but to be of it: and then when Gods judgments are abroad, we shall be in no
danger* God will command his faithful Angels to do us no hurt; wherein if
they should refuse to obey, they must needs become devils, and reprobate
spirits, which is impossible. Let us labor therefore to be of the number of
those that mourn for the abominations of Jerusalem, that so we may be saved
when others are destroyed. Let us grieve for the impiety, and blasphemy, and
cruelty, and impuritie that is in our Land: so shall we have a testimony unto
our hearts, that we are Jerusalem: but as for those that are Babels, Egyps,
Sodomes, whose houses are full of voluptuousness, pride, gluttony,
drunkenness, worldliness, and the like, the Lord is likely to command his
Angel to smite at them with a full stroke; for where should his sword light,
but upon his enemies?

Verse 17. And David spoke unto the Lord, and said, Behold, I have sinned]
Whereas indeed the people had provoked the Lord most, yet David thought
himself most guilty, and therefore he would have Gods hand to have been on
him, and not on the people.

A good man will lay a greater burden on himself then on an other, Doct. 6. A
good man is most severe against himself.
and pass sentence against himself, rather then against another.

So does Paul. Christ came into the world to save sinners, (says he) of whom I
am chief. 2. Tim. 1. 15.


And as for matter of guilt, so also for matter of punishment. We see in Moses,
Exodus 32.
that because the people were many, and he was but one, he entreated God that
he might be wiped out of his book, rather then all his people should be
destroyed, But especially this point is verified in our Savior, who, when
mankind was utterly insufficient, Philip.
either to put in sureties, or to discharge their debt, did humble himself, to
take on him the slate of a servant, and abased himself, that he might bring us
unto glory; and endured a shameful, and painful, and cursed death, that he
might bring us unto eternal life.

And this comes to pass, Reasons
first, because good men 1. Cor 13.
which causes them not so much to seek their own case, as the benefit of
others, but to lay the more upon themselves, that others may be the rather
spared.



This serves, Use. 1.
first, for reproof of those that are ready to shift off all from themselves,
and though they be wholly, or most in fault, yet will lay the blame altogether
on others.

Here also are those hypocrites to be reprehended, that will lay heavy
burdens, and require strict obedience of others, especially of Ministers, and
yet they themselves make no conscience of any sin, be it never so contrary
to the Laws of God, or of man.

Others there are also, that may justly come under this reproof, that care not
who want, so they have plenty; nor who hunger, so they have sufficient; nor
who sink, so they swim; though it be by thrusting others under water.

Moses, and David, and Paul were, and therefore their reward in heaven, and
their praise on earth, shall be suitable.

Merciful men lost nothing: if Nehemiah had gotten together all the money in
that country, and had attained to be King of Persia, he could not have procured
himself so much true honor, Nehem. 5. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18.
as he did by not taking all the stipend that he might have done, being a man
of his place, and by entertaining a great many that were in want at his table,
which he needed not to have done: and besides the good and deserved estimation
that he got, he could with comfort (and so may all that are like him) entreat
the Lord to remember him in goodness: which the Lord never failed to do.

The end of the secoud Sermon.
The third Sermon.
PSALM 12. 1. 2. Verse 1. Help Lord, for there is not a godly man left* for
the faithful are failed from among the children of men.

2. They speak deceitfully every one with his neighbor, flattering with their
lips, and speak with a double heart.


THese words contain in them a prayer of David, when he himself was pursued
by Saul, and the Church of God was in great distress: when his friends
withdrew themselves from him, and few continued in that holy profession of
Gods name, which formerly they had made.

Now in this prayer of his, we may observe

1. First a petition, Help Lord; Seeing men's help failed, and their power was
bent against equity and Justice, which should have vpheld and maintained it,
therefore he appeals to an higher power, and entreats relief and succor
from the Lord.

2. Secondly, a complaint, and that

1. Of the decay of good men, and of goodness in them, There is not a godly man
left, etc.] Whereas superiors should have ministered refreshing unto the
distressed, or at least inferiors borne a burden with them, they were now
taken away, when there was greatest need of them: not that there were no good
men at all (for Gad, and Nathan, and Jonathan, were now in the Church) but in
comparison of the adverse part, they were so few, that they did scarce appear
to be any at all.

2. Of the deceitfulnes of bad men, They speak deceitfully every one with his
neighbor, etc: that is, every one of the contrary side, was full of craft and
cunning, using fair words, but intending much mischief: speaking with a heart
and a heart (as the Prophet says) that is, a heart that made show of one
thing, but meant the quite contrary; seeming to be for David, when in truth
they plotted against him.

Help Lord] here we see his refuge, Verse. 1.
he betaken himself unto God, when he is forsaken of men, Whence observe this
Doctrine, that,

Although all humane helps and earthly friends do fail Gods people, Doct. 1.
Gods children never helples.
yet they are not helpless, nor hopeless.

Albeit in regard of man's assistance, they be utterly destitute, yet the Lord
will be ever with them, and always stand for them. David's argument here is not
this, Lord help: for there be many that will join with thee: but this, Lord
help, for there is none else that will help: so that our case is not
according to men's affections toward us, but according to Gods love unto us.

This is evident in the prophecy of Micha, Micah. 7. 2.
where it is showed, that friends failed: neither did they fail one man alone,
but the whole Church; good men were perished out of the earth, and there was
none righteous among men, etc: but the best of them was a briar, and the most
rightteous of them sharper than a throne hedge: yet the Church is not quite
dismayed, but resolves to fly unto the Lord for succor. Therefore will I look
unto the Lord; Verse. 7.
I will wait for God my Savior: my God will hear me, though good men were
dead and gone, and hypocrites did put on their shape and likeness, that they
might more freely practice mischief.

Yet the people of God determine with themselves not to cast off all hope, but
to rely upon the Lord, and though he delay to help them for a time, yet they
will wait upon him, knowing that at length he will deal graciously with them.

And for the further confirmation of this point, we have the example of Christ
Jesus himself, who being grievously perplexed and troubled within and without,
and on every side, uses this argument unto his father; Be not far from me,
Psalm. 22. 11.
because trouble is near, for there is none to help me. And this is usual
with God, to relieve his people in extremities: and therefore when no man
calls for justice, no man contendeth for the truth, etc. then he himself will
take the matter into his hand, and he will save and deliver his servants as the
Prophet Isaiah witnesses. Isa. 59. 4. 16.


And the reasons hereof are these.

First, Reasons.
though all men do forsake us, yet Gods power Jonathan, that it is not hard to
the Lord to save with many or with few: and in Asa, who says, 1. Sam. 14. 6.
it is nothing to thee to help with many, or with no power. They knew that
though they had few, 2. Chro. 14. 11
or none at all on their side, they were in as good case as if they had many
millions, if God were on their side: for all power in his, and that which men
have, Psalm. 62. 11. Math. 6.
is but borrowed from him: and though he sometimes use them, it is not because
he needs them: for who did help him in making of the heavens and of the earth,
and of all the creatures in them both? and what assistance has he now in
sustaining, and upholding of the same? now if he never needed the aid of any
creature in these greatest works of creation and preservation, surely he
wants not the help of men in matters of smaller importance.

Secondly, Gods mercy is no more lessened then his power is, by men's
withdrawing of themselves from us, the fatherless finds mercy. Hos. 14.
And then does he exercise the bowels of his compassion, when men show little
or no compassion at all.

When we see children to have rich and merciful parents to provide for them,
we do not much pity them: but as for those that are fatherless and
friendlesse, that are hungry and naked, and altogether destitute of relief, we
tender their case, and are ready to relieve them. Can we carry such an
affection toward other men's children that are distressed and helpless, and
will not the Lord our God have a greater care of his own children in the like
case? Will he leave them because men have forsaken them? No surely. But when
they are in distresses and straits, and that through their own foolishness
and disobedience, if they humble themselves, Psalm. 107.
and cry unto him, he will deliver them, though men dare not, or will not
speak, or deal for them.

Thirdly, when Gods servants are left destitute, their David's example, who
being in great danger in the cave, did at first look about him, for help on
this side, and on that: but seeing that all refuge failed him, what did he? I
cried unto thee o Lord (says he) saying, thou art mine hope, and my portion in
the Land of the living.

Psalm. 141. 4. 5.
in such times of difficulty, Gods glorious hand is more apparently seen, and
so all the honor is ascribed unto him. If Moses had brought the Israelites out
of Aegipt by force of arms, being aided with two or three millions of
soldiers, much of the praise would have been given unto them: but when Moses
was naked and altogether destitute of any power of man, the Lords mighty Arm
was more clearly seen in the deliverance of his people, and the subversion of
their enemies, And that work of his, has been, is, and shall be memorable in
all ages.

So also, Hezekiahs sickness had been such as any Physician could have
cured, his recovery should never have been recorded in Gods book, as not
making so much for his glory: but when the prolonging of his life was as much
as the giving of a second life, then notice of it was taken and given by the
holy Ghost, to the everlasting honor of Gods name. And as it was then, so is
it yet still, and ever shall be to the end of the world: the greater the
extremities and necessities of the Saints be, wherein God does relieve them,
and out of which he does deliver them, the more will it be for the magnifying
of his omnipotency, and of his tender mercy therein expressed.

This serves,

1. First, Use. 1.
for the confutation of their foolish conceit and expectation, who seeing
mighty adversaries against the Church, and few or no friends to interpose
themselves, presently conclude, that their case is desperate: down they must:
they are utterly undone: and so they begin to forecast in their minds the
manner of their overthrow, and the form of their lame^tation, when they shall
be thus and thus handled. But these men, for all their deep reach, may be
deceived; for all their conclusions are grounded on men: they do not consider
what God may do, as we see in David's enemies, who perceiving that many did
band themselves together, and rise up against him; concluded, that there was no
help for him in God, Psalm. 3. 1. 2. 3.
But what says David? Lord, thou art a buckler for me, my glory, and the
lifter up of my head. And in another Psalm, Psalm. 71. 10. 11.
Mine enemies (says he) speak of me, saying, God has forsaken him: pursue
and take him, for there is none to deliver him. These speeches (no doubt)
pierced David's soul: but does he make the same conclusion? No, he is far
from that; he rather lays faster hold on God, seeing cruel men to be so
violently bent against him. Go not far from me, Verse 12. 13.
O God (says he) my God haste thee to help me: let them be confounded and
consumed, that are against my soul, etc. Indeed if men's opposing of
themselves against him, could have kept him from complaining unto God, or God
from giving ear unto him, his case had been very lamentable: but seeing that
was impossible, whatsoever they imagined, there was safety enough for David,
and so is there still for all the elect of God.

Secondly, Use. 2.
this is for instruction, that seeing by how much less help we have from men,
so much the more we shall have from God; therefore we should deal earnestly
with the Lord in our distresses, and wrestle with him as Jacob did, Genesis 31.
when his brother Esau came with four hundred men against him: he was unable
to encounter him, and therefore he encountreth the Lord himself by prayers
and tears; and that which was his refuge, must be ours, and then we shall
have peace and safety: if once we can lay hand-fast on God, (as we may in
our houses, in our chambers, in our beds, in the night, or in the day) then our
case is good, we shall be protected from all the violent rage of the wicked;
so that none of the sons of violence shall be able to touch us for our hurt:
and therefore herein let us take comfort, that though men forsake us, and our
nearest friends reject us, yet the Lord will gather us up, Psalm. 27.
and provide sufficiently for us, as he did for David: neither can men's
persuasions withdraw his compassion from us, nor men's threatenings terrify him
from releeuing of us, For there is not a godly man left, etc.

From this lamentable complaint of his, arises this doctrine, that

No outward thing comes nearer the hearts of God children, Doct. 2. want of
good men much to be lamented.
then the decay of good men.

It much troubles the souls of godly men, to see a small number of
Christians. Hence proceeds that lamentation of the Prophet Micah: Woe is me,
for I am as the Summer gatherings, etc: Micah. 7. I. 2.
or, I am in case, as in the destruction of the Summer fruits: as in Hoseah it
is said, The fishes of the Sea shall be gathered: that is, destroyed: and that
this is the sense, Hos. 4. 3.
it appears in the words following, when it is said, There is no cluster to
eat: My soul desired the first ripe fruits: that is, I am as one that has a
fervent longing for them, and yet can get none of them; and what is the reason
of this his lamentation? The good man (says he) is perished out of the earth,
and there is none righteous among men, etc. So that the effect of those words
is thus much: that look how worldlings would grieve, if they should see their
grapes and figs (which were special commodities in those countries) to
fail, and their expectation that way to be utterly frustrate; so, and much
more bitterly did the Prophet bewail the loss of good and righteous men. That
was it also that did so pierce the heart of Elias, Lord (says he) the
children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, broken down thy Altars, 1.
Kings. 19. 11.
and slain thy Propeets with the sword, and I only am left, and they seek my
life, to take it away. Which loss of the Prophets was so grievous unto him,
that he had no pleasure in his own life; and therefore he entreats the
Lord to take away his soul. Verse 4.
In which regard when the Lord would comfort him, he uses a fit remedy for
his disease: for whereas his grief was that there were no godly men left, but
all were declined to Idolatry, he tells him that he had reserved to himself
seven thousand, Verse. 1^.
that had not bowed the knee unto Baal.

Yet further it may appear what a matter of heaviness the loss of good men
is unto those that are good themselves, by that speech of David, who says, All
my delight is in the Saints: for if they be his chief delight, Psalm. 16. 3.
then the want of them must needs be an occasion of very great anguish unto
him: as is evident that it was* Psalm. 42. 4. when he remembered how he had gone
with the multitude, Psalm. 42.
and had been as a Captain to lead them unto the house of God, which then he
could not do: this cast him into wonderful grief, so that he poured out his
tears, yea and his very heart, as he there speaks, being in such extremity
of sorrow, that he is feign to restrain himself, why art thou cast down my
soul (says he) and why art thou disquieted within me? etc: yet godly men were
not quite abolished at this time, but David, only taken from them: and he knew
that he should come again unto them at length, and that they should be his
flock: if then he were so far cast down for that he might not be with them,
what grief would he have conceived if they had utterly been cut off, and
ceased to be any longer?

Now the reasons why the decay of Gods people is and should be such an
heartbreaking unto the rest of the Saints, are these:

First, because the glory of God is precious unto them, Reasons.
which is much hindered and observed when his servants kingdom must needs be a
matter of grief to those that love and seek the honor of their King; then
can it not but go near the hearts of the godly, when they perceive the
soldiers and subjects of Christ to go to wrack.



the earth shall bring forth her increase, Psalm. 67. 5.
and God even our God shall bless us. If there be but ten righteous men and
women in a City, or some few in a whole Country, all the rest shall speed the
better for their sakes: how much more then if there be multitudes of them? What
a grief therefore must it needs be to the wise and godly, when these props and
pillars of the Church and Commonwealth are taken away?

Which serves,

First, Use. 1.
for the just reproof of those that do carry a deadly enmity against the
multitude of Christians that now are, and do much grieve that there should be
so many that resort unto the word in public, that read it in private, that
have prayer and singing of Psalms in their families, etc. they grudge and
murmur at it, as if some conspiracy or mutiny against the State were toward,
and as if the good of men's souls, and the peace of the commonwealth could not
stand together. These are of another spirit then David was, who lamented that
there were so few such: and these are indeed utter enemies unto God, who
esteems his people to be his chief treasure under heaven: and therefore they
shall bear their judgment, whosoever they be that do thus malice the
servants of God, and endeavor to pervert them, or to diminish the number of
them.

Secondly, Use. 2.
here is matter of comfort for the^ that are of the same disposition that
David was, that cry night and day, Help, Lord, for the godly perish, etc. and
that labor with God, by fasting, and weeping, and praying, that he would
uphold the state of his Church. If the prayer of David, being but one man, were
effectual for the continuing of Gods people, how much more forcible shall the
requests of many thousands be, who do incessantly entreat the Lord with great
earnestness to be favorable unto Sion, and to build up the walls of
Jerusalem, to save his chosen, and defend his own heritage against the
malicious plots and practices of all their enemies.

They speak deceitfully every one with his neighbor.]

Here he shows what manner of enemies were against him: not such as would
profess themselves open adversaries, (for though he had many such, yet here
he deals not against them) but such as would make show of good will, whereas
indeed there was in them nothing less, Now in that his chief complaint is
against them, the doctrine is, that

Deceitful friends are worse then open and apparent foes. Doct. 3. Fained
friends worse then open foes.


David had diverse professed enemies, as Saul, and such as were near him: yet
none of their practices went so near his heart, as these men's that would
pretend to be friendly unto him.

To this purpose it is said by Solomon, Prou. 27. 6.
that The wounds of a lover are faithful, and the kisses of an enemy are to
be prayed against: (for so the words must be read) When a faithful friend does
rebuke us, and seek to wound our hearts for sin, that is exceeding
profitable for us: but when an enemy under pretense of love (whereof by
kissing they then made show) does come against us, Judas, Matthew. 26. 49.
and seek to undermine us, that is exceeding dangerous, and the hurt there of
much to be prayed against.

The waters that run smoothly and mildly are commonly most deep and
dangerous, whereas that which roares is more shallow and safe.

The reasons of this doctrine are,

Reasons.
that such crafty foxes do more easily come within a man, and sooner deceive
him. An open enemy comes as it were before ones face, and so his blows may
be better warded off: but a false friend comes behind ones back, and
fasteneth a deadly blow ere a man be aware: and therefore Ioab, when he would
speed Abner and Amasa, did not bid open defiance unto them, but (being therein
more crafty and subtle, then either godly or manly) gave them kind
salutations, and, under pretense of love, most cruelly murdered them both. And
as it is for the outward man, so is it also for the soul. The most dangerous
temptations are those that proceed from fained friends under the color of
love, and desire of our good. If Satan had come unto Eve, and told her, I
charge you eat of the tree in the midst of the garden, and whatsoever the
danger be, stand not upon that, for I will have your husband and you to be
damned, she would never have hearkened unto him: but when he persuaded her,
that he was her friend, and meant her good, namely, that by eating thereof she
might be made like unto God himself, knowing both good and evil, then was she
overtaken by him, and so being overcome her self, she became the instrument of
the devil, to deceive her husband in like sort. And so it is with many, that
have held out well against raging and violent temptations, and yet have been
foulely drawn aside, and shamefully foiled by milder temptations, unto profit,
or pleasure, or credit.

Secondly, the false dealing of such counterfeit friends, David, where he
says, Surely mine enemy did not defame me, for I could have borne it, etc.
but it was thou o man, Psalm. 55. 12. 13
even my companion, my guide, and my familiar, etc. When his words were smooth,
and softer then butter, and yet proved deceitful, they went through his heart
even as swords: and this was just upon him, because he had dealt in that sort
with his faithful subject Vriah. seeming to favor him by employing him in
special services, when he went about to take away his life, that be might
cover his own iniquities.

First, Use. 1.
therefore let this instruct us to take another course: if we have inward
dislike, let us profess it: if we carry a loving affection, let us make show
of it, and love not in word alone, but in deed, as the Apostle exhorts.

Especially let us look unto this in matters betwixt God and us: let us not
play the hypocrites with him, pretending a love unto the Church of God, and to
the word of God, when there is no such matter; and drawing near unto him with
our lips, when our hearts are far from him: for in so doing we shall offer
great injury unto the Lord, and do more hurt at length then those that are
professed Papists or Atheists: for such as flatter with their lips, and dissemble
with a double heart in things that concern the holy religion of God, if any
persecution come, will quite renounce their profession, and betray the cause of
God, and grieve the servants of God, and harden the hearts, and open the
blasphemous mouths of the enemies of God, and make many to fall by their
reuolting and backsliding. Therefore let every one that takes upon him the
profession of Christianity, be a true, and not a fained friend of the same;
and bring a faithful, and not a guilefull heart thereunto; that the Lord may
witness for him, that he does heartily and unfeignedly seek him.

Secondly, let us hence learn this point of wisdom, Use. 2.
never to trust those too far, of whose faithfulness we have any just
suspicion: be they never so near unto us, let us not open our selves unto
them, but keep them at arms end. This is the advice of the holy Ghost: Let
eurey man take heed of his neighbor, and trust not any brother: (viz. that is
not sound hearted) for every brother will use deceit, Ier. 9. 4. 5.
and every friend will deal deceitfully, etc. for they have taught their
tongues to speak lies: they have exercised the trade of using fair words,
when there is within them nothing else but falsehood and deceit. And the like
exhortation we may read in the 7. of Micah.

Thirdly, this is for our consolation, Use. 3.
when we find such hollow hearted hypocrites and deceivers: we should not be
dismayed because there are so few whom we may trust and give credit unto, for
it is no strange matter: there have been such heretofore, and they have been
discovered: God has hearkened unto the prayers of his servants, and given them
wisdom to discern of them, and so will he do still, so that they shall
bring no annoyance unto his people, whatsoever they intend against them.

FINIS.
The fourth Sermon.
PSALM. 12. Ver. 3. 4. 3. The Lord cut off all flattering lips, and the
tongue that speaks proud things.

4. Which have said, with our tongue we will prevail: our lips are our own,
who is Lord over us?


IN the two former verses it set down the petition that David made unto God
for help, and his complaint that he put up concerning the decay of good and
righteous men, and the deceitfulnes of ungodly and unrighteous men.

Now in these verses is set forth an other part of his prayer, to wit, an
imprecation; The Lord cut off, etc: wherein he does by the spirit of
Prophecy, and according to the Analogy of faith, denounce judgment against
Gods and his enemies, to the end he might comfort himself, and refresh his
heart with hope that good men should be recovered, and wicked men confounded.
And as for this curse, we must understand that it is not uttered in bitterness,
but in zeal, and with warrant from Gods own spirit; and this is directed,

1. First against deceitful persons, who are called flatterers: the Lord cut
off the flattering lips.

2. Secondly, against proud persons, who are described:

1. In general by their speech, that they speak proud things, verse 3.

2 More particularly, that they say, with our tongue we will prevail. verse.
4. as if they should have said, look what we ask, we will obtain it: look
what we threaten, we will perform it: look what we set down, that shall
come to pass.

But it might be said unto them, you speak presumptuously, Object.
and utter words that do not beseem you.

They answer, Answer.
our tongues are our own: as if they should say, who dare be so audacious as
to control us? we will speak what we list, in despite of them all.

But some might say, though you set so light by men, Object.
you must know that there is one higher then you: what if the Lord should take
the matter into his hand?

To that they answer. Answer.
who is Lord over us? they think they may blaspheme God, and revile his
servants, and speak what they list, and yet none shall have to do with them
for it.

The Lord cut off all flattering lips.] whereby are understood, Verse 3.
the most dangerous and subtle deceivers, who under pretense of friendship,
do seek a man's utter overthrow.

Now in that the Prophet prays against such as do so cunningly carry their
matters, that they will appear to love, where they hate with a deadly hatred,
and in praying does show, not only what is his wish, but what is Gods purpose,
viz. that the Lord will cut off the flattering lips: hence this doctrine may be
gathered, that,

The more skillfully and artificially any coutriues his evil purposes, Doct.
1. The more cunning any is for mischief, the more fearful shall his mine be.
the more fearful destruction shall fall upon him.

The more fraudulent a deceiuer any one is, the more heavy shall the hand of
God be upon him, to cross and contrary him, and to bring him to such straits,
that he shall not for shame open his mouth again to speak as he has done:
and this is to have his tongue cut out, as it were, as is threatened in this
place.

Flatterers have a certain kind of dexterity in their enterprises, that they
will not be seen to be brochers of those things whereof they afterward become
practisers: but they speed never the better, but a great deal the worse for
that. Therefore does David conclude, Psalm. 52. 4. 5.
that God would certainly destroy Doeg, because he was a skillful worke-man,
and as it were a tradesman in mischief: he could flatter David, that he
wishes him well, and was sorry for his troubles, and would be ready to
befriend him in any thing he could: but when Saul complains how hardly he was
dealt with, in that no body would discover unto him the treacheries of David,
Deog changes his tune, and falls to accuse David, 1. Sam. 22. 8. 9. etc.
and most injuriously charge Abimelech to have conspired with him: and for
all this, he (no doubt) would have goodly pretenses: as, that duty bound him
to speak as he did: he respected the Kings honor and safety, and certainly
things were not well, but some mischief was a working; for he saw the son of
Ishai come unto Abimelech, who gave him a sword, and asked counsel of the Lord
for him, and ministered food unto him, and to those that were with him, and that
extraordinary food too, even the shewbread: in which regard, he, as a loyal
subject, must needs advertise Saul, to take heed, and to look well to
himself, that so he might prevent all imminent dangers.

So in the prophecy of Jeremy, Ier. 4. 22.
this is set down as one cause of the utter subversion of the Jews, that they
were wise to do evil, but had no knowledge to do well. They wanted not
ordinary capacity, (which had been one degree of happiness unto them, for
then God would have showed them greater compassion) but they wanted grace to
use it well, and had cunning heads to plot mischief, and therefore does the
Lord threaten judgment against them. And in another place he says, that they
had taught their tongues to speak lies. Ier. 9. 5.
And what follows? Therefore thus says the Lord of hosts, Behold, I will
melt them, etc. Shall not I visit them for this, says the Lord? Or shall not
my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Their tongues were too much
inclined to lies of their own accord, so that they needed not to be taught
that language: yet did they set their tongues to school, as it were, that they
might be artificial in their leaud practices, and carry out their lies under a
color of truth, and so sin with less disgrace: which was a thing that the
Lord could not abide, and therefore he threatens to plague them therefore.

And good reason is there that it should be so: Reasons.
for

Gentiles, or with the superstitious and malicious Jews, as they were when
they had to do with those that pretended to be Christians, to be Ministers of
the Gospel, yea to be Apostles: and therefore Paul expostulateth the matter
with the Galathians, saying, O foolish Galathians, Gal. 3.
who has bewitched you? etc. As if he should have said, No man could deal so
dangerously as these false Teachers, who have as it were charmed your
affections, and bewitched your minds. And in the Epistle to the Corinthians,
he greatly complains of such deceivers: I am jealous over you with a godly
jealousy: for I have prepared you for one husband, 2. Cor. 11. 2. 3.
to present you as a pure Virgin to Christ. But I fear lest as the Serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ. For such false Apostles are deceitful workers,
Verse. 13. 14. 15.
and transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ. And no marvel, for
Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light. Therefore it is no
great thing though his Ministers transform themselves, as though they were the
Ministers of righteousness. Paul had taken great pains to make a match betwixt
Christ and them, and to fit them for such a glorious husband: but he was much
afraid lest it would be broken, in regard of many of them, and that as the
Devil deceived Eve, so the false Apostles would deceive them, and that by
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, making show (as the Devil
does,) of the greatest love and care of their good, and of their eternal
salvation: when the truth was, they intended no such thing, but only the
serving of themselves, in their carnal credit and commodity.

Secondly, albeit such kind of persons do work

Thirdly, their hearts are maruellously hardened: for when they can fetch over
men according as they list,

Fourthly, Gods wisdom is much magnified by proceeding against such: they are
fit adversaries for him, who scatters the devices of the crafty, Job. 5. 12.
so that their hands cannot accomplish that which they enterprise, (as Job
speaks) and that takes the crafty in their craftiness, causing those that
are cunning hunters and fowlers, to fall into the pit that they have dug for
others, and to be ensnared in the works of their own hands; Psalm. 7. and 9.
so that when they go about to take others, it falls out by the righteous
and wise providence of God, that they are taken themselves.

Since it is so dangerous to have a crafty and cunning head, Use 1.
closely to plot and contriue mischief, let this admonish us to beware of that
vice: for assuredly, it will bring shame upon the favorers thereof. The wise
man says, Prou. 24. 8.
He that imagines to do evil, men shall call him an author of wickedness.
All men shall point at such a one, There goes a crafty fellow, a subtle Fox,
etc: so that the name of a vagrant is not more odious then his: every one has
such in detestation, even the most contemptible of the people: Do you see
yonder man? (will they say) he is a perilous fellow, able to set a thousand
together by the ears; If any have an evil cause, he is a man for his turn:
Let him make him his Soliciter, and he will go as far as devilish and
crafty wit can reach. And as it is a blemish to the name, so it is the bane of
ones estate to be a fraudulent dealer. The bread of deceit (says Solomon) is
sweet to a man, but afterterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel. Prou.
20. 17.
Howsoever deceitful persons do snatch here and there, and get much from
others, yet few of them thrive, but the curse of God lighting upon that which
they have, makes havoc of all. And therefore as we tender our estimation and
good estate in the world, let us beware of such practices.

Secondly, let us hence learn, not to be discouraged at crafty adversaries,
Use 2.
that have winding wits, and plotting heads, and flattering tongues, and
acceptance with great ones, even as they would wish: let us not be dismayed
heereat, but let this be our comfort, when they fawn, and flatter, and lie,
and traduce us most shamefully, that the Lord will cut off the lying lips.
Grant that we have not liberty or skill to encounter them, yet the Lord has:
There is no wisdom, Prou. 21. 30.
nor understanding, nor counsel against him: that is, none of these shall take
any effect against him: Psalm. 33. 10.
and therefore the Psalmist says, The Lord breaks the counsel of the
Heathen, and brings to naught the devices of the people. Though all the
wisdom of all the nations in the earth were laid together, yet God would
bring all their consultations to nothing if they made against him. When
Achitophel fell from David to take part with Absolon, it much troubled David,
for his words were as Oracles, and none could speak more in matters of policy
then he, and he knew all David's heart, and the state of the whole kingdom, and
therefore he turns himself unto God: O Lord (says he) I pray thee turn the
counsel of Achitophel into foolishness: and God heard his request, and did
so, insomuch that no creature could deal more foolishly for the procuring of
his own everlasting woe and shame, then he did in hanging himself.

The devil is still laboring to work mischief, and he wants not craft nor
subtlety, besides the experience that he has had from the beginning of the
world hitherunto: yet for all this, he has never been, nor shall be able to
procure the overthrow of one of Gods elect. The Church has been nothing the
worse, though he have been still warring against it. And why is this, but
because Gods wisdom is infinitely beyond all the subtilty of the devil? And
what cause have we then to fear crafty men, seeing their Captain has had no
better success, and seeing that the Lord has a quarrel against them as well
as against their head?

And the tongue that speaks proud things.]

In that the Prophet denounces judgment against such kind of persons, the
doctrine is, that

The more wicked men boast of their mischievous intents, Doct. 2. The wickeds
boasting, a forerunner of their ruin.
the nearer mischief is unto them.

When they brag most how well the world goes with them, and what hope they
have of effecting their badde purposes, some great evil is even at their
doors. When men boast in their talk, and swords are in their lips (as David
speaks) then the Lord will have them in derision, Psalm. 59 7. 8.
and laugh at their destruction. When they fall to bragging, God falls to
laughing: and when their swords are drawn out against others, the Lords hand
is stretched out against them. When Pharaoh in the pride of his heart said, Who
is the Lord? God made him know who he was. Exodus 15. 9.
And when the enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake them, (meaning the
Israelites) I will divide the spoil, etc: then the Lord set in against them,
and made the Sea to cover them, so that they sanke as lead in the mighty waters.

So when Saneherib insulted against God, 2. Kings. 18.
and against his people, and bragged what his forefathers and himself had
done, and what now he would do, if they would not yield up the City and
themselves into his hands, Chap. 19. 28.
then did the Lord put a hook into his nostrils, and a bridle into his lips,
and brought him back again the same way he came, and caused him to fall by
the hands of his own sons.

And the reasons why it must needs be so, Reasons.
are these:



This was David's comfort against Doeg: Psalm. 52. 1.
Why boastest thou thy self in thy wickedness, o man of power? (says he) The
loving kindness of God endures daily. If the stock of Gods goodness were all
spent, then his children had reason to hang down their heads: but seeing that
is, and will be as much still as ever it was, they need not fear the
insultations of their wicked adversaries.

Secondly, at such times Gods servants begin to look O Lord God the auenger! O
Lord God the auenger! show thy self clearly. And why are they so instant and
earnest with God? The reason is yielded, verse 4. The wicked prate and speak
fiercely: all the workers of iniquity vaunt themselves. As if they should say,
Lord, if ever thou will awake and stand up for our defense, now do it, when
ungodly men do so insult and triumph over us.

Thirdly, such proud persons do bid defiance to the All the proud [in heart]
are an abomination unto him. But if their pride appear in a more notorious
manner in their tongues, and in their behavior, they are much more hateful
unto him: for in making boast of their own hearts desire, they do contemn
the Lord; Psalm. 10.
and in speaking against the Church, Psalm. 73. 9.
they set their tongues against heaven it self, as the Prophet speaks.

Which point thus proved, ministers unto us,

First, Use. 1.
an use of instruction, that seeing the Lord is so incensed against proud
boasters, therefore we should contain our selves within the compass of
modesty, and never boast at all, but let others mouths, and our own works,
and Gods voice at the last day praise us, and not our own lips: but especially
let us take heed of vaunting our selves against the people of God, and against
the Majesty of God himself; for that will least of all be endured,

Secondy, here is an use of consolation against all the insultations of
malicious enemies: Use. 2.
if we can with patience and modesty endure, and stand it out for a while,
not returning like for like, nor using any sharpnes and bitterness against
them, we shall see that the Lord will cut them off. If a man had known the day
before, what should have befallen Haman, notwithstanding all his boasting of
his greatness, and of his honor, and of that favor which he had with the
King, and of all the evil that he intended against the Jews, and against
Mordecai especially; if (I say) a man had known before hand what should have
befallen him, would it not have made him laugh at his pride and folly? Yes
certainly: and yet the case of all boasters against Gods Church is little or
better then his. And if we could with the eye of faith behold Gods purpose
concerning their ruin and overthrow, all their bragging would seem unto us,
and it is indeed, even exceeding ridiculous. And this in particular should
comfort us against the blasphemies of the Church of Rome, and against all her
insultations over the Saints: for the Lord has set down her sentence: Revel.
18. 7. 8.
In as much as she gloried her self, so much give ye her torment and sorrow:
for she says in her heart, I sit being a Queen, and am no widow, and shall
see no mourning. But what says God? Therefore shall her plagues come at one
day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire, etc.

Verse 4. With our tongues we will prevail: our lips are our owne] In that
they are here found fault with for thus speaking, because they affirm that
which is directly contrary to the truth, the point hence to be observed is,
that

No man has the royalty of his own tongue, nor the ordering of his own
speech. Doct. 3. No man has the ordering of his own tongue.


Every man's tongue is in Gods hand, and his words at Gods disposing, he is
Lord over all men's, tongues; which will evidently appear by this, that

First, men cannot speak what they would, but what the Lord will, Reasons.
according to that of Solomon: The preparations Prou. 16. 1.
that is, a man determines and prepares what to utter: but the answer of the
tongue is of the Lord. As who should say, When a man has done so, yet he shall
speak, not what he himself intended, but what God has decreed; as is plain
in Balaam, who came with a purpose to curse, and if the Lord had permitted him,
he would have vomited out horrible imprecations against the Israelites; for
that would have made for his credit and commodity: Number. 23.
but notwithstanding his intent, the Lord made him to bless his people in
stead of cursing them. And so Saul, he would have all men know that David was a
Traitor, and therefore he pursued him, to bereave him of his life: yet when he
met with him, he had no power so much as to rate him, or to rebuke him; but on
the contrary part, is driven to justify him: O my son David (says he) thou
art more righteous then I. And this we may observe in our own experience, that
oftentimes men, contrary to their minds, do utter things which do
exceedingly grieve them, and bury other things in silence, the speaking whereof
might have been very behoouefull unto them: whence do arise these and the like
speeches, How was I ouerseene in that which I said? What an aduntage did I lose
at such a time? which does plainly prove, that God has the disposing of men's
tongues.

Secondly, God has given Laws for the tongue, how Ephesians. 4.
that men should not speak blasphemously, nor filthily, nor bitterly: whence
it may be concluded, that it is Gods subject; for Princes make statutes for
none but for their own subjects.

Thirdly, the success and event of men's speeches is With our tongues we will
prevail; yet do they not prevail: for whereas they forespeake others
destruction, the wise man says, A fools mouth is his own destruction. And
whereas they say triumphingly, Prou. 18. 7. Micah. 4. 11. 12. 13.
Sion shall be condemned, and our eye shall look upon Sion, they know not the
Lords counsel, to wit, that they themselves shall be gathered as sheaues into
the barn* to be threshed and beaten in pieces by Gods people.

Mat. 12. 36. 37
By thy words thou shall be justified, (says our Savior) and by thy words
thou shall be condemned: And, We must render an account for every idle word:
which evidently shows, that God has the sovereignty of men's tongues.

Now seeing that the Lord has the government thereof, this serves

First, to teach us, that therefore we should crave assistance Use 1.
from him for the well ordering of the same. Even as that holy Prophet does,
where he says, Set a watch o Lord before my mouth, and keep the door of my
lips: God will have the ordering of them by his providence, Psalm. 141. 3.
whether we will or not: but by his grace he will not guide them, unless we sue
unto him in that behalf: therefore let us beseech him so to sanctify and
purify our hearts, that out of the abundance thereof, our tongues may speak
unto his praise, and to our own, and others edification.

Secondly, Use 2
that we should not be afraid of performing any good duty, in regard of men's
tongues; for though they threaten, and rail, and slander, and traduce us, yet
they shall not hurt us, for God will hide us from the scourge of the tongue,
Job. 5. 27. Isa. 45. 16. 17.
so that no such weapons shall prevail against us: for the Lord made the
tongue, and the men themselves that speak therewith; and there is no voice,
nor sound that proceeds out of the mouth, but the Lord has the ordering
thereof: and therefore let us sue unto him, as the Apostles did, saying, O Lord
behold their threatenings, Act. 4. 29.
behold their reuilings, and do thou judge betwixt us and them: and thou which
have the disposing of all men's tongues, preserve thy servants from the hurt
that may befall us through the same.

The end of the fourth Sermon.
A BRIEF TRACT CONCERNING ZEAL, wherein the properties of true Zeal are
described, and the contrary discovered,
Godly zeal is a virtue very requisite and necessary for all Christans: not
so rare and seldom found: as precious and useful where it is found; as being
the very life and soul of sound Christianity, and one of the principal
Fountains and Well-heads, whence many other virtues of the spirit do spring
and issue forth.

The excellency of this grace does appear, as by many other arguments, so
by this, that the Saints are thereby described; where they are said to be a
people [zealous of good works:] this is the end of their redemption, Titus 2.
14.
and this is one special effect and mark of their justification, that they
do not only desist from their former evil works, and fall to the practice
of the contrary good works, but that they are zealous, both to do them, and
in the doing of them: they shake off the sluggishnesse of the flesh, and strive
for the feruencie of the spirit, Romans 12. 1^.
in all duties that they owe either unto God or men.

For this virtue, amongst many others, are the penitent Corinthians commended:
2. Cor. 7. 11.
Behold this, that ye have been godly sorrowful, (says Paul) what zeal it
has wrought in you! etc. Till such time as the Apostle had rebuked them by an
Epistle, they were either not at all, or very slightly touched with the sense
of their own sins, and therefore they set light by the offenses of others,
insomuch that when abominable incest (such as had not been heard of amongst
the Gentiles) was committed among them, yet they took it not to heart, nor at
all mourned for it, 1. Cor. 5. 1. 2.
nay they let the offender go uncensured, who should have been (as afterward
he was) excommunicated, and delivered up unto Satan, for the healing of his
own soul, the preventing of the like sins in others, and the stopping of
the mouths of wicked blasphemers, who would be ready hereupon to speak
evil of the holy name of God, and of the professors and profession of
Christianity. Thus cold and careless were they, till the Apostle had sharply
reproved them: but after that they had well disgested his speeches, and
thoroughly considered of all matters, they fell to lament for their own
corruptions, and for the transgressions of others, and were zealous against all
wickedness, and for all manner of goodness in themselves and others. This was
the effect of holy grief in them, and this will be found in all that attain
to that repentance which is unto life: in which regard, when the Lord would
work a cure upon the lukewarm Laodicians, Reu. 3. 19.
he bids them, be zealous, and amend. That was their sin, that they were
key-cold, and even frozen in the dregs of security, exercising themselves in
sundry good duties (for that must needs be, because they were a Church) but
never regarding with what love unto God or men they performed the same:
therefore the Lord urging them to reformation, wills them [ to be zealous,
and amend] implying, that these two ever go hand in hand, to wit, sound
repentance, and godly zeal: yet so, that as every one is of greater growth in
the body of Christ, so this grace is of greater strength in him: as is evident
in David, who speaks thus of himself (and that by the inspiration of Gods
holy spirit, Psalm. 119. 139.
and therefore cannot but speak truly) My zeal has even consumed me,
because mine enemies have forgotten thy word. Weaker Christians have some good
motions of grief for men's offances: but the Prophet was exceedingly wrought
upon by his zeal, so that it did even spend him, and consume him, in regard of
the fearful breach of Gods commandments, which he observed in his very
enemies. And the like we find in another place: Psalm. 69. 9.
The zeal of thine house has eaten me: and the rebukes of them that rebuked
thee are fallen upon me. Thus was the holy man of God touched, yea tormented
with the things whereby Gods glory was impaired, as if he had been laden
himself with reproaches and disgraces.

But most admirable was the zeal of Moses and Paul, Exodus 32. 32. Romans 9. 3.
who for that fervent desire that they had of advancing Gods glory, could have
been content to have had their names put out of the book of life, and to be
separated from the Lord, so that his great name might be magnified in sparing
and saving their brethren the Israelites.

Now because our hearts may easily deceive us in this matter of zeal, either
by persuading us that we have it, when we are far from it; or that we
altogether want it, when in some good measure we have attained unto it:
therefore will it not be amiss to set down some rules, whereby we may try
whether our zeal be current or counterfeit.

First, Rules of true zeal.
therefore touching the matter about which this holy zeal is to be exercised,
it must be good: according to the saying of the Apostle: It is good always to
be zealous in [a good matter:] The matter must be good.
and it was before showed, that Gods people must be zealous of [good works:]
otherwise, Gal. 4. 18.
if the matter be evil, the more earnest any is, the more sinful: neither is
such earnestness worthy the name of zeal, being nothing else but a devilish
and fleshly heat, or rather a kind of frenzy and madness. Such was the
zeal of Idolaters that would mangle and cut themselves, and that would offer
their children in the fire in honor unto their gods. Such was the zeal of the
Scribes and Pharisees, 1. King. 18. 28 Ier. 7. 31.
who would compass sea and land to make one a Proselite: that is, one of their
own sect.

With this violent and mad zeal was Paul carried before his conversion (as he
himself confesses in plain terms, Acts. 26. 11. and Phil. 3. 6.) when he
was enraged against Christians, and spared no pains nor cost to make them
deny and blaspheme the name of Christ.

Here then is to be condemned the zeal of ignorant Papists and Brownists, and
such like, who are very hot indeed (for he must needs run whom the devil
drives) but in evil causes, as might easily be proved, and may hence, if by
no other arguments, be probably concluded, in that they use the devils own
weapons (to wit, lying, standering, railing, cursed speaking, and the like) in
the pursuit of the same.

But much more damnable and vile is their zeal to be esteemed, who against
their knowledge and consciences, do violently and maliciously oppose
themselves against the Gospel, and the professors thereof, and stand for
falsehood and wickedness, and the practisers thereof: as did those wretched
Pharisees that set themselves against our Savior, and committed the sin against
the holy Ghost. We must know the thing to be good for which we are zealous.


A second rule is, that as the matter in which we are zealous, must be good in
it self, so it must be known unto us to be of that quality. True zeal must
begin where the word begins, Romans 14. 23.
and end where it ends: for otherwise it cannot be of faith, which is ever
grounded on the word; and whatsoever is not of faith is sin. We must not
therefore content our selves with an honest meaning, and hope that we have a
good zeal toward God, when we have no warrant for our hope: but must so
acquaint our selves with the Scriptures of God, Romans 10. 2.
that our zeal may be according to knowledge.

Which rule discovers the corruptnes of their zeal, whether close
hypocrites, or weak Christians, who are led on merely by the examples of good
men, whom they affect, much to like of, and earnestly to stand fot such
things, as they perceive them in their practice to observe, and to make
conscience of: and if there be but a word spoken against any of the things that
they have taken a liking of, they are maruellously stirred with indignation
thereat, and grow passionate and vehement against the parties, though they have
never so good a meaning in that which they speak: Yet let them be urged to
prove out of the word the necessity of those duties which they so earnestly
press, they can say little or nothing to the purpose for them; and so grow
many times either to dislike and forsake all if they be hypocrites, or at
least to be discouraged, and to be at a stand, if they be weaklings in Christ
Jesus. And whence proceed these inconveniences but from this, that they are
zealous for things that in themselves, and unto others are good and holy, but
not thoroughly discerned of them to be of that nature: the consideration
whereof, should make us to sit sure in matters of godliness, not building upon
the example of good men, but upon the truth of the good word of God, and then
our foundation shall never fail us.

A third property of true zeal is, that it begins Zeal must begin at home.
and after proceeds unto others: for never can that man be truly zealous to
others, which never knew to be zealous to himself. Those are the most skillful
Physicians and best able to deal with others, that have first wrought a cure
upon their own souls. Therefore our Saviors advice is, Luke. 6. 42.
Cast out the beam out of thine own eye first, and then shall thou see
perfectly to pull out the moate that is in thy brothers eye. We must then first
of all judge our selves, and cast the first stone at our selves, that so
finding how ugly and noisome a thing sin is, and that by experience in our
selves, we may be at defiance with it, wheresoever we find it, and neither
flatter others in their evil courses, nor yet too rigorously and unmercifully
rebuke them for the same. Those that have been pinched with sickness and are
recovered, can by the smart which they have felt, pity others in the like
case: even so they which have been stung with sin themselves, can more
easily be moved to show compassion toward poor sinners like themselves,
because by the feeling of misery, men learn the practice of mercy, Heb. 2. 17.
18.
in that Christ suffered and was tempted, he is able to pity and to succor
those that are tempted.

Against this rule do all hypocrites offend, who will wade very deeply into
other men's souls, and very bloodily gore other men's consciences, who yet never
once purged their own unclean sincks at home, nor drew one drop of blood out
of their own corrupt hearts. Such were the Pharisees, who pleased themselves
much in judging and censuring our Savior and his Disciples; Luke 16. 15. and
18. 9.
but were so far from condemning themselves as faulty in any thing, that
they justified themselves before God and men. Such also are the Brownists,
which are ready to burst their bowels with crying out against disorders
abroad, and yet never reform their own souls at home: for if they did, they
would also reform their lives and their families. But what kind of zeal these
men's is, wosull and late experience still cries in our ears: for many of
them being so zealous to others, but only through some secret love of the
world, when they had that which they sought for, made known their hollow and
their rotten zeal, in that without grief of conscience, they could suddenly
rush into a profound worldliness: and without all godly sorrow, could (after
they had satisfied their greedy and fleshly zeal) not only more hardly
sear up their own consciences, but also be so changed, that they could sow
up their lips, and spare their words from speaking in like manner again to
others, and so are neither zealous to themselves nor others.

Here also are all such to be censured as faulty, that can pry and make a
privy search into the wants of others, accounting the same wants no wants in
themselves. The father says, this my child does amiss: and the child, in
this my father fails: the husband knows, what the wife should do; and the
wife, what the husband should do, etc: every one in the mean time neglecting
their own duties; whereas indeed every ones principal care should be, to
know and do his own duty, and to be grieved where he comes short of the
same. And thus much for the third rule, that true zeal must begin in our
selves.

Now further we are to understand, that there must be We must make greatest
account of the weightiest matters.
that first and especially we make conscience of the principal matters of
the word, and after of the lesser, as our Savior tells the Scribes and
Pharisees: These things ought ye to have done, Matthew. 23. 23.
(that is, the weightier matters of the Law) and not to have left the other
undone: viz. matters of smaller importance.

Which shows, that their zeal is very corrupt and faulty, who as our Savior
says, strain out a Gnat, and swallow a Camel; who are very hot about matters
of ceremony, but altogether cold in matters of substance: as also theirs that
(on the other side) will cry out against them that rob by the highways side,
and yet they themselves make no conscience of pilfring, and cosoning, and
secret defrauding of their neighbors: as if small sins were not to be left
as well as great.

Another rule of true zeal is, that we look as carefully We must look to the
inside, as well as to the outside,
Clease thy heart, o Jerusalem, etc: how long shall thy evil thoughts remain
within thee? Ier. 4. 14.
And again, Purge your hands, ye sinners, and [your hearts] ye hypocrites.
Iam. 4. 8.


Which serves to overthrow the hypocrisy of such Pharisees, as make clean the
utter side of the cup and platter, but within are full of bribery and
excess, Matthew. 23.
of pride, disdain, self-love, and hatred.

Now that we may the better try our selves by this rule, two things are to be
observed,

I. That we fear to commit any sin secretly, and when we are alone, as
well as when we are in the presence of men. So did Job, and so did Joseph: and
this moved them so to do, Ioh. 31.
even that the Lord did behold them, Genesis 39.
and could punish them for secret, as well as for open offenses.

Which condemns them of gross dissimulation, that are loath to be accounted
ill, and yet make no conscience to be ill. What is this, but to be painted
sepulchers, that are fair to look upon, but within full of rotten bones? We
may deceive men, Matthew. 23.
but God is not deceined: and therefore let us beware of this hypocrisy: and
so much the rather, because the Lord has fearfully discovered and plagued
them, that in outward show have borne a great countenance of religion, and yet
have lived in secret filthiness, and other vile sins, which in time have
come to light to their shame and ruin.

and maintain continual war against them, as Paul did, Romans 7. and this we
should the rather do, because it is a fearful, and yet an usual judgment
of God, and that upon many professors, that making no conscience of
entertaining wretched lusts and vile affections secretly, they have broken
forth to the committing of the gross actions, and so have shamed themselves
publicly. And this is a just stroke upon those that would rather seem to be,
then in truth desire to be godly, that making no conscience of their thoughts
and inward desires, they should in time be so given up, as to make no
conscience of their words or deeds.

The sixth rule is, that we be more strict unto our We must be more strict to
our selves then to others.
and more severe against our selves, then against others, giving more liberty
unto them, then we will take unto our selves. And first concerning seuerite
unto our selves, such ought to be our acquaintance with our inward and outward
corruptions, and so grievous ought they to be in our eyes, that our heat being
spent upon our selves, we may think the sins of others more tolerable, and
so learn by the sight and sense of our own sores, to deal more mildely and
meekely with others, Titus. 3. 1.
whose corruptions (either for greatness or multitude) we cannot so thoroughly see
as we may our own.

Secondly, as we must deal most sharply against our selves, so must we be
ready to give more outward liberty unto others then to our selves. And for
this we have the example of Abraham, who was so strict to himself, that he
would not take of the King of Sodom so much as a thread or latchet, Genesis 14.
23. 24.
and yet he would not deny Aner, Escol and Mamre, their liberty. So Job, as he
would not permit to himself, Job. 1.
so neither would he deny to his children their liberty of feasting. But
especially the example of Paul is notable for the confirmation of this point:
for seeing that in some places he could not so conveniently live of other men's
charges, as at Corinth and Thessalonica, 1. Cor. 4. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
he would labor with his own hands, rather then be chargeable to any of them:
yet he would not that all men should be tied by his example to do the like:
and therefore he labors much in his Epistles about this, 1. Cor. 9. 1. Tim.
5. 18.
that Ministers ought to be provided for: so strict was he to himself; such
liberty left he unto others.

Whence we may easily perceive, that it is rather a Pharisaicall pride, then
any Christian zeal, to be too tetricall and rough in urging men so far, that
whosoever in every point is not so strict and precise as our selves, we cast
them off as dogs and profane persons, and such as are unworthy of any
account or countenance.

Zeal condemns sin in friends as well as in foes.
but to discern and condemn sin, even in those that are nearest and dearest
unto us. That was it that made Christ so sharply to rebuke Peter, Mat. 16. 23.
and Paul to deal so roundly with the Galathians and Corinthians. Gal. 3. 1.
1. Cor.


Many offend against this rule, who will never reprove sin in their friends,
till God revenge it from heaven; wherein they are far from true friendship:
for whereas they might by admonishing them of their faults in time, prevent the
judgments of God, they do, through a false love, pull the wrath of God upon
them whom they love most dearly. He loves most naturally, that has learned
to love spiritually: and he loves most sincerely, that cannot abide sin in
the party beloved, without some wholesome admonition.

But do not many now adays seem zealoussie to mislike sin in strangers,
who can wink at the same fault in their kindred, in their wives, in their
children, in their parents? as if the diversity of persons could change the
nature of the sin. This blind zeal God has punished, and does punish his
children. Isaac did carnally love his son Esau for meat, and for a piece of
venison. Genesis 25. 28.
David was too much affected to Absalon and to Adoniah for their comely
personage, so as his zeal was hindered in discerning sin aright in them. Now
Jacob was not so dear to Isaac, and Solomon was more hardly set to school,
and made to take pains: but behold, God loving Jacob, and refusing Esau,
(howsoever Isaac loved Esau better then Jacob) made Esau more troublesome, and
Jacob more comfortable unto him. Absalon and Adoniah, brought up like Cocknies,
became corasiues to David's heart: Solomon more restrained and better
instructed, was his joy, his crown, his successor in his kingdom. This
disease is so hereditary to many parents, loving their children in the flesh,
rather then in the spirit, that the holy Ghost is feign to call upon them more
vehemently, to teach, to instruct, and to correct, as knowing how easily nature
would cool zeal in this kind of duty. Indeed many will set by their wives,
children, and kinsfolks, if they be thriftie, like to become good husbands,
witty and politic, or if they be such as for their gifts can bring some
revenue to their stock, or afford some profit unto them; how deep sinners
soever they be against God, that makes no matter, it little grieueth them:
whereby they bewray their great corruption, that they are neither zealous in
truth of Gods glory, nor lovers aright of their children, because they can be
sharp enough in reprehension if they fail but a little in thriftinesse, and
yet are too too cold in admonition, if they fail never so much in godliness.

Well, let these fleshly zealous men lay to their heart the blind affection of
Heli, 1. Sam. 2. and 3. and 4.
who being the dear child of God, was severely punished of the Lord, for that
he was not zealously affected to punish the gross and foul offenses of his
children: but blessed are they that can forget their own cause, and even with
ieopardie of nature can defend the quarrel of God, laboring henceforth to
know no man after the flesh, nor suffering any outward league so to bleare and
dazzle their eyes, as that they should not epsy sin in their dearest friends
to reform it, or that they should not discern virtue in the greatest aliens
to reverence it.

Zeal opposes itself against the sins of the mighty.
or gainsaying them, cannot prevail against them, here comes another
property of zeal to be spoken of, and that is, that it fears not the face of
the mighty, neither is it dismayed at the looks of the proud and lofty, Such
was the courage of Job, who besides that he made the young men ashamed of their
liberty, and afraid of his gravity, made even the Princes also to stay their
talk, Job. 29. 8. 9.
and to lay their hands on their mouths. And yet here we must beware of their
hasty zeal, who will not stick to charge the children of God to be without
zeal, if presently and abruptly they rush not into an open reprehension of men
that are mighty in authority, as though no regard of time, place, or persons
were to be had: which opinion many by weakness of judgment defending, find
neither fruit in others, nor comfort in their own consciences, when they do
admonish in that presumptuous manner: for that hunting after feruentnesse
without the spirit of meekness, and casting off all consideration of a godly
opportunity, they rather exasperate then humble the parties admonished: and
they themselves rather depart with confusion and shame, for such posting on
without warrant of wisdom, then with comfort of heart for any duty done,
Neither am I here ignorant how great danger of trouble of mind comes to
many, in that they, being so curious obseruers and waiters of opportunity, do
for some ease of the flesh, under the cloak of this wisdom, altogether leave
off that godly duty. Wherefore, as we affirm that wisdom and love mixed
together do deeply enter into the most prefract and prodigious spirits; so we
mislike their fearful delay of duty, who having a mean occasion offered them
from the Lord, do not zealously and earnestly rebuke sin, though in some
higher personages.

Out of this may issue another frutit of holy zeal, namely when we are zealous
in their behalf who can never recompense us again, and that in defending
their right against oppressors that are craftier and mightier then they. Thus
Job delivered the poor that cried, Job. 29. 12.
the fatherless and him that had none to help him. He was the eyes to the
blind, and feet to the lame, at whose hands no reward was to be looked for.

Another most excellent and glorious property of Compassion to be joined with
zeal.
to be humbled in our selves for those sins which we epsy and censure in
others, and so to nourish an holy compassion toward them.

Here is an excellent and infallible difference between godly zeal and
fleshly heat, viz when our anger for our brothers falling does not feed it self
upon the party, because of our wrath, but upon his sin, because of our zeal;
we still retaining a tender affection toward the person of the offender. When
our Savior Christ went about to heal the man that had the withered hand, the
Pharisees that stood by murmured, because he would heal on the Sabbath day:
hereupon it is said, that he looked about him angerlie, and yet it is added,
that he sorrowed for the hardness of their hearts. Mark here in this notable
example, Mark. 3. 5.
how anger and sorrow meet together: Anger, that men should have so little
knowledge of God, and love of there brother: sorrow, that through ignorance they
were so foulie ouerseene. Matthew. 23. 37.
So likewise in zeal of his father, Luke 19. 41. 42.
Christ looked on Jerusalem, with an hatred to their sin, and yet with pity
of their misery which was at hand, which appears in that he wept over it.

Mark this in all the Prophets from time to time, as in Isay, Jeremy,
Ezekiel, Daniel, etc: whether they did not utter their message in heaviness of
spirit: and when they most threatened the people for their sins, observe if
they were not most grieved and feared, least they should be executed upon them.
This is a blessed temperature, thus to mingle grief with zeal: but that is an
ouer-reaching zeal, that feeds more on the person then on the sin.

Wherefore we must crave this special grace at the hand of God by prayer, to
be governed by a right zeal, and that we may truly discern the difference
between fretting anger, and pining zeal. Which if all sorts of men would
labor for, receiving this rule in judgment, and observing it in practice, it
would breed a great deal more conscience in ministers, magistrates, and
masters, when they are to admonish their inferiors. Alas we see many, who
can mangle and martyr a man for some offense, who never learned for conscience
sake to mourn for those in firmities, which so bitterly they inueigh against
in others. The Apostle Paul was of another temper: 2. Cor. 12. 21. 1. Cor. 4.
I fear (says he) to the Corinthians, left when I come, my God abase me
among you, and I shall bewail many of them, which have sinned already, etc: he
knew nothing by himself, (as he tells them in another place) yet could he
not but lament and be humbled for their offenses, who were a part of his
Apostolic charge. So Samuel, in the zeal of Gods glory, spares not flatly to
tell Saul of his sin, notwithstanding his great authority: and yet in love
and compassion to his person, 1. Sam. 15. 35.
he was always bent to lament Saul's case, and earnestly to pray for him, till
the Lord forbad him to do so any longer, 1. Sam. 16. 1.

If we could keep this golden mixture, we should stop the mouths of the
adversaries, who accuse us to be full of rancour and malice, if we be angry
as enemies to their sin, but grieved in that for sin they are become
enemies to God.

Further, we must know, that true zeal makes us as True zeal makes men
desirous of admonition.
as careful to admonish: and that not only of our superiors, which is an
easy thing, because there we must of necessity yield: but also of our
inferiors, whom we may seem to contemn. All men will grant, that a child
ought willingly to be admonished of his father, or a servant of his master:
but few will in practice give this, that a father should listen to the
advertisement of his son, or that a master should receive an admonition of
his servant. Howbeit Job says, he durst not contemn the judgment of his
servant or of his maid, when they did contend with him, because in a duty of
piety, he looked to them, Job. 30. 13.
not as servants, but as brethren; he looked not to the speaker only, which in
respect of his calling was his inferior, but unto the things spoken in the
ordinance of God, unto whom Job himself was an inferior, and before whom he
knew there was no respect of persons.

Howbeit to correct the preposterous boldness of some, we add thus much,
that inferiors must rather advise than admonish: advertise rather then
reprehend their superiors, that so still they may offer their pure zeal of
the glory of God in unfeigned humility, left through their corrupt zeal, they
do not only not profit their superiors, but most justly exasperate them
against them.

Another rule is, that in pure zeal we be patient in We must be most fervent
in Gods causes
but hot and fervent in Gods causes. Many can be as hot as fire in their
own private matters, who are as cold as ice in things that concern Gods
honor and glory.

But it was otherwise with Moses: When any private wrong was offered unto him
by the Israelites, he was meek as a lamb, and would with wisdom speak
mildly unto them to pacify them, and pray earnestly unto God to pardon them:
but when they fell to Idolatry, and worshipped the golden calfe, Exodus 32. 19.
20.
(a matter which nearly concerned the glory of God) his wrath waxed hot, and
he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them in pieces, and burnt the
calfe in the fire, and ground it to powder, and made them drink of it, being
strewed upon the water; and after caused a great number of the principal doers
in this wickedness to be slain by the sword. This also is the commendation of
the Church of Ephesus, that they had much patience, and yet could not forbear
those which were evil, Revel. 2. 2.
but examined them which said they were Apostles, and found them liars.

This rule well observed, would sow up the lips of the adversaries, who though
for a time they think us to be cholloricke, and men out of our wits, madly
revenging our private affections, yet one day they should confess, that we
sought not our own commodity, but Gods most precious glory.

And to stretch this examination of our hearts one degree further, let us
beware of that corruption, which, springing from self-love, will give us leave
to rejoice in good things, so long as they be in our selves, but repineth at
the sight of them in others: which will permit us to be grieved at evil things
in our selves, and yet make us to rejoice to see the same in others.

True zeal (having Gods glory for the object thereof) loves good wheresoever,
and in whomsoever it is: true zeal hates sin wheresoever and in whomsoever.
True zeal loves friends as they be Gods friends: true zeal hates
adversaries, so far as they be Gods adversaries: true zeal loves a good
thing in the most professed enemy: true zeal hates sin in the most assured
friend.

If we be persuaded that our enemies be Gods children, howsoever we disagree
in some particulars, yet we must swallow up many private injuries, and more
rejoice in them as they be Gods servants, then be grieved at them, as they have
iniuried us.

Indeed true Zeal is most grieved at the sins of the godly, because so much
are their sins more grievous then the sins of others, by how much they came
nearer to the image of God then others.

The last rule is, that we keep a tenor of zeal in Zeal must be constant
in all estates.
to wit, of prosperity and adversity. We must especially look to that
whereunto we are most ready, that is, whether we be more zealous in
prosperity, and fall away in adversity; or whether we be more fervent in
affliction, and ouer-whelmed in abundance: whether by the one we are not puffed
up with security and secret pride, and whether by the other we be not too
far abased and discouraged; or, which is worst of all, quite driven out of
the way: for many in time of peace are religious, who seeing persecution to
follow the Gospel, begin (like those that are compared to stony ground) to
step back, Luke. 8. 13.
and at last utterly to renounce their former profession.

Others so long as they may have credit by embracing the Gospel, will seem to
go far; but when discredit comes, they forsake all: contrary to the
practice of David, who says, The bands of the wicked have robbed me, yet
have I not forgotten thy Law. Psalm. 119. 61. Verse. 161.


And again,

Princes did persecute me without cause, but mine heart stood in awe of thy
Word. Verse 141.


And for disgrace he says,

I am small and despised yet do I not forget thy Word. Verse. 141.


Others on the contrary part, so long as God exercises them with any cross,
are zealous professors, who being set aloft, and coming once unto promotion,
begin to grow secure and careless of all duties toward God or men, as is to
be seen in the lsraelites from time to time.

We see many in time of their misery to he much humbled; Psalm 63. 34. etc.
and whiles they want livings and preferments, we see both Preachers and people
in outward appearance very godly, Judges.
who having obtained that which they sought for, have their zeal utterly
choked.

Do not many pray for the continuance of the peace of the Gospel, that they
themselves might continue in peace and prosperity? Do not many mourn in the
adversity of the Gospel, because they are grieved for their own adversity!
Oh great corruption of our hearts! Oh bottomless pit of hypocrisy! If we were
ashamed that we are no more grounded on the word, and that we can be no nore
holy and upright in our hearts, surely the Lord will so govern us; that he
would not suffer either prosperity to quench our zeal, or adversity to
discourage our hearts.

This is then our trial herein, if when we are in greatest prosperity, we can
mourn with them that mourn in the Lord; and when we are in greatest
adversity, we can rejoice with them that rejoice in Christ.

This is a sure token we love not the Gospel, nor favor the word, because
we have a love to prosperity, neither are zealous to see the word contemned,
because we have an hatred of adversity. Daniel concerning outward things was
an happy man, as being near to the Crown: and yet when he saw the God of
Isreal's glory to be defaced, and his servants and services to be trodden under
foot, he could content himself with nothing so much, as with fasting,
weeping, and prayer. Dan. 9.


And Paul on the other side being in bonds for the testimony of Jesus Christ,
and concerning his outward man in a miserable case, rejoiced greatly, and was
as it were revived when he heard that the Gospel flourished, and that the
faith and love of the Saints was still continued. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 6. 7. 8.
This zeal should we much labor for, that in all estates we might be rightly
affected toward God and men.

FINIS.

