THREE GODLY AND FRUITFUL SERMONS; The two first preached by Master JOHN DOD:
the last by Master ROBERT CLEAVER.

Whereunto are annexed, five Propositions, or points of doctrine, comprehended
in three other Sermons, by the same Author.

Engraving of man with trees Tam Robvr. Tam Robor. In-Colis Arbor Iovis. 1610.



LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM WELBY, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the white Swan. 1610.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Master Erasmus Dryden Esquier, grace, and peace be
multiplied.
SIR, it is a point well known unto your Worship, that in duties of absolute
necessity we must regard what God does command and enjoin, not what men do
approve and like of: and that we must still offer up our service in obedience
to the Almighty, whatsoever men do think or speak of us. As for this work of
publishing the labors of such faithful and painful Ministers, as desire
rather to spend their time in preaching, than in writing, I take it not to be a
duty of that kind: but of an inferior nature; wherein the acceptance or
disallowance of those that are godly wise, should have a great stroke, either
for encouragement to proceed in it, or for discouragement to desist from it
Herein having made some trial, I have (through Gods blessing) found success
beyond my expectation: which as it ministers unto me matter of much rejoicing,
in regard there are many thousands in Israel, who desire and embrace the
sincere and plain doctrine of the Gospel; so does it set an edge on my
desires to take up some vacant hours in this employment: being right glad, if
by any means I may be an helper to the truth, and an instrument of refreshing
hunger-bittensoules, by conueying unto them some baskets full of such
fragments, as may be communicated without any detriment or disadvantage to my
self, or to any else. These Sermons I have made bold to recommend unto your
favorable acceptance and patronage, not only in regard of the interest which
you have in them, and that encouragement which I have often received from your
Worship in businesses of this nature; but also because I persuade my self that
your very countenancing of them, will add, though not unto their goodness, yet
unto their good esteem, among many that are religiously affected.

I have annexed unto these Sermons, certain select points of doctrine, without
any special texts of Scripture prefixed thereunto: and that because I found
the rest of the doctrines that were delivered with those, either very briefly
handled, and so unfit to be printed, or else treated of in some of the Sermons
already extant. And thus nothing doubting of your Worships favor in taking in
good worth this my bold attempt, I leave you to the safe tuition of God
almighty, beseeching him to enrich you and yours with all manner of corporal
and spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus; and to add unto your life, as also
unto the life of your faithful and gracious yoake-fellow, many happy and
comfortable days.

Your Worships much indebted, and in what I may, to be commanded, JOHN WINSTON.

The doctrines of the first Sermon on ZECHARY 12. 10.
Doct. 1. THe way to all happiness, is, to have the Spirit of grace. 2 None
can make a faithful prayer without the assistance of Gods Spirit. 3 The Spirit
of prayer does always lead men unto Christ Jesus. 4 The due consideration of
Christ his death, is a forcible means to affect the heart with godly sorrow. 5
It is not sufficient to mourn for sin, but we must make our sins to be our
greatest sorrow. 6 It is not enough for men to be religious themselves, but
their families also must be religious. 7 Holy duties must be performed in
secret as well as in public.
The doctrines of the second Sermon on LVKE 6. 48.
Doct. 1. Hypocrites may go as far as Christians in many things. 2 They are
the blessedest hearers of the word that are the best practizers thereof. 3
Every man is in truth that out of temptation, which he shows himself to be
in temptation. 4 Of all falls, the fall from religion is the most woeful,
The doctrines of the Sermon on PSALM 14. 5.
Doct. 1 They that are most bold in committing of sin, are most cowardly when
dangers do approach. 2 God is always present with good men. 3 Mocking is a
grievous kind of persecution, 4 The estate of Gods people is commonly a poor
and afflicted estate. 5 True godliness is that which breeds the quarrel
betwixt the wicked and the godly.
Five other select doctrines.
Doct. 1. They are the most miserable rebels, that rebel against God. 2 It is
an infallible note of an impious person, to be unwilling to hear the holy word
of God. 3 The more holy and wholesome any doctrine is, the more grievous to
wicked sinners. 4 Our wretched nature is never so forward unto any thing as
unto that which is evil. 5 All the sorrows of Gods children shall end in joy.
The Printer to the Reader.
Note that the division of these five Popositions, into three Sermons, was
mistaken by the Printer, not purposed by the Author.

THE FIRST SERMON, UPON the twelfth of Zechariah.
ZECH. 12. ver. 10. 11, etc. Verse. 10. And I will power upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of
prayers, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced; and they shall
lament for him, as one that mourns for his only Son, and be sorry for him,
as one is sorry for his first borne.

11 In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning
of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo.

12 And the land shall bewail every family apart, the family of the house of
David apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of Nathan apart,
and their wives apart.

13 The family of the house of Leui apart, and their wives apart; the family of
Shimei apart, and their wives apart.

14 All the families that remain, every family apart, and their wives apart.


IN the eight and ninth verses of this Chapter is set down a gracious promise
of God, made unto the church, which should be in the time of the Gospel (for
that is meant by the inhabitants of Jerusalem.) Which promise is this, that he
that is feeble among them: that is, the weakest Christian that made conscience
of the means of his salvation, in that day should be as David: that is, equal
to the most excellent in the time of the law in sundry respects: and the house
of David: that is, the excellenter sort of Christians, should be as Gods house,
and as the Angel of the Lord before them. The Prophet could not find any holy
man, with whom he might fitly compare them, and therefore he says, that they
should be like the Angel of the covenant Christ Jesus, which went before the
Israelites in the wilderness to guide and govern them.

Then he goes on and tells us, that after the Lord has showed this mercy
unto his Church, He will seek to destroy all nations that come against
Jerusalem; that is, all the enemies that do oppose themselves unto his people,
and endeavor to hinder his good work in them, and for them. Now when it is
said that he will seek to destroy them, the meaning is, that as he has a
resolution to overthrow them, so he will provide means whereby it shall be
effected.

Then further in the tenth verse he sets down the means how his people
should be brought to such excellency. I will power upon the house of David,
and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace, etc. Signifying
that he would vouchsafe unto his Church under the Gospel a more plentiful
measure of his Spirit, that as they should have more excellent, and clear, and
powerful means; so they should find a greater blessing upon the use of those
means: that whereas under the law, they had but drops of grace, distilling
easily and by little and little, now they should have whole buckets full, as it
were; yea whole floods of grace powered down upon all sorts of Gods servants.
By the Spirit of grace, is meant the Spirit of adoption, and of regeneration;
so called, both because it is given out of Gods free grace and favor, as also
because it works grace and goodness in all such as are endued therewith:
this Spirit is further described by a special effect, viz. that it is a Spirit
of prayers. Till such time as men are made partakers hereof, they may use many
words of prayer, but they are altogether idle and vain; fruits of their
flesh, and not of their faith; such as they have great cause to be humbled for,
and no reason at all to be comforted in: but when once they have this Spirit
put into their hearts, they can call upon the Lord in an acceptable and
comfortable manner.

Then next is showed whither this Spirit leads them; to wit, unto Christ.
They shall look on him, whom they have pierced. When men begin to pray in a
religious and conscionable manner, they disclaim all fleshly helps and hopes,
and betake themselves unto their Savior, whom they have pierced by their
sins: for it cannot properly be said, that the Scribes and Pharisees, or
Judas, or the high Priests, or the Romans, did put Christ to death, they being
but instruments thereof; but the iniquities of Gods elect did the fact, and
they were indeed the true and principal cause, that brought upon the Son of
God all manner of affliction, and persecution, and execution it self.

In the next place it is said, that when his children shall look upon him,
They shall lament for him, or over him, or concerning him: (all comes to one
reckoning.) As soon as they see what evils, and miseries, they have brought
upon Christ Jesus, by their transgressions, and how odious their offenses are,
which could be healed by no other medicine, but by the precious blood of the
immaculate lamb of God: the due consideration hereof will cause them to be
troubled and grieved at the very heart. Which grief is set out, by two
special circumstances; two wit, by the greatness of it, and by the truth of
it. The greatness thereof is declared by two comparisons, which yet are
inferior and less then the thing it self.

For the first comparison, it is said, That they should lament for him, as one
that mourns for his only son, and be sorry, as one is sorry for his first
borne. If parents have many children, yet it will much grieve them to part with
any of them: but if they have but one only son, who is likely to be the
heir of the family, and they lose him, and so are disappointed of their hope,
then they usually mourn with an exceeding bitter lamentation, as the woman of
the city of Nain did for the death of her only son. Luke 7. 11. Such (the
holy Ghost says) shall be the sorrow of all true penitent persons, when they
apprehend the multitude and grieuousnesse of their sins, whereby they have
slain the Lord of life.

The second comparison, here used to express the measure of their sorrow, is
taken from the example of the Jews, who when their godly and worthy king
Josiah was slain in the valley of Megiddo near Hadadrimmon, in fighting
against Pharaoh Necho, king of Aegipt, they lamented for him very 2. Chron. 35.
bitterly: and not only the common people who have not so good a government
of their affections, mourned for him, but Jeremiah the Prophet also, and others
of the best sort of men and women, took this loss exceedingly to heart, as
seeing in the death of Josiah, the death and ruin both of Church and common
wealth. In which regard it was set down as an ordinance, that they should have
set times of mourning, for that affliction which befell them through his death;
and such (says the Prophet) shall be the lamentation of those that attain to
the sight and sense of their sins, whereby they have slain the Lord Christ
Jesus. verse 11.

Having thus set forth the greatness of their sorrow, he comes in the next
place to express the soundness thereof: The land shall bewail every family
apart, etc. Not in the public assemblies alone, where the tears of one may
draw on the tears of another, and so their mourning be either natural for
company, or hypocritical for vain glory: but he says, that every family
should weep apart, and in private; yea not only the several families, but
particular persons, yea those that were most nearly lincked together, viz. the
husband and the wife, should be separated in this work of humiliation, and
not content themselves to pray and bewail their sins one with another, but
take some time each of them to perform this duty in secret; and if they that
are so inward one with another should lament apart, much more others, that are
further off one from another.

By the house of David is meant (as was before showed) the excellenter sort of
Christians; and the like is signified by the house of Nathan, who was the son
of David, of whom Christ came: (for the family of Solomon was wholly
extinguished.) By the house of Leui, is meant the ordinary sort of the Levites;
and as for the family of Shimei, it was one of the principal families of Leui.
Whence we may observe, that all families without exception are tied to this
work, and ought jointly and severally to perform the same. None are so good
but they must weep for their sins in secret, and pray for the continuance
and increase of their goodness: and as it is not needless for the best, so
neither is it bootlesse for the meanest, but whosoever does so, shall have a
fountain of grace opened unto him, whereby all his iniquities shall be washed
away.

The drift then of these words (we see) is, to manifest and express the great
goodness of God toward his servants, in the time of the Gospel; and here is
showed, 1 First, what gift he will bestow upon them, viz. abundance of his holy
Spirit. 2 Secondly, the good use that they will make of it, which is twofold.
1 First, they will betake themselves unto faithful prayer, and by the eye of
faith look unto Christ, through whom both they and their prayers must be
accepted. 2 Secondly, they will grow to a maruailous great loathing and dislike
of their sins, and sorrow for the same; which is declared by two maine
circumstances, viz.
1 The greatness thereof, which is illustrated by two comparisons. 2 The
soundness thereof, both which are more fully laid open in that which goes
before


Thus much concerning the meaning and order of the words: now let us consider
of such instructions as may thence arise for our learning.

Verse. 11. [ And I will power upon the house of David, etc. the Spirit of grace
etc.] In that the Lord having promised, that his Church shall be brought to
wonderful excellency, does set down this as the means whereby he will
effect it, that they shall have the Spirit in great plenty powered down upon
them, this shall be the doctrine, That the way to all happiness and
blessedness, is to have the The Spirit of God is the author of all happiness.
Spirit of grace bestowed upon us.

Whosoever has not this, though he be never so great in the world, he is
altogether wretched and miserable, subject to the curse of God, and to
continual vexations, and discontentments: and on the other side, whosoever
has this holy Spirit dwelling in his heart, is an happy and blessed man,
though he be never so much dejected and cast down through outward afflictions
and tribulations.

This point is evident in the prophecy of Isaiah, Isa. 32. 13. 14. etc.
where it is showed, that so long as the Spirit of God is withheld from men,
they have grievous ruins, and desperate decaies among them, and they still go
from ill to worse, being ill without, and ill within: but how long does this
continue? Until the Spirit be powered upon them from above. And what then? The
wilderness shall become a fruitful field; That is, those men and women that
were like a wilderness before, bringing forth nothing but brambles and
briars, nothing but pride and worldliness, and such like fruits of the flesh,
even those men and women shall be as a fruitful field, being beautified and
adorned with the virtues of Christ, and with the graces of his Spirit; and not
only so, but likewise enriched, with all good prosperity, which the Lord sees
needful for them.



Romans 8. 13.
and fruits thereof. It does not lie still where it is, suffering the soul of
the party to be under the dominion of sin; but it abateth and consumes it by
little and little, till at length his soul and body be as clear from sin,
as Adams was before his fall. So that look how the Israelites did by degrees
wear and wast the Canaanites out of the land, till it was wholly brought in
subjection unto them: so does the holy Ghost destroy and root out the enemies
of our souls; not making them tributarie, as Joshua did some of the cursed
Canaanites, but spoiling them of their strength by little and little, and at
length utterly consuming them, so that they shall have no place at all within
us. And as it kills Ephesians. 2. 1.
sin, so it quickens the dead soul, and makes the whole man apt and fit
for every good work. Romans 8. 11.
That Spirit which raised up Christ Jesus from a natural death, does also
raise us up from the death of sin, to the life of grace: and puts more 1
Ioh. 4. 4.
spiritual strength into us, then the flesh, the world and the devil can
bring against us.

Corinthians, there are three special reasons to show the happiness of him
that is endued with Gods Spirit: the first whereof is this; That whereas all
men naturally are like the Jews, who (as it is there said) when they come to
the means of salvation, have a veil upon their minds, so that 2. Cor.
they can see nothing to save their souls, to further 3. 14.
their repentance, to cause them to believe in Christ Jesus, and to place their
hope, and happiness in him: as soon as ever the Spirit of grace enters into
them, this blindness of mind and hardness of heart is removed; and then they
are enabled soundly to understand, and truly to apply the word preached unto
their own souls. Verse 16.

That where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. Verse. 17. Till such
time as that does set men free, they are held fast in the cords and chains of
inquity, and are miserable slaves unto the vilest slave that is, even unto
Satan himself (who is an Apostata, and a reprobate*) and in the most wretched
slavery that can be imagined, viz. to serve sin in the lusts thereof; and
(which is the most grievous of all the rest) they shall have the worst wages
that may be, even the curse and vengeance of God, while they live, and eternal
damnation of body and soul after they are dead. Now when the Spirit of Christ
takes possession of us, it causes us to disclaim the service of Satan, and
to become servants unto the living God; it fills us full of Romans 6.
good meditations, of holy desires, and spiritual affections; it furnishes us
with ability to perform the duties of religion, and of our callings; and in a
word, it makes us willing and able both to do all manner of good, and to
resist all manner of evil. So that after we have received the holy Ghost into
our hearts, we shall not say: This is my nature and I cannot do otherwise:
but with the Apostle Paul* I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me: I will never be in bondage unto my corruptions any more; for
grace shall have the upper hand of nature, and the Spirit shall master the
flesh, and get the better of it.

verse 16. We would think no price too great to be given for such a
looking-glass, as would make one that is deformed to become beautiful by the
very beholding thereof: how much then should we esteem the holy word of God,
which (through the operation of the Spirit) is made effectual, not to change
the natural visage (which is a smaller matter) but to alter the form and
shape of the soul* and to make it very beautiful and amiable in the sight of
God and of his holy Angels, which was before time a most ugly and deformed
creature? This must needs be a maruailous great benefit; for if the defacing
of Gods Image be the cause of all our woe, then the repairing thereof must of
necessity be the cause of all our happiness.

upon them, do either fret or faint; either fall to murmuring, or to
desperation: but those that have their hearts replenished with the holy Ghost,
do then most strongly rejoice, when tribulations and miseries lie most heavily
upon them: as the Apostles when they were most grievously persecuted, are said
then to be filled with the holy Ghost. And Acts. 4. 31.
what of that? Then they rejoiced that they were counted Acts 5. 41.
worthy to suffer rebuke for Christ his name. And as Paul's sufferings did
abound, so did his consolations 2 Cor. ^. 5.
in Christ abound also. So that when comfort is comfort indeed, and when life
it self would go unless comfort came, then does the holy Ghost most
plenteously refresh the heart with inward joy and contentment: according to
that saying of the Apostle Peter; Now for a season ye are in heaviness, 1.
Pet. 16. 8.
and yet rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. Hitherto the reasons
alleged have tended chiefly to this, even to show what good the Spirit of
grace brings unto our selves.

Gal 5. 22. And in the sixth chapter of that Epistle, ver. 1. the Apostle
says; If any man be overtaken by any offense, ye that are spiritual restore
such a one; not ye that are witty or learned, etc. For no man can be a good
Physician unto others, but he that has first wrought a cure upon his own
soul; in which 2 Cor. 1. 4.
regard the Apostle Paul says: We are able to comfort others with the
consolations wherewith we our selves have been comforted. Look then who is most
spiritual, and we shall find that he does always most good. Therefore was
it, that when the Apostles were to convert the whole world, and to batter down
hell gates upon Satan's head, they had the Spirit plentifully powered down upon
them; which filled them so full of heavenly wisdom, and courage, Acts. 2.
and zeal, that they did that which all the Kings and Monarchs of the earth
could never have effected by all their power and policy. So also when Christ
was to do the greatest good that ever any creature did, the Lord says, that
his Spirit shall rest upon him: and thereby was he fitted to go through with
the great work of our redemption. Isa. 11. 1.
For (as it is in that place) the Spirit of the Lord is a Spirit [of wisdom
and vnderstanding] making those that have it to be of a sound judgment, and
able to search into the hidden things of God: [ a Spirit of counsel] to guide
and direct them [ and of power] to strengthen and confirm them, though they
were never so feeble and weak: [ a Spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the
Lord] to make such as are endued therewith, prudent in his fear, as there the
Prophet speaks.

Now seeing it is clear by these reasons, that the having of this holy Spirit
is the way to al happiness:



If any man have not the Spirit of Romans 8. 9.
Christ, the same is not his: and if he be not his, he is for the present* a
bond-slaue of Satan, and in the state of a reprobate; and if such can be happy
men, 2 Cor. 13.
then are they happy, otherwise not. If it were possible that for their outward
condition of life they could be equal unto Adam in paradise, yet must they
needs be very miserable as he was, when the spirit of God was taken from him;
it was not the garden of Eden that could then yield him contentment, but he was
in far greater misery and perplexity in that place then many thieves are in
the dungeon, or upon the gallows, when they are ready to be turned over. He
that has the spirit of God as Paul had, shall find a heaven in prison, in
sickness, in death it self: whereas he that has it not, shall find a hell,
though he lived in as good a place as the very paradise of God was.

viz. that we should search and try whether we have the Spirit or not: for it
is not a matter of small consequence, but such as nearly concerns us.

If then we would be resolved of this point, let How we may discern whether
we have the spirit or not. Gal. 5. 17.
us first examine, whether there be in us that continual war and conflict
(mentioned Gal. 5. 17.) between the flesh and the Spirit, which all godly men
do find and feel in themselves more or less: for as the Apostle there
speaks, The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh. Now this combat is general throughout all the powers and faculties of
the soul, as (to give instance in the chief of them:) First in the
understanding part, there is a conflict between carnal reason, and the
judgment rightly informed by Gods word; as in this particular: A good man is
railed upon, and vnderseruedly traduced, and vilified; in this case reason will
thus play its part: Why should you bear it at his hand, are not you his
better? have you not him at an advantage? why should you not take him down,
and give him as good as he brings? Nay (says the Spirit) you must not render
evil for evil, but rather overcome evil with Romans 12. Matthew. 5.
goodness, and bless them that curse you, and pray for such as hate you and
persecute you in word or deed: they have too much fire in them already, and
therefore do not you add more fuel thereunto, lest the flame be redoubled; but
rather cast water upon it, that it may be extinguished. Thus does the Spirit
bring the weapons of God to subdue the flesh, eue^ as the flesh does come armed
with the weapons of the Devil to resist the Spirit. Indeed there is many
times in unregenerate persons, a fight betwixt carnal reason and their
natural conscience; but that is not general throughout all the powers of the
soul, neither does it extend it self unto the motions and inclinations that
are evil, to curb and repress them; nor breed humility and poverty of
spirit, in the parties in whom it is found, and so drive them to the Lord to
crave aid and strength from him to subdue t^e^ corrup^^^ns: but these checks
of the natural cons^i^n^e do rather make men more fierce and froward, and at
length more violent and outrageous in s^^ning, especially if they have been
occasioned either by the hearing of the terrible curse of the law, den^unced
against them in the public ministry; or by the faithful dealing of some
Christian friend, which has thoroughly applied the threatenings of the word unto
their drowsy consciences, wherewith they were moved for the time, but
afterward return to their vomit again: then (I say) they will be much more
boisterous in their sinful courses then ever they were before.

And as there is a conflict in the understanding part, so is there the like in
the affections: for the flesh is ready to draw them unto pride and envy, and
uncleanness, and covetousness, etc. But the Spirit stirs and moves them unto
better things, showing withal that those forenamed vices will harden the
heart, make it unfit for prayer, or thanksgiving, or any such spiritual
exercise; and in the end will bring many bitter troubles and afflictions upon
those that let them to have sway and dominion in their souls: all which evil
inconveniences we shall escape if our affections be heavenly and spiritual,
and set on their right objects.

So likewise in the will this fight will appear, wheresoever true
sanctification is begun. For the flesh will be unwilling to pray, to hear, to
meditate, to confer; and in a word, as any duty tends more to the
crucifying of the lusts thereof, so will it be more auerse therefrom, and more
prone to delay and to put off the performance thereof. But the regenerate part
is contrarily disposed, and chearefully embraces that which is good, though it
be clogged and hindered in the performance of the same: setting down this for a
certain truth, that the more painful any service is, the more gainful it is;
that though we begin our prayers in heaviness, yet we may end in gladness;
that the more intractable and untoward the flesh is, the more glorious our
conquest is* if we can get the maistery of it, and bring it into Gods presence;
and that if we cannot do as well as we would, yet if we do as well as we can,
we shall be accepted and blessed of the Lord: and by the sight and sense of our
manifold failings, grow more humble and lowly in our own eyes, and more
pitiful and gentle toward others.

And lastly for the memory, before their conversion, Gods own children are
prone to remember injuries and unkindness which others have offered unto them,
and to forget such as they have offered unto others; they can hold fast all
such things as will further corrupt them, but they let slip whatsoever may
benefit and help them in good and holy courses: but after their regeneration
the case is altered with them: for the^ they strive to disburden their memories
of all things that may hurt them, and to retain only such matters as may make
them more humble, and merciful, and thankful. This spiritual fight in the
inward man is a most infallible mark of the spirit of grace, which is the
rather to be noted, because many of Gods servants through ignorance take it to
be quite contrary. We find (say they) such a deal of carnal reason, so many
sinful affections and lusts, and such unwillingness and unfitness for every
holy duty, that we much doubt whether we have Gods spirit in us or not. But who
tells you that there are so many things amiss in you? who is it that causes
you to see the errors of your mind, and the corruptions of your heart? who is
it that causes you to hate them, and to be out of liking with your self for
them? who is it that enableth you to take Gods part against them, and to strive
by all means to be freed from the bondage of them? Is it not the spirit of God
that works all these good things in you? and why then should you make
question whether it dwell in you yea or no? these are fruits of the Spirit,
which are never found in any but in spiritual men.

And if any desire yet a further trial, let him examine whether there be in
him those other virtues of the Spirit which are recited Gal. 5. 22. viz. 1.
Love unto God, to his word, to his Saints, to mankind, yea to our very enemies,
so far as to desire their conversion and salvation. 2. Joy in Gods favor, in
that he has given us any sparkles of grace, and thereby assured us that he will
provide al good things for us in this life, and afterward save our souls and
bodies everlastingly. 3. Peace with the Lord himself, with our consciences,
and with our brethren. If (I say) any desire further assurance that the Spirit
of grace does possess his heart, let him try whether he can find in himself
these fruits thereof, together with the rest there mentioned; to wit, long
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: and as these
do more or less abound in him, so may he be assured that he is more or less
spiritual.

How Gods Spirit may be obtainned


Now one means is, exceedingly to desire it, and earnestly to long for it: for
the Lord says in the prophecy of Isaiah: I will power water upon Isa. 44. 3.
the thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will power my Spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon thy buds. In which place, we see, there is a large
promise made, but to whom? To poor desolate Christians that do feel their
own miserable and wretched estate, and do even thirst for a supply of Gods
graces, as the dry and parched ground does for the rain to fall upon it; which
does even gape for it before it comes, as if it would devour the clouds before
they fall. Concerning such the Lord says, that he will power water upon them:
neither shall they have grace by drops, but whole floods thereof shall be
powered upon them: for God can as easily ouerflow their souls therewith, as the
ground with waters when it stands in need thereof. But what shall they be the
better for this? what benefit shall they find thereby? The Prophet tells us
in that very place. Verse. 4. They shall grow as among the grass, and as
willowes by the rivers of waters. No rain can make the grass so fresh and
green; no river can cause the trees that are planted thereby, so to flourish
and prosper as the Spirit of God will every thirsty soul, when it is
plentifully powered thereupon.

notable argument for us. Ask (says he) and it Luke 11. 13.
shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find, etc.

If ye which are evil can give good gifts unto your children, how much more
shall your heavenly father give the holy Ghost to them that ask it? As if he
should have said: You have no matter of desert in you, and therefore you are
discouraged from prayer: but what merit is there in one of your little
children, which are full of frowardness, of brawling and unquietness? yet if
they ask any thing of you that you conceive to be good for them, you will
presently grant it unto them. Now if you that are sinful can pass by the
infirmities of your children, and give them such things as are needful, though
you have made them no promise; and you cannot relieve them without cost and
pains unto your selves, nay many times not without pinching your selves, and
sparing from your own backs and bellies: if you (I say) that are evil can
deal thus lovingly and kindly with your children, how much more will your
heavenly father, who is the God of al goodness, yea goodness it self, deal
favorably with his children, having made a promise unto them, and it being no
pains nor charges unto him, to bestow a plentiful measure of spiritual
graces upon them? and especially seeing that the more liberal he is that way
unto them, the more glory shall thereby redound unto his great name. If then we
desire the Spirit of grace in an abundant measure, let us crave it at the
hands of the Lord, who gives of the same liberally, and casts no man in the
teeth: and we may the more comfortably and confidently do thus, because we live
in those happy times, wherein the Lord has promised to power his Spirit upon
all flesh, and to bestow Joel 2. 28.
as excellent gifts and graces upon ordinary Christians, as the most worthy men
had in the time of the law.

Gal. 3. 2.
in us, or through any works wrought by us, but God of his free mercy gives
it, and conueigheth it unto his children, by the preaching of the Gospel. And
again, the same Apostle persuading the Thessalonians not to quench the Spirit,
(for that is the best fire in the house, and without it men must needs freeze,
in woe and sorrow and misery) he says, despise not prophacying; that is, the
ordinary ministry of the word, when it is truly expounded, 1. Cor. 14. 3.
and faithfully and wisely applied, as may be most for the edification of the
hearers. This is as it were the fuel whereby the fire of God is continued and
increased in our souls; and as we are more careful in this duty of laying up
the word in our hearts, so shall we find the warmth, or rather heat of the
Spirit to be more abundant and in more constant us.

Lastly, if we would have the holy Ghost continually working in us with great
efficacy, let us labor evermore to keep an humble and broken heart, and
beware of pride, and all vain conceit of our selves, as the very rock
against which the ship wherein the Spirit is carried, does, as it were, make
shipwreck: for God resists the proud, and 1 Pet. 5. 5.
gives grace to the humble. If one have a hauty heart, though there be no body
else that seeks his overthrow, the Lord will bring him down: but if any have
a meek and lowly heart, there is a palace for the Lord himself, who will
dwell with him that is of Isa. 57. 15.
a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to give
life to them that are of a broken heart.

they can no more stay the operation thereof, then they can stop the course of
the wind from blowing whither it will: therefore shall they never be able
John. 3.
to defeat Gods servants of that blessed estate which in Christ Jesus he has
promised unto them, and through his precious bloud-shedding purchased for them.

The Spirit of grace [and of prayers.] From these latter words arises this
second point: that

Faithful prayers proceed from Gods Spirit.
Lord, unless he be assisted and directed by the Spirit of grace.

Howsoever men imagine it to be an easy matter to call upon God, yet the truth
is, that it is as hard for any of himself to make a faithful prayer, as it is
to make a world. Therefore is it said in the Epistle to the Romans, Ye have
received the Spirit of adoption, Romans 8. 15.
whereby we cry Abba, father. So that none can confidently call God father but
by the help of his blessed Spirit. If unregenerate men will pray to their
father, Christ tells them who he is, when speaking to such kind of persons,
he says; You are Ioh. 8. 44.
of your father the Devil. And how proves he that? The lusts of your father
ye will do. As those that are willing to do the works of God, are assuredly
the children of God; even so they that are ready to do the works of Satan,
are without doubt the children of Satan; and if they will pray unto their
father, they must pray unto the Devil.

Again, in that very place it is said, that the Spirit helps our
infirmities: for we know not what to Romans 8. 26
pray as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes requests for us with sighs
that cannot be expressed; where it is evident, that the best of Gods servants,
without the help and assistance of the holy Ghost, are ignorant both of the
matter and manner of prayer; but the Spirit does inform their minds what to
ask, and frame their affections how to ask in an holy and acceptable sort: so
that albeit sometimes they want words to express their meaning, yet they are
full of inward sighs and heavenly desires. But what are they the better for
them (will some say) if they cannot power them forth before the Lord in an
outward form of prayer? They are much the better, because (as it is in the 27.
verse) He that searches the hearts, knows the meaning of the spirit: and he
so knows it, that he approves of it, and delights in it. If there be never
so many good words, and those uttered by the very Saints of God themselves, yet
if they proceed not from the Spirit, but from the flesh, (as sometimes they
may) they are not pleasing unto the Lord, but abhorred of him. And on the other
side, albeit there be no words at all (as many times it falls out when the heart
is oppressed through extremity of grief) yet if there be a multitude of holy
desires in the soul, stirred up through the powerful working of the holy
Spirit, they are accepted of him, and shall be rewarded by him: for (as it is
added in the place above named) The Spirit (even at such times) makes requests
for the Saints according to the will of God. And therefore their suits
according with his will, he cannot but yield unto the same.

Again, it is the proper work of the Spirit to convince the judgment of
sin, and to humble John. 16. 8.
the heart therefore; without which, there can no faithful prayer be made unto
the Lord. Bring never so strong reasons to adulterers, or gamesters, or
Saboth-breakers, or any that live in the continual practice of such dangerous
and damnable sins, and press them never so forcibly to cause them to forsake
their lewd and wretched courses; and yet can they not see why they should leave
them, but rather imagine that they may lawfully follow the same still. And no
marvel: for till the God of heaven do set down their carnal reason, it can
never be set down; and till he stop their mouths, they will never be
silenced, but still have somewhat to say for their wretched and vile behavior.

Reasons collected from the former places.
Seeing then it is evident, that Gods Spirit alone can persuade us of the love
and favor of our heavenly Father toward us, that so we may be in case to pray
unto him: and withal must furnish us with the matter, and help us in the
manner of our prayers, and humble us in the sight of our own miserable wants,
that so we may be more earnest and fervent in the requests that we make: the
point now in hand, may hence be strongly concluded; to wit, that none can make
a faithful prayer without the special aid and direction of the holy Ghost:
which serves,

pray day and night. They that know what it is to lift up a fervent prayer unto
the heavens, do easily discern that they are but mere braggers and boasters,
and that indeed they never made one faithful prayer since they were borne,
because they are, and still have been sensual and carnal, and utterly void of
any sanctifying grace of Gods spirit: and therefore so far are they from
having any cause of rejoicing in regard of their good prayers (as they call
them) that they have great cause to be humbled for them, as being works of the
flesh, and not of the Spirit, such as do rather provoke the Lords displeasure
against them, then pacify his anger, or any way procure his favor toward
them.

Such are the prayers of all blind and ignorant Papists, who pray in an
unknown tongue, to whom it may be said, as it was by our Savior unto the sons
of Zebedeus, Ye know not what ye ask. They may speak what they list of their
often praying, and how readily they can go through with their stint and task:
but they that understand what it is to bring God and their own souls together
in earnest requests, and fervent supplications, cannot but judge them to be
bragging Pharisees, who think that the Lord is beholding unto them, and
indebted unto them for such prayers; whereas in truth he may justly condemns
em unto hell for the same, and will do so, if they be not humbled for them, as
well as for the rest of their iniquities. And therefore they that have indeed
the Spirit of prayer, are of another mind: for when they have used the best
preparation that possibly they can, they find so many defects in their
prayers, that they are driven to make a new prayer for the pardoning of those
their wants, and are stirred up heartily to praise the Lord, when they can in
any poor measure power out their souls before him, as knowing, that it is not
from any strength that they have in themselves, but from the help and
furtherance of his good Spirit.

Jude exhorts) to pray in the Jude V. 20.
holy Ghost. For those be the petitions that pierce the heavens, and bring
peace and comfort unto the conscience. But how shall we know, whether our
prayers proceed from Gods Spirit or not? for our sinful hearts are apt to
deceive us on both sides: viz. either to make us think (through Satan's
suggestion) that we do not pray in the holy Ghost, because we have so many
frailties, when in truth we do; or that we pray as we ought to do, because we
have matter and words at will, when indeed there is no such thing, but only a
natural gift of uttering that which is in our minds and memories, in apt and
fit terms, and in a fluent manner of speech. Therefore if we would know what
it is to pray in the holy Ghost, it is this.

First we must have a warrant for the things Rules for prayer. 1
that we ask, and that from the word of God, where the Lords will is revealed,
according whereunto 1. Ioh. 5. 14
all our petitions must be framed. In which regard we must acquaint our selves
with the holy Scriptures, and often exercise our hearts in the meditation
thereof. That is, as it were, the wood, whence we must fetch timber for this
building: and the mine out of which we may take many golden arguments to bring
before the Lord in our prayers, which he cannot deny because they are his own
hand writing, whereby he does grant us liberty to ask, and assurance to
obtain all needful things. So that spiritual graces we may ask simply
without any exception, or limitation: and for outward blessings, we may crave
them so far as they may be good for us: and for crosses we may lawfully
desire either to have them kept from us, or sanctified unto us, so that we may
have strength and patience to bear them, and grace and wisdom to make a
right use of them.

that the Spirit makes request for us Romans 8. 26.
[ with sighes] which cannot be expressed. As we see in Hannah, who came with a
heart full of heavenly meditations and of holy desires, which she did not
express in words, but made them known unto the Lord, with whom her heart was
laboring all the time of her prayer. Now if we would obtain this inward
affection, we must ponder much on Gods goodness and readiness to hear, and
to help us; and of our own miserable wants, which move us to become suitors
unto his Majesty: and then if we can get a good persuasion of God, and a due
estimation of the things which we beg at his hands, we shall not choose but be
instant and earnest in our prayers; not taking up the time in words of course,
and in making vain and idle repetitions, or drowsy and lumpish petitions, as
if we cared not whether we lost, or found; but we shall be able to cry
fervently unto the Lord, and then cannot he deny our requests. For he hears
the cry of them that fear him, and fulfilleth their Ps. 145. 19. Iam. 5.
desires; and the prayer of the righteous avails much when it is fervent.

See M. Dods Sermon on Iam. 4. 3.
any thing with an intent to spend it upon our lusts, but with a purpose to use
it unto the glory of God, the furtherance of our own salvation, and the good
and comfort of mankind, especially of such as are of the household of faith.

Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe Mar. 11. 24
that ye shall have it. Which faith of ours will be unto us a sure argument,
that we pray in the Spirit, which stirs us up to make such requests alone,
as it assures us shall be performed. But by the way let us observe, that
sometimes spiritual men may make carnal prayers, as Job, and Eliiah, and
Jonah did, when they desired that God would take away their lives; which
proceeded from the pride of the flesh, and from the rebelliousnesse of their
wills, in that they could not content themselves to live in that estate,
whereunto the Lord had brought them. Such fleshly petitions may we sometimes put
up before the Lord; but we shall have checks and rebukes in our hearts for the
same, and no assurance that they shall be granted: but when our suits are
spiritual, the holy Ghost which moves us to ask, will also persuade us that
God is able and willing to hear us, and to relieve us, and that therefore we
shall obtain a blessing sooner or later.

Let us therefore labor to ask in faith, (as the Apostle James exhorts) and
not waver: for he that James. 1. 3.
wauereth, and makes question whether God will hear him or not, is like a
wave of the sea tossed with the wind, and carried away; being never at quiet in
himself, but sometimes imagining that the Lord will help him, he runs unto
him; and then having a conceit that such and such men will do somewhat for
him, he leaves prayer, and betaketh himself unto them: but finding no relief
there, he will to prayer again; and yet having not a present answer, nor faith
to wait upon the Lord, he falls to shift for himself by using of ill means*
and so is altogether unstable and unsettled, even as the waves of the sea that
are never at rest; every vain cogitation, and every slight temptation tossing
and turmoyling, and disquieting his heart. Thus it ought not to be, neither
will it be thus with those that ask in faith; for they know that they shall
obtain, and that it shall be unto the^ according to their faith: that either
they shall have the particular thing that they ask, or a better in steed
thereof: and therefore they pray still, and wait Gods leisure: and herein they
much honor the Lord, in that they cast themselves upon the truth of his
promise, and do not trouble their hearts with unnecessary fears and cares
about the success, which is Gods work, and not theirs. Men will be glad to be
rid of importunate suitors, that they should not be still hanging upon them,
especially if their suite be weighty, and the things that they crave of some
importance: but the Lord would in no case have men to let their suits fall; nay
he takes delight in such as will not have a repulse, but still depend upon him,
and daily renew their petitions: for they show evidently that they have a
lively and strong faith: they would not presume to ask unless they had a
warrant; and having a warrant, they dare not make question of obtaining; for
that were to make doubt of Gods truth and fidelity.

Thus we see what it is to pray in the holy Ghost, viz. to have a good ground
for that which we ask: a good end, and a good affection in asking, and faith
to believe that we shall obtain whatsoever we ask in such a manner.

only such flashings as hypocrites sometimes have; yet hereby they may be
assured that the holy Ghost dwells in them indeed, because they constantly
power out strong cries, and faithful supplications before the Lord, which no
hypocrite can do: for (as Job speaks) He cannot set Job. 27. 10.
his delight on the almighty, nor call upon God at all times. For that is a
special gift of God, and peculiar unto the Saints; and as any one makes more
such holy prayers, so may he be confidently persuaded, that he has the Spirit
of grace in a greater measure.

[ And they shall look upon me, whom they have pierced] that is, upon Christ,
and that by the eye of faith, setting their heart and hope on him, and through
him expect to be heard and relieved: whence observe this doctrine, that the
Spirit of prayer does always lead men unto Christ Jesus.

The Spirit of prayer does always direct men unto Christ Jesus.
and to offer up their supplications in, and through their Savior and
redeemer. This was figured in the sacrifices that were offered under the
Leuiticall law; at which time if any one were polluted by any occasion, or
otherwise clogged with sins that he had committed, he was to bring his
offering unto the Priest, and was to be sprinkled with the blood thereof;
which did signify the blood of Christ, by which all Gods elect were to be
cleansed, and a reconciliation betwixt God and them was to be procured. For
this cause Daniel though he were a man much beloved of God, and endued with
the Spirit of prayer in an wonderful measure, yet he desires the Lord to
hear him, not Dan. 9. 17.
for his sake, or for his peoples sake, but for the Lord Christ Jesus his sake.
Therefore does our Savior tell his disciples that whatsoever they should Ioh.
16. 23.
ask the Father [in his name] he would give it unto them.

Then shall Eze. 36. 31.
ye remember your own wicked ways, and your deeds that were not good: and
shall judge your selves worthy to have been destroyed for your iniquities, and
for your abominations. This is the first work of the Spirit, even to set them
down, that they should have nothing to say for themselves, but plainly
acknowledge that shame and confusion, that destruction and eternal
condemnation is due unto them, if the Lord should enter into judgment with
them. Now when they are thus abased and humbled in themselves, then will they
seek to have a part in Christ his merits; that so both they, and their
services may be accepted of the Lord through his righteousness, and through
his intercession, which he does continually make for them: which serves,





of instruction both, that if we will have this testimony unto our souls that
we pray in the Spirit, then when we have the most feeling affections, and
purest desires, let us offer them up in Christ Jesus; let us not play the
Priests our selves, as king Vzziah did, lest we be smitten with a worse
leprocie in our souls, than he was in his body; but let us make Christ our
high Priest, to present our offerings before the Lord. So also when our prayers
and thanksgiuings are most imperfect and weak, let us present them through
him, that so they may find acceptance with God, being perfumed by the
righteousness of his dear son.



Heb. 5.
strong cries unto his Father? And for whom shall those be effectual, but for
such poor Christians as cannot so fervently call upon God for themselves?

It is said Hebrews 12. That the blood of Christ speaks Heb. 12. 14.
better things then the blood of Abel. Now we can easily believe that Caine was
in a dangerous case, when the blood of Abel did call for vengeance against him:
and why should we not as thoroughly believe that they are in an happy case who
have the blood of the son of God to call for redemption, and salvation, and
acceptance of all holy services in their behalf, as all true hearted
Christians have? The want of this persuasion is the cause why we omit many
excellent prayers and thanksgiuings, which would be very pleasing unto the
Lord, being offered up as sweet incense by our high Priest Christ Jesus: and
therefore let us labor for an increase of faith in this point, that so God may
not be deprived of service, nor our selves of those comforts and blessings
which are promised to all that call upon him in truth.

[ And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall lament
for him, etc.] In that this great lamentation is set down as an effect of
their beholding of Christ whom by their sins they had crucified, this
doctrine may hence be gathered.

The consideration of Christ his sufferings, is a forcible means to godly
sorrow.
a most forcible means to break the hearts of Christians with godly sorrow.

There is no such motive to make men weep bitterly for their offenses, as to
weigh with themselves in a serious manner, that they by their sins have
slain the Lord of life; that his bitterest adversaries were not the causes of
that his shameful and painful death which he endured upon the tree, but that
they themselves brought him thither, and were the procurers of that his bitter
passion. Christ Ioh. 10. 11.
laid down his life, but for whom? even for his sheep. He was cursed, that
they might be blessed: he was wounded, that they might be healed: he Isa. 53.
suffered disgrace, that they might be brought to glory; and endured in a sort
the torments of hell, that they might partake of the joys of heaven: the sound
meditation thereof, cannot but wound the hearts of such as have any spark of
grace in them. When it was told David that Abner was slain by Ioab, though he
had formerly been a rebel, and was now newly reconciled unto him, yet he
mourned for him till the evening, because he was a worthy man; albeit he
himself was altogether guiltless of his death. Oh then how much more should
the Saints of God lament over Christ Jesus, who was not a worthy man, but
infinitely more worthy then all both men and Angels? and not murdered by the
treachery of another, but killed by the sins of their souls, the sins of
their lips, and the sins of their hands? and if he had not been so killed,
they had been everlastingly damned. Put case that a man had one only son,
which was to be the heir of the family, and he of a sudden should find him
stark dead, would it not inwardly touch him, and strike cold unto his heart?
especially if he himself had unwittingly been the cause thereof? yes
certainly, it would go through his heart even like a sword: and such will be
the grief of those who through their transgressions have slain their blessed
Savior, as this very text witnesses, when they by the eye of faith do see him
heavy unto the death, crying unto his Father in the bitterness of his grief;
being full of torment in his body, and fuller of anguish in his soul, and that
for their sakes, even for their sins, they cannot but be excedingly moved
hereat. And a little to press the other comparison used in this text; if the
people of God did so bewail the death of their worthy king Josiah, who yet
died unwillingly, and not without any intent to benefit them thereby: how much
more bitterly should we lament the death of our blessed redeemer, who was a
far greater and excellenter king then Josiah was, and yet willingly and
freely laid down his life for our sakes, that he might free us from eternal
death, and destruction both of our bodies and souls? Questionless if we have
any spiritual life and sense in us, this will make us loath our sins, that
brought our dear Savior so much woe and misery; and cause us heartily to
mourn for the same, even as a man would do at the sight of a knife, or sword,
or some such like instrument, whereby at unawares he has slain his child, or
wife, or any that was near and dear unto him. Especially if we consider, that
God out of his mere love gave his only Son unto us, when Ioh. 3. 14.
we deserved nothing at his hands, but his heavy curse and vengeance to be
executed upon us: and that the Son of God was content from the abundance of
his love, to be so abased and vilified, so afflicted, and tormented, for our
offenses; this must needs work upon our souls, if we have but the least drop
of goodness in us.

as well as I.





suerty should be content to sell his lands and goods for the discharge of our
debts, we had just cause to rejoice thereat; and yet reason requires that we
should be touched with inward grief, for that we had been such bankroutes, and
provided so ill for the estate of our suerty. Even so the case stands betwixt
Christ and us: he did undergo those punishments, which were to be inflicted
upon us, and discharged those debts, which otherwise should have been charged
upon us: in regard of our freedom, we ought to take comfort; and in regard of
that which our Savior did and suffered for us, we must be humbled and
grieved.

in sin, because Christ has redeemed you by his blood, that you would
therefore abhor it and eschew it, because it cost him so dear. Even as one
that has any sparkle of civility in him, if his friend have endured great
tortures to free him from the imputation of treason, or have been at great
charges to deliver him being cast in prison for debt, will walk more
circumspectly and advisedly all the days of his life; and will be so far
from aduenturing upon those bad courses again, that he will be so much more
careful to avoid the^, by how much more pains and cost his friends have been
at for his redeeming.

Gal. 3. 1.
in the preaching of the Gospel, and in the administration of the Sacraments,
then if we had been standing by when he was put to death between the two
thieves: for that would have daunted and amazed us, as it did the disciples
that were Christ his followers: whereas in these ordinances of God, viz. the
word and the Sacrament, his sufferings are lively expressed and represented
unto us, so that we may more clearly and fully see the love of the Father,
and of the Son through the working of the holy Ghost in our hearts, than they
could that were eyewitnesses of his bitter passion.

And they shall lament for him, as one mourns for his only son, etc.] In
these words, as also in those that follow, is declared the measure of their
sorrow, viz. that it was exceeding great, as the two comparisons here used do
evidently express: whence observe this doctrine, that Great sorrow for sin
very requisite. Se M. Dod^ Sermon on Isa. 1. Doct. 1. where this point is
largely handled.


It is not sufficient to mourn for sin, but we must make our sins to be our
greatest sorrow.

Nothing must so pierce the hearts of Christians, as that by their iniquities
they have slain their Lord and Savior.

Joel 2. 13. and was found in David. Psalm 51. and in the people of God, of
whom mention is made. 1. Sam. 7. 6. who are said in the day of their fast to
draw water, viz. out of their hearts, and to power it out before the Lord:
whereby is meant that they wept very bitterly and abundantly for their
offenses against the Lord. And the reason why we must thus lament, is

Isa. 59. 2.
and have we not just cause then to grieve that we should lodge such a guest in
our souls? especially if we consider how beneficial this holy grief will be
unto us? for

2. Cor. 11. and also to purge our hearts and hands from the corruption
thereof, so that we shall not be in bondage thereunto any longer. Iam. 4. 8.
And hence it will come to pass, that either crosses shall not at all light
upon us, or at least they shall not be burdensome unto us. If we keep an
Assizes at home in our own souls, and find our selves guilty, and condemn
our selves, then shall not we be judged 1 Cor. 11. 2.
of the Lord* but because we deal very partially in our own matters,
therefore is the Lord driven to help us, by laying his, correcting hand some
way or other upon us: or if crosses do not fall upon us in that regard, but our
hearts tell us that we deal faithfully in this behalf, then will our troubles
be more easily borne: for when sin lies heavy, afflictions lie light. And
therefore when men are so vexed and disquieted at injuries and indignities, or
any outward distresses, that they cannot eat, nor drink, nor sleep, it is
sure that they have little godly sorrow, and store of worldly sorrow: for if
that holy grief did possess their hearts, it would eat up and consume
carnal vexation, even as Moses serpent did the serpents of the Egyptian
sorcerers. And this every godly man shall find in his own experience, that
look what day, or hour soever he has wept most bitterly for his offenses
against God, then he esteems crosses to be most light and easy, and finds
matter of thankfulness in whatsoever grieuances befall him, as knowing it to
be Gods goodness that it is not worse with him.

Miserable men, little do they know what sound repentance means: for that is
the thing which Gods Ministers must aim at, even to make men despair in
themselves, that so they might rest wholly upon Christ Jesus. And happy is that
Sermon, and happy that day which makes men so to weep over Christ Jesus, as
that they utterly fall out with themselves, and with their naughty and profane
courses: for this will best prove unto their souls, that they have received
the Spirit of grace, and have attained unto true repentance.



thereof, but (...)our to bewail our sins with a (...) lamentation. Such as
is mentioned in this text, viz. that we mourn as one would do for the death
of his first borne, and as the Jews did for Josiah, when he was slain in the
valley of Megiddo.



Iosiahs death: and as for others that have not been altogether so deeply
plunged in grief and anguish, they take up that in continuance, which they
wanted in present passion. Natural mourning is ordinarily more violent, as we
may observe in David's mourning for Absolon, who cried out in the bitterness of
his heart, so that the people might hear him: but godly lamentation is more
lasting and durable. So that the one may be well compared to a land-floud,
which makes a great show and noise for the time, but come a week after, and
there will be little appearance thereof: and the other, to wit godly sorrow,
may be likened to a still and constant rain, which enters more deeply into
the ground, and remains longer, and does more good a great deal, then a
sudden, violent, and tempestuous shower. and herein let these be judge(...)* who
are endued with the Spirit of God, and are acquainted with the ways of God;
and let them speak, who have had the greatest crosses, and have been even
drunken with wormwood, as the Prophet speaks: let them (I say) speak and
testify for the clearing of this point, whether many of their great troubles be
not in a sort forgotten, in regard of any present grief that they conceive for
them; and whether the sins of their youth do not more constantly vex and
torment them, then all the afflictions of their youth do. And if it be so, then
may it well be concluded, that their sorrow for sin is greatest, though it be
not always so boisterous and bitter for the present: and therefore seeing it
it is a thing that may be attained unto, let us use all good means and helps
whereby we may be furthered therein. See the means in that Sermon on Isa. 1.

Verse. 12. [And the land shall bewail every family apart; the family of the
house of David apart, and their wives apart.] From which words this doctrine
may be gathered, that

Religion required in every one in the family.
selves, but our families also must be religious. Not only the heads and
governors, but the whole household must be addicted unto Gods service. And
whosoever is religiously disposed in Gods house, he will certainly take care
for the planting of religion in his own house.

This testimony the Lord gives of Abraham: I know (says he) that Abraham will
command his Genesis 18. 19.
sons, and his household, that they keep the way of the Lord, to do
righteousness and judgment.

And Joshua protests and voweth, that he and Joshua. 24* 15. Psa. 101. 5. 6.
7.
his house should serve the Lord. And David also, that he would not endure a
wicked person near him: but if he knew any to be a vassal of the Devil, to
be a slanderer, a proud person, a liar, or the like, he should not long
remain in his sight, but he would soon thrust him out of his house, and
banish him from his presence. And it stands with reason that good men should
deal thus: for



will also be trusty and painful in their places and callings, even when
their governors are absent, as well as when they are present: as knowing that
though they be not by, yet God is always by, who will call them to an account
for all their works.

Potiphars house was blessed for Joseph's sake, and Labans estate much bettered,
and his wealth exceedingly increased for Jacobs sake.

(which is nearer and of better use then our orchard) that it may be planted
with such as truly fear the Lord, that so the deaw of his blessing may
continually descend upon us.



Every family [apart] the family of the house of David apart, and their wives
[apart], etc. The doctrine hence to be gathered is this: that

Christian duties are to be performed in private.
exercises in the family, but every one must perform the same in private and
apart.

Therefore it is to be noted, that in this place it is said of husbands and
wives, that they shall lament [apart] even they that are linked in the nearest
bonds, and might with most conueniencie lay open their hearts each before
other; yet they should not content themselves with those services which they
performed together, unless God and their consciences might sometimes meet in
secret. And as our Savior chose for himself, private and solitary places,
where he might with more freedom pray unto his Father: so does he give the
like advice unto others: When thou prayest (says he) Math. 6. 6.
enter into thy chamber, and when thou have shut thy door, pray unto thy Father
which is in secret. Where by [ chamber] he means any secret place, where a
man may freely lay open his wants before the Lord. Hence was it that Peter
after the denial of his master, is said to go out, and there to weep
bitterly. Now the cause why we must do thus, is

First, because it will be a witness unto our souls, that we do duties in
truth, and not in hypocrisy: for in secret, albeit we shed tears
abundantly for our sins, none can accuse us of vainglory, neither will our
own hearts charge us therewith: whereas in public there may be some such
suspicion in others, or doubt arising in our selves And as our sorrow will
thence appear not to be hypocritical, so will it also be clear unto us, that
it is not natural, nor for company, such as may be in a civil man, who seeing
a great many weeping and mourning, can hardly refrain himself from tears,
but will be apt and ready to lament with them.

merciful and pitiful; and not unto any creature in the world beside.



How much more are those to be condemned who are so far from serving the Lord
in secret, that they either refuse to do it in public, or if they afford
their bodily presence, yet they are idle or profane, or wanton in their looks,
and in their gestures, letting all that are near them see the vile disposition
of their hearts, by their leaud and abominable carriage? These sinful wretches
are so far from being excused by being at religious exercises, that they are
much to be condemned, for that in the land of righteousness (as the Prophet
speaks) they work wickedness, and in the places where they should show all
manner of holiness, they express such notable profaneness. These are even like
Judas, who was plotting to betray his master even then, when he was at the
Lords table to be partaker of the holy Sacrament; and they shall speed even
as he did: for when affliction and misery seazeth upon them (as come it will
sooner or later, if they prevent it not by hearty repentance) then shall they
not be able to stand before the Lord, nor before the face of their accusing
consciences, but shall be overwhelmed with horror and amazement, and be more
ready to lay violent hands on themselves, then to seek unto the Lord for
mercy, whom they have so haynously and presumptuously offended.

their hearts have not been exercised therewith in secret: for he that deals
with his own soul alone, shall find so many defects in himself, that he
will be very desirous of the help of the Saints in public assemblies.

Therefore let us tie our selves every day to spend some time in meditating on
the word, in searching our hearts, in humbling our selves for our offenses past
and present; in praying to the Lord to strengthen us where we are weak, to
resolve us where we are in doubt, to show us our errors, and to direct us in
the right way: to let us see our wants, and to supply them of his rich grace;
let us (I say) constantly perform these and the like duties in secret, and
then shall it be plain unto our souls that we are guided by Gods good
Spirit. And howsoever the devil will object that we are not sincere, because we
have many times more in show outwardly, then we have in substance inwardly; yet
hereby shall we be able to approve the sincerity of our hearts: that albeit we
have not that within us which we seem to have, yet we desire to have it, and
strive to attain to it; and he only is an hypocrite which neither has, nor
desires to have that which he makes semblance to have.

The end of the first Sermon upon the twelfth of Zechariah.
THE SECOND SERMON Upon the sixth of Luke.
LVKE 6. 47. etc. Verse. 47 Whosoever comes to me, and hears my words, and
does the same, I will show you to whom he is like.

48 He is like a man which built an house, and dug deep, and laid the
foundation on a rock: and when the waters arose, the flood beat upon that
house, and could not shake it: for it was grounded upon a rock.

49 But he that hears, and does not, is like a man that built an house upon
the earth without foundation, against which the flood did beat, and it fell by
and by: and the fall of that house was great.


IN the words immediately going before, is declared, how Christ rebuked those
that would call him, Lord, Lord, and make a profession of religion, and yet not
do the things that he commanded them: for if they would speak to their
Lords, they must speak to their lusts, for to them they are in subjection*
Having bestowed such a reproof upon them, he leaves them not so, but
directs them what they should do, exhorting them to a conscionable practice
of the word, to the which that he might more thoroughly persuade them, he uses
two forcible reasons.

1 One is taken from the great commodity that will redound unto those that do
practice it, namely, that they shall be invincible against all temptations, and
immovable in all the storms and tempests that shall arise. Verse. 47. 48.

2 Another is taken from the great danger that will ensue upon the contrary;
which is this; that let men hear as much as they will, if they do not yield
obedience unto it, they shall have a desperate, and fearful, and unrecoverable
fall: and therefore are they compared to an house that has good stone and
timber and workmanship bestowed about it, but it is built on an ill
foundation, on the sand, or on a quagmire, which is shaken by every blast of
wind, and if their arise any blustering storms, is utterly overthrown.

Whosoever comes to me] In that Christ shows that some have recourse unto
him, to hear his word, and are builders as well as others, Hypocrites in many
things agree with Christians.
(48) and yet are but dissemblers, which appears by their end; the doctrine
hence to be learned is, that hypocrites may go as far as Christians in many
things.

They may come to Christ in the hearing of the word, in the receiving of the
Sacrament, in public prayer, and yet be false-hearted all the while. A true
Christian hears the pure word of God, without mixture of popish or humane
inventions; so does an hypocrite. A true Christian is a builder, he edifies
himself in knowledge and understanding; so does an hypocrite. Judas as well as
Peter can carry away many good lessons; and yet the one go to hell for his
falshoode and guile, when the other has heaven for his portion: because he had
an upright heart, and a spirit without guile. Thus far we see in the text
wherein true Christians, and hypocrites do agreee: now let us consider what
difference there is betwixt them. The one when he is to build, digges deep,
and casts out the loose earth, that so his foundation may be firm and sure:
implying thus much, that the servants of God know their hearts to be hollow and
false ground, and therefore when they have heard a Sermon, they suspect their
own guiltiness, and so search their hearts and lament their corruptions: for
searching is digging, and lamenting is casting forth of the rubbish and loose
earth. They think their labor even lost, unless their hearts can meet with
such a promise, with such a threatening, or with such an instruction, to make a
right use of the same.

Now on the other side, an hypocrite makes quick work, all his building is
above ground, and therefore when he has talked a little of the Sermon, he is
well, and thinks all his work is dispatched: he spends no time in digging and
searching; nor in grieuing and lamenting for his corruptions: nay he censureth
Christians as too melancholy and pensive, that will go aside into a corner,
and there deal by prayers and tears betwixt God and their own hearts: what
need all this ado (says the hypocrite) is not God merciful? He is so
indeed, yet will he have us to be severe and unmerciful toward our corrupt
and evil lusts, and therefore still to be digging at them, and casting of
them forth of our hearts. And as in this place we may perceive how far true
Christians do both agree and differ, so there are other Scriptures to clear
the same, as the eight of Luke, the parable of the grounds, wherein it is
evident, that the stony ground did hear the word of God, and that with
understanding, yea with joy: nay which is more, the thorny ground did not only
receive the seed, but brought forth both the blade and the ear, that is, did
not only with readiness receive the word, but also did somewhat (in their
manner) which the word commanded: thus far the ill grounds agreed with the
good ground. But herein the good ground went beyond them, that those that were
signified thereby, came with a good and honest heart, and had patience to
undergo persecution for the truth, and contempt of the world, that they would
not be choked with the cares and pleasures thereof: whereas the other sort if
they saw in likelihood, that they might get more profit and ease by following
the world, then by embracing Christ, they were gone.

Another place fit for the proof of this point, we have in the parable of the
Virgins; where Matthew. 25.
we may observe. 1. That they were all [Virgins] that is, such as did profess
to separate themselves from worldly lusts, and did not go a whoring after the
common corruptions of the times, but kept themselves within the bounds of
outward sobriety; as Judas and Saul for a time did, who could not be charged
with gross covetousness or cosenage, or the like. 2. Further they had all
[lampes] that is, an outward show of good things. And (3.) [Oyle in their
lampes] so much as could make a blaze to get them the credit of professors:
they could speak well, and do diverse works that were glorious in the view of
the world. 4. They all went to meet the Bride-groome] that is, all of them
frequented the means of salvation, as if they expected favor and fellowship
with Christ Jesus. 5. Lastly (it is said) they all [slumbred and slept] that
is, those that were true Christians, having sound fruits of piety and
sincerity in their hearts, and in their lives, knew their estate was good, and
therefore waited for their Savior with quiet and peaceable hearts. Hypocrites
also, seeing that they went beyond Atheists and profane persons, thought their
case was good, and thereupon they grew secure, and never troubled themselves
about the assurance of their election: Thus far the wise and foolish virgins
accord. But here is the difference, that the foolish Virgins have no more oil
than they carry in their lamps: the world may easily see all that is in them:
but the wise Virgins have a lamp to carry oil, and an heart to carry oil:
they have two vessels, one for practice, and another for store; that though the
oil in the lamp should be spent, yet there might be a new supply made.



be horrible and fearful that build, and that with the good word of God;
because they build on an ill foundation: how terrible must their judgment
needs be, that come so far behind such in any show of goodness, and go so
far beyond them in every kind of gross wickedness? If these grounds that
made show of fruitfulness be accursed, because they bring not forth ripe
fruit, then what shall become of them that will not endure any plowing at all,
but bring forth briars and brambles, and all manner of poisoned weeds? And if
it went so hard with those that were Virgins, and went with their lamps to
meet the bridegroom, then what must their doom be that are not Virgins, but
adulterers, and adulteresses? that love the earth more then heaven, and earthly
things more then heavenly things? that would rather be at a table of good
cheer where their bodies may be pampered, then at the Lords table, where their
souls might be fed unto eternal life? Certainly these men's judgments
sleeps not, and when it ouertaketh them, woe unto them; for their case will be
most lamentable. Neither need they cry out against hypocrites, for they are ten
times worse then hypocrites, and their punishment must be suitable.

foundation be good: for the heart is deceiptfull above Ier. 17.
all things, yet the word of God tries it: that sets it, as it were, upon
the rack, and is as a two-edged sword that divides between the heart and the
reins, and finds out all shifts and excuses whatsoever. But that we may more
plainly perceive the way how to get a sincere heart, let us observe these
directions following.

How to get and try an upright heart.
that we must dig and search into our consciences, and when we find any
corruption therein, we must cast it forth. It is not sufficient to say, indeed
I find an ill foundation, but there is no remedy, I must build upon it: nay a
good builder will not do so, but throw out every thing that might endanger his
foundation. And so should we deal with sin, and thereby may we try our
plainness, if we can soundly judge our selves, and be glad to be admonished of
others, it is a sign that there is uprightness in us: as it is an evident
token that he minds to have a good foundation, that when his neighbor comes
with a spade, and tells him, I see you have much ado here, and that you need
help, I will join with you, is glad of this news, and thankfully accepts of
him and of his labor.

This is contrary unto the Scribes and Pharisees practice, who had little to say
against the gifts of John Baptist, and of Christ; but when they came to dig
at their pride, and covetousness, and cruelty, they could not endure it.

Jeremy made, Ier. 8. 6.
that no man said, What have I done? but all the stir of hypocrites is, what
others have done. Whereas if we could come to this, I have lived in this sin,
I have broken promise, I have been unfaithful in Gods service: what way may I
take to get peace unto my soul?

This were the way indeed to get a sound heart: and this is a good argument of
a sound heart, when the sins of our own souls do more vex us, than all the
injuries that men have done, or can do against us, and therefore we are ever
busy in searching out the hidden corruptions that lie lurking within our
souls, that so our foundation may remain still immovable: for this is the
difference betwixt an earthly house and a spiritual, that the one needs but
once to have a sure foundation laid, but the other requires daily looking to.
There is some one corruption or other that must be cast forth: so that
Christians are searching and digging builders: who albeit they seem to
themselves to be very blind, yet they get the greatest measure of knowledge:
and though they be very dead in their own feeling, yet they carry away the
life of God and the life of grace.

Verse 47. [Whosoeuer hears my words and does the same, etc. is like a man
that built an house, and dug deep, or (as it is in Matthew) is like a wise
builder] who before he be at any cost will be sure of a good foundation, or
else all his labor is lost. Now the foundation of a Christian is his practice,
whence arises this point: that Hearing and doing must go together.


blessed, as hear the word, and do it. Luke 11. 28. Yea more blessed than the
virgin Mary was for bearing Christ in her womb; for that alone could not have
saved her: whereas the word of God heard and practiced, is sufficient to bring
the soul to everlasting life: and not so alone, but it also gives the parties
right unto, and the enioyment of all manner of outward blessings whatsoever, as
is showed at large, Deuteronomy. 28. Leuit. 26. The reasons why such are blessed, are
these.



If any one will do his will, he shall John. 7. 17
know of the doctrine, whether it be of God or no. You shall have many, who
before the receiving of the Sacrament, and at such like times, will deal with
their Minister, that he would not examine them; for they are not book learned:
and besides, they are old, and their memories will not serve them. And will you
know the true reason hereof? it is even that of our Savior: They will not do
the will of God, and therefore they know it not. For their capacities and
memories, and all the faculties of their souls and bodies will serve them well
enough for their covetousness, for crafty and subtle dealing, and for such
pleasures as they are addicted unto, etc.



every duty that is enjoined, and to eschew every sin that is reproved:
otherwise we shall be cursed for our hearing when others are blessed, and be
beaten with many stripes, because we knew our masters will, and did it not.

Without me ye can do nothing. Ioh. 15. 5.
Do we then something in truth of heart? then we are in Christ branches of the
true vine, and bringing forth fruit in him, we shall be still purged to bring
forth greater abundance thereof.

[ And when the waters arose, the flood beat upon that house, and could not
shake it.] In that he commends the goodness of this building, because it
stood when the storms did beat upon it, the doctrine is. that

Trial shows what every man is.
which he shows himself to be in temptation. A wise builder is wise before
storms arise, though he be not put to it: but how shall that be known? by the
standing of his house in extremity of weather. If in the midst of all trials
he hold his own and stand it out, and prove the same man still, then is his
wisdom apparent to all: he that builds on the sand has (it may be) as fair
and goodly a house in show as the other; but when the winds arise, it quickly
tumbles down. And so it is with hypocrites, if troubles be approaching toward
them, especially if they once begin to pinch them, they are gone: one puff
of temptation; one show of promotion; one storm of affliction, makes all their
building in matters of religion to become altogether ruinous.

So for the grounds, what could the good ground say for it self for a time,
which the ill grounds could not? They were all plowed, they all received the
seed, and brought it above ground those that did least. Whence was the
difference then? The bad grounds had not the stones dug out, nor the thorns
grubbed up; and therefore the seed springing up in the one sort, when the
parching heat came, withered away; and that in the other was choked by the
thorns, and so came to naught: each of the^ failing when their trial came:
whereas the good ground held out unto the end.

Peter was a good house, Judas was an ill house; therefore when a storm came,
though Peter lost a slatte or two, as the best house may, yet the foundation
and the side-wals stood firm: he wept bitterly for his sin, and craved
pardon for it, and so all was repaired. But what of Judas? he stood
indifferently well for a while: but at length when Christ rebuked him, he was
full of wrath; and when the high Priests offered him money, he was full of
covetousness: and so thinking to gain more by selling of Christ, than by
serving of him, he quite forsook his Master, and sought how to betray him to
his most mortal adversaries.

So Joseph being good under his fathers government, continued good also under
the government of Infidels, where he had all means of damnation, but none of
salvation; yea though he were at first in an unchaste house, where he was set
upon by his unchaste mistres; and afterward cast in prison amongst the
notablest malefactors in all the country: yet look what manner of man Joseph
was in his fathers house, the same he was still, both in Potiphars house, and
in the prison; and the same he continued to be when he came to great
advancement in Pharaohs court, which was the most dangerous temptation of all
the rest. Hereunto we may add, that Joseph was a young man, and therefore more
likely to be carried away; but all was nothing: when his heart was sound, all
the powers of hell could not prevail against him.

On the contrary part, it is said of Amaziah, that 2 Chronicles. 25. 5.
he did that which was upright in the eyes of the Lord, but not with a perfect
heart. Therefore mark what came of it: after that he had overcome the
Edomites, his heart was lifted up, and he (contrary to common sense) fell to
worship their Idols, whom he had vanquished in battle: he would not be so
precise any longer, nor be at the command of every Prophet, but would take his
liberty: and so being an hypocrite in the beginning, he manifested himself to
be a miserable hypocrite in the end. So Ioash all the while the good Priest 2 Chronicles. 24.
Iehoiadah lived, that would not suffer him to take ill courses, was very
forward, yea in some things more forward then Iehoiadah himself: but as 2
Kings 12. 7.
soon as Iehoiadah was dead, his religion was dead with him, and of a
professor, he became a persecutour; and nothing could stay him from his wicked
courses, until he was taken away by a violent death.

But that the point may be yet more clear, we will give instance in some
particular things, wherein men judge themselves to be very strong, when as the
truth is they are exceeding weak.

Many will thank God, that though in other things they come short, yet they
are endued with patience: but what do they when wrongs are offered them? why
then they take on as bad as the worst. Such need not brag of the abundance of
their patience, for they have never a jot more then they find when iniures are
offered them.

So others there are, that hope they love the truth: but let one of the Family
of love, or of the Brownists set upon them, and what will they do? presently
begin to think, and speak hardly of the servants and services of God, and
of the truth of God. This plainly argues that there was in the heart but
little love of the truth, but much pronenesse and aptness unto errors and
heresies. He is the truly courageous soldier that will stand to it, when the
skirmish is at hottest: as for those that will brag much before, and betake
them to their heels, or join (for fear) with the adversary when the battle
begins, they are mere cowards, utterly unworthy of the name of soldiers.

Again, others are conceited that they have merciful hearts; but hereby they
manifest the quite contrary, that they give so little of their superfluity to
those that are in necessity, whose hearts might be gladded, and whose souls
might be stirred up to offer praises and prayers unto the Lord for them, in
regard of their liberality.

Others again will not be persuaded, but they make conscience of the Sabbath:
but if there be occasion of travel offered on that day, will they not rather
God should lose his glory, than they their commodity? Yes surely, and thereby
they show themselves to be but profane persons, that did never conscionably
sanctify the Sabbath: for if they had done so, every slight temptation would
never carry them so far wide.

John gives us: saying, Whosoever is borne of God 1 Ioh. 3. 9.
sins not: and why? for his seed remains in him, etc. that is, he can
never be brought under the dominion of sin any more, because the immortal seed
of the word, sown in his heart, can never die. It is as possible to pull the
Sun out of heaven, as to pull grace out of such an ones heart: because all
such are kept by the power of God himself. Adam at first Pet. 1. 5.
stood by his own strength, but every Christian now stands by Gods strength;
Who is greater then Ioh. 10. 29.
all: so that none can take them out of his hand.

me? Why now examine what foundation







that we should rejoice when we fall into diverse Iam. 1. 2. 3.
temptations. And the Apostle yields 2. good reasons. First because thereby
our faith is refined. Other weapons, the more they are used, the worse they
are: but it is otherwise with this shield of faith; the more blows it
receives, the better it is. Secondly these trials do work patience, as is
plain Romans 5. 3.
in Job, who by his weakness and humble submission unto God under his grievous
crosses, did much honor the Lord; so that satan is the lesser in all such
conflicts,

fearful and shameful. Neither let men dream that it will be always
Summer: nay, the Lord has said, that those that pervert their ways shall be
Pro. 10. 9.
known: hypocrites shall be sifted first or last: and then their filthy
nakedness will appear. In the Acts of the Apostles we read of many that made
Acts 26. 1^
profession of Christ, who when Paul brought amongst them the fire of
persecution, to try what metal they were, they in steed of standing for
Christ, fell to blaspheming of his name. Paul's cruelty was but the occasion of
this, the cause was in themselves: for if they had been faithful Christians,
they would rather have denied their life, than the Lord of life; and have
endured a temporal death, than an eternal.

Indeed Gods dear children may be somewhat frighted and terrified at first,
but they quickly recover themselves again: being therein like a pure spring,
which being trodde in by beasts, or any other way stirred, will be somewhat
muddy for a while; but come within an hour after, and you shall find it
settled again. Therefore Christians should not be discouraged, though they
find a passion of fear, and unbelief now and then, if so be ordinarily they
send forth pure water: for there is a great difference betwixt them and
hypocrites, who are filthy puddles, having a little fair water running on the
top; but if they be stirred and raked into, they will appear to be most
loathsome, neither will they be easily settled again.

[ And it fell by and by, and the fall of that house was great] Carnal men
make it a small matter for one to forsake the profession of the truth. But the
Lord esteems that [a great fall] yea greater then if the Sun and the
stars fell from heaven: so that the point is, that of all falls the fall from
religion is the most woeful.

Nebuchadnezzars fall was great when he was stripped Apostasy is a most grievous
sin.
of his Empire, and in steed of ruling men was turned into the wilderness to
live amongst beasts, to eat and drink with the wild asses, and that for
seven years together: this was a marvelous great fall, yet not comparable to
theirs, that of professors become profane persons. For whereas Nebuchadnezzar
went from men to beasts, they go from godly men to wicked Atheists, that are
worse then beasts, yea to the company of devils, and of all the damned spirits.
And whereas Nebucadnezzar had a stumpe left in the ground, which after seven
years should sproute forth again, and so he should return to a better
estate then he enjoyed before; those that are reuolts and backesliders, have no
stumpe at all left in the ground, but are unrecoverable: For if we sin
willingly Heb. 10. 26. 27.
after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for of judgment, and of a violent
fire, which shall devour the adversaries. Nothing does so provoke the vengeance
of God against men, as this wretched apostacy does. For a man to fall from
riches to poverty, from promotion to debasement, etc. it is a matter of
nothing; God loves him never the worse: but to fall from profession to
profaneness; from God to the Devil; from heaven to hell; from life to death;
this is a lamentable thing indeed. David did not sustain the fall of his
house, but had only some tiles, and a part of the roof blown off: yet was
that a greater loss than if he had been deprived of his kingdom: neither
would that have so rent his soul, and crushed Psalm. 51.
his bones, and grownd his heart to powder, as the committing of those
offensive evils did: nay, if he had been set upon a steep rock with a
millstone about his neck, and from thence had been cast headlong into the sea,
it had been but a trifle in comparison of the other. Oh then how fearful must
their case be that do utterly forsake the living God? If his deadness and
hardness of heart, and inabilitie to do duties to God and men, were more
bitter then the most violent death unto him; if I say, the very decay in grace
did bring with it such torture; what must they expect either in this world, or
in that which is to come, or both, who do not only in part, but wholly lose
that taste of good things which once they had? and do not only in a passion,
as Peter did, deny Christ, but quite and clean forsake him?



1. Because the things which they lose are most

2 The ruin is in the soul, which is the more excellent part.

And furthermore, the effects will prove as much, which are,

1. Monstrous shame; for when any one falls from Achitophel and Judas did.

2 And not only so, but also everlasting Judas; who did not only dye a base
kind of death, being his own executioner, and having his filthy bowels, that
had been so full of covetousness and cruelty, gushing out: but also seeking to
exempt himself from the pains and gripings of an ill conscience, he cast
himself into the torments of hell, which are easlesse and endless.



Now if we would not have a great and shameful fall, let us take the direction
of Jude, which Jude 20.
he gives as a preservative against apostacy. But ye, beloved (says he)
edify your selves in your most holy faith. That is the first thing, that we
must still be building up of our selves, and strive to be better and better:
for we are like a boat that goes against the stream; if we labor not with
might and maine to row upward, we shall be carried violently downward.

A second thing is, that we must pray in the holy Ghost. Many will brag that
they say their prayers morning and night: but do they pray their prayers? A
parrot may say a prayer, but Christians must pray in the holy Ghost, that is,
with such petitions as the Spirit warranteth, and with sighs and groans which
it works in the heart. These two things whosoever can practice, namely, to
build up himself daily, and offer up faithful prayers unto God, he shall be
sure to stand fast and firm.

James says, Let the James 1. 9.
brother that is of low degree, rejoice in that he is exalted. Exalted (might
some say:) what exaltation is that, when they are as poor as ever they were? A
marvelous great exaltation it is; for they are made Christians, and so
consequently kings, both in respect of grace and glory. Caine and Nimrod,
Revel. 1. 6.
and many other reprobates, went beyond* ten thousand of us for outward things:
but all that advancement was to their greater shame and confusion. For earthly
promotion is nothing else but an high stage, and if one be an idiote, it were
better for him to play his part on the ground: if those that are in eminent
places have not power to master their own lusts and carnal affections, they
are but great fools upon an high stage. Therefore let us seek for spiritual
things more then for earthly, and be more thankful and joyful when we find
grace in our hearts, then if we should find many mines of gold, which none
could lay claim unto but our selves.

The end of the second Sermon, upon the 6. of Luke.
THE THIRD SERMON upon the fourteenth Psalm.
PSALM 14. Verse 5. There they shall be taken with fear, because God is in
the generation of the just.

6 You have made a mock of the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his
trust.


IN the former part of this Psalm is set down the just complaint of the
Prophet, concerning the sinful and corrupt nature, and conversation of all
unregenerate persons; where is declared their horrible impiety against God, in
that they said in their hearts, there was no God: as also their bloody cruelty
against his servants, in that they devoured them as greedily as an hungry man
does eat bread. Both which, their impiety and cruelty, are sufficiently
proved: first, by their abominable practice and behavior, both in committing
evil, and in omitting good. v. 1. 3. 4. Secondly, by the testimony of the
Lord, who took a survey of their disposition and carriage.

v. 2. Thirdly, by the evidence of their own consciences, Do not the workers
of iniquity know, etc?

Now in these words the holy Ghost shows what will be the end and issue of
such ungodly courses, and what judgment will fall upon such irreligious and
cruel persons; describing it

1 First, by the manner of it [ There they shall be taken with feare] that is,
in the mids of their sinful practices, horrible terrors shall take hold of
them, so that they shall be full of trembling and amazement. 2 Secondly, by the
principal causes for which this judgment is sent, which are two.
1 One in respect of God, viz. his favor and love unto his people, which he
manifests by being in the congregation of the righteous. That is, among all
righteous persons; and that not with an idle presence, but standing with them
and for them, to uphold, direct, and comfort them according to their need, and
to confound all such as lift up their heads against them. 2 Another cause is in
regard of the enemies of God and of his people, to wit, their malice and
sinfulness: against which the holy Ghost inueigheth by way of insultation, You
have made a mock, etc. q. d. You shall assuredly be met withal; and will you
know why? You have made a mock of the counsel of the poor. That is, at their
resolute purpose to seek God, and their constant endeavors to depend upon him,
as the words following seem to imply. Because the Lord is his trust. q. d. You
are so far from taking good ways, and resting upon the providence and
goodness of God your selves, that you disgrace and despite those that will do
so; and therefore without doubt, woe and misery shall overtake and ouerwhelme
you, when you little imagine any such matter.
There they shall be taken with feare] We may read in the former part of the
Psalm, how forward these men were unto all ungodliness, and unrighteousness;
and now see how they are affected, and thence learn this doctrine: that
Boldness in sin brings dastardlines afterward.
Those that are most bold to commit sin are most cowardly when dangers do
approach. Hardines, and venturousnesse in evil courses, has commonly
darstardlinesse attending thereupon, when any occasion of fear is offered.
There they shall be taken with fear (says the Prophet,) that is, in the very
height of their impiety against the Lord, and of their cruelty against his
servants; even there they shall be surprizsed with horror and astonishment,
albeit they in their folly say, There is no God; and therefore rush into all
abominations, utterly casting off the yoke of obedience, and delighting in
nothing more, than in devouring Gods people: yet will he make them know that
there is a God in heaven, that takes notice of their works and of their ways;
and if nothing else will cause them to believe it, the very torments and
tortures which he suddenly and strangely inflicteth upon their consciences,
shall make them, will they nill they, to confess it. For when they presume of
all manner of safety, and do not so much as dream of any peril that is
toward, because of the weakness and baseness of their adversaries; then some
unexpected evil shall overtake them, and anguish shall come upon them, Even as
travel upon a Psalm. 48. 6.
woman that i^ with child, that is, suddenly, grievously, and unavoidably.

This is denounced as a part of the curse to be executed upon those that would
not obey the laws of God, nor fear the glorious and fearful name of the
Lord: That he would give them a trembling Deuteronomy. 28. 65. 66.
heart, and a sorrowful mind: that they should fear both day and night: that
in the morning they should say, Would it were evening; and at evening, Would
God it were morning. Which very curse is expressed in other terms in the book
of Leuiticus, where the Lord threatens those that would not be reformed, but
would walk stubbornely against him, that he would send a faintness into
Leuit. 26. 36.
their hearts, in so much that the sound of a leaf shaken should chase them,
and they should fly as flying from a sword, though none did pursue them.

This point may be made yet more plain by examples. King Ahaz was maruailous
bold in his 2 Chronicles. ^8. 2. 3.
idolatrous and wicked courses, rejecting the ordinances of God, and bringing
in heathenish abominations in stead thereof, without any fear of God or of his
judgments. But how was he affected when danger was near? The Prophet Isaiah
tells us, that when the king of Aram and the king of Israel came against him,
his heart (together Isa. 7. 1. 2.
with the hearts of his people (that were like unto him) was moved as the trees
of the forest are moved by the wind: That is, both he and all his soldiers
were even as Aspen leaves, or some such like, that in a great tempest of
boisterous winds are maruailously tossed and shaken: the fear of their enemies
that were near at hand, did make them, having no faith in God, exceedingly to
quake and tremble. The like whereunto the same Prophet foretells concerning
the unbelieving Jews, speaking of that which should be, as if it were already
done. The sinners is Sion were afraid, (says he) a Isa. 33. 14.
fear is come upon the hypocrites. When Gods judgments do fly abroad in the
world, this is the use that sinful persons will make of them: they will vex
their hearts with hellish and desperate fears, and cry out, Who among us
shall dwell with devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting
burnings? For so they conceive of God, that he is a consuming fire, (as indeed
he is unto such as they are,) and that he will not only torment them
presently, but everlastingly.

We may read of Saul, in what woeful perplexity he was when he must part with
his kingdom and his life at once. In the time of his prosperity he was a man
of great courage, and too too boisterous against David: yet when news came
unto him that he must dye, the very report of it caused him straight way to
fall all along upon the earth like a beast, so that all that were present had
much ado to make him arise, and take a little food to refresh him. He was
strong in body, and mighty in Note.
battle, but sinful in heart, and therefore cowardly in heart: and the like
might be showed concerning Belshazzar king of Ba^el, Daniel 5. and the
soldiers that kept the sepulcher where Christ was laid, Mat. 28. 4.
when the Angel appeared in glory. But let us consider of the reasons hereof.

Deuteronomy. 29.
to the stubbornness of their own hearts: and therefore crosses being
unexpected, do find The suddenness of their misery.
them unprepared, and so cast them into greater perplexity and anguish. It is
said ( Psalm. 53. 5.) concerning ungodly men: There they were afraid for fear,
where no fear was. Not but there was peril, and so cause of fear, but they
had no expectation thereof; they mistrusted nothing, but went on as boldly in
sinning, as a man would do in the works of his calling, and therefore were
their hearts so distracted with fears when troubles did light upon them.

Their iudgment^ are very grievous.
are so tormented with horror is, because many times the judgments that God
lays upon them are very grievous: as they have pressed down others with
heavy burdens, so the Lord pursues them with heavy plagues. Those that offend
only through infirmity, shall have more mild and gentle corrections: but as
for them that transgress with an high hand, the Lord will visit them with
sharper scourges: and as they have been more bitter against their neighbors,
so the Lord will have them to drink more deeply of that cup which they prepared
for others.

Gods terrible justice is apparent in their afflictions.
be seen against those that make war against him, and against his people: he
will appear in his anger against such, and that must needs be terrible unto
them. There is no blessing so small, but if it come with Gods favor, it is
made very great: neither is there any cross so small, but if it come with Note.
Gods displeasure, it is made exceeding grievous; and that made them so afraid.
Isa. 33. 14. of whom mention was made before.

A fourth cause of their great terror is, the The guiltiness of their
consciences.
guiltiness of their consciences. They have imposed upon them grievous
burdens, which when the world went well with them, they scarce ever felt: but
in time of distress they are made sensible thereof; and then they have as it
were a hell within them, and are continually upon the rack.

But that we may not mistake the meaning of this point, we must understand,
that this faint-heartednesse and cowardlinesse does not always come upon
presumptuous sinners when they behold imminent dangers: for though none of them
have true courage and fortitude, yet many of them have Note.
a kind of desperate stoutnesse and resolution, when they do as it were see
death present before their faces: which proceeds from a kind of deadness
that is upon their hearts, and a brawninesse that has ouergrowne their
consciences to their greater condemnation. But when it pleases he Lord to
waken them out of the dead slumber, and to set the worm of conscience aworke
within them, then this doctrine holds true without any exception, that the
boldest sinners prove at length the basest cowards; and they that have been
most audacious in aduenturing upon the most mischievous evils, do become of all
others most timorous when Gods revenging hand seazeth upon them for the same.

outward helps: for there is nothing in the world that can procure us safety if
we by our inquities do set the Lord against us.



Achitophel as deep a politician as the best of us? yet when Gods terrible
stroke was upon his heart, all his cunning could not keep him from hanging
himself.



They are all corrupt, all gone out of the way, there is none that does good,
no not one: so that there was as it were an universal conspiracy in evil; yet
is it said of them all: There were they taken with fear. And at the last day
at the beholding of the terrible signs that shall appear, and at the hearing
of the roaring of the sea, all nations shall quake and tremble: so that the
multitude of offenders does no whit better their case, nay that rather makes
it worse: for sometimes even where there is no peril, the very hearing of many
sending forth bitter cries and lamentable complaints, is a sufficient terror:
how much more then would it be, if we were plunged in misery with them? It is a
cold comfort unto us to be told, You may safely go to such a town; for there
all the houses are generally infected with the pestilence! and as small an
encouragement is it for men to rush upon the committing of any sin, because
almost all the world is addicted thereunto, and corrupted therewith. For, as
the more are infected with the pestilence, the more are likely to die; and
those that go unto them, are sure of more discomfort among them, and in danger
to perish with them: so by how much the number of them is greater that are
tainted with gross sins, the more are likely to go to hellish torments; and
such as will be their companions in evil, shall certainly be partakers with
them in punishment: and the more reprobates are in hell together, the more
hideous and woeful will their state be.



them, and to lay their sins new and old in order before them.

For what says the Prophet Zephany? In the great Zeph. 1. 14. 15.
day of the Lords wrath, the strong man shall cry bitterly. Now crying is an
argument of great perplexity and anguish, and of baseness of mind, when it
proceeds from outward causes; and yet the Prophet says, that the strong men,
and such as did profess fortitude, should cry, and that bitterly: and the more
courageous they had been in sin, the more cowardly they should be when the Lord
did visit them for sin.



Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, and Belshazzar, were as great and as proud as most of
these braggers: yet did not the Lord strike them with horror and amazement,
and make them see and know that he was the king of kings, and Lord of Lords?
Satan has all that worldly men can have, and a great deal more both of wit,
and wealth, and company, and courage, and command; and yet for all this the
very consideration of Gods indignation makes him to tremble: according to that
of the Apostle Iam. 2. 19.
James: Thou beleeuest that there is one God, the devils also believe, and
tremble. And how then can they think to escape the terrors of the Lord, who
though they be great in the world, yet come far behind the prince of the
world in greatness?

Let experience speak in this point: when the Note.
Lord took away our gracious Queen, and there was likelihood either of a
civil dissension, or foreign invasion, (howbeit the Lord miraculously delivered
us from them both:) who were then least troubled with fears? those that were
great in the world, or such as were great in Gods favor? And now that the Lord
does visit our cities, and towns and villages with the pestilence, who are
they that are most courageous? surely those that truly fear the Lord: they
think it the safest course to exercise themselves in the works of their
callings, and not to run hither and thither; and to come unto the public
assemblies of the Saints, and not to neglect the feeding of their souls for
fear of endangering their bodies: whereas the wealthy and great ones of the
world, hide their heads in a corner, being very unwilling to adventure upon any
good work that either God or man calls them unto, if there be but the least
appearance of any peril.



First, let us beware of all manner of sins, that no Remedies against he^lish
fears. 1. Fear to offend. See M. Dods book: Con. 1. Psalm. 1^. ^
iniquity have entertainment with us; and labor to be at one with the Lord,
that so our consciences may be at one with us: which if we can attain unto, we
shall be strongly fortified against all unnecessary fears. According to that
in the Psalm: Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, etc. He shall not be
afraid of evil tidings, etc. Where the Prophet shows, that he is an happy
man that is truly religious, and shows it forth by fearing of God, and
delighting in his commandments, and by performing the duties of love and
mercy toward his brethren: for as he shall be freed from all hurtful evils,
so shall he be exempted from all passionate fear thereof. Many wicked Note.
men have not the plague in their houses, and yet are plagued with the fear of
it: and many godly men have their families visited therewith, and yet are not
perplexed with such terrors: and the reason is yielded in that place, because
their hearts are fixed and established, and believe in the Lord. That is the
foundation whereupon they build their courage and confidence, even the Lord
himself, who is a sure stay to those that rely upon him. His children know
that nothing can befall them without his providence, and that nothing shall
betide them, but he will support them under it, and make them to profit by it:
and what cause then have they to be distempered? If therefore we desire to have
still and quiet hearts, when others shall be even at their wits end, then let
us get the breast plate of righteousness and innocence: for the righteous is
bold as a Prou. 28. 1.
Lion. Let us fear sin before it be committed, and when we are tempted
thereunto, say with Job: Are there not strange punishments for the workers of
iniquity? Job. 31.
Will not the Lord be angry with me if I should commit this wickedness? will
not mine own heart be discomforted? will not my spirit be made sad within me?
how should I be able to look the Lord in the face, if he should lay his hand
in any fearful manner upon me or mine, when I have so provoked him to his
face etc? Thus if we could fright our hearts from offending the majesty of God
we should be as bold as Job was when the waves of adversity flow in upon us on
every side: The Lord (says he) has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed
Job. 1. 21. Job. 13. 15.
be the name of the Lord. And in another place, Though the Lord should kill me,
yet will I trust in him. He feared sin which is the sting of crosses, and
therefore were his crosses less terrible unto him when they came: and so will
they be unto us if we carefully eschew those corruptions which otherwise will
inuenome and poison them unto us. This is the first means to arm us against
fears, viz. to take heed of sin before it be committed.

Repentance for offenses committed.
stand in awe of Gods judgments due unto the same, and so to be led on to true
repentance. The best way to escape desperate fear, is, to fright our souls
with an holy fear: For if we judge our selves, we shall not be judged of the
Lord. Excellent for this purpose, is that answer of Huldah the Prophetess
unto good Josiah: Because thine heart 2. Kings 22. 19. 20.
did melt (says she) and thou have humbled thy self before the Lord, when
thou heardest what I spoke against this place, and against the inhabitants of
the same, to wit, that it should be destroyed, and accursed; and have rent thy
clothes, and wept before me, I have also heard thee says the Lord. Behold
therefore I will gather thee to thy fathers; and thou shall be put in thy grave
in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil that I will bring upon this
place. And agreeable to this, is the speech of Habakkuk: When I heard, Hab. 3.
16.
my belly trembled, my lips shook at thy voice: rottenness entered into my
bones, and I trembled in my self. But what benefit had he by that? That I
might have rest in the day of trouble. So that we see the best way to be quiet
and peaceable in our selves in troublesome times, is to be disquiet in our
hearts for sin before troubles do approach.

Fear of Gods judgments.
when we behold them upon others; and if we have been sinful before, yet then
to seek a reconciliaon with God before his displeasure arise against us. It
was the wisdom of the Gibeonites, when they Joshua 9.
saw Ierico and Ai vanquished and destroyed, not to stand it out with Joshua,
but to make a league with him: if they could deal so prouidently with him for
their bodies, much more should we with the Lord for our souls. When the wise
captain came unto Elijah with his fifty men, considering how the two former
captains had been consumed with fire from heaven, he humbles himself and
says: O man of God, I pray thee let 2 King. 1. 23.
my life be precious in thy sight. In like manner when we hear that the people
of the land are taken away by hundreds and thousands, seeing we are guilty of
the same sins, that they were; we should cast down our souls before the
Lord, and beseech him that our lives may be precious in his sight, but
especially that our souls may be spared: that though our bodies should perish,
yet our transgressions being pardoned, our better part may be preserved, and
everlastingly saved. This is See the second Sermon on Lament. 3. v. 57. Fear
not.
the best receipt that any can take against the venom of the pestilence, that
he may be sure it shall never hurt him. And thus much of the remedies against
hurtful fears.

[ Because God is in the generation of the just.] This is one reason why it
must needs go hardly with wicked men, that are deuourers and spoilers of Gods
people; because the Lord himself is among them, to take notice of all the
injuries and indignities which they sustain, and to revenge their quarrel
upon their enemies, that are stronger than Good men never want good company.
they: whence arises this point of doctrine, that the Lord is ever present
with all righteous men.

A good man never wants good company: for wheresoever a Christian is, there
God himself is with him, and in him, and round about him: so that none are so
near unto one another, as the Lord is unto his people.

Now that he is always thus present with his Revel. 1. 13
children, appears in the Revelation. Where Christ is said to walk in the
mids of the seven golden Candlesticks: that is, of the seven Churches: so
that it is his ordinary walk to go in and out amongst his servants. Neither
has he a general care of the whole Church only, but he has an eye also unto
every particular member; as will appear in several examples. When Jacob was
all alone, traveling toward Padan Aram, there being no town near, and the
night drawing on, he was feign to take up his lodging in the open field: but
that night the Lord showed himself present with Jacob, and he saw that he had
acquaintance even in that solitary place; for God took notice of him, and
renewed with him his covenant made unto Abraham and Isaac, and made him a
promise Genesis 28. 15
to be [ with him] whither soever he went, etc. So that that night was one of
the comfortablest nights that ever Iocob had.

The like we read of Elijah, that when he fled from Iezabell, there was one
knew him in the wilderness and brought him his dinner, even an Angel sent
from God: and afterward when he 1 King. 18.
was upon mount Horeb, the Lord took knowledge of him, and called him by his
name: What do thou here, Elijah?

Yea Jonah found favor from God, where no body else could come unto him, even
in the bottom of the sea. Whence it is evident, that the Lord is every where
with his people. And How God is present with his.
that.

To direct them.
in which regard Christ that is called a counselor ( Isa 9.) is said to be in
the mids of the seven golden Candlestickes, clothed with a garment down to
the feet, as was the manner of counselors in those times. Revel 1. 13. So
that he is evermore ready to resolve us in our doubts: to advise us in our
actions and in our speeches, and to direct us what and how to do and speak,
according as occasion shall be offered.

To defend them. Isa. 43. 1. 2.
protector of his children, according to that of the Prophet Isaiah: When thou
passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the floods, that
they do not ouerflowe thee. When thou walk through the very fire, thou
shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Where we may see
that the Lord promises to be with his Church in a wonderful manner, and to be
a defense and safeguard unto the^ in the most perilous times, even when they
should pass through fire and water.

To comfort them.
Spirit as a comforter, to refresh their hearts in all extremities. Christ
fortelleth his disciples, that in the world they should meet with many
sorrows, which should cause them to mourn, when others did rejoice; but
withal he promises to send them the comforter, even the blessed Spirit of
grace, which Ioh: 14. 6.
should minister unto them abundance of consolation, even in the mids of the
persecutions and sufferings, which they endured for Christ his sake.

And that which was promised unto them, all the members of Christ shall feel
in themselves: for God is he that comfort the abect, one as 2 Cor. 7. 6.
well as another, without exception.

By this now which has been spoken it may easily be discerned how the Lord is
present with his servants, viz. by his wisdom to direct them: by his power,
to preserve the^; and by his Spirit, to comfort them. And that God has been,
and is thus present still, will be very evident, if we consider the state of
the Church what it is, what it has been: namely still beset with many and
mighty adversaries, that have used, and do use, their wit and wealth, and
power and friends, and al means that possibly they can divise, for the razing
and utter overthrowing of Gods people: and yet have Note.
never been able to effect and bring to pass their malicious enterprises
against the same. The Church is as a weak tent in it self, not fortified with
any walls, and yet those that have laid siege against it, and sought utterly to
consume it, have not taken away so much as one stake, or broken so much as one
cord thereof, as the Prophet Isaiah witnesses: and why? Isa. 33. 20. 21.
because (as he says) the mighty Lord was their defense. Christians are even
as sheep, very impotent and feeble for the most part, in regard of outward
strength; and withal few in number: and their enemies are like raging Lions,
and besides for multitude very many: yet the flock of Christ still remains,
and the more the wicked rage against it, the more does it still increase, as we
have an experiment in the Israelites under Pharaohs tyranny. Yea in many places
Note.
where their pastors seek to make havoc of the^, even there are they
courageous for the truth; and though Christians dwell where satan's throane is,
and were he seems to bear full sway, yet it may be said to them, as it was
unto the Church of Pergamus by Christ Jesus, Thou keep my name, and Revel.
2. 13
have not denied my faith.

Yea further (which is of all other things most strange) the poor lambs of
Christ are so far from being torn in pieces by those Lions, that they become
Lions themselves, not for cruelty but for courage. For so says the Prophet
Micah: And the Mich. 5. 8.
remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles, in the mids of many people, as
the Lions among the beasts of the forest, and as the Lions whelpe among the
flocks of sheep. The meaning of which place is, that some few poor
Christians standing in the cause of God, and coming furnished with the grace
and power of the holy Ghost, should be able to daunt and terrify the hearts of
many sinful persons, and cause them even to quake and tremble, as Paul did
Felix, when he reasoned powerfully and Act. 24. 26.
effectually concerning righteousness, and temperance, and the judgment to
come. In so much that many who are hypocrites in heart, will make a show of
religion and piety, and seem to conform themselves unto Christians whom they
hate with a deadly hatred: which plainly argues, that there is a kind of
majesty of God, shining forth Note.
in the faces and in the carriage of Gods servants, which the vilest reprobates
are many times driven to acknowledge, though full sore against their wills.

Achitophel that he forsook king David to take part with Absolon. And it was
the ruin of Abiathar and Ioab that they withdrew themselves from Solomon to
set up Adonijah as king over Israel. And why sped they so ill, but because they
were of a contrary side unto God himself, who stood for David and Solomon, and
their adherents? And certainly the Lord is as strongly with his Church now, as
he was with David and Solomon then; and therefore it must needs be very
dangerous for any to separate themselves from his chosen: in which regard let
us be careful evermore to cleave unto them, and to take part with them.



Psalm. 3.
thousand to one: for God is their buckler, and the lifter up of their heads:
he will smite all their enemies upon the cheek bone, and dash out their teeth
that seek to draw blood from his servants. All that hate Sion shall perish
even as the grass that grows upon the house top; which though it make a
bragging show for a time, yet suddenly withers and comes to nothing. They
that seek to root out the Israel of God, do, as it were, set their naked
shoulder, to remove an huge rock that will fall upon them, and grind them to
powder, be they Zach. 12. 3
never so many: and therefore we have little reason to be afraid of them.



Many are desirous to go to the Court in hope (though they be not certain) to
see the King only, albeit he do not look upon them, or speak to them, or
they to him: how much more desirous should we be to come unto public
Christian meetings, where we shall be sure to see the King of Kings in his
glory, and to have him to take notice of us, to speak unto us, to grant us
free liberty to put up our suites unto him, and to estate us in all the good
things, which his son Christ has purchased for us by his precious blood?

Are our hearts frozen in the dregs of our iniquities, and so hardened that
we cannot mourn for the same? let us repair unto holy assemblies, and there
we shall meet with the weapons of God that will pierce and wound our hearts, and
cause them to be dissolved into tears: there shall we feel the virtue of the
spirit, effectually working upon us, so that we shall be constrained to say of
those that deliver the message of Christ unto us, that God is in them indeed.
Do 1. Cor. 14. 25.
we want faith in Gods providence and promises? Do we want power and strength
against our corruptions? In a word, do we want any grace of God, or any
blessing of God? let us have recourse unto the congregations of the Saints, and
there we shall meet the Lord himself, who will be ready to supply our
necessities whatsoever they be, and to grant us above that that we can ask or
think.

And as for our own private cases, so for the public state of the Church and
Commonwealth; if we would have the pestilence or famine, or any other
judgment removed, the way to procure this is, to repair thither, where we
shall meet with many of the faithful, that will be ready to join with us in
prayer, and to wrestle with the Lord by fervent and earnest supplications for
the removing of his deserved strokes. And this should much encourage us and
add life unto our prayers, as often as we have occasion to ask any thing in
public, that God will vouchsafe unto us his gracious presence, and show by
good effect that he is in the generation of the righteous.

Verse. 6. Ye have made a mock of the counsel of the poore] In that the holy
Prophet does lay this unto wicked men's charge, as a heinous crime, and as the
cause of his strokes that were to be inflicted upon them, this Doctrine
offers it self for our learning, that

Mockers are grievous persecutors. Heb. 11.
takes special notice of.

In which regard the Apostle, Heb. 11. 36. speaking of the wonderful great
trials which sundry of the Saints did by faith undergo, reckons up this as
none of the least of them, that they had been tried by mockings. In like sort
when the holy Ghost yields a reason of the utter overthrow of the kingdom of
Judah, and of their long and woeful captivity, he sets down this to be one
of the principal causes thereof, viz. That they mocked 2. Chro. 36. 26.
the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets,
until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, and till there was no
remedy.

This kind of persecution Ismael used against Gal. 4. 29.
Isaac (as the Apostle witnesses) for which he Genesis 21. 9.
was cast out of the Church of God. And this was one of the meritorious
sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, that they spit upon him, and nodded Mat.
26. and 27. Psalm. 22.
their heads at him, and used taunting and disgraceful speeches unto him, and
put as it were a fools coat upon him to disguise him, and called him in
mockage, the King of the Jews, etc. This I say was not the least part of his
bitter passion, through which he purchased eternal salvation for all his
elect, namely, that he endured much contempt and reproach both in the course of
his life, and at the time of his death.

Now the reason why Satan makes choice of this weapon above others, therewith
to fight against Gods servants, is,



Note.
limme of his cannot imprison, nor spoil Christians of their goods, or of
their lives: but there are few or none but they can frame scoffs and jests
against the members of Christ Jesus. Every boy can quickly grow skillful at
this, as we see in Ismael, and in the two and forty children that 2. King. 2.
were torn in pieces of two bears for their mocking of the Prophet Elisha:
the very scumme of the people, the vagabonds and rogues that run up and down
the country can do their master the devil good service this way: those that
were the children of fools and the children of villains, Job 30. 8. 9.
(as Job speaks) who were more vile then the earth it self, could make Job
their song and their talk: and in like sort did the drunkards and Psalm. 69.
12. Psalm. 35.
pot-companions deal with David; and the thief upon the cross with our
Savior, even at yt time Matthew. 27. 44.
when the fierce wrath of God was manifested upon his body hanging on the
cross, for that he had been a notorious and heinous malefactor.

Ismael was, and be exposed to such plagues and punishments as the wicked Jews
were, who mocked the messengers of God, and reviled our blessed Savior in such
an opprobrious and disgraceful manner, as the Scriptures do record.

Heb. 13. 12. 13.
borne our reproach, we should bear his, and for the joy that is laid before
us, endure the cross, Heb. 12. 2.
and despise the shame, and so at length we shall receive the crown of
glory, which is prepared for all those that in patience do wait for his
glorious appearing.

Now that we may be better enabled to bear How we may be enabled to bear
contempt.
these taunts and reproaches, let us take this direction following.

Labor against pride.
is naturally in every one of our hearts, which makes us utterly unable to
undergo disgrace: therefore was it, that though many of the chief rulers of
the Jews believed in Christ, yet they durst not confess him, because of the
Pharisees, who would have excommunicated them, and disgraced them to the
utmost: and the reason is rendered in that place, viz. That they loved the John
12. 43.
praise of men, more then the praise of God: they stood upon their carnal
credit and reputation among their neighbors and countriemen, more then upon
that true credit and estimation which they might have had with the Lord and
his children; and therefore was it that they were so loath to expose themselves
for Christ his sake unto the shame of the world: whereas if they had had humble
and lowly hearts, they would have denied themselves in their estimation among
men, and have taken up the reproach of Christ as an honorable crown: let this
therefore be our first work to labor against the hautinesse of our fleshly
hearts.

Consider what scoffers are.
endure to be vilified and disgraced, let us consider what manner of men
scoffers be, viz. the most abject, vile and contemptible persons that are, as
we may see in those before mentioned, who in this sort pursued Job and David,
and our blessed savior.



Zenacherib was; for when he sent a disdainefull and scornful message unto
Hezekiah, and the rest of Gods people, he was indeed ignominious, because he
was impious and blasphemous: he was vile in Gods sight, and he made him appear
vile both before men and Angels, according to that of Isaiah, The Isai. 37. 22.
virgin daughter of Sion has despised thee and laughed thee to scorn.

Isaiah shows, saying, Fear ye not for the reproach of men, neither be ye
afraid Isai. 51. 7. 8.
of their rebukes. For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the
worm shall eat them like wood.



Note.
righteous men's bodies become worms meat, yet it is not in any displeasure
from the Lord, nor for any hurt unto them, for they are still precious in his
eyes, as their souls are, which even then enjoy celestial happiness; and
besides even those bodies of theirs shall be restored, and be made
everlastingly glorious together with their souls: all which things are far
otherwise with such sinful persons as delight themselves in scoffing and
deriding of the Saints of God: their bodies are at best when they are devoured
by worms: they can never expect better, but that which is far worse shall
surely come unto them.

Meditate on the reward.
to swallow up such reproaches as are cast upon us, let us seriously meditate on
the reward which is promised unto them that can so do. Blessed are you (says
our Savior) when men revile Matthew. 5. 11. 12.
you, and persecute you, and speak all manner of evil against you for my
names sake falsely. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven.
And again, the Apostle Peter says, If ye be railed upon 1. Pet. 4. 14.
for the name of Christ, blessed are ye; for the spirit of glory, and of God
rests upon you. This made Moses to esteem the rebuke of Christ greater
riches then Heb. 11. 26.
the treasures of Egypt: for (says the holy Ghost) he had respect unto the
recompense of the reward. Therefore when we find our hearts beginning to be
dismayed at the bitter taunts and jests of profane scoffers, let us animate
our selves unto patience with these or the like considerations; why should I be
discouraged at these things? sinful men seek to vilify and disgrace me; but
does God think ever the worse of me? I am base and contemptible in their eyes,
but do the Angels of God, or any of his Saints, conceive any whit more hardly
of me in that regard? Nay, does not the Lord himself, and such as have his
image most lively shining forth in them, esteem me so much more honorable, by
how much they labor to make me more vile and abject in regard of my weldoing?
Why then should I faint under the burden of reproach, wherewith they do still
load me? especially seeing that this momentanie disgrace which I sustain for
Christ his cause, shall bring unto me an eternal and inualuable weight of
glory?

Of the poore] From which words note this Doctrine, that the estate of Gods
people is commonly The godly usually afflicted.
a poor and afflicted estate. Therefore in the original the word [ poore] is
not used in the Plural number, but in the Singular, and carries this sense [
ye have made a mock of the counsel of that poor one] implying thereby, what
is the common case of all, namely, to be full of calamities and distresses,
through many tribulations to enter into the kingdom Acts 14. 22. Romans 8.
of God, and to be conformable unto their head Christ in afflictions and
sufferings.

And this the Lord in his wise providence will have to be so for these reasons:

1. 1. Cor. 2.
him.

Note.
thereby grow to advancement in the world, and so seek earthly things in
spiritual exercises.

In their affliction Hos. 5. 15.
(says God) they will seek me diligently. Before that time they would rather
sue unto any then unto the Lord: therefore was he driven to break them with one
breaking upon another, that so having no other refuge to betake themselves
unto, they might have recourse unto him. This is clear in the example of
Manasse, who being in bonds and in irons, humbled his soul before the Lord,
and prayed unto him for favor, and mercy, and found it at his hands: whereas
before such time as he was pressed down with grievous misery, he obstinately
refused to hearken unto the Lord, and to his messengers, and was so far from
calling upon his name, that he dishonored it by all manner of abominations,
which he committed with an high 2. Chron. 33. 6.
hand, even to anger the Lord.

Zephanie, saying, I will Zeph. 3. 12.
leave in the midst of thee an humble, and poor people, and they shall trust
in the name of the Lord.

Noblemen, or men of learning and policy are of their minds? and for those
that are, have they not manifold afflictions in their hearts, or upon their
bodies and estates? This is just the cavil of the Pharisees against the
doctrine of our Savior: Never man spoke like this man (say the officers that
Joh. 7. 46. 47. 48.
were sent to take him, but did not:) Then answered the Pharisees, Are ye also
deceived? Does any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believe in him? but this
people which know not the law, are accursed. Therefore let not us be deceived
by such vain words of men, that judge not righteous judgment, but according
as their own fleshly wisdom directs them, but let us rather build upon the
words of him that is the true witness, who as he received a commission to
preach unto the poor, so he did accordingly Luke 4.
perform it, and found good success thereupon, and therefore bids John's
disciples to tell him, that the poor received the Gospel. They Luke 7. 22.
were the profitable and fruitful hearers of Christ, who by reason of some
outward calamities and distresses or other, were humbled and abased in their
own eyes, and had the pride and stubbornness of the flesh somewhat mastered
and taken down.

which has been trodden by Christ and all his Saints, to pass through manifold
troubles and grieuances, manifold straits and extremities, and at length to
attain unto that rest which is prepared for us in the kingdom of God. If any
by reason 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7.
of their necessities and miseries had ever missed of the crown of life, we
had some cause to fear our selves in that regard: but sithence none ever did
so, but rather have reaped benefit by their afflictions, then taken any hurt
thereby, we should be of good comfort; and be so far from fainting in our
trials, that we should rejoice in the same, making full account, that then
Gods own hand will most manifestly appear for our preservation and
consolation, when humane helps do most of all fail us: neither indeed could it
be so clearly discerned that he is the vpholder of his Church, if it had
wealth, and power, and outward props and pillars to bear up the same.

Ye have made a mock of the counsel of the poor: and why? because the Lord is
his trust: This is the very true cause, whatsoever other pretenses there be.
Wicked men have a quarrel against godliness.
Whence observe this Doctrine, that true godliness is that which breeds the
quarrel between Gods children and the wicked.

Ungodly men may say what they list, as namely, that they hate and dislike them
for that they are proud and saucy in meddling with their betters: for that they
are scornful and disdainful toward their neighbors: for that they are
mal^content, and turbulent, and I know not what: but the true reason is yielded
by the Lord in this place, to wit, because they make him their stay and their
confidence, and will not depend upon lying vanities, as the men of the world
do.

And the like reason is given by the Apostle Peter, who speaking of
unregenerate men, says, that it seems strange to them, that the godly run
not 1. Pet 4. 4.
with them to the same excess of riot: and therefore (says he) speak they
evil of you. The cause why they traduce and defame them, is not because Note.
they are evil, but because they will not be as bad as themselves: not because
they have committed great faults, but because they will not commit them. And
this we may observe in our own experience, that the most holy exercises are
most offensive unto carnal persons: and that they exclaim against many
things, as if they were heinous crimes, which God has commanded as necessary
duties: to wit, fasting and prayer, and hearing of the word, and such like,
which as occasion serves, must of necessity be performed: these are the holy
men (say they) that must needs be more forward then all their neighbors; that
will not allow of good fellowship and of merry meetings, but are altogether
for praying and for preaching, etc. when others are sporting and dancing, and
recreating themselves: I warrant you they are but mere hypocrites and
dissemblers: their hearts are as bad as the worst, and none are more disloyal
subjects to their Prince then such are. These are hard charges, yet such as
befell Christ Jesus himself, who among many other false imputations was
esteemed an enemy to Caesar. But whence proceed all these hard surmises and
censures? Surely from this, that Gods children do endeavor from a true and
faithful heart to serve and please the Lord in all things, and do refuse to
walk with the multitude in the broad way that leads unto destruction. Here is
the matter whereupon al their malice does work: and this arises,

which keep the commandments of Revel. 12. 17.
God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

Cain, who hated and murdered his brother Abel: and why? because his own
works were evil, 1. Ioh. 3. 12.
and his brothers good.





otherwise what caused the Prophets of God, the Son of God himself, and his
holy Apostles to be so much hated and wronged by ungodly men? They dare not
say it was their indiscretion and nisenesse, or any the like failing on their
part, but in truth the malice of the wicked, which is the very cause why even
in these our days Gods people find such hard measure from profane persons.

they that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion, that Psalm. 125. 1.
cannot be removed, but stands fast for ever.

FINIS.
The fourth Sermon.
Those that rebel against God are the worst rebels.
rebels, that are rebels against God.

Though it be an offense very grievous and odious for a subject to show
himself disloyal to his earthly Sovereign, yet this shall stand as a sure
conclusion when heaven and earth shall fall, that the greatest Sinner is the
greatest Traitor. Hence it is, that when the Prophet Samuel would set out the
hainousnes of Saul's sin, in sparing Agag the King of the Amalekites, and the
best of the sheep and oxen, and of the things that should have been destroyed,
he compares it with those crimes that were most hateful and Exodus 22. 18. 20
most punishable by Gods law, saying, Rebellion (to 1. Sam. 15. 22.
wit, against the Lord) is as the sin of witchcraft, and transgression is
wickedness, and Idolatry: and therefore Saul must needs be a notorious
malefactor, that was found guilty thereof. So likewise in the prophecy of
Isaiah, when the Lord would lay upon the unbelieving Jews the most grievous
imputation that could be, for their renouncing and forsaking of him, and their
seeking unto and relying upon the King of Egypt for succor and protection, he
terms them rebellious children, Isai. 30. 1.
and rebellious people: and in the same terms deals 9.
Moses with the stiffenecked and perverse Israelites: Hear ye rebels (says
he) shall we bring you Numb. 20. 10.
water out of the rock? as if more could not be spoken for the shame and
disgrace of impious persons, then to brand them with the note of rebels against
the Lord of heaven and earth.

But that this point may be yet more clear and perspicuous, let us weigh these
reasons that follow for the confirmation thereof.

Romans 7. 12.
of his Prince) are most equal and just, and meet to be kept: and therefore the
presumptuous breach thereof must of necessity argue the most indigne and
unworthy rebellion that can be imagined. It was no small fault in the
Israelites to renounce their allegiance to Rehoboam, and to stand up in arms
against him, being their lawful King and Governor, albeit he threatened to
impose upon them rigorous and sharp laws, to make his yoke 1. King. 12. 14.
more grievous then his fathers, so that whereas Solomon had chastised them
with rods, he would correct them with scourges: how heinous then is their
offense that do refuse to submit their necks unto Gods yoke, who is a more
absolute King then ever any was, or shall be to the end of the world, whose
laws are perfitly good and righteous, all of them tending, not alone to his
own glory, but to the present and eternal benefit and comfort of such as do
obey the same?

Achitophels treachery against David more inhumane and barbarous:) now what
Kings favors can stand in the balance against Gods favors, which he
vouchsafes to the basest of the sons of men? for he it is that gives them
life and being and al things: in him they live and Acts 17.
move and have their subsistence: and without him they could not continue to
breathe so much as one hour, nay nor one minute of an hour, much less enjoy
the comfortable use of any creature under the Sun: and therefore seeing the
bounty and kindness of the Lord is so exceeding great, their rebellion that
do lift up themselves against him, and cast off the obedience of his laws, is
of all men most worthy to be condemned and abhorred.



First, the grieuousnesse thereof is evident by this, that whereas earthly
Monarchs can proceed no further against the most notorious malefactors, but to
the torturing and killing of their bodies, the confiscating of their lands and
goods, and the defaming of them and theirs for a season: (so that if there be
unfeigned repentance in the parties offending, as there was in the good thief
on the cross, their souls may be saved, and their names healed, and both body
and soul eternally glorified) it is otherwise with the great King of heaven,
who will plague those that are traitors against his Majesty with all manner of
judgments in this life, and when he has done with them here, will call them
to a reckoning again at that great Assizes at the last day, and there expose
them to perpetual shame and infamy, and inflict upon their bodies and souls
such torments as shall be easelesse, endless and remediless.

Secondly, for the vnauoidablenes of these punishments, we must know, that
though rebels against worldly Princes, when they have cast themselves into
danger, may by flying, or hiding of themselves, escape, or if they be
apprehended, make notable defenses and apologies to serve their present
purpose, and so wind themselves out of troubles, it is no boot to deal in
that sort with the Lord: for whither can they go from his Psalm. 139.
presence, but he will find them out? and what witty and cunning devices can
they have for the coloring of their treacherous practices, but he will
descrie and discover the same, and that to their greater shame and punishment?
Which being Isaiah 29.
so, the use shall be,

charge them with treason: what say they to this? Do they not usually take the
holy name of God in vain? Do they not profane his Sabbaths? do they not
defile their souls and bodies with many horrible pollutions? And whereas they
have been often told of these faults and sharply rebuked for them, do they not
for all that continue still in them, and undertake the defense of them? Yea do
they not fret and fume and chafe at such as seek to reclaim them from their
leaud courses? If their consciences do accuse them of these, and the like
crimes, undoubtedly they are guilty of high treason against the Lord of heaven
and earth: they carry the devils badge, and fight under his banner, as
professed enemies unto God, and his truth: and whatsoever they think of
themselves, such the Lord will esteem them to be, and proceed against them
accordingly.



as their consciences tell them, that they are willing to attend to holy and
wholesome doctrine, whereby their sins may be reproved, and their hearts and
lives reformed and bettered, they may be sure that God accounts them good
subjects; and those that are such unto him, are of all other most loyal and
dutiful unto their rulers and governors: neither indeed can any be truly
faithful unto men, that has not first learned to be faithful unto God. Let us
not therefore be dismayed at the clamors of those that do unjustly charge us
with disloyalty. Athaliah cried out, treason, 2. King. 11. 14.
treason: but in truth, she was the traitor her self: and the like may be said
of many that are so ready to traduce others in that sort: whatsoever their
outward behavior toward Magistrates and such as are in authority be, they
are miserable and wretched rebels before the Lord, and such they shall appear
to be in the end, if they do not in time submit themselves under his gracious
government.

FINIS.
The fifth Sermon.
It is a mark of an impious person to reject the word.
profane person to be unwilling to hear the holy word of God.

Although men do ordinarily resort unto the assemblies where the Gospel is
purely preached; yet, if they wish in their hearts that they were from under
those droppings, and if they might have their own choice, they would be from
under them, they are carnal and ungodly men, what appearances soever there be
to the contrary. From this ground the prophet Isaiah concludes the Jews to
be a falsehearted and rebellious people, because they would not hear the
Isaiah 30. 9.
word of the Lord. They were constrained now and then to hear it whether they
would or not: but their affection went against it, and the Lord judged them,
and passed sentence upon them for that, calling them a rebellious people, and
lying children, such as were full of perverseness and of dissimulation within,
whatsoever fair shows they made outwardly to dazzle the eyes of men.

The same mark of wicked sinners is given by Job, where he says, They say
unto God, Depart from Job 21. 14.
us: for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: not that there is any such
wicked monster that will directly use those terms unto the Lord: but his
meaning is, that their lives and practices do prove so much, viz. that they
would not willingly have any thing to do with God: which appears by this,
that they desire not the knowledge of his ways. Let them say what they will,
those that care not to be acquainted with Gods will, nor to learn from thence
what is their duty, do in effect bid the Lord depart from them, and therefore
must needs be very impious and irreligious persons. To the same purpose is it
said in the Psalm: My people would Psalm. 81 1^.
not hear my voice: and what of that? Israel would none of me. If one should
have said to them, You are Apostataes, and hate God in your hearts, they would
have thought it the greatest wrong that could be: but we see what the Lords
testimony is concerning them; they would not attend to my voice, therefore they
would none of me: they rejected my word, therefore they rejected me. Besides
these places, and many more that might be alleged, the causes and effects of
this unwillingness to hear the Lords message, will evidently prove those to
be sinful persons that are possessed therewith.

Reasons. The causes.
First then for the causes thereof, there shall two only be named, though
many other might be brought.

Jeremy makes mention of, saying: Unto whom shall I speak, and admonish
Jeremy 6. 10.
that they may hear? behold their ears are uncircumcised, and they cannot
hearken.

unto whom shall I speak, whom shall I admonish? their ears are
uncircumcised, that is, fleshly and carnal: so that albeit good instructions
be brought unto them, yet they cannot hearken thereunto; but will be gazing
hither and thither, and have their minds taken up with other matters. Let a
debtor of theirs come unto them to pay the^ money, and they will not be looking
on this thing and on that, when they should receive it at his hands: but when
the true treasure is offered unto them freely, they are either idle, or ill
employed, so that they have no mind to accept of that. Tell them a tale of
lucre, which they may get; or of some injury done unto them, whereof they may
take advantage, and their ears are wide open for such matters: but let there
be any speech used tending to the glory of God, or the salvation of their
souls, they are altogether deaf, and cannot with any life or cheerfulnes
listen to such things. Now how come their ears to be thus uncircumcised?
because their hearts are uncircumcised: (which is the Second cause of their
unwillingness to attend to the words of wisdom:) And this appears in two
things: the first is, that (as Jeremy speaks) they delight not in Gods voice.
The Ierem. 6. 10.
second, that they do take pleasure in unrighteousness, as the Apostle
witnesses. And look how much 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12.
delight any one takes in sin, so much hatred will he bear against the word
that checketh him for his sin: and in what measure any man dislikes the word,
in the same measure will he take pleasure in all manner of iniquity, which is
condemned by the word. And thus much for the causes of this unwillingness.



David says, Lord how love I thy law? my meditation Psalm. 119. 97.
is in it continually. What will follow then if a man do not love Gods law?
Surely, he will not at any time meditate thereon: which he that does not, must
needs be a very sinful creature.



because they receive not the love 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11 12.
of the truth, that they might be saved, therefore God will send them strong
delusion, that they should believe lies. That all they may be damned that
believe not the truth, but take pleasure in unrighteousness.

This doctrine makes

to hear the word of the Lord, and will rather hearken to erroneous and
heretical doctrine, then to the truth of God contained in the holy Scriptures;
and rather lie in prison amongst malefactors, then be in the Church amongst
true Christians.



Solomon says, He that turns Prou. 28. 9.
away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abominable. Let
them pretend what they will for their wilful absenting of themselves from our
assemblies, as namely, that we corrupt the word, and misinterprete and
misapplie the same, yet they shall find, that they have refused to embrace the
love of the truth, and have believed lies; and that therefore the Lord has
justly given them up to be deluded by Satan, and so to be damned with him
everlastingly.

them with all speed to get out of their sins, and to turn their feet into
the way of his testimonies. And because they will be very loath to acknowledge
thus much, but are ready to harbor too good an opinion of themselves, as if
none were more forward hearers then they are, let their own hearts be judges,
what preparation they make before hand for the fitting of themselves for such a
great work; what attention they use when they are present, and what meditation
and conference they have concerning it when they are departed. Of which points
if they would without partiality examine themselves, they should easily
discern a great deal of backwardness in their nature and in their practice.
If a man should protest that he goes to the market with a great desire to buy
food for himself and his family, yet if he always played the unthrift with
his money, and never brought home any provision, we would not give credit to
his words, but account him a mere dissembler: and the like censure may we
pass on such, as pretend they are willing to reap benefit by the word, to the
intent they may be able to help both themselves and their families, and yet
never carry away any thing to the purpose, but if you ask them what points
were handled, they can say nothing, but this, surely we heard a very good
Sermon, God be thanked, but my memory is very short, or I cannot utter all
that I have in my mind: my heart, I hope, is as good as the best, though I
cannot talk of the Sermon as others do: what is this but to deceive their
own souls with vain words? for certainly he that has a heart willing to
hear, will have a tongue ready to utter, in some tolerable sort, that which
he has heard, though not all of it, yet a good part of it, as God has given
to every one the measure of grace.

Another sort are here to be reproved, who do in a more palpable and gross
manner manifest their unwillingness to hear, in that they will take every
slight occasion to absent themselves, and that not only on the week days,
but on the Lords day also: so that when the Lord comes even to their doors,
and offers to power down his graces abundantly upon them, they refuse his
gracious offer, and so judge themselves unworthy of Acts 13 46.
eternal life.



Now to the intent that we may do so, we must Remedies against unwillingness
to hear ye word*
use these remedies following.

our souls be clogged with the poisoned humors of sin, we shall find no
manner of appetite, or affection to our spiritual foood. Wherefore the Apostle
James exhorting the twelve tribes to receive the word with meekness,
prescribes the^ what course to take for the preparing of their hearts
thereunto, viz. to put away wrathful and violent James 1. 20. 21.
affections, and to lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of malitiousnes.
And the like direction the Apostle Peter gives in his 1. Epistle and second
chapter, verse. 1. 2. thereby implying, that it is in vain for men to imagine
that they can be profitable hearers and receivers of the doctrine of Christ,
till they have done their best endeavor to cleanse their hearts and their hands
from all manner of iniquity.

pure, and holy and perfect it is every way: how it Psalm. 19. 7. etc.
inlighteneth the mind, and gives wisdom to the simple: how it conuerteth
the soul, and frames the affections unto obedience: how it casts down 2.
Cor. 10.
the strong holds of the devil, sets men at liberty Acts 26. 18.
from the power of darkness, and translateth them into the glorious kingdom
of Jesus Christ: and in James 1. 21.
a word is able to save their souls that do in a conscionable manner attend
thereunto, and treasure it up in the secret of their hearts. Which things being
well considered, will set an edge on our affections, and cause us to have as
great delight in Psalm. 119.
Gods statutes, as in all manner of riches.

David, Lord incline my heart Psalm. 119. part. 5
unto thy testimonies. Never discourage our selves, by thinking, surely I shall
never be able to master my affections, and to bring my heart with cheerfulnes
to listen unto holy things, but go unto the Lord that is greater then our
hearts, and stronger then our sins, and beseech him to give us a good affection
to his testimonies, and if we ask in faith and humility, we shall be sure
to obtain our hearts desire: for the Lord has promised to teach Psalm. 25.
the humble his way: and if he undertake it, it is neither our sinful nature,
nor Satan's malice that can hinder his work, but he will by degrees accomplish
the same in us, as he has done in all his elect from the beginning of the
world even unto this present time. And thus much for the helps that we must
use, that we may become willing and cheerful hearers of the word of the Lord.

The most holy doctrine is most distasteful unto unholy persons.
is, the more grievous is it unto wicked sinners.

As any man of God preaches more soundly, and comes nearer the conscience,
so is he more abhorred of ungodly men.

This we may see evidently in sundry examples of Scripture, as first of all in
those of whom mention is made in the Revelation, where it is said, Revel. 11.
that there were two witnesses, that is, a competent and sufficient number of
faithful preachers, which were like Olive trees, to distill the oil of verse
4.
grace into men's hearts, and like Candlesticks to hold forth the light unto
those that lived in darkness and ignorance: but what was the effect of their
preaching? It is said that these two prophets verse 10.
vexed them that dwelt on the earth: that is, all earthly minded men: all such
as were ignorant and proud, unchaste and covetous: so that they could never be
well, till they had killed them, and cast out their corpses into the streets
of the city: but then they were glad and rejoiced, and sent presents one to
another in token of their joy, hoping that now these two witnesses were
dispatched out of the way, they should go on merrily in their leaud courses, and
live at hearts ease.

So Ahab professes that he hated the Prophet Micaiah, and could not abide him:
how came that to pass? he could like well enough of those four hundred false
prophets that were entertained at Iezabels table: this was the very true cause;
Micaiah never prophesied good unto him, but evil. He 1. King. 22. 8.
would deal faithfully in delivering Gods message, and not flatter him either
for fear or favor, but when God proclaimed war against him, (as he must
needs being an impious Idolater) he would let him hear of it, and give him
no allowance in his wicked enterprises: whereas those four hundred dissembling
hypocrites had learned to frame themselves to the Kings humor, and to speak
not true, but pleasing things unto him, and by that means they insinuated
themselves into his favor. And as he was affected toward Micaiah, so was he
also toward Elijah: 1. King. 21. 20.
Have thou found me, O mine enemy? (says he.) Now what was the reason he
should profess such emnitie against him? even this, that the holy Prophet of
God came ever furnished with sharp rebukes and terrible threatenings from
heaven, which he was to denounce against him for his monstrous impiety
against the Lord, and cruelty against his servants.

The like may be seen in Paul, who for delivering the holy and powerful
doctrine of the Gospel, was counted a pestilent fellow, and a troubler Acts 24.
of the whole world: not of the Saints that were in the world, but of such as
were men of the world, who could not endure to have their ignorance, their
Idolatry, their hypocrisy, the ill government of their tongues, of their
affections and of their families, laid open and disgraced, and the reformation
of these corruptions urged and pressed upon their consciences. To this same
purpose we may observe further how mad and outrageous they were against Steven,
Acts 7. when he came with sound doctrine to their unsound hearts: it is said
when they heard the things that he delivered, Acts 7. 54. etc.
their hearts brast for anger, and they gnashed at him with their teeth, and so
giving a shoute with a loud voice, and stopping their ears, that they might
not hear him any longer, they ran upon him with great violence, and carrying
him out of the city, stoned him to death.



James 4.
length confound them bodies and souls: they would be always rooting in the
earth, and scraping together the pelf of this world; but the word tells them,
that such swine shall be without, Revel. 22.
that is, excluded from the heavenly Jerusalem, and have their portion in the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever. Now when they are resolved
to be proud still, and to be rooters still, and the Ministers of God are ever
and anon grating upon their consciences for the same, they are much imbittered
and incensed against them, and their doctrine, and if they can work them any
mischief, they shall be sure not to miss of it.

of the Scribes and Pharisees, an expounder of the law answered, and said unto
him, Master, thus saying, Luke 9. 45* 46.
thou put us to rebuke also: as if he should have said, Be advised what
you speak: for this doctrine of yours tends to our disgrace, as well as unto
theirs. But what? does our Savior forbear them hereupon? nay, he comes
nearer unto them and drives the nail to the head, saying, Woe be unto you
also ye interpreters of the law: as if he should say, Will you play the
dissemblers, and must not a man speak against your sin for fear of
disgracing you? Yes surely, sin must have shame wheresoever it is, and
therefore woe unto you also ye Lawyers, for without repentance, your case is
very dangerous.

Luke 10. 18.
out of their hearts, even as the lightning falls from the cloud. And this we
must make full reckoning of, that whatsoever dislikes the devil, the same John
8.
will dislike the children of the devil. And therefore we may observe, that
when Paul at Philippi Acts 16. 17. etc.
had cast out the devil of the maid that had a spirit of divination, Satan
himself being enraged thereby, all the city was in an uproar against him and
Silas, and commanded them to be grievously scourged with rods, and after to
be laid fast as close prisoners, with their feet in the stocks.



1. For instruction to Ministers, that, if they be faithful unto the Lord in
teaching right things in a right manner, they must make full account that evil
men will be grieved, and tired and quite wearied out therewith: they will be
unwilling to come to the Church, and think every hour two, while they are
there. Christ himself could not please carnal men; nay he displeased them
most, because his teaching was best. But what says he for his own and others
comfort? Wisdom is justified of her children: so that albeit fleshly minded
Luke 7. 35.
men dislike and reject pure and plain doctrine, yet those that are wisedoms
children, that is, truly and spiritually wise, will approve of it, and embrace
it.

Prophets, prophecy unto us Isaiah 30. 10.
right things: tell us plainly of our faults; make us to see them and to be
ashamed of them: if you perceive us to be covetous, or voluptuous, or riotous,
etc. let us hear of these our corruptions, and of the judgments of God due
unto them, that so we may be terrified and reclaimed from them. And when we
fail in the duties of piety, or mercy, or of our callings, let us be
admonished and exhorted; let us have forcible and unanswerable reasons, for the
conuincing of our judgments, and the winning of our affections to the love and
liking of those good duties, which we have been formerly negligent to perform.
If we can come thus prepared to the preaching of the word, we shall receive
abundant fruit and profit thereby: and hence be assured to our comfort, that
we are not rebels and traitors against the great King of heaven, but his true
and faithful subjects and servants, in that we are glad to know his statutes,
and willing and desirous to yield all loyal and dutiful obedience thereunto:
and howsoever our own misinformed consciences, or Satan, our subtle enemy,
may persuade us that we do not lone and fear the Lord, but that we have
unsound and unsanctified hearts, yet let us stand upon the contrary: for if
we have no other argument of our true and sincere love toward God; yet this
may be sufficient, viz. that we do unfeignedly love and embrace his sacred
word: it is an undoubted testimony of a good stomach, to be delighted and
refreshed with wholesome food: neither is there a surer and better sign of a
sound heart, then to be well affected toward a sound ministry.

All men are naturally most prone unto evil.
any thing, as unto that which is sinful and utterly unlawful. All men are
naturally exceeding slack in attempting and executing that which is good: but
very swift in setting upon, and going through with, that which is evil.
Therefore is it said of all the sons of Adam without exception, that their
feet are swift to shed blood. Many there Romans 3. 15.
are, who if they should be pressed to fight in lawful war for God and their
country, would be fearful and dastardly, and if they could with any credit or
safety, they would betake them to their heels: and yet the same men in a
private quarrel, or in robbing by the high ways side, or in stealing somewhat
out of their neighbors grounds, will be very forward and swift to shed blood.
Again, there are diverse that are exceeding slow in going to a Sermon, or to
any such holy exercise, or service: but to run to a Bullbaiting, or a
Beare-baiting, or to a Whitson-ale, none shall rise more early, nor hasten more
speedily then they* Examples will make this point yet more clear. When
Nebuchadnezzar was minded to pass an unjust sentence of death upon the
Caldeans and Astrologians, for that they could not Dan. 2. 14.
bring to his mind his dream, which he himself had forgotten, he made great
speed in the matter, in so much that he adjudged all to die, not only those
that had bin examined, but all such as were of that profession, yea not only
those that were Sorcerers and Coniurers indeed, but Daniel and his companions,
that were but only supposed to be such, whereas they did in truth abhor all
those unlawful and devilish Arts. If it had bin some matter tending to Gods
glory, or the good of his Church, he would not have been so ready to yield
unto it, and if such a sentence had been past, there would have been many
objections and oppositions, so that the execution thereof would hardly have
followed so speedily, as this here did, in which regard Daniel takes
exception against it, saying, Why is the sentence so hasty from the King? The
like forwardness was there in the unbelieving Israelites unto the foul and
abominable Exodus 32. 3.
sin of Idolatry: Moses had labored much to persuade them to make a covenant
with God, and to cleave unto him in faithful and constant obedience; yet when
he had been a while out of the way, they would needs have a golden Calfe in
stead of Moses, to go before them, and therefore al of a sudden they came with
great violence unto Aaron, urging him to make them one: he being afraid to
cross them and to displease them, goes about by carnal policy to stay them
from this wickedness, and therefore calls for their golden eare-rings,
thinking that they would at no hand have parted with them: but when it was for
the erecting of Idolatry, he could no sooner ask for them, but they presently
brought them. And the like may be seen in those Jews that lived in the time
of Isaiah, who were niggardly Isai. 30. 6.
and pinching enough in matters of expense that did concern Gods worship, or
the relief of such as were in distress: but to procure help and aid from
Egypt against their enemies, that were about to invade their land, which was a
course that God had utterly forbidden, none were more frank and liberal then
they: who spared not for any cost or charges, but sent their Camels laden with
treasures unto Pharaoh and to his Princes. So also in the days of Hoseah, the
people were Hos. 2. 8.
exceeding bountiful in bestowing their corn and wine and oil, together with
their gold and silver upon Baal: they thought nothing too dear or precious,
that was to go that way; so that they were content to part not only with
their goods, but also with their sons and daughters, whom they sacrificed
unto devils. Psalm. 106.


And as for evil deeds, so for sinful speeches, there is in our nature a
very great aptness and pronenesse thereunto, which unregenerate men do help
forward by their continual practice: in which regard Jeremy says concerning
them of his time, that they did bend their tongues like bows for Ierem. 9. 3.
lies, but they had no courage for the truth. If they were to speak of
hurtful and wicked things, they had words at will, and boldness suitable
thereunto: but if it were concerning good and profitable matters, they had no
heart unto them; their bow and their string were both broken.



All the imaginations of the thoughts of our Genesis 6. 5.
hearts are only evil and that continually. So that when we are about any
wicked practice, we have the whole force and strength of nature to help us
forward: as on the contrary, when we are about any goodness, we have the
whole current and stream of the flesh against us, still ready to stop and
hinder us. We are never exercised in that which is natural unto us, until we
be plotting, or practicing some wickedness against God, or some unrighteousness
against men.

the wisdom which is not from James 3. 17.
above, as it is earthly and sensual, so is it also devilish. The wisdom of
the flesh is emnitie against God, Romans 8.
and so of it own accord too too prone unto all kinds of mischief: and
therefore being set forward by Satan, it must needs be very violent in the
pursuit thereof.

Ioh. 15. 19.
loves, as it own persons, so likewise it own works; such as are those before
mentioned: and whatsoever it loves, that it commends: now praise is it which
earthly minded men do much hunt for, and that makes the^ so eager and swift of
foot in following after those things which the men of this world do affect and
like of. They would feign have present payment, and are loath to look after
those things which are not seen: they would rather have their sense satisfied,
then their hope exercised, (that which they have, not being a sound hope) and
therefore they choose rather the practice of those evils, whereby they imagine
to obtain some present contentment, then the performance of such good duties,
as would hereafter procure them an eternal weight of glory, besides the
present peace and comfort which from the same would arise unto them.

Luke 10.
few sheep that will hearken unto his voice, and be ordered and guided by his
Spirit: what doctrine then can we imagine that to be, but the doctrine of
devils, unto which such multitudes are ready to give ear, and to conform
themselves without any great contradiction?

Then further, as touching their liberality which they so much stand upon, and
boast of, what matter of commendation can we find therein, seeing it tends
only and wholly to the maintenance of Idolatry? to the furtherance of
superstition? and to the setting up of themselves in the room and stead of
Christ Jesus? Were not the idolatrous Israelites, before spoken of, every Hos.
2. 8.
whit as bountiful, yea more bountiful then they? What will they say to those
that offered their sons and their daughters unto Moloch and such like
abominable Idols? will that prove there was any soundness and uprightness in
them? Indeed this much may be gathered from thence, that they had a great
measure of love, which made them so bountiful. But what kind of love was it?
a Christian and well-grounded love? nothing less, but a fleshly and devilish
love, as is very apparent in this, that it made them so forward in performing
the works of the flesh and of the devil. And the like may be said of Papists
long and tedious pilgrimages, and their cruel and unnatural whipping of
themselves, and other such bodily exercises; it is no marvel to see them
undertake and undergo the same with all readiness and willingness, because
they are things unwarrantable by the word, and consequently services of the
flesh and not of God: And it is an easy matter for a man to spend his riches,
his strength, yea and his blood also upon his wicked lusts, and ungodly
affections.

thereof, and testify the truth of our humiliation by avoiding all occasions
of evil. Are we such dry wood as will easily be kindled? then let us take
heed how we come too near the fire: are we such light stuff, as will soon
be tossed and carried hither and thither with every puff? then let us beware
how we adventure upon such places and such company, where the wind of false
doctrine, or of devilish counsel and persuasion may blow upon us. Men will
yield that the flesh is frail: but why then will they rush upon the occasions
of falling? if the flesh be so subject to evil, why do they not crucify it
by prayer, by applying the threatenings of the word to their own souls, by
keeping good company, and the like?

This is it that makes a number to fall into Popery, into Brownisme, or into
some such dangerous sects, or other, that when they give themselves to the
profession of the Gospel, they find it to be cross and contrary to their
corrupt and sinful nature, and therefore they are full of contradiction and
gainsaying, and at length fall to reading of the books of Papists, or
Brownists, or the like: and then they are carried unto their opinions with such
eagerness and violence, as a ship on the sea that goes with wind and sail.
Now what is the reason hereof? because the flesh is never strongly bent, until
it meet with an ill object, but then it passes on amain without any stop or
let.

Therefore let us be careful that we do not rush upon any such inducement
unto Idolatry, or schism, or any manner of impiety; for otherwise we shall
be sure to be intrapped and ensnared.





that when we find our selves very eager and forward unto any thing, we make a
stay, and a pause, examining whether the thing be lawful and good, yea or no:
and if it be so, yet let us search whether our flesh be not set a work in that
spiritual action which we are about: whether there be not in it some mixture
of corruption, and some carnal respect or other, that makes us so nimble and
ready in the performance of it: let us (I say) look well unto our hearts in
this behalf; for all is not fire from the altar, that seems to be such: it is
a rare thing for us to be truly zealous of good works; and much of our heat
proceeds rather from our own flesh, then from Gods spirit; and therefore
when we perceive our violence and eagerness to arise rather from some
inordinate lust, then from any good and holy affection, let us curb and
restrain the same, and beseech the Lord to moderate our desires, that we may
do all our works in meekness and modesty, and with that good temper which
beseems Christians.

Romans 7.
and strive against it.

more earnestly, and firmly to superstition and idolatry, then we can to
true religion and piety?





Galath. 5.
does always resist the sinful motions of the flesh, so that as they cannot
do the good which they would, because the flesh lusts against the spirit,
that is, against the regenerate part in them: so neither can they do the evil
that sometimes they would, because the spirit strugleth and fights against
the lusts of the flesh. Now concerning wicked men, they are altogether fleshly,
and therefore when they have vile motions from nature, or bad suggestions from
Satan, they like of them, and nourish and cherish them, and if means and
opportunity be offered, proceed to the execution of them.

Herein then may Gods children rejoice that they are far unlike the limbs of
the devil, in that they mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, Romans
8. 13.
and therefore shall live: whereas others walk after the flesh, and satisfy
it in the lusts thereof, and therefore shall die. In the meditation whereof
they should raise up their discouraged hearts, and fainting spirits to sound
joy, and due thankfulness, for that the Lord has by his good spirit, and
powerful word, wrought a change in their hearts, and made them that were
naturally set on mischief, and did drink in iniquity with delight even as
beasts drink water; to be in any measure tractable unto holy duties, and to
carry a perfect hatred against all impiety and unrighteousness, albeit they
cannot get that masterie of their sinful lusts as they should and as they
would. This is a wonderful work of God, for which we cannot sufficiently
praise his name: and therefore we should do as the Prophet David did when the
Lord had put it into his heart, and into the hearts of his subjects to be
liberal toward the building of the Temple: Now therefore, our God, (says he)
1. Chron. 29 13. 14. 18.
we thank thee and praise thy glorious name. But who am I, and what is my
people that we should be able to offer willingly after this sort? etc. O Lord
God of Abraham, Izhac and Israel our fathers, keep this for ever in the
purpose, and thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their hearts unto
thee.

From which words it is apparent, that it is an admirable and supernatural
work to have a well disposed mind, and a well affected heart unto any thing
that concerns the worship of God and his glory: to be frank and free-hearted
in bestowing ones substance upon sumptuous buildings, costly apparel, great
housekeeping, setting up Lords of misrule, and the like, is a thing not worth
the speaking of, because a mecre carnal man in arrogancy and vain-glorie may
be very lavish and prodigal to such ends and purposes. But to have a liberal
heart for good uses, either for the furtherance of Gods service, or for the
relief of the distressed Saints, is a matter that we should take special
notice of, and be careful to magnify the name of the Lord for it, and
earnestly to entreat the continuance of it, as David does in this place.

And though we be not always alike, but now and then dull and heavy, and
lumpish and drowsy, when it pleases the Lord for our humbling to let the
flesh play it part; yet if we sometimes, and for the most part find
spiritual motions and affections, and from thence proceed to holy speeches and
actions, as occasion and ability is offered, we have great cause to bless
the name of God for his singular favor and goodness toward us in that
behalf.

All the afflictions of the Saints shall end in consolatio^s. Isaiah 30. 20.
shall end in joy.

As they have their times of feeding upon the bread of adversity, and the
water of affliction, so have they also seasons of rejoicing, and of singing
Psalms of praise for their happy deliverance 29.
out of troubles and miseries. Heaviness may abide Psalm. 30. 5.
at evening, but joy comes in the morning. They may sow in tears for a time,
but they shall reap in joy. This is the very patrimony and inheritance of the
Saints, as the Wiseman says, Surely to a man Ecclesiast. 2. vlt.
that is good in his sight, to wit, through Christ, God gives wisdom, and
knowledge, and joy: this he may build on, and make full account of, even in the
midst of all his sorrow and anguish. And there is good reason why it must
needs be thus.

against God, and smite upon their thighs in a holy Ierem. 31. 19.
indignation against themselves, in regard of their pride and unbelief and
unthankfulness, and other the like corruptions. They then leave off musing on
other men's injuries, and begin to bethink themselves of their own
transgressions, that so casting down themselves by godly sorrow, the Lord may
raise them up to pure and holy 1. Pet 5. 6.
joy, which he will certainly do in due season; neither shall all their sins
and sorrows be able to keep them down, when once they are thoroughly
humbled under the holy hand of God. It is his promise then to lift them up, and
Christ his office to comfort them that mourn: and therefore Isai. 61.
as those that in their miseries are passionate, and desperate, full of
murmuring against God, and of fretting against men, cannot expect any joyful
issue out of their troubles: so on the other side, they that are lowly and
broken hearted, much dejected and abased in the presence of the Lord, and mild
and peaceable in their carriage before men, they may be assured that all their
sighs shall end in songs, that all tears shall be wiped away from their eyes,
and that in stead of the spirit of heaviness, they shall in due time be clad
with the garments of gladness.

Call upon me in the time of trouble (says Psalm. 50.
God) and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. This Asa and
Iehoshaphat had good experience 2. Chron. 14. and 20.
of: for when they being in a great strait, had humbled themselves by fasting
and prayer, their hearts were full of joy, and their mouths full of the
praises of the Lord for their wonderful deliverance from their enemies. And
the like may be said of Hester and Mordecai and the rest of the Hester.
Jews in his time. And our Savior tells his Disciples, Verily, verily, I
say unto you, that ye shall John 16. 20.
weep and lament, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. But by what means
should they attain unto this? the words following do make it manifest, Ask
(says he) and ye shall receive, that your joy may be verse 2. 4.
full. When Christians do enjoy wealth, and credit, and ease, they are
oftentimes made so dull and secure thereby, that they have little mind to power
out their souls before God in prayer: but when once they are thoroughly pinched
and pressed with miseries and calamities, then they begin to renew their
acquaintance with God, and so bringing before him abundance of holy and
heavenly prayers, he replenisheth them with store of sweet and celestial
comforts.

that he may do his children good in the latter end, that he may make them
partakers of his holiness, and so by Heb. 12. 10.
consequent of the consolations of his spirit. When God will do his enemies a
notable displeasure, he sets them aloft in slipperie places, that so their
Psalm. 73.
fall may be more fearful and unrecoverable: even so on the contrary, when
he purposes some extraordinary benefit unto his servants, he will lay them
full low, and afflict them full sore, (as he did Joseph and David) that so they
may be more capable of his favors.

light is sown for the righteous, and joy for all Psalm. 97. 11.
that are upright in heart. Why then should we not sustain our selves with the
expectation of deliverance to come? and why should we not sweeten our present
tears, with the hope of future comforts? The Apostle James presses the
example of the husbandman, who though his barn be empty, and his seed that
he has cast into the earth, not yet appearing above ground, yet he waits
for the precious fruit of the earth, and has James 5. 7. 8.
long patience for it, until he receive the former, and the latter rain. And
what of this? Be ye also patient therefore (says he) and settle your hearts,
etc. And indeed all Christians have reason so to do: for they are good
seeds-men, that are evermore sowing prayers and tears in the bosom of Jesus
Christ: and therefore they have a crop growing, that cannot possibly miscarrie;
howsoever it fall out unto others, they shall be sure to speed well, and to
have an happy issue out of all their temptations.



Jobs so, in so much that no instance could be given by him of any of the
Saints that had endured the like? yet the Lord made a good and happy end of
all his distresses and miseries, and so will he do of yours, if in faith and
patience you can wait upon him. And in truth it is a great dishonor and
indignity that we offer unto the Lord, when we imagine that he can do
somewhat for us in small and light afflictions; but if our case be any thing
extraordinary, that then there is no hope of help and succor from him: for
thereby we make the Lord such a Pilot as can do somewhat upon a shallow river,
where there is little, or no danger: but upon the maine Ocean, especially if
the Sea begin to swell and rage, we dare not trust unto his skill: what vile
and base unbelief is this? The Prophet David was otherwise affected when he
says, God is our hope, and strength, a help in troubles ready to be Psalm.
46. 1. 2. 3.
found. Therefore will we not fear, though the earth be moved, and though the
mountains fall into the midst of the Sea. Though the waters thereof rage, and
the mountains shake at the surges of the same. And therefore let us be ashamed
and grieved that we have been so heartlesse and hopeless in great extremities.

Secondly, is it so, that all the perplexities and anguishes of the righteous
shall end in joy? Is this a privilege and prerogative peculiar unto them? then
how wretched and woeful is the condition of all the ungodly ones of the world,
whose sorrow shall end in sorrow, and who shall go from their present pain
and grief unto perpetual tortures and torments in hell fire? let them make
mcrrie, and be as iocund as they will for a time, and seck to put away
melancholy fits, as they term them; they have a crop growing, as well as Gods
children: but what is that? even a crop of shame, and horror and anguish, which
shall seize upon their souls at unawares, and that to their everlasting ruin,
and the utter destruction of their bodies and souls for evermore. And
therefore as the godly are to be exhorted not to envy the prosperity of the
wicked, though they flourish for a season; so are the ungodly to be admonished
that they do not esteem Gods children to be miserable, albeit they be in
heaviness for a time: for their light and momentanie afflictions 2. Cor. 4.
shall be recompensed with a far most excellent and eternal weight of joy
and of glory: whereas the short and vain delights of wicked sinners shall be
infinitely ouerpeised and weighed down with the unsupportable miseries, which,
if not in this world, yet in that which is to come, they shall most certainly
meet withal.

it shall go well with the righteous, and that the Isaiah 4. Psalm. 37.
end of such men shall be peace.

But if we would be assured of this good effect of our afflictions, we must
practice these two rules:

otherwise we may be sure, that the more he loves us, the more he will afflict
us. If we be men or women after Gods own heart, yet if we live in such
iniquities as are condemned by his word, he will still pursue us as he did
David, till he have reclaimed us, and healed our sinful souls of those
wounds that Satan has given them.



FINIS.
The sixth Sermon.
Of extinguishing the graces of the Spirit.
THe Apostle upon great and weighty consideration, delivers this precept
unto the Thessalonians, Quench 2 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
not the spirit: for though all those be worthily and justly condemned, that
never tasted of the spirit of God, yet a more fearful condemnation is like to
come upon them, that having once received some gifts thereof, do afterward
lose the same again.

Now as concerning this Church, when the Apostle says, Quench not the spirit,
it does evidently appear that they had received the Spirit. For as fire cannot
be said to be quenched where it is not; so neither can the spirit in those that
have it not. Wherefore let us know that this precept does properly belong to
them that have received the Spirit of God, and they especially are to make use
of it. As for others, it cannot profit them, unless that, as the seed lying in
the ground a long time, does afterward budde and become fruitful; so this
continue in their minds, till they have tasted (in some good sort) of the
spirit of God, and then breed in them some carefulnes that they do not quench
it.

But for the further clearing of this text, two Questions must be answered.



Effects of the spirit.


First of all, if there be nothing in a man but that which by nature and
industry may be attained We have received the spirit, not of the world, but
of God. 1. Cor. 2. 14.

Secondly, consider whether there be in thee John makes this the first work
of the Ioh. 16. 8.
spirit, that it shall convince the world of sin: which is so needful, that
without it Christ Jesus can never enter into the heart: for he promises to
dwell only with them, that are humble in spirit, and contrite Isai. 57. 15.
in heart, through the sight of their iniquities, and of Gods displeasure
justly deserved by the same: and calls those alone unto him that are weary,
and heavy laden, groaning and sighing under Matthew. 11.
the burden of their sins. Thus we see, that to be rebuked in our
consciences in this sort, is the first work of the spirit, which is also
wrought The Spirit works by degrees.
by degrees. For A general astonishment. Romans 8. 15.
first there is a great and general astonishment by reason of all those great
and enormous sins that we have committed; and this does strike us down, it
does terrify us, and hold us amazed wonderfully. Weakness of understanding. 1.
Cor. 2. 14.
Then it deals with us more particularly: it brings us unto a special
grief for special sins; it does bereave us of our chief desires; and
brings us out of conceit and liking with the best things that are in Romans 7.
8.
us: for then it does display before us the vanity and darkness of our
understanding, how unfit and unmeet we are to understand and conceive those
things, which do above all other most concern us: Corruption of judgment.
Philip. 1. 9. 10.
Then does it let us see the corruption of our judgment, how in things
belonging to God, we be as bruit beasts, not able to discern things that
differ, nor to put a sound difference between good and evil. Romans 8. 6. 7. The
unreasonableness of reason.
Then does it let us see that our reason is unreasonable, nay that it is
hurtful unto us, a great enemy to faith, and a great patron of infidelity
and unbelief. The sinfulnes of our affections. Acts 2. James 4.
Then it comes to our affections, and turns them vpside down: it turns
our mirth into mourning, our pleasure into painfulnes, and our greatest delight
into most bitter grief. If it do proceed further, and come once to the heart,
and to the stomach and courage that is in us, then it cutteth us to the
quick; then does it at once cast us down in humility under the hand of God,
whereas when we had to deal with men, we were as stout as any, and would not
start for the best. We had reason to say for our selves, and courage to defend
our selves against all them that did deal with us: but now the spirit draws
us into the presence of God; it lets us to see that we have to do with
God, and that our strength is weakness in respect of him. Then do our hearts
begin to fail us; then do we lay our hands upon our mouths, and dare Job 39.
37.
not answer. Behold here how the spirit works in conuincing men's
consciences of sin: which whosoever can find in himself, he may assuredly
say, that the spirit of God is in him indeed.

Justification.
The third note and effect is, the bringing on forward of this work unto
justification: for when the spirit has brought us thus far, then does it
begin to open unto us a door unto the grace and favor of God. It does put
into our minds that there is mercy with God, and therefore stirs us up to
seek mercy at his hands: afterward it does let us see how Christ suffered to
take away the sins of the world, that in the righteousness of Christ, we may
look to be justified before God. And this it does not let us see only, but
does effectually work a sure persuasion of it in our hearts, and confirms
the same by two notable Effects of justification.
effects.

The first is a joy most unspeakable and glorious, 1. Joy. 1. Pet. 1. 8. Romans
5. 2.
wherewith our hearts must needs be wholly taken up, and ravished, when we see
our selves by the righteousness of Christ, of the free mercy and grace of God,
redeemed from death, delivered from hell, and freed from the fearful
condemnation of the wicked.

The second is the peace of conscience, which 2. Peace. Romans 5. 1. Philip. 4. 6.
indeed passes all understanding. While sin, and the guilt of sin remained,
there was no peace, nor rest, nor quietness to be found, but fear within,
terrors without, and troubles on every side: but when once sin is nailed to
the cross of Christ: when the guilt thereof is taken out of our consciences,
and the punishment thereof far removed, then must needs ensue great peace,
because God is at one with us: and for this we have the warrant and testimony
of the spirit: for flesh and blood cannot work in us this holy and heavenly
assurance.

And hereof does arise a fourth note, to wit, the 4. Readiness to do good.
life and nimblenes that is in us to do good: for when a man does find favor
from God, for the forgiveness of his sins, then the love of God constrains
him, and that joy which he conceiueth inforceth him and puts life into him
for the performance of those things, which are pleasing unto God. Then he
begins to find himself, not only reclaimed from evil, but also framed to
that which is good. Then is his understanding enlightened to see into the
mysteries of godliness, then is his judgment reformed, so that he is able to
discern betwixt truth and falsehood, betwixt that which is good and that which
is evil. Then are his affections in some good measure altered: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
his desire is set, not upon earthly, but upon heavenly things: his joys are
not in earth but in heaven: his anger is wasted and spent, not upon his own
private cause and quarrels, but his own sins, and upon whatsoever hinders
the glory of his God. This is the life of God in him: thus Ephesians. 4. 18. Rom 8
2.
he lives that has received the spirit, and thus he leads his life
continually: for they that have received the spirit, are led by the spirit, and
do live accordingly, bringing forth the fruits of the Galath. 5. 22.
spirit.

But this has frailty joined with it, and men through weakness may soon
fall: therefore if notwithstanding that, we will know whether we still retain
the spirit, we must try our selves by these rules:

First, if through infirmity we have fallen, (as who does not) and will know
whether thereby James 3. 1. Notes of the spirit after slips. 1. Hatred of sin.
we have lost the spirit of God, or no, let us examine what liking or misliking
we have of sin: for if we still hold our former hatred of that, and the
oftener we fall, the more thorough and deadly hatred we conceive against it,
undoubtedly that frailty has not as yet deprived us of the spirit; for this
holy detestatio^ of sin is a fruit of the spirit.

Secondly, consider how it stands with thy 2. Sorrow for sin. 2. Cor. 7.
sorrow: for so long as thy sorrow for sin increases, it cannot be, that the
spirit should be quenched in thee.

Thirdly, try thy care, and if thou find thy self 3 Care to avoid it.
more careful both to fight against sin and to prevent it, by avoiding the
occasions of it, then know that, not it, but grace has dominion in thy Romans 7.
heart.

But the last is most certain, and that is this, 4. Greater zeal in well
doing. 2. Cor. 7. 11. Ephesians. 4.
when thou art careful to redeem that, which by thy fall thou have lost, and
have a care to run so much faster forward, by how much more thou have been
let by thy fall: then it does appear that the spirit is in thee, yea it is
lively and mighty in operation, and such as shall never be taken from thee,
until the day of Christ.

Now further, when the Apostle says, Quench not the spirit, he implies that
the spirit is in some respects like unto fire; therefore if we do but a
little consider of the nature of fire, we shall a great deal better judge of
the spirit.

First of all, it will consume things that are combustible: 1. The properties
of the Spirit whereby it resembles fire. Romans 8. 13.
and therefore lighting upon straw, stubble, etc. it brings all to ashes: so
does the spirit in our souls wast, and at length bring to nothing all noisome
lusts whatsoever.

Ioh. 15. 2. Acts 15. 9.
sin daily more and more, that we may be holy temples for him to dwell in.

1. Ioh. 1. 5. 6.
giving light unto us in the midst of the darkness of this world.

Coloss. 2 13. Ephesians. 2. 1.
us with a zeal of Gods glory, with a care of our duty, and with a love of
all mankind; yea withal it puts life into us to walk in that good way
which leads unto life.

Thus we see what likelihood there is between the spirit and fire, for which
cause it is sometimes called fire: as Matthew. 3. 11. Therefore as truly and
certainly as we may say there is fire where we see straw or sticks consumed,
gold or silver purged, great light in dark places, or great heat and liuelines
in bodies that were benumbed before: so truly may we say, and so certainly may
we persuade our selves that the spirit of God is in us, when we see our
corruptions consumed, our souls purged, our hearts enlightened, and made hot
in walking, and working according to that light.





Several operations of the spirit.
the spirit, which may be quenched: as appears in the two kinds of grounds,
Luke 8. to wit, the stony and thornie ground, which doubtless felt Matthew. 13.
Luke 8.
some working of the spirit; for they are said to receive the word with joy,
and to believe for a time, though after either the pleasures and profits of
this life did choke the graces of God, or else the fiery heat of persecution
did dry them up, not being such sanctifying graces as are bestowed upon the
elect. If any would see the truth of this more clearly, let him read, Hebr.
chap. 6. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Peter describes, saying, that the chosen of God are begotten again of the
immortal seed of 1. Pet. 1. 23.
the word: this is not a light but a deep tasting of the word, whereby men are
regenerated and begotten unto God. The Apostle John sets down another note
of this, saying, that they that are thus ^. Ioh. 3. 7. 8.
borne again, do not sin, that is, they cannot make an occupation of sin:
they cannot fall flat away by sin: and why? even because the seed of God
abides in them, even that seed whereby they were begotten again, which will
abide in them even unto the end, so that they shall neither Matthew. 24. 24. John
10. 28. 29.
by secret seducements, nor by open violence be taken out of Gods hands.

Thus then we see the question answered: neither must it be strange, much less
offensive unto us that the Lord should take some, and leave others; or that he
should work effectually in some, for their eternal salvation, and more
slightly in others, for the increase of their condemnation: for thus has God
dealt even from the beginning, and that most righteously, because he may do
with his own what he will: Romans 9. 20, 21.

Let us see rather what use we may make of it.

First, let us take heed of quenching any grace of God.

Secondly, still labor to have a greater measure of gifts, seeing small gifts
may be taken away.

Lastly, let us learn to put a difference between hypocrites and sound
Christians: for the one sort indureth but for a time, but the other lasts for
ever.

But if yet we require a cleerer difference between these several operations
of the spirit, let us mark these rules:

First, let us try what insight we have into the Rules to try whether the
spi^i^ have wrought in us in a saving manner.
word of God; certain it is that both the godly and wicked are enlightened,
but diversely: for the knowledge of the godly is certain and distinct, and
therefore in particular things they are able to 1. Concerning knowledge. 1.
apply the threatenings of God for their humiliation, and his promises for their
consolation: whereas the knowledge of the wicked is confused, and causes them
to apply nothing to themselves for good.



Lastly, the knowledge of the one continues with them unto the end; but the
knowledge of the other leaves them in the end. Therefore is the knowledge of
the godly for the cleerenes, certainty, and sufficiency of it, compared to
the Sun: and the knowledge of the wicked to the Heb. 6.
lightning, which is only for a sudden flash, and when it is gone, men are
more dimme-sighted then they were before. Thus we see one difference in their
judgments.

Secondly, let us come to their affections. Certain 2. Concerning the
affections. 1. Desire. Psalm. 78. 34.
it is, that the wicked do desire the help and favor of God, but the
difference stands in the cause why: they seek help only because of some
extremity they are in; and sue for the favor of God, because they would be
freed from grief: and therefore it is usual with them to say; Oh that I were
out of this pain! oh, that this my sorrow were taken from me! by which
speeches they show, that so they might be at rest and ease, they would little
weigh of the help and favor of God: but the godly find such sweetness in his
love, that they count it better then life it self: Psalm. 63. 3.
in so much that for the obtaining thereof, they can be content to forgo all
the pleasures of this Matthew. 13. 4.
life, yea and to suffer whatsoever it shall please the Lord to inflict upon
them.

Further, not the godly only, but the wicked 2. Sorrow.
also are grieved when they have sinned: but the wicked do therefore sorrow,
because their sin has or will bring some punishment upon them: and the godly
sorrow chiefly because they have Psalm. 80. 7.
offended God, and given him occasion to withdraw his favor from them.

The third difference is in their love: for though 3. Love.
both of them do love God, yet it is after a diverse manner; the one of
sincerity, the other for wages only. A poor child that is taken up, fed, and
clothed, will love him that does thus feed and clothe him: but if he
received no more of that man then of another, he would like him and love him no
better then another: even so it is with the wicked; if their bellics be filled,
their barnes stuffed, and they have their hearts desire, they love God indeed,
but only for their belly and their barnes. Thus did Saul love God for his
kingdom; Achitophel for his promotion; Judas for his place of Apostleship: but
what became of their love? Saul a little afflicted, forsook God; Achitophel
somewhat crossed in his devices and disappointed of his hopes, hanged himself;
and Judas for gain betrayed Christ.

Some experience of this we may see among us: Courtiers will be professors,
and Scholars of ripe wits will be religious, if that Courtiers may become
Counselors, and Scholars may be preferred to the chiefest places: but if
promotion come not, then is their profession forsaken, and their religion laid
aside: and yet that is not all, for either they wax profane in their lives,
or heretical in their opinions. Do the children of God love on this manner?
No, the holy Ghost which they have received in effectual manner, does shed the
seed of love in their hearts, and does Romans 5.
work in them a special liking of his goodness and of his holiness, so that
they love him not for Psalm. 116. 1.
his blessings alone, but chiefly for himself: as the natural child loves
his father naturally, and though his father beat him, yet he bears it, and
still loves him. They have powered and infused 2. Pet. 1. 2. 3. 4.
into them a godly nature, so that they do freely love God their father: and
though he afflict the^, or cross them in their desires, yet they love him, and
in love perform their obedience unto him continually. Therefore Job says,
Though he kill Job 13.
me, yet will I trust in him. And this is the third mark or rule whereby to
prove and try ourselves.



First on the right hand, the mercies of God do work in them a wonderful
contentation, but not such as causes them to return the glory unto God, but
rather to ascribe it unto themselves: for the graces of God do puff them up,
and make them conceited in themselves. Hereof there arises a great security,
which brings first neglect, and after contempt of all good means. On the
left hand others offend, being never pleased nor contented with that they have:
nay indeed forgetting, or lightly esteeming that they have, and still desiring
new. These men besides that they are unthankful, they do also murmr and
grudge against God, and are never pleased with him. Between these two do the
children of God hold a middle and even course, and therefore we shall see these
things in them. First a sight and acknowledgement of their wants, which cause
them. to long for the sincere milk of the word, that thereby their wants may
be supplied and their graces increased: and so far are they from being lifted
up with pride, that they rejoice when their pride may be pulled down, whether
by rebukes, or threatenings, or corrections from the Lord. For they know that if
Paul needed means of humbling, (2. Cor. 12.) much more do they.

Besides, as they desire the word, so they wait until it please the Lord to
work further in them thereby: and this waiting is as earnest as theirs, who
having watched all night, do wait and look for the dawning of the day.

Secondly, as they see their wants, so do they Psalm. 119. 10.
also see the graces they have received, and are for that time well apaid and
contented therewith: and therefore as their wants do humble them, so Gods
graces do comfort them: and as their wants do call upon them to seek more, so
the gifts they have provoke them to be thankful for that they have received.
And thus much for the last rule of trial. These forenamed properties whosoever
can find in himself, he may be assured that the spirit has wrought in him so
effectually, as that it shall never be taken from him.

But what then? may such cast off all care? No, the Apostle says unto such,
Quench not the spirit. And not without cause: for though the spirit it self
can never be utterly taken from them, yet doubtless if pride, security, or any
other sin begin to take place in them, the graces of the spirit may decay,
and their clear understanding, and comfortable feelings may be gone, so that
in their own and others judgments, the spirit may seem to be quite
extinguished.

Neither must this seem strange: for if the Image of God which was more
perfectly placed in Adam, might be quite lost, then no marvel if the graces
of the spirit be drowned in us for a time. The Galathians were truly
regenerated, and had received Christ into their hearts: yet their graces were
so choked and quenched, that he was as it were without fashion or form: so
Galath. 4. 19.
that the Apostle did as it were travel again, until Christ was fashioned
anew in them. David also upon the committing of his sin was brought unto that
case, that he prayed God to create in him Psalm. 51.
a new spirit. What, was the spirit quite gone? No, for by and by after he
prays that God would not take his holy spirit from him: but the graces
thereof were wonderfully decayed, and therefore he desires that they might be
renewed.

But that none may abuse this doctrine, let us consider what punishments do
follow upon the Evils that follow upon quenching of the spirit.
quenching of the spirit in this sort.







though he will not take his mercies utterly from his children, yet he will
visit their sins with the rod, and their iniquities with scourges: as he
dealt with David.



Yet here is matter of comfort also: for though we may suffer a great decay of
Gods graces, yet by the rod or by the word, or by both, they shall be renewed in
us again.

Of murmuring in the time of affliction.
MAny men hearing of the often murmurings of the Israelites, do judge them the
worst people under the Sun: but such do little consider, either the
temptations whereby they were provoked to murmr, or the corruption of their
own hearts, which will as bitterly murmr upon less occasion. For albeit
they were an obstinate and stiff-necked people, yet herein they were
vehemently tempted, that they came from plenty in Egypt, to scarsitie in the
wilderness, having neither meat nor drink for all that multitude, being six
hundred thousand men, besides women and children. Wherefore let us cease to
wonder at this people, and in them see our own corruption. For do not many
amongst us, beholding the abundance which the Lord has bestowed upon
Magistrates or Ministers for the discharge of their duties, do they not (I
say) rather murmr at it, then show themselves thankful for troubles that
they are freed from, and for sufficiency that the Lord has given them to live
upon?

True it is, that notwithstanding the greatness of this peoples temptation,
their sin was very heinous; for Gods mercies had been wonderful toward them
even immediately before, and that the vnthankfullest of them had been driven to
confess: yet did they wish to return to their former Psalm. 106.
bondage, rather then to be brought to such straits: but notwithstanding the
grieuousnes of this their sin, many now adays come nothing behind them: for
their eyes are so upon their wants, that the want of one thing which they do
desire, though it be but small, does more disquiet them, then manifold
blessings do comfort them, to make them thankful.

But this coffeehouse we must be armed against: which we shall be, if we
can receive the favor of God for it self, though it come alone, yea though
trouble do come therewith: for having it, we have all things, and wanting it,
we have nothing. Again, if we have it, no misery can make us miserable: and
if we have it not, in greatest prosperity we are most miserable.

But the Israelites here dealt after a clean contrary manner: for the want of
bread in the wilderness, being but for their bodies, did make the^ to despise
their great and wonderful deliverance out of Egypt, which was unto them a
sign of their spiritual deliverance. And this is the nature of all
worldlings; they had rather forgo many spiritual benefits, then one corporal
commodity: they grieve more at the losing, and rejoice more at the having of
wealth, then of godliness.

But to return to the point in hand, since murmuring is so great a sin, it
shall be profitable to consider of some remedies against it.

Remedies against murmuring.

Now for as much as impatiencie proceeds from infidelity, the remedy
thereof must be fetched from faith in Gods mercies, in the merits of Christ,
in the hope of the resurrection, and in Gods fatherly providence.

Moses applies it, Deuteronomy. 8.) but by the word of God.



First then if we can steadfastly believe that God for Christ his sake has
freely forgiven us all our sins, and given his son, that in him we might be
blessed, we cannot but be assured, that with him Romans 8.
he will give us all things. For seeing sin, which is the cause of all misery,
is taken from us, we may be sure that no cross shall ever hurt us.

Again, if we could believe that as God does lay our sins upon Christ, so he
does impute his righteousness to us, how should we doubt of food or raiment,
etc? For by this means he is made our merciful and loving father, who is for
power, able, and for will, ready to help us in all extremities. And thus does
he abide for ever, and is never changed.







The general providence of God must be considered, first in the creation of
all things: secondly in the preservation of them.

Do we then believe that the Lord made all things of nothing, and shall we
doubt of his ability to provide for us? When God created light before the Sun,
the Moon, or the Stars: and caused grass Genesis 1. 3.
to grow upon the earth, before there was either rain or dew to water it, he
did thereby teach us: first, that we should not put too much trust in them
whilst we have them: and again, that rather then we should suffer hurt by the
want of light, grass, or other such things, the Lord both could and would
provide for us without them. Yet now if we should not have the Sun, we would
think that light were taken from us: and if we wanted rain, we would soon
think we should neither have grass, nor corn: but the Lord has ordained
these means to serve his providence, not for himself, for without them he can
easily help us, but for our weakness, who otherwise could not easily be assured
of his goodness.

Secondly, we must believe that God preserves all: so that a sparrow does not
fall to the ground Matthew. 10.
without his providence, and he has a great care of beasts, and fowls: does
the Lord provide for these, Matthew. 6.
and will he not provide for man, for whom these were made, and are preserved?
Hereunto we must join the particular providence of God: Has he made our
bodies, and will he not clothe us? has he given us life, and will he not
minister unto us food for the sustaining thereof? He could provide for the
Israelites in the barren wilderness forty years together: yea he could
preserve Moses and Elias forty days without any meat at all: which evidently
proves that Gods blessing is all in all, whether there be means or no means.

David observed by experience that the righteous seed of the righteous was
never forsaken, nor begged Psalm. 37.
their bread: and if we could be righteous as then many were, we should
find the same true in our own experience as he did.

These things well considered, will work in us a patient mind, the properties
whereof are,

First to be contented with whatsoever the Lord Properties of a patie^t mind.
Philip. 4. 11.
sends, always acknowledging godliness to be great riches: for we ought
not to seek great matters, nor suffer our desires to be carried after high
things: for this did the Prophet Jeremy rebuke in Jeremy 45. 4.
Baruck. And Christ would have us to pray only for our daily bread: which also
was Jacobs prayer, that Genesis 28.
he might have food and raiment, wherewith the Apostle would have us to be
content. Let us first seek the 1. Tim. 6.
kingdom of heaven, etc. and then, if the Lord give plenty, let us be more
thankful and serviceable: if not, his favor is sufficient of it self, and we
shall be Psalm. 4.
more comfortable with a little, then others are in great abundance without
that. But if we cannot rest in the favor of God, though we want these
outward things, it is certain we do not truly esteem it, neither have we at
that time any comfortable assurance of the remission of our sins.

to give and bestow when and where, and ho^ it pleases him, and as it may most
make for his glory: and therefore we must wholly resign up ou^ selves unto
him. Which if we can do, so mercifully does God use to deal, that when we
least desire outward things, then we shall have them: and when we freely give
them up to him, he will give them to us again.

Abraham gave unto the Lord Isaac his son, which when the Lord did behold, he
quickly gave him his son again: and so will he deal with us still. The
readiest way to retain life, goods, etc. is to yield them up wholly into Gods
hands: not with this condition, that he should give the^ to us again, (for
that were to mock the Lord) but without all care to have them, we must give
them to him, being heartily well content for his glory to forgo them, and
then if they be good for us, we shall receive the^ again: if not, we shall
receive some spiritual grace, which shall better supply the want of them. Yea
the infinite wisdom and mercy of God does wonderfully appear herein, that
sometimes he keeps us long without these things, because that if we had them,
he sees that we would abuse them, and prefer them before spiritual
blessings. And sometime the Lord, seeing our small regard of spiritual things,
will by the want of these outward things, bring us to make greater account of
them, that when we can well want the one, and highly esteem the other, we may
have both together.

FINIS.

