A REPLY TO M. NICHOLAS SMITH, HIS DISCVSSION, of some points of M. DOCTOVR
KELLISON his Treatise of the Hierarchy.

BY A DIVINE

Facile est cuiquam videri respondisse qui tacere noluerit. Aug. l. 5. de Ciu.
cap. 27. It is easy for any man to seem to have ansvvered, that will not
hold his peace.

PRINTET AT DOWAY.

By the Widovve of Mark Wyon. 1630.

GENTLE AND CATHOLIQVE READER.
MASTER Doctor Kellison, as he has written diverse books tending to the
Reconciliation of heretics to the Catholic Church: so of late he set
forth a Treatise entitled: The Hierarchy of the Church, that thereby he might
reconcile some Catholics, the one to the other, to wit the secular Clergy
and Regulars, who, though both vvorthie members of the Catholic Church,
seemed to be at some little variance.

The reason why he published this Treatise, was, as I have heard him say,
because he was informed by letters, and perceived by certain writings and
Pamphlets written toe and froe, that there was some division betwixt the
most Reverend Bishop and Clergy on the one side, and the Regulars on the other
side, to the great grief, I am sure, of both sides, to the edification of
fevv, and dishonor of all.

Wherefore partly out of compassion which he took to see two so vvorthie
bodies (which bear no little svvaye in our little Church of England, and which
heretofore joined both labors and blood in setting forth the Catholic cause)
to be so divided in opinions and affections; and partly at the request of some
friends, who wished well to both (for setting these two motives aside, he
would not have entermedled in so ticklish a business, vvherin he might offend
one party and peradventure both, though he honoreth and loves both, he under
took the vvriting of the aforesaid Treatise of the Hierarchy, and of diverse
orders of the Church, that so he might take occasion to write of the dignirie
and necessity of Bishop, and secular Clergy, which seemed by many clamours
which he heard of, and vvritings also which he savve, to be opposed; in so
much that Episcopal authority in England, and in these times was counted a
novelty, odious, contrary to ancient laws of England, and prejudicial to
souls, and yet to speak also of the state and perfection, belonging to
Regulars, who seemed to be opposers, and so to dispose both parties to peace
and concord.

And therefore he vvrote a long Dedicatorie Epistle to all the Catholics of
England, exhorting all to agree in affections as they do in matters of faith
and Religion, and the Regulars to honor the seculars, and the seculars to
embrace the Regulars as their fellovv missioners, ayders and cooperatours.
Which exhortation he oftentimes upon occasion repeateth in his Treatise, and
has not in all the book so much as one bitter or tarte word against person
or state, unless now and then a glaunce against Luther and Calvin: but so he
extolleth the Bishop and Clergy, as he depresseth not the Regulars, but gives
them as much as S. Thomas of Aquin an holy and learned regular does yield unto
them. Jn so much that diverse were of opinion, and he him self also verily
hoped, that this Treatise would not have offended any, but rather would have
pleased all, and by pleasing all, induced all to an attoneme^t Out of which
hope and opinion he feared not to put his name unto his book, nor to present
it as a grateful gift to the chief of our English Regulars in Doway, where
the book was printed.

But he has understood by letters from England, and now lately by a certain
Discussion fathered on a Regular deceased (the Father belike was ashamed to
behold his Posthumus, and therefore dyed) that the Regulars took (...) this his
Treatise in that good pa^^ he wished and hoped; but rather thought them selves
dishonored by it: which the more grieved him, because as he sincerely
protested in his Epistle Dedicatorie, and often times has made the same
protestation by word of mouth, he intended in noe wise to disgrace the
venerable and approved state of Regulars, but so t^ commend the state of the
Bisho^ and Clergy, which he savv vvamainely opposed, as yet to give to the
Regulars as much as the learned Regulars do yield unto them, and
consequently so to right one party, as not to vvrong the other, but rather to
commend both.

Some friends have urged him to make a Replye to this Discussion fathered on M.
Nicholas Smith: but M. Doctor had not (as he said) the heart to write against
a Catholic and him a Regular, counting it no grace to disgrace a Catholic,
noe victory to overcome him: and fearing least in vvriting against him, he
might contristate other Catholics, and noe less make glad our common
enemies, who imagine our war to be their peace.

Yea M. Doctor used to say: To what purpose should J answer one who
vvriteth not against me. For I never think that he vvriteth against me, who
vvilfullie or ignorantly mistaketh my words and meaning, and puts upon me
what I never said or me^t, that so he may have the greater advantage and make
a shovv of a victory. But he vvriteth against me (said the Doctor) who
vvriteth against my words and meaning: and if he fathereth on me (as M.
Nicholas uses to do) that which J never said or meant, and in that sort
makes his assault; he assaulteth not me, but a supposed and feigned
adversary. And yet if M. Nicholas, had not feigned such an adversary, he could
not have made so much as a shovv of an answer to the Hierarchy as shall
every where be shevved in the decourse of this reply. And besides (said M.
Doctor) I am employed in more important businesses; and if I were not, yet
do I not think a Reply necessary, where there was noe answer, but only
wresting of words, vvittingly or vnvvittingly mistakinge, scanning of
intentions, imposition of untruths, so to make a shovv of a victory, where
indeed M. Nicholas him self was foiled. And moreover he said the book will
answer for it self, and the judicious Reader (as he hears a learned divine
in his Jnquisition, and some others have done) will out of it answer for
him. And last of all, he said: why should I encounter with an adversary that
dares not show him self in the field, and therefore goes masked under
another ma^s name: though it is thought he walks rather in a net; the
question, who he should be, being not so hard to solue, as Gordius his Knotte
was to be dissolved.

Yet out of the respect and affection J bear to M. Doctor, and in regard of
the obligation vvherby J ame obliged to him (as having lived under his
government) and out of the care I have of his good name and reputation (which
I thought could not be impeached without some prejudice to the common cause) J
have undertaken to answer for him, and in this my Reply to imitate the temper
and moderation which he in his Hierarchy has used: and not to follovv the
spleen, bitterness, immodestie and small respect of M. Nicholas.

Many, who have read M. Doctors book, have much commended him (to my
knowledge) by letters from England and other places for his mildnes, temper
and discretion; and therefore as many, do vvonder why M. Nicholas, and he a
Regular, should answer him with such bitterness and immodestie.

What is there in M. Doctors book which so moves his patience? J ame sure
there is not one tarte word in all M. Doctors book: and he vvriteth against
noe person, noe state, noe order; nor meddleth he with the late controversy,
and for no other reason but because he would not offend. It is true he
vvriteth of the Hierarchy of the Church, and of all orders: but that is a
point of the Catholic faith, which (as M. Nicholas confesses in his first
question n. 2.) Has been handled most learnedlie, copiously, and eloquently
by diverse, both in latin and vulgartongues as indeed it has by S. Thomas of
Aquin, Suarez, and others in latin. Why then vvriteth not M. Nicholas against
them, as well as against M. Doctor, they having not handled the matter with
more temper then he, nor having yielded more to regulars then he? what then
is it, M. Nicholas, that so moves your Choler? M. Doctor exalts the Bishop
and Clergy. So do S. Jgnatius, S Ambrose, S. Chrysostom cited by M. Doctor
in his 7. chapter, so do all that write of the Hierarchy; so does the
Council of Tre^t, Conc. Trid. seff. 23. c. 4. S. Th. 2. 2. q. 185. art. 8.
which says, that Bishops do appertain principally to Hierarchicall order,
so does S. Thoma^s of Aquin alleged by M. Doctor in his 11. chapter n. 18.
And as M. Doctor exalts the Bishop and Clergy, so does he the Regulars in
their rank. But he gives the precedence in dignity and state of perfection
to the Bishop, as S. Thomas and all deuines and Fathers do: he shows the
necessity of Bishops in the Church of God; the need that all countries have of
Confirmation, which ordinarily can not be had without a Bishop, whose
splendor, M. Nicholas peradventure fears would obscure his own.

This then may be the cause (for J can find no other, and hincillae lachrymae.
This is the cause of his rough answer which in every page almost is so
bitter, that as the laws of Draco the Legislatour of the Athenians were said
to have been written with man's blood, by reason of their cruelty, so M.
Nicholas his Discussio^ may be said to have been written not with ink, but
with galle, it is so biting and bitter.

Certes although I will not judge of his spirit, yet he seems to shevve
little of the spirit of a Religious man, which is the spirit of humility,
patience, modesty, charity, and of respect to Bishops, Prelates, Priests, and
Pastors: such as was the Spirit of S. Benedict, S. Bernard, S. Dominike, S.
Jgnatius, S. Xauier. For that he strives to depresse the state of Bishops and
Pastors, and to extenuate the necessity both of Bishops and of the Sacrament
of Confirmation.

Wherefore I protest sincerely, and as God knovveth, from my heart, that I am
heartily sorry that (...) has given me a just cause, and ^^^^osed a
necessity on me to answer his Discussion, and defend M. Doctor and the true
doctrine delivered by him: because I fear I can not do this sufficiently (as
I must, seeing J have undertaken to answer for M. Doctor) without dishonor
to M. Nicholas a Catholic and Religious man, and in credit and estimation in
his Order. Yet what I can do without prejudice to D. Kellison, whose honor
is dear unto me, and to the true doctrine, which he has taught, I shall
do: And therefore J mean not to imitate his odious manner of vvriting, which
J hear is displeasing to all judicious and indifferent Readers; rather I will
pass over his harsh speeches with patience, though not always with
silence, and vvheras it is his usual manner to insult before the victory
with these and the like speeches: A doughtie argument, page 16. J will not
say noe divine, but even no man in his right judgment, can affirm, page 48. J
can not but marvel that a learned man should use such a form of argument,
page 48 still M. Doctor cites Authors against him self, page 89. etc. J
shall not insult over him, though, as the Reader shall see, J get the maistrie
over him, and the victory of him; holding it a base thing, and not vvorthie a
generous mind, to strike his adversary or insult upon him, when he lies on
the ground. But rather I will proceed with patience and charity, and will
content my self to overcome, and to put my adversary to silence by argument,
not by cries and clamours: and though J be noe Regular, yet I will endeavor
to give him example of religious humility, modesty, and charity.

But to return to the Reader to whom this preface is addressed, J shall
desire him not to be scandalized to see one Catholic write against another:
Catholics as Catholics agree always in matters of faith, and good
Catholics never break charity: but the best Catholics, Gal. 3. Act. 15.
Hieron. Ep. 86. and seq. Aug. Ep. 8. and seq. Eus. l. 5. c. 24. and 25. Beda l.
3. hist. Angl. c. 24. and 25. l. 5. c. 16. Daniel 10.
as men, may vary in other opinions. S. Peter, S. Paul, and S. Barnabas: and
S. Augustine, and S. Hierome, disagreed in some opinions without breach of
faith or charity. About the observation of Easter there was great debate
betwixt Saints and Saints, till the Church decided the controversy, yea
Angels have dissented in opinion. And so long as the dissensio^ is not in
matters of faith, it may be without prejudice to faith, and without breach of
charity. And howsoever; this vvriting of one Catholic against another, is
to be imputed to M. Nicholas, who was the first that vvrote against a
Catholic; for that M. Doctor vvrote against noe man, and J would never have
written against M. Nicholas, but in defense of a Catholic, and Catholic
Doctrine.

And as thou (Gentle Reader) art to be a spectatour of the encounter and combat
betwixt me and M. Nicholas; so I desire thou should be the judge and vmpier
also; so that thou follovvest not affection which oftentimes blinds, but
vnblinded reason, which never deceives, but will cause thee to pronounce^
sentence^ where thou see most reason, not where thou settlest most thy
affection.

TO THE VENERABLE CLERGY OF ENGLAND BOTH, SECVLAR AND REGVLAR.
ALthough in this my reply which I have made for the just defense of M.
Doctor, and of the truth delivered by him, I may offend some; for that veritas
odiu^ parit, and be it never so discreetlie delivered, is dispeasing to some,
yet my desire is peace; and as the end of war ought to be peace, so my
intention in this my disputation was to shevveuerie order the truth, which
all men when they see do embrace; and so to induce them to peace.

And therefore now I address my speech unto you the Reverend and venerable
Priests of our afflicted Church, desiring you, that seeing I have set before
your eyes (which otherwise you knevve) the perfection of the states, both of
Bishops, Pastors, and Regulars: you would honor one another, Romans 12.
yea in honor prenent one another, and lay a side all contentions, that (as
the Apostle wishes) you may be of one meaning, having the same charity,
Philip. 2.
of one mind agreeuig in one: nothing by conte^tio^ neither by vain glory,
but in humility, eahe counting other better then them selves, every one not
considering the things that are their own, but those that are other men's.

And truly if one order had not too great an ouervveening of its own
perfections, but rather would cast an eye upon the perfectio^s of another,
which will be fovvnd to excelle in one thing or other: this consideration
would cause humility, and humility charity, and charity peace and amity.
So our blessed savior Christ Jesus God and man, though even as man he was
greater in dignity and sanctity then all the men that ever were, though
never so holy (of which also he was not ignorant) yet he as man considering
not so much the perfection he had by union with the divinity, as what he
was according to his humane nature taken barelie and nakedlie in it self; and
comparing him self with the grace and sanctity he savve in others,
humiliated him self in conceit under others, who in state and dignity was
above all others. So the Blessed virgin Mother, and Mother of God: so all the
Saints of God, considering not what they were by grace (though they knevv
it full well) but what of them selves they were, and casting an eye of that
which others were by the divine grace; cast them selves in conceit at the
feet of all men, even those that were far inferior unto them. If all
orders would practice this, none would contend with another fer perfection
or state of perfection.

Let the Clergieman (says Thomas Waldensis) look into the state of the
religions, Th. VVald. de Clericis and Regularibus Tit. 9. cap. 2.
and he shall find something vvherin he is inferior to the Religions: and let
the Religious man behold the order of the Clergieman and he shall find vvherin
the Clergieman excels him. If this they do, Philip. 2.
eahe will count other better then them selves, because every one (as S.
Paul's counsels them) considers not the things and perfections, that are
his own, but those that are other men's.

If this they do, noe order will prefer it self before another, but rather
thinck more lovvlie of it self then of another and so contention will be
avoided: If this they do, none will brag of their own state and
perfection, but all will study and endeavor to get perfection: knovving that
it is not the state or office, but the holy life and merit which God
especially respects; and that if one live not according to his state, the
higher his state is, the greater is his damnation; for that from the highest
place is the lowest fall. The state of S. Paul and S. Peter is high, but as
S. Hierome says: Hieron Ep. ad Heliod.
Non est facile stare loco Pauli, tenere gradum Petri: It is not an easy thing
to stand in the high place of Paul, or to hold and to stand steadfast in the
high degree of Peter.

S. Augustine looking into both states, so commends in both the good, that he
discomme^deth in both the badde, that so if they think to well of them selves
for the good, Ep. 147. 2d Valor.
they may humble them selves in consideration of the bad: for speaking of the
Bishop and the Clergy he uses these words to Valerius: Ante omnia peto vt
cogitet religiosa prudentia tua, etc. before all I desire that thy religions
prudence would think that there is no thing in this life more easy, grateful
and acceptable to men, especially in this time, then the office of a Bishop,
Priest, or Deacon, if carelesselie it be performed, but nothing before God more
miserable and damnable: likewise that nothing in this life, especially at
this time, is more difficile, more laborious, more dangerous, then the office
of a Bishop, Priest or Deacon, but before God nothing more happy and blessed,
if so they war as our Emperor commands. Which S. Augustine considering
wept bitterly, when he was consecrated Bishop, as he him self in the same
epistle confesses. And in another epistle speaking of Religions, he makes
this protestation: Simpliciter autem fateor charitati vestrae coram Domino Deo
nostro, etc. I confess simply to your charity befere our Lord God, who is
witness upon my soul, from such time as I began to serve God; as I have
hardly experienced or found better then such as have profited in religion; so
I have not found worse then such as in monasteries have fallen. Epist. 1 37.
But as gold is not to be refused for its dross, nor wine for the lees, nor
the good corn for the Chafe; so neither are stares and orders of the Church
to be less conceited, because some men's lives are not suitable to their order
and profession.

All orders are holy, yet none so holy but that the superior order wants
some thing of the inferior. The state of the Regular is inferior to the state
of the Bishop and Pastor in dignity, and Hierarchiall functions, but it is
less subject to danger, and so exceeds in security. The state of the Bishop
and Pastor has annexed unto it great honor, but this honos is onus, this
honor is a greater charge and burden, then is the Regulars state, because it
is harder to save ones self and others, which is the Pastors office, then to
save ones self only, which is the care of the Religions. Let then the
Pastors behold in the Regular merit and mortificatio^: let the Regular admire
in the Bishop and Pastor great dignity, and no less charity in engaging his
own life yea soul for others: and the one will not despise the other, but
they will both love and honor one another.

S. Greg hom. 10. super Ezech. c. 3.
Gregory expounding that place, of Ezechiel: Vocem alarm animalium
percutientium alteram ad alteram: the voice of the vvings of living creatures
stricking one against another, has these words: Omnes Sancti se inuicem suis
virtutibus tangunt, and sese ad profectum excitant, ex consideratione virtutis
alienae. Non vnidantur omnia, etc. The Sanctes touch one another by their
virtues, and stir up them selves to profit by the consideration of another
virtues. To one all are not given, least elevated by pride he take a fall, but
to this man is given what to thee is not given, and to thee is given which to
him is denied. That vvhilest this man considerenth the good that thou have, and
he has not, he may in his cogitation prefer thee before him self: and again
vvhilest thou see that he has what thou have not, thou may in cogitation
rank thy self after him, that what is written moy be fulfilled: Superiores
sibi inuicem arbitrantes: Each counting others better then them selves. So the
same father a little after says, Philip. 2.
hat S. Paul even after his conversion when in sanctity and perfection he
was peradventure inferior to none, yet considering what the rest of the
Apostles by Christ his grace then were, and what he by his sin and hatred
of Christians had been, counted him self Apostolorum minimum, the least of all
the Apostles, 1. Cor. ^^.
and S. Peter not regarding his own perfection admireth S. Paul's vvisdome
and learning shevved in his Epistles. 2. Petr. 3.
This has been the practice of Christ and his Mother, as I said before in
which all the Sanctes of God have imitated them.

And if we practice the same mutual consideration and comparison of our
defectes with others perfections, this mutual consideration would cause
mutual love, and mutual love would cause mutual praise, and mutual praise
would cause mutual humility (for that the more we praise another, the less
we esteened our selves) and mutual humility would take avvye all
contention, (for that into humble men's consideration it never enters, which
is or should be greater,) and contention taken away, a peace would fellovv.
Luc. 9.


And indeed, now that the Regulars in England are all almost Priests, and
have the same authority that Priests have; the secular Priest has inste cause
to love the Regular, and in him, his own state and order: and the Regular
Priest has good reason to respect the secular Priest, Priesthood being the
richest pearl of his crown and the fairest flovver of his garland; and not
to think that he is dispraysed when the Priest is commended.

The secular Priests who labor in the ship of Peter will be content to
becke^ to their fellow fishermen that are in another ship, that is in
another state, Luc 5.
to come and help the^. And the Regulars will with all charity and respect
also yield their helping ^arde. The secular Priests having lovingly invited
them, and the chief Pastor having sent them to that end. And seeing the
harvest is great, Gers. de statu Curatorum confid. 15.
and the work men fevve, the secular Priests will (as Gerson says they
must) benignelie and lovingly receive them, so that (says Gerson) they do
not de tract, from the Pastors, or seek to bring them in contempt with their
parishioners.

If both secular and Regular Priests would but look back to former freindlie
offices which have passed betwixt them, it would be sufficient to make them
renew former freindship. The time has been when the Clergy of England
invited the Jesuits to be partakers with the^ of their merit and labors in
the mission. Our most learned and zealous Cardinal of most pious memory, the
first founder of the English Seminary, to wit, of Doway, and of the mission
of Priests in to England in this time of Schism, vvriteth thus in his Apology
for the Priests chap. 6. Cum itaque nos ante aduerteremus, and paucis ab hinc
mensibus cerneremus Anglorum nonnullos a superioribus Societatis Jesus ad Indos
amandatos, etc. when therefore we perceived, and fevv months since did see,
that some English men by the Superiors of the Society of Jesus, were sent to
the Indians; we demanded of them (the Superiors) that they who were of this
nation, should rather be reserved for the profit of their country, then of
externe nations: to which petition after mature deliberation had of that
matter, with great affection of charity, they yielded. The like D.
Worthington President also of Doway College, relates in his Catalogue of our
late English Martyrs. Doctor Pitse also in his book of the famous vvriters of
England. In Edmundo Campiano, Conformablie to Cardinal Allen says: Videntes
autem sacerdotes nostri, multam esse messem, etc. Our Priests seeing that the
Harnest was great and Work men fevv, did earnestly request the Fathers of
the Society of Jesus, that they would adioine them selves as cooperatours,
and would send if not early in the morning, at least at the third sixth or
ninth hour of the day some of theirs to labor in the vineyard of our lord.
And with what charity and respect the Priests received the first Jesuits,
extolled their order, conducted them from place to place for their more
safety, and to bring them acquainted where they were not known, some yet
living can tell; and that truly Religious and learned Jesuit Father Campion
acknowledges no less in an Epistle to his General, saing: Presbyteri
nostrates, ipsi doctrina and sanctimonia prestantes, tantam opinionem nostri
ordinis excitarunt, vt venerationem quam nobis exhibent Catholici, non nisi
tim^de commemorandam existime^. Our Priests, they them selves excelling in
learning and sanctity, have raised such an opinion of our order, that I think
the veneration which the Catholics give us, is not to be spoken of but
fearefullie. And will the Jesuits now de tract from the good name of them,
who have so much extolled their order and given ^t the first name and credit
it had in England? noe: it can not be imagined. And will the Jesuits seek
now to supplante those, who first planted them in England? noe they will
not; and if heretofore any would, hereaster they will not. Nor will the
secular Priests seek now to exclude Jesuits from the mission, whom they
have lovingly invited, knovving that:

Turpius eijcitur quam non admittitur hospes:
It Is better to deny a guest no doubt,
Admittance; then admitted, turn him out.
Rather both orders reflecting upon these former friendly offices will
endeavor to renew the former friendship.

The time also was when the secular Priests shevved courtesies to the
Benedictins, and were so far from hindering their union or mission into
England, that they helped to set forvvard both: and had the Clergy opposed
their mission (as some others did) and not rather furthered the^ in their,
suit; we should not have had perchance, at this Day a Benedictine in
England. This the Benedictins have heretofore acknowledged, and must therefore
have respect to the Clergy. And if they reflect upon the many good offices
the Clergy has done them, and if the Clergy like wise look back to the
forner love and old freindship which bath been betwixt them, it will I hope
renew old friendship and take a way all iarres and divisions.

The time also was when the Franciscans obtained their mission of Clement the
eight, at the instance of Cardinal Allen, which notvvithsta^ding the Pope had
before refused at the instance of Cardinal Caietan; as some yet alive do
affirm, who lived in Rome at that time. And the Reverend Father, F. Francis
Nugent intending a mission of English Capucins, vvrote to M. Birchet then
Archpriest about the year 1611. to have his consent and assistance; to which
his request the Archpriest willingly condescended. And I have heard M.
Doctor Kellison affirm, that he also vvrote to Rome to procure their mission.

J know also that when our English Recollectes had obtained letters of the
Nuncio in Bruxelles to the Magistrates of Doway to receive them into their
Town; the Nuncio sent his letters enclosed in one to Doctor Kellison, in
which letters he vvrote to the said Doctor, that if he thought their
admissio^ into the Town might prone prejudicial to his College, he should
not give them the letters, but keep them back: and yet Doctor Kellison gave
the letters to the Franciscan that brought them, and did further their
admission what he could. And this they also will acknovvledge, and this
acknovvlegement will conserve a respect in them to the Clergy and a love of
the Clergy to them.

And all these orders have had their source and first beginning from the
Clergy and College of Doway: most of their principal men having had a great
part, at least of their education in that College. And so the Clergy and
College will bear a fatherly love to their children and offspring, and the
Regulars will never be vvanting in a respect and filial love to their loving
Parent, and will never be so unnatural children as to oppose their mother
that did breed and bear them: nor so evil byrds, as to seek to stayne by
evil aspersions the nest vvherin they were hatched.

Jf the Priests secular and regular be not deuidet, their sheep will be united,
and none will say: 1. Cor. 1.
I am Paul's, and I Apollos, I Cephas, but all will be Christ's, and seeing that
Christ is not divided, all will be united, and the multitude of believers will
have one heart and soul. Act. ^.
If the workmen who endeavor to rebuild our Jerusalem and Temple, our little
Church of England, will vouchsafe to follovv the directions of their
Architect, and with him and the other fellovv-vvorkemen join in all peace and
concord their fruitful labors: the building will go on a pace, and will
the sooner be finished; because virtus vnita est fortior seipsa dispersa:
virtue and force united is of more force then the self same divided. But if
the work men work every one a part, the work will proceed but
shovvlie; and if they oppose one onother, it will never be accomplished.
Wherefore as we tender our own spiritual good, which with contention can
not prosper; Catholics edefication, who by this discord can not be edifyed;
heretics and Schismatikes reconciliation unto us, who hereby will be rather
alienated from us; God his honor, 2. Reg. 12.
whose name as it was by David's sin blasphemed by the enemies of our lord,
so it will be glorified by your concord and unity, obscured by your division;
As (J say) we respect al these things, of which the least should be a
sufficient motive to reconcile us: Let us not seek to trench upon one another;
but let us rather as much as reason and conscience dictateth, yield to one
another: let us not dispute who in state or dignity are greater, but rather
let every one in humility and charity seek to excelle and to prevent one
another: and to end as I began with S. Paul; Philip 2.
Let nothing be done by contention, neither by vain glory, but in humility,
each one counting other better then them selves, every one not considering the
things that are their own, but those that are other men's.

APPROBATIO.
VISO testimonio cuiusda^ mihi probe noti, censui hunc libellum, cui titulus: A
Reply unto Mr. Nicholas Smiths Discussion, etc. vtiliter imprimi posse, vtpote
nihil continentem quod cum fide Catholica and bonis moribus non consentiat.

Duaci V. Kal. Aug. 1630. GEORG. COLVENERIVS, S. Theol. Doctor, Regius and
Primarius eiusdem in Academ. Duacena Professor, Coll. Eccl. S. Petri
Praepositus, and Canon. necnon eiusdem Academ. Canc. and librorum Censor.

THE FIRST QVESTION.
WHAT IVDGEMENT may be framed of M. Doctors Treatise in general.
MASTER NICHOLAS.
MY meaning is not to set down what censure others even secular Priests, to my
certain knowledge, give of M. Doctors book, because I desire not to give
offense etc. n. 1.

REPLY.
1. MASTER NICHOLAS, for an Introduction, says his meaning is not to set
down what censure others, even secular Priests (but what secular Priests, if
there were any, may easily be guessed) give of M. Doctors book. And my
meaning also is not to relate what I have heard from many, even principal men,
of the impertinencie and immodestie of M. Nicholas his book, and of the
moderation and temper observed by M. Doctor in his Treatise: and a learned
Divine in his Inquisition into M. Nicolas his discussion has briefly, yet
solidlie and clearelie declared what censure his book deserves: and I also
shall make the same more known to the world by this my Reply, then otherwise I
would, could I defend M. Doctor, and the truth by him delivered, without
impeaching M. Nicholas his honor.

2. He styleth his book A MODEST BRIEF DISCVSSION. But how immodest it is,
and how little beseeming the person who wrote it, and the person against whom
he wrote it, the said learned Author of the In^^^^^ion, in his second
Section, and I also in a catalogue of his tauntes, gibes, and scoffs, have
acquainted the Reader.

3. He says It may justly seem strange why M. Doctor, should at this very
time, write against Calvin concerning the Hierarchy of the Church, which is an
argument in these days not particularly spoaken of. n. 2. And as strange it
seems to me, why M. Nicholas should take upon him to examine M. Doctors
intentions. But what M. Doctor intended, and what reasons moved him to set
forth that Treatise at this time, may easily be gathered out of my preface to
the Reader. For which reasons being resolved to write of the Hierarchy, he
thought he had reason to write against Ihon Calvin (as he does in his second
Chapter) which M. Nicholas, cannot take as written against him (as he seems
to suspect n. 2.) Unless he, which God forbid, be also an enemy to the
Hierarchy of God his Church.

4. But whereas, in the same place, he meruaileth why M. Doctor should write
of this matter, Which had been already most learnedlie, copiouslie, and
eloquently handled by diverse, both in Latin and vulgar languages: I must tell
him, that if he will have no man to write of a subject, of which others have
written before, he must tax almost all the writters of this present, and
precedent ages, yea many of his own order; which were much for M. Nicholas to
do. For what has any man almost written of Philosophy, School divinity,
Controversies, Cases, Histories, which has not been treated of before? For,
Eccles. cap. 1.
as Ecclesiastes says: Nihil sub sole nouum, nec valet quisquam dicere, Ecce,
hoc recens est. Iam enim praecessit in saculis quae fuerunt ante nos: Nothing
under the sun is new: neither is any man able to say, behold this is new:
for it has already gone in the ages that were before us. Aug. lib 1. de
T^in^t. cap. 3.
Let S. Austin answer for M. Doctor: Vtile est plures libros a pluribus
fieri, diuer so stylo non diuersa fide, etiam de quaestionibus eisdem, vt ad
plurimos res ipsae perueniat, ad alios sic, ad alios autem sic: It is
profitable that many books should be made by many, in a diverse style, not a
diverse faith, even of the same questions; that the thing it self, may come to
many, to some so, to others so.

5. Before I go any further I observe that M. Nicholas even in the beginning
co^tradicteth the truth and himself also, and that within a few lines: Which
is an evil presage of future lapses, in which M. Nicholas will be found
tripping. For in his 2. page n. 3. he says that M. Doctor is the first who
has put in printe a Treatise (to wit of the Hierarchy) in the English tongue.
In which words he contradicts the truth wittinglie (which redoubleth his
fault) and himself also. The truth: because he knows that before M. Doctor
set pen to paper about this subject, there was a book of the like subject
published first in French, then in Latin, printed, as is pretended, at
Herbipolis in the year 1626. then in English at Roan where the Discussion was
printed: and in Latin, this book is styled Vindiciae priuilegiorum and
gratiarum, quibus in Ecclesiastica Hierarchia etc. in which book the Author
in his second reason, endeavors to prove Regulars to be of the Hierarchy
by the arguments, which M. Nicholas in his sixth question has borrowed of him
to prove the same, as we shall see hereafter. And so he contradicts the
truth in saying that M. Doctor was the first who has put in printe a
Treatise of the Hierarchy in the English tongue, seeing that the Treatise
mentioned was printed and diuulged in England before. And in Queen Elizabethes
time (as M. Nicholas or some of his brethren must needs know) a treatise was
set forth in a lay man's name to show that Religions were fitter to hear
Confessions, then Secular Priests.

6. He seems also to contradict himself, for that n. 2. he says that
diverse have handled this argument (before M. Doctor) most learnedlie,
copiouslie, and eloquently both in Latin and vulgar languages (as the alleged
English book does) and yet he says M. Doctor was the first; and
consequently he says M. Doctor was the first, and not the first, which is a
contradiction in himself. Whereby also it appears that it is far from
truth which he says n. 4. that this Treatise (of M. Doctor) has renewed
the no less improfitable, then odious comparison betwixt the perfection of
secular Pastors, and that of religous men: for that, by his own confession,
this argument was alreader (that is before M. Doctor wrote) handed by diverse,
both in Latin and vulgar languages. And he is not ignorant that Suarez, Suarez
tom. 3. de Rel. l. 1. c. 18. Et 21. Platus. de bon. stat. Rel. l. 1 c a. c. 37.
and Hieronymus Platus, me^ of his own coat have handled this argument and
comparison more largely then M. Doctor has done, and not more moderately.

7. He calls M. Doctors exhortation to peace and charity Verbal. n. 3. and
4. as though it came not from the heart: Which all they who know M. Doctors
sincerity and realitie, will not think to be true: but rather that M.
Nicholas takes to much upon him, in judging of men's hearts: which is a thing
belonging either to God, who is therefore said to search men's hearts, Ierem. 17
1. Cor. 2.
or to the Spirit of man which is in him: or to the Prophet or Saint, to whom
God reuealeth such secrets.

8. I agree to that he says n. 5. that to conserve peace and charity it is
good to let religious alone with their privileges: So that he agree with me
that it is good also, that the Clergy and laytie be let alone with their
rightes: amongst which, one is to have a Bishop to govern the Clergy, and
Confirmation to strengthen the laity in a time of persecution. But what
privileges have been taken from them? Or what offer has been mad to
despoile them of the same? They will say, that before a Bishop was sent into
England, Regulars were free from asking Approbation of the Bishop. But to this
they are easily answered, that exemption from asking Approbation of the Bishop
to hear confessions of seculars, is not any privilege annexed to their order:
and therefore in all Catholic Countries, Religious men are obliged by
commandment of the Council of Trent; and were before commanded by Bonifacius
VIII. Conc. Trid. sess. 23 cap 15.
Clemens V. in the General Counsel of Vienna, Ioannes XXII. and Pius quintus,
to ask the Bishops Approbation (as they do) to hear confessions of seculars:
but it was a privilege granted to secular Priests, as well as to Regulars,
all the while they had no Bishop. And with good reason also: for how could they
ask Approbation of a Bishop when they had no Bishop? But now since we have had
a Bishop, it is a question, whether they should not ask approbation in
England, as they do in other Countries: which question MY LORD OF CHALCEDON,
and others have learnedlie disputed: I will not meddle with it in this Reply,
because M. Doctor did not in his Hierarchy.

10. I allow also of that which M. Nicholas adds n. 6. that it would much
avail toward the conservation of charity, if all Superiors, and Presidents
of Seminaries were effectually careful that their subjects speak of
religious men with respect and charity. And as for M. Doctor President of
Doway College (at whom M. Nicholas aymeth) I may say boldly, because
truly, if some that come from other Colleges did not sometimes utter their
grieuances against some Regulars, there would not a word be spoaken against
the^, scarcely of them, in his College: and I know some, that have been
brought up in other Colleges, who have been sharply reprehended by him for
speaking against some of them. And therefore, unless many lie that come from
thence, there is more muttering against them in their own Colleges them in
Doway College, where the greatest part scarcely think of the^, much less
speak of their affairs. And if the Rectours and Superiors of other Colleges
did seek to instille into their subjects a reverence to the Bishop and
respect to the Clergy, many clamours and harsh speeches, cast out against the
Bishop and Clergy, might have been stopped and prevented. But unless also
many who come from thence, do tell us, untruths if any in those Colleges
speak but a word in commendation of the Bishop and Clergy (under whom yet
they must live when they come into England) they are the worse thought of, and
far much the worse for it. Of this I could say more, but I was loath to have
said thus much, had not M. Nicholas urged me unto it: To whom therefore I say:
Qui alterum incusat probi, ipsum se intueri oportet: he that accuses another
of any fault, must look that himself be free from it, else in condemning
another, he condemns himself.

11. And would to God the Superiors of other Colleges would teach their
subjects to think and speak well of the Bishop and Clergy and other
Seminaries: I know M. Doctor would be as forward, as the most forward to teach
and charge his to love and respect Regulars: which mutual correspondence if
there were; a peace would not only follow, but also would be conserved; and
this mutual peace would be pleasing to God, honorable and comfortable to both
parties: but as S. Gal. 5.
Paul says: If you bite and eat one another (by detracting from one
another) take heed you be not consumed of one another.

12. I wonder that M. Nicholas number. 7. should say that M. Doctors book should
not be pleasing to the Sea Apostolic, it proving the Catholic Roman
doctrine against Heretics; commending the Hierarchy, which the Counsel of
Trent defines to be of the divine Institution, Cont. Trid. Sess 6. c 22 and
Can. 3
and to consist of Bishops, Priests, and other Ministers: and defending the
mission of our most Reverend Bishop sent to England from the Sea Apostolik with
that authority over England, which other Bishops have over their Dioceses, and
highly commends also by the same Sea Apostolik: rather M. Nicholas might
fear a check, if the Sea Apostolic were rightly informed, seeing that he, in
his Discussion, speaks so coldly of the Sacrament of Confirmation, because be
would not have a Bishop, and so openly, that is, by a book in printe glaunceth
at the Bishops person, impugneth his mission, as not convenient for these
times, as though he would controlle the chief Pastor, and knew better then he
and his Counsel, what times are most suitable for a Bishop.

Neither can M. Doctors book (whatsoever M. Nicholas says n. 8. be
ungrateful to our English Catholics, much less to the greater and better
part. Whom every where he commends for their zeal and constancy in
defending God his cause with hazard of their liberties, lands and lives; and
does not tax them of want of obedience or charity (as he says) in not being
united to my Lord of Chalcedon: for that he knows, that the most of them are
linked to him in love, respect, and obedience; and if some of them be not so
much united to him as were to be wished, it is rather to be imputed to some
regulars who are their Guides and Directours, then to them. And how the
Catholics are not condemned of sin for refusing a Bishop (as M. Nicholas also
says) shall appear hereafter in my reply to the third question. But whom M.
Nicholas means by the better and greater part of Catholics, I know not. I had
thought, when we talk of matters of faith, the Church, and her Hierarchy,
the greater and better part had been the Bishop and his Clergy together with
those that adhere unto him, as to their lawful pastor, and they as M.
Nicholas knows are well pleased with M. Doctors book, as the rest also
would have been had not M. Nicholas, and his, misinformed them of the
contents.

14. Let M. Nicholas reflect upon himself; for if he and some others had not
terrified them with vain shadows and made them to fear where was no cause
of fear, they would have been as zealous for a Bishop, as the most zealous,
knowing that by the presence of a Bishop, God would be glorified, our little
Church of England graced, the weak Catholics in time of persecution
strengthened, and all comforted.

15. But I did not think that M. Nicholas could Exeodem orefrigidum efflare
and calidum: Out of the same mouth breath could and hoate, had I not seen that
in diverse places of his Discussion he charge M. Doctor as to partialie
addicted to the Bishop and Clergy; and yet in this his first question n. 9.
accuses him as an enemy to his Ordinarieship. To which he may easily be
answered that M. Doctor only says in his 15. Chapter n. 10. that the Bishop
of Chalcedon has only a general spiritual Jurisdiction over the Clergy
and lay Catholics in spiritual matters, and has no Title given him to any
particular Bishopric in England, and so cannot challenge to himself any
particular Bishopric, no more then the Priests by their faculties, which they
have to preach and minister Sacraments all over England, can challenge any
particular parish Church: Which he said to show that our Protestant Bishops
have no just occasion to except against our Catholic Bishop. Yet who can doubt
but that as the Pope has given him that power and authority over England,
which other Bishops have over their Dioceses, so he can Ex plenitudine
potestatis, by fullness of power, with this general authority, make him
Ordinary of England by an extraordinary manner, as at first he was styled.
But whether he be De facto Ordinary, or no, because M. Doctor in his
Hierarchy never determined it, nether will I. Yet I have seen certain
writings, in which some have learnedlie disputed for his ordinariship: on which
he stands not so much, as on the power of an ordinary, which he thinks
sufficient to demand approbation.

16. M. Nicholas (as he is very forwards in that kind) again charge M.
Doctor, saying: that it cannot be pleasing to God to treat of holy things
upon particular designs: And so still makes himself judge of M. Doctors
intentions. But let him look into his own conscience, and see whether he
cannot there discover a particular design in opposing the having of a Bishop
in our Country. M. Doctor has protested before God in his Epistle
dedicatorie, and other parts of his Hierarchy, that he intended only that
the Bishop should be honored, and all orders, in their rank, respected, and I
have already in my preface to the Reader laid open his intention. And
therefore M. Doctor knowing his own good intention hops that he pleased God
in writing his Hierarchy for so good an end, as to commend all orders in their
kind, and thereby to induce them all to peace with one another.

17. Let M. Nicholas take heed of his Discussion full false dealings, wrong
imputations, wilful mistakings, gibes, and tauntes to disgrace M. Doctor, as
in their places shall be showed; farsed with many oppositions against a Bishop
sent and commended by the chief Vicar of Christ: derogating to the holy
Sacrament of Confirmation (whose necessity he slighteth, whose perfection he
denies in denying that it makes us perfect Christians; S. Cle. Ep. 4. S. Vr.
banus ep. decr^t.
opposite to the ancient fathers, who, as I have showed in my Reply to the 4.
question. n. 15. attribute that perfection unto it. And for no other cause, but
because he cannot brook a Bishop: Let him I say take heed least his discussion
fraught with this ill merchandise, be neither pleasing to God, nor man.

18. As for the manner hold by M. Doctor in preouing his Tenets, which M.
Nicholas n. 11. auerreth not to be correspondent to the opinion of his
learning, but to be easily answered, and without any study; the truth
thereof shall appear in my Reply, by which I shall defend all M. Doctors
positions, and shall show M. Nicholas his answer to be altogether deficient or
not to the purpose: Whereby I think in the end he will not have the face; and,
I am sure, not the cause, to brag, as he does.

19. I cannot here omit, how n. 12. he accuses M. Doctor of want of Logike
and prudence, though, he has taught Divinity alone longer, then M. Nicholas
has been in studying Logik Philosophy and divinity. There are many manners
of arguing, and all good in their degree, for the Logician sometimes argues
from the cause to the effect, which manner of arguing is called demo^stratio
propter quid: sometimes he proceeds from the effect to the cause, which is
demonstratio quia: and sometimes he argues from intrinsecall, sometimes from
extrinsecall causes: and all these forms of arguing are good, because there is
a connection betwixt the cause and the effect, and so one infers another,
and the cause is notior natura then the effect, and the effect is notior nobis
then the cause, and soethey may infer one another. And it were to be
meruailed if M. Dectour should hit upon none of these forms and manners.

20. But let us hear what M. Nicholas says. for example (says he) to prove
the necessity of a Bishop in England, he serves himself of these strange and
unto ward propositions: that it is a divine law for every such particular
Church, as England is, to hauea Bishop: that without a Bishop England cannot be
a particular Church: that unless every particular Church have it Bishop or
Bishops, the whole Church should not (as Christ has instituted) be a Hier
archie composed of diverse particular Churches. That without a Bishop we cannot
have Confirmation, which whosoever wants, is not, as M. Doctor says, a
perfect Christian. And are these harsh, strange and unto ward propositions,
they being grounded in Scripture and the divine law? To speak with in compass,
this saying of M. Nicholas, is a very rash assertion.

21. That these propositio^s are true and according to Scripture and the divine
law, and conseque^tlie not harsh, I shall prove more at large in their proper
places. Here I briefly argue thus: It is of the divine law that there must be
Bishops in the Church, as M. Doctor has proved in his 12.13. and 14. chap.
and as M. Nicholas confesses q. 3. n. 4. and 17. and cannot deny, if he will be
a Catholic. And why? But to supply the wants the Church has of Preaching,
Sacraments, and in particular of Confirmation, of which only the Bishop is
ordinary Minister: but one Bishop cannot supply the wantes of twoe notable
parts, such as are England, Spain, and France: Ergo every notable part, such
as these Countries are, must at least have one Bishop, and that also by the
divine law.

Soelikewise that without a Bishop a people cannot be a particular Church I
shall prove in the next question. n. 2. For if it be true which S. Cypr. Ep.
69. ad Flor^
Cyprian says, that the Church is Sacerdo^i plebs adunata, Apeople united to
the Priest, that is, Bishop; then that people which has no Bishop cannot be a
Church: and consequently also the whole Church cannot (as Christ has
instituted) be a Hierarchy composed of diverse particular Churches, unless these
Churches have every one their Bishop. And hence it follows also that without
a Bishop, who is the Ordinary minister of Confirmation, we cannot, by
ordinary course, be perfect Christians, because we cannot have Confirmation,
which makes us perfect Christians, as S. Clement and S. Urban hereafter
alleged do auerre; as also other fathers, and S. Thomas of Aquin, and sundry
deuines, even Jesuits, as we shall see in the 4. question. n. 15. These
arguments are a priore, and are inferred from the extrinsecall cause, to wit,
God his commandment and institution, which is a cause why Bishops are
necessary in the Church. And therefore as we may argue from the
ecclesiastical law, as from an extrinsecall cause, and say; the Church has
commanded to fast in Lent: Therefore we must fast: So we may argue from the
divine law as from an extrinsecall cause, and say: God has commanded that
Bishops shall be in the Church, and that every particular great Church must
have it Bishop, ergo it must have him. And so it was harhlie and vntowardlie
said of M. Nicholas that the above rehearsed propositions are harsh and
untoward; they being grounded in Scripture and Fathers.

23. Th 3. p. q. 72 art. 11. ad 1.
And although S. Thomas of Aquin and many divines do affirm that by
commission from the Pope, a Priest not Bishop may confirm: yet diverse also
hold the contrary, as S. Bonauenture, Durand, Adrian VI. Estius in 4. d. 17.
Alphonsus a Castro, Verbo; Confirmatio: and they prove their opinion out of
Eusebius Ep. 3. Pope Damasus Epist. 4. Innocentius III. de consuetud. cap.
quando. Who expressly affirm that Confirmation cannot be given but by the
Bishop, as in the primitive Church is was given by the Apostles only, to whom
Bishops succeed, and not by the disciples to whom Priests succeed.

24. Yea they want not apparent reason. For (say they) the act of Confirming
either it is appertaining to the Bishop by reason of his power of Jurisdiction,
or by reason of his power of Order. If by reason of his power of Jurisdiction,
then a Bishop elected and confirmed, but not consecrated, might confirm. For
that he has Episcopal Jurisdiction, which yet never was seen, yea then this
might be committed to a deacon, or an inferior minister, for he also is
capable of Episcopal Jurisdiction, as when one is elected and confirmed Bishop
before he be Priest or deacon. If by reason of the power of Order, then as the
Pope cannot give power to a deacon to consecrate, because that is proper to the
Character and Order of a Priest, so he cannot give power to a Priest to
confirm, that appertaining to the Character and Order of a Bishop. If the
authors of the other opinion say, that the Priests Character of it self is
sufficient to confirm, they should contradict the Fathers alleged, who say
that to confirm, is proper to the Bishop, and cannot agree to the Priest not
Bishop. Besides thence it would follow that though the Priest in confirming
might sin, Confirmation being reserved to Bishops, yet as a Priest suspended
if he consecrate, though he sins, yet consecration is valid: so if a Priest
should confirm he should sin, yet Confirmation would be valid, it being not
above his character. And this opinion would answer to the fact of Saint
Gregory, upon which the contrary opinion much relieth; that S. Gregory only
permitted certain Priests! who before had presumed it, Greg. l. 3. ep. 9 ad
Ianuarium did 90 cap peruenit.
to anoint the baptized in the forhead, but not with the unction proper to
Confirmation, nor with the form of words which the Bishop uses. Others
answer otherwise.

25. And to the Counsels of Florence and Trent; which say that the ordinary
Minister of Confirmation, is the Bishop, as though the extraordinary minister
might be the Priest; They answer that these two Counsels define, that at
least the Bishop is the Ordinary Minister, because it was disputed whether by
commission, and as an extraordinary Minister, the Priest might confirm. And
whereas the Council of Florence says that It is read that sometimes by the
dispensation of the Sea Apostolic a simple Priest has confirmed; they answer
the Council defines not that this indeed has ever been done, but that it is
read so. Thus they.

26. But for all this, S. Thomas his opinion is most probable, being now
especially most common, though not most secure. And this opinion would allege
for it, the fact of S. Gregory and the twoe counsels alleged. And to the
Fathers it would answer, that they mean only that the Bishop is the only
Ordinary Minister of Confirmation, yet that the Priest may by commission from
the Pope, confirm, and they would say that the Priests Character of it self
is sufficient to confirm, so that the Pope commit this to him; not that the
Pope gives him any power of Order, for that this Priests own Character is
sufficient, so that this condition be also put, to wit, that the Pope commit
him: and if he attempt to confirm without this commission he shall not
validlie confirm; because he wants a condition necessary. But although this
be a probable, and peradventure the more probable opinion, as being the more
common, yet the first opinion is houlden of all as undoubted, and so is most
secure.

27. And so we have more reason to demand a Bishop then a Priest committed by
the Pope, for that it is most certain that he can confirm, and by
Confirmation give us strength against persecution, and make us perfect
Christians. And therefore M. Doctor uses to say that without a Bishop, we
cannot be a particular Church, nor have Confirmation, because the Bishop is the
Ordinary and most assured Minister: and therefore this hereafter I will
suppose.

28. M. Nicholas n. 13. affimerth that M. Doctor does not a right compare
Religious with Secular Priests. But to this he is fully answered in the sixth
question, n. 1. Where he is told that if we take the Regular as Regular,
according to that state and quality only, he is not, as so taken, of the
Hierarchy, though as Regular he be above the laity, and an eminent member of
the Church: but the Secular Priest, as a Secular Priest, considered in that
state of a Priest, is of the Hierarchy. But more of this in that place shall be
said.

29. M. Nicholas numer. 14. says the thing which I most wonder in a man of
learning, is that those Fathers and Schools divines, which be produces, for
witnesses of his doctrine, are in deed against himself, as the Reader will see
in his allegation of S. Cyprian, S. Clement, Sotus, Bannes etc. And I admire M.
Nicholas, for many things; as for his conning carriage of things, wilful
mistakings, false impositions etc. But most of all I wonder at his audacitie,
and that he has the face to utter the aforesaied words so considentlie. Noe
doubt the Reader cannot but think (he affirming it so boldly) that M. Doctor
has not alleged well these Fathers, and Doctors; but let him suspend his
Judgment until he come to the 2. question in M. Nicholas n. 2.9.10.11.17.
Where he shall find it so clear and plain that those Fathers and Doctors
are for M. Doctor, and against M. Nicholas, that when he has read the places
alleged, he will have cause never to credit M. Nicholas in this kind upon his
word, albeit he make never so great or solemn protestations.

30. Lastly M. Nicholas n. 15. accuses again M. Doctor for derogating to my
Lord of Chalcedons Ordinariship: but to this he is already answered and may
have a fuller answer hereafter.

31. Thus in a cursorie manner I have run over M. Nicholas his first
question, not staying any long time about it, partly because the matter by him
proposed did not require any longer discourse; partly because in his first
question he seems principally to brag only what he will do, as in his
seventh and last question he boasts of what he has done. But I having in the
five middle questions answered him fully to all; and having showed that he
has not been able to disprove any one of M. Doctors assertions, nor to
answer to any one of his arguments; it will plainly appear that in his
firstquestion he breaks promise, and in his last boasts of more then he
has performed.

THE SECOND QVESTION.
Whether without a Bishop there can be a particular Church.
MASTER NICHOLAS.
MASTER Doctor in diverse parts of his Treatise does teach, that without a
Bishop, there can be no particular Church: And in his 14. Chapter where he
endeanoureth to prove that a particular Country may not refuse a Bishop by
reason of persecution, one of his maine arguments is n. 9. because without a
Bishop, there can be no particular Church. n. 1.

REPLY.
M. Nicholas Smith mistaketh M. D. Kellisons arguments.

1. TRVE it is that M. Doctor Kellison in diverse places, of his Treatise does
teach, that without a Bishop there can be no particular Church: But as
concerning that which M. Nichulas adds, that one of his maine arguments chap.
14. numer. 9. is, be cause without a Bishop the^^ cannot be a particular
Church. I deny that this is one of M. Doctors maine arguments to prove that a
particular Country may not refuse a Bishop by reason of persecution, For that
in that 14. Chapter. numer. 4. M. Doctor, having affirmed that as England
cannot except against the coming in of Priests by reason of persecution, so
England cannot except against the coming in of a Bishop for fear of
persecution: He adds: And my reasons are twoe. The first is that, which I
have often alleged, because the government of Bishops is instituted by
Christ, and has been in practice in the greatest persecution, as we have
seen in the former Chapter. My secondreason is, because the commodity which a
province reapeth by a Bishop is so great, and the want of him, is such a
loss, that we should rather hazard persecution (as the Asrica^ Catholics did)
the^ to be deprived of a Bishop. And in this his second maine reason he
includes 1. the necessity of a Bishop to make a perfect Christian: 2. the
utility or necessity of Confirmation. 3. that without a Bishop there can be
no particular Church. 4. that by Ordinary course without a Bishop there can be
no Hierarchicall functions. So that these twoe only be M. Doctors maine
arguments; and that which he alleges Chap. 14. n. 9. is not, as M. Nicholas
says, but only part of his second maine argument. For if it had been by it
self one of his maine arguments, he would not have said: n. 4. And my reasons
are twoe, but he should have said: And my reasons are five; because the
second reason includes four, which yet do all but make up one his second
maine reason.

2. Yet is that reason which M. Nicholas alleges, a good reason also, because
it being the divine law, that every particular Church of extent (for he
speaks not of every Diocese) should have its Bishop by whom it may be made
a particular Church; the people that would resist a Bishop sent in by Lawful
and Supreme authority (as our twoe last most Reverend Bishops were) should
resist the divine Law and Institution, and so commit a sin. But of this more
hereafter.

M. NICHOLAS. Ep 69. ad Flor.


This assertion, he proves out of S. Cyprian, who says, that the Church is:
Sacerdoti plebs adunata, and pastori suo grex adharens: the Church is the
people united to the Priest (Bishop) and the flock adbering unto its Pastor
etc. And number. 3. Three things I will endeavor (says he) to perform. First
that the alleged words of S. Cyprian etc. Make nothing against us, but rather
are for us, against himself etc. n. 2. and 3.

THE REPLY.
M. Doctor proves sufficiently, and evidently out of S. Cyprian that
without a particular Bishop, there can be no particular Church.

3 True also it is that M. Doctor alleged those words out of S. Cyprian to
prove that a particular Church cannot be without a particular Bishop. And what
brings M. Nicholas to disprove this? He answers number. 4. that S. Cyprian
does not define the Church to be the people united and the flock adhering to a
particular Priest and Pastor, but only. indefinitlie, to the Priest and
Pastor: and he adds n. 5. and 6. that Saint Cyprian speaks of those who by
Schism do leave their Bishop.

4. But first, in that M. Nicholas denies that out of this definition of a
Church, it necessarily follows that a particular Church, cannot be without a
particular Bishop; he contradicts Cardinal Bellarmin who lib. 3. de Eccles
militante cap. 5. alleges this definition of S. Cyprian word by word, and
lib. 4. de notis Ecclesiae. cap. 8. he proves that the Church by no means can
be without Bishops, because S. Cypian says, Ecclesians esse Episcope
adunatam, and Episcopum esse in Ecclesia, and Ecclesiam in Episcopo: that the
Church is united to the Bishop, and that the Bishop is in the Church, and the
Church in the Bishop. Where first by the word Sacerdoti, Priest, he
understands a particular Bishop, not a Priest or Pastor indefinitelie, as M.
Nicholas said: because in that place he proves that the Church cannot be
without particular Bishops. Seco^delie, he proves out of this place, that the
Church cannot be without Bishops, in the plural number. And why? But because
particular Churches must have particular Bishops. For, the whole Church ca^
have but one Supreme Bishop, her government being Monarchical, which
requires one Supreme Governor, as M. Doctor has showed in his Hierarchy
cap. 3. And there fore if it be necessary that in the Church there should be
other Bishops, besides one Supreme Bishop, the reason must be, because the
notable parts of the Church, which are of notable exte^t, must have their
particular Bishops, by whom they may be made particular Churches, and so may
compose the whole Church, and obey their particular Bishops with a
subordination to the chief Bishop. Hence it is that the same Cardinal in the
foresaied place, alleges S. Hierom l. contra Luciferianos, who says:
Ecclesia non est quae non babet Sacerdotes: the Church is not, (or it is not a
Church) which has not Priests, that is, Bishops. And in his second Tome lib.
vnice de Sacramento Confirm. cap. 12. Sextum augmentum, he says out of S.
Hierome contra Lutiferianos: Necesse est in singulis Ecclesijs vnum esse
Episcopum, ne si multi sine pares, and non ad vnum summa referatur, schismata
fiant: it is necessary that in every Church there be one Bishop, least if
many were equal, and the chief place or authorttie not given to one, Schisms
should be. And dares M. Nicholas gain say so learned a Cardinal, and him also
a Jesuit?

5. To Cardinal Bellarmin I shall add our learned Countrieman Doctor
Stapleton, whoin his fifth book De potestatis Ecclesiasticae subiecto cap. 7.
says: non nisi propter Pastores and praeposi^os, Ecclesiae nomine vocari
debet aliqua multitudo. Vnde Cyprianus, Ecclesiam esse in Episcope; and Sanctus
Hieronymus; vbi non sunt Sacerdotes, Ecclesiam non esse sapienter scripserunt:
a multitude ought not to be called by the name of a Church, but only for the
Pastors and Prelates. Whereupon, it is truly and wisely written by S.
Cyprian, that the Church is in the Bishop; and by S. Hierome, that there is noe
Church where there are noe Priests. And again Stapleton says, that the word,
Church, in Scripture signifies properly, and, as it were, antonomasticallie,
multitudinem non vagam aut (...): not a vagrant or head less multitude: sed
cuiiam Pastores and praepositi a Deo constituti sunt: But a multitude, to which
Pastors and Prelates are constituted by God.

6. So that Cardinal Bellarmin and Stapleton (and so do all deuines) require
in the whole Church many particular Churches, and to particular Churches,
particular Bishops: and M. Nicholas, in endeavoring to extenuate S. Cyprians
definition of a Church, depriueth Catholic Authors of a principal authority,
by which they prove against heretics that the Church cannot be without
Bishops, and thereby he favors heretics.

7. Out of this definition of a Church given by S. Cyprian, to wit, that it is
the people united to the Bishop, M. Doctor infers, that a people without a
Bishop can be no particular Church. M. Nicholas q 2. n. 5. and 6. says S.
Cyprian speaks of those who by Schism do leave their Bishop, and so are no
Church. But this little avails M. Nicholas: for that it is a Maxim in Logike
grounded in one of the principal places or seats of arguments, called
definitio, definition: That, Cuicunque non conuenit definitio, non conuenit
definitum: to what thing soever the definition agrees not, to that thing, the
thing defined does not agree: and so seeing that the definition of a Church
according to S. Cyprian, is Sacerdoti plebs adunata, a people united to the
Bishop; Stapl. l. 6. de potest. Eccles. Subiecto. c 7.
which definition Stapleton in his sixth book Depotestatis Eccles. subiecto,
cap. 7. commends for a good definition saying; Quenadmodum Ecclesiam been
definit Cyprianus, as Cyprian well defines the Church to be a people united to
its Priest (Bishop:) to what company or multitude soever that definition of a
Church agrees not, that multitude can not be a Church. Now a multitude may be
without a Bishop, either because by Schism it cutteth it self disobedientlie
from its Bishop, or because without its fault, it wants a Bishop: and which
way soever it want a Bishop, it is no Church; because which way soever it want
a Bishop, it is not a people united to its Bishop: Even as a body is not a
perfect body without a head; whether it be deprived of its head, by a just, or
by an unjust sentence, or whether it never had a head. Wherefore as S. Cyprian
out of the a foresaied definition of a Church (which Stapleton commends for a
good definition) inferred that the Nouatians were no Church, because they had
separated themselves by Schism from their Bishop; so M. Doctor might well
also infer that what country or people soever has not a Bishop, it is not a
Church; because, as M. Nicholas is taught in Logike, Cui non conuenit
definitio, non conuenit definitum: to whom the definition agrees not, the
thing defined agrees not. This only is the difference; that they who separate
themselves by Schism from the Bishop are not only no particular Church for
want of a Bishop, but also are no members of the whole and universal Church,
by reason of their Schism, which cutteth them of from the whole Church, as
Bellarmin proves in the place alleged: Bellar. lib. 3 de Eccles. milit. c 5.
But they who without Schism, or heresy want a Bishop, though they be no
particular Church by S. Cyprians definition, yet they are members of the whole
Church.

8. And so the Catholics of England, who many years without their fault
wanted a Bishop, wereindeed no particular Church; yet they were most worthy
members, of the whole Church: and the heretics, of England, who by Schism and
heresy, separated themselves from all particular lawful Bishops, yea from the
universal Bishop himself, were not only no particular Church, but also were
no members of the whole and universal Church, being cut of from it by
schism and heresy.

9. But M. Nicholas cries out, that S. Cyprian out of that definition
infers only that the Nouatians, who had cut themselves of by schism were
no Church. It is true: and what then? May not out of the negation of the
definition diverse conclusions be inferred, and co^sequentlie, that they also
who without schism want a Bishop be no Church? Else if M. Nicholas infers
that a horse is not a man because to a horse agrees not the definition of a
man, which is; Animalrationale; M. Doctor must not infer that a mule is not
a man, though the definition of a man agree not to it. And therefore this
Maxim; Cui non conuenit definitio, non conuenit definitum; to whom the
definition agrees not, to it the thing defined agrees not, as it is
anvniuersall proposition, so it is universally true: and seeing that the
definition of a Church is a people united to a Bishop, that people which
wa^teth a Bishop whether by Schism, or otherwise, can be no Church because it
cannot be a people united to a Bishop, unless it have a Bishop. And so all the
while English Catholics wanted a Bishop, they were no particular Church,
because all that while they could not be a people united to the Bishop.

10. M. Doctors ground being so fully proved to wit, that a people, cannot
be a particular Church without a particular Bishop, his conclusion follows in
good consequence, to wit, that England, even as Catholic, all the while it
wanted a Bishop, was not a particular Church; and M. Nicholas his foundation,
which was, that a people Catholic is a Church though it have no Bishop, being
shaken and refuted, all which M. Nicholas builds thereon falls of it self,
Nemine impellente,

11. As for example that which he says page 13. ^. 4. that S. Cyprian
speaks of a Priest indefinitelie, when he says the Church is a people
united to the Priest, and that therefore England, so long as it is united by
obedience to the Bishop or Rome, is a particular Church without a particular
Bishop; is rejected by that which is already said and proved. For as a Church
in general is a Church, in that it is united to a Bishop, so a particular
Church is that, which is united to a particular Bishop. To be united to the
universal and Supreme Bishop, is sufficient to be a member of the Church; but
to be a particular Church, is required also, that the multitude have a
particular Bishop: else every Catholic family, every Nunnerie, yea and
company of Catho^like weomen should be a particular Church, because they are
subordinate to the Supreme Bishop.

12. And I wonder M. Nicholas cannot see this. For that as more is required to
be a particular body of the Kingdom, then to be a member, so more is requisite
to a particular Church, then to a member of the Church. For as if the King
should take from a duchy the honor of a duchy, by depriving it for ever of
a duke, that part of his Kingdom should still be a member of the kingdom,
and subject to the King, but it should be no more a duchy: So if the Pope
should deprive some one little province of its Bishop (as he may) though that
Province be neither schismatic, nor heretical) that Province should cease
to be a particular Church or Diocese, but yet should still remain a member of
the universal Church.

13. So likewise that which M. Nicholas says page 16. number. 6. falls:
because S. Cyprian in the Epistle alleged, by this definition of a Church.
Which is; The people united to the Bishop, excludes the Nouatians, not only
from being a Church, but also from being of the Church, in that by Schism they
had separated themselves from their Bishop. But M. Nicholas demands: And
what is all this to prove that a particular Church can be no such without a
Bishop? no more the^ if one should say; King Henry the 8. and his adherents in
Schism, dividing themselves from their lawful Pastors, were no true Church:
Ergo English Catholics living in perfect obedience to the Vicar of Christ,
cannot truly be a Church: Which is in effect, as doughtie an argument as
this: The soul, and body separated can make no true man: Ergo, if they be
conjoined they cannot make a true man. Behold M. Nicholas his little
subtilitie, who could not distinguish betwixt Schismatic separation, and
faultelesse or meerelie negative separation. The Catholics of England, in King
Henry the 8. his time, who remained in heart and profession subject to the
Bishop of Rome, were only negatiuely separated from their particular Bishops,
because King Henry, took them from them by urging them to follow him in his
Schism. And so those Catholics not joined in that Schism with their
Schismatic Bishops or King, were still members of the Catholic Church by
their subordination and obedience to it, and its universal Bishop; but they
were not a particular Church, because they wanted a particular Bishop. But the
Schismatiks who left their law full Bishops and the chief Bishop also, or
joined with their schismatic Bishops, were not only no particular Church
for want of a lawful particular Bishop, but also were no more members of the
Catholic Church, by reason of their Schism.

14. And so his example of the soul and body is not to the purpose, or is
nothing against that I have said. For that as the soul united to the body
makes a man, and separated from it, makes no man: so the people united to the
particular Bishop makes a particular Church; and if it be not united to him,
makes no particular Church, because it is not a people united to the
particular Bishop; yet it may be a member of the whole and universal Church,
if it be united to the rest of the Catholic Church and her chief pastor.
Whereas they who are separated from their Bishop by schism, are not only no
particular Church, as being not united to their Bishop, but also are no members
of the Church because they are separated by Schism: So they who are separated
only negatiuelie, are no particular Church, because they have no Bishop, yet
are members of the whole Church, because they are not separated by Schism.

15. And M. Nicholas may learn by that which I said be fore (if he knew it
not before) that it is not all one to be a particular Church or body, and and
to be a member of the Church: and that every particular Church, is a member of
the whole Church, but not every member of the Church, is a particular Church;
because M. Nicholas alone is a member of the Church, but no particular Church,
and every Catholic family is a member of the Church, but not a particular
Church; as every subject and every town or village is a member of the
Empire, which contains many particular Kingdoms, yet is it not a particular
Kingdom; for that a particular Kingdom requires not only to be subject to
the Emperor, but also to have a particular King under the Emperor. And
therefore if the Emperor would for ever deprive a country of the dignity of
a Kingdom, by decreeing that it should never have a King again, it should
cease to be a Kingdom, but should still remain a member subject to the
Emperor, in quality of a part and member of the Empire, but not in quality
of a particular Kingdom. And I wonder M. Nicholas does not see this, as it
seems he does not, in that he so often inculcateth it, and seems to think
it most certain, that the Catholics in England remaining still good
Catholics, not separated by Schism, must needs have been a particular Church
all the while they had no Bishop.

16. In like manner that argument which he frames against M. Doctor number. 6.
out of S. Cyprians definition of a Church, is grounded in M. Nicholas his
error so often refuted, by which he thinks it is all one not to be cut of
from the Bishop by Schism, and to be a particular Church; whereas how soever a
people wants a particular Bishop, whether by Schism, or not schism, it can
be no particular Church, because it cannot be a people united to its Bishop,
when it has no Bishop. Yet let us hear his argument. Thus then he argues:
Whosoever are not in Schism with any lawful Bishop, do fulfill the
definition of a Church given by S. Cyprian: but those who have no Bishop, are
not in Schism with any lawful Bishop; Ergo those who have no Bishop, do
fulfill the definition of a Church given by S. Cyprian. But M. Doctor I am
sure would deny the first and Mayor proposition of this M. Nicholas his
Syllogism; for that the definition of a Church given by S. Cyprian is, Plebs
Sacerdoti (Episcopo) adunata and Pastori suo grex adhaerens: a people united to
the Priest (Bishop) and the flock adhering to its Pastor: Which definition is
not fulfilled by those, who though free from Schism, have no particular
Bishop, because they also are not a people adhering to their particular Bishop,
they having none at all, and so are no Church. And if I should retorte the like
argument on M Nicholas, he would peradventure see his error, and the
weakness of his own argument. For I could argue in the like manner:
whosoever are not in Schism with any lawful Bishop, do fulfill the definition
of a Church given by S. Cyprian: But a Catholic family consisting of the good
man of she house, his wife, children, and servants, and considered by it self
without a Bishop, is not in Schism with any lawful Bishop: Ergo such a
family considered by it self without a Bishop does fulfill the defifinition
of a Church given by S. Cyprian, and consequenlie is a Church. Which yet M.
Nicholas cannot grant; for although that Catholic family be a member of the
whole, yet taken by it self, it is not a particular Church, as above is
demonstrated, and by examples declared.

MASTER NICHOLAS SMITH.
That his (M. Doctor Kellisons) application of S. Cyprians definition is
injurious to English Catholics. n. 7.

THE REPLY.
M. Doctor Kellison is unjustly calumniated as injurious to English
Catholics, for applying unto them S. Cyprians definition.

17. It will prove that M. Nicholas is injurious to M. Doctor, but not M.
Doctor to English Catholics, when the matter shall be examined. For, as we have
seen above, S. Cyprian out of the definition of a Church; Sacerdoti plebs
adunata, a people united to its Priest (Bishop) infers that the Nouatians
were not only no Church, because they had no Bishop, having left him; but also
were not of the Church, because they had separated themselves by schism from
Bishop and Church also. Cypr. ep. 69.
And so (says he) If any be not with the Bishop (to wit by reason of
Schism) he is not in the Church, and they do in vain flatter themselves, who
having not peace with the Priests of God, creep in, and beleine that secretly
they are in communion with some etc.

18. But M. Doctor goes not so far, nor did he ever affirm, or think that
the English Catholics were not of the Catholic Church, but in his Hierarchy
diverse times calls them most worthy members of the Church, and a mirror to
all other Catholics, for their zeal toward God his cause, and their
constance in Religion. Only he inferred out of the definition of a Church
given by S. Cyprian, that they were not, all the time they had no Bishop, a
particular Church, but yet were a worthy member of the whole Church. And so M.
Nicholas wrongeth M. Doctor in saying, that in his application of S. Cyprians
definition, he is Injurious to English Catholics, as though M. Doctor had
inferred out of that definition, that the English Catholics, all the while
they wa^ted a Bishop, were schismatikes, and out of the Church, as the
Nouatians to whom S. Cyprian applies his definition, were; Which is no less
then a false calumniation. For although out of that definition of a Church, S.
Cyprian inferred that the Nouatians werenot only no Church, for want of a
Bishop, but also Schismatikes, out of the Church, because they were separated
from the Bishop by Schism; which not only hinders from being a particular
Church, but also separateth and cutteth of from the whole Church. Yet M.
Doctor inferred not that odious conclusion against the English Catholics; as
M. Nicholas seems to say, and therefore says that M. Doctors application
is injurious to English Catholics: and gives the reason, Because S. Cyprian
said the Nouatians are out of the Church: they have no peace with the Priests
of God etc. but he only inferred out of the same definition (as I have told
him above, that out of the same place or seat of arguments, as definition is,
many conclusions may be deduced) that the English Catholics, all the while
they had no Bishop, were no particular Church, because then the definition, of
a Church, which is, A people united to its Bishop, did not agree to English
Catholics: for how could they be a people united to their proper Bishop, who
had none at all? And so M. Doctor is not injurious to Catholics, who pleads
for a Bishop for the^, to make the^ a particular Church and to have other
honors and commodities by a Bishop; but M. Nicholas is injurious to them, who
labors to hinder them from a Bishop, by whom they should be a particular
Church (as formerlie they have been) and that so glorious, that after the
Church of Rome they might contend with the most glorious Churches of Europe.

M. NICHOLAS SMITH.
The second point which I undertook to make good, namely, that England may be
a particular Church without a Bishop, is easily proved etc. pagin. 20. number. 8.

THE REPLY.
England was not a particular Church without a Bishop.

19. It is easily said M. Nicholas: but not so easily proved, as partly
may appear by that which is already said: and S. Cyprians definition will
still be a block in your way, at which you will infalliblie stumble and
perchance break your shinnes.

20. But how proves he that the Catholics of England may be a Church without
a Bishop? Because (says he) the Pope in defect of particular Bishops, is the
particular Bishop, Ordinary, and Diocesan of such Churches; as Philosophers do
teach, that almighty God the supreme and universal cause of all effects,
concurreth not only as an immediate, but also as a particular cause to the
producing of effects, when second particular causes do fail. Thus he.

21. And if he mean that the Pope has been a particular Bishop to England,
he must show it, else M. Doctor may still say, that all the while England was
without a particular Bishop, it was no particular Church; or if he think he
may argue a possibili ad esse, from possibility to actual being, as if
because the Pope can be Englands proper Bishop, therefore be has been so;
then every one should be what he may be; and so M. Nicholas should be general
of his order, because he may be, and he should be a man of fourscore years of
age, because he may be; and be should now be at Rome again, because he may be.
If he mean that the Pope so soon as a country or Diocese wants a Bishop,
is actuallie that countries or Provinces particular Bishop, no Bishoprike
should be vacant; because so soon as the particular Bishop is dead, that Pope
is the particular Bishop. And so when a Rectour of a College is dead, the
Provincial should be Rectour, and when the Provincial is deceased, the
General should be Provincial, and no office should ever be vacant; because
the Superior officer should supply it; which is absurd: and yet be it never so
absurd, it seems M. Nicholas his opinion. For he says; that the Pope in
defect of a particular Bishop, is the particular Bishop, ordinaie and Diocesan
of such Churches, to wit, which want a particular Bishop. Which is a strange
opinion of M. Nicholas his own invention. And by this his doctrine it would
follow, that if per impossible there were never a particular Bishop, in all
the Church but the Pope, the Church should still be Hierarchicall, composed of
diverse particular Churches, because the Pope should be in that case not only
an universal Bishop of all the Church, but also a particular Bishop of every
particular Church, and so one sole Bishop (the Pope) should make a Hierarchy,
which consists of diverse particular Churches.

22. Yet I will not deny, but that the Pope to honor a Bishopric which
before his Popedom he enjoyed, may retain still the Title of that
Bishopric, Ex Baron. anno. 1849. Leon Papa 9 anno 1.
as Leo IX. did the Title of the Bishopric of Tulle. Yea he may though
universal Bishop of the universal Church, be also the particular Bishop of a
particular Church, as he is de facto particular Bishop of S. Ihon Lateran: but
then he must either do the office there of a Bishop by himself, or by his
delegate; or at least he must take unto himself the Title of that Church, not
only in name, but in very deed; else he shall not be a particular Bishop. I
say, or at least he must take unto himself he Title; for that seems to be
sufficient to make a particular Bishop, as we may gather by diverse examples:
for that there is a Patriarch of Jerusalem in Rome, who neither does the
office there by himself, or any delegate, because he cannot be permitted; and
my Lord of Chalcedon, though he do the office of a Bishop only in England, and
not at Chalcedon, either by himself, or his delegate because it will not be
permitted him to do so; Yet he is truly the particular Bishop of Chalcedon,
because he has the Title and right to govern that Church granted unto him.

23. Now therefore if M. Nicholas can show me that the Pope has done the
office of a Bishop in England by himself or his delegate, or that he has
taken to himself the Title of the Bishop of England, I shall grant that all
this while we had no particular Bishop in England, he has been our
particular Bishop: If he cannot, as all the world knows he cannot: for nether
has the Pope been in England in person, nor has he sent before these twoe
most Reverend Bishops any Bishop into England to do there the offices of a
Bishop, which is to confirm and ordain; nor has he ever taken unto him the
Title of the Bishop of England: then M. Doctors assertion is true, to wit,
that all the while England had no particular Bishop, it was no particular
Church, because, as S. Cyprian says, the Church is a people united to the
Bishop, which England could not be, when it had no Bishop. It is true the Pope
is Bishop of the whole Church, and so of England, as it was a member of the
whole: but he having never done there the office of a Bishop by himself or his
delegate, nor ever taking unto him the Title of the Bishop of England, he was
not Englands particular Bishop, and so England by him could be no particular
Church.

24. To M. Nicholas his similitude which he mamaketh betwixt God the first and
universal cause of all effects, and the Pope the universal Bishop; I
answer, that as God can supply the external actions of second causes, called
Actiones transeuntes, and therefore can produce heat without fire, a man
without a man, a tree without a tree, as he did in the first creation of
things: Yet he cannot, as some hold, produce immanent actions without their
particular causes, and powers: and so cannot produce the act of seeing without
the eye of hearing, without the ear, of love without the will, of understanding
without the power of understanding. But how soever; as God can produce the
former external actions without their particular causes, and so supply the
second cause: So the Pope if he be not only elected Pope, but also
consecrated, can do all the actions by himself, which Patriarchs,
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and other inferior Ministers can do. For he can
ordain Ministers, and confirm the baptized with the Bishop; he can
consecrace, absolve, and minister other Sacraments, and preach with the Priest;
Yea he can do other inferior offices with the Deacon, Subdeacon and therest,
though it be not so convenient he should. And so as God ca^ be not only an
universal but also a particular cause, supplying the particular cause: so the
Pope can be a particular Bishop, but then he must do the office of a particular
Bishop by himself, or his delegate, or take the Title of that particular
Church unto him.

25. That the Pope has founded Seminaries of Priests for our country; that he
has sent thither first Priests, and then Religious men (as M. Nicholas tells
us n 8. and we all gratefully acknowledge) to preach and minister Sacraments
in our Country; as this argues his great care of England, and his no less
charity; so it arguerh not (as M. Nicholas would make his reader believe) that
he was our particular Bishop; he neither by himself, nor by his delegate doing
the office of a Bishop in England, nor ever having taken unto him the Title of
the Bishop of England. And so since the decease of our old Bishops, to these
late years, in which his Holiness sent us twoe most worthy Bishops, England
was no particular Church, because it had no particular Bishop to make it a
particular Church,

26. And by this M. Nicholas may gather an answer to all that he says n.
8.9.10.12.13. In his 11. number he obiecteth against this; that many places and
persons are exempt from the Jurisdiction of a Bishop, be fides the Pope:
neither did any man ever dream, that for that cause they ceased to be
particular Churches. I here pity M. Nicholas his arguing, and the necessity
he is driven to, which Cogit ad turpia. For although monasteries be exempt from
the Bishop and immediately subject to the Pope; yet no particular congregation
or multitude, that is a particular Church, can be exempt from a particular
Bishop, as we have proved out of S. Cyprians definition of a Church, unless
the Pope make himself particular Bishop of it. And therefore monasteries
subject only to the Pope, and exe^pt from particular Bishops, are indeed
members of the Church, but not a particular Church; unless M. Nicholas will
make every nunnerie of women a particular Church.

27. But here I cannot but marvel that M. Nicholas thinks it so strange
that M. Doctor says, that there cannot be a particular Church without a
Bishop; and it should seem thereby that he has not much considered S. Thomas
his doctrine in this point. For that this learned Doctor says, D. Th. libr.
4. gent. c. 76. n. 4.1. p. q. 108. art. 1.2.3.
that the Church militant, is derived by similitude from the Triumphant: and he
says also that every Order of the Angels consists of diverse Angels
subordinate to one Prince, who in this Doctors opinion is higher and perfecter
in nature the^ the rest, and is the particular Prince of that Order; and all
the orders with their particular Princes are subject to one supreme Angel, who
is Prince of the three Hierarchies, and nine Orders of Angels: And therefore in
the Church militant, in every notable part of it, there must be, and most
commonly is, a Bishop, a spiritual Prince of that Church, and all the
particular Churches with their particular Hierarches and Bishops, are
subordinate to one supreme Bishop, the Pope, as M. Doctor has proved in the
3. and 4. Chapter of his Hierarchy. And therefore in his 2. Chapter he says
that the Church is compared to a Kingdom, in which besides the King are Dukes,
Earls, Marquises, Barons, etc. who are princes, in their kind, of their
particular dominions, and all are, with their Dominions and Lordships,
subordinate to the King: and if any of these particular dominions be quite
deprived of their Duke, or Earl, they are no more Dutchies or Earledomes;
though still they be members of the Kingdom; and so that particular Province
deprived of its Duke or Earl, gives not that luster to the Kingdom, which it
has by other particular Lordships, and bodies of the Kingdom.

28. In like manner the Church being a Hierarchy, is composed of diverse
particular Churches of which every one has its particular Bishop, who is not
the Popes delegate, but an ordinary, and a Prince in his kind: and the Church
receives by this variety of particular Bishops and particular Churches, a
great luster. And when any notable part of it wants its particular Bishop
and spiritual prince, although the Church remain still a Hierarchy, in
respect of other particular Churches, which have their particular Hierarche and
Bishop; yet in respect of that part of the Church, which has no Bishop, and
which therefore is not a particular Church or body, it is not perfectly
Hierarchicall, nor has it by that part of the Church that variety, and
luster, which it has by other parts, of which every one has its particular
Bishop.

29. Wherefore when the Pope gives to a country a delegated Bishop, though
many times he gives to the delegate more power then the ordinary has,
although that country then be in its kind a particular Church, yet it wants
some perfection, it being not governed by an ordinary Bishop and Pastor, as
other Churches are, it being more perfect, and more honorable to have an
ordinary, then a delegate. And likewise if the Pope should send a simple
Priest into England with power to confirm, England should be in its kind a
particular Church, but not in that degree of perfection, as if it had an
ordinary Bishop and Pastor.

30. Whereas M. Nicholas n. 14. says that his last task in this question was
to show, that although he should freely grant that a particular Church cannot
be without a Bishop; Yet it were not sufficient to prove that a Bishop could
not be refused by reason of persecution. He brings in this out of its place;
and somust expect his answer in the next question. Whereas he demands a
precept to receive a Bishop, and that also indispensable: Has not M. Doctor
in his 12. Chapter of his Hierarchy proved at large, that by the divine law
and institution, besides one supreme Bishop, there must be other Bishops in the
Church, without which the Church cannot subsist, because without particular
Bishops of particular Churches, the whole Churches should not be Hierarchicall?
Has he not in his 13. Chapter proved also, that Bishops by the divine
institution and law, are so necessary, that even in time of persecution they
are to govern the Church, as they ever have done in the greatest persecution?
Has he not proved in his 12. Chapter. that by the divine ordinance, every
great part of the Church, such as England, France, Spain, is to have its
Bishop? But more of this in due place; where also I shall show whether this
divine law houldeth in all circunstances. What need then had Master Nicholas
to demand a precept where the Divine law is so often inculcated.

M. NICHOLAS SMITH.
The reason which M. Doctor adds that: as the whole Church has one supreme
Bishop to govern it, so every particular Church also must have its Bishop, or
Bishops, else it should not be a particular Church, and so the whole and
universal Church should, not (as Christ has instituted) be a Hierarchy
composed of diverse particular Churches. n. 16.

REPLY.
M. Nicholas wresteth M. Doctors argument to a wrong and odious sense.

31. M. Doctors argument is good and solid: for as the whole and universal
Church requires a a supreme and universal Bishop over all, to make it a whole
Church; so a particular Church requires a particular Bishop to make it a
particular Church, as above is often proved; and otherwise if particular
Churches had not their particular Bishop, the whole and universal Church,
which consists of many particular Churches, should not be a Hierarchy, as
Christ has instituted. But M. Nicholas not so modestly as were to be expected
of one of his coat, says that this argument deserves no answer, and why?
Because, says he, who dare say, that there is as great necessity or
obligation to have a Bishop in every particular Church, as to have one supreme
head of the Whole Calike Church?

32. And thus (as he uses to do) taking M. Doctor wilfully or ignorantly
in a wrong sense he runs on. For M. Doctor only said, that as the whole
and universal Church cannot be a whole Church, without a supreme and
universal Bishop; so a particular Church cannot be a particular Church without
a particular Bishop: whence by no Logic it follows that there is absolutely
as great necessity of a particular Bishop, as of the universal and supreme
Bishop. Because the Church cannot be at all without a supreme Bishop, or nor
without order to him, when the Sea is vaca^t: but it may subsist though a
particular Bishop, and his Church also should fall from the Church by Schism
or heresy, and it should still remain Hierarchicall in other particular
Churches, which have their particular Bishops, as is easy to see by that,
which is allreadie said. For although the Greek Church for the greatest part
be cut of from the Roman Church by schism and heresy, and so the Roman
Church in it, is not Hierarchicall, yet the Roman Church still subsisteth, and
is Hierarchicall in other Churches.

And this I shall illustrate by an example. The Empire is an universal
Kingdom which contains in it diverse particular Kingdoms. Wherefore as the
whole Kingdom of the Empire cannot be a whole Kingdom without a supreme King
and Emperor; so a particular Kingdom of the whole Empire cannot be a
particular Kingdom without a particular King, but yet there is not absolutely
such necessity of a particular King or Kingdom, as of the Emperor, who is
supreme King. For that although that a particular King and Kingdom should be
cassired, and should be no more a Kingdom, nor have its particular King, yet
the Empire might still subsist by its supreme King and Emperor, and by other
Kingdoms, which are governed by him. And therefore M. Nicholas forces me to
say that he shows a great deal of spleen toward M. Doctor, in taking M.
Doctor in a wrong sense, as though he had said that there was as great
necessity of a particular, as of a supreme Bishop; and then inferring, that
his doctrine is subject to a deeper censure then he is willing to express.

33. And what Censure, I pray you, M. Nicholas deserves it to say, that as the
whole Catholic Church cannot be without a supreme and universal Bishop; so a
particular Church cannot be a particular Church, without a particular Bishop?
In what council does M. Nicholas find this censured? And does not common sense
and reason censure M. Nicholas, for calling this in question? Is it any more
then to say, that as an Empire and universal Kingdom requires a supreme
King and Emperor, so a particular Kingdom of the said Empire requires a
particular King? And to infer hence that M. Doctor says a particular
Bishop is as necessary, as the supreme Bishop is, to vphould the Church of
God, is as absurd, as to infer that a particular King, is as necessary to
vphould the Empire as the Emperor himself is.

34. And so when M. Nicholas adds: what Catholic dare avouch that because
England for the space of 60. years wanted a Bishop, the universal Church,
that time was not, as Christ instituted, a Hierarchy composed of diverse
particulars: is of the same stuff: for where or when did M. Doctor ever say
thus as M. Nicholas makes him to say? I confess M. Nicholas his cauilling in
this manner and false construing, yea false alleging, would move some little
passion in me; but that I am resolved to imitate M. Doctors temper and mild
manner of writing, of which he gives me example in his Hierarchy. M. Doctor
said only that the Church cannot subsiste a Hierarchy, as Christ instituted,
unless it be composed in general of diverse particular Churches which have
their particular Bishops: but he never said that the Church cannot subsist
without a particular Church, nor that all the time England was without a
Bishop, the rest of the Church, composed of particular Churches, which were,
and are, and ever shall be subordinate to the supreme Bishop, was not, as Christ
instituted, a Hierarchy: as above he is sufficiently told: only he said,
that England, so long as it wanted a Bishop was not a particular Church: and
that the whole Church should not be a Hierarchy, if it were not composed of
particular Churches and Bishops: Which it may be, and was in other particular
Churches, when England wanted a Bishop, and should still be so, although (as
God forbid) England were quite cut of from the whole Church and had not one
Catholic in it.

35. Having thus demonstrated M. Doctors doctrine which auerred that a people,
Province, or Country, cannot be a particular Church without a particular
Bishop, and consequently that all the time England wanted a Bishop it was not
a particular Church: and having also detected in M. Nicholas wilful or
ignorant mistakings, which commonly are the grounds of all his arguments, and
having answered to all his arguments; I will go to the next question, if first
I add this; that seeing that England when it had no particular Bishop was no
particular Church; M. Nicholas and his brethren, out of the love they ought to
bear to their country, should labor with the Clergy that we may always
have a Bishop or Bishops, by whom we may have the honor to be a particular
Church, and enjoy many other comforts and commodities which other countries
enjoy by their Bishops, which to English Catholics seem most necessary by
reason of their persecution.

THE THIRD QVESTION.
Whether by the divine law every particular Church must have its Bishop.
MASTER NICHOLAS.
TO prove, that a particular Country may not refuse Bishops, by reason of
persecution, M. Doctor in his 14. Chapter alleges, that it is De Iure
diuino, of the divine law, to have a particular Bishop in every particular
Church and for proof he cites Sotus affirming it to be of the divine law
etc. and Bannes teaching etc. n. 1.

THE REPLY.
1. I Confess M. Doctor in his 14. Chapter auerreth that a particular
Country cannot except against a Bishop sent by lawful authority; and one
ground there of is because by the divine law and institution, not only the
whole and universal Church must have an universal and supreme Bishop, but
also there must be in the whole Church diverse particular Churches, governed by
particular Bishops even in time of persecution, as he has proved in his 13.
Chapter. And this also he proves in the beginning of his 14. Chapter n. 1. Yea
M. Nicholas number. 4. says, that certain it is, that Iure diuino, by the
divine law, the Church must be governed by Bishops, that is, in the whole
Church there must be some Bishops: but to affirm that it is De iure diuino to
have a particular Bishop in the particular Church of England, and not only
that there is such a precept, but moreover, that no persecution can excuse the
obligation thereof, or give sufficient cause of dispensation (all which he must
prove if be will speak home) is a paradox.

2. But soft, M. Nicholas, bona verba quaeso. Remember your old fault of
which you have been so often told. By your leave you make M. Doctor to say
more then he does, that he may seem to speak Paradoxes, and you may have more
advantage. For M. Doctor in the same Chapter number. 3. (which M. Nicholas would
not see) grants that if the persecution be so great that a Bishop would not
be permitted to enter into England, or would presently be taken and put to
death; then it was to no purpose to send a Bishop with evident hazard of his
life, and no hope of good to the people by sending him; and so in that case the
obligation of having a Bishop should cease. But, (says M. Doctor in the same
place.) If a Bishop may be bad, and may so live in a Country (as he may in
England) that as there is fear least he be apprehended, so there is hope he
may escape sometime, and so do some notable good: I do not think that the
Catholics of that Country can except against his entrance.

3. Nor does M. Doctor deny that the Pope may dispense in the divine law, or
declare that in some cases it cease to oblige: yea he speaks not at all of
dispensation in the divine law. Yet M. Doctor knows that the chief Pastor
may dispense in vows, and in Matrimony contracted only, not consummated;
which yet are of the divine law.

4. And he knows also the divine laws in many circunstances do not oblige.
As for example every one is bound by the divine law to receive the B.
Sacrament, at the hour of his death least he adventure on that so dangerous
journey from this life to the next, without his Viaticum; and yet, though a
Priest be present, if he have not holy vestements (without which the Church
commands not to celebrate Mass) he must not say Mass, because he cannot say
it in that manner as he should, and the sick person is, in that occurance of
the ecclesiastical law, freed from divine obligation to communicate.

5. So that Priest by the divine law is bound not to give the B. Sacrament to
any whom he koweth to be in mortal sin, and so unworthy; and yet if this
party be a secret sinner (though known to the Priest) and demand of the
Priest in public to communicate he is bound to communicate him, least he
defame him; and the divine law which forbids the Priest to give the B.
Sacrament to unworthy Persons according to that: do you not give the holy to
dogs; Mat. 7.
does in that case cease to oblige the Priest.

6. So it is a common opinion of deuines whom Vasquez alleges, Vasq. tom 3.
disp 207. c. 4. 1. Cor. 11. Conc. Trid. Sess. 13 cap. 7.
that by the diuinelaw whosoever is in mortal sin must confess that sin
before he presume to receive the B. Sacrament; which they prove out of those
words of S. Paul: But let a man prove himself, and so let him cate of the
bread and drink of the Chalice; which probation of ones self, the Council
of Trent defines to be by Confession; and yet if the Priest at Mass, or the
lay party, that is in company kneeling before the altar, remember at that
time his sin, he may communicate, if by omitting to do so he should defame
himself. And so in that case also the divine law cease to bind to
confession, and it will excuse him from the sin of unworthy receiving, if he
endeavor to get contrition.

7. And Navarre fears not to say, Nanar in Silma c. 27 n. 263.
that it is Omnium vna conclusio etc. it is a conclusion of all, that many
laws, agreeing to many by the divine and natural law, are restrained by the
chief Prince (...) the Church, in regard of spiritual things; and of the
secular Prince, in respect of temporal matters, as well by interpretation
betwixt right and equity interposed, as by imposition of punishment, as by
inst dispensation, as by just and naturallreason, and Felinus, Decius and
others do copiouslie deliver.

8. Wherefore M. Doctor does not say that the Pope cannot in some cases
dispense in the divine law, of having a Bishop, or declare that in son case
it binds not, and therefore did not persume to say that the Pope, all this
whlie he gave not England a Bishop, did commit a sin against the divine law;
rather he defends him from all sinnein his 14. chapter n. 3. Only he says
that the Country cannot except against the entrance of a Bishop (so he be
sent by lawful authority, as our two last most Reverend Bishops were) for
that then the Pope rather declares that the divine law cease not to oblige:
and therefore let our Regulars look how they can be excused, who except
against a Bishop, whom the Pope has sent, and who, no doubt, was informed of
all circumstances: and therefore knew whether it were convenient to send him at
that time or not. And truly seeing the Pope has sent him, all Regulars, and
they especially who have bound themselves particularly to the Pope by a
fourth vow, should by a perfect resignation conform their wills to his will,
receive and embrace his Bishop with all obedience and humility.

M. NICHOLAS SMITH.
But although we should grant, that as M. Doctor affirms, a great or
notable part of the Church could not Iure diuino be governed without a Bishop:
yet that would be far from proouing, that England, as things now stand, must
needs have a Bishop. For if our Country be considered not materiallie, but
formallie (as divines express themselves) that is not the extent of Land etc.
n. 7.

THE REPLY.
Supposing it be of the divine law that a great or notable part of the Church
could not be without a Bishop, whether England as things now stand, must needs
have a Bishop?

9. M. Nicholas says first that although we should suppose that a notable
part cannot be without a Bishop, yet England (see how favorable he is to his
country) might spare a Bishop, or at lest must not needs have one. And why M.
Nicholas? because (says he) we must not consider the extent of the land, but
the number of Catholics in England, which, as he tells us, is so far from
a great, or notable part of the Church, that the Catholics in England would
scarce make one Bishopric or Diocese. And (says he) to affirm that one
Diocese or City is a notable part of the Church, is a thing which noe
divine, yea no man of Judgment, will say. But by this we may see into what
absurdities partiality may lead men.

10. See, how to hinder English Catholics, from a Bishop, what an handful of
people he makes them. The Ancient Fathers and writers, as Justinius Martyr.
Tertullian, S. Leo cited by M. Doctor in his Epistles Dedicatories to his
Survey, and Hierarchy, gloried in the increase of Christians, maugre the fury
of persecution; and M. Doctor in the same Epistles comfort and encourages
the Catholics of England, that notwithstanding the like rage of persecution
there are Catholics in the Court, in the Universities, Cities, Towns,
Cottages, prisons: and are found amidst the Magistrates; yea Ministers (if we
regard their hearts) and amongst all sorts of people: And this is a comfort to
Catholics, a glory to God, and an honor to Chuste his Church, and Religion,
for which Catholics suffer. But M. Nicholas to hinder England from a Bishop,
who seems to be an eye sore unto him, makes English Catholics an handful
of men, a little, and, as it were, a contemptible number not worthy a Bishop.
But, thanks be God, who has the more multiplied English Catholics, Exodus 1.
the more with the Israelites they have been oppressed, they are not so few,
Deuteronomy. 12.
as M. Nicholas makes them; and in this Inimicinostri sunt Iudices: Our
enemies (our persecutors) may herein be Judges.

11. But if they were not so many, as they be, yet Confirmation, and
consequently a Bishop, especially in time of persecution, were necessary to
confirm them virtute exalto; with virtue of the holy Ghost from above; which
virtue and force, Luca. 24.
is the effect of Confirmation. Neither is the case of England, and of one
particular Diocese annearing and joining to others, all one. For that one
Diocese may be helped by another adjoining to it, or by recourse to the Bishop
of it, if there shall be heed, whereas England, as the Poet says, is Divided,
by Sea, from the whole world, and cannot have convenient succor, but by its
own Bishop, with in it self.

12. And again M. Nicholas says not truly that the multitude of Catholics,
not the extent of the place, is only to be considered, Did. ^o. cap. In
illis vere ciuitatibus. Suarez to. 3. l. 1 destatu perf. c. ^ 17. n. 5
for in the primative Church, as S. Clement in his Epistle to S. Tames, called
the brother of our Lord, or as diverse think, to S. Simeon S. James his
successor, which is alleged in the Canonlaw, and by Suarez and other divines,
says, that in the primative Church, in those Cities, which before their
conversion, were esteemed Capital Cities, and were governed by Archflamines,
primates and Patriarchs were constituted; and in lesser cities, which had
before their conversion lesser Flamines, Archbishops were placed, and in other
lesser Cities, one only Bishop in one City, not two in one, were appointed.
And Pope Auaclete, Anacl. ep 3 and refert. d 90. c. Episcopi.
alleging out of S. Clement, whom he calls his predecessor, the same words
in effect, says that this was done by S. Peter, and S. Clement, and himself,
ORDINANTE DOMINO, Our Lord so ordaining. And the same S. Anaclete (as M.
Doctor had alleged in the fifth Chapter of his Hierarchy n. 11.) in the same
third Epistle has these words: Episcopi autem, non in castellis, aut modicis
Ciuitatibus debent constitui, sed presbyteriper castella, aut modicas civitates
atque villas debent ab Episcopis constitui: Bishops not in castles or little
walled towns, must be constituted: but Priests must by the Bishop be placed in
Castles or little Cities: And he gives the reason: Ne vilescat nomen Episcopi,
lest the name of a Bishop should be less esteemed.

13. So that a regard was had (whatsoever M. Nicholas says) to the extent of
the place where a Bishop was to be placed) and not only to the number of
Christian Catholics there living. When S. Peter chose Rome the Head City of
the Empire for himself and his successors; when S. Mark was placed at
Alexandria, S. Euodius, and after him S. Ignatius at Antioche, and S. James,
and after him S. Simeon at Jerusalem, they had respect to the material
greatenesse, and the dignity of the place; and in such places appointed
Patriarchs or primates, who had under them other Bishops; because the extent
of the place required it. And although at first, in some of these Cities there
were not so many Christians as were afterward in one Diocese; Yet they
perceiving that in these great Cities and extentes of place there might be many
more Christians, which might be increased by the presence and industry of
their Prelate, they placed in them Patriarchs or Archbishops, or Bishops
according to the extent of the place. Who as spiritual Fathers may beget many
thousands to Christ, and may rule them when they are begotten; as the carnal
Father first begets, then governs his children.

14. M. Nicholas has read in his Breuiarie 17. Nou. how S. Gregory called
Thaumaturgus of the wondrous miracles he wrought: at the hour of his death,
demau^ding how many infidels there were remanent in his City, and answer
being made that there were seuenteen; God be thanked, said he, I found so
many when I accepted of my Bishopric. Where M. Nicholas may see that for the
placing of a Bishop, there was had a regard not only to the number of the
Christians, but also to the extent, and greatenesse of the place; otherwise
seventeen Christians should not by M. Nicholas his count have had a Bishop.
And the reason is, which M. Nicholas considered not; for that a Bishop is
appointed, not only as a Ruler to govern Christians already converted, but as
a Father to beget Christians by his preaching, and example as Saint Paul and
the Apostles did, who at their first preaching found few or none to govern,
yet by their preaching were Fathers of the whole world. And so although in
England there were not so many Catholics as there are in one Diocese in a
Catholic Country (though, thanks be to God, there are many thousand
Catholics, and many hundred Priests, who deserve a Bishop to govern them, and
to confirm those that have not Confirmation) yet England by reason of the
extent of the Island might require a Bishop, yea many Bishops, in that so
great an Island is capable of many more Catholics, then a Diocese ca^ hold,
especially if it may enjoy the benefit of a Bishop or Bishops.

15. But I do not marvel that M. Nicholas labors so hard to hinder
England from a Bishop, for that peradventure he is of the opinion of those, who
in An answer to the Bishop of Chalcedons letter, to the Lay Catholics of
England, which was sent unto him by the Heads of three Regular Orders, do call
Episcopal authority in England, and in these times a Novelty, though as old
as Christ and his Apostles; Odious, though proceeding from Christ his love to
his Church, unto which it is much beneficial; Derogating to the ancient laws
of England, though England by Bishops has many hundred years been conserved
in religion, piety, sanctity and all ecclesiastical splendor; Pernicious to
souls, though instituted for their gaining, government and salvation. Which
opinion, in a manner is worse then Caluins opinion, for that it is less
injurious to Christ, to deny all Episcopal authority, as Calvin does, then
to say that Christ has iustituted and given to his Church an authority, which
is a Novelty; odious, derogating to temporal laws of Kings; pernicious to
souls. I say, In a manner; for that these Regulars do not absolutely speak
in these terms of Episcopal authority; but only in England, in this time of
persecution, they count it a Novelty, we having not had till of late a
Bishop of long time; odious, derogating to ancient laws and pernicious, at
this time: Which yet will hardly serve for a just excuse, Christ having
instituted this authorities and given it to the Apostles in the beginning of
the greatest persecution, and they having exercised it in the greatest fury of
persecution, maugre all the laws threats and menaces of the cruel
persecutours. And if Episcopal authority in time of persecution be odious and
pernicious; when shall it be grateful and profitable. Certes if when the wolf
inuadeth the flock, the Pastors presence be odious and pernicious when can it
be profitable?

M. NICHOLAS SMITH.
Enough has been said to disprove M. Doctors Tenet in this present
question, yet nothing will more disadua^tage his assertion that when the reader
shall by my answer clearly perceive his own augments, either to go beside the
matter, or to prove against himself, n. 8. And n. 9. his first argument is
taken out of Sotus affirming it to be De Iure diuino of the divine law etc.

REPLY.

Sotus his opinion concerning that point, whether by the divine law; every
Church must have its Bishop, makes for M. Doctor, and against M. Nicholas.

16. M. Nicholas braggeth that he has said enough, and in deed to much
unless he had said more to the purpose, as partly has been, showed partly
shall: but (says he) nothing will more disadvantage his assertion, then when
the Reader shall see by my answers, that M. Doctors arguments are besides the
matter, or against himself. Thus he: but by his leave he still continues his
old fault in making M. Doctor say more then he does. For M. Doctor does not
impose upon Sotus more then he says, as M. Nichoas imposes on M. Doctor. M.
Doctor only relates Sotus his words, leaving the Reader to conceive that
sense which the words offer. And although M. Doctor does not say so much of
him, or his words: Yet his words may very well have; Yea indeed have a sense
which favors M. Doctor.

17. Sotus. l 10. de Just. and Iure q. 1. ar. 4.
Let us therefore hear Sotus his words: He says it is Deiure diuino quodin
genere singulis Ecclesijs, secundum Ecclesiasticam diutsionem, sui applicentur
Episcopi; it is of the divine law, that in general, to every particular
Church, according to the Ecclesiastical division, their proper Bishops are to
be applied. Which words may very well have, and indeed have another
interpretation, then M. Nicholas gives, and they do clearelie favor that
which M. Doctor said; to wit, that by the divine law, every particular
Church, at lest which is a notable part of the whole Church (of which M.
Doctor speaks) should have its Bishop. For, supposing that Christ has
instituted a Hierarchy composed of diverse particular Churches, governed by
particular Bishops, and has given to the Church authority to make this
division of diverse Churches and Dioceses; Sotus, as by the former words may be
gathered, is of opinion, that supposing the division of Dioceses, every
Diocese (much more every notable part of the Church, as England, France etc.)
is by the divine law and appointement to have its Bishop, not Peter, or Paul,
but one indeterminatelie: and this by virtue of our Saviors institution in
general, whereby that order is set generally, and every where to be
observed, Singulis Ecclesijs vt sui applicentur Episcopi; that to every
particular Church their proper Bishop should be applied. And thus in general,
the election of Bishops is Deiure diuino, of the divine law. And therefore when
a Pope does apply a Bishop to a Diocese, he does but that which our Savior,
has before instituted in his general institution, and commandment, Vt
singulis Ecclesijs sui applicentur Episcopi; that to every Church their proper
Bishops should be applied.

18. That the division of Dioceses is Ecclesiastical, that is, introduced by
the Church, it is not material; for that according to Sotus the divine law
stillis general, commanding in general that all Dioceses divided by the
Church, be they more or fewer, of greater or less extent, each must have its
Bishop in it.

19. So our B. Savior having instituted in general, that under every host
rightly consecrated, there shall infalliblie be his sacred body; be the host
consecrated divided into many or few, great or small parts (which
determination depends of man, as the division of Dioceses depends of the
Church) the body of Christ is in each of them, by virtue of the consecration.
And that this is the meaning and scope of Sotus, may appear by these words of
Sotus himself: Nunquid propterea, quod per Ministrum Dei, illa facta fuerit
applicatio, continuo fit consequens non fuisse diuinam? Does it therefore
follow that it is not the divine Institution, that every Diocese should have
its Bishop, because that application, of a particular Bishop to a particular
Diocese, was made by the minister of God? Out of which M. Doctor may infer
against M. Nicholas that, in the opinion of Sotus, according to the divine
law, every Diocese must have its Bishop, and M. Nicholas can infer nothing
against, but rather for M. Doctor, to wit that at lest by the divine law,
every notable part of the Church (as England, France etc.) must have its
Bishop.

20. To this. M. Nicholas answers n. 10. that Sotus his meaning is not, that
the Pope is obliged by the divine law to give particular Bishops to every
particular Diocese; but only, that when the Pope does confirm and consecrate
a Bishop, and give him charge of some particular Diocese, in such cases he does
a particular action, which in general was instituted and commanded by our
Savior Christ, who ordained in general, that in the whole Church, there
should always be some Bishops. This M. Nicholas confirms by Sotus his own
words in the same place, where he says: Dum Dei minister etc. Whilst the
minister of God by his command dispenses that which he (God) instituted, the
action is to be esteemed of the divine law: but when the Pope does confirm and
consecrate a Bishop and apply him to some Church, he executes that which
Christ in general (Mark) did institute, and which he commanded them to do;
therefore such an action ought to be said of the divine law. Whence M.
Nicholas says, it is plain against M. Doctor, that Sotus speaks of the
Institution of Christ only in general.

21. But M. Nicholas, goes about to deceive men in generalities, when he
biddes us Mark, that Sotus says that Christ only instituted and commanded
in general that there should be Bishops. For that this may have two meanings;
the one, that Christ instituted and communded only in general, that there
should be Bishops in the Church: and this is M. Nicholas his interpretation:
The other, that Christ in general instituted and commanded, that not only in
general there should be Bishops in the Church, but also that every particular
Church or Diocese (after the division of Dioceses made) should have its Bishop,
and this is Sotus his meaning, as I have showed out of his words above
alleged; and as may appear even by his last words cited by M. Nicholas; for
Sotus says there, that when the Pope does confirm and consecrate a Bishop
and apply him to some Church, he executes that which Christ commanded in
general to do, that is, to confirm, and consecrate, and apply a Bishop to the
Church, over which he gives him charge. And Sotus in the former place alleged
by M. Doctor says not only, that there must in general by the divine law
be Bishops in the Church, Sotus supra l 10. q. q. 1. ar. 4.
but also that it is of the divine law that in general to every particular
Church, according to the Ecclesiastical division, their proper Bishops are to
be applied.

22. Sotus l. 10 de Just and iure q 3 ar. 4.
That this is Sotus his opinion it may appear also by other places: as where
he says: Cum enim ius diuinum sit, vt vnicuique suus mancipetur Episcopus,
idgue (vt demonstratum est) propter peculiarem curam and vigilantiam, quae
eidem Ecclesiae est necessaria etc. For seeing that it is the divine law, that
to every Diocese its own Bishops should be mancipated or bound; (he says
not only that in general there must by the divine law be some Bishops in the
Church, but also that by the divine law to every Diocese its own Bishop must
be bound and mancipated) and then he gives the reason, Sot in 4 did 20 q 1.
art. 5 Concl. 1.
for the peculiar care and vigilancie, which is necessary to that Church: And
in another place he gives also the reason why the Pope only is not sufficient
to govern the whole Church without Bishops, nor a Bishop the whole Diocese
without Pastors: Si autem aliorum rationem desideres, haec est egregia, quod
officium Pastoris est ad salutem gregis oculate attendere: supremus autem
Ecclesiae Pastor non sufficit toti Ecclesiae prospicere, nisi singulis
Dioecesibus Episcopos praeficiat; neque Episcopus toti Dioecesi, nisi
parochijs, parochiales Sacerdotes praeponat. But if thou desire the reason of
others, this is a notable reason, because the office of a Pastor is to attend
with a vigilant eye to the safety of the flock: but the supreme Pastor is
not sufficient to look to the whole Church, unless he ordain to each Diocese
a Bishop, and unless the Bishop constitute Parish Priests to the Parochial
Churches. So that seeing the Pope is bound by the divine law to have care of the
whole Church; and that according to Sotus, he cannot look sufficiently to the
Church unless he appoint to each Diocese a Bishop, it follows in Sotus his
opinion, that by the divine law, he is bound to give every Diocese his Bishop,
as the Bishop is bound to give to every Parish its Pastor.

23. But M. Nicholas n. 10. says that Sotus also says that sacramental
absolution, and the like are to be esteemed of the divine law; and yet it were
a madness, out of these words to infer, that the minister is bound by the
divine law, to administer Sacraments. I answer, that the Sacraments are of the
divine law, though men dispense them: and so according to Sotus, that every
Church should have its Bishop, it is of the divine law, though the Pope elect
him. This is the Scope of Sotus, as appears by these words, Nunquid propterea
quod per ministerium Dei etc. Is it therefore any consequence, that the
application is not divine, because it was done by the Minister of God. And M.
Nicholas out of this cannot infer any thing for his purpose.

24. Now whether all this which Sotus says, be true or no, M. Doctor did not
examine; he intending only to show that his own assertion, page 376. n. 2.
which affirms it to be the divine law, that every notable part of the Church
(such as is England, Spain, France) should have its Bishop, was moderate, in
respect of the assertion of Sotus, who said that every Diocese by the divine
law, in the aforesayed sense, must have its Bishop. And to this purpose only
he cited Sotus. And therefore that was not modestly, nor truly said of M.
Nicholas; but odiouslie, and not so charitablie, as might be expected of him,
in the 10. number toward the end, where he he says: Finally M. Doctor, I
doubt not will be more circumspect in alleging authors, lest he does wrong his
own reputation, the Authors themselves, the Reader, and most of all the
truth; Rather M. Nicholas should have been more modest, and more careful of
the truth in his words. For that M. Doctor does not say so much as Sotus does
(as M. Nicholas would make him) but only alleged him, to show that this
assertion, in respect of that of Sotus, was moderate; M. Doctor affirming
only, that it was of the divine law, that every notable part of the Church,
such as England, France, Spain, should have its Bishop; Sotus auerring that by
the same divine law every Diocese ought to have its Bishop, which is much more
then M. Doctor said: and that this was Sotus his opinion is showed out of his
words; and so not M. Doctor, but M. Nicholas alleges authors contrary to
their meaning.

MASTER NICHOLAS.
The second Author alleged by M. Doctor is Bannes, saying; that Bishops
cannot by the Pope be removed from the whole Church, or a great or notable
part thereof. I wonder M. Doctor would allege this learned divine etc. number.
11.

REPLY.
Bannes his opinion concerning that point; whether it be a divine law, that
cuerie notable part of the Church, must have its Bishop, and whether Bannes
makes for M. Nicholas, Bann. 2.2 q. 1. ar. 10 Concl. 6. ad vlt.
and against M. Doctor.

25. To this I shall endeavor to answer with much more moderation then M.
Nicholas uses. I answer the^ that M. Doctor did not allege Bannes to prove
that every particular Church of Diocese, is to have a Bishop; neither does M.
Doctor ever say so, as M. Nicholas himself observes n. 14. but he alleged
the sense of that Author, as he did of Sotus, to show that his assertion or
opinion was moderate. And that which is cited as the sense of Bannes, is
manifestly there in these words: Non tamen admittendum est, quod in tota
Ecclesia, aut in magna eius part, tam temere (Pontifex) sua potestate
abutatur: Yet it is not to be admitted, that the Pope in the whole Church, or
in a great part of it, should so rashly abuse his authority. And what is
this, but what M. Doctor said, to wit, that Bishops, according to Bannes
cannot be removed from the whole Church, or a great or notable part of it? And
further that Ba^nes did believe that the Pope could not do this by reason of
the divine law, it is easily gathered, by the example, he brings; and by
those words: tam temere sua potestate abutatur; that he should so rashly abuse
his authority: for were it an Ecclesiastical impediment and law, he could
take it away. That Bannes says the Pope may remove one Bishop, and not
appoint another, may seem to be against Sotus, but not against M. Doctor, who
says not that every Diocese must have by the divine law a Bishop, but only
that at lest every notable part as England, France, etc. is to have a Bishop
by the divine precept. Yet neither does Bannes herein plainly contradict
Sotus; because Sotus would also grant, that it pertains to the Pope to
divide Dioceses, and to make them greater or less, and so to make of two one;
and consequently he would grant to Bannes, that the Pope may take from a
Diocese its proper Bishop, which it had, and subject it to another Bishop, by
making it part of his Diocese: only Sotus says, that supposing the
division of Dioceses made by the Church, it is of Christ's institution and the
divine law, that every Diocese should have its Bishop.

M. NICHOLAS.
The reason that M. Doctor did infer from the said authorities makes for
him, just as they did: It was this: By the divine law etc. n. 12.

The truth in the foresaied point setting a side opinions of authors.

26. Before I show the force of M. Doctors argument, and the fault of M.
Nicholas his manner of arguing, I shall explicate, and confirm M. Doctor his
assertion, by which he auerreth, that by the divine law, in every notable
part of the Church there must be a Bishop: Which I shall easily do, supposing
M. Doctors ground, to wit, that the Church must not be governed by one only
supreme Bishop, but also by other particular Bishops, who are to govern
particular Churches; because the supreme Bishop alone cannot by himself
govern the Church; and because the Church is a Hierarchy. This ground M.
Doctor has proved in his 9. Chapter of his Hierarchy where he has showed,
how Bishops, and inferior Pastors are to govern the Church, to preach, and
administer Sacraments. Secondly in his 12. Chapter, where he has proved that
Bishops are so necessary in the Church, that it cannot subsist without them.
And thirdly in his 13. Chapter, where he has could us how even in the time of
persecution, though it was the greater for the Bishops presence, the Church
was, and ought to be governed by Bishops. Whence it is consequent, that by the
divine law, the Church must be governed by Bishops, and that in general there
must be particular Bishops in the Church of God: Which M. Nicholas also
grau^teth with Suarez n. 17. And why are Bishops necessary, but to govern, to
preach, and minister Sacraments.

27. Out of which assured ground, I argue in this manner. There must be by the
divine law Bishops in the Church to govern it, and consequently as many as
may suffice to supply the necessities the Church has of government,
preaching, and Sacraments: therefore by the same divine Institution and
precept, there must be at lest a Bishop in every notable part of the Church,
such as is France, Spain, England; for that fewer will not suffice; one Bishop
being not sufficient to serve all France, England, and Spain, and in
particular to confirm by the Sacrament of Confirmation all French and English.

28. I instance in Confirmation, because other Sacraments may more easily be
in some sort supplied without a Bishop, especially in the country; for that
neither the English can go all into France, nor all the French into England to
receive Confirmation; neither can one Bishop go to one Country to serve it of
Confirmation, without prejudice to the other country; nor can he, being but
one, suffice for so many. Wherefore England must have its own Bishop, France
its own, Spain its own, and so of the rest, if they be notable parts of the
Church; all having the like necessity; and there being the same reason of one,
which is of another. And so M. Doctor in his 14. Chapter n. 2. page 376.
argues well from the like necessity in this manner: By the divine law there
must be particular Bishops in the Church, to supply the necessities of
particular Churches, but there is no more reason why the particular Church, of
France (for he speaks especially of great particular Churches, which are
notable parts of the whole Church) should be governed by a Bishop or Bishops,
more or fewer, according to the extent of the Country, rather then the Church
of Spain; or the Church of England: Ergo France, Spain, and England, and all
other such particular Churches of extent, must be governed by Bishops; and
every one by his own, all having the like necessity.

29. M. Nicholas numer. 12. wondreth that a learned man should use such a form
of argument, and therefore to make a show against this argument of M. Doctor,
be brings other arguments very ridiculous, which though they may seem to
the ignorante to be like, yet indeed are not so like as chalk and cheise. His
first argument of diverse meats does argue that he was hungry for want of
arguments, else he would not have made use of one so weak and lean. Thus he
argues: Some meat is necessary for the maintenance of man, but there is no
more reason, why eggs or fish should be necessary, rather then other
particular meats; Ergo eggs, fish and all meats are necessary.

30. But I marvel that M. Nicholas (if he be learned) could not see the
difference betwixt his own and M. Doctors argument. For that he arargueth
from the necessity of some indeterminate means, to the necessity of some
determinate means: Master Doctor argues from like ends to the like
necessary means. The first manner of arguing, which Master Nicholas uses,
is ridiculous. For it follows not: Meat which is an indeterminate mean, is
necessary for man's life. Ergo this meat; Bishops are necessary in the
Church: Ergo this Bishop in particular; Marriage of some men is necessary to
maintain lawfully mankind: Ergo this man must marry. M. Doctors manner of
arguing is good and solid; for that it is grounded in paritie and equality of
reason, Lib. 1. Post or c. 4. and 5.
or in this principle known by the light of reason: Quod conuenit alicui
quatale conuenit omni tali, that which agrees to a thing, as it is such a
thing, agrees to every such thing: as for example, says Aristotele, because
it agrees to a Triangle, as it is a Triangle, to have three angles equal to
two right angles; it agrees to every Triangle to have three angles equal to
two right angles; but because it agrees not to a triangle, as it is a
triangle, to be of brass, every triangle is not of brass. And so because it
is necessary to a notable part of the Church, as it is a notable part, to
have a Bishop, and that also by the divine law, because one Bishop cannot serve
sufficiently two notable parts of the Church, every notable part must have
its Bishop. And there being the same reason of England, France, Spain, every
one of these countries, being of such extent, that one Bishop cannot serve two
of them, every one of them must have its Bishop by paritie of reason; and for
that it being necessary to a Church to have a Bishop, because it is a notable
part, every such notable part must have a Bishop: Because quod conuenit
alicui, qua tale, conuenit omnitali: that which agrees to a thing, as it is
such a thing, agrees to every such thing. And if it be necessary to one, it
is necessary to another.

31. If M. Nicholas his argument had been thus framed, it had been good:
Meat or food in general is necessary to ma^s life: but there is no more
reason of one man then another (for that all mortal men do need meat or food)
Ergo meat or food is necessary ot every ma^s life, but this food in
particular, as eggs or fish is not necessary.

32. M. Nicholas his second argument is as ridiculous: for that by it he
argues from an indeterminate mean, to wit, from men who are necessary to
maintain by marriage mankind, to every particular man. Which kind of
argument is not the same with that of M. Doctor; but as fond as this: A ship
indeterminatelie is necessary to pass from Dover to Calais, Ergo every
particular ship.

33. His third argument is of the same or of a worse form and stamp:
Religious institute in general is of the divine iustitution, and the Supreme
Bishop is by his office obliged on his part to procure that in the Catholic
Church so sacred an institute be maintained: but there is no reason why it
should be be maintained rather in France or Spain, then in England: Ergo the
Pope is obliged to maintain the religious institute in England. To his mayor
or first proposition I answer that religious orders can be no more norso much
necessary in the Church, I. 2. q. 108. ar. 4.
then the Counsels, in which, according to S. Thomas, they are grounded;
which counsels are instituted by Christ, but as M. Doctor says in his
Hierarthie page 300. they are not commanded to any, but counseled only. And
so M. Nicholas cannot find out a divine precept to oblige the Pope to admit
any religious order, as he is bound to give Bishops to the Church: and hence it
is that the Pope does much deliberate before he admit of any new Religious
order; and when he admits it, he admits it only as profitable to the
Church, not as necessary by any divine law.

34. But suppose it were of the divine law, that religious orders
indeterminatelie and in general should be in the Church: yet no Religious
order is necessary by the divine law in every notable part of the Church, as
Bishops are. And so it would not be a good argument: Religious orders must by
the divine institution be in the Church, Ergo in England, or in this or in that
particular Coutrie. But, as I have proved, it is of the divine law that in
every notable part of the Church there must be a Bishop; and so there being
no more reason of one such part, then another, all such parts must have their
Bishops. This, I suppose, would be M. Doctors answer to that argument. Now let
M. Nicholas make what he can of this answer. Who, very politikelie perhaps,
as he thought, said. n. 13. page 50. When M. Doctor shall tell me what he
thinks of this manner of argument, I will then let him know what good use I
shall be able to make of his answer, whatsoever it be.

35. And by this M. Nicholas his fourth argument will prove to have the same
fault that the others had: It is not of the divine law, as M. Doctor
confesses, to have a Bishop in every particular Church or Diocese; but if we
respect the divine law, there is not more reason of one, then another, Ergo all
the Dioceses of England may be governed without a Bishop. But M. Doctor would
deny his mayor, as it is Fathered on him: for he neither affirms nor denies
that every Diocese must have its Bishop: only he says page 375. that it is
not so certain that by the divine law, there must be a Bishop in this or that
particular Church, as that in general there must be Bishops in the Church: and
page 376. he says that it is of the divine law, that every notable part of
the Church should have its Bishop. It is true Sotus says that it is of the
divine law that every Diocese should have its Bishop: but M. Doctor neither
affirms it, nor denies it. Secondly I answer that there is more reason and
necessity of a Bishop in a whole country or Kingdom, which is a notable
part of the Church, then in every particular Diocese, because one Bishop may
in some sort govern two Dioceses, but not all France, Spain, or England, or
any such notable part, as I have showed, and one Diocese may be assisted by
the Bishop of the next Diocese, but not one great Country by the Bishop of
another country, as I have also proved.

36. By this M. Nicholas may gather an answer to that his question n. 16.
whether that England and Scotland Iure diuino must also have an Ordinary. For
if England and Scotland be both notable parts of the Church, both ought to
have by the divine law their proper Bishop: be he Ordinary or delegate: and
when men demand any thing, there is more reason to demand that which is
ordinary, the^ that which is extraordinary. And if the Pope think best to
give a Delegate; as so he may supply Engla^ds wantes, so that is not the
ordinary course observed in other Churches. And so England may demand an
Ordinary, and leave the rest to the Chief Pastors discretion, who is to
Judge whether he should give an Ordinary, or delegate, and whether the divine
law obliges to give unto a country a Bishop in this or that circumstance.

37. Out of all this I gather how unwilling M. Nicholas is to have a Bishop. I
grant that he says page 204. that he would most willingly spend his blood
for the purchassing of times suitable with the enjoying of a Catholic Bishop in
England. But what is that time which M. Nicholas deemeth suitable for the
enjoying of a Bishop? Would he have a time which the supreme Pastor (whose
office it is to give Pastors to euerie^ Church) thinks in his judgment
suitable? That time is already come. Would he have a time in which the country
has men of its own, in it to be Bishops? that time is also come: for that two
most worthy Prelates have been thought by the supreme Pastor sit and worthy
to be sent, the one after the other. Would he have a time in which there are
not particular laws enacted against the Bishop? no confiscation of goods, no
loss of liberty or life executed on them, that receive Confirmation of him?
That time also is come. Would he have England altogether Catholic, and no use
of any other religion to be permitted in it, but Catholic, before he would
have a Bishop come? If that time only be in M. Nicholas his opinion suitable,
the primative Church lived in no time suitable for a Bishop; and yet Christ
constituted his Apostles Bishops, and they constituted others in the greatest
rage and fury of persecution, as M. Doctor has showed in his 13. Chapter n.
3. And to say that a time of persecution is not suitable for a Bishop, is to
say, that when the enemy is in the field, it is not a time suitable to have a
General; when the woulfe is ready to set on the flock, it is not a time
suitable to have a Pastor. And so the time of the primative Church, in which
the Church was assalted by persecutours, in all Countries, and on all sides,
was not a time suitable for enjoying a Bishop. And yet that is the time in which
there is most need of him, to give them by Confirmation spiritual force and
strength, to direct them by his counsel, to encourage them by his presence,
and example. If none of these times be suitable for a Bishop in M. Nicholas his
opinion: The primitive Christians should have been without a Bishop, till the
Emperor Constantine appeased persecution; and Christ should not have sent his
Apostles to govern, preach and confirm, till the said time of Constantine:
for all the times before being times of persecution, were not by M. Nicholas
his count, suitable to the enjoying of a Bishop. If then neither the time that
Christ thought fit to send Bishops, nor the time that the Apostles ordained
Bishops, nor the time that Christ his chief Vicaires have thought suitable for
the enjoying of a Bishop in England, be suitable in M. Nicholas his Judgment;
Let him name us another time, which is suitable: least if he except against so
many times, men may think that M. Nicholas deemeth no time suitable for
enjoying a Bishop in England.

M. NICHOLAS.
What he alleges out of Suarez to prove that the government etc. n. 17.

THE REPLY.
Suarez is not against M. Doctor, but for him.

37. Suarez in the place alleged by M. Doctor has two reasons, Suarez tom.
4. in 3. p. disput 26. sect 1. n 8.
and it sufficed M. Doctor to cite the one, because the other matter, which
the second reason touches, was not controuerted, nor in question. Every
Reader of Judgment would observe that in the citation nothing is wanting, but
an etc. which was not necessary, because the first reason served, M. Doctors
turn, which was, that the Pope cannot change the government of the Church
because the Church by Christ his institution is a Monarchy, and a monarchy
requires not only one chief Monarche, but also other subordinate princes;
Which was enough to confirm what M. Doctor there intended, to wit, that in
the Church there must be diverse particular Bishops and Churches. And the second
reason, which Suarez alleges, as it was not necessary to be alleged for M.
Doctors purpose; so it was not left out as M. Nicholas rashly judges,
because it made against M. Doctor, as it is manifest. His second reason
therefore was: tum etiam quia in republica Christiana etc. and also because in
the Christian commonwealth this was most necessary: for it is most ample and
most universal, and its government is spiritual and interne, which is not
done exactlie, bu^ by proper Pastors and Princes of the Church. And what is
this against M. Doctor? rather it is for him. For as the Church is a must
ample and most universal Monarchy, and therefore according to Suarez his
second reason, needs more spiritual Princes and Bishops, then a Kingdom
does need temporal Princes: so every notable part of this universal and
ample Church, pleads for one Ordinary or Delegate Bishop, one Bishop being
not sufficient to serve diverse great parts thereof, as above is declared.

38. By this, says M. Nicholas number. 17. is answered a demand of M. Doctor.
Chapter 14. V V by the Pope and Bishops in the primative Church were so
diligent in consecrating Bishops, yea and making Popes in the midst of
persecution, but that they thought it was the divine law, that every (great)
Church should have its Bishop? M. Nicholas answers, that the reason was,
because in those times every Country needed its own Bishop, to ordain
Priests etc. And why might not Priests then have been sent out of one country
into another, as well as now? Was any one country so far distant from all
Catholic countries or Churches, as none could send Priests unto them, as now
they do from Rome, Spain, Fla^ders and other places into England? And is not
England separated from the whole world more the^ many of those countries? Did
not Apostolical men then go further, and do they not now also?

MASTER NICHOLAS.
In the numbers 19.20.21.22.23. he examineth the Examples of the Africans
alleged by M. Doctor Chap. 13. n. 7.8. and he says, examples prove little,
unless we were sure of all circumstances.

THE REPLY.
Why these examples were alleged by M. Doctor: and what they prove.

39. M. Doctor brought these examples, as he does profess in his 13. Chapter.
number. 7. to show their zele, and great desire to have a Bishop notwithstanding
persecution; and so M. Nicholas may let them stand, as they will, to all
posterity. If all English Catholics and especially some Regular Catholics
and their adherentes, had imitated this zele, those oppositions against a
Bishop sent by lawful and highest authority would never have been, but
rather we should have allioyned vnanimouslie for the procuring of a Bishop, not
for private interests (of which M. Nicholas, though he inculcate it sometimes,
had as much need to take heed of, as Secular Priests, who, considering the
times, have little reason to desire such an office for humane respects, to which
many labors and dangers, no wordly splendor or riches are now annexed) but
for the good of our country, the comfort of Catholics, the salvation of
souls, the honor of our Church of England, and the greater glory of God. Yet
these examples of those zealous African Catholics prove also something. For why
should they so cry for a Bishop, but that they knew it was the divine
Institution, that the Church in all times should be governed by Bishops, Victor
Vtice^s. l. 2. de persec.. Va^dal.
but that they reaped great comfort, and had much direction in persecution by
his presence, and great strength by the grace of Confirmation, which for
twenty four years they had wanted; they having had all that time no Bishop.

40. And thus M. Nicholas his third question being fully answered, though he
peradventure not satisfied, M. Doctors position of the necessity of a Bishop
in every notable part of the Church proved, and all M. Nicholas has been
able to say disproued, I will make an end of this question.

THE FOVRTH QVESTION.
Whether a country although the persecution should be increased by occasion
of having a Bishop, could refuse one, if it were only for the Sacrament of
Confirmation.
MASTER NICHOLAS.
FIRST we protest that by Gods holy assistance, we do, and ever will reverence
the Sacrament of Confirmation etc. but to put upon men's Consciences so strict
an obligation not withstanding whatsoever persecution etc number. 1.

THE REPLY.
M. Nicholas changes the Question.

1. M. DOCTOVR only affirms that as although no man in particular be bound
to receive a Priest, if thereby he should hazard lands, liberty or life: Yet
no country can except against the coming in of Priests, for fear of
persecution in general; because the loss of preaching and Sacraments etc. is
such a spiritual damage to a whole country, that it should rather hazard
persecution, then refuse Priests, though none in particular be bound with such
temporal loss to receive a priest, his private spiritual loss being not
co^parable to the spiritual loss, which a whole country should receive by
want of Priests: So M. Doctor says also, that although no man in particular
be bound to receive a Bishop into his house, or Confirmation of him, with any
notable temporallosse: Yet neither a whole country, nor any of the country
can except against the coming in of a Bishop; by reason that the spiritual
loss, which it should sustain by want of him: for that the Country should
not be a particular Church, nor the Catholics could be perfect Christians, nor
could they have so infalliblie the grace of Confirmation given to that purpose,
that men may have force thereby to stand constantly to the profession of their
faith; nor should they have the example and encouragement of the Bishop, who in
that case uses to put life into his subjects.

2. M. Nicholas changes the state of the question, and imposes on M. Doctor,
as though he said, that every Catholic in particular is bound to hazard all
for the Bishop, and Confirmation.

3. That M. Doctor speaks only in general, may appear by those his words,
which he has Chapter 14. numer. 3. 4. and 8. and also by the words, which out
of Master Doctor, Master Nicholas himself alleges q. 4. number. 12. Where M.
Doctor says: I am of opinion (which I humbly submit to authority) that
this particular Church, of England, France, Spain and such like (of which
notable parts he before spoake n. 2.) cannot except any long time against a
Bishop. Again M. Doctor says in the same Chapter nu. 8. But howsoever
although every man in particular cannot be condemned of sin for omitting
confirmation for fear of loss of his life, lands or liberty: yet I think
etc. Which words M. Nicholas alleges out of M. Doctor p. 85.

4. And yet that M. Nicholas in the beginning of this 4. question, charge M.
Doctor as though he had said, that every one in particular is to hazard
temporal losses, rather then to omit confirmation: appears, because he
exaggerateth, this as if he had put upon men's consciences so strict an
obligation, notwithstanding whatsoever persecution etc. And again page 83.
endeavoring to answer a place alleged out of S. Clement, he says, our case
is When Confirmation cannot be had without hazard of goods, liberty, and life;
as though M. Doctor had said that one in particular is to hazard such loss
rather then omit Confirmation.

5. But M. Doctor speaks in general: and if because in particular no man is
bound to hazard any notable temporal loss for the Bishop, or Confirmation, he
may infer that the country may except against the Bishop and that Sacrament;
by the like reason it may be inferred, that because no man is bound to receive
a priest secular or regular into his house, or to receive any Sacrament of him,
or to hear his sermon with hazard of loss of goods, liberty or life, he may
except against the coming in of Secular and Regular Priests. For though there
be not the like necessity of a Bishop and Priests in all points, yet if one
argument concludes, the other must conclude: especially in M. Nicholas his
opinion who says in this question number. 17. that the general persecution of a
whole country is more to be avoided the^ of any private person. Who yet, as
M. Doctor confesses, is not obliged to hazard goods or life, for enjoying the
Sacrament of Confirmation: by which it seems he would infer, that if a
private person be not bound to hazard loss of goods or life for Confirmation,
neither is a country whence it follows in M. Nicholas his manner of arguing,
that if a private person be not bound to receive a Priest with that hazard, a
country is not bound to receive Priests into it with hazard of persecution.
But the general spiritual loss is greater the^ any particular loss as M.
Nicholas confesses and so more is to be hazarded, rather then a whole country
should want a Bishop or Priests, then that a private man should want them.

5. But M. Nicholas in the beginning of this question, fearing be like that he
might seem no good Catholic in writing against the necessity of the Bishop,
and Confirmation; protests that be reuerenceth Confirmation, and that when
Confirmation can conveniently be had (and when is it more necessary then in
time of persecution, against which it is instituted? When is it more necessary
that the soldier should be armed and have his Captain then when the enemy is
ready to give battle?) the neglict of so great a benefit cannot be pleasing
to God. Which protestation was indeed necessary, and I fear is not
sufficient: for that hereafter Puritans may allege him against Bishops and
Confirmation, the necessity of which he so much extenuateth.

M. NICHOLAS.
True it is the Sacrament of Confirmation was instituted for giving of grace to
profess our faith, and S. Thomas teaches that by it a man receives
augmentation and grows etc. numer. 2.

THE REPLY.
Whether according to S. Thomas without Confirfirmation we can be perfect
Christians.

M. Doctor in his 14. Chapter n. 5. page 180. being to prove that a particular
Country, cannot refuse a Bishop by reason of persecution, alleges two
reasons. The first is, because the government of Bishops in the Church, is
instituted by Christ, as he had proved in the former Chapter. The second reason
is n. 2. because the commodity which a province reapeth by a Bishop is so
great, and the want of him is such a loss, that we should rather hazard
persecution, then to be deprived of a Bishop. For first without a Bishop we
cannot be perfect Christians etc. then n. 4. Secondly, the Sacrament of
Confirmation pleads for a Bishop. Then n. 9. without a Bishop we can be no
particular Church etc. Then n. 10. Without a Bishop no Hierarchicall action can
be exercised in the Church. So that M. Doctors second reason includes four
reasons all which make one total reason. M. Nicholas begins with that part
of the total second reason, which was, because without a Bishop, we cannot be
perfect Christians. Wherein he plays foul play, in taking these reasons a
part; because virtus vnita est fortior seipsa dispersa; and a child will
break a sheffe of arrows one by one, which joined in one boundell he cannot;
and many united can draw a ship, which severed they cannot; and so all M.
Doctors partial reasons put together may make one good and conuincing reason,
though severally taken they could not.

7. But let us see how he answers this partial reason singled out from the
rest. S. Th. 3 p q. 65. ar. 1.
M. Doctor had alleged S. Thomas of Aquin who compares Baptism to our
nativity, by which we have our first being, and Confirmation to our
augmentation and increase, by which we get strength and grougth. To our
nativity (says this learned Doctor) is answerable, in a spiritual life,
Baptism, by which we are regenerated, and receive our first spiritual being.
Joan. 3. Tit 3.
To our augmentation and grougth (says he) is answerable Confirmation, by
which the holy ghost is given to give us manly pitch and strength; Luc. vlt.
according to that: And I send the promise of my father upon you: But you,
tarry in the City, till you be endued with power from high. And again. But
you shall receive the virtue of the holy Ghost coming upon you. Act. 1.
So that according to S. Thomas by Baptism we are borne Christians, but little
ones, 1. Pet. 2.
and to use S. Peter's words, as infants even now borne: and by Confirmation me
receive manly grougth: for as our nativity gives us our being, and all our
parts, and limbs, but all little and weak, and our augmentation gives us
full strength and quantity in all the body, and makes us men; so by
Baptism, we have our spiritual birth, and we are Christians, but weak, and
infirm, and by Confirmation we receive full grougth and strength, and we
become perfect Christians.

8. Whereby it is evident that S. Thomas, though a great Saint, and a great
divine, says as much as M. Doctor does. Yea what M. Doctor says, he
speaks out of his mouth: and none write against S. Thomas for saying so, as
M. Nicholas has written against M. Doctor. Yet let us hear M. Nicholas his
answer; True it is (says he) that S. Thomas teaches that by it
(Confirmation) a man receives augmentation and grows: which yet cannot be so
understood, as if this Sacrament were the only means to attain such
spiritual grows. And why? because (says he) by other Sacraments, and
ordinary helps of almighty, God we may receive the effect of that same
grace. which is given men in Confirmation. I cannot like this his answer, if
it were but for this, that it in a manner gives Christians occasion to neglect
this, and other Sacraments, seeing that by other means, as the love of God,
Contrition, prayer, meditation etc. they may get as much grace, as is given by
Sacraments. But suppose that by other Sacraments and other means one may get
as much grace, as Confirmation gives: yet he should not so easily norsoe
infalliblie get it: nor should he Sacramentallie, and by a Character be a
perfect Christian.

9. For as although a Cathecumene who beleiueth all that other Christians do,
may peradventure by multiplication of acts of Charity and contrition, by
prayer, alms, fast, get as much grace as is gotten by Baptism, yet he shall
not be a Christian Sacramentallie, and by Baptism, nor shall he be so
incorporated to the Church, as the Church shall have that authority over him,
which she has over the baptized; and therefore cannot bind him to any
Ecclesiastical law, nor excommunicate him, he being, as S. Paul says foris,
without, 1. Cor. 5.
and no actual member of the Church: So though one might get more grace by
other works then by Confirmation, yet he should be no more Sacramentallie and
by character a perfect Christian, then a Cathecumen unbaptized, should be a
Christian, and so although (as M. Nicholas says n. S. Tho. 2 2 q. 184. ar. 3.
ad 3.
4. out of S. Thomas) by observing the counsels, as religious men do, a man
may have greater perfection, then other Christians have, yet that will not make
him a perfect Christian in S. Thomas his meaning. For as a man may have as much
strength and skill in fencing and fighting, as the best soldiour, yet till he
be admitted and does receive his military liuerie, he is not a soldiour by
profession: So a Christian may peradventure have as much grace as one that is
confirmed, but till he be confirmed, he shall not be an enroulled spiritual
soldiour, nor a perfect Christian.

10. And although a man may have grace without this Sacrament to profess his
faith, and to suffer death for it, as many in England not confirmed have done,
and as M. Doctor grants in his Epistle dedicatorie n. 18. and in his book
pagin. 384. n. 7. Yet that grace was merely gratuitely and freely bestowed,
and is not so infalliblie given without Confirmation, as by it; because to the
confirmed that grace is due by reason of the Sacrament and Character, which
they have received, God by promise and covenant obliging himself to give the
special grace of the Sacrament to them that receive it. And they that write
against this Sacrament, or they that neglect it when they may have it without
any imminent or certain danger (for I do not hear that any have been
particularly persecuted for having been confirmed, though thousands have
been confirmed) may fear lest they may be denied this special grace, as
neglecting the ordinary means to get it, which is Confirmation. To that he
says n. 3.4.5. he may gather his answer by what is said: To that he
alleges n. 7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14 he is partly answered, partly shall be
anon. For M. Doctor says only that a Country, for fear of persecution,
cannot except against a Bishop or Confirmation; Whereas M. Nicholas would make
M. Doctor say, that every particular man is bound to suffer persecution,
rather then not admit a Bishop or Confirmation; and M. Doctor by a Bishop
means him, who has Episcopal authority to give Confirmation: M. Nicholas
would have him mean an Ordinary, though I know, M. Nicholas for his part
desires no Ordinary.

M. NICHOLAS.
Then he alleges S. Clement ep. 4. saying: omnibus ergo festinandum est sine
mora renasci Deo, and demum consignariab Episcopo etc. but first M. Doctor
should not have grounded so hard a doctrine upon an Epistle which I suppose he
knows not to be so authentical etc. n. 15. and 16.

THE REPLY.
S. Clements Testimony that without Confirmation one is not a perfect
Christian, is defended, and M. Nicholas his answers plainly refuted.

11. M. Nicholas says M. Doctor should not have grounded so hard a doctrine
upon an Epistle not so authentical, as thereon to settle a doctrinall point
as he may see in Bellarmine. Sell. de Script. Eccl.
I note hear first that M. Nicholas counts it an hard doctrine, to say that
one is not a perfect Christian without Confirmation. S. Tho. 3 p q. 65. ar. z.
Urban ep. decretali.
And yet S. Thomas, as we have seen: S. Clement already alleged: S. Urban, S.
Cyprian, and other Fathers yea and Divines; whom I shall add after S.
Clement, do affirm, and heretics only deny it, with whom M. Nicholas
joins in this point.

11. Call. l 9 Instit. c. 19 n. 9.
Let us hear Calvin speak. These are his words: Addunt praeterea fideles
omnes Spiritum sanctum per manuum impositionem accipere debere post Baptismum,
vt pleni Christiani inueniantur. They (Catholics) add also that all the
faithful must receive the holy Ghost by imposition of hands after Baptism,
that they may be found full Christians: which Calvin in his next words
condemns with M. Nicholas, who says it is an hard doctrine. And Bellarmin.
To. 2. l. 2. de effectu Sacramentorum cap. 29. says that S. Cyprian l. 2. ep.
1. and S. Cornelius Pope ep ad Fabianum apud Eusebium l. 6 hist. c. 53 fear
not to say that they are not fully sanctified, nor perfect Christians who want
the Sacrament of Chrisme, although Calvin and Kemnitius call this word an old
calumny. But see how disaffection can transporte even a Catholic and a
Religious man. Because for sooth he would have no Bishop in England, he would
not have Confirmation necessary to make a perfect Church or perfect
Christians; and therefore says against the ancient Fathers, and all divines,
even Jesuits, that treat of this matter, that a man may be a perfect
Christian, without Confirmation; yea that it is an hard doctrine to say that
without Confirmation we cannot be perfect Christians. He urges censures
against M. Doctor, where no censure, but good, can be given, as I partly have
and partly shall she we. But if this M. Nicholas his proposition: It is an
hard doctrine to say that without confirmation we cannot be perfect
Christians, were proposed to superiors I fear it would be hardly censured, it
being against ancient Fathers, and the common opinion of Divines, and only
being applauded by Calvin and other heretics, who, because they deney
Confirmation, cannot abide to hear what the Fathers say, to wit, that it
perfecteth Baptism, and makes us perfect Christians. And therefore Calvin
says, lib. 4. Inst. c. 19. n. 8. Adeo nihil eos pudet vt negent Baptismum
rite sine Confirmatione perficiposse. They are so shameless, as that they
deney Baptism to be rightly, perfected without Confirmation. These Fathers,
and divines I shall allege after S. Clement.

12. Secondly here I observe M. Nicholas his boldness in daring to reject S.
Clements epistles, and in particular the 4. Epistle alleged by M. Doctor, it
being alleged to prove Confirmation a Sacrament, by Coccius tom. 2. lib. 3.
ar. 20. Cocc. Suarez Conin. Bellar. Estius. Cate^^ Baius. Valontia.
Suarez 3. p. tom. 3 disp 32. art. 1. Conincke, 3. p. qu. 72. art. 1.
Bellarmin, l. 1. de Confirm. c. 3. Est in 4. d. 7.. 13. the Catechism ad
Parochos, Confirm. Sacram. Baius l. 2. de Instit. c. 6. Valentia in Controu.
lib. de numero Sacramentorum cap. 1. obiecteth against decretall Epistles as M.
Nicholas does against S. Clements epistles which are part of them; illas
epistolas decretales Po^tificum esse suppositias: that these decretall Epistles
of the Popes are Cou^terfaite: Gregory of Vale^tia a Jesuit answers. Sed
defensionem earum Epistolarum suscepit Franciscus Turrianus in lib. quem pro
illis aduersus Magdeburgenses Ce^turiatores eruditissime conscripsit: qui
hactenus illi non responderunt, neque satis vnquam respondere poterunt. But a
defense of those Epistles Franciscus Turrianus (a Jesuit also) has undertaken
in a book, which for those Epistles he wrote most learnedlie against the
Magdeburgian Centurians. who have not hitherto made any answer to it, nether
shall they ever be able to answer sufficiently And so M. Nicholas against all
these (as well as against M. Doctor) who allege this place to prove
Confirmation a Sacrament, might have said, that they should not have grounded
the verity of a Sacrament (so much impugned by heretics) upon an Epistle,
which (as is to be supposed) they knew not to be so Authentical as to settle
thereon a doctrinall point, yea a matter of faith. Did not they know, as well
as M. Nicholas how Authentical Saint Clements works were?

13. But says M. Nicholas, Bellarmine in his book de Scriptoribus Eccles.
Says, that the Epistles of S. Clement are not Authentical: And I grant that
Bellarmine says that the Epistles (of S. Clement) which now are extant, want
not a so^uple, Lib. de Script. Eccles in Clement.
by reason that there are many things inserted, as that two Epistles were
written to Saint Lames who was dead before. But, says Bellarmine, perchance
they were written to S. Simcon; and other things there are (says he) which
peradventure were inserted, and are not in the Vatican book. But yet he
rejects not this Epistle, and therefore (as we have seen) he and many
others do cite this Epistle, and in the Canon law S. Cleme^ts Epistles, and
other his works, Did. 40 c In illis and 16 q. 1. capit. Cunctis.
are alleged; and Turrianus, Gualterus, and many others do defend these
works, and Catholic writers allege them against heretics, whom M. Nicholas
must take heed least he favor in so slighting the authority of these Epistles.

14. If this answer in which he denies S. Clements Epistles to be of
authority please not, M. Nicholas has another n. 16. Which he takes out of
Estius whom he says M. Doctor cited for the necessity of Confirmation, but
did not cite his explication of Fathers how they say that one is not a perfect
Christian without Confirmation: which, says M. Nicholas, is no fair dealing.
But why was it no sayre dealing for M. Doctor to cite Estius for the
necessity of Confirmation? Suppose in the other point he had been against M.
Doctor? do not Divines commonly allege a father or Divine for the point
wherein he favors them? And are they bound to allege him in another matter,
wherein he seems to be against them? And so if Estius had been against M.
Doctor and had said that without Confirmation a man might be a perfect
Christian, he might yet have cited him for the necessity of Confirmation,
without citing him for the point of a perfect Christian. Else how could Master
Nicholas cite Estius for this point, seeing that in another point he holds
against M. Nicholas, that a Priest not consecrated Bishop, cannot confirm by
any commission of the Pope as we see above q. 1. n. But Estius his doctrine of
a perfect Christian, is not against M. Doctor and so was not by him left out
for that cause: but either because he is not so clear in that point as others,
or because M Doctor had cited S clement whose words were plain. But let us
hear Estius: these be his words in English: It must be observed, that the
Fathers in such sentences (where they say that men cannot be perfect Christians
unless they be confirmed) do allude to the name of Christ, which signifies
anointed. VVhereupon they dency that they are fully Christians, who as yet
have not received Episcopal unction, making force in the word Christian.
Estius in 4. did 7. 9.
Which his manner of explication may very well favor the explication above
given, by which it was said that although a man may perchance by other means
get as much grace as confirmation gives; yet he is not a perfect Christian,
because he has not the Sacrament of perfection, which is the Episcopal
Unction.

15. But our adversary fearing perhaps not to be fortunate enough in these
two answers, adds a third p. 8 1. He tells us that the ancient practice
was to give together with Baptism, the Sacrament of Confirmation, and that
therefore S. Clement his meaning is only this; that they who have not both
these Sacraments (for one was not given without the other) are not perfect
Christians, and says he, I doubt not but that this will fully satisfy the
learned Reader.

16. But this answer argues only the hard shifts, to which M. Nicholas is
put: for else, what divine, yea Catechumen who knows his Catechism, would
have given such an answer? For who knows not, that it is one thing to be a
Christian, another thing to be a perfect Christian, and how that goes before,
this comes after; that Baptism only makes a Christian, Confirmation a
perfect Christian; and he that wants both is no Christian at all? And
therefore S. Clement could not have said of him that wants both, that he is
no perfect Christian, but rather he should have said, that he is noe Christian
at all. For that a perfect Christian supposes a Christian, and he that wants
baptism, is no Christian, and so cannot be called an imperfect Christian, he
being no Christianistiall at all.

17. Wherefore S. Clement to show that he speaks not of both Sacraments when
he says that one cannot be a perfect Christian; distinguishes the effects
of both these two Sacraments, and therefore says: all must make haste to be
regenerated without delay: behold the effect of Baptism, regeneration. And
then at length, that is, after Baptism, to be consigned of the Bishop. that
is, to receive the seuenfould grace of the holy Ghost. See the effect of
Confirmation, to wit, seuenfould grace; And then he adds: And when he shall be
regenerated by water, See the effect of Baptism, regeneration: and after
wards, as is mentioned, confirmed of a Bishop by the seuenfould grace of the
spirit see the effect of Confirmation: quia alias perfectus esse Christianus
nequa^uam potest: for otherwise (that is unless he be Consigned and confirmed)
he cannot be a perfect Christian. Where otherwise, has a reference only to
Confirmation of which he spoke last: for if it had reference to both Sacraments
(as M. Nicholas said) S. Clement should have said, he can be no Christian at
all, because he that is not baptized is not at all a Christian, and so cannot
be called an imperfect Christian.

18. And to confront M. Nicholas the more (for I see by experience, Bol. l. 1.
de Co^firm c 3.
he will not he Satisfied with alitle) let us hear Cardinal Bellarmine: He,
after he had cited those words of S. Clement: All must make haste without delay
to be regenerated, and then to be consigned of the Bishop and receive the
seuenfould grace of the holy Ghost: adds: Et infra causam reddit (Clemens)
quia non potest aliquis fine eo Sacramento esse perfectus Christianus: and
after he (Clement) gives the reason, because without that Sacrament
(Confirmation) one cannot be a perfect Christian. Where the Reader must note,
that Cardinal Bellasmine says not (as M. Nicholas does) that without both
Sacraments, but without that Sacrament to wit, of Confirmation, one cannot be a
perfect Christian. And so without Confirmation, according to S. Clement one
cannot be a perfect Christian.

19. But as they who have never a good answer are forced to use many, whereas
one good answer always satisfies; so M. Nicholas knowing belike that none of
his answers will abide the touchstone, nor stand the examination, brings many
answers, not so much to satisfy us, as to press us with the multitude. He
therefore has in store for us a fourth answer: and what is that? He says
page 83. that S. Clement is not faithfully alleged by M. Doctor. And why?
because he alleges not all his words, but ends at these words before
alleged; otherwise he cannot be a perfect Christian. And what needed M.
Doctor allege any more words, seeing he had alleged those that proved what
he intended, to wit, that without confirmation one cannot be a perfect
Christian? And truly M. Doctor alleged more of S. Clements words then
Cardinal Bellarmine in the place above cited did; and yet Bellarmine who saw
those words that follow, as well as M. Nicholas; without alleging them, feared
not to say: Et infra causam reddit (Clemens) quia non potest aliquis sine co
Sacramento esse perfectus Christianus: and after he (S. Clement) yields the
reason, because one cannot without that Sacrament be a perfect Christian.

20. But what are these words, which M. Doctor left out. Let us hear them
from M. Nicholas his own mouth. My 4. answer is that S. Clement is not
faithfully alleged by M. Doctor, for S. Clement after he had said: When he
shall be regenerated and by water afterward confirmed by the Bishop with the
seuenfould grace of the spirit, because otherwise he cannot be a perfect
Christian (where M. Doctor ends with an etc. immediately adds words wherein
the very point in question consists saying: si non necessitate sed incuria
sic, aut voluntate remanserit: If be shall remain so not by necessity, but by
carelessenesse or voluntarily. But first here I might (if I were is foreward
in carping at leaving out word, though not to the purpose, as M. Nicholas is)
observe the like fault in him even in this place in which he taxes Master
Doctor, for that he omitteth those words: nec sedem habere inter perfectos:
nor have place amongst the perfect, which are the immediate words that go
before those, which M. Nicholas says M. Doctor lift out, to wit; If he shall
remain so not of necessity. And M. Doctor has indeed cause to think M.
Nicholas left them out of purpose: for that, as we shall see, they made
against him and for M. Doctor.

21. Yet let us hear how M. Nicholas argues out of these words, which not
only M Doctor, but also Bellarmin left out, as also others above cited do. S.
Clement (says he page 83.) says, that he who after Baptism is not
Confirmed, cannot be a perfect Christian if he want it out of carelessenesse,
not out of necessity, ergo says he, the Catholics of England, who want it
out of necessity may be perfect Christians without it; but what necessity is
there now, or has there been since the Pope sent our two last most Reverend
Bishops, to want Confirmation? For we have, thanks be to God, a Bishop willing
to give that Sacrament, and there is no special law against him, and never any
as yet has been persecuted for having taken it, Confirmation, at least the
persecution is not so great, but that thousands have taken it. And these words
which M Doctor left out, as they are some what obscure, so they are as much
against M. Nicholas, as M. Doctor.

22. For first he says out of Estius, that when S. Clement or other Fathers
say, that a man cannot be a perfect Christian without Confirmation, they say
so, because till he have it, he has not the perfect unction, of which we are
called Christians, that is, anointed. And then will I add these words in which
M. Nicholas says the point of the controversy consists, if not by
necessity, but by carelessenesse, or voluntarily, he shall remain so: ergo
if not by carelessesse, but out of necessity he want Confirmation, he may he a
perfect Christian, that is, perfectly anointed without it; which were to say,
he may be perfectly anointed without perfect unction, and so have it without
having it.

23. Secondly his third answer to S. Clements words page 81. (as above we
have seen) was, that the ancient practice was to give baptism and
Confirmation together: and that therefore when S. Clement says, that
otherwise he cannot be a perfect Christian; he means that unless he have
both Sacraments, that is, Baptism and Confirmation, he cannot be a perfect
Christian: and then will I come M. Nicholas with those words following, if he
shall remain so, not by necessity, but by carelessenesse or voluntarily:
Ergo if by necessity, he want both Baptism and Confirmation he may be a
perfect Christian: and yet without Baptism he is no Christian at all, and
consequently no perfect Christian. Wherefore unless we will make S. Clement
absurdlie contradict himself, and make all Divines almost absurd, who
allege, (as Suarez also alleges) these last words, Suarez Supra.
which M. Doctor omitted, as not necessary to his purpose, we must say that
S. Clement means not to say, as M. Nicholas infers, that if of necessity
one want Confirmation, he may be a perfect Christian without it: for that were
to contradict himself, he having said before, that unless one be consigned,
he cannot be a perfect Christian. And so whether he want Confirmation
voluntarily or of necessity, he cannot be a perfect Christian Sacramentallie
as above is said; as whether voluntarily or by necessity he want Baptism,
he is no Christian. Wherefore the sense of these words must not be, that which
M. Nicholas gathers, but some other, and as it is very probable, it is this
sense following, which is gathered out of the words which M Nicholas left out,
which are those, nor have place amongst the perfect, if he remain so, not by
necessity etc.

24. This then is the sense of S Clements words. All therefore must make haste
without delay to be regenerated to God, and then to be consigned by the Bishop,
that is, to receive the seuenfould grace of the holy Ghost, because the end of
every ones life is uncertain (which he may say, because Baptism and
Confirmation then were given together, and so Baptism at least was not to be
delayed least one should dye without Baptism) and when he shall be regenerated
by water, and afterward confirmed by the Bishop with the seuenfould grace of
the spirit (as is memorated) for otherwise he cannot be a perfect Christian,
nor (these words M. Nicholas left out) have place amongst the perfect, if he so
remain not by necessity but by carelessenesse or volu^tarilie. Which last
words cannot be referred to the words, otherwise he cannot be a perfect
Christian, but to the words immediately following (which M. Nicholas left out)
to wit, nor have place amongst the perfect: that is, he cannot be admitted to
the sacred Eucharist, nor to the rank of them that are admitted to it, if not
by necessity, but by carlessenesse, or volu^tarilie be shall remain so For if
by necessity the party baptized wanted Confirmation (as when he was baptized,
for some just cause, in absence of the Bishop who could not be gotten) then,
not else, he might (being baptized) have place amongst the perfect, and be
admitted with them to the Eucharist. And this exposition may be gathered out of
S. Dionysius Areopagita according to the Translation set out at Colein an.
1536. l. de Eccl. Hier. c. 2. in fine. Ipse vero (Hierarcha) deificantissimo
vnguento virum signans, participem manifest at de caetero sacrae perfectissimae
Eucharisitiae. He (the Bishop) anointing the man with the most deifying
ointment, manifests him partaker of the Sacred most perfect Eucharist. Vasq.
to. 3. in 3 part. disp. 212. c. 2.
And Vasquez a learned Jesuit following the Translation of Perionius, cites
these words: Is, cum virum vnguento, quod maxim diuinos efficit, insigniuit,
Eucharistia, qua vim maximam habet perficiendae sanctitatis, participem esse
pronunciat: He (the Bishop) when he has marked the man with the oil, which
makes most divine, pronounces him partaker of the Eucharist which has
greatest force to perfect sanctine, Whence Vasquez gathers, that when one was
baptized, he was declared capable of the Eucharist, and that the Eucharist used
to be given after. Confirmation, yet he says there was noe divine precept to
take Confirmation before the Eucharist, but only use and custom; So that
they who were confirmed, were declared capable of the Eucharist, and commonly
did presently after receive it, though there were no divine precept. And if any
out of carelessenesse neglected Confirmation (which then by custom was to be
taken presently after Baptism) he was not admitted to have place amongst the
perfect, that is, amongst them who were capable of the sacred Eucharist: but if
after baptism they could not be confirmed, and so of necessity wanted
Confirmation, then they might communicate (there being no divine precept to
receive Confirmation before the Eucharist) and so have place amongst the
perfect, that is, the confirmed who were capable of the sacred Eucharist.

25. And thus it appears that M. Doctor has not been unfortunate in
alleging S. Clement, no more then Bellarmine, Suarez, Coninck, the Catechismus
ad Parochos, and diverse others alleged, were; rather M. Nicholas has been
unfortunate: first in rejecting him, then in expounding him.

26. I add to S. Clement, S. Urban Pope, S. Urban. cp. decretali.
who lived about the year 220. Who has words which should make M. Nicholas
grant, that one cannot be a perfect Christian without Confirmation, if he
respect either Antiquity, Authority or sanctity, he thus pronounces: Omnes
fideles, per manus Episcoporum Impositionem, Spiritum Sanctum post Baptismum,
accipere debent, vt pleni Christiani inueniantur. All the faithful by the
Imposition of hands of Bishops, must receive the holy Ghost after Baptism that
they may be full (perfect) Christians. S. Cornelius Pope and Martyr: says: He
(Nouatianus) was not co^summated by the seal of Chrisme and therefore could
not deserve the holy Ghost. S. Cyprian says, Cornel ep. ad Fabianum apud
Eusebius. l. 6. c. 33. Et Boil. supra. Cyp. 72 seul. 30 ep. 1. Ep. 73. ad lubaian.
Council. Eliber. can 35.
Christians are then fully sanctified, if they be borne of both Sacraments, to
wit, baptism and Confirmation. And again he says, that by Confirmation,
which he calls our Lords seal, they are consummated: And the Council
Eliberinu^ says, that the baptized, if he live after, must be carried to the
Bishop that by imposition of hands he may be perfected. S. Ambrose says that
after the font of baptism the spiritual seal, remains that perfection may
be made, by which they insinuate that Confirmation makes perfect Christians.
The Council of Orleans says one shall never be a Christian (that is a
perfect Christian) unless he be chrismed by the Episcopal Confirmation. Ambr.
l 3 de Sacra. c 2. Conc. Aurel. c. 3. de consot. d 5. c. leiun. Bell. l. 2. do
Sac effect. c. 28.


27. Wherefore Bellar. feared not to say: Cypr. l. 2. ep. 1. and Cornelius in
cp. ad Fabianum apud Eusebius. l. 6. hist. c. 53. Non timuerunt dicere, non esse
plene sanctificatos nec perfectos Christianos qui carent Sacramento Chismatis,
ctiamsi hanc vocent Caluinus and Kemnitius veterem contumeliam: Cyprian and
Cornelius feared not to say, that they are not fully sanctified nor perfect
Christians, who want the Sacrament of Chrisme: although Calvin and Kemnirius
call this an old calumny; as M. Nicholas also condemns the same speech and
so in this joins with heretics. in c 8 Act v 17 lit H.
Lorinus a Jesuit writing upon the 8. Charter of the acts says, that
Guilielmus Parifiensis deplores worthily the contempt of so great a Sacrament
(Confirmation) whose grace is in some manner greater then the grace of Baptism
(and without which (Sacrament) as the Fathers and counsels speak, we are not
full, perfect, and consummated Christians. Wherefore (he says) this Sacrament
is called (...), that is, consummatio, consummation: Bayus also cites S.
Clement his constitutions and the epistle which M. Doctor alleged to prove
that the Bishop is the minister of Confirmation, Bas us l. 2 inst cap. 60 5
Clc. l. 3 co^st. c 10 16 17 andl. 7. c 44 and cp 4
and he gives this reason, because Confirmation is the perfection and
complement of Baptism, and so must be ministered by the chief minister. And
again the same Author cites as M. Doctor did S. Clement Epist. 4. Clemens
epist. 4. sic Demum a B. Petro accepisse refert, oportere renasci Deo ac
consiguari ab Episcopo, vt perfecti efficiamur Christiani: Clement in his 4.
epistle says that he had from S. Peter that we must be regenerated to God,
and then be consigned by the Bishop, that we may be made perfect Christians. L.
2. de Confir. c. 57.
Wherefore M. Nicholas in condemning M. Doctor for saying that without
Confirmation we cannot be perfect Christians, and for alleging S. Clement to
prove, it conde^neth the ancient Fathers and almost all Divines who say the
same, and for it, In c. 17 Mar. n. 18. in fine.
allege also S. Clement. Maldonate a Jesuit also, observing that the gift of
miracles and tongues, and the visible descent of the holy Ghost did not
ordinarily, follow immediately Baptism, but Confirmation, says: qua re
aperte significabatur etc. by which thing it was signified plainly, that by
Confirmation, Baptism was in some sort perfected, which being said by some
Bishops of Rome (he cites in the margent Vrbanus and Melchiades) heretics do
not only impudently, but also unlearnedly laugh at it. And Canisius also
says: he is no perfect Christian who is not confirmed. And so M. Nicholas
whilst he condemns M. Doctor for saying that without Confirmation we are
not perfect Christians, and for alleging S. Clement for proof of that he
said, condemns also the ancient Fathers and all Divines who write of this
matter; yea Jesuits themselves; and so I cannot tell how hereafter he can
look them in the face. Yea he favors Calvin as we have seen.

M. Doctor immediately after S. Clement cites S. Dionisius Areop. lib. de
Eccles. Hierar. c. 5. calling the Sacrament of Confirmation a perfecting
Sacrament. page 8. n. 17.

THE REPLY.
S. Denis calls the Sacrament of Confirmation a perfecting and consummating
action.

27. M. Doctor in calling the Sacrament of Confirmation a perfecting and
consummating action: says no more then Card. Bellarmin does, who to prove
Confirmation a Sacrament alleges some Greek Fathers, Dion. l. di Eccl. Hier.
c. 2 p. 3. C 4. p. 3.
and first S. Denis in these words: perficiens illa vnctio facit perfectum:
that perfecting unction makes perfect and again: Sed and ipsis etc. But to
them also who are consecrated by the most holy mystery of Regeneration, the
consummating unction of the ointment does give the coming of the holy Ghost.
Suarez also a learned Jesuit, and Estius and others do attribute perfection
and consummation to Confirmation, as M. Doctor did. Let us hear Estius who^
M. Nicholas took for his friend in explicating how the Fathers say, that
without Confirmation we cannot be perfect Christians. He says, that the
proper effect of this Sacrament, is robur Spiritus sancti id est Gratia etc.
the strength of the holy Ghost, that is, a grace by means of which the mind of
a Christian confirmed and corroborated by the holy Ghost, may persist and
resist impugners He adds: Hinc apud veteres etc. Hence, in the ancient
fathers in many places we read, that perfection, consu^mmation, Confirmation,
augmentatio^ consta^cie, strength. fortit u^le, are given to this Sacrament, as
effects thereof. And for this he alleges S. Dionysius, S. Clement even in
the place above allege by M. Doctor, and says that S. Clement says,
Dion. l Eccl. Hier c. 4. p. 3. Clem. l. 3 co^s. Apost. c 17 and epist 4 Fabia.
cp 2. ad cp. orien. Corn. aoud Euscb. l. 6. c. 35 Melch. ep. ad epist. Hisp.
Dyon. Carth. in Elucidat c 4 in initi^ar 8.
one cannot be a perfect Christian without it: and cites to this end S. Fabian
Pope, S. Cornelius, S. Melchiades and others. And this M. Nicholas would not
see nor acknowledge for fear least thence might be inferred, that without
Confirmation one cannot be a perfect Christian: only he could espy. cap. 5.
for c. 4. which fault (if he had been corrector of the print) might have been
prevented.

28. Whereas M. Nicholas says that S. Denis in that 4. chapter speaks of
Baptism; and some times generally of oil and Unction used not only in
diverse Sacraments, but also in Consecration of Altars, as though, in that
Chapter he spoke not of Confirmation. Dionysius Carthusianus stands against
him in the very beginning of his Elucidation of that 4. Chapter, saying.
Postquam praehabito immedtate capitulo etc. after that (by S. Denis) it has
been treated in the immediate a foresayed Chapter, of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, of the celebration, rites or Hierarchicall Acts about it, here (in
the 4. Chapter) the same now is done of the Sacrament of Confirmation.

M. NICHOLAS.
His other chief argument is out of Estius in these words Quod si quaeras etc.
but if thou ask whether the omission of Confirmation when it can commodiously
be had etc. pagin. 87. numero 18.

THE REPLY.
M. Nicholas makes M. Doctor say more then he does, to wit that every one in
particular is bound to take Confirmation with hazard of persecution, whereas M.
Doctor says only, that a country should hazard persecution rather then
want Confirmation. Estius in 4. d. c.


29. Estius proposes a question; whether the omission of Confirmation when it
may be had commodiouslie be a mortal or venial sin. And answers that it
cannot be omitted without mortal sin in time and place of persecution of
faith, when (forsooth) by reason of infirmity, there is danger to a man least
he deny his faith in word or deed, or at least be ash imed to confess (his
faith) when he should. And M Doctor says the same, as appears by his words
which immediately follow these words of Estius. For if the reader turn over to
the page 386. and 8. number, he shall find these words of M. Doctors. But
howsoever, although every man in particular cannot be condemned of sin for
omitting Confirmation, for fear of loosing his life, lands, or liberty, Yet I
think that neither any country or any one of the country, for fear of
persecution, can oppose against the coming in of a Bishop, though thereby,
only the Sacrament of Confirmation hold be wanting.

30. So that M Nicholas plays not fair play with M. Doctor in making him
say that Catholics in particular are bound to receive Confirmation with loss
of life, liberty or goods, whereas as M. Doctor confesses in the a foresayed
place, and before it also number. 3. and 4. grants, that none in particular are
bound with such danger; and only says, that neither a country nor any one
of the country (which yet he humbly submits to authority) can except
against a Bishop, or Confirmation for fear of persecution in general;
notwithstanding which general persecution, many commodiouslie and without
danger may receive Confirmation. And this Estius, when he says, that if
Confirmation can commodiouslie be had in time of persecution, it cannot be
refused by particular persons under mortuall sin, supposes.

31. The reason of this is, because there may be a general persecution, and
yet many in particular, may commodiouslie have Confirmation. for as
notwithstanding persecution, and the general laws of England enacted against
receiving a Priest, hearing Mass or going to Confession, many Catholics in
particular without moral danger may many times receive a Priest, hear Mass,
and go to Confession, as thousands have done: so many Catholics may receive
the Bishop, and Confirmation of him without any imminent or moral danger; and
therefore hitherto not any have suffered loss in life, liberty or goods for
receiving of confirmation though thousa^ds have received it. And as, although
persecution in England is the greater for Priests, Jesuits, and other
regulars, yet many can, and do without moral danger hear Mass (as they are
bound on holy days, when they can commodiouslie) can go to Confession and the
like: so although the persecution in England were greater for the Bishop (as it
is not, there being no special laws in force against him) yet many might
receive him, and Confirmation of him, without any immine^t danger: and
consequently according to Estius his opinion, are bound under mortal sin to
receive Confirmation, when there is danger, by reason of infirmity, of denying
their faith, or of fearing to profess it when they should. And so I marvel
that M. Nicholas could not see the difference, betwixt persecution in general,
and in particular, for that persecution in general does not excuse particular
men from receiving Confirmation, they, notwithstanding a general persecution
having commodity to receive it without danger: but when the persecution is
particular to men in particular, then they cannot without danger, and so are
excused. yet nether a country nor any of the country can except against
Priests coming into the country by reason of a general persecution, because
notwithstanding such a persecution, many in particular may hear Mass, receive
the B. Sacrament, go to confession, hear a sermon now and then, without
imminent danger; and so for respect and regard of these (who have right to the
Sacrament) none can except against the coming in of Priests: into a country
seeing that if the country were deprived of Priests, none could hear Mass,
go to confession, receive the Sacraments, or hear exhortations: and so at
this day, if Priests had not been sent into England maugre persecution, there
had now scarce any Catholic or Catholic Religion been left in England: and
nisi Dominus exercituum reliquisset nobis semen, quasi Sodoma suissemus, and
quasi Gomorrha similes essemus: Unless the Lord of Hosts had left us (this)
seed we had been as Sodom, and we should be like to Gomorrha. Isai. 1.


32. So although no man in particular be bound to receive the Bishop into his
house, or Confirmation of him with imminent danger of the aforesayed temporal
losses: Yet a country could not except against a Bishop or Confirmation, for
fear of persecution in general: for that, notwithstanding such a general
persecution, many might without the aforesayed danger receive a Bishop and
Confirmation at his hands, as we see they have done in England. And so in
regard of these who have right to a Bishop and to Confirmation, none can except
against the coming in of a Bishop lawfully sent (unless as M. Doctor says
p. 378. n 3. the persecution were so great that the Bishop could not enter, or
would presently be apprehended or put to death) because without a Bishop many
should want the confort, encouragement and example of such a Pastor, and they
should want Confirmation which as Estius says cannot in time of persecution,
and when there is danger of falling to many, who might commodiouslie receive
it, be omitted without mortal sin, as we shall prove anon.

M. NICHOLAS.
His last argument is out of a conjecture, that without Confirmation if one
fall not, others probably will, as he says Nouatus did n. 19.

THE REPLY.
That Nouatus fell for want of Confirmation, and that in time of persecution,
without that Sacrament, if one fall not, others will.

33. M. Doctor indeed said page 387. n. 8. that if in time of persecution
there were not a Bishop to give Confirmation: if one fall not, others probably
would, as Nouatus did for want of it. But M. Nicholas says, that of Nouatus
he finds no such thing in Eusebius, to wit, that in time of persecution
hefell, for want of Confirmation.

34. And indeed neither Eusebius nor Cornelius by him alleged do say so in
express terms, but they do so insinuate, and so it follows out of their
words, that as other writers have done, so M Doctor might say, that Noutatus
(others, as Baronius ad Pamelius call him Nouatianus) did fall in time of
persecution for want of Confirmation.

35. Eusebius. l 6 c. 33 alias 35. iuxta verse. Christophor soni.
For Eusebius says first, that Cornelius in an Epistle to Fabianus tells
all the particulars, quis, qualis suerit vita vel moribus, and quomodo ab
Ecclesia Dei declinauerit: Who, what manner of man he was in life and manners,
and how he declined from the Church. And after he says of him. Et quod iacens
in lecto, pronecessitate perfusus sit etc. and that lying in his bed he was
baptized out of necessity, and that the rest which are wont to follow
Baptism, were not solemnly fulfilled, and that he was not consummated by the
seal of Chrisme: where upon neither could he ever deserve the holy Ghost: that
is, in that special manner as he is given by Confirmation, that is to give
courage to profess our faith in time of persecution. Li. aduersus Luciferia^
nos.
For as S. Hierome auerreth the Holy Ghost is also given by Baptism, yea (as
Divines grant) by other Sacraments, so often as by them we receive instifying
grace, but not in that special manner, nor to that particular end, which is to
give force to profess our faith in time of persecution, maugre all threats
and torments of the Tyrant. And therefore Eusebius a little after adds that
Cornelius writes also of Nouatus, that in time of persecution when he lurked
in a certain little celle, (for fear) and was desired by the Deacons, as the
manner is, help the Catechumenes at their departure out of this life, he
fearing to come out, denied himself to be a Priest. And presently after he
tells how he also fell into Schism. And so seeing that he fell in
persecution, and wanted the holy Ghost for ant of Confirmation, if we put all
this together we shall find it at least very probable, that he fell for want
of Confirmation, though other causes might concur, as ambition, which M.
Nicholas alleges in that manner, as though he meant couertelie to glaunce at
the ambition of Priests who desire a Bishop: though (as above I have told him)
in this time there is little cause why out of ambition any should desire a
Bishop; and I pray God there be not ambition also in seeking to hinder the
Catholics from having a Bishop.

36. But that Nouatus fell for want of Confirmation, diverse before M. Doctor
have affirmed. As first The venerable and learned Authors of the Rhemes
Testament (of whom M. Doctor had it) who writing on the eight Chapter of the
Acts have delivered these words: To conclude, never none denied or contemned
this Sacrament of Confirmation and holy Chrisme but known heretics S.
Cornelius that B. Martyr so much praised of S. Cyprian ep. ad Fabium apud Eusebius
l. 6. c. 35. affirms that Nouatus fell to heresy for that he had not
received the holy Ghost by the consignation of a Bishop, whom all the Nouatians
did fellow, never using that bolie Chrisme.

37. Fulke in his answer to the notes of the Rhemists on this place answers,
that Nouatus omitted the ceremony of anointing, yet does not Cornelius say
that he fell into heresy because he had not received the holy Ghost by
consignation of a Bishop, but only shows what manner a man he was. Thus he
answers the Rhemists. And M. Nicholas joins with him in his answer to
Master Doctor, saying: Only Eusebius out of Cornelius in an Epistle to
Fabianus recounteth that he fell, persecutionis tempore, metu debilitatus and
nimia vitae cupiditate adductus; in time of persecution, weakened with fear,
and moved with too much desire of life. And presently after says Master
Nicholas: It may be well that he fell for want of Confirmation: Yet as Fulke
said, so he says, I deny that Eusebius says so. But I had rather give
credit to the Rhemists then to M. Nicholas, I having especially found him
tripping so often and their one affirmation ought to be taken before ten
negations or denialls of M. Nicholas. Estins also having said that the
Apostles use to give Confirmation so soon after batisme as might conveniently
be, Estius in 4. d. 7 18.
says: Quorum alacritatem and studium in conferendo hoc Samentum imitari
conuenit omnes Episcopos, maxim quod huius subsidij neglectu fiat, vt
persecutionis tempore multi deficiant aut labantur, sicut test Cornelio Papa,
Nouato accidit: Whose alacrity and study in giving this Sacrament, it is
convenient that all Bishops should imitate, especially because by neglect of
this help, it comes to pass in time of persecution that many do fail or
fall as (witness Pope Cornelius) it happened to Nouatus. Behold another
author of greater credit then Master Nicholas as being a Classical Author,
and having been many years professor of divinity in the famous University
of Doway, affirms also with M. Doctor and against M. Nicholas, that Nouatus
fell in time of persecution for want of Confirmation. Bzouius also in his first
tome speaking of Nouatus or Nouatianus says thus of him: morbo tandem
clapsus, neque caetera quibus post Baptismum secundum Ecclesiae Canonem, imbui
oportucrat, acquisiuit; neque Domini sigillo ab Episcopo obsignatus, quamobrem
neque Spiritum sanctum ex sacro Chrismate adeptus, persecutionis metu
debilitatus, and nimia vitae cupiditate adductus, se presbyterum esse negauit:
At lenght having escaped, his sickness, he neither got the rest with which
according to the Ecclesiastical Canon he should have been imbued or
furnished, nor was he signed with our Lords seal: Wherefore neither having by
the sacred Chrisme gotten the holy Ghost, he in time of persecution being
weakened with fear (to wit because by Confirmation he had not gotten the
holy Ghost) and moved with too much desire of, life he denied himself to be a
priest. Bzeuius to 1. l. 3 Eccl hist. Anno. Christi 254. Corn. Papa an. 1. Colu
^49.
And after, Bzouius relates how at the request of the Deacons he refused to
help them that were in danger and necessity; but in a Choler want from them,
and afterward fell into Schism in ambitiouslie aspiring to be Pope: And why
all this, but because he had not by Confirmation received the holy Ghost. Baius
lib. 2. Instit. c. 631. l. 2. de Conf. c. 63. nam ideo Nouatum ad haeresim
procliuiorem fuisse sensit Cornelius Papa quoniam signaculo Chrismatis
confirmatus non esset, Eusebio test l. 6. hi c. 33. For Cornelius Pope thought
that Nouatus was more prove to heresy because he was not confirmed by the
seal of Chrisme, Inc 8 Art. ve. 17. in fine.
as Eusebius witnesses libr. 6. Histor, cap. 33. Lorinus a Jesuit says that
Nouatus was possessed by the derull because he received not the Sacrament, yea
rejected it? With these Catholic Authors M. Doctor thought it more honor
toioyne, then with Fulke the heretic as M. Nicholas in this does.

38. Now whereas M. Nicholas says, that he has answered to M. Doctors
conjecture (so he calls it) that in time of persecution, Confirmation is
necessary for a country, because if one fall not, others will; I grant that
he has endeavored in the beginning of this question numero 6. and 7. but,
could never yet perform that he has endeavored. He says numero 6. that the
times of persecution in our Country have been most bitter; and yet would to
God we could behold the zeal, fervor, Charity and constancy, which in
these days Catholics without Confirmation showed. But why speaks he in
this manner? Does he think a country in persecution may do better without
Confirmation then with it, or that it helps nothing? Why then did Christ
institute it to the end that in persecution we might with an undaunted courage
profess our faith before the persecutour? And says he. I hold it noe
rashness to say, that since Englands enjoying a Bishop, more harm has
hefalne Catholik's in general. See how Passion transporteth Master Nicholas?
And by whose fault is it that since we had a Bishop more harm has befalne
Catholics in general? Is it the presence of a Bishop that brings such
harm? Why then did Christ and the holy Ghost appoint Bishops to govern the
Church? Act. 20.
Other Countries in time of persecution have ever received great benefits,
much comfort and encouragement by their Bishops: Why then should we only
receive a general harm by having a learned Bishop, a man of exemplar life,
and a bishop sent by lawful and highest authority? I will not say who are the
cause, but I refer that to all indifferent men's judgments, and even to
Master Nicholas his calmer disposition, and better consideration. If every
one had received and obeyed him as they ought to have done (Saint Peter's
successor sending him) and if they who found themselves grieved, had proposed
their grieuances and difficulties unto Superiors in all quiet modesty, and
without clamours, and had patientie expected their decision, and determination,
there had not arisen such scandal as there did.

39. But to come to the matter. Ca 14 n. 7.
Master Doctor said, that although even in time of persecution a man may
have sufficient grace without Confirmation to stand to his faith and Religion,
as may appear by them who neither confirmed nor Baptized with water, have
endured martyrdom for their faith, and so have been baptized in their own
blood, and as may be seen in our English Catholics who (though many of them
were not confirmed) shed their blood to seal and sign their faith: Yet
because Confirmation is the ordinary means instituted to give force and
courage in time of persecution: to neglect it in such a time when every man
may fear his own infirmity, is a mortal sin: and if it be neglected for a
general persecution (in which, as above, many thousands in particular may
commodiouslie receive it) if one fall not as Master Doctor says, Estius in
4. did. 7. 18. Ca. 14. n. 8.
others probably will as Nouatus did: And so, a country in such a persecution
is obliged to receive a Bishop, least it show it self cruel to so many
thousands, who have right to the Sacrament, and might notwithstanding a
general persecution commodiouslie receive, and may fall for want of it.

40. Of this I shall give these ensuing reasons. The first is this. Even in
time of a ganerall persecution (of which we speak) many and sometimes many
thousands, as above is showed, may receive this holy Sacrament of Confirmation
without any moral danger (as now in England, since we had our two most
Reverend Bishops, many thousands have done) and seeing that all these by Christ
his institution have right to Confirmation; the rest of the country cannot,
for a general persecution, refuse this Sacrament, least they should do great
injury to so many. Secondly they who in time of a general persecution when
they may in particular receive this Sacrament, do neglect it, though they know
not how soon they may be called to make profession of their faith, do seem
to presume to much of God his extraordinary grace: for seeing that Confirmation
is the ordinary means to get this grace, thereby to confess their faith, if
they neglect it, presuming of God his grace without this means, it cannot be
but a great presumption.

41. Thirdelie in time of persecution when one is apprehended and brought
before the persecutour, he uses to threaten loss of Lands and goods,
liberty and life it self: he therefore who in time of persecution sees
himself exposed to all these difficulties, had need to arm himself by all
the means he can: and (whatsoever Master Nicholas says) he may fear his
own infirmity, for that it is not an easy thing, even with ordinary grace,
to forsake Lands, goods, liberty, life, Father, mother, wife, and children,
rather then to deny or not to profess his faith; and it is above the force of
flesh and blood: and although he may have grace sufficient (as many in our
Country without Confirmation have had) yet this grace which gives force to
profess our faith before the Tyrant, is not due to any but these who are
confirmed, to whom it is due by the Sacrament and character which it
imprinteth, as ahoue I have declared. 3. par. q. 72. art. 8. n. 89,
Wherefore AEgidius Coninck a Jesuit says, that it may be a mortal sin
not to receive this Sacrament by reason of ones conscience; Vt si omnino
crederet sibi imminere periculum nisi hoc Sacramentum susciperet, quod saepe
posset contingere in ijs qui versantur continuo inter haereticos, and vel
minis, vel promissis, aut alia ratione ad defectionem sollicitantur, nam est
singular Dei donum in talibus casibus fidem constanter tueri, quod etsi Deus
paratus est omnibus dare, tamen saepe minus liberaliter illud dat iis qui non
vtuntur medijs ab ipso ad hoc institutis, qualis est Confirmatio: As if one
should altogether believe, that he should be in danger unless he received this
Sacraement, which might oftentimes happen in thsse who live continually
amongst heretics (as English Catholics do) and who there by threats or
promises or otherwise are solicited to forsake their faith (as English
Catholics are.) For it is a singular gift of God to defend constantly ones
faith in such cases; which gift though God be ready to give, yet oftentimes,
he less liberally bestows it on these who use not the means by him
instituted to this, as is Confirmation. And so as a Vigilant and prudent
soldiour when he is in the field and knows not how soon the enemy will
assault him, is always armed and even sleeps in his armor: So the prudent
Christian in time of persecution, when he knows not how soon the persecutour
may set upon him, ought always to be armed, and especially with the armor of
proof, Confirmation, it being the proper armor instituted by Christ to be
used in time of persecution.

42. But M. Nicholas pagin. 88. and 89. says that when Estius says that
Confirmation cannot be omitted without mortal sin in time of persecution, he
speaks in time and place of such persecution of faith, as brings with it
danger of a man's denying his faith, which thanks be to God, we may sayis not
our case in England, where etc. And is there not danger in England of a man's
denying his faith? I would to God there were not. Is there not danger of a man's
denying his faith in England where not long since a Priest and a lay man were
executed for their faith at Lancraster? and where many also not so long since
were enforced to abjure their faith, not only for the time present, but also
for the time to come: where so many not long since had their Lands seized on?
Where the Pursiuantes do lie in wait and watch continually to apprehend
Catholics? where the Laws are still in force and may be executed every day?
M. Nicholas says in the hoatest persecution the zeal of many was admirable.
I grant it, and the greater was Gods grace to them, but many also then fell,
of whom some no doubt would have stood constantly to their faith, if they had
had Confirmation.

42. Fourthlie, although heretofore in Queen Elizabethes reign or, when we
had not the honor nor hoppines to have a Bishop and so consequently were
deprived of Confirmation. God out of his great mercy supplied the want of
Confirmation, and gave to many the grace of confirmation without Confirmation:
Yet now when we may have a Bishop (as thanks be God we have) and may
commodiouslie in time of persecution receive Confirmation (as thousands have
done without any temporal loss or damage) to except against a Bishop and
conseque^tlie against Confirmation, of which the Bishop only, is at least, the
ordinary Minister, almighty God might justly and should have just reason to
deny us that grace, and many for want of it would fail and fall as Nouatus and
others have done.

43. Lastly, it cannot be denied but that Christians are more able and likely
with this Sacrame^ to profess their faith, the^ they are without it: and that
more in a country persecuted are like to stand to the profession of their
faith with this Sacrament the without, else this Sacrament should be needless,
and Christ tolitle purpose should have instituted it: ergo in a country
persecuted and destitute of this Sacrament, many do full who otherwise would
stand, and for every one that stands, perhaps twenty will fall.

44. For these reasons in the primative Church the custom was to give
Co^firmatio^ prese^tlie after baptism, that so the baptized might never want
his special armor instituted against persecution. Act. 2.
Saint Peter by his first sermon having converted about three thousand, bad
them do penance, and be cuerie one haptized, and what else? and you shall,
says he, receine the gift of the holy ghost, the proper effect of
Confirmation, given presently after Baptism. And when S. Philipp had
converted and baptized the Samaritans, because he (as being no Bishop) could
not confirm them, the Apostles who were in Jerusalem hearing of their
conversion sent S. Peter and Ihon that of them they might be confirmed and
receive the holy Ghost. Act. 8.
In like manner so soon as certain disciples at Ephesus were baptized, Actor.
19.
Saint Paul imposed hands upon them and gave then the holy Ghost. And the
first Popes and Bishops following herein the AApostles example, never separated
(but in case of necessity, the one Sacrament from the other, and therefore S.
Clement, S. Cle. 4. Ep ad Epist. Hispa.
as above we have seen, bids all to hasten after baptism to be consigned
of the Bishop: and S. Melchiades Pope, says that these two Sacraments,
Baptism and Confirmation, are so linked together, vt ab inuicem, nisi morte
praeueniente, nullatenus possint segregari, and vnum sine altero rite perfici
non potest: that unless by preventing death, they can in no wise (according to
that ancient custom in time of persecution) be separated nor the one without
the other cannot rightly be accomplished. Estius in 4. d. 7 18
And so I conclude with Estius (as before) that it is a thing very fitting and
convenient, especially in time of persecution, that all Bishops following the
example of these their worthy Predecessors, should have can that Confirmation
should not be differred too long after Baptism (much less quite omitted as M.
Nicholas would) maxim quod huius subsidij neglectu fiat, vt persecutionis
tempore multi deficiant aut labantur, sicut test Cornelio Papa, Nouato
accidit: especially because by a neglect of this aid or succor it comes to
pass, that in time of persecution many do fail or fallie, as (witness S.
Cornelius Pope) it happened to Nouatus.

THE FIFTH QVESTION.
Concerning M. Doctors comparison between Bishops, inferior Pastors, and
Religious men.
MASTER NICHOLAS.
MVCH against my will I am enforced to handle this point by occasion of M.
Doctor his Treatise, through all which, and particularly in his 11. Chapter,
he speaks with over much partiality and disadvantage of a Religious state in
comparison of Bishops and other inferior Pastors, or Curates. n. 1.

THE REPLY.
M. Nicholas untruely accuses M. Doctor of partiality in comparing of
Bishops and other Pastors with Religions.

1. Whereas M. Nicholas accuses M. Doctor of partiality in comparing the
state of Bishops and other Pastors with the state of Religions, I answer for
him, as Suarez answers for himself to a supposed objection which might be
made against him, for making the self same comparison. Suarez to 3 l. ^ de
Statu perfectionis c. 18.
Haec comparatio (says he) odiosa videri potest, and ideo vitanda, vt tetigit
Valensis lib. 3. tom. 3. de Sacramentalis. titul. 9. capit. 8. veruntamen
facile tollitur inuidia etc. This comparison may seem odious, and therefore to
be shunned as Waldensis says libr. 3. tom. 3. de Sacramentalibus tit. 9. c.
8. but yet the envy is easily taken away, if both prudentelie and modestly
it be handled; and if with all it be considered, that the comparison is not
made betwixt persons, but states: and their conditions and qualities; or, as S.
Thomas says 22. q. 184. art. 8. if comparison be made of the kind and nature
of the work, not of the charity of the worker as Christ preferred the
contemplative life before the active Luc. 7. saying that Marie had chosen the
best part. And I refer me to the Reader, what moderation M. Doctor has
used both in his Epistle dedicatorie and throughout all his Treatise, and even
in his 11. Chapter, where he makes noe comparisons betwixt persons, but only
betwixt states and their conditions and qualities, and yields to the Regulars
as much as Saint Thomas of Aquin and Suarez do, and gives no more to Bishops
and other Pastors then they and all Divines, even Regulars do.

MASTER NICHOLAS.
First then we will speak of Bishops; and in the second place, of inferior
Pastors. n. 1.

THE REPLY.
M. Nicholas cannot deny but that Bishops are in higher and perfecter state of
perfection, as is proved.

2. M. Nicholas after he has told us that he will first speak of Bishops and
their state, makes some unnecessary preambles from the page 92. and number 2.
to the 5. number, endeavors to answer this first comparison, but his
endeauours are all vain; for that he neither has, neither can he, or any for
him ever prove or show, that the Regular state is to be parangoned to the
Episcopal. And that the state of a Bishop is higher then the state of the
regular, S. Th. 2.2. q 184. Suarez tom. 3 l. ^ de Statu. perfectionis c 18.
it is the common and confessed opinion of S. Thomas and all Divines which
Suarez proves largely and learnedlie.

3. This is his conclusion concerning Bishops: Dico ergo primo Episcoporum
Statum esse perfectiorem quocunque statureligioso: ac subinde statum
perfectionis exercendae, perfectiorem ex suo genere esse, quam statum
acquire^dae perfectionis: I say therefore, first that the state of Bishops is
perfecter then any Religious state: and that the state of perfection to be
exercised, is of its nature and kind perfecter, then the state of perfection to
be acquired. This conclusion concerning the first part of it, I could prove by
many arguments, as M. Doctor has done in his 11. Chapter numero 14. but, that
less exception may be taken against my proofs they shall be no other in effect
then those which Suarez has.

4. First he proves this out of Fathers, whom be alleges in his fiftee^th
chapter, and amongst them S. Clement in his first Epist. Which Fathers do not
only affirm that Bishops are in the state of them that are perfect, but also
in that height that noe state can equalize the^; and therefore they style
Bishops most Holy, the Legates of Christ, spiritual Fathers, pillars of the
Church.

5. Secondly this I prove as Suarez does by the functions of a Bishop, to
which by his state he is obliged: for as powers are specified of their actions,
and therefore the understanding is a perfecter power then the will, the will
then the sensitive appetite, the power of seeing them the power of hearing: so
the state of perfection takes its eminency over other states, by its more
perfect fu^ctions. And therefore seeing that to the Bishops state there belong
the highest functions in God his Church, his state is the perfectest of all
states in the said Church. That the Bishop has the most excellent and eminent
functions, it is manifest: for that he by his state has all the perfections
and excellencies which are in the states and fruictions of inferior prelates,
and in a more eminent manner for he has power to teach and preach, and to
illuminate others by the word of God, which he preaches, as inferior Pastors
have; yea this function of preaching principally belongs to him, as the
Council of Trent has defined, saying that it is praecipuum Episcoporum munus,
the chief office of a Bishop: as indeed it is, Cone. Trid. sess. 5. c. 2. and
sess. 24 c. 4. Marci. vlt.
according to the commandment of Christ given to the Apostles, and in them, to
Bishops their successors: praedicate Euangelium omni creaturae: preach, the
Gospel to all creatures. And besides he has his own proper functions, which
they have not, to wit, to govern a more ample part of the whole Church, to
sit in Counsels as Judge, to direct and Judge inferior Pastors, to ordain
ministers, to confirm, to consecrate Churches, Altars, Chalices etc. which
other Pastors cannot do. Likewise it pertains most of all to Bishops by
their examples to illuminate others, even inferior Pastors, Mat 5 Joan. 10.
Conc. Tol. 11. c. 2.
and therefore they especially are the light of the world and they especially
like good Pastors are to go before their sheep by illuminating them by
doctrine and example. For as the eleventh Council of Tolet says: by how much
any one has the higher place, by so much the more it is necessary, that he
go before others in grace of merits etc.

6. Thirdly says Suarez in a Bishop especially is required great charity,
as well toward God, who is the principal Lord of his sheep, Joan. 21.
and therefore Christ calls them his sheep: as also towords his subjects
whom he must tolerate and assiste; with whose infirmities he must bear, whose
necessities he must relieve, and to whom he must be an honorable servant as S.
Paul was, 1. Car. 9.
when he said: factus sum omnium seruus vt plures lucrifacerem: I made my
self the servant of all, that I might gain the more.

7. Fourthlie, the Bishop peculiarly and in the first place, by his office and
state is bound to give his life for his sheep, which is the greatest charity,
Joan. 10. and 15.
and which requires great patience and fortititude.

8. Lastly the perfection and height of the state of a Bishop, may be gathered
by what M. Doctor has said in his 6. Chapt. where he has showed that the
Bishop is higher in dignity, power and authority, then the simply Priest, by
the Divine Institution; for that he can confirm and give orders, and with two
other Bishops can ordain a Bishop: Which simple Priests cannot do, at least,
as ordinary ministers; and therefore the Council of Trent says, that
Bishops, do principally appertain to the Hierarchicall order. Conc. Trid.
sess. 23. cap. 4. de Sacram. Ordin.


9. The same may be deduced by what he has delivered in his seventh Chapter,
were he has proved, that Bishops and Priests, are of the highest orders in the
Church. This he has proved out of diverse Fathers and examples, even of
Emperors who attribute much to the dignity of Bishops, and amongst those
Fathers he cites S. Ignatius, Ignat. ep. ad Smyrn
who says, that in the Church of God, there is nothing greater then the
Bishop.

10. The same may be also gathered out of his eleventh Chapter n. 18. S. Th 2.2
q 185 ar 8. in Corp.
Where he alleges S. Thomas his words: Status religionis ad perfectionem
pertinet, quasi quaedam via in perfectionem tendens: Status autem Episcoporum
ad perfectionem pertinet, tanquam quoddam perfectionis Magisterium. Vnde status
religionis comparatur ad statum Episcopalem, sicut disciplina ad magisteriu^,
and dispositio ad perfectione^: The state of Religion pertains to perfection,
as a certain way tending unto perfection: But the state of Bishops pertains
to perfection as a certain maistership of perfection. Whence it is that the
state of Religion is compared to the Episcopal state as instruction to
maistership. M. Doctor also alleges there Henricus de Gandauo who has the
like words, and thence he concludes, Henr. quodl. 12. q. 29. Math. 10.
that where the Religious ends, there a Bishop or Pastor begins. For (as
Christ says) the disciple is not above the master, nor the servant above his
Lord. It suffices the disciple, if he be as his master. And seldom it is
seen, that the Scholar attaineth to the perfection of his master: and if he
does, yet the state of a Scholar is lower then the state of a master, and it
requires less perfection. Henr Supra.
Wherefore Henricus as M. Doctor alleged, says that the master ought to
be perfecter the^ the Scholar: and again: that when any Religions is brought,
ad summum aliquid and perfectum; to the hight of perfection; he is then fit to
be assumed for a Prelate.

11. Why does then M. Nicholas so storm against M. Doctor as though he had
spoken partially and with disadvantage of a religious state through all his
Treatise, and particularly in his 11. Chapter? Has he said more for Bishops,
or less for Regulars, or could he say more for Bishops then S. Thomas, Suarez
and Henricus have? Yea M. Doctor speaks principally out of S. Thomas, let
him them wreake his anger on S. Thomas and Suarez.

12. So that M. Doctor in this, needs neither to leave S. Thomas nor
Henricus de Gandauo, as M. Nicholas n. 13. says he must. For that concerning
the state of a Bishop they both agree, as their words alleged will witness;
and although Henricus says more then S. Thomas does, to wit, that not only
the Bishop, but also inferior Pastors are in an higher state of perfection
then the regulars; much more in his opinion, the Bishop is in an higher state
the^ the religious, for which only thing M. Doctor alleged him. And whereas
M. Doctor said, that where a religious man ends, there a Bishop or Pastor
begins, which words ( or Pastor) M. Nicholas carpeth at; M. Doctor adds
or Pastor, because he knew that Henricus de Gandauo and Gerson do hold, that
even Curats have a state of perfection above regulars, which opinion Suarez, as
we shall see, deemeth not improbable; and at least, as M. Doctor a little
before had proved, they have a calling and office of greater perfection the^
has the religious. Yet M. Doctor not standing on this, concludes only,
that the Bishop (he now adds not or Pastor) lays his foundation on the
religious man's roof and top. So that unless M. Nicholas will leave S. Thomas
the Angelical Doctor, Suarez and all Divines, he must Grant, that the Bishop
is absolutely in an higher state of perfection, then the state of Regulars is.

13. And in deed M. Nicholas cannot bring so much as one argument to equalize
the state of a Regular to the state of a Bishop, nor has he, or can he answer
any one of M. Doctors arguments by which he preferred the state of a Bishop.
What then has he done? He tells us n. 2. that we must distinguish betwixt
the state, which is to exercise perfection, which is the state of Bishops, and
the state which endeavors to attain to perfection, which is the state of
Regulars, least we err in generalities, as he said, and be deceived, with
specious words not well understood; as though M. Doctor had not in his 11.
Chap. made the same distinction, and therefore had deceived others. And what
more? he seeks all he can to extol a religious state, as being more secure,
yielding more means to get grace: and to depresse the state of a Bishop, as
requiring perfection, but yielding no means to get it, as being dangerous etc.
But let us come to particulars.

M. NICHOLAS.
The Bishop is in a state which presupposes, but does not give perfection;
which a religious state does not suppose, but give. n. 5.

THE REPLY.
M. NICHOLAS offers injury to the state of a Bishop: for that it does give
perfection even ex opere operato.

14. I find by M. Nicholas his dealing in this point, that it is true which
Philosophers say of the senses, to wit, that sensibile supra sensum positum non
facit sensationem; and therefore the eye which can see the obiectes without it,
cannot see the moate that is within it: for so M. Nicholas can epsy odious
comparisons of the state of Bishops and regulars in M. Doctor (who indeed
made none) but he cannot see such comparisons in himself, because they are too
near him, as being his own. For what comparison can be odious, if this be
not, which derogateth to the very consecration of the Bishops, as though
thereby he received no grace? for although the state of a Bishop be holy, and
is also the most eminent state and order in the Church of God, yea and, as the
Council of Trent says, is onus Angelicis humeris for mida^dum, a burden to
be feared even of Angels shoulders; Council. Trid. sess 6. de Refor. c. 1.
Suarez to 3 de Relig. l. 1.6.15. n. 12.
and therefore of it self presupposes grace and perfection, which may be
gotten, and oftentimes is, out of a Religious state, as M. Doctor proves in
his (...) Chapter n. 11. and Suarez also confesses (wherein it has a
precedence of the religious state, which requires no such former perfection,
but admits even the greatest sinners, so they bring with them a purpose of
amendment.) Yet the order of a Bishop which consists in an holy consecration
under a certain form of words, gives great plenty of grace, and
consequently of charity (in which consists perfection) and that also ex
opere operato as other Sacraments do.

15. I grant that Dominicus Sotus and others also are of opinion, Sotus ^n 9.
d. 24. q. 2. ar. 3. Bell. to. 2. l. 1. de Sacr. Ord. c. 5. Vasq to 3. disput
260. c. 3 Petr. a Soto de Inst. Sacerd. lec. 4. de Sac. Ord. Mich. Med. l. 1.
de Sacrorum hom. continentia cap. 15.
that the order of a Bishop is an holy office and dignity instituted by
Christ, and higher then the dignity of as Priest, but yet no Sacrament: Yet
many other Divines do affirm it to be a holy Sacrament which is the opinion
of C. Bellarmine, Vasquez, Petrus a Soto, Michael Medina, and commonly of
Jesuits.

16. This they prove out of S. Paul in the first Epistle to. S. Timothy and 4.
Chap. Noli negligere gratiae^ quae in te est, quae data est tibi per
prophetiam, cum impositione manuum presbyterij: neglect not the grace that is
in thee which is given thee by prophecy with the imposition of the hands of
priesthood. Out of which Words the Fathers and Catholic writers do use to
prove that order is a Sacrament, which gives grace: and therefore seeing that
in these words S. Paul speaks of the ordinatio^ of Timothy a Bishop, which
ordination is done by three Bishops, at least, who are understood in the words
Priesthood, Episcopal ordination must be an holy order and Sacrament, and yet
not make 8. orders, because it is counted one order with priesthood, in that in
essentiallie supposes priesthood, without which presupposed, one cannot be a
Bishop, and it makes of a simple Priest an high Priest, who is called Summus
Sacerdos. This consecration then of a Bishop which consists in imposition of
hands of the priesthood, that is of three Bishops (as M. Doctor has showed in
his Hierarchy Chap. 6. n. 6.) is an holy order and no less holy Sacrament,
which gives grace to the Bishop (as S. Paul auerreth) and no doubt, copious
and abunda^t grace proportionable to the state of a Bishop, which as it is an
high state subject to dangers and many molestatio^s, so it requires great
grace. For if carnal marriage requires grace to bear the burde^s and
difficulties thereof, much more does the Consecration of a Bishop, who by his
office is to exercise the highest acts of perfection, and is to govern others
and to expose himself by his office to many difficulties and dangers,
requires abundant grace. And this grace the Bishop receives by his
consecration.

17. And so M. Nicholas derogateth to the Episcopal state and consecration
when he says n. 5. that the Bishop, is in a state, which presupposes, but
does not give perfection, which a religious state does not presuppose, but
give. For that the consecration of a Bishop does give great grace, and that ex
opere operato and infalliblie, whereas the religious state gives only ex
opere operantis and not infalliblie, nor at all, unless to the profession it
makes, and to the religious acts of poverty, chastity and obedience which
it exercises, charity be adjoined.

18. Secondly the very exercise of Episcopal functions being the most
eminent Hierarchicall actions, and most charitable and beneficial to others,
cannot but continually (unless the Bishop by his own fault do hinder)
augment this grace and perfection received in his consecration as M. Nicholas
is forced to confess n. 3. For as the master by teaching others, perfecteth
himself in learning, so the Bishop in perfecting others by ordaining,
confirming, preaching, and governing perfecteth himself in grace, charity and
perfection.

19. And although there be greater danger in the state of a Bishop the^ of a
Regular (if he keep his rule and cloister, yet the Bishop by his consecration
receives grace to perform his office, which grace also is due to his
consecration, and never wanting but by the Bishops own fault. And this danger
proceeding from the height of the Bishops state, argues it an higher state of
perfection, because as S. Hierome says: non est facile stare loco Pauli,
tenere gradum Petri, iam cum Christo regna^tium: it is not an easy thing to
stand in Paul's place, to bold the degree of Peter, who now reign with Christ.
Hieron ep. as Heliodorum Qua^to amore.
For as the High Cedars are more shaken with winds the^ the low shrubbes; so
they who are highest in state and dignity, are most subject to the winds of
te^ptatio^s; and yet the Bishop in Peter and Paul's place may stand firmly
against all such tempests and winds, if he use the grace which he receives in
his consecration, as many a worthy Bishop has done.

M. NICHOLAS.
But these 2. states of perfection already acquired or to be acquired, are not
so distinguished that they must of necessity be always separated. For
although a secular Bishop be only in a state of perfecting others, yet a Bihop
regular is in a state of perfecting himself and others. n. 4.

THE REPLY.
A Bishop regular is not in an higher state of perfection then a Bishop
secular.

20. If M. Nicholas his meaning in these words be, that a Bishop by his state
is so to perfect others, as he has no means to perfect himself, he goes
about to deceive his Reader: for that (as eue^ now we showed) a Bishop by his
consecration receives copious grace, and by exercising his function has
means to increase it. If his meaning be that a Regular Bishop is in an higher
state then a Bishop not regular, he is deceived: for although the regular
Bishop has more states, then the Bishop not regular, yet he has no higher
state. It is true that a regular Bishop if he observe his counselles, vows and
rules, has more means then a Bishop not regular, because he has the means
of a Bihop and of a regular also: but he cannot when he is Bishop exercise much
more his counselles and Rules then a Secular Bishop does: for that both are
bound to chastity, and the regular is now bound to noe other obedience then
the secular Bishop: and although the regular Bishop has not Dominium of his
revenues as the secular Bishop has, yet he has as much use of them, saving
that he cannot make a testament, as the secular Bishop may. But howsoever he
may have more means to get perfection, yet he is not always most fit to
govern a Bishoprike.

22. Now as concerning these Regulars who by their institute (as M. Nicholas
says the same place nu. 4.) beside their own perfection, attend also to the
help of their neighbor; that is, do preach and minister Sacraments to
Christians at home, and to infidells abroad: I grant that they as Priests are
of the Hierarchy (of which I shall speak in the next question) and do
exercise Hierarchicall actions of perfecting, illuminating and purging others:
but that pertains not to a religious state in general, and therefore the
Regulars of the primitive Church were few of them Priests, as we shall see in
the next question, and so did none of the Hierarchicall actions, nor did they
preach or minister Sacraments: and therefore Suarez says that although the
religious state does sometimes exercise actions pertaining to the state of
perfection to be communicated, or to be exercised about others, they do only
participate it instrumentallie, and by a certain delegation from the supreme
Prelates: and therefore such a state does not attain to the excellency of the
Episcopal state, to which these actions do principally, and as it were by
proper right appertain. Whereupon, the obligation of exercising such acts,
and the procuring the salvation of souls, and loosing his life for them (if so
it must be) is far greater and higher in the Bishop, then in any whosoever
simple religious, of whatsoever institute he be. And therefore in this respect
also his state is perfecter. Moreover the Bishops by their own right, and all
privileges set a part, are Pastors and perfectors of the religious, of what
order soever they be: and therefore by virtue of the office, more perfection is
required in the Bishop. Suarez to. 3. l. 1 c. 18. n. 14.
Thus far Suarez, whereas M. Nicholas adds that the religious, who by their
institute are not only to perfect themselves but also others, is perfecter
then the state of Curats, we shall examine that hereafter.

M. NICHOLAS.
That the state of Bishops does not so wholly ouersway the Religious state as
that there be not many good things in religion, which are wanting in episcopal
state etc. A vow not to be come religious is wicked and of no force etc.
Something there must be wherein a religious state surpasses that of a Bishop,
otherwise i^ were not lawful to vow not to accept a Bishopric. n. 6.

THE REPLY.
Whether A vow not to be religious be wicked; and whether one may vow not to
accept a Bishopric.

23. All that M. Nicholas here alleges is little to the purpose; for although
there may be some commodities in a religious life, as less danger more
security, more means to mortify sensuality and that therefore one may
rather vow to be religious then to be a Bishop, or to accept of that office and
dignity, yet all would not prove that the state of a religious man is an
higher state or as high, which yet is the thing we dispute of; for as the little
shrubbe is less shaken with the winds then the Cedar, yet is not taller then
it: and as the low cottage is less beaten by tempests then the princely
palace, yet is not higher, so the religious life may be a more secure, yet not
a more perfect state.

24. But says M. Nicholas n. 5. the more voluntary the election of a
Religious life is, the more commendable it is, and the state of a Bishop is hen
most securely accepted of, when it is less willingly accepted. I grant
this. But why? not because a Religious life is a perfecter state, but because
it being a lower state is less subject to danger, and so may more willingly
be desired and vowed. He proceeds n. 6. a vow made of not accepting a
Bishopric is valid and holy. A vow not to become religious is wicked, and of
no force: ergo says he, there must be something wherein a religious state
surpasses that of a Bishop. By the same argument M. Nicholas might prefer a
religious state before the sat of the Pope, because a man may vow to be
religious yet he may not vow to be Pope; or if he may vow not to accept a
Bishoprike, much more may he vow not to accept the Popedom.

25. Wherefore I demand of M. Nicholas when he says that for this cause,
there must be something wherein a religious life surpasses that of a Bishop,
What he means by his something? if he mean some degree of state or
perfectim, wherein the religious life surpasses that of the Bishop, he
co^tradicteth S. Thomas and Suarez and all that above is alleged to prove the
state of a Bishop to be the highest state of perfection. If he mean by that
something more security, less danger, and peradventure some better means to
tame our flesh, to bridle our concupiscence, to remove the impediments of the
love of God, in which consists perfection: it is not to the purpose. For so
there is something in a fly which is not in an Eagle, something in a mouse
which is not in a Lio^, some thing in a little shrubbe, which is not in a Cedar
something in a flint which is not in a Sapphire, and yet absolutely the Eagle
surpasses the fly, the Lion the mouse, the Cedar the shrubbe; the Sapphire the
fl^it, and so there may be something in a religious state which is not in the
state of a Bishop, though this state absolutely surpass that.

26. But M. Nicholas obiecteth that to vow not to be religious, is wicked and
inualid, to vow not to accept a Bishopric is laudable and valid: ergo a
religious state has some good which a Bishops state has not; else this might
be vowed as well as that. I answer, first that to swear at least in some case
not to be religious is not wicked and yet an oath has a great affinity with
a vow. For M. Nicholas knows that the Sea Apostolic has commanded all
these who will enjoy the benefit of the Popes Seminaries, to swear that they
will be Priests, and will not enter into any religious order or congregation
without license of the Pope, unless they first labor in the missio^ the space
of three years. And Navarre says, Naua. in M^nuali. ca. 12. n. 16.
that for one to swear that he will not enter into religion, or receive holy
orders is but a venial sin, ergo it is not to be called wicked: for says he
if to swear to commit a venial sin be but a venial sin, to swear not to
be religious to which, under noe sin he is bound, can be but a venial sin.

27. Nau. c. 12. n.
Secondly I answer with the same Navarre more directly, that to vow not to
be religious byndeth not, and therefore, notwithstanding that vow, one may be
religious; yet such a vow is but a venial sin, and so cannot be called
wicked as M. Nicholas calls it, because in our English tongue, wicked sounds
as does impium in the Latin tongue, and is taken for a grievous or mortal
sin. And therefore M. Nicholas could not call him that commits only a
venial sin, a wicked or impious man.

28. Thirdely I answer that although to vow not to procure to be a Bishop may
be holy and valid, yet to vow not to accept a Bishopric when it is imposed on
a man by the Pope and in necessity of the Church, is not holy and valid, but
it is rather wicked and inualid. For that to vow not to accept a Bishopric in
that case, is to vow a great disobedience against authority, and which also in
that case, is against the Charity we vow to God his Church, and so the vow is
wicked being a vow of a mortal sin, and it is inualid because it is not de
meliori bono, not of an act which is better done then undone, for that in that
case it is not better not to accept a Bishopric imposed by Authority, then
to accept it. 2. 2. q. 185. ar. 2.
Wherefore S. Thomas says that to refuse finally the office of a Bishop
pertains to an inordination of the will for twoe causes. The one because it
is against charity, S Tho 2. 2. q. 29. ar. 7. ad 2.
the other because it is against humility, by which a man subiecteth himself
to the commandment of the superior. And in another place he says: cum
aliquis jurat quod non accipiet praelationem in casu quo expedit eum accipere
etc. When one swears that be will not accept of a prelacie when it is
expedient be should, that he sins because his oath hundereth a greater good.
Navarre also says, Nau. in man c 12. n. 16.
that he who swears that he will not enter into Religion, or that he will not
receive holy orders, or that he will not accept of a Bishopric sins,
though not mortallie: and he cites S. S. Thomas in the last place, Angelus and
Sylu. v. I^ rame^tum
and Angelus, and Syluester. And he says that such an oath does not bind.
Azorius who cites for himself. Antoninus, says that the oath which one
makes not to accept of a Bishopric may be broken by the private authority
of him that swears. Azor. to. 1. l. 11. c. 5.
And so to vow absolutely not to accept a Bishopric is unlawful, because in
a necessity one may be bound to accept is and to desire it, and if it be
imposed by authority it cannot be refused. Only it is lawful and laudable to
vow not to seek for a Bishopric, or to accept of it when it is offerred and
when there is no necessity, and when it is not imposed by a commanding
authority.

29. Lastelie I answer that although to vow to procure to be a Bishop or to
seek after that dignity, where there is no necessity of the church, be
sinful and of no force to bynd; and to vow to be a Religious man be an holy
and valid vow: and to vow absolutely, not to procure a Bishopric is holy
and valid, and to vow absolutely not to be a religious man is absolutely
unholy and not valid: Yet that is not because to be a religious man is
absolutely better then to be a Bishop (for as S. Paul says, if a man desire
a Bishops office, he desires a good work, 1. Tim. 3. Yom. 3. de Relig. c. 18.
and as we have seen and as Suarez affirms, a work more perfect then the
proper acts and functions of a religion are, but because the office of a
Bishop (though good and of greater charity and perfection then religious
profession and in that respect fit to be vowed as much as other good works) is
subject to avarice by reason of the riches annexed unto it, to ambition by
reason of the splendor and honor, and to presumption by reason of man's
improportion to such a dignity, and lastly to other dangers by reason of many
destractions caused by Episcopal affairs, and so cannot be so much as
desired, as S. Thomas affirms: yet as he also auerreth, S Tho 2 2. q. 185. ar
^.
to desire to do good to others, in the exercise of the Episcopal function is
of it self laudable and virtuous According to which S. Chrysostom cited by S.
Thomas, Chrysostom. bom. 35. in Mat.
says: opus quidem desiderate bonum, bonum est, primatum tameu bonoris
concupiscere vanitas est; primatus enim fugientem se desiderat, desider antem
so odit: To desire a good work is good, but to covet the primacie of honor is
vanity, for that primacie desires him that flies it, and hates him that
desires it.

30. But in necessity of the Church, when there want men able and willing, or
when other wise an unworthy person would be preferred, to defire or to vow to
be a Bishop is noe sin, nor is the vow inualid. Suarez having said, that
though the state of a Bishop be better then the state of a religious man
obliging to more perfect operations, and requiring more and greater virtues,
yet cannot be vowed because that only can be vowed, Szarez to. 3. l. 1. c. 18.
n. 5. 11. 12.
which is not only good, but also has no danger annexed: yet notwithstanding
(says he) it is not intrinsecallie evil, to vow to accept a Bishops office
if it be abstracted from these temporal commodities, as honor, riches,
splendor (as now it is in England) and especially if it be joined with the
contrary incommodities, to which it was joined in the primative Church, and as
it is now in Iaponia and China, yea and in England. I speak says he of a vow
of accepting a Bishops office, for the^ the judgment of the fitesse and
worthiness of the person, is left to the Superior, and so the danger of
presumption is taken away. and other dangers are supposed not to be. Wherefore
to procure a Bishop office though the said conditions be supposed, can hardly
be approved much less counseled or vowed: yet he also adds, that if there
were great necessity of the Church to have a Bishop, and yet such
discommodities annexed to the Bishopric or danger of death etc. and none
could be found fit and willing; then to offer ones self (to be a Bishop) would
be a work of perfection and matter of vow. By this it is evident that the
state of a Bishop far passes in perfection of state the state of religious,
and that which M. Nicholas brings to exalte the religious, proves only that
in it is less danger and some good means to attain to prefection, and that
therefore religion may more freque^tlie and securely be vowed.

31. But M. Nicholas says n. 6. p. 99. that to desire a Bishopric eue^ for
that is best in it, namely for the good of souls according to S. Thomas 2.2.
q. 185. ar. 1. seems presumption, and there wants not who says that commonly
it is a deadly sin and he cites in the marge^t Valentia. to. 3. disp.
10.9.3. puncto 228.

32. I answer that this spoken, so rawlie as it is by M. Nicholas, may
derogate to the most perfect and most necessary state in God his Church, yea
and to S. Thomas also: and therefore needs examination. S. Thomas in that
place says, that in the office of a Bishop three things are to be
considered. The first and principal is the good work of a Bishop, by which he
attends to the profit if his flock in governing them, fieeding the^ by the
word of God and Sacraments etc. The 2. is the height of his degree over others.
The 3. is that which follows these twoe, to wit, riches, honor, reverence
etc. Wherefore says he, to desire a Bishopric for the third is avarice or
ambition; for the second it seems to be presumption: but for the first it is
of it self laudable and virtuous. But because the first, which is the work of
a Bishop, has annexed unto it the height of degree, praesumptuosum videtur
quod aliquis praeesse appetat ad boc quod subditis prosit, nisi manifesta
necessitate imminete: it seems presumptuous, that one should desire to bear
rule to profit others, unless in an evident and imminent necessity. So that
M. Nicholas left out his answer in the last words unless in an evident and
imminent necessity. For the^ it is lawful to desire a Bishopric, so to
exercise the function, and to profit others, else S. Paul would not have said:
he that desires a Bishops office desires a good work. He alleges Vale^tia
also as though he said absolutely that it is a mortal sin to desire a
Bishopric to profit others: but he also serves him in the same manner, Tom 3
disp. 10. q. 3. puncto 2. Co^clus. 3. V. Epis. Tolet. l 5. c. 3. Nau. tom. 3.
Miscel. 36. and 37. Hour. l. 10. c. 32. 3. Valentia sup. Concl. 2.
for he also says: In casu necessitatis laudabile potest esse vt qui dignus
est appetat Episcopatum: In case of necessity it may be laudable for him that
is worthy to desire a Bishopric. And this he says is the common opinion as
in deed it is. Emanuel Sa says that for the necessity or vtilite of the
Church a Bishopric may be desired. The same do also Navarre and Tolet auerre:
So does Henriquez. And Navarre against Valentia, says that to desire a
Bishopric with the honor and revenues annexed, is no sin, but merit if
it be principally desired for the honor of God, and the good of our
neighbor. And although Vale^tia thinks that oftentimes it is a mortal sin
to desire a Bishopric though he that desires it be worthy and do also
desire it for the end to do his office, and to do good to others: yet Navarre
holds against him, and indeed if for the danger of sin in the discharging
of the office (as Valentia says) one that is worthy and intends God his
honor, and the good of others, may not desire a Bishopric, he may not accept
of a pastorship or seek for it though in many places pastorships be given by
concurse, because though the danger be not so great, yet if it be a great
Parish it is sometimes not much less: and if for danger one might not desire a
Bishopric in this case, we could not accept of our mission to England where
there is more danger. But as this danger in England is not immine^t nor moral,
so we prepare our selves well and demand God his grace: so neither is the
danger of a Bishop immine^t or moral if otherwise he be fit and have a good
intention. And Vasquez a learned Jesuit says, In op. dub. 1. de Episcopatu.
that as to desire virtue or to do an act of virtue for honor or praise is
but a venial sin of vain glory: so to desire a Bishopric for the honor
and dignity, so that one intend withal God his honor, and the good of others
and be also fit, is but a venial sin, and that therefore S. Thomas says,
2. 2. q. 185. ar. 1.
only that it is unlawful and seems presumption, but says not that it is
a mortal sin as Valentia does.

MASTER NICHOLAS.
If you demand wherein this particular perfection of a religious life
consists etc. I say it may seem to consist in multitude, facility,
continuation of perpetual acts of virtue, and effectual means speedily to
get it etc. n. 7.

THE REPLY.
How M. Nicholas herein contradicts S. Thomas and Suarez, and how religious
perfection according to Suarez consists not in acts but in habit.

33. S. Tho. 2 2. q. 184. ar. 3. ad 1. and in ^orp.
M. Nicholas herein flatly contradicts S. Thomas, who in his answer to the
first argument which objected those words Math. 19. Si visperfectus esse, vade
vende omnia etc. If thou will be perfect, go fell the things that thou bast,
and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come, fellow
me: says: that in those words of our Lord, something is put as the way to
perfection, to wit that which is said: go sell all the things that thou have
and give to the poor: But another thing is added, in which perfection
consists, to wit, follow me. VVhereupon S. Hierom says, that because it is
not sufficient only to leave what he has, Peter adds what is perfect, and
we have fellowed thee. And S. Ambrose upon these words Luc. 5. follow me:
says: he bids follow not by the bodies going but by the mynds affection,
which is done by charity. And therefore by the manner of speaking it appears
that the Counsels are certain instruments to come to perfection, when it is
said: If thou will be perfect, go sell etc. as if he said, by doing this
thou shall, come to This end. thus S. Thomas. Hiero. in hu^c locum Ambr super
illud Luc: 5. sequere meto. 5. cap. 5.
And so poverty, chastity, obedience and other acts of virtue exercised in
religion are not as M. Nicholas says, the perfection of a religious life, but
only means to come to perfection, that is charity. And in the corpse of the
article in the end: S. Thomas alleges Moses Abbot, S. Tho. supra. Cassia.
collas. 1. c. 7.
who as Cassian relates said: iciunia, vigiliae, meditatio Scripturarum,
nuditas etc. fastinges, watchings, meditation of the Scriptures, nakedness,
and privation of all riches, are noe perfection, but instruments of perfection,
because in them consists not the end of that discipline (to wit of a
religious order) but by them is attained the end.

34. He contradicted also Suarez who says that the counsels, which are the
acts of virtue practiced principally in religion, Suarez to. 3. l. 1. c 15.
n. 12.
and which M. Nicholas must especially mean by his acts of virtue, are not
perfection but instruments to attain perfection. Illa consilia (says he)
corumque obseruantia non continent formalem perfectionem sed sunt instrumenta
ad illam acquirendam, sine illis tamen potest inueniri perfectio: those
counsels and their observance, do not contain formal perfection, but they
are instruments to get it; yet without them perfection may be found.

35. Suarez to. 3. l. 1. c. 4.
Yea Suarez denies that the perfection which a religious person intends,
consists in multitude, facility and continuation of acts of virtue, as M.
Nicholas would have it, but says it consists not only in charity which is
the essential perfection of a Christian life and consequently of a religious
order; nor in any act of charity or other acts of virtue as M. Nicholas
would make us believe, but in an habitual promptitude and facility of loving
God, and exercising other acts of virtue for the love of God. For (says he)
if this religious perfection consisted in acts, a religious man when he
sleeps loses his perfection: for then he has noe use of reason nor of any
reasonable actions. Only says he acts of charity and other virtues
pertain to perfection antecedentlie, because by them is gotten the aforesayed
habit and promptitude, and consequently also because they conserve that
promptitude, but in them consists not the perfection intended to be gotten by
a state of perfection as M. Nicholas says. Wherefore M. Nicholas not daring
to stand constantly to this, adds toward the end of this discourse in his
7. number, or else in an habit, with particular reference to the said
frequentation and continuation of such acts.

M. NICHOLAS.
To all which we must add that these advantages are found in a religious life
etc. n. 8. 9.

THE REPLY.
M. Nicholas endeauours to prefer a religious state before that of a Bishop
by reason of the advantages of a religious life, of which the first is, the
observation of the Counselles.

36. If I would be as carping as M. Nicholas is against M. Doctor, I could
tell him that S. Thomas 1.2. q. 104. ar. 4. as he is cited in the margent by M.
Nicholas, has nothing of the Evangelical counselles. Only in his 108. quest.
and 4. artic. he has, and says, that the Evangelical counsels are proper
to the new law, which is true in respect of their perfection and vows annexed
to them in the new law, but yet they were observed by the children of the
Prophets and others: and therefore S. Hierom says: filij Prophetarum quos
monachos in veteri testamento legimus adificabant sibi casulas proper fluenta
Iordanis etc. The children of the Prophets whom we read to have been monks in
the old law, builded to themselves little cotages nere to the rivers of Jordan
etc. Ep. 4. ad R^sticum.
And again. Ep. 13. ad Paul^.
Nos autem babeamus propositi nostri principes Paulos, Antonios, Hilariones
Macharios, and vt ad Scripturarum auctoritatem redeam, noster Princeps Elias,
noster Eliseus, nostrifilij Prophetarum; but let us, have as Princes of our
Institute those Paul's, Antonies, Hilarions, Machariouses, and to return to
the authortiie of Scriptures, our Prince Was Elias, ours Eliseus, ours the
children of the Prophets.

37. M. Nicholas adds. and in this particular (to wit of observance of the
three cou^sailes, poverty, chastity, and obedience) there appears a mame
difference betwixt a Religious man and a Bishop, whois not at all bound to
poverty, and to chastity, he is obliged only as other Priests by a row
annexed to holy orders. If by this reason M. Nicholas will prove that a
religious state excels the state of a Bishop, because that state has the
wow of chastity annexed, this has not; by the same reason he might prove that
a simple Priest, yea a Deacon or Subdeacon has an higher state then a Bishop
because to the order of Subdeacon is annexed the vow of chastity which is not
annexed a new unto the order of a Bishop. To 3. l. c 16. n 25.
But let Master Nicholas say as he pleases, the Bishop is bound to keep
chastity as much as the Priest, and although as Suarez says, he makes not a
new vow when he is consecrated Bishop, yet because he can not be a consecrated
Bishop unless he first receive priesthood, to which this vow is annexed, he
cannot be a Bishop consecrated without this obligation to keep chastity. And
although this vow of chastity be annexed to prieshoold by the law of the
Church, which M. Nicholas adds as though that did something derogate to the
Bishops state; I answer that as the vow of chastity which the religious
makes, proceeds from his humane free will, yet aster it is made, byndeth by
the Divine law; so although the vow of chastity in a Priest, proceeds
originallie from the Churches law (and therefore the Greek Priests may use
their wives they had before Priesthood because the Church byndeth not them to
any such vow) yet a Priest voweth freely, for that he may choose whether he
will be Priest or not, and supposing that he voweth chastity, his vow byndeth
him by the Divine law according to that. Vouete and reddite: vow and render.
Ps. 75.


37. Whereas M. Nicholas affirms that a Bishop elected yea and confirmed may
marry: I deny it. For, although (if he be not in holy orders) he has made no
vow of chastity, Cap; inter corporaliada Trans. Episcepi. Suarez Vasq.
Canomist c. cum ap Mon. de statu monach. S Tho. Scotua
yet (as Innoce^tius the third affirms) he that is elected and confirmed
Bishop, co^tracteth a spiritual marriage with his Church which as Suarez lib.
1. cap. 16. cit. says byndeth by the Ecclesiastical, or as Caietan. and
Vasquez to. 3. in 3 p. disp. 2. and cap. 1.3.5. Caiet. 2. 2. q. 184. ar. 6.
think by the Divine law; and so after he is confirmed, he cannot leave his
Church without the Popes leave or dispensation. So after a simple vow of
religion if one marry he sins but his marriage is valid. Nay a regular
professed by dispensation of the Pope, may of religious become no more
religious and so may marry as co^monlie the Canonists, and diverse Divines do
hold, And although S. Thomas in 2.2. q. 88. ar. 11. in Corp. teaches that the
Pope cannot dispense in a solemn vow, and Dura^d Riah. in 4. d. 98. Henr. de
Gand. quod 5. q 28 Caict. Less. Caiet. Supra.
yet Caiet. 2.2. q. 88. ar. 11. says, that this his opinion proceeds from a
mistaking of the Chapter Cu^ad Monasterium. Wherefore we read that diverse Popes
have dispensed with regulars professed, to marry, as may appear by diverse
examples related by Caietan, Lessius, l. 2. de Veto c. 40. dubit. 14. number. 111.
and others. Yea, as Navarre witnesses the Commendators of the military orders
of S. James of Alacantara and Calatraua, are truly religious, and do make the
three vows, but their vow of chastity is only of conjugal chastity betwixt
man and wife. And so their religion, though a true religious state, admits
Marriage. I grant that some Divines do hold that these are not perfectly but
imperfectlie, and as they say secundum quid relireligious, but yet Rodericus
to. 1. q. 1. ar. 6. Fortunius. Burg. de Pa. Roder. Nan.
with Nauar. trac. de Reddit. ibid. and diverse others whom he cites do
affirm them to be truly religious, though military religious. Whereas the
state and order of a Bishop, consecrated priest, Deacon and Subdeacon admits
noe valid marriage.

38. As for poverty in which M. Nicholas says the regular excels the
Bishop, because he is not bound to poverty. S. Thomas.
I answer with S. Thomas 2.2. q. 184. ar. 7. ad. 1. that the actual
abrenunciation and leaving of all riches is not perfection but an instrument
and means to get perfection: and therefore a state of perfection may be
without this actual leaving of all. But to leave all in preparation of mind,
so as that a man be prepared to leave all when the case happens that he mast
leave all or offend God mortallie, is perfection: yea S. Thomas says: and hoe
pertinet direct ad perfectione^: and this pertains directly to perfection,
because this preparation includes charity, and the love of God by which we
are so disposed that we are prepared rather to leave all even life it self,
then to offend god mortallie. Ad hoc autem (says S. Thomas) S. Th. 2.2. q.
184. ar 7. ad 1,
maxim tenentur Episcopi: quod omnia sua pro honor Die, and salute sui gregis
contemnant, cum opus fuerit, vel pauperibus sui gregis largiendo, vel rapinam
honorum suorum cum gaudio sustinendo: and to tbis Bishops most of all are
obliged, to contemn all for the honor of God and the health of their flock
when it shall be needful, either by giving all to the poor, or by taking with
joy the spoil of their goods. Hebr.


MASTER NICHOLAS.
With these commodities proper to religious state are to be joined twoe others
of most important consideration, of security and immobilitie, Wherein a
regious state exceeds that of a Bishop. n. 9.

THE REPLY.
Of security and immobilitie and whether the regular, in them excels the
Bishop.

39. M. Nicholas would prefer a regular at least in this particular respect
of security before the state of a Bishop. And I grant that if the regular
keep his cloister and observe his rules, he is more separated from all
occasions of sin; but this as above I have said, argues not, an higher or
perfecter but a lower state; for as the low shrubbe (as I said before) is
less shaken with wind and tempests then the higher Cedars, so the lower the
state is the less it is subject to tentations, and dangers, and the higher it
is the more dangerous it is, for that (as S. Hierome says) non est facile
stare loco Paulitenere gradum Petri: it is not easy to stand in the place of
Paul, to held the degree of peter: Hier. supra ap. ad Helio dorum
But as the state of a Bishop by reason of the height of it, and the charge
annexed to it, is more difficile and dangerous then the state of a Regular; so
his victory over these difficulties, is more meritorious and glorious then the
virtue of a Religious man by how much the religious has less and fewer
difficulties to over come. A certain holy and learned Abbot Philipp de
Harueing above four hundred years ago (whose works were approved and
printed in Doway) in his 99. Chapt. says the same in better words: for
speaking of the states of a regular and a Pastor, he delivers his conceit of
this point in these words: est ergo quanto facilius tanto securius de medio
fugere Babilonis and saluari: est antem quanto diffieilius, tanto gloriosus in
medio Babilonis Victorem coronari: It is therefore, as much more easy, so much
more secure, to fly out of the midst of Babylon (the world) as the regular
does and be saved: but it is so much the more glorious by how much the more
difficile, to be crowned victour in the midst of Babylon, as the good Bishop
and Pastor is. And S. Austine says, that there is nothing in this life, and
especially this time, more easy and joyful and more acceptable to menthe the
office of a Bishop, Priest or Deacon if the office be done negligentlie and for
a fashion; sed nihil apud Deum miserius and tristius, and damnabilins. But
nothing before God more miserable, sad, and damnable. Item nihil esse in hac
vita and maxim hoc tempore, difficilius, laboriosius, periculosius, si eo modo
militetur quo noster imperator inbet: And there is nothing in this life,
especially in this time, that is more hard more laborious more dangerous the^
the office of a Bishop, Priest or Deacon, if so We War, as our Emperor
commands. Ep. 143 valor. Episc.
And therefore S. Chrysostom says that if you should bring unto him a monk
as good as Helias, yet he were not to be compared to him who being given (as
Pastor) to the people and ca^pelled to bear the sins of many, persisteth
immovable and strong. Chris. 16 de Sacerdetio.
And the same Doctor Considering the difficulty and merit of the Bishops
charge: if one (says he) should propose unto me where I had rather please
(God) either in the Priestlie office that is of a Bishop or in the solitude of
Monks; without comparison I would make choice of that I first spoake of. And
if the regular be sent in mission to do the functions of a Pastor then he is
in as great danger as the Pastor, and in so much the greater as mutations
from one extreme to another are more dangerous. And therefore in the primative
Church when regulars were sent abroad into the world to preach or to take care
of souls, they used to send none into the world, but such as by long practice
of humility, and mortification in a religious state, were as dead to the world
in affection as they were by profession. But if M. Nicholas may make
comparisons with the Bishop because a regular is in greater security, he may
compare the inferior regular with his Abbot and General, because their state
as it is higher so it is less free from danger, it being harder to govern
others then ones self, and easier to rule one then many.

40. Now as concerning immobilitie, which is another advantage that the
regular, (as M. Nicholas affirms) has of the Bishop, T. 3 li. I.C. 16. n. 23.
I answer with Suarez that when the Bishop accepts the office of a Bishop in
such a Church, and is accepted of it, he makes a pact and covenant with his
Church to remain with it, and to exercise Episcopal functions in it (to which
says Suarez he is bound by charity and justice) and this is sufficient to
make the Bishop to have a state immovable. Yet this immobilitie is augmented
by the ecclesiastical law (as he thinks) or even by the divine law, as
Vasguez affirms. And says Suarez a vow is not required to make a state
immovable, because, says he, a vow is not the total cause of a state.
Suarez and Vasq supra.
And whereas S. Thomas seems to require a vow annexed to the state of the
Bishop, he answers with Caretan, that S. Thomas means only the aforesayed
pact, which the Bishop makes with his Church when he accepts it. S Th. 2. 2.
q 284. ar. 58 and q. 185 ar. 4.
And because the Bishop is many times elected and confirmed Bishop of a place
before he is consecrated, he is also then in a state of perfection, because
then he makes a pacte and covenant with his Church and electours, never to
leave that Church without license or dispensation of the Pope, with which
difpensation the religious may leave sus religious state and marry, as above
we have showed.

M. NICHOLAS.
Neither is this perfection of a religions state prrfitable to the religions
man alone but oftentimes disposes him further to the helpeing of hes
neighbors and c. n. 10.

THE REPLY.
Regulars as regulars are by office to have care of the souls of others.

41. Here M. Nicholas must be content to hear again M. Doctors reduplication
of Regulars as Regulars, for as Regulars they are not to have care or charge of
others but of their own souls, to the perfecting where of they endeavor: and
therefore the regular state (as we have seen) and as M. Doctor teaches Chap.
12. is status perfection is acquirendae, non exercendae vel conimunicandae, a
state of perfection to be gotten not to be exercised on others or to be
communicated unto the^: and therefore says S. Thomas Bishops are in state of
a perfectors of others, S. TW. 2.2. q. 184. ar. 7.
regulars are in state of them that are perfected. And so the regular state is
to get perfection for ones self, the Bishops state is to communicate
perfection to others by preaching, administration of Sacraments etc. Secondly
we must distinguish bet wixt the obligation which one has of justice and by
office, and the obligation which is only of charity. By this second
obligation not only Pastors, but also others not Pastors are bound when
there is opportunity, to have care and to help their neighbor by fraternall
correction, freindlie counsel and exhortation. And by this obligation of
charity, the religions when occasion occurreth are bound to help others. Ecc.
c. 11. and 17. Mat. 18.
By the first obligation which is of office and justice, only Pastors and
Superioursare bound to assist their neighbors and to tender their salvation. I
grant that the regular if he practice the counsels well and observe his rule
exactlie, and exercise him self in acts of humility; patience, mortification
frequentlie, does remove the impedimentes which hinder the love of God, and so
has good means to increase in himself the love of God, and consequently of
his neighbor, this love being grounded in that: and so if he be called to
preach, teach and minister Sacraments, his charity will much help him yea
move and incite him to do good to others: but this belongs not to him
precisely as he is a regular, for then it should belong to all regulars even
lay brethren and women (for, as above I said, quod connenit alioui qua tali
conuenit omni tali) but as he is Priest and is called to do the office of a
Pastor, which office belongs not to him, as due to the state of a regular,
but (as Suarez says in the words above alleged) by privilege, by
delegation and by participation. And therefore (says Suarez) the obligation
of exercising such actions, Suarez l. 1. c 18 p. 18.
and procuring the salvation of souls and loofing life for the^ is far
greater and higher in a Bishop (as it is also in an inferior Pastor who also
by office is to give his life for his sheep Io. 10.) the^ in any whatsoever
simple religious of what institute soever he be, that is, although by his
institute, he be to preach, teach, and minister Sacraments, as the Dominicans,
Franciscans, and Jesuits are. And so when regulars have been sent to preach
to infidelles (as many have been who also have performed these functions with
great success, as M. Doctor, confesses in his Hierarchy) they did these
offices (as Suarez says) by commission, delegation, and privilege, and not
by any ordinary right.

42. I grant therefore that religious and some by their in stitute do many of
the functions of Pastors, for as Pastors do preach; Cap. ^. n. 8.
so do they; as Pastors do minister Sacraments, so do they at least some
Sacraments: but in regulars this is accessorie, in Pastors principal; in
regulars it is volu^tarie, in Pastors necessary; in regulars it is will and
pleasure, in pastors obligation; in regulars it is free offer, in Pastors
bounden duty. Regulars assiste souls without charge or obligation to answer
for the^; the pastors must answer soul for soul, yea for as many souls as
he has charge of the regulars does minister Sacraments sometimes and to those
that come to them, Pastors in summer and winter, by day and by night, in rain
and snow in heat and cold, must oftentimes go to their penitentes howses,
there to hear their confessions, there to minister unto the^ the B. Sacrament,
there to give them the last Sacrament: The regulars meddle not with Baptism,
marriage and extreme unction, the Pastor ministers all. In fine the Pastor
with Jacob day and night is parched with heat and forced; Genes. 31. and. 35.
Math. 20.
and is by office vigilant and careful for his sheep that the sleep flies
from his eyes: and with the first workers in the vinyeard he bears the burden
of the day and heat: Whereas the regular as they are the later workers, so
they work at plea fure. And as one says the Priests or Pastors of the
Church, are the body of the army, regulars are the ayding wings, Priests are
pressed soldiers, regulars are voluntaries; Priests by office and ordinary
right do minister Sacraments and preach, regulars only by privilege. And
therefore S. Denis says that because that the monks when they were
innitiated, did not kneel an both knees, nor had the Divine books laid on
their head, but were near the Priests whilst he recited the prayer: Declarat
monachorum ordinis non esse alios deducere, sed in se ac per se stare in
singulari sanctoque statu. Lib de Eccl. Hier. co S. Conteplatio se. cundu^
verse. periotium.


M. NICHOLAS.
The perfection of a Bishop consists in this, that by his office he is obliged
to enlighten others, and if occasion require to give his life for his Flock,
which occasion seldom happens. To these two obligations, the Bishop is tied
by justice in regard of maintenance and honor afforded him by his flock, or
by virtue of sideline etc. but religions men meerelie vpe^ charity or religion
(more noble virtues then justice or fidelity) to illuminate others and venture
their lives for the saving of souls. n. 11.

THE REPLY.
M. Nicholas speaks to baselie of the Bishops office and duty.

43. when I read these words of M. Nicholas I confess I noe little wondered to
hear a religious man, who should honor Bishops and Pastors, speak in this
manner. But, speak truth, M. Nicholas, and da gloriam Deo: give glory to God,
in giving the due to his Bishop. Is not the Bishop also bound, and especially
bound, out of charity to undertake and execute his office in illuminating and
perfecting others, and in giving his life for the^? If he be not; why did
Christ three times demand of S. Peter whether be loved him, Joan, 21
before he would commit the government of the Church unto him? Do not those
words of our Savior a good shepherd gives his life for his sheep, Joan. 10.
pertain especially and more principally to Bishops (yea and to inferior
Pastors) then to regulars? Suarez a regular as well as M. Nicholas, Lib 1. c
18 n. 14.
and far more learned and modest in the place last alleged, says that the
obligation of exercising actions (ordained to the perfecting of others) and the
procuring the salvation of souls, and loosing life for them, is far greater
and higher in a Bishop, then in any whatsoever simple religious, of what
Institute soever he be. And is there any greater charity then to expose ones
life for his sheep as the Bishop is bound? confess then, M. Nicholas, to the
honor of God (who is honored in his Bishops) that the obligation which the
Bishop has to illuminate others, and to give his life for the^, is greater
the^ any regular has, unless he be also a Bishop or Pastor. Yea (as above we
have said) it belongs not to regulars as regulars to illuminate others, or
to give their lives for them (for then they should be in statu perfectionis
acquisitae and exercendae) but only to seek to save and perfect themselves.
And M. Nicholas (see how partial affection domineereth sometimes even in
Religious men) when he says that a Bishop is eyed to illuminate others and to
give his life for his flock by justice only in regard of his maintenance, and
by fidelity in regard of his coucuant made with his flock, and that regulars
meerelie out of charity expose themselves to dangers for gaining of souls, as
he commends partiallie regulars, so he derogateth no little to all Bishops in
making the^ all in a manner mercenaries, which kind of Pastors Christ
disco^me^deth and rejects. For that the mercenarie takes care of the flock
not for the sheep good and love of them, but for his own interest to wit,
honor, maintenance, and lucre, as M. Nicholas seems to say all Bishops do.
And so regulars are only the good Pastors who merely upon charity and
religion do illuminate others, and adventure their life for saving of souls.
wherefor as all Bishops ought to accept their office principally for the love
of God and zeal of souls, so we must have that charitable opinion of them, as
to think that they do so. Suarez speaks more honorably of the charity of
the Bishop. Tertio desideratur maxim in Episcopo charitas, tum in Deum qui est
principalis ouium Dominers, vt significanit christus Joan. 21. cum ter
interroganit Petrum an se diligeret prinsquam illiones suas commendaret etc.
Thirdly (says he) there is required most of all in a Bishop charity as well
toward God who is the principal Lord of the sheep, as Christ signified Ioa.
21. when three times he demanded of Peter whether he. loved him, before he
commended unto him his sheep; as also toward his subjects, Suarez c. 18. n.
4.
whom he must tolerate, receive beinglie, patie^tlie suffer and releive their
necessities, and serve the^ according to that of S. Paul 1. Cor. 9. I made
myself the servant of all that I might gain the more. And after: To the weak
I became weak, that I might gain the weak. And finally he is bound in a
particular manner by virtue of his office, so to love his sheep, as to yield
his life for the^ (if loit must he as Christ taughe Joan. 10. Whence it is that
patience is necessary for him, which has a perfect work, because he must
not only observe mercy, but also justice, and that sometimes stoutly and
severely. Whence also it must needs be, that he must suffer many things of
the naughty. For these causes therefore and the like, the Episcopal throne is
a place of, greatest perfection. Thus, and thus far Suarez.

44. Whereas M. Nicholas adds n. 12. that merit does not consist in office,
but in acts thereof. I must tell him that though merit consist not in office
only, yet there is great merit in executing a lawful and holy office, such
as is the office of the Priest and Bishop, and the greater the state, office,
and dignity is, the greater is the merit in executing it. And M. Nicholas
cannot deny, but that the state and dignity of the person adds merit to his
actions. For as the regulars actions by reason of his state and vow, are more
meritorious then are the same actions done by other Christians not regulars: so
not only the Bishops actions proper to his state, are of greater perfection
and merit then the proper actions of regulars: but also the same actions done
by a regular and a Bishop, are more meritoriousin a Bishop the^ in a regular.
For as M. Nicholas know weth the dignity of the person dignifieth the
operation, and therefore Christ his operations were of infinite merit and
satisfaction, because his person and state of the natural son of God, was
infinite.

45. And now one would think that M. Nicholas had made an end of his (I fear)
too odious comparisons of the state of a regular with the state of a Bishop:
but it seems he has reserved the most odious to the last place, for that in
the same 12. number immediately after the words alleged, he calls the world
to witness whether the regulars have not more enlightened, it the^ secular
Pastors. These are his words. Let the whole worlds experience decide whether
the secular Pastors or Religions men do in fact enlighten mankind, by
preaching, teaching, filling libraries with learned volumes, reducing heretics
throughout Europe and converting iafidelles in both the Indies, Iaponia, China
etc. To this his comparison I answer first, that I grant that many countries
have been converted by religious men, as England by S. Austine and his Fellow
Monks, Germany by S. Boniface and other religious me^. And in this last age
the Jesuits are famous for the conversion of Infidelles in Iaponia, China and
other Countries, and amongst them S. Xauier was the chief. But M. Nicholas
must grant that by the Apostles who were Bishops and Priests, and cannot be
proved out of Scripture to have been properly religious, and by many of their
successors not religious, many countries have been reduced to the Christian
faith. Seco^dlie I answer that though it be most true that many countries have
been conuertedby religious, so for M. Nicholas to brave all secular Pastors
under whom are comprehended Bishops and Popes, is to bold a comparison. Thirdly
I answer that regulars did not as regulars nor as Abbots or Priors which are
Titles of their religious state, convert these countries, but as Priests and
Bishops and Popes which are Titles of the Clergy. To that which M. Nicholas,
adds n. 13. concerning the state of religion which te^deth to perfection, and
of the Bishop which supposes perfection, and therefore perfecteth others, I
have answered him fully in the beginning of this question.

M. NICHOLAS.
Now as for the second comparison of religions men with, inferior Pastors
etc. 11. 14.

THE REPLY.
M. Nicholas has had no success in comparing Regulars with Bishops.

46. M. Nicholas in his comparison of Regulars with Bishops. (as the Reader
will easily see) has had noe great good success: for whereas M. Doctor,
compared state with state, and in state preferred the Bishop: he, seeing the
Regular in this comparison to come far short of the Bishop, has changed, yea
left the question, and has had recourse to some commodities and good means
which are to be found in a religious state, as security from danger means to
attain to mortification and perfection, and now he comes to compare the
state of regulars with that of inferior pastors: and before I shall first
speak of the state of inferior Pastors, and out of that I shall say of it,
Ishall answer to all M. Nicholas alleges against them.

Of the state of Priests and Pastors inferior to Bishops.

47. M. Doctor, because he would not seem in any wise to contradict S.
Thomas, had granted to the religious a perfecter state by reason of immobilitie
which S. Thomas requires to a state, then to inferior pastors who may leave
their pastourships ^^d enter into religion; and he contented himself to glue
only to these Patours a perfecter office and calling, S. Th. 2. 2. q. 184. a.
8. M.D. in his Hier. c 11 n. n. 14.
the office of governing souls (which was the office of Christ and his
Apostles) fair surpassing: and so M. Nicholas might have spared this labor;
but seeing that he moves this comparison, as making himself Cock sure that
regnars are of a more perfect state the^ they. I shall show what probability
there is for the preferring of these pastors before Religious. And least I may
be esteemed partial, Suarez to. 3. l. 1. c. 17. and 21. S. Th. 2 2. q. 184.
ar. 8. in corp.
I shall say little in this point which Suarez does not avouch. And for a better
and easier entrance into this matter it will not be amiss, if a certain
distinction of S. Thomas be premised. For (says he) in a secular Pastor we
may consider three things, to wit, that he is secular (in which consideration,
he agrees with lay men) that he is a Priest, and that he has charge and care
of souls. So in a regular Priest we may consider that he is a regular, that
he is priest, and that he has care and charge of souls. In the first the
regular excels the secular; and no marvel, for in that consideration he
agrees with a lay Christian, who in state is ever inferior to a regular. In
the other two considerations, to wit in regard of Priesthood and charge of
souls, the regular Priest and Pastor on the one side, and the secular Priest
and Pastor on the other side, are equal. The question is whether a regular
not Priest, be in an higher state of perfection then the secular Priest or
Pastor.

47. And if we speak of the secular Priest who is only Priest and has no
charge of souls, he no douht by virtue of his Priestlie order and caracter is
in an higher state and dignity then any Regular not Priests, Because the
Priests state is immovable by reason if his indelible Caracter, which by no
sin, by noe degradation can be taken from him. By his order and caracter he
has power to consecrate the sacred body and blood of Christ, and to offer
them in Sacrifice; and by the same caracter he has power to absolve from
sins so that the Pope or Church give him comple are Jurisdiction or apply
subjects unto him, Chap. 6. nu. 11. and chapter 12. nu. 6.
as M. Doctor has in his Hierarchy declared: Which power also (as in the
same Treatise is showe^) is the greatest power that is in the Church of God and
greater then any Angel has. And if states be measured by their actions and
operations to which they are ordained (as they must) then is the state of a
simple Priest greater then any regular or whatsoever other state excepting the
state of a Bishop, which includes this power and is greater for it then for
any other power; because by this power he with the Priest has power over the
natural body of Christ by co^secrating it, by his other power of absoluing
from sins (which the Priest also has) and by his power to ordain ministers
and to confirm, he has only power over the mystical body of Christ, which
is his Church. And therefore by how much the natural body of Christ deified
with the Divinity surpasses the mystical body, the Church: by so much,
portionably, the power of consecrating which the Priest has, surpasses the
power of absoluing, ordayning and confirming. And this Suarez grants, so
does Valentia, who says, Suarezlib. 1. c. 17 nu. 2. Valen. 2. 2. disp. 10. q.
2. De statu epist. Pu^cto 1.
That if in inferior Prelates. We consider the degree of holy order, then
speaking absolutely there is some thing more worthy and more perfect in them,
then in religious as they are religions, and net also initiated with holy
orders. Where by the way I note, that he uses M. Doctors reduplication (as
religious) which so much offends M. Nicholas: and this no man can deny. This
holy order of Priesthood in which is grounded this power, requires (as S.
Thomas says) of a Priest greater sanctity then the regulars state requires
of him, and for that cause also (says S. Thomas) the same act of sin in a
Priest by reason of his holy order, is greater then in a Religious man, not
Priest. The state of 2 Priest is so high and holy, that many, S. Th. 2.2. q.
184. a. 8. in Corp. Baro. anno Chris. 378. in fine. Hier. ep. ad Helio.
though religious have seared to under go it as S. Antonie, S. Benedict and S.
Francis; yea S. Hierome though a great saint, Religious, and learned, did so
at lengh permit himself to be ordained Priest, that as Baronius observes he
never received any Title or charge of any Church saying, That it is not an
easy thing to stand in Paul's place, and to hold the degree of Peter: And
therefore wishes, That it may be far from him to speak ill of Priests who
succeeding to the Apostles, do consecrate the body of Christ, and Judge us
before the later day, and by whom we are made Christians.

47. For these and the like reasons there want not as Suarez, out of Antoninus
and Augustinus de Ancona relates, who affirm that a simple Priest is in an
higher state then a Regular not Priest. Suar. l. 1. c. 17. n. 2 Anto. 3. P. in
prolog.. 4. and S. Aug. de An. con. l. de Potest. ec^l. q. 26. a. 1.
And although S. Thomas as we have seen, Caietan and others are of opinion,
that simple Priests are not in a state of perfection, because Priests, if we
except the vow of chastity, are by their ordination bound to noe works of
superegation or Counselles, but only to keep the commandments, though by
reason of their sacred order, more sanctity be required of them, then of other
Christians, and if they sin, their sin (if other circumstances be alike) is
greater then the like sin in others: yet for the reasons alleged, the state
of a Priest by Reason of his eminent and sacred functio^s, exceeds in that
respect the state of all Religious not Priests whatsouer.

48. L. 1. cir. c. 17. n. 4. in sine.
Suarez concludes this point in these words: Quapropter censeo Sacerdotes ex
vi sui ordinis habere statum altiore^ and sanctiorem, qui ab eis nonnulla
perfectionis opera requirit, ratione cuius obligationis, merito dici possunt,
esse aliquo modo, saltem inchoatiue^, in statu perfectionis. Wherefore I think
that Priests by virtue of their order. have a state higher and holyer, which
requires of them certain works of perfection, by reason of which obligation,
they worthily may be said to be in some manner, in a state of perfection, at
least inchoatiue, that is imperfectlie, and in a certain beginning. And a
little before he says that the diversity of opinions in this thing is rather
in the manner of speaking then in the thing it self: as indeed it seems to
be. For if we understand by a state of perfection, a state which is immovable
(as the Priests is by reason of the Carracter) and which is ordained to high
and excellent functions and which therefore requires sa^ctitie of the Priest,
and makes his sins the greater; then the state of a simple Priest is higher
then any regulars state is: but if we understand by a state of perfection, a
state that is bound to works of superogatio^, such as are the works of the
three Counselles, poverty, chastity, and obedience, then the Priests state is
not in that sense a perfect state of perfection, because chastitite excepted,
he is not bound to the Counsels and works of supererogation, which are
instruments by which perfection is attained. But yet, as not with standing
that the Bishop is not obliged to such works of supererogatio^ for neither is
he bound to poverty nor to obedience to any but the Pope: and yet by S Thomas
and all men's opinion is in an higher State of perfection then the Regular, by
reason that his state is so immovable, that he cannot leave his Church without
license of the Pope, and he is by his state obliged to more eminent functions
and greater charity (which is to die for his sheep) so the Priest because his
state is immovable by his caracter, and is ordained to higher functions, as
the consecrating of Christ's body, offering of the dreadful and unbloody
sacrifice, absoluing from sin, if he have co^pleate Jurisdiction: may seem
to be in an higher state then a Regular not Priest.

49. Now as concerning Pastors inferior to Bishops who are not only Priests
but also have charge of souls: it seems more probable that they are in a
state of perfection higher and perfecter then the state of a Regular not
Pastor. Garso^. trae. de statu perfect. alpha. 67. l. v. ^ p. (...) 12. q. 28
and 29. (...) in 4 l. ^.^. q. 7. Suaraz c. 17. n. 5.
And this is affirmed by Gerson, Henricus de Gandauo, and Mayor, whom Suarez in
the same chapter alleges; and thus they prove their opinion: because they by
their office are bound to works very perfect, to wit to minister Sacraments,
to preach and to govern souls which is the art of arts, and to take care
and charge of them, to perfect, illuminate and purge them, and to yield (when
the occasion is offered) their lives for them. To which actions, Regulars not
Pastors are not ordained or obliged. This the aforesaid and: ours confirm,
because the disciples whom Christ sent two and two to preach, were in a state
of perfection next to the Apostles: but Pastors succeed to them, as Bishops
do to the Apostles: Ergo they are in a state of perfection and next to the
state of Bishops. And for this (to wit that inferior Pastors succeed to the
disciples) Suarez cites S. Clements first Epistle, against which more is
objected then against the 4. Epistle alleged by M. Doctor. These arguments
may seem much to urge for a state of perfection in inferior Pastors.

50. Yet S. Thomas whose authority is great not only in the School, S. Th. 2
2. q. 184. a. 7.
but also in the Church, affirms that Curates are not in a state of
perfection, because to a state is required immobilitie, which is not in a
Curate or inferior Pastor, because he has no vow to tie him to that state,
but may leave it, if he will go to Religion, without the Bishops license, S.
Th. sup. 19 q. 2. cap. due sunt.
yea against his will as S. Thomas proves out of Pope Urban: whereas the
Religious by reason of his vow cannot forsake his state of life. To this
Suarez answers, that if S. Thomas require a proper vow to make a state, then
the Bishops state should not be a perfect state, because when he is made
Bishop he makes no vow: But if by a vow he mean a pact, Suar l. (...) 17.
supra.
conuenant, or mutual promise betwixt him and his Church, such a promise or
pact is to be found in the Pastor, as well as in the Bishop.

51. Caietan (says Suarez) answers, that the inferior Pastor has not a
divine commandment to stick to his Pastourslip, nor any humane precept,
because none can be alleged: To whom Suarez replyeth that nether the Bishop by
any divine law is tied to his Bishopric, (though Vasquez in this
co^tradicteth him, as above we have seen) only by the Ecclesiastical law he
is wedded to his Bishopric, and by this law, the inferior Pastor also is
wedded to his Pastourship. It is true that the inferior Pastor may enter into
Religion without the Popes or Bishops leave, as S. Urban affirms in the place
alleged, yet, 19. q. 2. cap. dua snnt. Suar. l. 1. c. 17. n. 9.
as Suarez assures us, that is no sign that he is not in a state with
obligation sufficient to stick to it, but only that his obligation is not
absolute, but includes this condition, to wit, so that he ascend not to an
higher or securer state. For so also a religious man professed in a laxer
religion, Cap. sand and ca. licet de regular. Cap. admonet. de renunciat. and
ca.
has a state, yet he may leave it to enter into a stricter Religion as the
canons do teach us. But unless the Archdeacon or inferior Pastor enter into
Religion, he cannot leave his office or Pastorship without license of the Pope
or Bishop, as may appear by diverse textes of the canon law. And this (says
Suarez) S. Thomas supposes when he says that an Archdeacon or Curate may
leave his Church by the license of the Bishop, insinuating that otherwise he
cannot. It is true that the Bishop has a greater obligation to stick to his
Bishoppricke because he cannot forsake it without dispensation or leave from
the Pope; Si quis vero^. and ca. Episcopus de loco 17. q. 1.
the inferior Pastor may leave his Pastorship with license of the Bishop. but
the reason of this may be, because the Bishop has noe Superior but the Pope
to license him, the inferior Pastor has the Bishop who may dispense with
him. To which may be added, that the Pope himself who has the highest state
in the Church, may renounce it, and yet because he cannot do this without great
and urgent cause, he is in a state of perfection. Wherefore because the Curate
or Archdeacon cannot leave their charges without license of the Bishop, their
state is morallie immovable, because that which we can not do without
dispensation of the Superior is counted to us morallie impossible. And so the
state of an inferior Pastor is morallie immovable and unchangeable and so
in that respect wants nothing required to a state. And that their state is an
higher and perfecter state, it may be proved, because Pastors even inferior
to the Bishop are in a state of perfection to be exercised and co^munscated to
others, the regular is in a state of acquiring or tending to perfection; and so
the Pastors state (though in an inferior manner) is as the Bishops state is,
to wit a state of Illuminators, the regulars is of those that are illuminated;
the Pastors state is of perfectors, the regulars state is of those that are
perfected, that state is of masters, this of Scholars, that of Agentes this of
patients. And so that the perfecter state, this the less perfect.

52. For as S. Anstine says, the Agent (in that respect) is more noble then
the patient: and therefore the soul or spirit is more noble then the body,
Aug. l. 12. de gen ad lie. c. 16. S. Th. 22. q. 84. a. 6. in ^^g. Sed centra
Dionys. l. de Lecies. Hier. c. 5. S. Th. 2.2. q. 185 art. 8. Isidorl 2. de
dimnis officijs. c. 7.
that being the Agent this the patient. And we see that the Suns office in
illuminating is more noble then the airs condition in being illuminated, the
fires in heating then the waters in being heated, the masters in teaching,
then the Scholars in being taught. And as S. Thomas out of S. Denis says,
that Pontisi^um ordo consummatiuns est and perfectiuns, sacerdolum autem
illuminatiuns: the order of. Bishops is consummatiue and perfectiue, the order
of Priests illuminatiue; so the order of inferior Pastors is illuminatiue and
perfectiue: and as he says that the state of a Regular is compared to the
Episcopal state as discipline to Magisterie, and as a disposition to
perfection; so the same may be said of inferior Pastors in their degree, for
that they are in state not of Scholars but of masters and perfecters. hence
it is that S. Isidore says: Sacerdotibus ficut Episcopis dispensatio my.
steriorum Dei commissa est: praesunt enim Ecclesiae, and in confectione diuina
corporis and sanguinis, consortes cu^ Episcopo sunt, similiter in doctrina
Populora^ and in officio praedicationis: To Priests, as to Bishops the
dispensation of the mysteries of God is committed: for that they be are rule in
the Church, and in the divine consecration of the body and blood of Christ,
they are consores with the Bishop, like wise in teaching of the people, and in
the office of preaching. And the Council of Trent says That to all to whom
the care of souls is committed, it is commanded by the divine commandment, to
know their sheep, to offer for them the sacrifice, and to feed them by
preaching of the word of God, administration of sacraments, and by example of
good works.

53. But Suarez obiecteth against inferior Pastors out of S. Thomas, S. Th.
2. 2. q 184. ar. 6. ad 2.
that Archdeacons and inferior Pastor have but vnder-administrations under
the Bishop, and are to the Bishop as Bayliues are to the Prince. And Caietan
cited by Suarez says, the Pastoral office, a. 2. and 20.
and obligation to yield ones life for the sheep pertains principally to
Bishops, and only secu^darilie and ministeriallie to inferior Pastors, and
that Curates and under Pastors do undertake the care of souls as Ministers
and Officiales of the Bishops, who are the principal agentes, and so are not in
a state, but Ministers and Officiales of the Bishops, who only are in state
of perfection to be exercised on others. But Suarez answers very well, that
Curates are not instruments', Officialles, or delegates of the Bishops, but are
truly Pastors comprehended under the name of Proprius Sacerdos to whom every
Christian of sufficient age is bound to confess once a year. Cap. omnit
vtrius que ^exus de poenit. and remis.
And although the Bishop has greater and more ample authority then the
inferior Pastors have, yet they are not Officialles nor ministers, nor in
instrumental causes in respect of the Bishop but true and ordinary Pastors
though both, they and the Bishop also, be ministers and isntrumental causes in
respect of Christ. Supra n. 28.
And although (says Suarez) the Bishop be in an higher state, yet that
hinders not, but that Curats also be in a state though inferior: for so
though all religious orders be in states of perfection, yet one is a perfecter
state then another. Out of all this which for the most part is grounded in
Suarez, it seems very probable, that inferior Pastors have not only an
higher and perfecter office (which S. Thomas insinuates saying that they
rather have an office pertaining to perfection then a state of perfection) but
also an higher state of perfection: their state being of perfection to be
exercised, S. Th. 2.2. q. 184. a. 6. ad 3.
not to be acquired as the Regulars state is, and being ordained to higher
actions and functions, and they making a pacte and conuenant with their Church
as Bishops do, which in a Bishop (as Suarez confesses) causes an immobilitie.

54. Wherefore Suarez at length concludes, l. 1. c. 2. n. 5.
that the state of Inferior Pastors and Regulas do exceed and are exceeded
of one another in diverse respects; for says he if we demand which state is
more profitable to ones self, less dangerous, and more sure, then the
Religious state in this respect takes the precedence: but if you demand which
state contineth, n. 6.
Mains Dei obsequium, greater service of God, and perfectiora opera ex genete
she requirit; and requires more perfect operations of their kind, then, says
he, the state of these inferior Pastors is in it self and of it self
perfecter then the state of a Religious man. And in this sort speculatiuelie
It may be granted that the Pastoral state is perfecter then the Regular state,
S. Th. in c. 5. Mat.
and this S. Thomas upon S. Matthew, seems to favor as Suarez confesses.

55. And so whereas M. Nicholas nu. 14. proves that a Regular state is
perfecter then the state of an inferior Pastor, because 2 Pastor may enter
into Religion without dispensation: his argument proves only that a Regulars
state is more sure for ones own salvation, S. Th. 2.2. q 184.7. arg. sed cutra.
and so may be elected and vowed, but not that it is an higher or perfecter
state. I grant that S. Thomas Proves that a Religious state is inferior to
the state of a Bishop, because a Religious man may become a Bishop, and his
argument is good. Because a Religious man cannot accept of a Bishops office
because it is more sure, as is manifest, and therefore if he may accept of it,
it must be because it is a perfecter state. But an inferior Pastor may
undertake the state of a Regular not because it is more perfect (as Azorius
Regular confesses) but because in it he may more surely save his own soul
which he may prefer before the soul of others, Azar. to. 1. l. 11. ca. 24.
charity first tendering ones own salvation and so although the inferior
Pastor does thus descend in state yet he does not properly Retrocedere nor
Retrospicere go back or look back because he thus auaunceth his own
salvation. And so it is a good argument. A regular may be a Bishop ergo a
Bishops state is perfecter: but is not a good argument: an Inferior Pastor
may be a Religious man, ergo a Religious man has a perfecter state; but only
ergo a Religious man has a more secure state.

56. But in a controversy so much disputed, and wherein to give sentence, may
provoke the one party or the other, I will leave the Judgment thereof to the
Judicious Reader who by what is said for inferior Pastors, will peradventure
Judge it more probable that inferior Pastors should worthily be preferred in
state of perfection. And as M. Nicholas Page 103. Number. 7. refers his reader
to Platus a Regular concerning the Regular state: so will I (and with less
exception) refer him to one Philippe de Harueing a Regular and learned Abbot
concerning the Clergy and all Pastors even inferior.

57. This man was Abbot of a Monastery called Bona Spes; Good Hope and he
wrote above four hundred and fifty years ago. His works were printed in
Doway in the year M. D C. X X. and approved by Doctor Colvenerius Chauncelour
of the University, and Censor of Books in that University. He in his work
De Dignitate, Scientia, Iustieia, and Continentia Clericorum, commends
highly Regulars (amongst whom he was very eminent,) yet in every chapter
almost, he prefers the Clergy, I will (for breuities sake) cite only a few
passages. In his 17. Chapter he says, as M. Nicholas will not say; Nostrum
est nouissimum locum eligere, nec ad altiora volatu praesumptuoso nos ipsos
erigere: It is our part (that is the part of Religious) to cboose the last
place and not by a presumptuous flight to eleuate our selves to higher thing.
In his 17. Epistle he says that from all the bounds and limits of the earth,
all a^tiquitie did ever extol the Clericall order, and ever gave it amongst
the other orders, the principal rank and degree, and though by the divine
disposition a soldier or Rustique do excellin sanctity, yet the Clergy man
in excellency of Ecclesiastical dignity: and although the Clergy man, as we
do sometimes, decline to wordlie things and To the weak and poor elements,
yet their order declineth not in authority. In his 84. chapter he says, that
the Blessed S. Benedict sounded many Monasteries, and instructed and informed
many monks by the good and wholesome documents he left to posterity, and is not
read to have been Priest: yet wanted not perfection of a monk, nor did he
think it any disparagement to his monastical institute, that his monks should
not contend to excel others in holy orders, but in holy manners, considering
that the promotion to orders makes not a monk, but abiection and vilifying of
ones self, labor, silence, discipline, rest, Religion. And in his 99.
chapter: Habeant sibi matorem monachi sanctitatem, relinquentes Clericis
maiorem humiliter dignitatem: Let monks keep to themselves greater sanctity,
leaving humbly to Clergy men greater dignity. And in his 98. and 97.
Chapters, Page 462.
he says that S. Hierome did therefore inuit Heliod. Paulinus, and Rusticus
to be monks, not because he thought more baselie of the Clergy, but because
he esteemed their state, as more worthy, so not so secur, and therefore (says
he) S. Hierome wished it might be far from hi^ to speak euillie of Priests
who succeeding to the Apostolical degree, do consecrate with their own wouth
the body of Christ, by whom we are Christians, who having in their custody the
Keys of heaven, do Judge us in a manner before the day of Judgment, As if
he should have said: eos quoru^ gradus tanta est in Ecclesia dignitatis,
quorum of siciu^ tantae est sanctitatis non audeo inseriores monachis iudicare,
quamuis eos vidca^ in or whibus habitare etc. those, whose degree is of such
dignity in the Church, whose office is of so great sanctity, I dare not
judge inferior to monks although I see, they dwell in Cities. But other is
(says S. Hierom) the cause of a monk, other is the canse of Clerks. Clarckes
do seed the sheep, I am feed That is to say, us, who are fed noe cause
urges to be are the molestations of the popular tumult, which to tolerate the
Clarcke is compelled by Pastoral necessity: yet is not he therefore esteemed
inferior: Yea so much more worthier the Clarcke is judged then a monk by how
much the Pastor is worthier then the sheep. But how much more worthier mace
the Clarck obteineth by so much it is more necess rye that he be of holier
life: least if the greater dign^^e want the greater sanctity; the Clarcke way
take the greater detriment by his greager dignity. But because it is rare to
stand with an vndeclining san^^^ie, and to avoid that (mortal sin) I do not
Counsel thee (thus he makes S. Hieron to speak) to ascend to an higher
place least thon stand not, and sind a greater ruin. It is not (says he)
casie to stand in the place of Paul nor to hold the degree of pecter. page
453. Aug. op 76 ad Aurel.
And in his hundredth, chapter alleging that sentence out of S. Austine: Nimis
dosendum si ad tam ruinosam superbiam monachos surrigamus etc. cum aliquande
etiam bonus monachus vix bonum clericum faciat: it is much to be lamented if we
eleuate monks to such ruinous pride, and think Clerks, in whose number we
are, worthy so great a contumely, whereas sometimes also a good Monk scarcely
makes a good Clark, This Author Philip de Haruing adds; That s. Austine
hereby does openly show, that not only an evil Monk ought tolbe removed from
clericall office but a good Monk is scarcely worthy to be promoted to it And
a little before these words he says S. Austine saw Monks who being weary of
their quietesse and silence, ad not showing in their life monastical
humility, impude^tly desired ecclesiastical honors, not considering (behold
this Abbots humility, and the reverend conceit he had of the Clergy) what is
the difference betwixt the footestole (so he stilled his own Regular state)
and the Chair, to wit the Clerks state, whereas in that state a man sits
more securely, in this more dangerously. This humility this Abbot learned of
s. Hierome how in his Epistle to Heliodorus says: Mihi ante preshyterum sedere
non licet, illa, si peccauero, licet tradere me Sathanae in interitum carnis:
It is not lawful for the to sit before the Priest, for him it is lawful, if I
sin, in deliver me up to Satan, to the destruction of the flesh. This
humility and reverent conceit of Priests and Bishops if M. Nicholas also had
learned, he would never have endeavored so to detract from the Bishops honor,
as we see he has done.

57. Out of this which I have said of the state and dignity of Bishops and
Inferior Pastors (which I hope will not offend, it being all or the most
part taken out of Regular Authors) may be gathered in how high and perfect a
state or calling, not of perfection to be acquired, but to be exercised and
communicated to others, the Priests of our Seminaries, and Religious houses
are, who are sent in an Apostolical mission into England, to convert
Heretics, to reclaim Schismatiques, to govern and comfort Catholics, to
illuminate, perfect, and purge the people by preaching, catechizing,
administering the Sacraments, and by offering the dreadful sacrifice of the
mass: who are to show the people the ways to good life, virtue, and
perfection, not only by wholesome connsailes and exhorrations, but also by good
examples; who are to labor day and night, on horse back, on foot, and to
expose their liberty, yea lives, for the gaining governing, and comforting of
souls.

58. This office, and calling is the greatest, as being the calling of the
Apostles, who were sent by their master Christ to trauerse the world for the
gaining of souls: this was the calling and office of our Lord and master
Christ Jesus, who was incarnate and became man, lived and conuersed with us,
preached, wrought miracles, gave examples of all virtue and perfection, and at
last suffered a cruel death on the infamous Cross for the redeeming and
gaining of souls. This is the greatest calling and office in this life. For
there is no greater calling, after that of Christ, then an Apostolical
calling, snch as this is: And the reason is, because there is no greater
perfection then charity, Ioa. 15.
and there is no greater charity the^ to expose once life for the saving of
souls.

59. And let not any meruell that I call this an Apostolical calling, because
in this, all Pastors, and especially they who are sent in mission to convert
souls, do succeed and imitate the Apostles: and as the mission of other
preachers to other countries, as first of Fugatius and Damianus, then of S
Austme and his companions to our country, and of S. Denis to France, S.
Palladias to Scotland, S. Ronisace to Germany, is worthily called
Apostolical, they all being sent by the Se 2 Apostolic of Rome, which ever
sent preachers to foreign Countries: so they who now are sent in mission to
England with intention only to gain souls, are sent by Apostolical mission,
because from the same sea and authority. And in this, as our Seminary Priests
do excelle all other Priests; so our Religious do excelle all other
Religious what soever, who are not sent in such an Apostolical mission, but
live quietly in their Celles, endeavor their own salvation and perfection,
but are, not sent in mission as our English Regulars are to convert, and to
save the souls of others.

60. The question may be whether as these have the highest calling in the
Church of God, so they have also a state, And this is not so certain as that
To astate of perfection (as we have seen) twothings are required. The first
that it be ordained to acts of perfection: The second that it be immovable by
vow, oathe, promsse, pacte, or conuenant. The state of Seminary Priests
wants not the first, as even now I showed: only there may seem to be wanting
in them an immobilitie which is required to a state as S. Thomas has
delivered, 2.2.9. 134. a. 4.
but if that were wanting it would not derogate to the perfection of the
Seminary Priests office and calling, because still it should be ordained to
the most perfect actions, and this is the principal in astate of perfection,
and by this, onestate is judged to be more perfect or eminent then another.

61. And yet this immobilitie seems not altogether wanting: for that the
Seminary Priest byndeth himself by oathe to go to England, there to
endeavor with hazard of liberty and life, to convert and gain souls. And
indeed Pope Gregory the thirteenth who founded the English Seminary in Rome
has decreed, Greg. 13. in bulla edita an.
that the Scholars who will enjoy the benefit of that house, shall swear (as
appears by a Bull made for the erecting of that Seminary) that they will
undertake an Ecclesiastical life, and will be ready, omni tempore, at all times.
to return to their Country at the Commandment of the Superior, there to
aid souls, as much as in our Lord they can. 1579. 9. Kal Maij
And in the oath of that and other Colleges, the Scholar swears unto
Almighty God, that he Is and will be in mind prepared, as much as his grace
shall help him to receive orders, and to return into England to gain souls
quotiescumque and quandocumque, so often as ever, and when or what time soever,
is shall seem good in our lord to the superior of the college according to
the Institute thereof to command him. And the more yet to bind the Seminary
Priest to this state, the holy congregation De Propag. fide, by commandment
from the Pope, has ordained, that the Scholars of the popes Semiies shall
swear, that they willnot enter into Religion without license from the Pope, or
not till they have labored three years in the missio^: and if thus they
undertake a Religious life yet by the decree of the said congregation they
must go to labor in the mission.

62. And if by these words, So often as ever, and When or at what time soever,
it be understood that although the Priest upon occasion may retire himself out
of England, he will yet return so often as his superior shall command; then
the Seminary Priests state is immovable, because his oath byndeth him
perpetually to go to England when soever his Superior shall send him: which
argues a perpetual obligation by oath, which as Navarre and others do think
byndeth more then a vow; Nau. c. 27. Man. n. 75. Mayor. in 3. d. 39. q. 2. Va
lentia to 3. diso. 6. q 7. punct. 4 S. Th. 2.2. q. 89. a. 8.
or if not so much as S. Thomas thinks; at least it byndeth sufficiently to
make a state, and more then a pacte or covenant, of the Pastor with his
Church; which Suarez (as we have seen) holds sufficient to make an
immovable state. But because I will not take upon me to interpret so
rigourouslie those words Quotiescu^que and quan documque, but leave that to
Superiors, and to the practice of the same oath, I will not affirm that the
Seminary Priests calling has a sufficient immobilitie to make it a state. At
least this out of the premises is certain, that the Seminary Priests calling,
under the Bishop, is the highest calling in the Church of God, by reason that
it is ordained to acts of greatest perfection, which are to preach, teach,
minister, Sacraments etc. amongst heretics, even with daily hazard of his
liberty and life.

63. By this which has been said of the state of Bishops, Secular Priests,
inferior Pastors and Seminary Priests, may easily be gathered an Answer to
all, which M. Nicholas alleges from the number 14. to the number 16. for the
precedence of Regulars in state of perfection. From which number 16. to the
number 23. he goes about to prove, that Religious men are fitter to be sent in
mission then secular Priests are (which is an odious comparison) whereas
notwithstanding our Savior Christ, who wanted neither wisdom nor will, has
made choice of Bishops and Priests as the Church to this day does, though
Regulars also be sometimes called to be Bishops and Priests, To. 3. lib. 1. de
Rel. c. 19. n. 14.
and to do Episcopal and Priestlie functions. But this, as Suarez says they
do only by delegation and privilege, not by ordinary right and power. And in
this sense, it is out of their element: though M. Nicholas page 232. thinks
this strange: But to this also he is answered above n. 41.42.45. and to his
contentment, if reason will content him.

M. NICHOLAS.
It remains that I explicate a point or two handled by M. Doctor obscurely
and with disadvantage to Religious state. n. 22 in the end. The first is, that
perfection consists in charilie, and that the three Evangelical Counsels,
are noe perfection but instruments and means to perfection etc. n. 23.

THE REPLY.
M. Doctor speaks as S. Thomas and Suarez do.

64. If that saying of M. Doctors displeases M. Nicholas, S. Th. and Suar
infra Caiet. infra Caiet. in 2.2 q. 184. ar. 7
he must blame S. Thomas and Suarez, yea and all deuines who speak as M.
Doctor did. And although I have already cited S. Thomas and Suarez, yet to
ease the Reader of the labor of looking back, I shall here again set down
their words. S. Thomas alleges Moses Abbot his words to show that
perfection consists in charity not in the Counsels. S. Th. 2.2. q. 184. a.
3. in corp.
The words are these; leiunia, vigiliae, meditatio Scripturarum etc. Fastings
watchings, medication of the Scriptures, nakedness, and privation of all riches,
are not perfection, but instruments of perfection, because in them consists
not the end of that discipline, but by them is attained the end. And S. Thomas
himself in his answer to the first argument, has these words Et idcoex ipso
modo loquendi apparet guod consilia sunt quaedam instrumenta perueniendi ad
perfectionem etc. And therefore by the very manner of speaking it appears,
that the Counsels are certain instruments to come to perfection. Suar. to. 3 l
1. c. 15. n. 12.
And Suarez joins with him or rather follows him in the same: Illa consilia
corumque obseruant^a non continent formalem perfectionem etc. Those counsels
and the observation of them do not cont^yne formal perfection, but are
instruments to acquire it: yet without them perfection may be found.

65. But M. Nicholas obiecteth against this, 2.2. q. 184. n. 3.
that S. Thomas in the same article says: Secundario and instrumentaliter
perfectio consistit in consilys: Secundarilie and instrumentall^e perfection
consteth in the Counsels. I answer that to say perction consists
iustrumentallie in the Counsels, is all one as to say with S. Thomas and
Suarez, that they are instruments of perfection, but conteyne not formal
perfection: otherwise S. Thomas should contradict himself. So the Sacraments
do contain grace virtuallie and instrumentallie, but not formallie, because
they are instruments by which grace is produced. And therefore Caietan says:
Vhitunque haec repereris esse perfectiones, fatere verum idesse, sed cum grauo
selis, scilicet instrumentaliter, non essentialiter: whersoeuer thou find
that Counselles Are perfections, grant it, but with a grain of salt, to wit
instrumentallie not essen^iallie. Caiet. in 2. 2. q. 184. art. 7.
But M Nicholas obiecteth again, that S. Thomas says that Perfection
secundarilie and instrumentallie, consists in the Counsels, which is more
then instrumentallie, because (says he) S. Thomas says also, that the
perfection of Christian life consists principally in the love of God,
secondarilie in the Love of our neighbor, and yet (says M. Nicholas) we see
that secundarilie and instrumentallie, are terms much different; for who will
say that the love of our neighbor is only an instrument of Christian
perfection.

65. I answer that S. Thomas in the same article clears this difficulty: For
he says, that Perfectio dicitur in aliquo consistere dupliciter: vno modo
perse and essentialiter: alio modo secunda. rio and accidentaliter: Perfection
is said to be in one two manner of ways: one way essentiallie, another way
secondarilie and accidentally. And so when S. Thomas says that perfection
consists Secundarilie and instrumentallie in the Counsels, his meaining is;
that as the essential perfection of a man consists in his Essential parts
which taken metaphysicallie are animal and Rationale, physicallie, are the body
and the soul, but yet his accidental perfection which also may be called
secondarie, consists in the powers, faculties and other perfectio^s of the
soul, as science and virtue; so the essential perfection of a Christian
consists in charity; but in the Counsels his perfection consists
instrumentallie, because they are instruments to get perfection, and means
also to conserve it; in that they remove the occasions of sin and the
impediments of charity, in which consists the essential perfection: and in
these Connsels perfection also consists, yet but secondarilie and
accidentally, as a man's perfection also secondarilie and accidentally
consists in Science and moral virtues. And this is S. Thomas his meaning,
when in the first article of that question in his answer to the second argument
he says, 2. 2. qi 184. art. 1. ad 2.
that as a living creature is said simply and absolutely to be perfect, when
it has all the members and dispositio^s required to life, but then is said to
be perfect Secundum quid, when it has accidental perfection: so the
perfection of a Christian life, simply and absolutely consists in charity,
but Secundum quid in other virtues which are accidental perfections. 2. 2. q.
184. art. 3.
But when S. Thomas in the same q. and 3. article says that the perfection of
Christian life consists principally in the love of God, Secondarilie in the
loud of our neighbor, he adds not and instrumentallie or accidentally, as
he does when he speaks of the Counselles, but only says, that perfection
consists Secondario^ Secundarilie in the love of our neighbor, by which
diversity of speech he insinuates a difference betwixt the Counselles and the
love of our neighbor; for that in the Counsels perfection so consists
Secundarilie, that it consists also in them instrumentallie and
accidentally, as I have explicated: but in the love of our neighbor,
perfection so consists Secondarilie, that it consists also in it
essentiallie not accidentally or instrumentallie, because the love of our
neighbor for God, is a true act of Charity, though secondarie: and in all
acts of charity essential perfection consists, though principally in the
love of God for himself, which is the first and Principal act of Charity,
secondarilie in the love of our neighbor for God, which is the seco^darie act
of the same virtue.

66. And so let M. Nicholas endeavor all he can, he shall never be able to
prove that perfection consists formallie in the three Evangelical
Counselles, which are poverty charstitie and obedience, nor that they of them
selves are more then instruments and means whereby to attain to Charity,
which is our perfection: and he shall have S. Thomas, Caietan, Suarez and all
Divines that treat of this matter against him.

67. I Deny not but that the acts of the Counsels, as also of the precepts,
yea and of all virtues if they be done in sanctifying grace, and especially if
they proceed from charity do augment grace and perfection and in this sense
are causes of charity and increase of grace, but then they are not taken by
themselves but with grace and Charity. Suar. 20.3. l. 1. c. ^ 1. n. 16.
And I grant with Suarez, that although the general Counsels of poverty,
chastity and obedience be only instruments of perfection; yet there are
particular Counsels, to wit the frequent love of God, or the intense love of
God (which are Counseled but not commanded) which are formal perfection,
because they are formal acts of charity, in which consists perfection.

M. NICHOLAS.
In his 11. chapter n. 12. he writes thus: There is only this difference
betwixt religious and other Christians, that the Religious leave all things
actuallie, other Christians must leave them in prepation of mind n. 24.

THE REPLY.
This distinction is defended as good.

68. This distinction of leaving all actualie or in fact, and in preparation
of mind is used by S. Thomas and all deuines, who also grant that to leave
all actuallie is proper to religious men; to leave all in preparation of mind
is common to all Christians, who ought to be so disposed (as they are if they
be in grace and charity) to leave all, 2.2. q 184. art. 7. ad.
to wit, goods, liberty, life rather then offend God mortallie. These be S.
Thomas his words: Ad Primum ergo dicendum, quod abrenuntiatio propriarum
facultatum dupliciter considerari potest. Vno modo secundum quod est in actu.
Et sic in ea non consistit essentialiter perfectio, sed est quoddam
perfectionis instrumentum etc. Alio modo potest considerari secundum
praeparationem, vt scilicet homo sit paratus (si suerit opus) omnia dimittere
vel distribuere. Et haec pertinet direct ad perfectionem. To the first
therefore it is to be said, that the abrenu^ciation of our own goods may be
considered in two manners. First in act, and so in that (abrenumciation)
Perfection consists not essentiallie, but it is a certain instrument of
perfection etc. Secondly it may be considered in preparation of mind, that
forsoothe a man be prepared if it shall be needful to leave all, or distribute
all. And this directly pertains to perfection. Where M. Nicholas may see the
distinction which he misliked in M. Doctor, and how in actual leaving all,
perfection consists not; but in preparation of mind, which as S. Thomas says
Directly pertains to perfection. And therefore in the same place S. Thomas
says, that the bishop though he leaves not all actuallie, is in a greater
state of perfection then is the Religious who leaves all actuallie, because
the Bishop Is most of all bound to contemn all for the honor of God and the
health of his flock when it shall be needful And this preparation of mind (as
we have heard S. Thomas say) pertains directly to perfection. But let us
hear Caietan, and whether he also be not of S. Thomas his opinion. Caietan
then upon the alleged article of S. Thomas, having, as before I alleged,
affirmed that the Counselles are but instruments of perfection, and that
actuallie to leave all riches, or actuallie to leave a wife, is not perfection,
Caiet. 2.2. q. 184. a. 7.
he adds these words, lide^ aute^ actus secundu^ animi praeparationem sunt
perfectiones long in altiore gradu quam primo modo quoniam sunt inseparabiles
Comites seu effectus essentialis perfectionis, quae in charitate co^sistie: but
the same acts (of the Co^nsels) in preparation of mind, are perfections in a
far higher degree, then in the first manner (that is of actual leaving)
because they are inseparable companions or effects of the essential
perfection which consists incharitie. Why then does M. Nicholas so storm
against M. Doctor who speaks, no otherwise then S. Thomas and Caietan do?

69. But (says M. Nicolas) M. Doctor in his eleaue^th Chapter n. 12
distinguishes the perfection of Charity necessary to all Christians by which
they are resolved not to offend God mortally, from another perfection of
charity, by which we so love God as we are ready not only to observe the
commandments, but also the Counsels for his love and this is the charity of
Religious. It is true M. Doctor said so in his Hierarchy, and why should you
now seek to draw him into an odious sense, as though he meant now to deny it,
and would leave to Regulars only actual leaving of things without the love of
God. Religious may and do no doubt often times leave all actuallie for the
love of god: and the Bishop, as S. Thomas says, and all good Christians out of
God his love are prepared only to leave all: and so the difference betwixt
Religious and other Christians is, that the Religious leave all actuallie,
other Christians not actuallie, but in preparation of mind. And the actual
leaving of all is no perfection, but a means to get perfection, unless it be
joined with the love of God. And therefore M. Doctor says, Chap. 1. n. 12.
that the former that is the actual, leaving of all Is noe perfection but an
instrument of perfection unless it be joined with the love of God in which
consists perfection.

70. So that M. Doctor grants more perfection to the Religious then he does
to other Christians. For he confesses that they so love God that they not only
are willing for the love of God, to observe the commandments as other
Christians ought to be, but also the Counsels; and they are not only willing
for his love to leave all in prepacation of mind as good Christians are, but
also (which is more) for his love do actuallie leave all. Only this is the
difference, that actual leaving of all may be without the love of God (for
although many noe doubt leave all for God his love yet some do not) but the
preparation of mind to leave all rather then offend God mortallie, is so
nearly linked to the love of God that as Caietan above says, Caiet. 22. q.
184. art. 7.
it is an inseparable companion or necessary effect of Charity. And therefore
both S. Thomas and he do affirm (as we have seen) that perfection
consists in that preparation of mind, but not in actual leaving of all unless
that actual leaving proceeds also from charity: which is the self same
that M. Doctor said, as appears by these his words: the former actual
leaning of them is no perfection, but an instrument of perfection, unless it be
joined with the love of God in which consists perfection, as S. Thomas of
Aquin well observes. In his Hier. c. 14. n. 12.
Yea M. Nicholas n. 24. S. Th. 2. 2. qu. 184. ar. 7. ad 1.
(such is the force of vertiei) confesses that M. Doctor says so. Why then
does M. Nicholas tax M. Doctor for distinguishing as he did betwixt actual
leaving all, and leaving all in preparation of mind, which distinction S.
Thomas, Caietan and all divines do admit? Why does he in that 24. number
seek to wrest M. Doctors words to an odious sense. as though he gave to
religious only actual leaving without the love of God: but only because he
was desirous quaerere nodum in scirpo, to seek a knotte in a bulrushe, a
fault where noe fault was, and an untruth where there was nothing but truth.

71. By this which is said; all that which M. Nicholas alleges from the n.
24. to the n. 29. is easily answered: for that all that he says does only
prove these points; first that actual leaving all, conduces to perfection,
which is true, because it is a mean and instrument; and that it is more, out
of the love of God to leave all actuallie, then in preparation of mind,
because in actual leaving is more difficulty; Secondly that actual leaving
of all when it proceeds from the love of God includes formal perfection,
because it includes charity: which also M. Doctor had granted. Thirdly that
it is hard to abound in riches and not to be entangled by them with an
inordinat love or desire of them, Ps. 61.
which is also true: though one may flow ia wealth and yet not be taking by
these lime twigges: according to that: if riches abound set not your heart on
them. Genesis 22.
And therefore Abraham in the midst of his riches, was in mind prepared not only
to have left them, but also to have killed his one and only son, and with
his own hands also, at the commandment of God.

M. NICHOLAS.
In his ninthe Chapter n. 19 M. Doctor writes at if he were not unwilling
the Reader should believe that the Apostles made noe vow of poverty, and
consequently were not religious men, etc.

THE REPLY.
M. Doctor only relates what others say; and indeed it is not so certain,
etc. as M. Nicholas would make it that they were religious. But supposing
they were religious, yet Christ gave to them power to preach and minister
Sacraments not as they were religious but as they were Bishops and Priests.
n. 29.

72. M. Doctor in that place relates only what some divines say, but does
not determine that they were not religious: and therefore says, that supposing
they were religious, yet Christ gave not to them as they were religious power
to preach and minister Sacraments, but only as they were Bishops and Priests,
another manner of life pertaining to religious, another to Pastors: for that
they are fed, these feed, they are perfected, these perfect, they as
regulars are to receive the Sacraments, these are to minister the^, as we have
seen above, and shall see more in the next question. And therefore as M. Doctor
did not determine this question, whether the Apostles were religious or no; so
neither will I: but if it be probable that they were religious (as diverse
authors hold it) so it shall remain for me, who do not desire to detract
from the religious any honor which probably they may claim. Yet I will
relate wat some Authors say in this matter, that the Reader may see that
though it may be probable, yet it is not so certain as M. Nicholas thinks
that they were religious men.

73. 1. p. de Redditibus eccl. c. 1. and 1. p. defens. page 887.
Franciscus Sarmiento a learned Bishop, confesses that the Apostles whilst
they were disciples observed poverty, either by commandment of Christ for
that time, or out of their free will and devotion, for that then thy were in
state of proficients and Scholars: and therefore Christ for that time said
unto them: nolite possidere aurum, neque argentum, neque pecuniam in zonis
vestris: do not possess gold, nor silver, nor money in your purses. Mat 10.
But says he this was but Counsel, or a temporal precept for that time. And
for that time S. Peter said: Ecce nos reliquimus omnia, and sequuti sumus te:
behold vveehaue left all things and have fol. lovved thee. Matt. 19.
But (says he) after they had received power to absolve from sins, and to
bynd and loose, Matt. 18. Ioa^. 20.
and had care and charge of the Church and were become to be Masters, and in
the state of the perfecters of others, then poverty (says he) was not
required at their hands, yea it was convenient that they should have goods,
thereby to help the poor, and to give example of charity: and therefore, says
he page 216. Christ who exacted poverty of the young man Mat. 19 exacted only
of S. Peter (when he made him Pastor) charity Joan. 21. And although they
were not at first Bishops and Pastors, yet because they were shortly to be,
it was not requisite (says the same Bishop) that whilst they were disciples,
they should vow poverty. And then concludes thus: Sub correctione Matris
Ecclesiae existimo nullu^ votum express Apostolos emisisse, quia non legitur
in Scriptura sacrae, sequutos tamen consilia Euangelica, quia perfectissimi
erant, etc. Saron. 1. p. defensionu page 887.
Under correction of our mother the Church, I think that the Apostles made no
vow expresselie, because it is not read in the holy scripture, yet that they
followed the Euangelical Counsels,) because they were most perfect, etc. And
so according to the opinion of this learned Bishop, th Apostles were not
religious because they made no vows.

74. In opusc. 1. dnb. 2.
Vasquez says, that by the fact of the Apostles nothing certain in this
matter can be proved, but only that it was not needful as we have proved,
that they should follow poverty by vow, but by Counsel they followed it
whilst they were under the teaching of Christ. But although the matter be not
certatne, yet (says he without yielding any reason) the opinion of S. Thomas
who says that they vowed the things that pertain to perfection is more
probable. But yet that as certain (says he) may hence be gathered, that at
least the state of Bishops requires not necessarily pouerue; 2. Cor. 11.2.2.
q. 185. art. 6. ad 2.
yea some^ymes by reason of the condition of the time, it is more commodious)
that they should have goods, as says he S. Aussme, S Ambrose, yea and S. Paul
(as S. Thomas confesses) had. Thus far Vasquez. So that in his opinion also
it is not so certain as M. Nicholas makes it, that they vowed poverty and
the things that pertain to perfection. And consequently in his opinion, it
is not certain that they were religious, because vows are necessary to make
one religious, Vasqis. to. 2. in 1.2. disput. 164. c. 5.
yet the same Author (I confess) in another place thinks that the Apostles
vowed the counselles.

75. And although many in the beginning of the Church presently after the
descension of the holy Ghost l^u^d in common, Acto. 2. and 4. In illa ioca.
yet as Estius and Bartholomaeus Petrus Lintrensis affirm it is not necessa^ie
to say that al of ^h^left the propriety of al they had, it being only a
Counsel, and some of these Christias say these two Authors had w^u^s and
children, and so could not leave al, but did only contribute to the community;
and so (say they) al was common amongst them all, as all things are common
amongst friends in regard of use, but not amongst all in respect of propriety
or dominion. So that all at least of the first Christians who are said to have
lived in common, were not religious in the opinion of these two learned
Doctors.

76. Baronius in his A^ales says, Baron. to. 1. an. Christi 34.
that this community of goods amongst the first Christians was not such as
that every one that would be Christian, could not be admitted, unless be
first sold all; or that being made Christian, be was compelled to this as if
to al Christians that rule of life was prescribed: for of Paul it is knovve^
that he warned the Corimthia^s by his Epistle, that so they should give alms
to the needy, that their giving should not be prodigal, least, (said be) that
which to others is an ease, should be to you a tribulation, but by an
equality. Let in this present time, your abundance supply their want. 2.
Cor. 8.
But says Baronius, at the first by a private motion of the holy ghost these
things were done for many causes: as to set an example to posterity of a
stricter life; and therefore (says Baronitus) S. Austine and S. Basile from
this example took the form of their religious life. And this (says he also)
at that time when persecution was immine^t and was presen the to follow, was
convenient, least their goods might afterward be an hindrance unto the^ and
cause of falling in persecution

77. Azer. to. 1. li. 11. mor. Instit. c. 23. Act. 2. and 4.
Azorius relating the manner of life of the first Christians, of which the
Acts of the Apostles do make mention: says: quae viuendi ratio veluti quidam
Coenobyticae vitae typus and figura fuit: which manner of living was a
certain type, and figure of Coenobyticall (or Monastical) life not that he
says not that it was a Coenobytical life, but a figure of that life, which
afterward was to be led. And (says he) if the heretics object, that in
those places (of the Acts) there is noe mention of vows: we now do not
endeavor to shevve against them that a form of a religious life in all parts
perfect, has been before, in Elias, Eliseus, S. Ihon Baptist, and the first
Disciples of the Apostles; but only for a great part it was shadowed and
delineated in these things, which pertain to meat, drink, cloth,
habitation, and manner of life, poverty, obedience, chastity. So that neither
does Azorius hold it as certain that the Apostles or first Christians were
religious; S. Th. 2.2 q. 88. ar. 8. ad 3.
though before he had cited S. Thomas who says they vowed the things that
pertain to perfection; yea and S. Austine who says that the Apostles vowed
poverty. Aug. li. 17. de Ciuit. Dei c. 4. Sarm supra p. 1. defes. page 887.
To which place Franciscus Sarmiento answers, that S. Austine by vow in that
place understands a full purpose of keeping poverty, which purpose says
he, the Apostles left, when they were noe more disciples but Masters and
Pastors.

78. Caietane a Regular, principal Thomist, and Cardinal, in his commentary
upon the 19. Chapter of S. Matthew, explicating these words: Vade and vende
omnia, etc. and vent sequere me: go and sell all, etc. and come and follow me:
Has these words. Attend lector, quod nullum indicitur a IESV votum, volenti
perfectionem vitae assequi: quia non in vinculis votorum, sed in operibus
consistit perfectionis assecutio. Laudabilia sunt vota Religionis, sed non in
illorum professione sed operibus quibus imitamur IESVM CHRISTVM, acquiritur
perfectio. Infinitus est hodie numerus eorum qui acquirunt perfectionis statum
profit endo religionis vota: sed rari sunt qui volunt esse perfecti, imitando
IESVM factis humilitatis, patientiae, mansuetudinis, charitatis, etc. Mark
Reader that noe vow is denounced (or commanded) from IESVS-CHRISTE to him
that will attain to perfection of life: because the attaining of perfection
consists not in the bonds of vows, but in works by which we imitate
JESUS CHRIST. Laudable the vows of Religion, yet not in their profession but
in works by which we imitate JESUS CHRIST perfection is gotten. There is at
this day an infinite number of those who get a state of perfection, by
professing the vows of Religion: but rare they are who will be perfect, by
imitatim JESUS in works of humility, patience, mildenes, charity, etc. So
that Caietan is of opinion, that in the place of Scripture alleged there is
noe mention of vows, and yet they who hold that the Apostles were religious,
out of this place especially prove the three vows of Religion. And seeing that
without vows a man cannot be religious: if out of this place it can not (as
Caietan thinks) be proved that the Apostles vowed, it can not out of this
place be proved, that the Apostles were religious, vows being necessary to
make a man religious.

79. Suarez to. 3. de Relig. l. 2. c. 15. n 13.14 15.16. Vasqu. to. 2. in 1.2.
disp. 164. c. 4. and. 5.
But suppose the Apostles and first Christians vowed, yet does it not follow
that they were religious: For that as Suarez and Vasquez do confess, the
three vows are not sufficient to make one a relig ous man. But the order and
Institute must be approved either by the Bishop in his Diocese, as ancienthe it
was, or by the Pope as afterward was decreed. And the religious his vow must
be accepted of the Superior who has Jurisdiction over him, and authority to
receive his vows. And what certainty is there that the Apostles and first
Christians lived in an order approved by Christ or S. Peter, or that their
vows were accepted by Christ or S. Peter as sufficient to make them
religious, seeing that h^ly Scripture says nothing of any such acceptance?

80. Suarez to. 3. l. 3 de auttore and orig. and antiqu status relig c. 2. ^. 9.
I confess that the learned Suarez defends that the Apostles vowed poverty,
chastity, and obedien^e, and were religious, and that Christ not only
instituted a religious state in general in regard of the three Counselles, but
also made a religion in particular to which he called the Apostles eis proprium
and particularem modum vitae religiosae tribuendo, giving to them a proper and
particular manner of living. Nu. 10.
And this particular manner of living he says consisted in a life mixte partly
contemplative partly active in endeavoring the conversion of souls. But yet
his proofs out of Scripture do only prove that Chariste instituted the
Counsels and commended them: what he alleges out of some Authors proves
only that the Apostles vowed the Counsels, which yet is not sufficient to make
them religious as we have seen: what he brings out of other Authors only
proves that the Apostles gave examples of religious l^f^ by living at first in
common, and by observing poverty, chastity and obedience, but not that they
were religious, though I d^ny not but that some Authors do affirm, that the
Apostles were religious, which yet might be understood, not that they were
properl^e and compleatelie religious, but only for that they observed or vowed
the three Evangelical Counsels.

81. To. 2. in 1. 2. disp. 4. and 5.
Wherefore Vasquez resolves the matter thus: His praemissis, quod attinet ad
station religionis distinguendum est, etc. These things premised, we must
distinguish concerning the state of Religion. For either to have instituted the
state of religion is all one as to have invented and excogitated it, and to
have proposed it to others to be follovved: and in this sense we must say that
the state of religion was instituted by Christ our Lord, that is proposed and
preached, as is gathered by the things we have said: or to institute a state
of religion, is all one as indeeed to erect it under the power and
Jurisdiction of one Head: and so it is not to be said that the institution of
this state is of the deume or natural law. For seeing that to constitute a
state of religion it is necessarily require^ that he who vovveth, should make
the three vows under the Jurisdiction of a Superior (praepositi) as above is
explicated, and seeing that it is in the will of the legislatour to accept of
the three vows of him that vovveth them, that so he may have him for his
subject; it follovvet that the erection of a religious state does pertain to
the positive law, or to the will of the humane legislatour; for that the
three vows made, have not this by the law of nature or by the divine law,
to constitute him that vovveth under the Jurisdiction peculiarly required to
religion, of an head or superior: but this agrees to them by the constitution
of the Church or Chief Bishop. Thus he. And seeing it can not be showed out of
Scripture or cou^cells, or ancient Auctours that the Apostles made their vows
of the three counselles under the jurisdiction of an Head, who accepted their
vows, it can not so clearly be showed that they were properly and
co^pleatelie religious, though they had vowed the three Counselles which are
the substance of all religious. It is true that Christ was head to the
Apostles and Disciples, and so under Christ was S. Peter, Ioa^. 21.
as now the Pope his successor is, to all Christians. But that the Apostles or
Disciples lived under Christ first, and after under S. Peter as religious
under an Abbot, cannot so easily be proved.

82. This I have said only to show that it is not so certain as M. Nicholas
seems to make it, that the Apostles were religiou^ ^en: but not in any case
to take from the Regulars any honor to which they may make any probable
claim; and therefore I leave this opinion which some hold of the Apostles being
religious, in all the probability it might have, not intending to derogate to
it: and this which I have said, I would not have said, had not M. Nicholas
egged and provoked me in his 4. qu. n. 29.

THE SIXTH QVESTION.
Whether Religious as religious be of the Hierarchy.
M. NICHOLAS.
M. Doctor after his wonted manner is here reduplicating Religious as
religious but never secular as secular.

THE REPLY.
Reduplication is defended, and by it, Regulars are excluded from the
Hierarchy.

1. REduplication (as M. Nicholas should know) is frequentlie used in the
Schools, not only of Philosophe but also of divinity, and it serves much to
know, and to distinguishe the natures of things. And to omit examples hereof,
which might be brought out of Philosophy, as album currit but not as album;
musicus aedificat, but not as musicus: In divinity we say, that God dyed,
not as God, but as man; the man Christ created the world, not as man, but as
God: the B. Virgin is mother of God, not as God, but as man: the son of God
was borne of the Virgin MARIE, not as God, but as man, for as God he was borne
only of his eternal father. And so regular Bishops or Priests, are of the
Hierarchy as much as other Bishops and Priests, yet not as regulars, but as
Bishops or Priests.

2. Whereas M. Nicholas excepteth against M. Doctor for saying that Regulars as
Regulars are not of the Hierarchy, and yet says not, that secular Priests as
secular are not of the Hierarchy: I answer, that M. Doctor wanted not his
reason.

3. For we may compare secular Priests with regulars diuerselie. First, as
both are only Christians, and so both are members of the Church, neither of the
Hierarchy, as it is taken for that part of the Church which rules perfecteth
and illuminateth, as we shall show by and by. Secondly we may compare state
with state, to wit, the state of a secular Priest with the state of the
Regular. And then I say that a secular Priest as a secular Priest, that is
considered as in that state, is of the Hierarchy as it consists of diverse
orders, by reason of his order and caracter. And because this caracter makes
him apt for Jurisdiction, he is apt also to be of the Hierarchy as it
imports degree in Jurisdiction. But the regular as regular, that is, taken
Preciselie in the state of a regular, is not of the Hierarchy, because, as a
regular, he has neither order nor Jurisdiction. And so the secular Priest by
virtue of his state of Priesthood, is of the Hierarchy, the regular by virtue
of his state of regular is not of the Hierarchy, though if he be Bishop,
Priest or Deacons, etc. He be also of the Hierarchy as much as the secular
Bishop or Priest. But as regular he is not of the Hierarchy. And if as regular
he were of the Hierarchy, then all regulars even lay brothers and religious
women should be of the Hierarchy.

4. For as because it agrees to man as man to be risibilis, it agrees to
every man to be risibilis, so if it agree to a regular as regular to be of
the Hierarchy, every regular though but a Converse or a lay brother or
Sister, must be of the Hierarchy.

5. Wherefore Dionysius Carthusianus uses M. Doctors reduplication. Dionys.
Carthe. art. 13. in Theoria^ c. 6.
For he explicating S. Dionysius Areopagita says, that S. Denis; declarat, id
est, significat monachorum ordinem non esse pralatum alijs iurisdictionaliter
atque Pralatice, in quantum sunt monachi; does declare, that is, signify that
the order of monks as they are monks (behold his reduplication) is not placed
over others Iurisdictionallie and in manner of Prelates: Though the same author
presently after grants that monks in their own orders have Prelacie over
others as Abbots and Priours have, and that in later times religious men were
more frequentlie admitted to be Priests, which M. Doctor also grants.

6. Wherefore M. Nicholas must not except against that reduplication of Regulars
as Regulars, least he except against the mission of Regulars in o England; for
although their observing of their vows and rules does much perfect them if
they observe them as they should do, yet as Regulars they can do little good
in England in this time of persecution; for that they can not keep the Quire
and Cloister, they cannot rise at midnyght to sing Matins, they cannot wear
their habit, nor use abstinence or other austeritie, externallie, thereby to
give good example (for that by reason of persecution they fare as others, are
lodged and clothed and have almost in all things the same liberty that
others have) and so as Priests they are sent to England, and as Priests by
Preaching and Ministering Sacraments they are most beneficall to our Country.

7. 2.2. q. 184 a. 8 in corp.
And that Priests not Curats or Pastors are in a perfecter state then Regulars
as Regulars not Priests, Thomas planelie teaches who comparing Religious with
secular Priests who are Curats or Archdeacons, says only that a Religious man
as Religious excels the secular Priest not as Priest but as in state of
secular: and no marvel, for so the Priest is considered as he aggreeth with
lay men: and therefore a little after in the same place, he says: Si vero
Religiosus etiam ordine careat (sicut patet de conuersis religionum) sic
manifestum est excellere praeeminentiam ordinis quantum ad dignitatem, etc. But
if the Religious wants also order (as conuerses doc) so it is manifest that
the preeminence of order does excel in dignity: because by holy order one is
deputed to most vvorthie ministeries by which service is done to Christ him
self in the Sacrament of the Altar, to which is required greater interior
sanctity, then the state of Religion requires because as Dionysius says in
his sixth chapter of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; the Monastical order ought
to follovv Priestlie orders, and by their imitation to ascend to divine
things. Thus S. Thomas. And who doubts but that the holy order of Priesthood
especially, excels the regular state which is no h^ly order: and
consequently who can doubt but that a Priest as Priest is in an higher state
then a Regular as Regular? Val. to. 3. disp. 10 q. 2. punct. 5. conc. 2.
Valentia a Jesuit speaking of inferior Prelates says: Si in eiusmodi
Praelatis, etc. If in such Prelates we confider the degree of the holy order,
speaking simply, there is some thing in them vvorthier and more perfect, then in
the religious as religious, not in holy orders. Where we see he uses M.
Doctors reduplication which offends M. Nicholas, and prefers the holy
order before the state and perfection of a religious man who is not in holy
orders.

M. NICHOLAS.
J grante that if we limit the name of Hierarchy to Bishops, Priests,
Deacons, etc. then to say that Religious not Priests or Bishops are not of the
Hierarchy, is no more then to say, religious not Priests or Bishops are no
Priests or Bishops, which surely is no great mystery, but then it should be
proved with what ground the mame of Hierarchy should be so limited. n. 2.

THE REPLY.
How regulars are of the Hierarchy, and how they are not.

8. M. Nicholas from this place begins to prove, that Regulars are of the
Hierarchy. And truly if either God or his Church had bestowed that honor on
them, God forbid that I should go about to take it from them. rather I would
by word and writing defend it and hazard even my life to assure it the more
unto them. But if neither God nor his Church has given them this honor,
neither must we give it to them least we break God his ordinance, neither
should they desire it. But as the laytie murmureth not against the Clergy (as
Core, Dathan and Abiron, Number. 16.
and their followers did against Moses and Aaron) for that they may not
preach nor minister Sacraments: and as those of the secular Clergy ought not
to take it in evil part, that they are not esteemed religious: So neither
should the religious be offended, if we say that they are not of the
Hierarchy, neither God nor his Church having bestowed that honor upon them,
though they be adorned with many other graces. Rather they may rejoice in God,
that they have many perfections of a religious life, which others have not, and
are furnished with more means to attain to perfection then secular Priests
have, and that their state is more secure and free from danger then any other
state is.

9. And if M. Nicholas who endeavors to prove them to be of the Hierarchy
mean only, that they are members of the Church which is a Hierarchy; neither
M. Doctor nor any good Catholic will or can deny it: Nay M. Doctor in his
Hierarchy, Chap. 8. n. 7.
says: that religious men as religious, are a great ornaments to the Church
and are in this sense of the Hierarchy of the Church, in that they are eminent
members of the Church and are ordained to help and assist Bishops and Pastors,
etc.

10. But if he mean that they are of the Hierarchy as commonly it is taken by
S. Denis and divines, for that part of the Church which governs,
illuminateth, perfecteth, and purges the rest by preaching, and administration
of Sacraments, etc. so only Bishops, Pastors, Priests, and other Ministers are
of the Hierarchy. And in this sense the holy Council of Trent takes the
Hierarchy saying: Si quis dixerit in Ecclesia Catholica non esse Hierarchiam
diuina ordinatione institutam, quae constat ex Episcopis and Pres byter is and
Ministris: Anathema sit: If any shall say that there is not in the Church a
Hierarchy instituted by the divine ordinance, which consists of Bishops and
Priests and Ministers: let him be accursed. Sess. 23 can. 6.
Where we see that the Hierarchy is taken only for that part of the Church
which consists of Bishops, Priests, and Ministers, and seeing that Regulars as
Regulars are neither Bishops, Priests, nor Ministers in the Church, as Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons are, they are not, as Regulars of the Hierarchy in this
sense: for if as Regulars they were of the Hierarchy in this sense, then lay
brothers and sisters who are truly Regulars should be of the Hierarchy in the
same sense, and so should be comprehended under Bishops, or Priests, or
Ministers in the Church.

11. And therefore I wonder that M. Nicholas page 165. should say, that it is
temeritie to affirm that the Council intended to define as a matter of fayto,
that under the name of Hierarchy could be compreh^nded only Bishops, Priests,
or other Ministers endued with order or jurisdiction: rather it may seem
great temeritie in M. Nicholas to comprehend Regulars as Regulars under that
definition, they as such being neither Bishops, nor Priests, nor Ministers in
the Church. But peradventure M. Nicholas will comprehend Regulars under the
word Ministers. And why so? are they as Regulars Ministers in the Church, who
as Regulars can not by office preach or Minister Sacraments, or assist at the
Altar with the Deacon and Subdeacon? did he ever read or hear that Regulars
were called Ministers of the Church? Certes Vasquez a Jesuit and Regular,
Vasq. to. 3. disp. 238. c. 2.
under that word Ministris, Ministers, comprehends only Deacons, not other
inferior Ministers, much less under that word would he understand Regulars
who as Regulars were never called Ministers in the Church, they as Regulars
having no Church-functions. Others under that word Ministers, understand
Deacons and Subdeacons: but none understand Regulars.

22. M. Doctor in his Hierarchy, chap. 15. touched this question, whether
regulars be of the Hierarchy in the former sense; and indeed he seemed only to
touch it, and that with great moderation and respect to Religious, and
therefore alleged noe Authors for the proof of it: And I also because I would
not give the least occasion of offense, would have been sparing in this
matter, but that M. Nicholas urges me much in his 6. question where he
handles this point at large, and says n. 1. that nothing is more frequent,
then that some persons (he seems to mean M. Doctor for one) who I dare
say scarcely ever read S. Denis nor ever were much conversant in S. Thomas of
Aquin ( from whom we have the best and almost only Treatises of the
Hierarchy, will be discoursing of the secular Clergy, as though they only
were of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. And because M. Nicholas will seem to
be more conversant in S. Denis and S. Thomas then others are, and says that
from them we have the best and almost only Treatises of the Hierarchy: I
shall especially examine what S. Denis says of the Hierarchy, and I will
show so plainly and clearlie out of him (from whence indeed S. Thomas and
all deuines, have learned that which they say of the Hierarchy) that regulars
in his opinion and as he takes the word Hierarchy are not of the Hierarchy,
that the Reader will confess, that either M. Nicholas never read S. Denis (and
so is of the number of them who as he says scarcely ever read S. Denis, or if
he read him, that he understood him not, or wittinglie and willingly
dissembled his opinion.

13. L. de Eccl. Hierarch. cap. 5.
S. Denis then in his book of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy speaking of those
who are of the Hierarchy reckeneth only the Bishop, Priest, and Deacons: and
says that the Bishops office is to perfect, the Priests to illuminate, the
Deacons to purge. And in the said Chapter in his contemplation he tells how
they all three are ordained. And the Bishop he says is the first and Chief
order, in whom the rest are consummated. For, says he, as the whole Hierarchy
of the Church is consummated in the Chief Hierarch and Bishop, Christ, so
every spiritual and particular Hierarchy, that is every particular Church
is terminated and consummated in its proper Bishop. Which may be noted against
M. Nicholas who would have a particular Church without a particular Bishop. So
that S. Denis in the Hierarchy places only Bishops, Priests and Deacons, to
whom are reduced Subdeacons and other inferior orders, if especially these be
of the divine institution: of which point M. Doctor has disputed in his
Hierarchy.

14. Dion. l. Eccl. Hier, c. 6.
In the next chapter which is the sixth he treats of the three orders of those
that are perfected. And Dionysius Carthusianus in his Elucidation or
explication of this sixth chapter, says that S. Denis in the former chapter
treated of the three orders of perfectors, that is, the Bishop, Priest, and
Deacon, but now in the sixth ^hapter he speaks of three orders of those that
are perfected. And he observes that when S. Denis speaks of the three orders
of those that perfect others, the name order signifies a name of dignity; but
when he speaks of the three orders of them that are perfected: the name order
signifies no name of dignity, but rather is a name of subjection.

15. S. Denis in that sixth chapter says that the orders of those who are
perfected are in general three. The last, as Dionysius Carthusianus
explicateth, to wit, they that are purged are 5. that is, Catechumenes,
Energumenes, Apostataes, vicious, infirm and timide or fearful persons: the
next above them are the people baptized and admitted to the sacred Euchariste:
the highest order of those that are perfected, are the Monks and religious who
therefore are called according to the Translation of Lanselius: Summus little qui
initiantur and perficiuntur ordo: The chief order of those that are initiated
and perfected: not the chief in the Church, because S. Denis places Bishops.
Priests, and Deacons before them, but the first of those who are initiated and
perfected. Dion. Cart. says that the order of Monks is perfectus inter
perficiendos: perfect amongst those that are to be perfected, but not amongst
those that perfect others. Art. 13. super That. 6.


16. All this may be confirmed by what S. Denis says in his Epistle to
Demophilus Monk, where checking him for having Kicked a penitent who was
confessing to the Priest, and for contemptuously using the Priest him self,
he takes him up in these words: Nefas est sacerdorem a Ministris qui to
superiores sunt, aut a tui ordinis Monachis corrigi and reprehendi, etc. It is
not lavvfull that a Priest should be corrected or reprehended by the Ministers
who are above thee, or of the Monks of they order, etc. and he gives the
reason, saying: Sacerdotes autem nuncij atque interpretes (secundum pontifices)
sunt dininorum iudiciorum: ab eis recte and ordine, t^ per medios
interiectosque Ministros, cum tempus posiulabit, diuina disce, a quibus etiam
vt monachus esses habuisti. An non hoc etiam clamant sacramysteria? neque enim
plane omnibus aditus ad Sancta Sanctorum interdictus est, sed proxime ad ea
accedit Pontificum ordo, deinde Sacerdotum, tum secundum hos, ministrorum. Ijs
autem qui Monachi instituti sunt, valuae adytorum occlusae sunt, ad quas and
initiantur and assistunt, non vt eas Custodiant sed vt agnoscant and se and
ordinem suum; propiusque populum quam Ecclesiastici ordinis homines accedunt,
etc. Priests next to the Bishops are the messengers, or relaters and
interpretors of the divine judgments: of them by means of the middle
Ministers, rightly and by order when the time shall require, do thou learn
the divine things, of whom also thou had that thou vvast monk. Do not the
sacred mysteries, erye this? For that all is not interdicted access to the
Holies of Holies; but next to them has access the order of Bishops, then of
Priests, then, after them, of the ministers. But to them who are instituted
monks, the doors of the Chaunselles or secret places of the Temple are shut
at which they are initiated, and do assist not to keep them, but that they
may acknovvledge themselves and their order, and they do approach nearer to
the people then the men of the Ecclesiastical order do. By which it
appears, that according to S. Denis Regulars in his time wen excluded from
the presbytery and the Chaunsell, and only were admitted to the doors, but
were not admitted into that holy and secret place.

17. But let us hear a worthy Regular speak. Father Ihon de S. Francois
General in his time of the order of S. Bernard called the order of the
Fueillianes in Paris who is famous for his Translation of S. Denis his work
into french. He (in his Apollogie for these works in answering an objection
made by Scaliger against them) has these words. Chap. 13. page 74.
Rour l'intelligence de ce que nous disons, faut supposer que saint Denis,
voulant monstrer le bell order qui est en la Hierarchy de l'Eglise, divise tout
le peuple Chrestien en deux parties, don't l'vne est celle du Clerge l'autre est
du peuple laique. Il distingue tout le Clerge en trois ordres: le premier esi
celuy des Euesques, l'autre des Prestres, and le tiers de liturges, etc. For
the understanding of this which we say, it must be supposed that S. Denis
intending to show the goodly order which is in the Hierarchy of the Church,
deuideth all the Christian people into two parts; of which the one is that of
the Clergy, the other of the lay people. He distinguishes all the Clergy
into three orders: The first is that of the Bishops, the other of Priests, and
the third of the liturges, that is Deacons, to whom the other Ministers of the
Church are reduced. He distribueth the people in like manner into three Quires:
the first is that of Catechumenes, Energumenes and Penstents: the second part
is that which is the holy people, and the third is of the Monks. And because
that all the ministry of the Hierarchy consists in three things, either
in purging or illuminating or perfecting; or in being purged, illuminated, or
perfected. Therefore he (S. Denis) calls the order of liturges (Deacons)
(...), purgative order; that of Priests (...), illuminatiue, and that of the
Bishops (...) perfectiue or perfecting. Respectiuelie he (S. Denis) calls the
Catechumenes, Energumens, and Penitents, (...), the order that is purged; the
solie people (...), or (...), illuminated, and the order of Monks (...),
perfected.

18. And a little after this Auctour adds: Voyla done premierement comme il
constitue les Moynes entrele peuple laique qui esloient ceux qui faisoyent
profession d'vne plus grande perfection que les autres, and d'vne vie plus
deuote and spirituelle, renoncans anx affections and soucis d^s chooses de ce
monde, se deuouans and consacrans totalement au service de Dieu, etc. Behold
then first of all how he (S. Denis) places the Monks amongst the lay people,
which Monks, were they who made profession of a greater perfection then
others, and of a life more denoute and spiritual, renouncing the affections
and cares of the things of this world, vowing and co^secrating them selves
wholly to the service of God, L. de Hier. Eccl.c. 6.
etc And after that, to wit in the page 76. and 77. he relates out of S. Denis
how the Priests that were under the Bishop had the office to consecrate the
Monks who made (says he) their profession enter les mains des Prestres ^^
dessoubs des Euesques: betwixt the hands of the Priests under the Bishop. And
page 78. this Auctour shows out of S. Denis in his Epistle to Demophilus
how the rank and place of the Monks in publicque assemblies was with the
lay people, though as we have seen they were above the people and under the
Clergy: and says this Auctour: Leur estoit deffendu d'entrer dans le
Presbytere: It was ferbidden them to enter into the Presbytery. All which
and more S. Denis him self has in his fifth and sixth chapter, of his
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy as may partly appear by that which I have
alleged out of those two chapters.

19. By this it is manifest that according to S. Denis, and as he understands
the word Hierarchy, the Regulars are not of the Hierarchy, that is of that
part of the Church, which governs the rest, and ministers Sacraments and
preaches, and thereby purges, illuminateth and perfecteth, which (as S. Denis
says) are the proper actions of the Hierarchy, and are called Hierarchicall
actions, which also are exercised in the Hierarchy of the Angels in which
the Superior orders illuminate, purge, and perfect the inferior. And
therefore in S. Denis his time regulars took their place beneath the Clergy
and above the lay people. And although in later times the Regulars enjoyed the
Clericall privilege, and were more frequentlie ordained Subdiacons, Deacons,
Priests, yea and Bishops, and as such are of the Hierarchy: yet as Regulars
they are not of the Hierarchy in S. Denis his opinion; for then in his time
also they should have been of the Hierarchy. And M. Nicholas who told us that
many who never read S. Denis are forvvard to discourse of the Clergy as
though they only were of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, Shows that he either
never read, or understood not S. Denis, who will have regulars to be of the
Hierarchy, and even according to S. Denis his opinion.

20. And thus I hope I have brought sufficient proof out of S. Denis to
exclude regulars as regulars from the governing and perfecting Hierarchy,
though I grante them to be eminent members of the Church which is a Hierarchy,
to wit, in like manner as they are members and subjects of the Kingdom, who
though eminent, bear no rule in it. And seeing that (as M. Nicholas confesses)
what other Doctors, even S. Thomas of Aquin, say of the Hierarchy they rake
out of S. Denis, his Authority is to be preferred before them all.

21. Secondly I add to S. Denis and his Translatours and Expositours a reason
or two. And my first shall be taken out of the Council of Trent alleged in my
Reply to this question n. 7. The Council defines, that there is a Hierarchy
in the Church which consists of Bishops, Priests, and Ministers. Ses. 23
can. 6.
But Regulars as Regulars are neither Bishops, Priests, nor Ministers; ergo
they are not of the Hierarchy, as the Council of Trout takes the word
Hierarchy. The minor proposition I have proved in that number; and so the
conclusion must follow.

22. My second reason which excludes them from the Hierarchy in the meaning
of S. Denis, shall be this: They who are of the Hierarchy must simpathise with
that part which is co^fessedlie of it, to wit, with Bishops, Priests, and
Ministers, in their manner of life and profession, in their actions and
functions: but Regulars as Regulars do lead a life altogether different from
the life of Bishops, Priests and Ministers of the Church, and their actions and
functions are as different: ergo Regulars as Regulars are not of the
Hierarchy. The mayor or first proposition is evident, for that all who are of
the same art or trade, or the same science or profession do agree in actions,
functions and manner of life; and therefore lawiers agree in pleading and giving
Counsel, Physicians are busied in prescribing and ministering Physic,
Carpenters work in timber; masons in stone, etc.

23. The minor and second proposition, to wit that Regulars as Regulars do
differ in actions, functio^s, and manner of life I shall prove out of S. Amb.
l. 9. Ep. 82.
Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, and other Authors of good authority: and so the
conclusion must follow. S. Ambrose in an Epistle to them of Vercelles,
co^paring the state of the Clergy with that of the Regulars says: Namque hac
duo in attentiore Christianorum deuotione praestantiora esse quis ambigat,
Clericorum officia and Monachorum instituta? Ista ad comitatem and moralitatem
disciplina, illa ad abstinentiam assuefacta atque patientiam. Haec velut in
quodam Theatro, ista in secreto: spectatur ista illa absconditur: Who can doubt
but that these two, the offices of Clerks, and the institutes of Monks are
the more excelling in the more attent devotion of Christians. This discipline
(of Clerks) accustomed to humanity and morality, that (of Regulars) to
abstinence and patience. This (the state of Clerks) is as in a Theater, that
in secret; this is obuious to the eyes of men, that is hidden. And a little
after: This life therefore (of the Clergy) is in a race, that in a den. This
against the confusion of the world, that against the desire of the flesh; this
subduing that flying the pleasures of the body. This more grate full, that more
secure. This governing it self, that restraining it self, yet both denying
them selves that they may be of Christ, because to the perfect it is said, he
that will come after me, let him deny him self to him self, and take his
cross and follovv me. And again: Haec ergo dimicat, illa se remouet, haec
illecebras vincit, illa refugit, huic mundus triumphatur, illi ignoratur: huic
plura tentamenta, and ideo mayor victoria: illi infrequentior lapsus, and
facilior custodia: This life therefore (of Priests) fights, that (of Regulars)
with draws it self from fight: this overcomes allurements, that flies
them: to this life the world is triumphed over, to that it is banished: To
this life are incident more tentations, and therefore greater victory; To that
life (of Regulars) seeldomer falling, more easy custody.

24. S. Ep. ad Heliodorum
Hiero^ declares this difference of lives thus: Alia est Monachi causa, alia
Clericorum: Clerici pascunt ones, ego pascor: Other is the cause of a Monk,
other of Clerks; Clerks feed the sheep (to wit by preaching and ministering
Sacraments) Jame fed.

25. Possiuine a Jesuit out of diverse Fathers whom he cites in the Margent,
Posseuin. to. 1. l. 5. c. 54.
gathers these differences betwixt the life and functions of Priests and
Regulars: Alij Monastica vitae, alij vero Presbyterij fines, ac diuersa pene
verinsque status olim officia extiterunt. Monachorum illa propria erant, iugis
oration, psalmodia, vigiliae, etc. Others are the ends of Monastical life,
others of Priesthood, and almost diverse in times past were the offices of
both states. These were the proper offices of Monks, continual prayer,
singing of psalms, watchings, fasting, and other exercises, contemplation of
divine things, and eue^ the manner of living was distinct in diet, clothing
place from communicatio^ with other men, according to the Etymology of the
name. And Dionysius Areopagita when he had constituted Monks above the
people, but under the Clergy, (yet who for purity of life should approach
nearest to Ecclesiastical functions) and had described their life and state,
he testifies that by the Apostles they were called Therapeutes of the
lavvfull worship and contemplation of God, to which one thing, they wholy
dedicated them selves, and were called Monks of the undeuided and singular or
sole life (which they professed) and separated from other things. Moreover
the whole rite and ceremony of the Monastical consecration which is to be
seen in S. Denis, does design this secretion and separation, and
transformation, into a sole life and contemplation of God. There are extant of
this thing many decrees of the Fathers in Gratian and Juo. Jn the Council of
Nice we read the 61. 1. q. 1. c. placuit.
cano^ of the Arabicks, that the conversation of Monks according to their name
should be separated from the rest. In the Council of Chalcedon cap. 4. the
life of Monks is defined by prayer, fasting, quietness and clausure or shutting
up. And S. Hierome in his Epistles to Riparius, Paulinus, Heliodorus, Rusticus
and desiderius teaches, that solitarines, prayer without intermission,
watchings, labor of hands, contemplation of divine things, and a penitent
life, by the Apostolical institution altogether separated from others, and
according to the interpretation of the name sole or singular, is proper to
them, that is to Monks. Jn the same manner Chrysostomus also describes the
institute of Monks: Domusluctus (inquit) sunt Monasteria, vbi cinis a^que
cilicium, vbi solitudo, ieiunia, terrenorum duritia lectulorum, nullae ibi
perturbationes, nullae curae, tranquillo nempe in portu nanigant, alta ibi
quies and silentium: Monasteries (says he) are the houses of mourning,
where is Ashes and hair cloth, where is solitude, fasting, the hardenes of
earthly biddes, noe perturbations there, noe cares, for they sail in a quiet
haven: there is great rest and silence. But (says Posseuine) these are the
propter offices of Presbiters and Religious Priests of the institution of
Christ, to employ them selves for the salvation of men, as God his
coadioutors, to edify others by discipline of manners, doctrine of faith, and
ministry of the word, administration of the Sacraments, exemplar life and
prayer, to profit the people. To be brief (as by Dionysius it is delivered)
to purge illuminate and perfect others: which are the proper actions of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. Thus far Posseuinus.

26. The mayor then and minor proposition being proved, the conclusion does
follow in good consequence, to wit, that Regulars who have so different a
manner of living, from Bishops, Priests, and other Ministers of the Church (who
by all men's confession, and by the aforesaid definition of the Council of
Trent, are of the Hierarchy) and who agree not with the^ in any Hierarchiall
actions and functions, which consiste in purging, illuminating and perfecting,
by preaching and administration of Sacraments, are not of the Hierarchy in the
sense and meaning, in which S. Denis and his Translatours and Interpreters do
take the name of Hierarchy, though they be by them placed above the laity,
next to the Clergy, and are of them, and all good Catholics esteemed as
worthy and eminent members of the Church ornaments and aids unto it.

27. By this all that M. Nicholas alleges out of S. Denis him self and other
Authors is answered; for that S. Denis will not be found contrary to him
self: and other Autours as M. Nicholas truly confesses n. 1. Have from him
the bee^ and almost only, Treatises of the Hierarchy. But yet least he, or
some for him, may imagine that I mentioned not his objections because I could
not solue them, I shall set them down.

M. NICHOLAS.
And first of all, it can not be denied but that the name of Hierarchy has a
latitude. For if it has not; I demand whether it signifies only order, or
jurisdiction, etc. n. 3.

THE REPLY.
The Hierarchy comprehends both oder and jurisdiction.

28. To this he might have found his answer in M. Doctors Hierarchy, in the
8. chapter n. 2. and 6. where he is told, that both order and jurisdiction do
make men of the Hierarchy. For if we sprake of the Hierarchy (says M.
Doctor n. 2. as it imports distinction of degrees in power of order: then
only Bishops, Priests, and they who have some order are of the Hierarchy, and
they only in this sense are of the Hierarchy. And in this same sense, Bishops,
Archbishops, and Primates elected only but not in any order, are not of the
Hierarchy; and so if they be not consecrated Bishops, they are not of the
order of Bishops, if they be not consecrated Priests, they are not of the order
of Priests. But if we speak (says M. Doctor) of a Hierarchy as it
imports a distinction of degrees in power of jurisdiction: so Bishops,
Archbishops, and Primates elected only and not consecrated, are of the
Hierarchy, because by their election, when it is confirmed, they have the
jurisdiction of Bishops, Archbishops and Primates. And so that M. Nicholas his
Dilemma: Either the name Hierarchy signifies order only: and then Bishops,
Archbishops, Primates Popes elected only are not of the Hierarchy. If
jurisdiction only: Then Priests, Bishops, Deacons, etc. shall not be of the
Hierarchy, till they be made Pastors. This Dilemma is vain and frivolous;
for that the Hierarchy, as I said, so comprehends both, that order only will
make a man of the Hierarchy as it imports distinction in order, and
jurisdiction only will make him of the Hierarchy as it implies distinction
in power of jurisdiction; and if he have both, then by both titles he is of the
Hierarchy.

To his other demand n. 4. he is also answered in the Hierarchy chap. 5. n.
18. and 21. for if the four lesser orders be of the institutition of the
Church, as some Authors cited by M. Doctor affirm, then they who are under
Subdeacons, are of the Hierarchy in regard of order, by the Churches law and
institution, and not by the divine law and institution: but if they be of the
divine institution, then these Ministers who are under Subdeacons, are of the
Hierarchy in regard of order by the divine institution. And seeing that
Regulars who are neither Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, nor Accolytes,
etc. have neither order nor jurisdiction over the Church, as other Ministers of
the Hierarchy have, they cannot as Regulars, be of the Hierarchy. And
therefore if an Abbot had only primam Tonsuram, the first Tonsure, which is no
order although he have jurisdiction over his Monks; Yet he should not be of
the Hierarchy of the Church, because he has neither order, nor
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction but only Regular. And so an Abbot as Abbot though
he have ordinary power in his Religious order is not so much of the Hierarchy
as a Bishop delegated: because an Abbot not Bishop, Priest, etc. is not of the
Hierarchy at all, but the delegated Bishop has both order and jurisdiction,
and so by both ways is of the Hierarchy. And therefore S. Denis as we have
seen, excludes all Regulars from the Hierarchy, and yet some of them had
jurisdiction over other Monks. Wherefore Regulars must not take this in evil
part, for I give them as much as S. Denis and learned Regulars give them, and
would give them alfo this dignity to be of the governing and perfecting
Hierarchy, if either Christ or his Church had given it unto them.

M. NICHOLAS.
That Religious Superiors, as such, be of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy S.
Bernard cited by M. Doctor, chap. 1. n. 17. does expressly teach, etc. n. 5.

THE REPLY.
S. Bernard is explicated.

I answer that S. Bernard must be so explicated, S. Bernard. l. 3. de consid.
c. 4.
as that he do not contradict S. Denis, from whom (as Mr Nicholas in this
truly says q. 6. n. 1.) we have the best and almost only Treatises of the
Hierarchy, Certain it is, that S. Denis, and his Translatours, and
Interpreters, do give not place to Regulars (amongst whom some were Abbots)
in the Hierarchy, but do place them under the Clergy and Hierarchy, and
only about the laity: and therefore perchance S. Bernard puts Abbots
amongst them that are of the Hierarchy, not because they are properly of the
Hierarchy, but because they are eminent members in the Church and have some
resemblance by reason of their high rank in their Religious orders, with those
that are of the Hierarchy. And if I would take hold of every thing (as M.
Nicholas uses to do) I could confirm this, because S. Bernard in that place,
places. Abbots after Priests. S. Ber. l. 3. de consid. c. 4.
Or else S. Bernard rekeneth Abbots amongst them that are of the Hierarchy,
because in his time most of the^ were Priests, many had Episcopal authority
in some things, Bell. to. 1. l. 1. de council. c. 15.
and many were perchance then (as according to Bellarmine they are now)
admitted by privilege or custom to have their voice in general Councels, and
so by the Ecclesiastical law were of the Hierarchy, as we shall hereafter in
the end of this question, declare.

31. Now whereas M. Nicholas in the same place says, that he has reason to
complain of M. Doctors dealing in alleging S. Bernard, as if he had said
that the Hierarchy of the Church is perturbed when Abbots are subtracted from
the Bishops jurisdiction: vvheras S. Bernard in the very same place, which M.
Doctor cites, does in express words approve the exemption of Abbots from
Bishops, and only disliketh exemption procured out of a spirit of disobedience,
pride and ambition: whereas (I say) he says he has reason to complain on M.
Doctor, it will prove that M. Doctor has reason to complain on him, in
making him say more then he does, for does not S. Bernard say as much as M.
Doctor imputes to him? Does he not complain in that chapter that the order
of the Hierarchy, was then perturbed by exemptions? has he not these
complaining words? Subtrahuntur Abbates Episcopis, Episcopi Archiepiscopis,
Archiepiscopi Patriarchis sen Primatibus. Bona ne species hac? mirum si
excusari queatvel opus. Sic fac titando probatis vos habere plenitudinem
potestatis; sed iustitiae forte non ita. Facit is hoc quia potestis, sed virum
and debeatis quaestio est. Honorum ac dignitatum gradus and ordines quibusque
suos, seruare positi estis non inuidere. Abbots are subtracted from Bishops,
Bishops from Archbishops, ArchBishops from Patriarchs or Primates. And these
words only M. Doctor alleged. But S. Bernard as we have seen goes on
further. Bona ne species hac? Is this a good show? forsoothe if eue^ the
work it self can be excused by so doing. You (he speaks to Pope Eugenius)
prove that you have the fulness of power, but perchance not so of justice, you
do this because you can; but whether you should, there is a question.
Wherefore If S. Bernard in speaking thus much against exemptio^s (to wit which
have no lawful cause) does not deny but that the Pope has power and just
cause to exempte Abbots and Monasteries from the jurisdiction of the Bishop;
much less can M. Nicholas infer against M. Doctor, who said not so much as
he, that he is against all exemptions; but as S. Bernard for all those words
does allow of exemptions when there is just cause (as when a Monastery from
the beginning has been exempte) so might M. Doctor, and so he does.

M. NICHOLAS.
Mauclerus also, whom M. Doctor in his 10. chapter n. 23. styles a learned
Doctor of Sorbon, compares Superiors in Religion to the Principalities;
secular Pastors, inferiors to Bishops, to Archangels; and Priests not Curates
to Angels n. 5.

THE REPLY.
Mauclerus means only that Superiors in Religion have some similitude with
Principalities.

32. M. Nicholas now would place Superiors of Religion not only in the
Hierarchy, but in one of the highst ranks also, for that he says Mauclerus,
compares them to Principalities. And I also honor them not only for their
Religious state, but also for their dignity in Religion: But if S. Denis as we
have seen excludes all Regulars, (amongst who^ were Abbots) from the
Hierarchy, and places them under the Clergy and Hierarchy, and above the
laytie, they ca^ not be of the Hierarchy, unless they be Bishops, Priests, etc.
or have some Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, or by privilege be admitted to the
Hierarchy, as we shall see in the end of this question: and so as Abbots
preciselie they are not of the Hierarchy. I answer therefore first, that as I
honor Mauclerus for that his learned work, and for the great good fame, and
report that goes of him: so if he did hold against S. Denis, I ought te
prefer S. Denis, as he him self would.

33. Secondly I answer that Mauclerus intended not in that place exactlie to
declare who are properly of the Hierarchy of the Church, but only to show how
some in the Church militant resemble one order of the Hierarchy, some another,
though they be not properly of the Hierarchy, Maucl. 1. p. l. 5. c. 5. de
Monarch.
as S. Denis and the Council of Trent do take the name Hierarchy. So he
says, that holy Christians who rapte with the love of God, do contemn the
world, do resemble the Seraphins, as S. Gregory also by him alleges does
affirm, and yet M. Nicholas will not say that all holy women or lay men who
are so rapt with the love of God, are of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. And if
for this resemblance which they have with Seraphins, they are of the Hierarchy
of the Church militant, they should be in the highest rank of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, because they resemble the highest order of the
Angelical Hierarchy; and so should have an higher rank then Bishops; and yet
S. Denis excludes all lay people from the Hierarchy though never so holy and
burning with the love of God. And the reason of this is, because it is not
charity or merit which makes a man of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, but
only order or jurisdiction, or Ecclesiastical office and dignity: and
therefore an evil Bishop has an high rank in the Hierarchy and an holy
layman is not of the Hierarchy. So Mauclerus says, that good Princes, such as
Theodosius and others were, do resemble the Celestial powers, and yet Princes
are reckened amongst the lay people, which S. Denis, as we have seen,
excludes from the governing and perfecting Hierarchy; for although they be
lawful gouernorus of the common wealth, yet they are noe Governors nor
Superiors of the Church, but subjects to her Pastors, and especially to her
chief Pastor. So he says that compassionate and charitable persons, are like
to the Angels, because they have care of pupilles, widows, and the poor, as
Angels have of them who are committed to their custody: and yet lay
Christians though never so charitable, are not of the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy.

M. NICHOLAS.
S. Denis de Eccles. Hierarch. cap. 1. defines a Hierarchy in this manner:
Qui Hierarchia^ dixit, omnium simul sacrorum ordinum dixit dispositionem: He
that names a Hierarchy, names the disposition or due ranking of all sacred
orders. What words are here to exclude Religious men, etc. n. 6.

THE REPLY.
The definition of a Hierarchy is declared against M. Nicholas.

34. Here M. Nicholas urges us with the definition of a Hierarchy, and
argues, as he thinks, a definitione ad definitum, which is one of the best
manners of arguing. For if from the definition of a Hierarchy Regulars are not
excluded, they can not be excluded from the thing defined, that is from the
Hierarchy. And then as making him self cock sure to be of the Hierarchy by
this definition: he demands: What words are here to exclude Religious men?
I am sure (says he) M. Doctor knovveth well, that by sacred orders, S.
Denis, is far from understanding, as some valearned persons might imagine,
holy orders of Priesthood, Deacon, and Subdeacon. But by orders he
understands professions, institutes, offices, degrees. Thus he. And if you
let him go with this interpretation, all Regulars must be of the Hierarchy;
though they be but lay brothers or sisters, and yet as we have seen S. Denis
excludes them from the Hierarchy and Presbiterie, and places them under the
Clergy and above the laytie. So that it should be strange that S. Denis should
define a Hierarchy in the sense in which M. Nicholas takes him, and yet
should exclude them from the Hierarchy: which were to gross a fault to be
attributed to S. Denis; for that it were to comprehend them in the definition,
and yet to exclude them from the definitum, which were as gross a thing, as if
a logician should grant one to be animal rationale, and yet deny him to be
homo, a man.

34. I answer therefore first, that S. Denis has not that definition of a
Hierarchy which M. Nicholas alleges: for he says not, that he that names a
Hierarchy, names the disposition of all sacred orders; nor has he the word
ordinum, orders, but only sacrorum sacred things, to signify that the
Hierarchy is that, in which is a disposition of all sacred functions and
Hierarchicall actions. Lib. de Eccl. Hier. c. 1.
The Greek Text has these words: Cap. 1. (...): which words Perionius
translateth thus into latin: Vt enim qui Hierarchiam dixit, omnium simul
sacrorum dixit descriptionem: sic, qui Hierarcham dicit, is virum diuino numine
afflatum diuinumque declarat, qui omni sacra scientia sit praeditus, in quo
omnis quae eum attingit Hierarchia pure absoluitur ac cognoscitur: And Friar
Iean de S. Francois, whom I above alleged, translateth the same words into
French thus: Car ne plus ne moins, que celuy qui dict Hierarchy, comprend
sommairement l'ordre and disposition de toutes les chooses saints and sacrees
ensemble, etc. And the English both of the greek, latin and french is this:
For as he that names a Hierarchy, names a description (or an order or
disposition as the french translation has) of all the holy things together:
so he that names a Hierarch he declares a man inspired by the divine power
or majesty and a divine man, who is moved with all sacred knowledge, in
whom all the Hierarchy which forteineth to him is purelie complete and
finished. And so in none of these translations is sacrorum ordinum sacred
orders, but only sacrorum holy things, that is sacred and Hierarchicall
actions which are performed by the Hierarchy: which (as S. Denis says) are in
general to purge, illuminate and perfect, by preaching, administration of
Sacraments and such like sacred functions. So that according to S. Denis as the
Hierarchy is an order and disposition of all the sacred functions and actions,
so a Hierarch which is a spiritual Prince, to wit the Bishop, has in him all
sacred orders and functions, and comprehends all power and functions, which
are in inferior ministers: and so all the functio^s of the Hierarchy of the
Church are compendiouslie comprehended in him. And thus Dionysius Cartusianus
does expound the former words, Dion. Cart. art. 1.
saying: Nefiraigitur Hierarchia, puta Ecclesiastica, dicitur and est continens
omnium quae iuxta eam su^t sacrorum, id est, continua est omnium sacrorum ad
ipsam spectantium, puta sanctorum actuum and sacramentorum: Our Hierarchy
therefore, to wit Ecclesiastical, is named and is containing all sacred or
holy things which are apperteining to it, that is, it is couteining all
sacred things belonging to it, to wit holy actions and Sacraments. I grante
that Petrus Lansselius of the Society of Jesus, in his translation of S.
Denis, has the words which M. Nicholas has and as it is like took out of him
for he translateth it thus: Vt enim qui Hierarchia^ dixit, omniu^ simul
sacrorum ordinum dixit dispositionem: For as he that names a Hierarchy,
names a disposition of all sacred orders (in which word Orders M. Nicholas
would have Religious orders and institutes comprehended) yet the same Author
in his notes upon the first chapter of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,
confesses that Perionius translateth these words of S. Denis as we have
showed; and that other Authors read sacrorum, sacred things, without ordinum,
orders, but says he, verto sacrorum ordinum, I translate it holy orders, and
yet gives no reason sufficient, why he leaves the text which has sacrorum
only, and why he dissenteth from other Auctours.

35. Secondly I answer, that although S. Denis had said, that the Hierarchy
is a disposition of all holy orders, yet he could not have understood Religious
orders, but only those orders and functions which pertain to the perfecting
illuminating and purging Hierarchy; because he who afterward in his 5. and 6.
chapter of his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy in express terms excludes
Regulars, and consequently their Religious orders from the Hierarchy; would
not have defined a Hierarchy a disposition or description of all holy orders,
even Religious; for that so he should have contradicted him him self, and
should have denied the^ the definitu^, in his 5. and 6. chap. to who^ he had
granted the definition, in his first chapter: that is should have denied the^
to be of the Hierarchy, to whom agreed the definition of the Hierarchy. I
know that some do other wise translate the alleged place, Ambr. Came.
and for Hierarchia do put Sacerdotium: but yet so as their exposition also
excludes Regulars from the Hierarchy.

M. NICHOLAS.
But why should I seek a better interpretour then S. Denis himself? who in
his 6. chapter titulo Contemplatio, does expressly put Monks to be one of the
orders in the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy: and a little after the beginning of
the same chapter he plainly says: Summus little omnium qui initiantur and
perficiuntur ordo, est sanctorum Monachorum: The highest of these that are
initiated and perfected, is the order of holy Monks. Before you heard him say
that a Hierarchy was a dispofition of holy orders, and now all most word
for word he says, that Religion is ordo sanctorum Monachorum, the order of
holy Monks n. 6.

THE REPLY.
M. Nicholas by the aforesaid words proves him self not to be of the
perfecting, illuminating and purging Hierarchy, but only, as lay people are,
of the Hierarchy of the Church.

36. By this one may gather, that M. Nicholas either does not understand S.
Denis, or else is driven to his shifts, and therefore is forced to make use of
every thing that has but the least appearance; though indeed it be against
him. For in that S. Denis says, that the order of Monks is the chief of
those that are initiated he plainly excludes them from the purging,
illuminating, and perfecting Hierarchy, and places them under the Clergy,
and amongst the people that have noe government, nor Ecclesiastical, or
Hierarchicall function, but are initiated, purged, illuminated and perfected
with the people, yet so as they, by reason of their regular state, have the
chief place amongst them. So that Regulars are of the Hierarchy of the
Church, as the people is of the Kingdom, but they are not of that part of the
Church which governs, purges, illuminateth, and perfecteth by preaching and
administration of Sacraments. And therefore Dionysius Carthusianus in his
Elucidation of the 6. chapter of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, as above we
have seen, says, that S. Denis in the 5. chaprer treated of the three orders
of perfectors, that is Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and in the 6. chapter of the
three orders of those who are prefected, amongst whom are Regulars; and says
he, when he speaks of the perfecting orders, the name order is a name of
dignity, when he speaks of the orders that are perfected, the name order is
a name of subjection. And again (says Dion. Carthusianus) the higher order of
these which yet are perfected (as S. Denis him self also says in the sixth
chapter,) is the order of Monks who (says Carthusianus) are called
consummatus ordo, a consummate order, that is perfectus inter perficiendos,
perfect amongst those that are to be perfected, not in the order of these that
perfect others: for in that order the first (as we have seen) is the order of
Bishops, the second is the order of Priests, the third the order of Deacons, to
who^ other ministers may be reduced: and after them S. Denis and the Bernardine
above alleged do place the Regulars above the lay people, but under the
Clergy. And so although the orders of Regulars, be orders of the Church and a
great ornament to it, yet they are noe orders of the purging, illuminating, and
perfecting Hierarchy, unless they be Bishops, Priests, etc. but are purged,
illuminated, and perfected by it.

M. NICHOLAS.
Out of S. Thomas, it will be no less easy to prove that Religious men are of
the Hierarchy. He therefore 1. p. quaest. 108. art. 1. in corp. says thus:
Hierarchia est sacer principatus. In nomine autem principatus, etc. A
Hierarchy is an holy principality, by which name of principality, two
things are understood, namely the Prince him self, and a multitude ordered
under the Prince. Are not I pray you Religious men a multitude ordered under
one Prince, the Vicar of Christ and S. Peter's Successor? n. 7.

THE REPLY.
Regulars are a multitude ordered under the head of the Church, as the people
of a Kingdom are ordered under the King, but not as they who govern and rule.

37. M. Nickolas says it will be as easy to prove out of S. Thomas that
Regulars are of the Hierarchy, as it was to prou^ it out of S. Denis: and I
believe him. But as it was impossible for him to prove it out of S. Denis, so
is it as impossible for him to prove it out of S. Thomas, who takes, all he
has almost of the Hierarchy, out of S. Denis, and will not, nay does not in
any wise contradict him. But says M. Nicholas, Regulars are a multitude
ordered under one Prince Christ's vicar: ergo they are of the Hierarchy. I
answer that if this argme^t were good, it would prove also that the degrees
and orders of the laytie are of the Hierarchy, for that they also are a
multitude ordered by the head of the Church, and subordinate to him in matters
of faith and Religion.

38. Secondly I answer, that two ways one may be of the Hierarchy of the
Church, first as the people are of the Kingdom, that is as subjects, and
such as are ruled: and so all Catholic Christians are of the Hierarchy of
the Church, and are a multitude ordered under one spiritual Prince, the Bishop
of Rome. S. Peter's Successor. Seconlie, as the King and his Consellors and
Officers who bear rule in the Kingdom: and so only Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
Pastors, and those tha^ under the chief Bishop govern the Church, and who
purge (as S. Denis says) illuminate, and perfect others by ruling, preaching,
and administration of Sacraments, are of the Hierarchy: and in this sense,
Regulars as Regulars, or who are not Bishops, Priests, etc. are not of the
Hierarchy, as above is euidenlie showed out of S. Denis and others. And this
distinction M. Doctor hath^ his Hierarchy, chap. 8. n. 1. where he has these
words, which if M. Nicholas had marked he would not have made this objection:
for there M. Doctor has these words: It fellovveth now that I breifely
declare which in partieular are these orders, and whether all that are in
dignity in the Church be of the Hierarchy, not only as the laity is, which
is of this Hierarchy, as the common people are of the Kingdom, but also as
who bear office in the Church.

M. NICHOLAS.
In his second article he (S. Thomas) demands, whether in one Hierarchy
there be more orders (of Angels) and he answers that there are: Because it
should not be an ordered, but a confused multitude, if in it there were not
diverse orders, which diversity of orders, is considered according to diverse
offices and acts as in one city there are diverse orders according to diverse
actions: for there is one order of judges, another of the fighting men, another
of such as till the ground. Mark how S. Thomas does hold that diverse
functions and acts are sufficient for the distinction of Hierarchies, although
they do not alvvayes, presuppose jurisdiction, etc. n. 7.

THE REPLY.
Not all acts and functions, but Hierarchicall which are purging,
illuminating, and perfecting, make men of the Hierarchy: and there is a
difference betwixt the Hierarchy of Angels, and of the Church militant.

39. M. Nicholas because he knows that Regulars not Bishops, Priests, etc.
do not exercice Hierarchicall actions, which are purging illuminating, and
perfecting, by preaching and administration of Sacraments; would feign have it
granted unto him, that all diversity of acts are sufficient to make me^ of
diverse orders of the Hierarchy. And this he proves out of S. Thomas, by two
examples, the one is of the diverse orders of Angels, the other is of the diverse
orders in a city, as of judges, soldiers, and those that till the ground. But
as concerning the Angels, 1. p. q. 50. ar. 4.
it is true in S. Thomas his opinion, (who holds every one of them to be of
diverse natures) that every one of them (saving the last and lowest) is of the
Hierarchy: because every one purges, illuminateth, and perfecteth his
inferours. I say saving the last, because the last and lowest Angels is purged
from ignorance, illuminated, and perfected, but purges, illuminateth or
perfecteh no Angel, he being the lowest, and so he in respect of the Superior
Angels is not of the Hierarchy, but only as the people is of the Kingdom, as
before is said. Yet this lowest Angel, does exercise Hierarchicall acts in
respect of men, to whom he is superior in nature, and who^ he can purge from
ignorance, illuminate, and perfect. Yet all the lowest orders (as S. Denis
teaches lib. Eccl. Hier. c. 5.) may respectiuelie be called orders initiated
and perfected in respect of the higher Angels. But in the opinion of other
divines, who hold that all the Angels of the same order are of one nature and
do not differ in nature and function, but only indiuiduallie; Vasq. 1. p.
disp. 181. c. 2.
and not specie, but numere: (for which opinion Vasquez cites diverse divines,
and which diverse learned Jesuits do embrace) all the lower orders are of the
purging, illuminating and perfecting Hierarchy in respect of the lowest order,
but all of the lowest order, are in respect of all the higher orders, as the
people is of the Kingdom, because this last order, in this opinion, bears no
rule or office over any order of Angels, nor purges, illuminateth or
perfecteth any Angel; yet in respect of men, this order exercises
Hierarchicall actions of purging, illuminating, and perfecting So that M.
Nicholas may see, that there is a difference betwixt the Hierarchy of Angels
and of men; for that in S. Thomas his opinion all the Angels as they are every
one of distinct natures, do exercise Hierarchicall actions over inferior
Angels, and only the last Angel is not of the purging, illuminating and
perfecting Hierarchy, in respect of Angels, because he is purged, illuminated
and perfected, of the superior Angel, but purges, illuminateth, and
perfecteth no Angel, he being the last. And so according to this opinion, all
the Angels are of the perfecting Hierarchy saving only the lowest. But the
Hierarchy of the Church milita^t though it consist of diverse dignities, orders
and offices, as under the Pope, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops,
Priests, Deaco^s, etc. yet there are many of the same order and jurisdiction,
as many Bishops are of the same order of Bishops, many Priests are of the same
order of Prieshood. But Regulars as Regulars having no Hierarchicall action
though they have other Regular actions, are not of the ruling and perfecting
Hierarchy.

40. Now as concerning M. Nicholas his other example of a City, in which are
diverse orders, according to diverse actions, as the order of judges, the order
of soliders, the order of husbandmen and tillers of the ground: I answer that
S. Thomas brings this example, to show that there are diverse orders amongst
the Angels, as there is in a well ordered City: but his intention was not to
show that all the diverse orders in a City that have diverse actions, are of
that part of the City that rules, and directs, as the superior Angels
illuminate and perfect the inferior. For in the City some rule and govern as
the Mayor and Alderme^ and judges, but the orders of Tailors and show makers,
and other artificers, though they have diverse actions and functions, yet they
are not of that part of the City which rules but which is ruled. And so
although Regulars have diverse actions according to their diverse orders, yet
these actions being not Hierarchicall, they are not sufficient to make them of
the ruling, purging illuminating, and perfecting Hierarchy; but only they are
of the Hierarchy, as the common people that bears no rule in the common
wealth, is of the Kingdom, amongst which people not with standing, there are
may arts trades, and actions, which yet do not make them rulers in the
Kingdom.

41. And by this M. Nicholas is answered to all that he brings in the 8.
number; for that all he there alleges in commendation of Religious orders,
proves only, that Regulars are worthy and eminent members of the Church for
their sanctity and perfection of life, but not that they are of the Hierarchy
in that sense as S. Denis takes the Hierarchy, because as Regulars they are
not to govern the Church, nor to preach and minister Sacraments, but only as
Bishops or Priests, if they be so. And M. Nicholas should know that oue may be
a Saint, yea and a designed and resolved martyr, and yet not be of the
Hierarchy in this sense, as if he be a lay man, or a lay brother. And so it is
not grace, nor merit, nor mortification, nor perfection which makes a man of
the Hierarchy, but order, and office, by which he exercises Hierarchicall
actions.

M. NICHOLAS.
In the said question art. 8. he (S. Thomas) demands whether men be assumed to
the orders of Angels. And his resolution is: that by grace men may merit so
great glory, that they may be made equal to Angels according to every degree
of Angels, etc. n 9.

THE REPLY.
That men may be assumed to all orders of Angels in heaven in respect of
glory, does not argue that in this life they were of the Hierarchy in the
sense aforesaid.

42. I grante that men by grace and merit, may be assumed to the orders of
Angels and to the lower or higher orders according as their grace and merit is
greater or lesser. But what then? If gratia consummata (says he) grace in his
full perfection, can place men in the same orders with Angels in the
celestial Hierarchy, we have no reason to doubt, but that a profession and
state of life, most powerful for attaining perfection or grace and charity of
this life, may suffice to place the Professors thereof amongst the cheifest
orders of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy which is framed to the similitude of
that other in heaven. Thus M. Nicholas. And if you admit of his argument, you
must admit all Regulars even lay brothers (so they be perfect) to be in the
Hierarchy of the Church, as high in rank as Bishops: for Bishops are the
cheifest orders. But first I answer that if his argument were good it would
conclude against S. Denis, who as we have alleged above, excludes all
Regulars, as such, from the Hierarchy, though their states of life be never so
powerful for attaining of perfection or grace and charity. Secondly I
answer that this argument is so poor an one that I mernell M. Nicholas a
divine, should propose it. For that deuines know, that by grace men cannot
merit to be indeed Angels or Archa^gels, or Cherubins, or Seraphins, but only
can merit as great glory as they have: and because some saints have merited
as great glory as Angels, others as Archangels, others as Cherubins or
Seraphins have, therefore they are said to be assumed to the order of Angels,
Archangels or other orders. And because it is not grace but the order, state
and office of purging, illuminating, and perfecting, which makes one of the
Hierarchy: a Christian in this life may merit as great glory, and attain at
length unto as great glory as Cherubins and Seraphins have, though he was not
of any order of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. And so it does not follow, as
M. Nicholas thought, that because men*by grace and merit do attain to the
glory of the orders of Angels, that therefore in this life they were of any
order of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, for that S. Benedict and S. Frauncis
may by the great charity and grace they had here, be assumpted to the glory
of the Seraphins, and yet here they were not Priests. And a lay brother or
sister, yea a poor shepherd who was in noe order of the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, but only was of the Hierarchy as the common people is of the
Kingdom, that it was a member of the Church, which is a Hierarchy, but did
bear noe office in it; may be assumpted in glory to higher orders then many
are, who here were Bishops, Patriarchs yea Popes. Otherwise according to M.
Nicholas his doctrine because S. Frau^cis in this life was in a state powerful
for attaining of grace and perfection here by which be merited greater glory
then a Pope does and for which peradventure he is assumpted to the glory of
Seraphins, he must in this life have had an higher rank in the Hierarchy then
the Pope had. But as I have ^ould M. Nicholas it is not grace merit or
perfection, that makes a man of the perfecting Hierarchy, but Ecclesiastical
order, office or dignity.

M. NICHOLAS.
What we have labored in proving that Religious as such, truly, and properly
are of the Hierarchy, has not been so much in regard of our selves as out of
duty and gratitude to those pillars of Gods Church, those Counselors and sole
electours of Christ's Vicar, etc.

THE REPLY.
M. Nicholas has in this labored in vain, and he vvrongeth M. Doctor, as
though he excluded Cardinals from the Hierarchy n. 10.

43. M. Nicholas has indeed labored to prove that Regulars as such, are of
the Hierarchy: but as it is evident by what I have said out of S. Denis and
other Authors, he has not been able to prove it, and so he has labored in
vain. And whereas he says that he has taken these pains rather out of
respect to those most emine^t Prelates the Cardinals, the^ for respect to the
state of Regulars: as he currieth favor with the Cardinals: so he wrongeth
M. Doctor, in that he insinuates that he excludes them from the Hierarchy:
whereas he in his tenth chapter of his Hierarchy has a great and long
commendation of them, their office and dignity. And in his eight chapter,
moving the question, who in particular are of the Hierarchy: he says n. 2.
that to the deciding of this controversy: we must distinguith two vvayes by
which Christians may be of the Hierarchy. First then (says he) if we speak
of the Hierarchy as it imports distinction of degrees in power of order,
then only Bishops, Priests, Deacons, etc. are of the Hierarchy: And
Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, etc. unless they have some order, are not,
in this sense, of the Hierarchy, because their dignities are not orders, but
dignities and jurisdictions. Bur if we speak (says he n. 6.) of a Hierarchy,
as it imports a distinction of degrees in power of jurisdiction and
dignity, etc. in this respect there are diverse orders and degrees amongst
Bishops, which make also a kind of Hierarchy, etc. to wit Patriarchs or
Primates, Archbishops and Bishops. And heretofore Patriarchs were of the
highest rank of Bishops; and amongst them the Patriarchs of Rome, Alexandria
and Antioche and after wards of Constantinople, had the precedence, after whom
followed Archbishops and Bishops: but now Cardinals, and ever since they
were Counselors to the Pope and his Electours, take place of all Patriarchs
and are in dignity next to the Pope. And so Cardinals though they have noe
order (as most of them have holy orders, yea many of them are Bishops) yet in
this respect, to wit, as the Hierarchy consists, of diverse degrees in power
of jurisdiction and dignity, (which is the second way by which M. Doctor said
that men are of the Hierarchy) are of the Hierarchy and above Bishops,
Archbishops and Patriarchs, next to the Pope. Now whether this their dignity
of Cardinal be of the divine law, as Turrecremata thinks, or of the
Ecclesiastical law, I will not dispute, but refer the reader to M. Doctors
tenth chapter: certain at least it is that the Pope could institute such a
dignity by which the Cardinal though not in orders, is Counselor to the
Pope, Electour of him, has his decisiue voice in a general Council, and
takes his precedence above all other Prelates and next unto the Pope. And
therefore Cardinal Bellarmine says, that if we compare the jurisdiction which
the Bishop has over his own proper Church with that which the Cardinal has
over his title then ordinarily the Bishop has the greater jurisdiction. To.
1. 3. 1. de Cler. c. 16.
But if we consider the government of the whole Church in which the Cardinal
has his part, in that he is one of the Popes Counselor: then the Cardinal
Priest or Deaco^ only, is greater then the Bishop. The same learned Cardinal
in another place: says that Bishops have an ordinary right of discipline and
suffrage in provincial and general Councelles, To. 1. l 1. de Conc. c. 15.
and by privilege and by custom Cardinals and Abbots, and Generalles of
orders, have the same right. And if by this custom or privilege granted by
the Church, Generalles of Religious orders, and Abbots be of the Hierarchy, I
will not giane say it: only I say with M. Doctor yea with S. Denis, S.
Paul's Scholar, that Regulars as Regulars, and Abbots as Abbots are not of the
Hierarchy, and therefore were excluded by S. Denis; but if they be now, it is
by the Churches privilege or custom; which privilege and custom M. Nicholas
shall never be able to show for other Regulars.

44. And therefore whereas M. Nicholas n. 10. says that he has labored rather
for Cardinals then Regulars in laboring to prove Regulars to be of the
Hierarchy: he has labored in vain, not having been able te prove Regulars
as Regulars to be of the Hierarchy; and he does wrong to those most eminent
Prelates and Pillars of Gods Church, as though they could not be of the
Hierarchy unless Regulars also were: whereas Cardinals by their dignity and
by the care which they have in governing under the Pope the universal Church,
are assuredly of the Hierarchy as it consists of diverse degrees in power, of
jurisdiction and dignity, as M. Doctor said: they even as Cardinals (though
not Priests) having the highest ra^ke and Ecclesiastical dignity and office
in the external court of all the Prelates of the Church, whereas Regulars as
Regulars bear noe rule nor office in the Church, and so are not of the
governing Hierarchy.

45. Thus I have proved sufficiently, that to be true which M. Doctor
auerred; to wit, that Regulars as Regulars, are not of the ruling and
perfecting Hierarchy: and this, by the testimony of S. Denis, S. Paul's
Scholar, (of whom S. Thomas and all divines have learned that which they
teach of the Hierarchy) as also by his Transtatours and Expositours, yea and
by theological arguments: and I have answered clearlie all the arguments which
M. Nicholas has been able to allege to the contrary. And therefore I
conclude, that Regulars as Regulars, though their institutes and orders be most
holy, and which add much aid and great splendor to the Church, and though
they be eminent members of the Church, yet they are not of the Hierarchy in
that sense as S. Denis and his Translatours and Expositours, or as the Council
of Trent takes the name Hierarchy.

46. S. Denis l. Eccl. Hier. c. 5. and 6. Conc. Trid. sess. 23. can. 6.
But let not therefore either Priests or Bishops glory (unless it be in our
lord) that they are of the Hierarchy; for that their charge increases with
their dignity, and their burden is the heavier, the greater their honor is:
and if they live not accordingly, that dignity will not suffice to their
salvation: but rather it will serve to their greater damnation. For as their
rank and degree is higher in the Church of God, so it is more exposed to
danger; and the higher they stand the more subject they are to falling: and the
lower and greater is their fall, if they fall: because as S. Hierome says: Non
est facile stare loco Pauli, tenere gradum Petri: It is not easy to stand in
the place of Paul, to hold the degree of Peter. And let not Regulars be
dejected or grieved in mind, because as Regulars they are not of the
Hierarchy: let it suffice them that of later years they are also assumpted to
the Clergy and Hierarchy, most of them being Priests and some Bishops: and
let it content them (as indeed it may both content and confort them) that their
life is more secure and free from all occasions of sin, and that they have
better means to dompte their passions, to curb sensuality, to mortify their
bodies, to satisfy for sin, to attain to perfection, and to gain an higher
degree in glory, so that they use their means, fulfill their vows, and
observe their rules and orders.

THE SEVENTH QVESTION.
Whether by the precedent questions we have sufficiently ansvvered M.
Doctors Treatise, for such points as either deserved confutation, or required
explication.
M. NICHOLAS.
J must ingeniouslie confess that J have not labored to examine all, etc. n.
1.

THE REPLY.
YOU have not left any one of M. Doctors propositions or assertions
unexamined; but you have not refuted any one, as is evident by my Reply to the
former questions. For neither have you proved against M. Doctor, that without
a particular Bishop there may be a particular Church: nor that every notable
part of the Church (such as England, France or Spain is) ought not by the
divine law to have at least one Bishop: nor that such a country as England,
Spain or France is, can except against a Bishop for fear of persecution
though it should be increased by occasion of the Bishops presence: nor that
Regulars are in an higher state then Bishops; nay you have not proved
sufficiently that Regulars are in an higher state then inferior Pastors: nor
that Religious as Religious are of the Hierarchy: nor have you answered any
one of M. Doctors arguments grounded in reason or authority of fathers or
divines by which he proved the former positions, as is evident by my Reply. And
therefore this your last question being principally a recapitulation only of
what you have done, I might here make an end, all you have done, being just
nothing. But because you could answer to nothing, disprove nothing, refute
nothing that was to the purpose, or to the points in controversy, you carpe at
by speeches which it little skilled were they true or not; and therefore a reply
to this your last question might well by me have been spared, yet least you
should think that even in those things. I refused to encounter with you: I shall
also breiflie give you your answer to them.

M. NICHOLAS.
His Epistle in words exhorts to charity but how much in deeds he has by
vvriting this book prejudiced charity, etc. n. 2.

THE REPLY.
M. Doctor has not prejudiced charity.

2. I do not know how M. Doctor has prejudiced charity by writing his
book; unless to exhort to charity be to prejudice charity. For, of this I am
sure, that in his Epistle dedicatorie he exhorts and alleges many motives
to charity, as he does also in diverse parts of his book, and he has not one
tarte or bitter word in his book against any state, order or person, but he
comendeth all, and yields as much to the Regular state as S. Thomas of Aquin,
Suarez and the leardnest Regular Auctours do. But to this he is answered in my
Epistle to the Reader, and in my Reply to the first question.

M. NICHOLAS.
The Church must be governed by the Clergy, I grant, but J never heard that it
must be governed by the secular Clergy, etc. n. 2.

THE REPLY.
This is a strange speech and is ansvvered above chap. 9.

3. It is to me a strange speech and little edifying, to say, that he never
heard that the Church must be governed by the secular Clergy. By what other
Clergy then by the secular Clergy has the Church hitherto for the most part
been governed, and by what other Clergy at this day is it ordinarily
governed, then by the secular Clergy? Has not M. Doctor showed and
demonstrated in his ninth chapter out of Scripture and Fathers, that Bishops,
Priests, and Pastors, are by the divine law to govern the Church and to
preach and minister Sacraments? and has he not showed very sufficiently that
the government of the Church and preaching, and ministering of Sacraments does
not appertain to Regulars as Regulars? yet as M. Doctor grants in that 9.
chapter n. 15.16.17. that Regulars may be, and often times are assumpted to be
Bishops, yea and Popes; and then, to them also appertains the government of
the Church, but not to them as Regulars, for to them in that consideration,
Monastical and Regular actions and functio^s appertain, not Ecclesiastical.

And therefore S. Thomas cited by M. Doctor n. S. Tho. 2.2. q. 187. a. 1. in
corp.
17. page 255. says, that a thing may be said unlawful for one to do, two
ways; first because there is some thing in him repugnant to such an action. So
he who is irregular, may not receive holy orders; so a public sinner may not
preach; so one in mortal sin may not receive the Blessed Sacrament; so a
Priest in mortal sin must not celebrate mass, nor absolve from sins.
Secondly it may be said to be unlawful for one to do a thing, not because
there is any thing repugnant in him, but because there is something wanting in
him to do it: so it is not lawful for a Deacon to say mass because he has
not the order of a Priest. And in this sense (says he) it is not lawful for a
Regular to preach and minister Sacraments. Yet as a Deacon is capable of the
order of Priesthood, and then may say mass; so a Regular is capable of order
and jurisdiction, and then he may preach and minister Sacraments. But as you
can not say absolutely that a Deacon may celebrate mass, because he as Deacon
wants the order of Priesthood: so it can not be said absolutely that
Regulars are Governors of the Church, because as Regulars, they want both order
and jurisdiction which jurisdiction ordinatilie is not given to Regulars but to
secular Priests; and therefore, that speech of M. Nicholas, I never heard that
the church must be governed by the secular Clergy is very har she. Sua^. to.
1. l. 1. do rel. c. 18. n. 14.
For that to the secular Clergy ordinarily this government of the Church is
given, and if to Regulars it be some times given. it is given as Suarez says
by delegation or privilege, not by ordinary right; and in this, Regulars are
accessorie not principal as I have above declared. And therefore Clement the
fifth calls Regulars Cooperatours. Supra q. 5. n. 41. and 42. Clem. Dudu^ de
sep. 1. Cor. 12.


5. And so M. Nicholas in this his 2. number was to forward in carping at M.
Doctor for applying to Regulars that word of S. Paul Opitulations: for
although diverse understand that word of those who lent their helping hand to
the curing of the sick, etc. yet as S. S. Th. 2.2. q. 184. a. 6. ad 2 In 1.
Cor. c. 12.
Thomas by accommodation calls Archdeacons, Opulatio^s, because they help
the Bishop, and in his commentaires upon the Epistles of S. Paul, says that
they be called Opitulationes qui op^m ferunt maioribut Praelatis in regimine
Ecclesiae: Who help the greater Prelates in the government of the Church, as
Lyra also does: so M. Doctor might call Regulars Opitulations, because they
help Pastors, and are as Clement the fifte says, their Cooperatours.

6. and therefore M. Nicholas who in this self same place, S. Th. 2 2. q. 184.
^. 7. and q. 185. a. ^.
affirms so boldly that in England Regulars are not more ordained to help
secular Priests, then they to help Regulars, says not truly, for that
Clement the V. calls them Cooperatours; and the reason is because their
principal end is not to have care of other men's souls but of their own: and
therefore, as we have showed out of S. Thomas their state is statue perfactionis
acquiren^^ non communicande alij^^ A state of perfection to he acquired, not to
be communicated to others: the state of Bishops and other Pastors, is a state
of communicating perfection to others: and therefore if the charge of souls be
given to them, it is per accidens, and does not agree to them perse, as it does
to secular Pastors; who have the caracter and ground of jurisdiction. And so
it is not so connaturall to Regulars (though M. Nicholas affirms it page 132)
as to secular Priests, to have care of souls for that secular Priests by their
caracter (so that jurisdiction be added to it) are ordained to minister
Sacraments, to preath, and to govern the Church whereas the Regular order is
not so ordained. And therefore Germanius says, Germ. in prto. 5. tit. 37. Sot.
l. 9 de Just. and iure q. 4. a. 3. in fine. Rod. to 1. q. 35. ar. 5.
that Monks should not have care of souls but in case of necessity when
there are not secular Priests to be gotten: and Sotus would not have Regulars
take care of souls, but to attend to their own institute. And Rodericus says
that the Franciscans did over fly the hea^ie burden of Curats. And Gerson
says: Debent parochi Religiosos tanquam coadiutores missos a superioribus,
benign ac beneuole recipere, modo non obstet rationabilis causa, vt si
detractor, si collusor, sicorruptor, si seductor appareat, and parochianos in
contemptum parochi addncat, etc. Pastors ought gently to receive Religious as
coadiutours sent from their superiors, so that no reasonable cause be to the
contrary, as if he be a detractour, one that uses collusion, a corruptour, if
he appear to be a deceiner, or do bring the parishioners to contemn their
Pastor, etc.

Whence I gather that M. Nicholas is not so grateful to the secular Clergy as
might have been expected, for that (as we have seen above in my Preface to the
secular and Regular Clergy) Cardinal Allen of famous and pious memory, made
suit to the General of the Society of Jesus to send the first English
lesuites to England to help and aid the Priests, who to the number of
fowrescore were there laboring and end eauouring the conversion of souls,
before the first Jesuits were sent. And the Pope sent them, and the Clergy
received them as Cooperatours. D^^itse in Edm. Camp.
And therefore D. Pitse in his book of the famous writers of England says,
that the Clergy desired the Fathers of the Society, vt s^se Cooperatores
adiungerent: that they would adioine them s^lues as Cooperatours. And yet now
M. Nicholas will nor acknowledge him self a Cooperatour and ayder, but says,
that in England Regulars are noe more ordamed to help secular Priests, then
they to help Regulars: Which I suppose his brethren will not say.

M. NICHOLAS.
In his fourth Chapter n. 2. he vvriteth: that an Ordinary must have others to
succeed him in the same authority, without any especial grante, etc. Out of
these words, it most evidently follovveth thut my lord of Chalcedon, is no
Ordinary, he cause he has no successor in his authority without an
especial new grante.

THE REPLY.
What ordinary M. Doctor means.

8. M. Doctor speaks of an Ordinary made by an ordinary course and means;
and it is most true, that such an one has others to succeed him in the same
authority without any new special grante, and therefore because a Bishop is
Ordinary, when he dies or leaves the place, another Bishop is to succeed,
who in that he is elected and confirmed Bishop of such a place, has the power
and jurisdiction belonging to it, without any new especial grant. But M.
Doctor denies not but that by an especial grant, and by commission, the Pope
may make my lord of Chalcedo^ Ordinary of England. Whether he has or not, I
thought not to have disputed, but because M. Nicholas not only in this, but
also in other places still accuses M. Doctor, as though he derogated to my
lord of Chalcedon his ordinariship and carpeth at it as though it were most
certain that he is not Ordinary I will demand only of M. Nicholas, what it is
that is wanting in my lord to make him ordinary?

9. There wanted not power in the cause efficient or him that gave him the
power of an Ordinary over all England; for that the Pope who has plenitudinem
potestatis fulness of power gave him his authority. And Syluester says:
Ordinariam iurisdictionem dant quatuor. Primo, lex inanimata, vel Canon. 2.
Silu. verbo iurisd.
Lex animata: vt Papa vel Imperator. 3. Consuetude. 4. Vniuersitas approbata,
vt mercatorum, etc. and similiter vniuersitas facultatum artium vel legistarum:
Four do give ordinary jurisdiction. First the dead law or Canon. 2. The
living law: as the Pope or Emperor. 3. Custom 4. An approved company or
community, as of merchants, etc. and likewise an university or company of
the faculties of arts, or of lavviers. Wherefore seeing the Pope gave my lord
of Chalcedon his jurisdiction, there was no want of power in him to make him
Ordinary. And seeing that the Pope made him Pastor of England, as his letters
do witness, there wanted not lex inanimata, the dead law or canon, for that
the law and canon gives to him that is Pastor, all power belonging to his
Pastourship.

10. M. Nicholas will say, that he was made by delegatio^ and commission, and
so is only delegate, not Ordinary. But although this may hinder him from being
made Ordinary according to the ordinary course, yet it hinders him not from
being made Ordinary after an extraordinary manner, that is, by delegation and
commission.

11. For first according to the received Axiom of law^ers; Delegaius a Principe
ad vniuersitatem causarum, est ordinarius: He that is delegated by the Prince,
(as my lord of Chalcedo^ was by the chief visible and spiritual Prince of the
Church, the Pope) to an university of causes, is an Ordinary.

12. Secondly a Commissarie General, who is made by commission, is (as
Rodericus says) an ordinary: and his reason is, Rod. to. 1. q. 51. art. 3.
Glos. in c cum ab Eccl. Praelat. De Of. Ordin. Pan. in c susp. de offic. del.
n. 9. Innoc. in c. l. 1 and in c. ad hoc de off. Archi. Sylis. V. del. n. 1.
because eligitur a communitate, he is elected by a community. Which
Rodericus says is determined by a general Chapter called Pincianu^ confirmed
by Apostolical authority. And again he says that the rule which says that
a delegate cannot subdelegate, does not hold in him who is delegated, ad
vniuersitatem causarum, to an university of causes.

13. Thirdly the Popes legate is made by commission and delegation, and yet he
is ordinary, as Syluester teaches. For, says he, Legatus est is cui a Papa
certa patria vel prouincia committitur gubernanda: A legate is he to whom by
the Pope a certain country or province is committed to be governed. And this
he proves out of the Decretalles in the sixth book, where Innocentius the
fourth says, that Legates, Cap. leg. de of. leg. in sexto.
to whom in certain provinces the office of a legate is committed, are reputed
ordinaries.

14. Fourthlie a Vicar General of the Bishop is Ordinary, and yet he is made
by commission, as Germonius affirms: and Sanchez, Lib. 1. Anim. c. 6.
Sanch. tom. 1. l. 3. de consensu cland. disp 29. qu. 1. concl. 1. and ad 2.
who affirms also that he is Ordinary, proves it because the Bishop and his
Vicar General have one Tribunal. And, says he, a vice gerent in a diverse
Tribunal, is delegate, but in the same Tribunal he is Ordinary, and may assist
at marriage as an Ordinary Pastor.

15. If M. Nicholas object that my lord of Chalcedo^ is constituted ad
beneplacitum Papae: at the pleasure of the Pope; neither will that hinder his
Ordinariship; for that a legate is constituted also ad beneplacitum Papae, and
yet, as we have proved out of Syluester and the Canon law, he is Ordinary. And
so it will be hard, fellowing the opinion of these Auctours (for I will say
nothing of my self but refer the determination of this to Superiors) for M.
Nicholas to exclude my lord of Chalcedon from being an Ordinary by commission
or delegation. If this anger M. Nicholas, let him blame him self for that I
would not have touched this point, if he had not provoked me. In his fourth
number he taxes M. Doctor for alleging S. Ambrose 1. Tim. 3. the book being
doubfull. But M. Doctor having alleged other proofs to prove that the Bishop
has an higher rank in the Church then the Priest, and writers using to
allege diverse books of Fathers which yet are doubted of by some, this M.
Nicholas might have ouerpassed.

M. NICHOLAS.
Here nu. 14. he teaches, that Catholics ought to contribute maintenance to
my lord of Chalcedon n. 5.

THE REPLY.
This M. Nicholas should not have objected.

16. M. Nicholas makes M. Doctor a beggar for my lord of Chalcedons
maintenance, wherein he shows little respect to my lord. M. Doctor only
alleged S. Paul, 1. Ti. 5.
to prove that Priests or Bishops who rule well should be esteemed vvorthie
of double honor, that is, not only of the honor of cappe and knee, but also
of honorable maintenance: and therefore we see that Bishops and Pastors are
by the Church honorably provided for.

But M. Nicholas obiecteth that S. S. Th. 2 2.188. ar. 4 ad 5.
Thomas says that the people are not bound in justice (S. Thomas his words
are, ex debito iuris) to provide for the expenses of others besides Ordinaries.
To which he is easily answered; for that S. Thomas supposes that the people
has their ordinary Pastors, who receive their ordinary Tithes, and other
renenewes; and then if any will voluntarily preach unto them, they are not
bound to maintain them; but when there are no ordinary Pastors, the^ the
people is bound to give them competent maintenance, whether they be ordinaries
or delegates, for as S. Paul says: Who ever plays the soldior at his own
charges? who planteth a vine and eats not of the fruit thereof? who feeds
a flock and eats not of the milk of the flock. And as in the same place he
says: If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if
we reap your carnal things? and a little after: they that serve the Altar,
participate with the Altar. So also our lord ordained for them that preach the
Gospel, to live of the Gospel. S. Th. 2.2. q. 87. a. 1.
And S. Thomas and other divines affirm that by the law of nature the people
is bound to give in general, necessaries to them that minister unto them the
things that pertain to the worship of God and their salvation; as the same
people is bound to minister necessaries to soldiers and Princes, that fight for
them or have care of their common wealth, though the determinate part which
divines call quota, and which in the old law was the tenth part, be of the
positine law. And so the Catholics in England are bound to give competent
means not only to their Bishop but also to their Priests, though the Priests
be not ordinary Pastors. To which I add that in the opinion of the alleged
Auctours, my lord of Chalcedon is an Ordinary by commission. Where as M.
Nicholas n. 5. adds, that, except for the Sacrament of Confirmation, which
yet has not been administered to many, and which also may be committed to a
Priest, they find not what greater benefit lay Catholics have reaped by my
lord Bishop, then they may receive from secular and regular Priests: that
rather since my lords coming, some inconveniences have happened, which they
will not easily be persuaded, they are bound to buy with money: that they
cannot take much comfort to spare from their own necessities arising from
daily pressures) for the maintenance of Agents. I leave this to the
consideration of the judicious and indifferent Reader; whether in this he
speaks like a religious man, yea or a zealous Catholic. But for the like
speech to this, he is a little taken up above page 123. n. 38.

18. But I marvel that M. Nicholas should exaggerate, as he does n. 5. the
charges to which the Bishop and Clergy put the Catholics of England for the
maintenance of their Agents in diverse places. And many will, think that M.
Nicholas shows noe great discretion or prudence, to complain of the charges
to which the Bishop and Clergy put the Catholics unto; considering that M.
Nicholas and his brethren have and do daily put the Catholics to far
greater charges; as appears by the stately howses, purchasses, and many
other expenses, which comes from the Catholics states and purses. But such
things should not have been mentioned, but that M. Nicholas gives the just
occasion.

19. To that which M. Nicholas adds in this question concerning a particular
Church without a particular Bishop, and a notable part of the Church without a
Bishop, and of a perfect Christian without Confirmation, and of the Fathers and
divines alleged by M. Doctor, and of regulars state of perfection, and of
their being of the Hierarchy, and all such points, he is answered fully, as
the reader will confess if he read my Reply to his former questions.

20. And so that which he says n. 8. is little to the purpose: because M.
Doctor in his cleuenth chapter of his Hierarchy, intended only to show that
charity is the perfection of a Christian life, in that it unites us to our
first efficie^t, and last end, God. That charity unites us to God M. Doctor
proves out of Scriptures, and also by the effect of all love, which is to make
two friends one soul by affection in two bodies, as (says M. Doctor) S.
Augustine confessed of him self and his friend; who, were he Nebridius of whom
S. Augustine spoke before in the third chapter, stiling him charissimus mous
amicus: my most dear friend, or another, it was all one to M. Doctors
purpose, and so might by M. Nicholas have been omitted, but that he, not able
to answer to any maine point, is enforced to take hold of every trifle. The
rest which M. Nicholas alleges in this question is answered, or else is not
worthy any answer. Only there rests one thing which I shall examine in the
next number.

M. NICHOLAS.
Jn this account (of Popes martyrs) M. Doctor is much mistaken, for the 3.
last Popes by him reckened, namely Ioannes, Syluerius, and Martinus, were long
after Constantine, etc. qu. 7. n. 10.

THE REPLY.
This error is vvrongfullie fathered on M. Doctor.

21. M. Doctor in his thirteenth chapter n. 5. to show that in the greatest
fury of persecution, it was the custom of the primative Church not to except
against Bishops, as some now do in England, but to consecrate Popes and
Bishops (maugre all the threats and cruelty of the tyrants) thereby to
practice the government of the Church instituted by Christ, to strengthen the
Christians by the grace of confirmation and by their authority, presence,
example, and encouragement to put life into them: affirms that from the
cruel Tyrant Nero, to the clement Emperor Constantine the great there was
scarce any Bishop of Rome, who was not a martyr, who at the least suffered
not great persecution. Twenty seven of them are commonly avouched for
martyrs, to wit Peter, Linus, Cletus, etc.

22. M. Nicholas because he can not disprove any one of M. Doctors positions,
as I have showed evidently; impugneth by-speeches, which be they true or not,
it skilleth not at all, for whether just so many Popes were martyrs or more, and
whether before Constantine or after, it is not to the purpose, it being true
that many Popes were martyrs, and that the creation of the^ was not intermitted
for fear of persecution, as M. Nich. would have the succession of Bishops in
England to cease for fear even of an imaginary or uncertain persecution. But
let us see how M. Nicholas cauilleth and imputes to M. Doctor this error in
the number of the Popes martyrs, which indeed is none.

23. M. Doctor said first that from Nero to Constantine there was scarce any
Bishop of Rome who was not a martyr, who at least suffered not great
persequution. And there M. Doctor makes a full point. And the^ he adds:
Twenty seven of them (that is of the Popes in general) are commonly
avouched for martyrs: but he says not that all the twenty seven, which he
reckeneth, lived before Constantine, as M. Nicholas imposes. True it is that
in the margent there is this note, (27. Popes martyrs before the time of
Constantine.) But M. Doctor after he had finished his book, trusted others
with the setting it forth, and did neither make the contents of the chapters,
nor all the marginall notes, and so, that was put in by the error of one who
marked not the full point which I even now specified, as neither M. Nicholas
did or would not.

24. And that M. Doctor mea^t not only those Popes who lived before
Constantine, but the Popes in general, of which he said 27. were martyrs; it
may clearelie be gathered. For that M. Doctor was not ignorant (for who
knows it not?) that there was diversity amongst Auctours concerning the
number of Popes, who were martyrs; some reckening 27. some 33. some 35. some
more, some less. But he, that he might be sure to speak within compass,
contented him self with the lesser number according to Bozius his reckening,
whom he cited in the marge^t l. 8. c. 3. And to the end that the number twenty
seven might not seem a Catalogue of his own making, he put their names in a
distinct caracter, and cited Bozius in the margent. Which M. Nicholas if he
had dealt fayrelie, should have mentioned or noted that thereby the Reader might
have seen M. Doctors intention, and whether he had falsified Bozius whom he
cited.

25. Moreover it well appeared that M. Doctor confined not him self (in
setting down that Catalogue of Bozius) to the Popes before Constantine,
because in that Catalogue he left out Hyginus who succeeded Thelesphorus, and in
the next paragraphe or number which is the sixth, he puts him in his place
after Thelesphorus, whom all they who recite their Breuiarie, know to have been
a glorious martyr.

26 If M. Doctor had himself made a Catalogue of the Popes martyrs, yea and
of those only before Constantines death, he would not have set down 27.
Popes only, as Bozius does, but rather thirty according to the Roman
martyrologe, Baronius and others: which Popes (that the Reader may see at how
small matters he cauilleth) I will set down. To wit: Petrus, Linus, Clemens.
Cletus, Anacletus, Euaristus, Alexander, Xistus, Thelesphorus, Hyginus, Pius,
Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, Victor, Zepherinus, Callistus, Vrbanus,
Pontianus, Anterus, Fabianus, Cornelius, Lucius, Stephanus, Xistus H. Foelix,
Eutichianus, Caius, Marcellinus, and Marcellus. And Rishton in his Synopsis;
with other Auctours numbreth three more, to wit. S. Dionysius who in the
Register of Popes follovveth Xistus the second, and Eusebius and Melchiades,
who succeed Marcellus. All which thirty, were before Constantines death;
yet these three last I will not enrolle in this Catalogue, there being not so
great certainty whether they were martyrs or not, and therefore I will
content my self with the former thirty: vvheras M. Doctor contented him
self with 27. Popes martyrs in general, according to Bozius, it being not to
his purpose in that place to examine the number of Popes martyrs.

27. Thus I have ansvvered to all M. Nicholas his questions; I have made good
all M. Doctors assertions and arguments grouned either in reason or authority;
and I have showed that he has not bee^ unfortunate in alleging Auctours as M.
Nicholas to often affirms. I have also disproued M. Nicholas his assertions,
refuted his reasons, and answered to all his arguments, as the Reader will
plainly see. And this I have done, not to disgrace M. Nicholas, nor his, or
any approved order of the Church, nor in any sort to auerte any one from a
Religious state, which (as I ought to do) I honor from my heart: but only to
defend M. Doctor, and the truth by him delivered. Rather I wish and Counselle
every one, to embrace that state of life to which God shall call him, and in
which he is persuaded he may save his own foul, and promote the glory of
God. For that Christ to provide for every man, and to condescend to every
ones liking, has furnished his Church with diverse orders, Ps. 44.
and has clothed her round about with varieties, that every one may make
choice of what he best likes, and which he thinks most suitable and
proportionable to his own forces. And therefore he that fyndeth him self able
to overcome the temptations of the world, and with the grace of God has
confidence not only to work his own salvation but also the salvation of many
others: let him if he like that state take upon him an Apostolical Priestlie
course of life; Priests being to live in the midst of the difficulties of the
world by reason of their preaching, teaching and administering of the
Sacraments: if he otherwise be weak, feeble and is hardly able to pass
through those temptations and allureme^tes with the safety of his own soul:
let him hasten to some religious course of life proportionable to his force and
liking, with the advice of his Ghostly Father and those that are sufficient by
their wisdom and discretion to give him counsel herein: and if he has not
those talents which are required in Priests, and that he can not brook the
austeritie of Religion, 2. Cor. 9.
let him endeavor to serve God in the world: Vnusquisque prout destinauit in
cord suo; every one (as by God his grace and inspiration) he has determined
in his heart: and as he shall think most conducing to God his glory, and his
own salvation.

FINIS.
A MYRROVR OF M. NICHOLAS SMITH'S, pretended Modesty.
IT could not be put into Heretics hands for their conversion, unless we
would have them sca^dalized, page 2. By it be gives a great blow against
charity, page 2. His Dedicatorie Epistle is full of verbal exhortations to
charity, page 3. Jniurions to the Vicar of Christ, page 21. They deserve no
answer, page 28. They are against him self, page 181. They are lick unto
Beza page 130. His argument is a doughtie one, page 16. Jnsufficient, page 199.
VVeake, page 49. Directly against him self, page 17. 51. His form of
disputing seems the same which Heretics use against Catholics, as uttering
contradictories and nonsense, page 25. He treats of holy things upon
particular designs and humane respects, page 6. He proves his conclusions
against all Logic, by principles more barsh, incredible, and worse then the
conclusion, page 7.8. He serves him self of strange and vntovvard
propositions, page 7. He must answer his own arguments or contradict him
self, and tax his Holiness, page 10. 26. 37. His assertion must vvrong the
Sea Apostolic; and can subsist on no better grovvnd, then by Heretics is
wont to be objected against the said holy Sea, page 12. He is mistaken in
things for the true understanding of which, is required no greater labor,
then looking on the book; nor deaper learning, then understanding latin, page
19. Js a thing that no divine, but even no man in his right judgment can
affirm, page 39. He cites Suarez against all Grammar, page 53. He teaches in
effect with one breath to desire a Bishop and to disobeye Bishops, page 59 He
contradicts him self, and impugneth his own reason, page 198. M. Nicholas
taxes him of want of good manners, page 4. of want of prudence, page 7. of
not using fairedealing, page 80. of speaking partially, page 92. 126. 187.

By this scantling of the whole piece which is entervvouen in enery leaf
almost with the like stuff: the judicious and impartial Reader, will (after
he has read this defense of M. Doctors Hierarchy) easily gather, how little
he deserved these aspersions of M. Nicholas.

ERRATA.
Page Lin. Faults. Corrected. 8 7 far fare 9 in mat. Sess. etc. 21. and can.
3. Sess. 23 c. 2. and can. 6. 2^ 17 full false full of false 26 my Reply this
my Reply 2^ 6 my Reply this my Reply ^^ 22 this the 30 first other ^^ 11
constance constancy ^^ in mat. l. 9. l. 4. 17 cap. 29. cap. 28. 19 c. 53. c.
35. 101 21 Christianistiall Christian 10^ 30. 31. and by water by water, and
20^ 18 carelessesse carelessness 2^^ 12 baptized confirmed 2^^ 6 c. 53. c. 35.
2^^ 10 use used 2^^ 17 want went 2^^ 15 these those 2^^ 3 can care 250 17
vovv owe 252 15 is it 253 12 fitesse fitness 15 Bishop Bishops 267 30
contradicted contradicts 26^ 20 regious religious 26^ 22 glorious gloriosius
269 20 does do 33 regular regulars 270 9 an on 275 22 before wherefore 278 5
Prelates. We Prelates we 29^ 13 quitesse quietness 18 stilled styled 22 how
who 295 21 Palladias Palladius ^^^ in mat. 1. 11. ^38 6 (...) (...) 8 (...)
(...) 9 solie holy 9 (...) (...)


