

STRANGE News from Antvvarpe, which happened the 12. of August last past. 1612.

FIRST PRINTED In DVTCH at Bergen ap Zoame by Ioris Staell and now translated
into English by I. F.



At London printed by Ralph Blower. 1612.

To the Reader
IT is not unknown unto most men of sort, what a famous City the City of
Antwarp is, wherein of late, the wonderful power of Satan, has (by the
permission of the Almighty God) bin there done and showen in the Cloister of S.
Michaells in the said City, which is not only worthy: but also very requisite
and meet to be made known and manyfested unto all men, in regard of the
sins and wickedness which now in thiese days remains to common amongst all
nations, and forasmuch as of late the foul Find (by Gods permission) showed
his wrath and indingnation against the same City by consuming and spoiling of
a great part of the Cloister there, as it is most truly made known unto
diverse and sundry persons already, as well by letters as otherwise: Therefore
to the end that all persons should understand of the strange Accidents there
happened, I thought it meet to set forth a small and brief treatise thereof,
whereby every one may understand, and be truly advertised thereof to their
own contentments, wishing all people to pray unto the omnipotent Majesty of
God, for to defend us all from such, and the like Sathanicall Actions of the
most tempting and wicked Satan, who seeks daily for the distrction of all
mankind, as in the matter following is at large truly declared.

A true and perfect news of the wonderful Judgments of God showed in the
famous City of Antwerpe: in S. Michaells Cloister there in which place most of
the Princes or Potentates of those Countries are commonly entertained and
lodged when they come into the City: which said Cloister, a great part thereof
was greatly hurt and spoiled, the 12. of August last past. 1612. as hereafter
is most truly related.
FOR as much as this famous City of Antwarp now is known to be one of the
fairest Cities of building in all those parts of the Country: and also that
for trade of Marchantdize it is now far surmounting many other towns, which in
times past have bin of great fame, and now this flourishing City abounds with
many rich Merchants and Citizens, besides many other persons of great account,
likewise there are in the same City many fair and goodly Churches and
Cloisters of most rich and stately buildinges, the same being beautified, and
most curiously adorned with diverse and sundry costly and rich Alters, besides
many Immages and other Idoletrous and supersticious relickes, such as the like
are not to be seen or found elsewhere, in all the Netherlandes, as every one
that has bin there can truly justify and report of, amongst all which, the
richest, and most fairest momuments that now remain there, are in a place
called Saint Michaells Cloister, wherein most commonly are all the chiefest
Princes and Potentates of those Countries lodged, during their abode there. And
as of late it has bin manifestly seen and known, how that the great and
mighty Prince Abertus Duke of Brabant was lodged there in the same Palace or
Cloister himself, besides many other great Princes and Potentates with him,
which said Palace or Cloister is situated not far from the Castle of
Antwarpe, wherein are a thousand and three hundred Spaniards and soldiers
which do now remain therein: who according to an ancient custom always
ever heretofore continued amongst them, do usually once a year make a great
account of their most worthy Patron S. Jacques, otherwise (according to our
English tongue) called S. James, upon which day is showed many great triu^phs,
sports and pastimes, throughout all the whole City, besides much feasting and
banqueting, especially, amongst all the papistical sort of people, as well the
Massing Priests: as also all the soldiers, and others there; all which is done
in honor and reverence of S. James, as in manner and form is here expressed.

First of all, the Gunn^rs and others in the Castle, do there discharge off
all their great Ordinance, which is round about the Castle: Then all the
soldiers standing in order of battle, do discharge and shoot off all their
pieces (both Muskets and Caliuers) three times one after an other, in honor of
S. James, as aforesaid, and thereby they hold a firm and steadfast opinion,
and are fully persuaded amongst themselves, that they are all quite freed and
delivered from all trouble and mischief that might happen and ensue unto them,
for all the year after. This is all performed in the forenoone.

Upon the same day in the afternoon, there was a Tragedy played, wherein was
showed, the manner of the Turks fight against the Christians. At which time,
the Spaynish Ambassador that last departed England, came with a great train
into the City from Bruixills, and there was very honorably received as well by
the Citizens there, as also by all the Captains and Soldiers, and great
triumphing was at his coming in, amongst which, the Citizens caused great
store of ships to be placed before the town. and there they planted a great
number of soldiers, which with their long shooting and discharging their
pieces and Ordinance they beat down a huge great Ball of Brass or Copper,
which was richly gilded over, which stood upon the top of the steeple of S.
Michaells Church, and shot the same quite through in many places: the chardge
of making of a new Ball, and placeing of it there again as the other was
before, will cost them an infinite some of money: moreover at the time great
store of fireworkes were shown and made upon the waters, to the great delight
of the Ambassador and all others that were there present.

The next day after, they likewise acted a Comedy in Spaynish, the effect and
meaning thereof, was (altogether) to show, and make the people to believe that
they are, and so they account themselves to be, both lords and masters over
the whole world. But let all true Christians now mark well what afterward
insued amongst them.

The third day after S. James his day and feast holden amongst them as before
rehearsed, in the afternone, how the devil came and played his Tragedy there in
the same Church and Cloister of Saint Michaells, who came thither with such a
horrible and terrible noise both of Thunder and lightning, that all the people
that were in the town were greatly amazed thereat.

As Soon as this Sathanicall Fiend came into the City in this fierce and
terrible manner, making a great noise or roaring over the same, he first came
and sat upon the cross which stands upon the top of the Steeple of S.
Michaells Church where he was discerned and plainly seen of many people,
having in one of his ugly and filthy Claws, a huge great stone, the which
stone with great and mighty force, he cast down into the said steeple, and
therewith he made such a huge and fearful a noise and rattling, that the
Munckes that were in the Cloister, with great fear and anguish ran all out of
their lodgings, verily supposing that the devil had bin at their heels: from
thence he went into the Steeple, (as it seemed unto them all) and set the same
on fire, wherewith it burnt most fearfully, and the flame thereof was so
terrible and great, that many of the stones of the Steeple (with the heat and
force of the fire) flew out and scattered so abroad, that it did exceeding much
hurt, in and about the same Church and Cloister, and likewise the lead being
molten, dropped down so extreme fast and was so scalding hot, that no man durst
go near to quench that unmercifully fire, the fury of it was so great:
nevertheless the Munckes be stird themselves so well and lustely there, to quench
the same fire with holy water, that they had spent so much thereof, that they
had work enough to do, to read their ordinary Coniuration, and to make their
Autentible Charm, to consecrate more holy water: And yet all that they could
do at that time would not serve their turn, for at that instant, if that the
common sort of People (as laboring men and such like) had not come thither to
aid and assist them, in this their great necessity and still called for both
holyed and vnholyed water, and had more steadfaster faith and better and more
perseverance in them, then the Munckes and themselves, I veriely persuade my
self, that their holy water would have little auayled them at that time. But
if they had not mixed other vn-holy water therewith, and by the carefulnes of
the chief Gouernoures and Magistrates, and of the good industry of all the
Artificers, soldiers and laboring men that were then present, all of them
being most careful and painful in this business, and ready to do their best
endeavors in this extremity, who (by Gods help and theirs) at last quenched
the Fire by force, and yet before they could do it, the greatest part of the
leads that covered the Church was molten down from the top thereof, and many
stones flew out of the walls and did great harm, both to the lodgings in the
Cloister, and to many people inhabiting there about, besides the great hurt
that was done to the Church, at that time. The like villainy wrought against
Gods Church by the most wicked Feend, has never, or seldom heretofore bin
heard of.

But when Satan had performed this wicked Tragedy, before spoken of: yet he
began a new, to skew the Munckes what he was further able to do, he began to
play a Commedy with a great Picture that was hang'de within the Church, that
had bin made by one of the rarest or excellentest workman in the whole
Countries, whose name was (as then called) Peter Rubbens, a man well known
throughout all the seventeen Provinces for his knowledge and skill in that Art
or science, and that there is none comparable unto him, which said Picture, the
devil rent and tore all in many pieces, he ruinated the same in such manner
and sort, that the repayring thereof will cost an hundred pound (at the least)
before it can be wrought to that perfection which it was of and so set up
again, in the like order and form as it was at the first there placed.

Likewise, he in his Sathanicall course, rent and spoiled the Alter whereupon
this picture or Idolatrous Immage stood upon, also spoiled and defaced the same
with his wicked nails or claws, that he almost tore the same all quite down to
the ground, which since that time, has bin viewed and seen by many thousands
of people, who do greatly admire at the same, they all giving God most hearty
thanks for their safe deliverance from all the mischiefs that Satan (if he
might have by Gods sufferance) bin as then permitted to have done his own will.

Moreover he took the Immage of an other Saint which he papisticall sort of
persons much honored there, and made great account thereof, for that they held
the same for a great Relicke in their Church, and did much more worship and
honor that Relicke then all the rest.

But what was it that grieved the Papists there, and in many other places
planted most? that was, for the destruction and spoiling of another Immage (of
what nature, quallitie or condition the same was of, none or very few can tell)
yet notwithstanding, amongst many of them, great account was made thereof, but
to what use, let us leave them to their own conceits and fond opinion, and
now let us return to a third action.

Likewise he took an other Immage of a saint (pictured like an old Friar in
times past) that was near the place where the other stood, and cast both it,
the stone and place whereon it was seated all unto the ground, and withal (not
yet contented) with this, bear it as small as powder.

All which his Sathanicall actiuitie was showed upon the third day after S.
Jacques his day before mentioned: all which by him was performed in the Cloister
of Saint Michaells, and upon the sudden the devil was gone away again none
perceived him, and then his plays and shows were ended.

The fowrth day the Munckes and Friars, in the morning betimes fell to prayer
again, and afterward no vision of the serpent seen nor heard of any more,
they then much praised and glorified God in all his works, and seeing and
hoping that the tempest or storm was as then past and gone, they in their own
bounty and glory, being glad that the storm was past and gone, bestowed upon
them that were poor workmen laborers Soldiers and others, for their pains
and in recompense of the business done, bestowed six Barrells of Beer, which
amongst them was as then holden for a great matter, all which was merryly
drunk up amongst them.

By this and many other most wonderful and fearful examples (you may see and
most evidently mark that the Commandments of God being wholly trodden down
underfoot and neglected, God therefore sends such messages, and messengers
unto the places wherein Idolatry, and supersticious ceremonies are daily used,
thereby to give them warning to amend and leave of all such wickedness and
abomination, and not any more to serve nor pray unto any such Idols, that are
made of nothing else, but of stocks and stones, and of other earthly substance,
and to move us to serve him with an humble and penitent heart, for I only am
the Lord your God (says he) that fargiueth the sins of the people unto the
third and fowerth generation, of those that love me, and keep my
Commandments, and punish all those that hate me, as we see the papists daily
committ and use inumerable kinds of blaspheamies, and superstitious idolatry,
with many vain idle toys and imaginations of their own brain and fickle
inventions, which God utterly abhoreth, and is greatly displeased therewith:
therefore I wish and council all men to love, serve, and honor God almighty,
and not to worship stocks and stones as all Idollaters do: And thus (with my
heart) wishing all happiness, and eternal salvation through Christ Jesus unto
all true and faithful Christians that love the holy and blessed word of God: I
take my leave.

Leave of your sin, and so your lives amend:
And think upon Gods judgment in the end,
For Matthew says, there is not any man:
Of what degree, so ere he be that can
Withstand the same, which will come unaware,
Like thief by night: therefore we must have care.
To watch and pray to him, till that we may
Be ready, for that great and dreadful day.
Wherein all those, that here have lived well,
For evermore, with God in heaven shall dwell.
FINIS.

