A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT MARIE SPITTLE April. 10. 1615.

BY THOMAS ANYAN Doctor of Divinity, and President of Corpus Christi College
in Oxon.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, Printer to the University.

HONORATISSIMO, ET ILLVSTRISSIMO VIRO, THOMae EGERTONO, MILITI AVRATO, BARONI
DE ELLESMERE, TOTIVS ANGLIAE, ET ACADEMIAE OXONIENSIS CANCELLARIO SVMMO ET
INTEGERRIMO, MVSARVM GRATIARVMQVE PATRONO SINGVLARI, SACRATAE REGIAE MAIESTATI
A SECRETIS CONSILIIS INTER PRIMOS SPECTATISSIMO, DOMINOQVE SVO OMNI OBSERVANTIA
COLENDISSIMO, LEVIDENSE HOC DEVOTISSIMI OBSEQVII TESTIMONIVM D. D. D.

Capellanus Honori Tuo Devinctissimus T. A.

ACT. 10. 34. 35. 34 Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I
perceive, that God is no accepter of persons.

35 But in every nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted with him.


MY Text is the beginning of a Sermon, endited by Him, who at his Ascension
inspired the Holy Ghost, preached by that great Apostle and glorious Martyr of
Jesus Christ St Peter, delivered at Caesarea a garrison town by the Seacoast of
Palaestina, occasioned by the strange and wonderful conversion of Cornelius an
Italian Centurion; and is an Evangelicall Speech, well suiting so blessed an
occasion, so divine a Speaker. Wherein I observe,

1 The Speaker of the Speech; Peter.

2 The Manner of his Speech; which was, not by letters, but by words, not by
writing, but by preaching, not by substitution or deputation, but by teaching
himself in his own person.

3 The truth of his Speech, and asseveration thereof; (...), In veritate
comperio.

4 His confidency, and apodeicticall knowledge of what he taught; (...), I
plainly perceive, or, am constantly persuaded.

5 The Speech it self; God is no accepter of persons, etc. Wherein we may see
(as in the Vision of the Prophet Ezechiel) rotam in rota, two propositions, one
linked within the other, which carry with them much weight, and a glorious
luster of God's impartial Justice and Majesty.

The first is negative and general; God is no accepter, etc.

The second is affirmative, with a particular exception out of the general
negative. But in every nation, etc.

In the first God's Justice overpoiseth his Mercy: in the second his Mercy is
transcendent over his Justice. In the first he appears a terrible Judge to
spare none: in the second a merciful Father to spare all, that fear him, and
work righteousness. For they are accepted of him, not by merit, but by favor,
not by works, ex condigno, but by mercy, and ex dono. These are the parts of
my Text; of which in their order.

Peter] What Christ elsewhere promised here he performed, and makes a poor
Fisherman, to become a fisher of men. The Sea wherein he fished is the Ocea^ of
this World, swelling with pride, livid and blew with envy, boiling with wrath,
deep with covetousnes, foaming with luxury, swallowing all by oppression,
dangerous for rocks of presumption and desperation, rising with waves of
passion, ebbing and flowing with inconstancy, and last of all, Mare amarum,
bitter with all kind of misery. The chief fish, which at this time came to his
net, was Cornelius an Italian Centurion, and with him many other Gentiles. The
Net, wherewith he fished and caught him and them, was the glad tidings of the
Gospel, and Faith in Jesus Christ: which is compared in Scripture to a Net,
and consists of manic Articles, as a Net of many threads. The casting of this
net, was the unfolding of the Word: Then Peter opened his mouth. The plummets
that keep such down, as are taken in the Net, from presumption, are the
threatenings of the Law, and the severe Justice of God: God is no accepter of
persons. The Corkes, that bear them up in all the surges of this world, that
they sink not down into the depth of despair, are the promises of the
Gospel, and the sweet mercies of Almighty God: But in every nation, etc.

This great Fisher of men St Peter, was natura Homo, gratia Christianus,
abundantiore gratia vnus idemque primus Apostolus. He was by nature, says St
Austin, but a man, by grace a Christian man, by abundant grace not only one,
but a chief Apostle. He was the first, that confessed Christ to be
consubstantiall with his Father; he was the first, that preached Christ; the
first, that baptizea in his name; and still the forwardst man, in the execution
of his Apostolic function. He was with Christ, whilst he lived on earth most
familiar and conversant, with his secret counsels best acquainted, most
observant of his words and precepts: and because, says Cyprian, unit as ab
exordio dependet, to preserve order and to avoid schism amongst the guides of
the Church, he was by Christ set before the rest, unto whom all the rest of the
same rank and order in religious matters of importance should have recourse,
as to a person more honorable then the rest. John indeed was that Apostle, whom
Christ loved above the rest; but St Peter was he, that loved Christ, more then
John or any of the Apostles. Ille melior qui plus diligit Christum;
illefeiicior, quem plus diligit Christus. In that S. John was best beloved of
Christ, he was the happier man; but in that S. Peter loved Christ better then
they all, he was the better man. Better, not in commission, but in place, and
order; he was before him or the rest, not above him or any of the rest; he was
a chief Pecre of the Apostles, not their Prince; he was in order their
Superior, not their Sovereign; he had a Primacy amongst them not a Supremacy
over them; he was not (...), but (...), not a prince of the Apostles, but a
fellow Elder, as he himself terms himself, 1. Pet. 5. 1.

There is, says Almaine (in his Tracte de Potestate Ecclesiastica) a double
Primacy; there is Primatus Ordinis, and Primatus Iurisdictionis, a Primacy of
Order, and a Primacy of Power and Jurisdiction; the former is properly
Primatus, the other Potestas. The first we yield unto Peter, and give him
(...), the first place, the first and best employment, the sitting and speaking
first, the moderation and direction of other men's speeches, the publishing and
pronouncing of the Conclusion agreed upon by the Synod of the Apostles: but
Primatum Potestatis, a power to do any ministerial Act, which another has
not, a power to restrain others in the performance of their Acts of Ministry,
such a Primacy we deny unto Peter; the Apostles all being, (as Cyprian says)
pari consortio praediti Potestatis, all joint Commissioners endued with equal
power. This Primacy of Order, which we ascribe unto Peter, is the original of
all the Superiority, that Archbishops and Metropolitans have over the Bishops
of their Provinces; and the foundation, upon which is built all the fabric of
Ecclesiasticke discipline, whereby the unity of the Church at this day
remains preserved.

If I were to dispute with a Papist, I would not be so troublesome unto him, as
to cause him to prove that Peter was ever at Rome, that he sat Bishop there,
that he died there, or that the Pope is his lineall Successor, (which some of
our Divines have denied; and to prove them all, it is impossible) but yielding
that, yet tanquam datum, non concessum, nothing thence can be inferd, for the
support of the Roman Supremacy, more then may be concluded for the Sea of
Antioch, or the Bishop of Jerusalem. For at Antioch Peter first sat Bishop,
and afterward governed it by Evodius; at Antioch the Professors of the
Gospel were first called Christians, and the place (...), the City of God. And
if St Peter's death, or Martyrdom, could add such Soveraigntie to the place,
where he died; then much juster claim may be laid to this Supremacy by the
Bishop of Jerusalem, because Christ the great Pastor and Bishop of our souls
did there suffer death for the Redemption of universal man. But nor the one,
nor the other, is a sufficient foundation to raise up this Edifice of the
Popish Hierarchy. The Commission given to Peter was not singular, but to
others common with him: the rest of the Apostles were authorized, as well as
he, and that immediately from Christ; their pre-eminence of binding and loosing
as ample; and as Christ was sent by his Father, so sent he them, and what he
said to one, he said to all, Pasce oves, Feed my sheep. For it was a thing in
the Evangelicall story with Christ usual, sometimes to direct his speech to one
private man, and no more, as Arise and walk, Lazarus come forth; sometimes to
direct his speech to one in the person of al, as Vade and noli amplius peccare,
Go and sin no more, and to Peter, Pasce oves; Nam quod dicitur Petro,
dicitur omnibus; What was said to Peter, was said to all the Apostles, says
Austin, cap. 30. de Agone Christiano. Now the reasons, why Christ directed his
speech to Peter in the behalf of them all, were these; vel quia aetate senior,
vel charitate ardentior, velne videretur reliquis abiectior, quia negaver at
Christum, says Occham lib. 4. Dial. 1. Tract. 3. part. c. 3. Either because he
was more ancient, or in charity more ardent, then the rest, or else lest he
should seem to be despised for the denial of his Master. But the Pope (the
pretended Successor of this Peter) will not content himself with this
Prioritie; he will not only have a Cheiftie of Order, but of command, and
Power: and because (in all likelihood) Christ would have his Church governed in
the best form of regiment that is, and that of all States the Monarchy is
best; hence Sanders, and after him Bellarmine lay it down for a Praecognitum,
that the Government of the Church must needs be Monarchical; that this was
committed unto Peter, and continued in his Successors; whereby his Power is
become illimited, his Judgment infallible, and he an Universal Bishop, whose
Diocese is the whole World. The truth of this State-Maxime, on which they build
the Pope so high a Throne, I will not dispute; but keep my self within the
sphaere of mine own Profession; and, for an vncontroll'd Answer to them all,
add that limitation, which I find in the forecited Occham (3. Part. Dial. l.
3. Tr. 1. c. 30.) Status Monarchicus est omnium optimus populo simul moranti,
non autem vni populo comprehendenti plures populos locis distantibus. That
Government is best, where one bears Soveraigntie, not many, but so, that it be
over but one nation, and not many, or if over many, yet not far disjoined.
Which limitatio^ of Occham's I find strengthened with the authority of great St
Austin (lib. 4. de Civ. D. c. 15.) Feliciores essent res humanae, si omnia
regna essent parva, and concordi vicinitate laetantia. The estate of worldly
things would be much more happy, if the whole world were divided out into
small Kingdoms, then if all should be swayed by one supreme Commander. That
form therefore of Government is not so expedient for the whole, as for each
part, for large and disioyned Circuits, as for narrow bounds: and as it is
impossible for one temporal Monarch to weeld the Empire of the whole world,
either long, or well, so much more impossible it is for one man to manage all
Ecclesiastique affairs and dispatch the weighty businesses of the Universal
Church. Better therefore were it for Peter, or his Successors, to be (as St
Austin terms him Tract. 13. in Ioh.) Oculus in corpore, an Eye of the Church,
then to be so vast a Head of a body so far dissevered: lest that be applied
unto him in the Comedy, Hic quidem fungino genere est, capite se totum tegit;
The Church of Rome is become a mushrome, or like a Toad-stoole, all Head, and
no body.

Yet has the sweet desire of Ambition so enchanted the Chair of the Scarlet
Whore, that rather, then the Pope will loose this eminent Soveraigntie and
command, he will become the Patron and maintainer of most enormous offenders
and their offenses, thereby to procure support of his Antichristian Primacy.
For the best stake in the Pope's hedge is his own Authority, to maintain his
own Infallibility, and is now become stripped of all, save the naked Decrees of
Canonists, and the Dreams of wel-fed Monks: to which had he not of late
annexed an omnipotent Power of Binding, and Loosing, of Approving, and
Dispensing with things repugnant to all Laws as well Natural as Divine; I might
by way of prediction say of the Pope's Arrogancy, that, which was said to the
Trojans of the Grecian Horse, -- haec in vestros fabricata est Machina muros;
The Pope's Supremacy had long since been the destruction of him, his Sea, and
City. He is but a child and ignorant in the Histories of his own times, that
does not know, that the cheifest proppe, whereon the Pope stands, and at this
hour is sustained, is his correspondency with the Spanish King, and the House
of Austria; which he first procured and now maintains by his dispensing and
warranting of his incestuous and unlawful Marriages. So that if the Spaniard
should revolt from the Sea of Rome, the Legitimation of his Successors would
be questioned and his Signiories endangered. Which is the only reason of the
consistencie of the Papacy, claimed under the title of S. Peter, which
otherwise had ere this not been at all, or else reduced into a narrow Diocese.

Opened his mouth] S. Peter spoke not rashly, or without meditation making his
words to break the prison of his lips, before the door of his mouth was
opened; but he takes the keys of knowledge and Meditation in hand, and
therewith opened his mouth, and then spoke. When I mused (says David) there
was a fire kindled, and then I spoke. What was this Musing, but his Meditation?
What was this fire, but the light of God's Spirit? What was the kindling
thereof, but the inflammation of his affections? that so he might speak Ignita
Dei eloquia, with a tongue touched with a cole of Meditation from Gods holy
Altar.

For by opening of the mouth in this place is not to be understood a bare
dissevering of the lips, but a preparation of the heart, out of the abundance
of which the tongue should speak, and is indeed a pleonasme, or redu^dancy of
the Hebrew tongue, signifying to begin to speak after long silence with
Religion; and in this sense our Church Liturgy prays, O Lord open thou our
Lips. So that, as Moses first spoke with God, before he spoke to the people: so
St Peter first speaks with God's Spirit by Meditation, before he delivered
to Cornelius this Sermon, which is the subject of my Discourse. The greatest
perfection of a man is his Wisdom, and the best herald to proclaim his
wisdom is his Speech, and the richest treasure to adorn his speech is
Meditation. Meditatio est quasi mentis ditatio, (says Bernard) it is the
enriching of the soul with the treasures of Wisdom: nay it is the chewing of
the food of the Soul, which makes it taste sweeter in the mouth, and digest
better in the stomach; and you know those beasts, that chewed not the cudde,
are reckoned among the unclean beasts in the Arc. I know no greater
difference between a wise man and a fool, then that one speaks all things
rashly, the other all things maturely and advisedly: the one has his tongue in
his heart, the other has his heart in his tongue, as the Wise man speaks.
For want of which serious consideration, of the Majesty of the person, of whom
they speak, and of the holiness of the place, wherein they speak; many bold
and unworthy speakers, contrary to the Law both of God and the Church, start up
into the Pulpit, and being dull and heavy bodies, contrary to the Law of
Nature, they ascend up to fill a vacuitie. These empty vessels make the
greatest sound in many places of this City; and like Vessels filled with new
wine, they will rather break then not vent, though it be but their own Emptines
and Ignorance; their words are full of wind, and like Aeolus Winds,

Qua data porta ruunt, and turbas turbine perflant. Their mouth, like the Cock
of a Conduit-pipe, if it be but once opened, will run out two Howre-glasses,
and that twice or thrice a week. Before Ezechiel could have his Commission to
speak to the people, he was enioined, not to touch, to open, or to put into
his mouth, but to eat the roll, Ezech. 3. 1. and to receive the words into
his heart, Ezech. 3. 10; but these men never do so much as touch the Roll, or
open the book. They ran from the Seminaries of learning, like Lapwings from
their nests, with their shells upon their heads: the portion of learning they
brought with them was like the bread and wine of the Gibeonites; their bread
was hot that day they departed, and therefore it was molded and dry; and their
bottels because they were new, were rent, Josh. 9. 13. These men need never
fear to be taken for Mercury with St Paul, because they seek to vent their
wares by number, never weighing them. Of these too hasty Pulpit men St Bernard
says wittyly, Quia nimis propere, minus prospere rem peragunt.

When the Material Temple was built, there was not so much as the noise of a
hammer heard there, all things were so prepared before: but in the building of
the Immateriall Temple of God, and edifying of men's souls in the faith of
Christ, whose Temples we are, there is often times amongst these extemporary
preachers, (who never prepare what to speak, but only to open the mouth and
speak) such a stammering and hammering of words, such a rude noise of jarrings
in sense, and construction; that I hold it far better for the Church they
should look gravely and say nothing, then make so many shallow, frivolous,
inconsequent discourses. And so I come from his Manner of speech, to his
asseveration; which is, In truth.]

He was the Legate of the God of truth, the Apostle of him, in whose mouth
there was found no guile; and being by Cornelius required to speak only that
which God had commanded, (as it is in the verse before my text) he could not
but speak the truth; and therefore does adorn the forefront of his speech
with this (...), Of a truth. This is the insoluble bond of Amity, the safest
refuge of Innocence, the surest warrant of Fidelity, the strongest sinew of
humane Society, the authentical evidence of Justice, the ensign of
Christianity, the sovereign influence of God, nay it is God himself, for God
is truth.

Detestable therefore and more then Diabolical is their doctrine and practice,
who strain, and weaken this sinew, which holds peace and society together;
who cancel this bond, which being made in earth is registered in the high court
of heaven, subscribed and signed by God himself; who either untie this
everlasting knot of truth by cunning Aequivocation, or cut it asunder by Papal
Dispensation. How can we better argue, that the Pope is not Peter's Successor,
at least in doctrine, then by urging this one argument here in my text? Peter
begins his Plat-forme of speech, Of a truth: but the Pope advises his
Disciples often times in their speech to use a Mental Reservation, which is in
plain terms a Lie; and so to begin their speech, not with St Peter, Of a
truth, but Of a lie. How could we demonstrate the Pope to be the man that
exalts himself above all that is called God, if he sat not in the Temple
of God, as Judge of God's law, nay as God of GOD himself; whose commands he
controles, by adding to, taking from, and dispensing with them. Far be it
therefore from us to hold with him that breaks with God himself; to join
with them in truth of doctrine, that maintain Equivocating and forswearing; to
partake of that Religion, which takes away all religious obligation. Is that
the faith of a Christian, which allows, and in some cases commends Perfidio
usnesse, and unnatural treasons? Can their doctrine be truth, qui dogmatizant
mendacium, who make an equivocating lie a doctrine, and that they may verify
this their lie, belie the truth it self, and make JESUS himself (I tremble to
speak it) to become a Jesuit? teaching by many arguments, that Christ
himself used this kind of Equivocation, both unto the High Prtest, and his
Disciples, and that all his speeches were not like unto this of Peter's, Of a
truth.

Tantum relligio potuit suadere malorum? Of all beasts we have those in
greatest detestatio^, which devour their own young. What are our Words and
Promises, what are our Oaths, and Vows, but the issue of our mind, which they
that resume, and recall, what do they else, but devour and eat their own
offspring? The first that brake this bond of truth in earth was the Devil Ge^.
3. whose scholars they show themselves, who teach, that Oaths, Vows, and
Promises of truth are better broken then kept with Heretics, and that they may
lawfully violate them at their pleasure; as Julius 2. was not ashamed openly to
profess, fides danda omnibus, servanda nemini. And of this profession was
Alex. 6. and his son Borgias, of whom it is reported that the one would never
speak what he meant to do, nor the other ever do, what he spoke. These were
two of the greatest mo^sters which nature ever yet produced. For what monster
can there be in nature more prodigious, then a Liar, or Equivocator, whose
speech is not Of a truth? All other creatures in the world bring forth the same
issue, which they conceive; but a Liar, or Equivocator brings forth of his
mouth, that which he conceaueth not, or rather a contrary issue to that which
he conceaueth. He conceaueth, or rather concealeth, the truth, and brings
forth a lie, and so the issue of his mouth is contrary to the conception of his
heart. The heathen Philosopher Zeno rather then he would be the Father to
beger, or suffer his tongue to be the Mother to bring forth such a monster,
bit of his tongue, and spit it in the face of the king of Cypres, who had a
long time tortured him to tell a Lie. Pliny in his 37. Book of Natural
History reports, that if a perjured person dip hand or foot into the river
Olachas in Bithynia, he feels as great torments, as if he were thrown into
a furnace of melting lead. And Solinus seconds this relation with the like of a
river in Sardinia, Periuros furto facto, quos lumine coecat.

And Philostratus tells as strange a miracle of a river near Tyara; in
which, if a perfidious person, that has forsworn himself, do but bath, the
water sinketh into all parts of his body, and breeds an incurable dropsy.
But alas! what is Olachas in Bithynia, or any river in the earth, to that River
of Brimstone in hell which boyles with a continual fire, and much wood? In
which, without long and bitter repentance they shall boil for ever, who make
no conscience of making a lie, and breaking the truth. Great surely are the
tortures, which Dives, and with him all the damned do, and must suffer in
hell; yet no part of Dives body was so much tortured, as his Tongue. He was
proud, and clad in fine linen; he was a Glutton, and fared deliciously every
day, and therefore in all likelihood a wanton too, Nam epulas comitatur
voluptas; he was uncharitable to the poor, and denied Lazarus the crumbs that
fell from his table: yet none of these sins were punished so severely as the
sins he committed with his tongue. Ex poena indicat culpa^, quia illud membrum
maxim omniu^ puniebatur; they are St Gregory's words l. 1. Mor. c. 5. and may
teach us to put a watch before our lips, and to make a conscience of breaking
the truth, which should be the cognizance of every Christian man's speech; as
here it is placed in the frontispice of St Peter's, Of a truth.

I Perceaue] St Peter was not till this time ignorant of God's impartial
Justice to universal man; but now he does see that truth confirmed in
particulars, which before he knew in general; he knew it before, and now
his knowledge was by a sensible probatio^ more confirmed. Job in his prosperity
knew, that God would not punish the innocent, yet he would never acknowledge
so much, till he had a sensible experience of it, Job, 9. 28. The sincere
affection, and filial obedience of Abraham to God, could not be hid from God
himself, yet there was no evidence of it expressed by God, till he refused not
to sacrifice his Son. Genesis 22. 12. And although the Apostle before this time
had a notion of this truth, which here he preaches; yet a manifest and
experimental overture he never learned, till he saw the gate of the Church now
opened to the Gentiles also. The Mistress of truth is Experience, and the best
knowledge has it is assurance from particulars. By a General knowledge we
know, as he that had bin blind saw, confusedly, Men like trees: but by a
collection of Particulars which are obvious to the sense (especially in matters
practike, and moral) our mind rests assured without hesitation. The one I may
call Notitia, the other Fiducia, the one resides in the understanding the other
in the will, the one is Theoricall, the other Practical, the one consists in
General notions, the other in Particular Experiments; the one is (...), the
other (...), by the one we may know Good from Bad, by the other Better from
Good. In the knowledge therefore of divine verities we must not content our
selves with the first operations of the Spirit, which are but general, but we
must strive for particular directions, and assurances; we must not only have
our hearts disposed, but informed; not only ploughed up, but sown. For as all
other Sciences and Professions must needs savor of much rawnesse and
imperfection, if they be studied only in passage, (...), to gain popular
estimation, or to content the state in which we live: So, and much more, is it
with religious knowledge, if a man profess it only with relation, and fashion
superficially, not syncerely, and exactly.

For though that a weak faith and confused knowledge of Divine things be of
that admirable and working nature, that the very least corn and grain of it,
is able to effect the salvation of him in whom it is, and to lift him up to
heaven, were he as gross and heavy as a mountain: yet nevertheless this must
not content a Christian man; but he must make a continual progress from
faith to faith, from knowledge to knowledge, till at length he be not only able
in gross to know, but evidently to perceive the mysteries of religion and
properties of God himself; whereof this is one, (...), that he is No accepter
of persons.]

God is an agent infinite, whose will is nothing else, but Deus volens, as St
Austin says, essentially God himself, without whom there is no moving or
efficient cause of his operations: but his will is a law to himself, and to
all things else whatsoever, and the only cause of what, and why he works. It
was his pleasure to create this goodly fabric of the world we see in time,
and not before. It was his pleasure to permit the lapse of the first created
man, and his posterity, and being fallen, to sequester out of the corrupted
mass some few, to be the inheritors of his kingdom, and to leave the major
part in their deserved perdition. Beyond his pleasure to make a Quaere of his
actions were saucie curiosity, and yet to think his will to be without reason
were indigne blasphemy. It is not the prescience of faith, or prevision of
works, that can move the will of God, to choose one, and refuse the other,
because they are not, (says Aquinas part. 1. q. 23. a. 4.) the cause, but the
effects of Gods love. Praedestinatio est gratiae praeparatio, gratia vero
praedestinationis effectus. Aug. c. 10. de praedestinatione sanctoru^.
Predestination is the harbinger of grace and grace the effect of Gods love. He
first created all things, and then saw they were good: the foresight of their
goodness was no inducement to the work of their creation, but his creation
gave them this eloge, Quaecunque fecit erant valde bona. God chooses none,
because they are good, but men are good, because they are chosen. Gratia Dei
non invenit elige^dos, sed facit. Therefore St Paul (says Austin) compared
together the sons of Isaac, twins, vno etiam concubitu fusos in vtero, both
yet unborn, neither of them having done well or ill; Quod referendum est
(says the same Father) non ad dispensatoris iniustitiam, sed ad donantis
misericordiam; which we must not impute to Gods Injustice, or partiality, but
to his good will and pleasure: which must be the last resolution of our
inquiries; and whatsoever the event is, we must still say, as our Savior did,
Mat. 11. 25. Naepater, quia sic placuit tibi; Even so father, for it seemed
good in thy sight. Could the master of the vineyard say, Annon possum facere de
meo, quod volo? Is it not lawful for me to do with my own, what I will? And
shall we deny to God the supreme cause of all things, the free disposition of
any thing after his pleasure? Whose will is not only just and full of equity,
but, as St Basil calls it, (...), the very oracle and rule of justice, who does
make things just and right, because he wills them. There is no man rejected by
God without just cause and demerit, nor any saved but by his mercy and free
pleasure. Now if it be asked, why God should thus be an accepter of persons,
and afford this mercy to some, and not to all: we must with a religious
ignorance content our selves, and stand amazed at the secret and inexplicable
greatness of God, and satisfy our selves with this, (...), it was his
pleasure so to dispose of his kingdom. This is the Nonvltra, beyond which we
must not wade, but hither being come, we must make a stand, and with the
blessed Apostle cry out, O altitudo divitiarum! O the depth of the riches both
of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and
his ways past finding out! Romans 11. 33.

But here we may not be so injurious to the Deity, as to conceive God in his
Decrees to be tyrannical, as to say, Sic volo, sic iubeo, stat pro ratione
voluntas; or that the will of God is moved (...), without reason: for although
neither beauty of face, feature of body, honorable descent, wisdom, and the
endowments of the mind, or any thing else without God, ca^ move his will to
Election, or make him to accept of one person before another; yet is there
never wanting a most just cause, and sufficient reason of his purposes and
Decrees. For although God works all things according to his will and
pleasure; yet whatsoever he does, he does it (...) with counsel and wise
resolution. Ephesians. 1. 11. God does order all things sweetly and profitably. Sap.
8. 1. Omnia fecisti in sapientia Domine. In wisdom have thou done all thy
works o God, Ps. 104. 24. And shall we think that this wise-creating God,
who made all things for his glory, should without some proper reason determine
of any thing which he has made? The doctrine therefore of St Peter in my Text
remains still true, and as firm as heaven, (...), God is no accepter of
persons: because when he determines any thing he has a sufficient reason,
besides his Will and Pleasure to do what he does. Which reason (says the
divine Author of the Ecclesiastical Policy) because we are not worthy or, able
to apprehend, we must humbly and meckely adore. This secret and unknown reason
of Gods purposes is like himself, Eternal, before the foundations of the
world were laid, and has so effectually moved his Will, that now it can admit
of no change or variation. That which God has decreed, must still be like
God, without change, who can as well deny himself to be God, as not perform,
what he has defined. Whom he loves, he loves unto the end; and to whom he
gives the earnest of his spirit, they have a continual feeling in some measure
more or less, of his gracious presence. For the love of God, it is not (...)
variable like the gifts of temporal men, which may be granted to day and
reversed to morrow, with a Non obstante priore concessione: but the love of God
and the gifts of his holy Spirit they are (...), and stand for ever without
change, Romans 11. 29. He is Triumphator Israelis, the glory and strength of
Israel, and will neither lie nor repent, nor yet can he in the mean time be
termed injurious to any, or an accepter of persons (as Pelagius profanely
sometime did object:) because God in giving his grace to some and denying it to
others does not proceed (sairh Alex-Hales) iuxta dignitatem humanam, sed
secundum dignationem divinam, it is a donation of bounty, not a dotation
according to the rules of Justice. As God is in heaven, so should Gods
Vicegerents be in earth; as they sit in his chair, so should they walk in
his paths of Justice. They should without respect of persons, as well hear the
cause of poor Bartimaeus, as rich Zachaeus, as well the small, as the great,
Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Their eyes must always be shut, that they be not drawn by favor,
their ears always open, that they may hear both parties indifferently, and
their hands must be fast clinched up, least otherwise they be corrupted with
bribes, quae excoecant prudentes, and subvertunt verba iustorum, which blind
the wise, and subvert the words of the righteous, Exodus 23. 8. It was a
provident law enacted in the time of Rich. 2. and afterward revived in the
days of the last Henry (and would God till this day it had still been
continued without violation) that no Justice of Assize should ride his Circuit
in that country, where either he was borne, or did live: that being unknown to
all, they might accept of the persons of none, but be indifferent unto al; that
so they might the more freely administer justice, and the more lively represent
him, whose deputy Lieutenants they are; in being merciful, as he is merciful,
holy, as he is holy, no respecters of persons, because with God there is no
respect of persons.

But in every nation] Cornelius an alien from the common wealth of Israel is
accepted with God, as well as Peter borne among God's own people, and trained
up in Christ's own school; the poor Leper a Jew, as well as the rich
Centurion that built his nation a Synagogue; as well old Simeon in the temple,
as young John in the womb; as well those that watched him under the Cross, as
the Thief that hung with him on the Cross: for in Christ there is neither Jew
nor Grecian, neither bond nor free, Gal. 3. 28. but he that is Lord over all,
is rich unto all, not only to some of all nations, but to all of all nations,
that fear him and work righteousness. And if any man be not accepted of him,
the fault is not in the sufficiency of God's grace, but in the defect of
efficiencie in us. Whereupon says Calvine Com. in 10. Act. v. 33. the words
before my text, Maceria i am diruta, Deus aequali amore omnes gentes complexus
est; the partition Wall being now broken down, God embraces all nations with
an equal love. For the will of God toward, mankind is (if I may so speak)
Orbicular, environing universal man, with Mercies and Judgments, with
Salvation, and Damnation: if with repentance and works of righteousness we
turn to the right hand, we shall find a Merciful Father, and be accepted of
him; but if we remain obdurate in our sin, and turn to the left hand, we
shall see an Angry Judge and rue the punishments of his wrath. Which change and
alteration is in us, not in God; God does not bow to man, but man does come to
God; nor does God leave any man of any nation, but man does revolt from his
Creator. Not only the Schools, but Expositors both Orthodoxe and Romish,
stand at this day much distracted, with a diversity, or at least a diverse
conceit of the Will of God; of his Antecedent, and Consequent, Hidden and
Revealed will, of his Absolute, and Conditional Will: whereas to speak
properly, Gods Will is one and the same, nor can he be said to have two Wills,
no more then to have two Wisdoms, two Mercies, two Goodnesses, or a diversity
of other his Essential Attributes. But as the Wisdom of God (to instance in
that Attribute) is by St Paul termed (...), Ephesians. 3. 10. which some render
Multiformis, others Multis modis varia, and our English Manifold; which is yet
but one: so the Will of God being one and the same in it self, may yet in
respect of us, and the diverse effects thereof, be termed (...), Manifold,
and Diverse. The ground of all these Distinctions is taken out of Damascene, and
by Damascene out of Chrysostom, Hom. 1. in Epist. ad Ephesians. There is in God
(says he) a twofold Will, (...). There is in God a twofold Will, a First
and a Second; the first and principal will of God does immediately proceed
from God himself, whereby he desires to do good unto all, (...), and it is
Voluntas simplicis complacentiae, and may be termed Voluntas benefaciendi. His
secondary will does proceed from contingent causes without God, and is
occasioned by us, and it may be termed Voluntas Iustitiae, which does arise
from our sins, which God cannot but put in execution without prejudice to his
Justice. The first is the Will of God, wherein he takes delight and pleasure,
and is by the same Father termed (...) the principal will of God. That which
has been spoken I thus bring home to my text. That it is the Will of God to
leave many of most nations in the corrupt mass of perdition, I well know: but
that it is his principal Will, his (...), or Voluntas simplicis
complacentiae, to decree the absolute reprobatio^ of any man of any nation, I
utterly deny. Deus non est prius vltor, quam homo est peccator, says Aug. ep.
105. Man deserves his punishment, before he has it, and God makes no man a
reprobate without just cause. The word Reprobation or Reprobate is in Scripture
seldom used to this purpose, and the Greek word (...) will hardly carry it,
signifying as well Improbus, or Reprehensione dignus, as a Reprobate, and
therefore should be used more sparingly, and not so absolutely determined of.
In the Fathers the opposite to Predestination to life eternal is Predestination
to a second death; and to Election to grace, they oppose Dereliction in the
Mass of perdition, seldom Reprobation. In those parts of St Austin, which I
have read, I never met with the word Reprobus as opposite to Elect, but once;
and whosoever has spent most hours in reading the works of that Judicious
Father, did never in that sense read it twice. I will end this point (because I
have St Mary's in Oxon.
elsewhere spoken of it more at large) with that of the Prophet, Perditio tua
ex te o Israel; there is no man of any nation that falls, but by his own
iniquity. Stygias vltro quaerimus vndas, we ferry our selves over unto hell:
and like the Ostrich in Pliny, Proprijs configimur pennis, we prick our
selves with our own feathers, and like desperate Mariners cause those ships
to leake which should carry us safe to the fortunate port of heaven.

He that fears him] Fear is defined by the great Master of Art Aristotle, l.
2. Rhet. c. 11. to be nothing else, but a perturbation of the mind through an
opinion of some imminent danger, threatening, if not the destruction, yet the
annoyance of our nature, which to shun it does contract and deiect it self.
For as the object of Hope is Bonum, something that is Good, so the object of
Fear, Hopes opposite, must needs be Malum, something being or apprehended to
be Evil. Yet not every evil, but (...), such an evil as threatens us with
destruction or vexation, and that such as we have no ability to resist, nor
yet are utterly disenabled to avoid. To fear that which we know our selves
able to withstand were cowardice; to withstand that, which we know our selves
unable to differ or eschew, were extreme folly. The proper object therefore of
Fear, is an Evil in our persuasion irresistable when it comes, yet not
utterly impossible for a time, either in whole or in part, to be declined.
(...): Fear always, says the same Aristotle, has some hope of escape
annexed, and therefore does cause us to consult and deliberate; which in
matters past hope to do were mere madness. Neither does our nature much
shrink and deiect it self, at such evils, except they be at the door, ready
to enter in and rush upon us, or hanging over our heads ready to oppress us.
(...), dangers out of sight are seldom feared, nor, if they be near, do we
fear them except we think them to be near. There is no man living but is
assured, that once he must pay the tribute due unto nature, Death: but because
most men put death e longinquo, far from them, and the eldest man that is,
does think he may live yet, yet a day longer, there is nothing in time of
health less thought on the^ sickness, and throughout the whole course of our
life less feared then death.

But when we apprehend a thing nociue, as nociue, a danger as a danger, ready
at hand, for to assault us; then does our dastard blood retire to the fountain
of heat, and what we cannot forcibly withstand, that we seek warily to
decline. Which eschewing of evil being a thing natural, and ingrafted in the
heart of every man, as he is a man, is in it self neither good nor bad, but
good or bad according to the cause for which, or the measure by which it is
entertained. Now because in diverse Texts of Scripture we read this passion of
Fear commended and enjoined, and else where forbidden and reproved: to
reconcile this seeming opposition, we must know, that on the one side is
commended a godly and religious fear, on the other is reproved a diffident and
perplexed fear; the one is a remedy against desperation, the other against
presumption; the one against diffidencie, the other against security; the one
reprooues an anxious torturing fear, which is without hope, the other commends
a cautelous and sollicitous fear, in every man that stands, to take heed, lest
he fall.

And if here any Auditour should demand, how God can be feared, being not only
good, but essentially Goodness it self; and that nothing can be feared but
that which is evil or apprehended so to be? I answer with Aquinas 2a. 2. q.
19. a. 1. that as hope has it is double object, the one the good we pursue in
expectation, and the other the auxiliarie help, by which we hope to obtain
this good: so fear has it is double object, the one is the evil which it
eschewes and dreads, the other is something from which this evil may proceed.
Now although God everlasting and blessed for ever, cannot in the first sense be
said to be feared, or to be the object of fear; yet in the second he may. For
although he be goodness it self, yet something may be feared to proceed from
him, which is evil; evil, not in it is own nature, but evil in respect of him
that fears; which is indeed malum poenae, not culpae, an evil of punishment,
not of offense.

And for our direction in this point, give me leave to note unto you (out of
Aquinas) a fourefold fear, A Natural, a Worldly, a Servile, and a Filial
fear. A natural fear is nothing else but a provide^t shunning of those
dangers and mischeefes, with which we are not able to encounter. Which passion
is entayled to all the sons of Adam, and made hereditary; nor from it was our
Savior himself freed, but as he was a man he feared, and therefore prayed,
and that often, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.

The second is a worldly fear, when, for the safety of things temporal, we
stick not to admit of things excluding from eternal; when we more fear them,
that can kill the body only, then him that can cast both body and soul into
eternal fire; when we startle at the least bluster of persecution, when we
contract our selves at the touch of a pins point, being ready at the least
assault to leave Christ for the love of the world.

The servile fear is a slavish dread of the judgments of God, and his
punishments for sin; when not for the love of heaven, but for fear of hell,
we retain our selves within the circle of Gods Commandments.

The last and best fear, is a filial, chaste, and loving fear, when we fear
to commit sin, because it is sin, and do embrace virtue, as it is virtue;
cum non delectaret iniquitas, quamvis proponeretur impunitas, says Ambrose.
Which fear is proper to Christ's flock; which who so has is accepted with God
and may be assured to live for ever. St Austin in his 120. Epist. ad Honoratum
does truly express and lively effigiate the nature and difference of these
two fears, by the example of the two married women, the one an adulteress, the
other a chaste matrone. These both fear their husbands, but after a different
manner. The one fears the presence of her husband, least coming home he take
her tarde, the other fears the absence of her husband, lest by his departure
she be deprived of his much desired company. The one fears to commit adultery
least her husband catch her, her mind nevertheless is adulterous, and quod
deest operi inest voluntati (says Austin) what she wants in deed she
perfourmes in desire: the other fears her husband, but it is chastely and
lovingly, nothing but his displeasure or absence; Nam amanti etiam absentia
molesta est. So the wicked fear God with a base, servile fear, they fear him
as a Judge; the godly as a Father. The servile fear makes men to avoid sin,
quia nocivum, the filial, quia prohibitum, only because it is forbidden,
says Almaine in his Morals. He who has a chaste, filtall fear, does not only
avoid the act of sin, but a desire to commit the act: but the servile fear
restraines men only ab actu executorio (says Aquinas,) and leaves behind,
velle complacentiae, a desire to sin. In a word, the servile fear does tie
us unto God with clampers of iron and fetters of brass, the filial with
bracelets of needle work and chains of gold; by the one we receive the spirit
of adoption and cry Abba father; by the other the spirit of bondage again unto
fear. The servile fear (says Hales part. 3. q. 06.) respicit poenam
aeternam, vt destructivam subiecti; the fil^al, tanquam separativam et
privativam a Deo. By the one we fear the Judgments of God and the pains of
he^^, by the other the loss of his grace and the ioies of heaven. The one is
not Timor, but Terror, a passion mixed of horror and dismay; the other sweetly
composed of love and an awful regard. The one is timor poenae, the other
culpae; the one the fear of the punishment, the other of the offense: the one
is the badge and brand of the reprobate; the other the proper and inseparable
character of the elect; insomuch that Jacob the religious Father of the
Patriarcks did call God nothing else, but the fear of his father Isaac. Genesis
31. 42.

This fear of God should bind us hand and foot from sin, and make us
think of that heavenly Vow of St Anselmes, Si hinc peccatum and illinc
infernum viderem, ac vni eorum necessario immergi deberem, prius me in infernum
immergerem quam peccatum co^mitterem. If sin (says he) were on the one side
and hell on the other, I had rather plunge my soul into the depth of hell,
then commit a voluntary sin. This fear of God and loss of his love, should
serve, as a strong curb to retain us from sin; whenever either by the
corruption of our nature or allurements of the Devil we are tempted thereunto.
When Joseph was by his wanton mistress tempted to adultery, it was not the
fear of temporal punishments, the loss of his service, or the discovery of
the fact, that kept him from yielding to her unlawful desire, but the fear of
offending God; How can I do this so great wickedness and sin against God?
Genesis 39. 9. But now sin has clambred up to that height of impiety; that
neither the fear of God (whose wrath is a co^suming fire) nor the terror of
punishment can restrain many from the frequent practice, scarce from the open
profession of sin. There was a time, when Tamar was vayled and covered her
face: but now she boldly walks unmasked in the broad eye of the multitude,
enters the presence of the best, walks through the midst of the city, and
makes public profession of her lust; and quod solet esse publicum incipit esse
licitum, that which is done commonly by many, will ere long be thought lawful
to be done by any. There was a time, when, those that were drunken, were
drunken in the night, but now it is become a day work, or rather a daily
work, and so obvious that a man can hardly balke it in the street. There was a
time, when an eye required an eye, and blood would call for blood again; but
now murder is become the badge of manhood, and sin is made a mockery. As
Abner called fighting but a play or sport, 2. Sam. 2. which indeed procured a
bloody battle (for every man killed his fellow) so Monomachies are now become
but recreations, and the least but suspicion of disgrace is a just cause of a
single combat. But this is madness not manliness; this kind of courage is
in the head, not in the heart, it is not hardy valor, but a soft and moist
enthusiasme of Bacchus, qui ad praelia trudit inermes. And therefore men should
as well consider of the beginning, as fear the end of such contentions.

But such men the fear of God in my Text cannot retain, the goodness of God
cannot allure; nothing but his Judgments and terrors can prevail with the^.
Let the first call to mind the fearful end of Zimbri and Cozbi in the very
act of Incontinency; that God sent fire and brimstone, even Hell from Heaven,
to consume the people for their uncleanness; and that most times then
punishment in this life is shame and penury, and in the other perpetual
torments, and extremest misery. Momentaneum est quod delectat, aeternum quod
cruciat: an Ocea^ of torture for a drop of pleasure. Let the other know, that
though the wine be red, and goes down pleasantly, yet in the end it will
bite like a Serpent and hurt like a Cockatrice: and wine in the conveyance is
most like the poison of Serpents, whose teeth are hollow (says Pliny) like
pipes, that with more secret speed they may convey their poison. Last of all,
let the other know, that Clamitat in coelum vox sanguinis, the voice of blood
is loud, it pearceth the clouds, it knocks at heaven gates, and enters into the
ears of the Lord of Hosts. And so I go on.

And works righteousnesse] It is the note of Calvine upon my Text; who by the
fear of God understands the observation of all the Commandments of the first
Table, and by working of righteousness, all the Commandments of the second
Table; by the one we are just, and righteous before God, by the other before
men; the one is necessary, but not sufficient, the other is acceptable, but not
perfect. Which exposition of his will serve to strike off all the hold-fast of
the Divines of Rome from this place; who hence infer the Merit of Works, and
the favor they procure us with God: for if by working of righteousness be
understood, only the observation of the Comma^dements of the second Table; then
doubtless are they not sufficiently able to make us acceptable with God. Yet
Bellarmine falls upon this Text of Scripture, and hence infers an ability in man
to make himself acceptable with God. I am in the Pulpit, not in the School;
and therefore will not trouble you with the Subtilties of the Question: which
as well in this, as other cases, are often times made too common to the multitude.

The property of Faith is to receive and apprehende; the nature of Charity is
to diffuse and impart to others. Faith alone is the Justifying instrument,
whereby we apprehend and apply Christ's merits unto us: but we cannot make any
discovery or manifestation thereof unto others, except there be joined to our
Faith the Works of righteousness. So the inward work of Justification we
ascribe to Faith only, but the righteousness of Sanctification, we ascribe
unto good Works, which are by Jesus Christ to the glory and praise of God. For
the more clear understanding whereof, we must observe, that our Works are of
two sorts; either Intrinsecall and infused, as Faith, Hope, etc. or
Extrinsecall and acquisite; such are Almsdeeds and Works of Charity. Our
intrinsecall Works, they are, as it were, the Principal, and our Extrinsecall
or outward works they are the Interest, which God expects as due unto him; as
may well appear by the Parable of the Servants in the Gospel, to whom the
Talents were concredited.

Now we shall be rewarded by God, not according to our intrinsecall Habits, but
extrinsecall Works; not because we had a strong faith, or great hope, but for
releeving the poor, visiting the sick, and performance of other works of
that quality, and nature. But the Church of Rome, proceeds further, and does
not only make them the rule according to which, but the cause for which we are
justified. They make them Merita, we Debita, they the Cause of our salvation,
and a Priori, we the Consequent, and a Posteriori; as fruit makes not the tree
to be good, but only shows it to be so. Non praecedunt iustificandum, sed
sequuntur iustificatu^: they are the Signs of our Sanctification, not the
Causes of our Justification. For Faith does not spring out of Charity, (as
Bellarmine falsely averres;) but true Charity is the offspring of Faith;
whereupon it is by St Paul termed De Just. l. 1. c. 4.
(...), the ground of things hoped for, and the foundation on which all other
Theological virtues are erected. Credendo fundamur sperando erigimur,
diligendo perficimur. By Faith (says Austin) we are ingrafted, by Hope we are
improved, and by Charity we are made perfect, God working in us, and with us.
For our righteousness is rather passive then active: Iustitia nostra non est
in nobis, sed extra nos, says Doctor Luther. Yet although our Works are not
the cause of our justification, yet are they the perfection of our faith and a
demonstratiue assurance, that we are justified. And although it be true that
sola fides iustificat, faith only iustifies, yet fides quae est sola non
iustificat, that faith which is alone does not justify. And although it do
justify alone, yet does it not save alone; for it is one thing to be saved, and
another thing to be justified. They who expect to be the sons of God must be
legitimate both by the Fathers and the Mothers side, and as they must be
begotten of Abraham who was (...), the father of the faithful, Romans 4. 11. so
they must have Sarah the free woman to be their mother, who was (...), the
mother of all that do well, 1. Pet. 3. 6. Besides the State in fide, there
must be an Ambulate in dilectione: and although the crown of glory be not
given bonis operibus, yet is it given been operantibus, not for the work, yet
to the workers, for Christ's sake, in whose name the work is done.

Aristotle (l. 2. Eth.) requires in his perfect Moralist, besides knowledge and
a will to work, an actual practice, wherein consists the life of virtue: and
in every scholar in Christ's school, besides the theory of faith and
speculation of theological verities, or with these a desire to do good, there
must be an actual performance, we must work out our salvation, and thereby
make our election sure. The fountain of saving grace I know is set wide open
unto us all by Christ; and by the hallowed waters of Baptism, as by the waters
of Jordan, we are cleansed from the leprosy of sin. But yet this means
alone without Works and industrious labors, without fights, races, crosses,
and strict examination of Talents, will never present us, as amiable
spectacles, in the sight of God and heavenly spirits. We must not think that
it is the Churches office to absolve that the Spirit must cleanse, Christ must
suffer, God must save, and that We must either sit still or sin still, all the
while relying upon this, I believe, and therefore I shall live. It is a reason
without reason to infer, that since God saues little ones because they cannot
work righteousness, therefore also he must save great ones without works,
because they will not work. But this must be our rule for direction; that God
has proposed both himself and his kingdom unto us under a double title, the
one of Inheritance, the other of Reward; an inheritance to sons, a reward to
servants. For to inherit, it suffices to be sons; but reward presupposes
service, which must expect it. Every man shall receive his reward according to
his labor. The first years of man, through the unaptness of the reasonable
powers of his soul for action, allow him not to expect God or heaven as a
reward, which yet as his inheritance even Baptism does impart unto him. But
when years increase, and with years reason grows active, it will not
suffice to plead for our inheritance, as sons, except we also endeavor for
our reward as servants. God will be Abraham's reward; but Abraham must walk for
it: Ambula coram me, Walk before me. And it is not said, Euge fili bone! Well
done good son (though none but good sons shall enter;) but they must be
good servants too, Euge serve bone! intra; Well done good servant! enter into
thy masters joy.

It is therefore a slanderous imputation cast by Bellarmine upon the Reformed
Churches, that their Gospel is carnal, and the high way to Epicurisme; that
they inveigh against Good Works, and by a bare and naked faith do expect to
soar up to heaven. To which my answer is, that of St Austins in another case
Ep. 86. Nemo nos ita intelligit, nisi qui seipsum non intelligit. There is no
man that understands himself, or any thing else, that can so understand us.
We make the one the tree, the other the fruit, and do profess, with the same
Father in another place, Inseparabilis est hona vita a fide, imo ea ipsa est
bona vita: A good life is the inseparable companion of Faith, nay, a living
Faith is it self a good life.

The preaching of which doctrine in our English Church warranted by the Word of
God has taken so deep root, and brought forth so good fruit, that since the
first year of our late Sovereign Queen of pious memory there have been more
Hospitalls, Public Schools, Libraries, Colleges, and Places for learning,
built, adorned, and now in building, then ever were before in any one 60.
years. Many of which public Monuments of Religion have received their first
erection and chiefest endowments from the Heroical liberality of those, whose
Successors diverse here present are in Office and Dignity. Be not, I beseech
you (R. H.) their successors only in Place, but in Piety; pass not through
this world, like an arrowe in the air, or ship in the sea, that leave no
impression behind them. As God has given you means and hands to effect, so
should you have hearts to affect that which is good; and if not to found, yet
to further and finish Good works for public benefit: whereby your
righteousness shall be recorded in heaven, and your Names preserved from
rottennes on earth.

And if your Charity wants a fit object for her practice, then cast your eyes
upon the bare Habitations of the Muses: harken after the SCHOOLS of sciences
and learning, which by the beneficency and prensation of many, especially of
that worthy Sr John Benet.
Knight the Patron of the work, (whose name shall for ever be to us as a sweet
ointment powered out) have crept out of the ground, and now deserve to be
covered by the Charity of all that love either learning, or learned men. This
is a work in which the Elephant may wade, as well as the Lamb, the rich man's
gift shall be welcome, and the meaner mite not refused: and a co^currency of so
many founders to a work of that incomparable benefit, will doubtless make a
glorious constellation of blessed stars, whereof some shall be greater, others
less, but al shining in the highest heavens. And if that be true which the
Wise man says, Eccl. 40. 19. that the Building of a City will make a man
immortal; then much more the erection of a Work of this infinite benefit which
shall remain longer, then any City. For when the stones shall by time and
long continuance be decayed, yet Iustitia manet in aeternum, the Founders and
Benefactors (especially with us of that University) shall be in everlasting
remembrance. Solaque non norunt haec monumenta mori. Of this assured I am, that
neither the Plantation of Vlster in Ireland, nor the Contribution to Prage in
Bohemia may stand comparison with this Monument of all Arts and learning: of
whose benefit, not only our own nation, but the remotest kingdoms of the
Christian world shall have a taste. It disquieted the Wisest man, that ever was
to think, that he should leave his goods he knew not to whom, peradventure
Homini otioso, to one that would spend all, Eccles. 2. 19. And let it not be
your sole care to leave All to your riotous Executors, who peradventure in few
years will consume that estate, which with much care and in many years you
have gathered together. You must purchase something, Alteri seculo, for the
world to come: you must make your eyes in this life the overseers of some good
works; you must imitate Jacob, who to pacify his brother Esau, sent a Present
before, Genesis 32. 20. and before Cornelius could have Peter sent unto him, he
sent his Alms deeds to usher him up the way into heaven. And therefore it is
not said in my Text, he who has, or hereafter will work righteousness, but
(...), he that actually does work righteousness.

That new convert Zacheus did not say (...), the half of my goods I will give
unto the poor when I am dead: but (...), I now presently give. Such as defer
the performance of the works of righteousness, till the end of their days, are
like those that carry ca^dles in Lanthornes behind them in a dark night;
whereby they direct others, and themselves in the mean time fall into the
ditch. It is not for men to be like swine, good for nothing till they be dead;
or like Christmas-boxes, that will afford nothing, till they be broken. Let us
rather imitate the example of the forenamed Zacheus, who gave in the present
tense, and that no small driblet, but (...), even the half of his goods and
substance; and that not (...), but (...), not to one poor man, but to many;
yea and makes proclamation, that if by forged cavillation he had wronged any
man, he would restore him fourefold. Surely had Zacheus lived in these our
days, he had been an honest Master of the Custom house. For if this or the
like proclamation should be made among us by all of his profession, how many
are there in this City, now in great reputation and esteem, that would have
scarce sufficient left them in this life to maintain their families, and being
dead to defray the expense of an ordinary Funeral! And yet these men too to
sweeten the mouth of the poor, and to stop the ears of the multitude will
clad some few in frize, and when they die bequeath a solemn Potation to their
adjoining friends, thinking by these petty posthume works of righteousness to
make themselves acceptable with God. Such men I can compare to nothing more
fitly, then to the Lion, which Sampson killed; which in his life time was
ravenous and devoured all, and being dead was found to have some little honey in
his mouth. Judge. 14.

And as we are to work righteousness, whilst we have time, or rather
continually, so we must work our own, not other men's; we must not like Simon
of Cyrene carry other men's crosses: we must not be busy Bishops in other men's
Diocesses, but stand in that station, whereunto we are called; and not think
it sufficient in some respect to be good and in other bad, to bring forth with
one branch sound fruit, and with the other rotten, but to work righteousness in
every respect. It is not sufficient for the inferior to be a good man, but to
be a good servingman, for the superior to be a good Master, but a good
Magistrate. It is not sufficient to be a good Preacher, but a good Bishop; and
not only a learned Lawyer, but an upright Judge. For unless in all respects we
be quadrate and perfect, we shall not be accepted with God: which is the end
of my Text, and shall be the end of my speech.

Is accepted with God] Not in strict legal rigor, but in Evangelicall
mitigation, not, because we can perform exact obedience to the Law of God, or
work perfect righteousness: but because we love, purpose, desire, endeavor,
and in some measure perform obedience to the Law of God; and where we are
deficient we sigh and groan for our defects, which at the Chauncery bar of
Gods mercy is acceptable performance. Acceptable, not for our observing what
the law requires, but for our sincere desire to perform it: because, as Saint
Paul says, (...), the ready mind is accepted with God.

The benefits (says Aristotle lib. 1. Eth. c. 14.) which men receive from God
and their Parents are of that infinite worth and transcendent value, that we
are not able to return for them any correspondency of desert, (...). The
reason is, because the gifts of God and his acceptance is infinite, but the
actions of man finite and determinate; the best whereof has many stains and
imperfections. For the immediate and next causes of our works are not
altogether spiritual, and totally regenerate, because there dwells yet the
Iebusite in Jerusalem with the Israelites: the soul of man has her inmates,
the Old man coinhabiting with the New, the flesh with the spirit, the law of
sin, with the law of the mind. Insomuch that the best of men cannot climb up
to heaven without Jacobs ladder, the merit of Christ, and the gift of God.

I have wearied my self and am sure have tired you. I will therefore end all
with that devout prayer of Archbishop Anselme; Recognosce Domine quod tuum
est, and absterge quod meum, ne per dat mea iniquit as quod fecit tua bonitas.
Accept (O God) of what is thine own in us; and let not our iniquity eclipse
thy gracious mercy. Meritum no strum, miseratio Domint; our Merit is thy Mercy
and gracious acceptance; in which we repose our whole assurance. We
acknowledge our selves to be naked of all righteousness, beseeching thee to
cloth us; to be lame and impotent in the performance of any Good work,
desiring thee to strengthen us; to be blind in our understanding, desiring thee
to enlighten us; to be servants to sin desiring thee to free us: and we
ascribe all glory unto thee in this world, praying to be glorified of thee in
the world to come.

FINIS.

