THE MASQVE OF THE League and the Spanyard discovered.

Wherein, 1. The League is painted forth in all her col^^^^. 2. Is showen, that
it is not lawful for a (...) Arm himself against his King, for (...)tence so
ever it be. 3. That but few Noblemen take part with the (...) an Advertisement
to them concerning (...).


TO MY LORD, THE CARDINAL OF BVRBO^.

Faithfully translated out of the French (...) at Toures by Iamet Mettayer,
(...) Printer to the King.

PATERE, AVT ABSTINE.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. Charlewoode, for (...) Smyth, and are to be sold at
his shop, (...) West end of Paul's. 1502.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Mistress Dorothy Edmonds: one of the Gentlewomen of
her Majesty's most honorable privy Chamber.
All happiness in this life, and in the world to come heartily wished.

Your worships in all duty to command. R. Smyth.

TO MY LORD, THE most honorable, reverend ar^ religious Cardinal of Burbon:
Prince of the blood.
MY Lord, being d^^sirous to warrant a^^ protect my self, from the injury and
repro^^ of false French-me^, v^^der your inexpugna^^ shield that are so great
a Prince and Prela^^ most faithful to God, the King and the esta^^ which by
divine grace is now (though wi^^ mighty and trouble-some trauerses) in yo^^
most noble and royal House: your gener^^sitie and kindness, excusing me from
the tear^^^ of ouer-bold: provoked me, peraduentu^^ somewhat rashly (having
enterprised wit^^out your knowledge) to address this d^^^course to you; For
this cause, to with-stan^ such as will immediately cry nothing but (...)
re^ique, under shadow of making passage to ^^th, as being cloaked with the
habit of holi^^es and religion: betray God, to whose service ^^ey are vowed, in
sporting with their swords (...) the service of the devil, father of
dissenti^^, and author of blood-sheds and murders. ^herby we may evidently
discern, that they ^^ue no part of religion but the habit, and that ^^y abuse
their profession, seeing that with^^t any fear of God or the Magistrate, and
to (...) great disgrace of Christian religion: they ^^mbat for the earth with
material Arms, and (...) for heaven with spiritual forces. I beseech good men,
that duly under this habit make ^^ofession of Christian Catholic religion,
(...) to make a scandale of it, seeing that kee^^ng this pure whitenes, the
humility and sim^^^city of their forefathers, and not contending ^^^war
otherwise then under the Ensign of ^^rist Jesus, they cannot here sustain
any ^^derance: protesting, that hitherto I have (...) in Christian religion,
and therein will persevere so long as God gives me grace.

As for the rest of my discourse, touchi^^ the praises and Trophies of our
victorio^^ Prince, and the obedience (which I have pr^^ued by scripture) his
subjects owe him of d^^tie, what-soeuer pretense the Leaguers o^^pose: I think
there is no one, if he be not ^^uer passionate, an Anti-catholique or
Sp^^nyarde (as are these zealous murderers a^^ thieves of the rebellious
unity) that can will speak against it. If there be any one (...) hardy, as
dare produce any false inductio^ on the behalf of the rebellion of these fa^^
Frenchmen, to beat down the estate roy^^ or to use any color against your
royal ho^^^ (which they attache with a false semblance (...) show of religion)
by estranging, or stayni^^ the French Nobility, that stand in defense (...)
their King: the sword of this great and ma^^nanimous Prince, put into his hand
by t^^ highest puissaunce, shall quayle (by his ayd^^ all such shyfts, scourge
the Rebels, vp-hol^ (...) estate, and preserve the flourishing No^^esse, that
with so good heart do follow his ^^ruice.

And if these Arms will deigne to admit ^^e assistance of the pen, there are
so many ^^rned and faithful for his Majesty, as soon ^^ll dysprooue such
false propositions: God ^^ding, whom (my Lord) I pray to preserve ^^d keep
you, as an ornament and pillar of ^^s Church, the good of this estate, so vexed
^^d afflicted by the Stranger: as also the ma^^ging of his affairs (which so
nearly con^^rnes you) for the service of his Majesty.

From Toures the 27. of February. 1592. Your most humble, obedient and
affectionate Servant. L. T. A.

THE MASQVE OF THE League and the Spanyard discovered.
THE Tyrant of Spain, gaping and watching a long time for the invasion of
France, and general ruin of the French, working (to his own desire) the
disorders not long since, and which yet continues in all the estates of this
Realm. Seeing likewise, that the last of the house of The King (...) was (...)
by Iacobi^ Friar.
Valois swayed the Scepter, after the death of Monsieur his brother, who was
reported to be poisoned; By his own subtilty, and by the means of his Agents,
Ambassador, and adhering Pencionars, (whom he has drawn into a very great and
high hope, to his own profit and their perdition) has raised a League, and
thereby engendered Monsters, more horrible and hiddious, then those that (of
old) are said to be subdued by the valor of Alcmenaes Son.

It were needless to make further search for new horrors in the depth of
Lybia: let me rather question how to banish hence the cruelty and barbarism
of these Scithians, Goths by nature, these Moors and Sarrasin Spaniards,
whose first Fathers had their original from the Goths, and from hence this
League (the mother of all mischief) that is here so lovingly cherished, had
her beginning. This Pandora has so cast abroad her poisons out of her box,
as the air, the earth and men, being unprovided of a counter-poyson, yea,
very near all things else, are infected therewith. It has changed in many
places, the face of this fair Monarchy, into an Anarchie or many headed
government: it has overthrown the throne and royal Authority, violenced the
Magistrates, murdered the Prince, perverted all order and policy, both divine
and humane. It has made France a den of thieves, murderers, robbers and
spoylers, such Monsters has this League prodigiously brought forth; among
infinite of the very worst sort, is ignorance, malice, deceit, guile,
hypocrisy, robbing, theft, incest, feigned Religion, all kind of execrations,
murder, sacrilidge and parricide; this Witch, engendered by the terror and
ambition of the Spaniards, has made a strange metamorphosis of a most
beautiful estate.

But GOD the Author of all good, foreseeing in mercy such as he made choice
of: gave courage to their hearts to detest this Scithia, to fly from this
Lybia, whose Monsters strangle living men, as has been known and seen: and
so to come into a sweet air, pure and not poisoned, under the gracious Laws
of their natural and legittimate Princes. To work this effect, (a marvel
amongst them esteemed of greatest marvel) it is his will and pleasure, that
out of a great evil, should spring and arise as great a good, that from a
most strange conspiracy of fellons, murderers, and parricides of their King,
should be raised and lifted to the Majesty royal, the man, whose life this
Sorcerer daily sought to abridge and confound. For heereon did he build, and to
this day does build all his arteficiall and pernicious deseignes, thinking
heerby at one bit (as it were) to swallowe and devour the King, (whom the
lusty cutters of this Medea, scornfully call a Bia^^ a na^^ scorne^ they (...)
the (...)
Bearn-nish man) yet in sted of preventing, is he placed in the front of the
gate of France, and lifted to the highest royalty thereof, through the midst
of many treasons, and even (as it were) against his own will, has God seated
him in the Empire.

Thus thinking to ruinate and overthrow at once this very sickly estate, ready
to stagger and fall down under the burdenous weight of oppression: the only
and sovereign mean of relief is found, and where the very stroke of death
was directed against the heart, heere-hence arises the special remedy and
medicine of the wound.

Thou Circes, what say thou? thou horrible Megera, what say thou? thou
forespent Sorcerer like the shadow of death, what say thou? can thou
persuade thy self as yet to prevail by thy enchauntments? are not thy false
and poisoned drugs now manifestly discovered? knows not each one thy
counterfeit dissembling? are not thy underminings prevented? thy blows
rebated? thy sinnowes shrunk up? hold thou still this ancient withered
Sarasin for thy support? put thou thy hope in the Duke of Parma and his
Spaniards, who by nature use cruelty even toward thine own followers, because
they love the League no better then they do their Kings, in respect they are
French borne, and but serve themselves with them, only to reach the highest
of their tyrannous enterprise? think thou yet to help thy self with thy
Monks coule and hoode, to bath again thy parricide hands in the blood royal?
What mean is left thee whereby to exterminate this royal house of Burbon,
issued from S. Jews, to whom God in succeeding right has trans-ferred the
Crow^e?

Thou bendest thy brows, thou cursest, thou spightest, and grindest thy teeth
to behold all thy Magic arts deluded, thou art ready to burst with rage and
despite, and deafnest our ears with exclaimes, that thus at last thou art
kept at a bay. The virtue, the Laurel, the fortune and victories of our
Hercules of Gaul, the queller of so many Monsters thy children, makes thee
ready to die with fury, there are so many punishments, and so many deserved
corrections hammering in thy head. Thy goodly Armies, thy puissant forces, nor
all thy presumption will serve to benefit thee, the fields all covered with thy
strange men at Arms, in short time will be (as often heretofore they have
been) died and imbrewed in their own unhallowed blood, by the strength which
the great God of Armies, has vouchsafed to the arm of our victorious Prince.

How is it, that thou forcest reason? chaungest the Laws, exterminatest the
blood royal, and chasest the true heirs, to place a stranger in their room?
who can endure this? No, no, the valiant, virtuous, and most magnanimous issue
of S. Jews, with so many courageous Princes of his blood, and so many worthy
and noble Frenchmen: has both wisdom, counsel, experience, and the sword
wherewith to defend his royal house, and in justice to correct the injury
that has been done unto him.

Magitian, thou look pale and wan, when I oppose against thee the force of
this Sampson, the counsel of this Nestor, the valor of this Achilles, the
generositie of this French Prince, with the martial labors and happy fortunes
of this Alcides. Thou flyest (Enchanter) and all thy policies fail thee, thy
practices, thy poisons, thy parricides, thy incantations, with thy other wicked
helps: which can nothing at all prevail against this rock of constancy,
strength and virtue: but fear conuerreth thy wings to thy heels, and many
times has forced thee to take a shameful flight.

Think thou the enclosement of walls, and Rampires of Cities can warrant
thee? tryumphest thou already of two small Towns, which the Spaniards have
taken with such pain and loss of their men, as the gains they made thereof
was very little: marie the marks of their cruelty there exercised (according
to their nature) marvelous great? Do thou buckler thy self with
Fortresses, Cittadels, and one Bastillon? unable are they to sheelde thee,
having been vanquished in field, and glad to fly the battle with thy new
forces? Will thou ward thy self with walls, and therein put assurance of thy
defense? Our Hercules shall pluck thee out as another Antheus, or so shut thee
up with his powerful Arm, as even there thou shall smoother, and so loose thy
life.

Thou show thy self to be senseless, rauing, moved with impacience, and
stark mad: the fire of thy frenzy makes thee travail and torment thy self;
but these thy very latest behauiours, this heat, fury, frantique fever and
plague, brings thee into a sprightly resolution of thy strength, and so will
forthwith conduct thee to thy death.

What medicine may serve thee in this mortal malladie? what herb can any
way relieve thee, whereby thou may refortifye thy self, and so withstand our
valiant Hercules? to what Saint have thou vowed thy self? who shall be thy
Aesculapius? what physical drugges and simples can thou help thy self
withal? I understand thou have gotten a new Army of Spaniards, conducted by
the Duke of Parma, who fears us with the renown of his valor, and the taking
of one or two small booties, (he having notwithstanding already refused the
battle five times, because against so many of the noble and generous French,
he durst not be too prodigal of the lives of vile Moors, the Kings evils, and
the very base beggars of the Country.) With these barbarous Rodemontes would
thou disharten us, they that gave succor to the Rebels of Paris, and the
Ambassador Mendoza of Spain, or, to term him more rightly, The liar of
Spain: he that not long since fled with thy puissant Army into Laon, when
he perceived himself pursued by his Majesty with fifteen hundred horse,
ouer-spent and wearied with extreme iournyes: yet persuading thee he would
destroy them all, with so many strange powers, as amounted to many Cornets of
Spaniards, who like the forces of Pharao came to swallowe up Gods people: yet
as then ensued, so doubtless will he now permit, that they shall be
overthrown in the Red Sea, which shall be made of their own proper blood.

Thy old Caballe and couerture of Religion, is as good to thee as nothing,
this drugge was long since uttered, and returns thee no profit: the Catholic
Noble men that abhor thee, do very well know, that herein is no virtue
left to sheelde thee from falling; at this hook and line, angling for the
estates, thou fastnest sundry licorish baytes, of Crosses, Miters, Dignities,
Prelat-ships, Partages of Provinces, Offices, Governments, and great
prerogatives, which thou promisest to distribute among such, as with thee do
cast the Nets for so rich a Fish.

The first Fathers of this half crowned Jew, (who to thy proper ruin, and
his own advancement, plucks the heart out of thy belly) to wit, Atlas, Oris,
Anus, Siceleus, Lusus, Vlus, (as then in the Pagan Religion) took Spain by
the like bayte, feigning themselves religious, and men of good behavior; So
this old Fox, seeing himself ready to succeed his forefathers, has
practiced, and does practice the like in the usurpation of this Crown, hoping
to make a booty of it, and to tyrannize therein at his own pleasure: but that
our noble Prince makes him let go his hold, and surrender up the estates he
proudly usurps, namely, the Realm and estate of Navarre, sometime trodden
down by Ferdinand of Castile and Arragon, one of thy Grandfathers.

This Ferdinand, usurped on D. John of Albret, the thirty five King of
Navarre, who espoused Katherine Sister to King Phoebus the thirty four, who
died without issue, whereby she came to the Crown, in the year one thousand,
four hundred, eyghtie-three. Then Henry of Albret the second, the Son to
John of Albret, succeeded in the right of Navarre, the year one thousand, five
hundred, and seauenteene, and espoused Margaret of France, the Sister to K.
Fraunces the first. Of this marriage came Ione, whom Bertrand Helie calls
Charlotte, who succeeded in the right of her Father, the year one thousand,
five hundred, fifty-fiue, and was married to the most puissant and magnanimous
Duke, Anthony of Vendosme, of the most illustrious and royal house of Burbon:
whereof is left this Mars in earth, Henry the third of that name, the true
succeeder in the rights of Nauar, and now by lawful succession, the most
Christian and most victorious King of France, the fourth of that name.

These effects make known thy pretense to the very ignorant, thy disloyalty,
thy ingratitude, and thy impiety (in many places) has made the people wise:
they know that the dotage and simplicity of men, is the assured foster nurse
of Tyrants. The bounty and clemency of our King toward his Subjects, yea,
even his enemies has, from a great number, taken away the frontlet of
ignorance; the Christian and Catholic Religion, florisheth more among his
faithful Subjects, then else where, obedience there maintains it, where
contrariwise, such disobedience as thou use, hatcheth naught else but
rebellion, breach of faith, and lastly utter ruin and confusion.

Thy Masque cannot hide thee from being noted for a most disloyal and
infernal Fury; thou have bravely extolled thy self like a God, thou have
smoothly beguiled the people with outward show of Religion and holiness:
these make thee known for such a one as thou art, and that thou do but lie,
when thou tearmest thy self a Christian and a Saint.

The mercinarie tongues of thy false Preachers, with all their cosenages and
impostures, are other sophistical wares of slender valewe: in that they cannot
maintain thy health, albeit they have broken and altered the humors of a
great number of thy folowers, to make them like and conformable to thine own.
Who sees not that the Sermons which thou causest them to make, are
Phillippicall Appologies, and inuectiues? Where is the Gospel of peace,
concord, charity and love? Where is the office christian brotherly kindness,
humility, devotion and obedience? Where is the Christian catechizing, or the
exercise of Gods commandments? Thou by them prescribest a clean contrary
matter, for thou have hired their tongues, to thunder forth a Gospel of
blood, vengeance, disobedience, and rebellion: such Trouch-men and Trumpeters
of sedition, have learned of thee to speak, so to distill into French-mens
hearts thy golden poison, whereof already the Rebels feel the bitter taste and
deadly operation.

Thou have thrust into their hands the flaming firebrande, wherewith they have
circled the four corners and very midst of France: and all was well near
lost, without the succor of our Alcides, who ran to the water, and would not
suffer his House and Heritage to be consumed in the violence of this fire. They
have annimated the simple, (who now are wexen to be deuilish partakers, and
term themselves zealous Catholics) to the spoil, massacre and total ruin
of their Parents, friends, and Countrymen, to receive therefore in the end with
them, the earnest of divine justice on the Iibbets and Gallows: the spectacles
and witnesses whereof, are continually before their eyes, for their notorious
crimes and offenses. By these kindled fires, have thou already murdered one
King, and by the same pursuest him that now reigns, that he being slain,
and all his race cut off, the estate might be trans-ferred to thy self; a
horrible and most lamentable case, that Ecclesiastical persons will partake in
such enormous foul deeds and treasons.

One John de Prochite, chief Author of the conspiracy against the Frenchmen
in the Realm of Scicilie, performed the same, being disguised in the ^utward
(...), the ^^tenance ^edition murder, (...) the ex^^ples.
habit of a Gray Friar: and so solicited and induced the Scicilians to the
massacre of the French, which by them was done one evening in the Easter
holy days. So thou, like these Prochites, covered with the habites of
penitence and Religion, did compass thy villainy and treason against our
late King, whom thou murderedst by a Iacobine Monk, or rather, to term him
righter, A hoodded devil, and so continuest against the Princes of his house
and blood, of whom thou have sworn the destruction.

Thus by Monks thou iniurest the estate, which thou would dismember, and
divide among those Coniurers, (albeit thy crafty Author pretends otherwise)
and thus are the faithful subjects to the Crown abused. Under this Masque,
what impieties are committed through all France by Monkish Soldiers, who have
changed their former simplicity, poverty, and humility, into audacious treachery
and presumption?

And because the Spanish hypocrisy, the shadow of their Atheism, is one of
the principal pillars of thy contrived conspiracy, and that thou make our
men believe (by the introduction thou have made to the K. of Spain, who at
this day raises war in the heart of France, to destroy thee together with
the King if he can, after he has first served his own turn with thee:) that
these Moors are good Catholics, and their followers religious. If any such
were to be found, it were shame to deny it, then look a little on their
devotion, and whether the Monachall rage kindled not a notable sedition in
Lisbone, in the year one thousand, five hundred and nine, when two bloody
Two Iacobines the procurers (...) four tho^^sand and more to b^ murdered
Lisbone.
Iacobines parted from their Cloister, with a Cross in their hands, (a trick
at this day practiced among our fyring Monkish Soldiers, that bear a Cross
in the one hand, and a sword in the other, with Corslets on their banks under
their ^owles, as if Jesus Christ and warre-weapons agreed together, when never
was he seen harnessed or weaponed amongst his Apostles and Disciples) and so
did they inflame the people against certain that were newly converted to
Christianity: that they altogether governed by their malice and envy, crying
they were but dogs and heretics, slew forthwith more then four thousand;
this being the principal spur of this merciless butchery, that the
sedicious might spoil and make havoc of the others goods.

The King, who was named Emanuell, being advertised of this exceeding
Massacre, caused the two aforenamed plagues of the Cloister and the
Commonwealth to be apprehended, they that had excited this pitiful and
bloody Tragedy, who by his command, were publicly burned in Ebora: and
information being given against the other thieves and murderers, about
threescore and ten of them were most justly hanged.

At this day in France it is heresy with the Leaguers, to do justice on such
like naughty villains, when as their crimes, trecheries, and murders, are as
miraculous. An obseruaunt Gray Friar, named brother ^n obser^^^t Friar
^^^swaded King of ^^stile, to (...) sundry ^^ristians ^eath, ^^ming (...)
Apo^^^^aes.
Ferdinand de la Place, with other that were his zealous companions, went so
fast as he could to Madrill, to the King of Castile: there this impudent and
bloody Monk, persuaded him shamefullie to put to death certain Christians,
whom he termed to be Apostataes, which afterward was found to be most false.
So many abuses and mischiefs has been committed by these counterfeit
hypocrites, these scellerous and hooded murderers: as not without cause, in
the year one thousand, two hundred and threescore, under the reign of S.
Jews, was the order of the begging Friars extolled to the third heaven for
their profession, yea, they preferred themselves before all other in holiness
of life, and stoutly commended their voluntary poverty: whereby they
provoked many Prelates against them, and almost all men that were seen in
Divinity. But Guillaume du Temple d' Amor, a Doctor of Sorbonne, (being a man
of better conscience then any at this day of the same College, who create the
like instruments of rebellion by their pernicious resolutions, and defend the
abominable murder of the late most Christian and religious King) with other
more of great learning: both despised and disproued openly, such Beggars,
alleging, that their poverty was vowed without cause, and that he would
maintain such manner of life, to be but a pretext of Religion, and only fit
for such The dys^grace of (...) begging Friars, by Doctor of Sorbonne.
beggars as desired to live in loosenes and idleness. In the end nevertheless,
they got the vpper-hand in their cause, by the judgment of Pope Alexander, and
the Book that this Doctor made, (which at this day remains in the Library
of Sorbonne) was condemned. But should not this Doctor have highly aduantaged
his cause, if he had lived till now? adding to his plea the impieties,
parricides, and all sorts of crimes, smoothly hyd and covered (for the present
time) under the habites of this holiness.

Thou have (wretch) brought in and practiced another manner of people, that are
called Jesuits, Jesuits too ^roud to be ^eggers, ^^ey rather ^ake beg^ers to
^aintaine ^^emselues.
not beggars, but such as make beggars: of whom the scandalles are more
secret, yet much more pernicious then of the other. But why say I, thou have
practiced this bad generation, seeing thou thy self art not only practiced,
but begotten and engendered by them? How now? me thinks I hear some one say,
belike then this Alecto or accurssed League, has many Fathers? Very true: the
Spanish pride and ambition (as I have said) brought it into the world, as a
misshapen mass or lump, but these turbulent Jesuits, with the Rodemont of
Mendoza, have so lovingly lyckt it, as they gave it form, composition, and
garments to deck it withal.

These thou esteemest fit for thy coniuration, or else they are found to be
very necessary members: to thee cleave these hypocrites, for the particular
profit of themselves, and of their Master the King of Tyrants, they being all
of the Spanish Nation, or at the least issued from Spain. For about the year
one thousand, five hundred, and twentie-one A Spany^rd the first ^uthour of
(...) Jesuits.
Ignatius de Layola was the first founder of these Jesuits, (an obstinate
enemy to the house of Albret, and which malice yet continues in his seed) at
what time Pampelunae revolted, and the affectionate friends to the royal House
of Albret, (from whence descended the King, by the late Queen Mother of most
worthy memory) with those of Foix, as also the true heir of the Realm Henry
d' Albret: took occasion (by the retreit of the Garrisons of Pampelunae, that
sallied forth to succor the Governors of Castile) by reason of the wars and
deuisions then being, to have their secret intelligences in Bearne and
France. In favor of whom, King Fraunces sent Andrew de Foix, Lord of
Asperraut, the younger Brother to Odet de Foix Lord of Lautrech: who gathering
unto him those of the faction of Grammont, took the Castle of Saint John at
the foot of the gate. Whereupon, the Duke of Nagera Don Anthony Manrique,
seeing himself so suddenly surprised, and that the City of Pampelunae began
to grow tumultuous: secretly got forth thereof, and withdrew himself into
Castile, leaving his house to the peoples spoil.

This Layola, then at the dislodging of this Viceroy Manrique out of Navarre,
remained in Garrison in the Castle of Pampelunae, with other Soldiers
belonging to the Emperor. It so chanced, that the Castle was assailed by the
people, and the mouth of the Cannon directed by the assailants to a certain
place: where, by hap, it met with this Layola, who had both his feet bruised in
pieces with the stones, that the force of the bullet drove out of the wall, so
that he fell down from the height of the Castle, and being with-drawne, was
afterward preserved from death, and his hurts healed.

Then seeing himself thus maimed and unapt for Arms, he gave beginning to
this good kind of people. Let us not then account it strange, that these men
so desperately apply themselves to remoouing of estates, especially this
here, considering they are come of a Spanish Father a warrior, a natural
enemy to this estate: whom herein they follow very perfitlie, but not in
change of life. For this holy Father, being thus metamorphozed, could wear no
^lame ^^ning (...) proud ^^nde of ^^le, that (...) whole ^^doms ^^ther by
^^ares.
shoes, and therefore went bare-foote, and came for followers first to Paris,
where being vexed by some, and relieved by other-some, his own Master, Peter
Fabri, Diego Laynes, John Codury, Claudius Gay, Pasquall Brouet, Fraunces
Xauierre, Alphonsus Salmeron, Simon Rodrigues, and Nicholas de Bonadilla,
students in divinity, he raunged into the rule ordained by himself, each
making a vow of perpetual poverty and chastity.

But to them alone I will not give this honor, for many other have travailed
in this high piece of work, as faithful servant, and counselors of so
worthy Fathers: the bellows of ambition, abortiue sons of the Father of
lies, bringing nothing hither but what they learn of him, and marked with his
mark to know them for his own.

Thy face (Sorcerer) is writhen, and like to that Sibillaes, whom the Poets
feign to be the Mother of the Gods: but thy Bawdes and Pandars, have made thee
a false visage, so fair as can be, to entise young Lords and Gentlemen to
love thee. The draught of thy dissembled countenance, to diverse of thy chief
consorts, has brought immediate death: yet seemed it so excellent, as in their
eyes it surpassed the ancient Marble portraite of Venus, that wonderfully
enflamed men with love. Diverse Lords and Gentlemen have been ravished with thy
looks, whom thou in the end have deprived of life, in sundry battles and
encounters: to make them receive due chastisement to their impudent and
dishonest affection.

But who would not dis-robe thee of thy shadow (false Venus) seeing it is
nothing else but gold, silver, and all sorts of stones about thee, with
Perfume, Amber, Musk, and Ciuet, that thus makes thee smell so sweet as
violets? Thy garment is bordered about with certain Ciphers, only understood
by thy principal Cabalists, with diverse Letters and Charracters wrought on the
imbroyderie, carrying this report: This The (...) and coun^^^naunce this (...)
vn-holie League.
is the Sanctuary or defense of the Catholic religion, and of the
Commonweal. All the forepart and exterior show of thy body, is fair, yet
semblable to painted and gilded Sepulchers, that contains within them nothing
but loth-some smells and rotten bones: far dyffering from their goodly
appearaunce, yet like to that deceit shrouded with the Mantle of hypocrisy.

Thou have gotten Archers for the guard of thy person, who on their best
coats, bear the double Cross of Jerusalem, but on the other, the red Cross,
with tears. In what part soever thou marchest, thou art followed with a great
Court of all sorts of people, because thou give here, and bestowest there.
Thou make some Marshals of France, others Governors, others Chauncellours,
others Presidents, others Secretaries at command, others Counselors of thy
Privy counsel and the brotherhood: despoyling the better sort of their
Offices, and substituting thy servant. So many boot-halers, so many
Banck-rupts, so many shameless persons come to kiss thy hand: each one
striving who shall bear thy Commissions so full of profit, who shall first
extort a gift, by falsely giving the Pope to understand, the fulminations
against the death of the Prince; who is in Spain, who is in Flaunders, who in
Lorraine, and who in Sauoy. When thou show thy self in public, these
poor Brokers of thy College, these Carriers of rogations, these Graplers for
benefices and pencions, these Fishers with Crosses, these Preachers for reward,
with the gesture, habit and Castillane countenance, go publishing with heart
and voice: An oth^^ brag a^ dissembli^^ show of these wick^^ Co^federa^^
See here the blood of Charlemaine, see here the enemy to the Heretics and
Pollitiques. And this is but to beguile the valiant Princes that take part with
thee, as some have written, to wit, the Author of the Book called Stemmata
Lotharingiae, in thus blazing thy descent: even as thou deceiuedst and brought
to a poor end, the courageous Duke of Guyse and his Brother, who but for thee
(the only cause of their loss) had much credit and many honors in this
Realm. And not long since under thy shadow, I saw a band of Armed men,
breaking and renting the arms of France, under the authority and conduct of
a simple Attorney, at this day named Bussi: who having done violence to
justice, and forced (perforce) the Senate against the Senate, alas, led
captives and prisoners the chief of Harley, the example of constancy, and
only president of virtue: as also the other principal Officers of the Court,
to the Dungeons in the Bastille, which at this day remains in his hand.

Fair Goddess, one can hear nothing more openly cried by thy back-bearers,
then thy co^mendations, and panegiricall praises: and contrariwise, the
execrations of Henry of Valeys, and of the Bearn-nish-man: he is not the son
of a good Mother, that rayles not against them, and who so holds his peace, is
thought a suspicious person, a pollitique, and a Huguenot.

By how many sundry ways, have thou dealt against the very cinders and ashes
of that good King, since thy violent hands so bloodily murdered him? And how at
this instant do thou baffle and abuse our lawful King his successor, who
deserves not this Empire alone, but (as Alexander had) the whole world? Albeit
thou art thrown down from this thy greatness, and that notwithstanding thy
policies, thou can not reach (I will not say to thy desseignes) but to the
step from which thou art withheld by by the strength of our Alcides, and very
near vanquished: yet nevertheless thou presumest near Paris, with thy Duke of
Parma, whom thou tearmest thy Deliverer: thou make the earth tremble where
thou pacest: thou hastest to the succor (but indeed the general ruin
rather) of this sincke of all filth, this Babylon Paris, where, as a Ship
without a guide, thy followers flote alofte with every guscke of wind, ready
to endure shyp-wracke, and fall from Scilla into Charibdis or run on the
inevitable rock of thy imminent end and destruction.

Now, the Spaniards discern thee abounding infurie like the wounded beast, at
the wild Bore pursued, or the chafed bull, and therefore they nourish thee with
the succor of thy sworn enemy, execrable Enion, furthering thy charms
wherewith continually thou bewitchest the people, that thou with them may be
confounded together. What need thy borne-foe stir further? thy The Fre^^^
against (...) French ex^^cute the bloody (...) of the Spa^nyards.
self hold the weapon on thy peoples throats: if they speak of peace or
returning to duty, thou dis-armest them, thou killest them, thou hangest
them, thou cuttest their throats, thou castest them into the Rivers. Thou have
no care of the extreme calamity of so many poor people, of the strange
necessity and want, whereby thou have and still do send forceably to wrack
so many innocents, so many artizans and Husbandmen, who live (as it were) but
from this day until to morrow. If they leave thee, thou watchest them with
Spies, to rob, spoil, and lastly kill them: but let us not abash our selves
hereat, for at all times thou have been cruel, and only feedest thy self
with theftes, spoils, blood, and pitiless murders.

Thou (deuillish Circes) have had recourse to one like thy self, to be
maintained and conserved in nature and reason alike: but here thou will prove
to have a contrary and far different issue. Thou art cruel, and call to thy
help all kind of cruelty, to hold for ever, if thou could, thy Babylon,
slave like to thy tyranny, if thy associats did not surmount and out-goe thee.
Thou now make thy self strong with Spaniards thy friends, who at all times
have been enemies to the honest minded French: the cruelties of them committed
in France, in Italy, and in Flaunders, have been manifested enough unto us,
and as yet remain fresh in our memory. But if we would see how they have
employed their industry, to make themselves renowned with the Prototype, first
pattern and mould of all barbarous cruelty: let us read the history of the
horrible insolences and detestable tyrannies, exercised by them of late
memory in the West Indiaes, under the reign of Charles the fifth, and Phillip
his son, they Atlas and thy chiefest Minnion. This History is written by a
Spanyard himself, named D. F. Bartholmew de las Casas, a religious man and a
Bishop, and out of the Castilliane tongue, was turned into French. And is
^^^ewise in ^^glish, by (...) name of (...) Spanish ^^^donie.


Good GOD! how cruel did this Sarrasin show himself, in his tyrannous
conquest of Portugale, where he murdered and massacred the faithful Subjects
of the King Don Antonio: and martyred an hundred or sixe-score Ecclesiastical
persons, men of worth and good quality, as also the poor religious men that
took not part with him. Thou should forsake this vowed enemy, in thy
pretense to this Realm, which pertaines not to thee, neither can thou gain
it by thy forces so often vanquished: but herein thou resemblest the
bold-faced and shameless A fit ^^^ample of the Leaguers pro^ceedings (...)
France.
Woman judged by Solomon, who was contented, that the Child which never sprang
from her body, (rather then it should be delivered to the rightful Mother:)
should be divided and cut in halfes, according to the discreet judgment of the
King, who pronounced that sentence, only to know the true Mother, well knowing
that she would never condescend to such a cruelty.

Thou can not by right obtain France, wherein remains nothing of thine,
and therefore thou would rather dismember it, and give it as a pray to the
Spaniard our greatest enemy, then we should enjoy our true and legittimate
successor, who shows himself a Father of his Country and the estate, and as
one rather desirous to loose, then see it ruinate: would by kindness call
home the Rebels to repentance. Heereto tended his so long siedge against Paris,
being certain, that if he had not detested the spoil thereof,
(notwithstanding it was the fordge of all this rebellion) he had long since
forced, taken and possessed it, or laid it level with the ground in cinders.

This succor of the Spaniards, (which at at this present are thy Gods, yet in
the end, thou shall find them ravening Woolues) is very conformable to thee:
but if by thy incantations and charms, thou can call the dead from their
graves, or draw them out of the fire infernal, call to thy aid if thou will,
^^at (...) to the (...) black (...), Son (...) (...) the 3. ^ngland, (...)
re-(...) this ^^^lesse K. (...) seat (...) he had (...) it.
Don Pedro, the first and only of that name, sur-named the cruel, he being
the fourth King of Castile, and the thirtie-fyue of Leon, who began his reign
in the year one thousand, three hundred and fifty, by cruelty, and therein
continued all his life time. In unhappy hour he espoused fair Blanch of
Burbon, (of that royal house which reigns at this day in despite of thee)
whose life he shortened by poison in the prison of Medina Sidonia: and her
body was afterward taken up by the French, who (on this occasion) entered into
Castile on the behalf of Don Henry, and so was buried at Tudela in Navarre.

Raise up this Python, raise up this monstrous Tyrant if thou can, whose
cruelties surpassed all other cruelties: addicted to unlawful loves, to
murders, massacres, persecution of his Lords, cruel to his Subjects and his
own proper blood: a perjured wretch, a parricide, an impious robber, he will
serve thee for a goodly guide to thy men of war.

Call up Erithia, who under color of Religion and holiness, in the time of
the former Kings, established and caused to be builded in Spain, a great and
magnificent Temple, in the I Will of Tartessus, now called Calis, or Tarifa,
whereof she then changed the name, and caused it to be called Erithia. To this
Temple was due the tenthes of the pyllages and theeueries of the West parts, by
perpetual ordinance, and very long time observed: because those Kings of
Spain, to cover their thefts and spoils, gave part thereof unto their false
The S^^^nyards (...) continue devotion their Go^
Gods.

Draw forth of Hell a most ambicious Cardinal of Spain, called Ximenes, no
mean enemy to them that were of greatest authority in his time, for he could
scant brook any companion in the government of Castile, and therefore would
divide between the King and himself, the authority royal. Call the authors
of the tumult of Medina Sidonia, and those turbulent fellows, that forced and
violenced the Courts of Parliament and Chauncerie, in Vailledolid: whereupon
ensued a rigorous determination, yet no more then the rebellious breakers of
justice had deserved.

Summon the sedicious people of the City of Badaios to the Realm of Castile,
who revolted from their King Don Sancho, and yet nevertheless were too cruelly
punished: for the King having given the^ assurance of their lives, suddenly
caused them to be massacred, without sparing man, woman, or child, to the
number well near of four thousand. Send for the A Ca^^^logue of honest (...)
Span^^^ards, such they (...) still to the day.
sedicious of Lisbone, of whom I spoke before. Call for the rigor and cruelty
of the Spanish Inquisition. Aid thy self with the factious of Castile, for
the Bishop of Siguenca. Draw to thee by thy sortiledges, the conspyring
Vailledolitaines, in the year four hundred and sixty four, who rebelled
against the King Don Henry the fourth, who were accompanied with certain of
the chiefest personages, being moved with a kind of jealousy against Don
Bertrand de la Cueua, made Master of the Caualierie of S. James, because he
was the Kings Minion: yet defended they themselves with other reasons, and made
the desire of public benefit, a shadow for their conspiracy. Which was not
punished when it might have been, through the negligence and ouer-great
compassion in the King, who rather loved to show himself quiet, then valiant.

He endured the peremptory speeches of the Bishop of Calorra, without being
moved, and was betrayed on all sides, but principally by Aluaro Gomes, whom he
putting in trust with his greatest affairs, because from mean degree he had
highly advanced him: yet he notwithstanding wrought the means, whereby his
adversaries warred against him, and gyuing no credit to the counsel was given
him: was betrayed to the Archbishop of Toledo, and deprived of courage, was
afterward disgraded ignominiously in Auila, and so deposed from his royal
seat. But it may be these fellons are not bad enough to receive thy
prest-money, because thy present companions, surpass them in villainy and
treason; for these rehearsed, contented themselves with chasing their King,
marie thy companions have murdered theyrs. Then call yet if thou will from
Plutoes kingdom, other worse Bloody Spanyard murderer of Kings spoylers o^
Commonweals.
Spaniards: the rebellious Subjects of Phillip de Castro, Prince of Arragon,
whom they killed in Castile; the Granadanes, who slew Joseph the seventh, and
Ismaell the fifth, their Kings; The Valentians in the year one thousand, three
hundred, and fortie-seauen, because of the succession in the Realm of Arragon:
notwithstanding, their rebellions were subdued by the King, Don Pedro the
fourth, who gave battle to these rebellious confederates: Sarragossa was
captiuate, and Valentia conquered, albeit at the first, the Valentians thought
to make resistance, and many skyrmishes past between them and their Kings: but
being many times vanquished and repulsed with loss, they resolved in the end,
to surrender up the City, which the King (being by nature sharp and
rigorous) would have rased, that the plough might pass thereon, and then have
sowed salt in the place, in hatred of the dishonorable insolences he
sustained by the Valentians.

Nevertheless, he was dissuaded from his angry purpose, by his Lords that
then were with him: and contented himself with the execution of justice on
certain of the conspirators.

I see thee nod thy head, and that yet thou have need of other kind of
whelps: for these yet rehearsed, thou will but place among so many Rebels, as
holding yoke with thee, do yet trust to the clemency of our Alcides, and would
be submitted to his mercy. Then join to all these, to increase and make up
the number of thy new Spanish Army: the League of Arragon against their King:
raise up the usurpers of Zaell in the Realm of Valencia.

I will propose no other No exam^^es allead^^d, but (...) of the ^^^cked
Spa^^ards.
Rebels to thee, then only of the Spanish Nation, confederates and Nursses of
thy Forefathers; extreme cruel, and agreeable to thy humors. The Rebels of
Gallicia, who cast off Ramis, the third King of Leon; The coniuring Bishops,
that scaffolded their King of Arragon, and made him pay an honorable fine,
because he had taken the revenues of the Churches, whereto he was
constrained by necessity, to satis-fie the charges of the wars against the
Moors, in the year one hundred, foure-score and two. Get to thee also by the
same enchauntments, the Rebels of Sallamanca, against the King of Leon; Of the
Nauarrets, by whom nevertheless these seditious were besieged, taken and
chastised; Of the Lords of Lara, who moved great threatenings and attempts, in
the reign of King Henry of Castile: An Almorand, quarrellous and sedicious
against the estate of Navarre; The mutinous, of Ebora, having for their chief
leaders, Gonsallo and Vincent Ianes.

If the Spanish Tyrant Phillip, if his son in law the Duke of Sauoy, if the
Duke of Parmae^ war but (...) his own profit, and the King (...) master.
Parma, who is come to thy succor for his own profit and his masters,
suffice not with their forces, in steed of them which have been vanquished by
our invincible Hercules and his valiant Noblemen: call up to thy aid by thy
charms, the predecessors of thy King, no less cruel and bloody, to wit,
Alphonsus, King of Castile and Leon, unhappy, vicious, and most tyrannous:
Almundir, desirous to reign: Berenger, the murderer of his brother Remond,
whereupon he dyed very miserably: Bermond, the 21. King of Leon: Henry the
fourth of Castile: Eringo, who poisoned the King Bamba, and reigned over the
Goths: Don Alphonso, the 11. who caused his brother the infant of Castile to
be smothered: Ferdinand of Arragon, who conspired with the Duke of Ferrara, to
poison the King Don Ferdinand: Garcia, King of Leon: Mahomet the fourth, King
of Granado: and many others besides.

If the women that bear thee company, have not their wits sharp enough, to
advance both thine and their own affairs: withdraw thy self to hell, and
there consort thee with that wicked Queen of Metz, Brunechilde the Sorceresse,
by nation of a Spanish Goth, daughter to Atanagilde, the twelfth King of the
Goths, whom Sigibert King of Mets married for the plague of France. And if
thou will, for company join with her Goswind the Gotthish Queen, who
conspired against King Richard very troublesomely: take likewise Brunehault,
Fredegonde, and all the deuillish women of the world. Aid thy self yet if
thou please, with Cerberus, the Sisters Eumenides, and with all the horrible
route of hell, because thy The holy (...), is ^^ll it self.
self art very hell in-deede. Revive again all the Monsters vanquished by
ancient Hercules: but being thy self so monstrous, thou had need fortefie
thee well with the Monsters already subjected by the force of the aduenterous
Thebane.

Do thou travail thy self to seek on the earth, and under the earth, all
that is an emie, pernicious, monstrous, cruel, turbulent, bloody, barbarous,
odious, horrible, and contrary to virtue, knowing the same to bide in thine
own self? Need thou any other assistance then thine own? other forces or
other horrors? Thou surpassest all the horrors of earth and hell, all the
malices of the air: and never was any cruelty or treason exercised, but thine
has surmounted them. Can thou not content thy self to have this Geryon of
Spain thy succourer? Are not these thy fathers strong enough to maintain thee
in thy greatness?

But when thou shall be thus assisted with all that I have spoken of: can all
these forces, all these cruelties, treasons, charms, Magical-arts, Friars
frocks and hoodes, these Monsters, the horrors infernal, and these Furies,
ouer-throw our Alcides? The body is stronger then the shadow, and truth more
forcible then falsehoode.

Thou groundest thy self on an unjust cause, on human strength and exceeding
violence: our Hercules (in his just cause) builds not on fleshly forces, but
on GOD only that established him, the virtue, equity and right of his claim;
thy in-iustice and ambition, are the enemies, that hitherto have disgraced and
defiled thee. Think thou to conquer by flattering and embracing thy foe? the
spy that betrays thee, and discouers all thy enterprises? Would God thou
had been smothered in thy birth, then had not this estate been in such
combustion where thou raignest: but thou have given him the fair colors,
which beguileth thee, and strengthens us, thou have honored and shaddowed
him with the goodly titles of The bl^^dished (...) of ye (...) whereby t^
deceive (...) world.
Catholic, zealous, the enemy of the Heretics and Pollitiques, the Freende
of the Commonwealth, and the holy Unity.

These couertures are too slender and feeble to blind the eyes of our Lynceus:
and are no other to thee then Nets, to wrappe thee in, as Venus with Mars, by
the cunning of Vulcane, or as ambuscadoes, on sudden to surprise thee. Thou
flyest fair, with thy enemy after thee following at thy heels, and euer-more
to our great advantage: he spurs thee, and yet (as I have said) keeps thee
company, albeit thou have decked him with so many double Crosses and bought
Pater nosters, after the fashion Castillane and Albanois, as he seems to thee
thy special friend; thus love thou thy fraudulent coulloured enemy, and
hate and pursuest us to thy uttermost.

And albeit so many learned pens, have discovered him for a bold-faced
shameless beast, defacing his fair glistering colors, wherewith like a
Peacock he makes thee follow him about: let us once again lift up this
counterfeite Masque, and we shall see with what Chymaera, and with what Hydra
our Hercules has to deal.

He that under thy Ensign makes open war upon us, and covert war upon
thee, or rather this enemy that fights for us against thee, (for he need not
doubt, but the faithless ambition which thou have brought forth and begun,
will bring both thee and thy other Coniurers to a miserable end,) decks
himself with feigned love to the Commonweal and the holy unity. What
publique-weale? what holy unity means he? Call thou it co^mon-good to
ruinate so many Countries and Cities? is this detestable League, this
coniuration so pernicious to the estate and the Catholic Religion, a holy
unity? If it be? the effects do publish themselves. Was never seen such
outrages, such impieties, wrack of Religion, corruption, licentiousness and
Atheism: as since thou thus exaltedst thy self, and have trod both justice
and Religion under foot: thy Arms have brought in this dysorder, and
generally has dyspersed both blood and fire.

Thou prophanest justice, thou forcest and slaue-like leadest it under thy
irregular and most indirect Laws: thou make the Catholic Religion the
Goddess of war, that strikes, spoils, and kylles. Have thou no shame?
Know thou not that Religion is full of peace, and makes it her glory to
suffer and endure torments, and not to torment any? Know thou not that she
defends her-selfe by Martyrs, by Faith, Humility, Obedience, yea, all the
other Virtues: and not by mortal Arms?

The Church is millitant, but with what war, hurts and wounds? even those of
her Spouse CHRIST JESUS; who so gives Religion any other Arms, then those
that Christ Jesus gave to his Church, in stedde of aduauncing, does ruinate
it. The Arms given by GOD to a Christian, are justice, in sted of a Corselet,
^^hn, 29. (...). 5. (...), 59.
the Helmet of Health, the inexpugnable Target of Equity, the Shield of Faith,
the Sword of the Spirit, which is the word of GOD.

Heere-vpon Saint Paul says: ^ These. 5
Let us which are of the day, be sober, putting on the Breast Plate of Faith
and Charity, and the hope of Salvation for our Helmet. For God has not
appointed us to wrath, but to obtain Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ.

And to the Ephesians he says: (...). 6.
Finally my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.
Put on all the Armor of GOD, that ye may stand against the assaults of the
devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against Rulers,
against powers, against worldly Governors of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickedness in heavenly places.

For this cause take unto you the whole Armor of GOD, that ye may be able to
resist the evil day, and having fynished all things, to stand fast: having
your feet shodde with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace. Above all,
taking the Shield of Faith, wherewith you may quench all the fiery Darts
of the Wicked.

Take also the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of GOD.

These Arms are commendable, and meet for a Christian, and he is forbidden
to use other material Arms, where he goes for Religion and for his
conscience, which are no proper means to maintain and defend them withal.

And now at this instant comes to my memory, an example well worthy noting,
showing that Religion ought not to be debated or proved by corporal Arms;
The History is taken from the faithful Corriualles of Spain.

The Master of True R^^ligion no^ to be dec^^ded by the sword, (...) the
exam^ple.
Acantara, D. Martin Ianes de la Barduba, of the Portugal Nation, entered in
quarrel with the King of Granado, about Religion, and would make proof of
the truth of his Religion by Arms. Hereupon, at the motion of a certain
Hermit, who had promised him victory against the Infidel Moore King, (in
despite of the King of Castile to whom he was subject, and had forbid him to
enter war on this occasion:) he brought an Army to the Field, gave Battle
to the Moore King, and there by the just judgment of God, was worthily
punished; For there was he slain, and his Army vanquished, and driven to
flight by the Granadanes.

In this case he used no manner of color or pretense, the truth was, that he
took Arms for the maintenance of the Christian Religion, and yet
nevertheless was overcome. Then thou, that under cloak of Religion have
raised these Arms, and perpetrated so many sundry evils: what think thou
will become of thee?

That it is not lawful for a Subject to Arm himself against his King, for
what pretense so ever it be.
IS it not permitted the^ (say thou) to bandie our forces against an
heretical Prince? Albeit thou had such a one, yet is it not for a Subject to
Arm himself against his King, and that the Catholic Noble men which follow
him, may well give thee to understand. Tush, this is nothing else but thy
deceit* it sits thee well to have such a colloured pretext* although thou have
no heretical Prince. For the good life and behavior of his Majesty, with the
desire he has to be better instructed without obstinacy, if he were in
error as he is not, exempts him from that infamous name, and renowneth him
with the most Christian King.

The tree is known by his fruit: good reason then that thy barbarous actions,
should show thee to be plunged in the bottomless depth of Atheism. For if
thou did believe in GOD, or but love him: thou would follow his word, and
obey thy Prince: what ever he be in his conscience, he seeks not to
constrain thine. He is a Christian, and most Christian King, further of from
the infidelity and impiety that reigns in thee, then thou or thy helpers,
are near your tyrannous wills to despoile him of his Crown.

I would particulerly answer to all thy false inductions, placed in a rank
under this slye pretense: if others (better able then I) had not done it
before me, wherein there is not any thing forgotten.

This is to be granted, that a sovereign Prince is not to be violate, and his
Subjects are bound to obey him (whatsoever he be:) without doing that which is
contrary to the honor of God. If the King command me to go to war in his
service, to mount my horse, and to give a charge upon the enemies of his
estate: I will do it most gladly, and am bound in duty so to do. If he
command me to change my Religion: I will not do it, neither is there any such
duty to be exacted on me. But his Highness is so wise, as he well knows,
that his power tends not that way: at his descretion and appointment remains
our bodies and goods, the conscience only appertains to God. He can not
force it, and if (perchance) he should offer the means of Religion not to b^
changed any constraint, b^^ to be (...) stood by (...) suf^^raunce, God in
i^^stice righ^ the cause.
constraint: I would withstand him by sufferance, and give over force, not
resist again by force. I will change my Country to shun this compulsion, or
I will dye in the defense of my Religion: notwithstanding, our good Kings
thoughts are far from this, he will not make war against God, to take from
him his kingdom, which is our conscience and soul, he being inspyred with
him, and burning in the zeal of his love. Having divided the French Empire
with God: think thou he will take from him his part, or but enterprise
upon his estate?

He is no Tyrant to do so, like thee, that would usurp, and tear it
altogether out of his hands: but he shall well enough defend thee, thou have
a puissant and unconquerable adversary against thee, he that with him has
part of this Empire. And when thou have presented all thy human forces, those
that thou have gathered together of lost men and strange Spaniards, equal in
number with the Army of Xerxes: yet shall thou not be able, (I will not say to
fight) but only to hold head against our Alcides, having his Master, the most
mighty King of Kings to be his helper, who holds him by the hand, who in this
estate established him and the predecessors of hy srace, for the space of six
hundred years and more, and commands us to obey him: thou (to thy extreme
damage) have proved his force more then Herculean.

His Edicts and holy ordinances be obeyed, and most expressly already proposed
by many pens, and sundry Doctors of divinity, for our perfection: which
consists in the obedience due to GOD, and consequently, to such as he has
placed over us, ^ath. 10. (...) 23. (...), 13. ^ct. 2,
Kings, Princes, and other their Lieuetenants, for the chastising and
punishment of male-factors, and sound assurance of the good.

To resist the King and his seculer authority, is to rise against GOD, the
Author and protector of royal dignity: by which ^^ou, 8.
Kings reign, and the Princes of the earth exercise justice toward their
Subjects; that we (...) to (...) our (...), and ^^^rebell any (...) of cause.
By which the wise are maintained, Rebels prostrated, their enterprises
ouer-throwne, and the injury done to the blessed and anointed of the Lord,
searched into, and venged with severity. The antiquity of the Royal estate, is
most excellently noted in the holy Scripture, and recommended in Melchisedech
King of Salem, in the time of the great Patriarch Abraham, long before Moises.

Kings depend and are established by God over their people: God said to the
people of Israel; Deuteronomy. 17
When thou art come into the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, and
enioyest it, and dwell therein, and if thou shall say, I will set a King
over me, like as all the other Nations that are about me: the^ thou shall make
him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose from among the number of
thy Brethren, and thou may not set a stranger over thee, that is not of thy
Brethren.

Since this Law, in the time of Samuel, the 1. Sam. 9
Israelites, desirous to use their privilege received of GOD: demanded that a
King might go before them, lead their wars, defend their Country, and
venge them on their enemies, even as by all other Nations they beheld the
Majesty royal to flourish and be advanced. Which by the commandment of God
was granted to them, whereon succeeded David, chosen according to Gods own
heart, and so continued this dignity among the Israelites: till by the division
of the people, and divorce of the ancient Religion, it was tottered and
shaken, and afterward in the end, dissipated and brought to nothing.

Nevertheless, what captivity ensued on the people of the Hebrews;
what-soeuer strange Kings were commanded them: yet had they evermore in chief
commendation the Royal greatness, and were instructed by the Prophets to obey
and pray for their Kings, yea, although they were Ethnickes and Pagans, in so
much as GOD had appointed them their Lords, during their bondage and captivity.

1. Peter, 2
Subjects ought in all fear to submit themselves to their Princes, not only
the good and human, but those likewise that are stearne and rigorous, for
this is agreeable to the will of God. If any one for the cause of his conscience
toward God, endures vexation and suffers unjustly, our God in no case will
permit the Servant to contend against his Master, nor the vassayle to take up
Arms against his King.

But the King (say thou) is contrary to thee in doctrine, what does this
pretense avail thee? when were he contrary in doctrine, and as impious and
sacriligious as thy self: yet it follows not, that justly thou art to revolt
from him, to make war upon him, to attempt his life, and the spoil of his
estate.

It is certain that Saul, for having contraryed Gods commandment, in
pardoning the Amalechites, whom he should have put to the sword: he was given
over to the evil Spirit, who by times tormented him, and declared him unworthy
of the Realm: Notwithstanding, was it lawful for any living man among his
subjects, to enterprise against him? So much wanted it in David himself, who
could find far greater occasion to do it than any other, not only
pretending to the Crown, (having been before by the Prophet Samuel anointed
1 Samuel 1
King of Israel) but also carrying in memory the injuries he received of
Saul day by day, in recompense of his good and faithful services: albeit he
were a fugetiue, he, his father, and all his race: albeit in despite of him,
(through cruel indignation) Saul had caused to be slain, the sacrificing
Priests of God, to the number of four score and five, that wore the linen 1 Samuel 2
Ephode: besides, discomfited their city Nob, and in the same rage slew with
the edge of the sword, so many men, women, children, young sucking Infants,
Oxen, Sheep, and Asses, as were there to be found, only because the high
Priest Ahimelech gave David to eat in extreme necessity, as also delivered
him the sword of Goliath, being ignorant that he had fled the Court, and was in
Saules displeasure.

Although that David was searched through all the corners of Israel, in the
Mountains, Deserts, Rocks, and places very near inaccessable: although that
Saul had appointed and concluded his death, and David hearing this sentence,
well knew himself to be innocent: although that God had given the King into
his hands, and easily he might have put him to death. Yet had he no will to
touch the person Royal, assuring himself, that who soever durst be so hardy,
what good right to ever he could pretend in the cause: yet should he not
stand innocent before the face of God.

Which well he witnessed in the Cave of 1. Sam, 24
En-gadi, and in the Desert of 1. Sam, 24
Ziph, even there where soon after Saul was discomfited. For even as David
was hyd in the Rocks of En-gadi, Saul being advertised thereof, took three
thousand of the most chosen men in all Israel, and so went to seek David and
his men, in sollitarie and vn-habitable places. There Saul causing his men to
come before him, went into a Cave to ease himself, and David and his men
remained behind within the same Cave, when as David's people thus spoke to him.
Now is the day whereof the Lord thy God told thee: (...), 26
see here I give thine enemy into thine hand, and thou shall do with him
what thou please.

David beheld his enemy alone, in a place convenient, far enough from his
men, disgarnished of defense, and brought in all points according to his own
will. He could have smytten him, without hazarding the meanest of his people,
or without moving his enemies troop: now could he have left the Host a buried
memory of the place where Saul had withdrawn himself, that there should not
remain any tracke of his entrance or foorth-comming. Albeit he knew by this
deed, he should be delivered from all his enemies at once, and advanced to the
Majesty royal promised him before: notwithstanding, he was so far of from
reknowledging the ingratitude and ill will of the King, as secretly he arose,
and cutting a piece of the skyrt of his garment, being yet touched in his heart
because he had done so much, he said to his men. 1. Sam. 24.
The Lord keep me from doing that thing to the King my Sovereign Lord and
Master, the Lords anointed, let not me lay my hand on his person that is
sacred and anointed. For albeit he is now in my power to revenge my self,
yet will I not do that which I know is defended and prohibited by God, seeing
he is anointed of him.

Thus David appeased the people with his words, and would not permit them to
rise against Saul, notwithstanding all the reasons they could allege: so
that Saul acknowledging his humanity, by the demonstrations he had of David at
his coming forth of the Cave, he fell into tears, and thus spoke unto David.

Thou art more righteous then I, for thou have rendered me good, whereas I
intended thee evil, and thou have showed me this day the good thou have
done me: for as much as when the Lord had given me into thy hands, yet thou
would not kill me. For who shall find his enemy, and let him depart into a
good way: wherefore the Lord will reward thee with good, for that which thou
have done unto me this day. And now I behold, and know for a certainty,
that thou shall be King, and the kingdom of Israel shall be stablished in thy
hands.

Such were the words of Saul to David, beholding the humanity David had used
toward him: by which pardoning of his enemy, he advanced him, and was so
far of from being avenged, as he withdrewe himself from his right of
reigning in the Kingdom which God had given him.

I cannot omit in this case another deed of David toward Saul. The Ziphians
being come to Saul in Gibea, advertised him that David was hid in the
Mountain of Hachilah, which was face to face before the Desert of Iesimon.
Then Saul renewing his mortal enmity against David, accompanied himself with
three thousand able men, and pitched his Camp on the Mountain of Hachilah.

Now David dwelled in the wilderness, and knew by his espials that Saul was
come near him; wherefore (in the night) he came to the place where Saul had
placed his Camp, and himself slept within the Fort, his Tents being pitched
round about him, and very near him was Abner the son of Ner, the chief
Captain of his Army. Which David perceiving, descended into that place with
Abisay, and approached near his enemy Saul, when Abisay thus spoke to David. ^
Sam, 26.
God has closed thine enemy into thy hand this day, now I pray thee let me
smite him once with my spear to the earth, and I will not stir a foot from
thee: whereto David answered. I will not have him smitten: for what is he can
lay his hand on the Lords anointed, and be guiltless. And David said
furthermore. So truly as the Lord lives, no harm shall be done him: but
rather God shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend
into battle, and there perish. The Lord will keep me from luying my hand
upon his holy and anointed: but I pray thee only take his Spear that
stands at his head, and his Cruse of water, and so let us depart.

Thus David contented himself with this brauado: euer-more declaring him to be
no way excusable, that should attempt any thing against the person of the King.

Let me say beside, that Saul being slain in the fight against the
Philistines, 1. Sam, 3^
and David hearing tidings of his death, was very sorrowful, and used
marvelous lamentations: commanding him to be brought before him that had cut
off his head, who thought to delight him with bringing the head of Saul,
saying that he had done him to death, when David, moved with pity and anger:
How is it (quoth he) that thou wast not afraid to lay thine hand on the Lords
anointed? 2. Sam, 1
Thy blood be upon thine own head, for thine own mouth has testified
against thee, saying: I have slain the Lords anointed.

All the water of the Sea cannot then serve to wash the murderers of the late
King, neither shall any of them be held excusable, that pursue the life and
estate of his successor, our virtuous and most valiant Prince. But thou
alleadgest the Proverb common among the barbarous: Si ius violandum est,
regnandi gratia violandum est: If right be to be violate, for a kingdoms sake
it is to be violate. Wherefore then use thou the pretense of Religion and
common-good, to ouer-throw the most simple with these deceits? This proverb is
of Tyrants and Atheists, who regard not that God is the revenger of Kings, and
returns evil to such as enterprise against their estates.

What advancement received Absalon, listening to the pernicious counsel of ^
Sam, 16
Achitophell, and following it, attempted against the person of King David his
Father? What happened to ^ Kings, 1.
Adonia, who thought to usurp the Realm against Solomon, having deceived the
Mother of the King, as very well it was made known unto him afterward? How is
it chanced to those, who (to the hard hap of France) taking a morsel with
the Spanish enemy and the treacherous League, have troubled this estate? How
will it fall out with such, who after being in favor with the coniuration,
did by a Monk murder the late King? let them not now stand doubting, seeing
that GOD is just.

But to confute the colloured objection of the Leaguers at this day, who say,
that the King is of a contrary Religion, and thereby pretend an excuse for
their conspiracy. Have they not read in the holy Scripture, that 1. Reg. ^^
Jeroboam king of Samaria, had raiected the ancient Religion? What Prophet
persuaded to make war against him? His Son dyed of disease because of his
sin: the ruin of his Realm was foretold him, but not executed by his
Subjects, offenders against the Law of God.

Great evils befell to 1. Reg. ^^
Achab and the Realm of Israel, for having brought in new Religion by the
persuasion of Iezabell, Daughter to the King of the Sidonites; false Prophets
were permitted, the Altars were destroyed, and the better sort of people put to
death. Nevertheless, 1. Reg. ^^
Elias the chief Prophet of that time, albeit he was of wonderful zeal: yet
did not he command that any one should rise against the King?

The Prophets of God were hid in Caves, an hundred in one place, and an hundred
in an other, secretly nourished with simple bread and water, the good men of
behavior afflicted on all sides: and yet was none of them offended with the
King, or any enterprise prepared against his person.

The Prophet only showed him his sin, and that 1. Reg. ^^
GOD would punish it by drought, three years and a half: but who ever read,
that he incited any one to contend against his Prince? Far off from him was,
quae* vim vi repelleret, he willed none to repulse violence with violence, and
so to deliver their Country: but hearing that Kin. 19.
Iezabell sought for him to put him to death, he referred vengeance to the hand
of God only, who shows himself a Revenger, when any one is unjustly
punished by the Magistrate, (whom no man is permitted to resist with arms)
according as it happened to Achab and Iezabell. For besides the death of many
Prophets, they caused righteous Kin. 21.
Naboth to be murdered, thereby unjustly to get his Vineyarde, and then our
God, who reserved the punishments hereof till convenient time, suffered Achab
to endure such necessity, as he ouerthrewe himself and was Kin. 22.
slain. As for Iezabell, she was Kin. 9.
thrown from the height of a Tower by her Eunuchs, rent in pieces with dogs,
and her members scattered in the vineyard of the innocent, whose death she had
before solicited.

Dyed not Kin. 22.
Athalia, who put to death all the royal Children of Ochozias: whereto
withstood the high Priest Iehoiada, that reserved Ioas, in whom the reign was
afterward established and made peaceable? But very true is it, that when Ioas
fell into forgetfulness of this good turn, he consented to the death of
Zacharia son to Iehoiada: for which cause, God suffered that he should be
slain by his own proper servants, which (notwithstanding) none of the
sacrificing Priests nor Prophets would attempt or persuade, considering that
above all things the person Royal is to be reverenced.

How many Epipha^us in his bo^ke o^ the lives the Prophets.
Prophets were in times past put cruelly to death by Kings, who never excited
any tumult against them, but rather councelled and induced them to repentance?
Esaias was parted through the myddest of the body with a Saw, by the
commandment of the King Manasses.

Jeremy was kept prisoner under Zedechias, by the Governors of the Land of
Benjamin. The Dan, 3, and 6.
three Children were cast into the midst of the fiery Furnace, by the
commandment of Nabuchodonozer King of Babylon. Daniel was two several times
cast out to the Lions, under the reign of Pagane Kings; Yet read we not that
these did so much as speak evil of the Princes and Magistrates, that gave
such sentence on them.

Look then upon our Savior Christ himself, the true example of justice,
albeit he knew the wicked intent of John. 1 ^
Pilate, did he make any acknowledgement of having power from above? Where did
he command to force the cruel Magistrates, albeit he could have done it when
himself pleased? Moreover, did he not reprove the wish of Luke. 9
S. James and S. John, who desired that fire might descend upon Samaria,
because their entrance there was refused? Acts, 23,
S. Paul, albeit he were smitten before the Prince of the Priests: did he not
freely say: He knew not his greatness when he reproved him? For it is written
(quoth he) Exodus, 23,
Thou shall not curse or speak evil of the Ruler of the people: how much
less lawful is it then, to attempt any ill against his person*

But still thou obiectest, that the King is of a contrary Religion. The late
King whom thou dydst murder, was not he a Catholic? yet in thy bloody
passion have thou not slain him, contrary to the will of God. And should it be
that our King were of a contrary Religion, and an enemy to the Laws of God,
(which he is not, but fears and honors him: cherishes his subjects both of
the one and other Religion, would gladly pacify his Kingdom, and requires to
be instructed if he were in error,) is that sufficient cause for thee to kill
him, whom GOD alone has lifted to this authority? The contrary were more
necessary rather, as S. Paul says Rom, 12
To overcome evil by doing good, ^, Pet, 2,
so that our good works may serve to stop the mouths of ignorant and foolish
men: whereby those may be confounded, that esteem Religion to be an enemy to
the public quiet.

For who doubts that Nabuchodonozer was not a man of pernicious opinion, (...).
1, et 3.
when he destroyed the Temple, overthrew the Altar, pyld away the holy
Vessels, led captive the people of Israel into Babylon, and constrained many
to worship the Image which he caused to be erected? yet nevertheless* so far
were these people from conspyring against him, as Baru* 3.
Baruch the Scribe to Jeremy, in the name of them wrote to the Jews that
remained at Jerusalem, that they should pray for the life of Nabuchodonozer,
King of Babylon, and Balthazar his Son. See Daniell himself, was not he
faithful to Darius and Cyrus their successors? Albeit he was a stranger and a
Captive, found he not grace of the^ for his loyal service? yet
notwithstanding, he was by nation a Jew, the other Gentiles: he the servant
of God, the other Idolaters: he a Prophet of God, the other blinded in all their
doctrines.

I would have all the Prophets alleged, and find me but one, that under any
pretense whatsoever it were, did at any time take Arms against his Prince: yet
were they used but as vagabounds, glad to live in Heb, 11
Mountains, in sollitarie and desert places, to escape, and not to move
persecution.

Math, 3. John, 1, Mark, 1,
S. John the forerunner of our Savior Jesus Christ, saw in his time Herod
Idumean, a counterfeit Jew, usurp the Realm of Galilee and Jury, he knew
the Romans to be Gentiles and Idolaters, that they had by force not right,
deprived the people of Israel of their liberty: brought them to be tributarie,
ordained Governors after their own mind, and done such things against the
people of God, as he might well complain on and lament: did he for all that
purpose any thing to their prejudice? or teach them to revolt against their
Empire? The Pharisees came to him for counsel: gave he them any mean to
mutiny against the Romans? The Soldiers and men of war came to him, said
he any thing else to them, but that they should remain contented with their
wages?

Did he say to them, that the Romans ought not to reign, or because it was
permitted, that therefore they should rise against them? Moreover, Herodias
molested him, King Herod hated him, because he was not a pleaser of their
persons; He knew well that his death was plotted by Phillips wife, did he
therefore animate his Disciples to set themselves against her or Hered? or
did he practice any mean to escape? Nothing less, but willingly entered the
prison, submitted his neck to the Executioner, offered himself to the death:
having good means by his followers that day by day visited him, to raise a
mutiny among the people for his deliverance. For how should he have prepared
the Esaias, 40
Lords way, if at that time and place he had showed himself impacient? He
was the forerunner of him, that taught him to obey, pay tributes, and do the
rest of his duty to the Princes of this world, albeit they were Pagans and
Idolaters.

That it should be so, our Savior JESUS CHRIST, did he ever preach or permit,
that any one should stir against Caesar? he so much despised it, as being
demanded if it were lawful to pay him tribute or no, he answered Math, ^
Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and unto God, that which is Gods. I
say furthermore, himself, although he was poor, yet paid he the Trybute for
him and S. Peter: commanding him to take out of a Math, ^
Fish a piece of money, to dyscharge therewith his duty. He saw the
Publicanes and gnawers of the people, to be exacters and ransackers of poor
souls, under pretense of seeking the Roman Princes right: nevertheless, he
never did or would take occasion to murmur, but himself haunted to the
Publicans, and did Luke, ^
eat and drink with them.

He well noted the ambition of the Kings of the Gentiles, saying: they would
stand upon the tytles of governing: yet did he ever animate the people to
chase them from their seats? He knew the cruelty of Herod, the injustice of
Pilate, the avarice and hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees:
notwithstanding, he euer-more commanded to obey them. Did he find fault with
the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moises chair? or that the people should
not do what they said, albeit their works were very contrary? Being brought
before Herod, did he murmr? When he was bound to be presented before the
wicked Judges, as well Jews as Pagans; Did not he forbid (...), 18,
S. Peter to use the sword? yet nevertheless he knew himself to be innocent,
the other vile men: he just, the other unjust: he truth it self, the other
full of lies, and corrupted by false witnesses.

He could with one word have ouer-thrown them, as sometime he did the
imperious Rulers: he could have past through the midst of them, as he did in
Nazareth: he could have made the earth swallowe them, as of old the mutinous
were with Dathan, Corah, and Abiram. Notwithstanding, to leave an example to
such as were his, he esteemed it better to suffer, and councelled rather to
fly, then use violence against the Magistrate.

So other-whiles, seeing his Disciples began to animate themselves against the
Pharisees, ^ath, 15
Let them alone, (quoth he) they be the blind, leaders of the blind: and so
taught them rather to Arm themselves with patience, then to offer any
violence. He very often foretold them, ^ath, 10
That they should be brought before Kings, Princes and Judges, for his sake:
Did he therefore bid them find some mean to set footing in the Realms they
entered, to the end they should co^plot and practice the death of the Lords that
there ruled? Did he council them after their entrance into speech, to
advance their complaints, afterward Arms, and then treasons?

Did he ever advise to use human forces, to such as had nothing but the two
Iame^ ^
weapons in the time of their fury? To take from any for such as had left
their own; to lift such to the Luke ^
seats of the earth, as war-fared only but for heaven? He told them that they
should be happy when they endured persecution, when they were afflicted and
chased. Did he join hereto, that they should be happy when they had murdered
a King, spoiled a fair Country, prayed on all the goods of poor people,
massacred and killed all such as withstood them?

In what place of the Scripture can thou find, one only point for
confirmation of such deeds? Where can thou show that the Apostles made
themselves heads of such enterprises? From what word do thou gather, that
the Subjects may bandye themselves against their Prince? If we shall come to
the Apostles, we shall read sufficiently, how they endured perpersecution by
Tyrants: yet shall we not read, that by corporal arms they offered
rebellion. The Apostle S. Peter was held prisoner by King Herod: the Arms of
the Acts ^
Church, was fasting and Prayer for his deliverance. The self same Herod put
to death S. James, the brother of S. John: yet did not the Church in any case
mutiny against him. (...), 7,
S. Stephen was stoned by the wicked sentence: with what Arms did he revenge
himself? He knew that the Prophet had said: Leave vengeance to me, for I will
do it: therefore he spoke no evil, but prayed to God for his persecutors.

This charity did he learn of his Master Christ Jesus: who kissing the
Traitor Judas, called him friend, and prayed upon the Cross for his
tormentors. Likewise he had learned of him, that he which sheddeth blood, is
the child of the devil, such as the Jews were, in following the desires of
their fathers. (...), 8,
For (quoth he) the devil your father, was a murderer from the beginning. And
because that ^ath, 6, ^or, 6,
light and darkness, Christ and Beliall, God and the devil are not alike;
Therefore our Savior gave his Disciples manifestly to understand, that they
ought to abhor blood and slaughter. Which S. Cor, 9,
Paul well witnessed, when he gloried not in temporal Arms, but spiritual:
not in the honors of this world, but in afflictions for Jesus Christ: in
prisons, fastings, shyp-wracks, hatred, perrils on the way, danger of spoils,
deceit of false brethren, and other persecutions, assuring himself, that
these were the means whereby a Christian man was to be exalted.

^al, 44
He (says he) shall be hated and despised of the world. Likewise, (...), 8,
He is as a sheep appointed for the slaughter. Great difference is between the
Apostles and the false Apostles at this day, in seeking the means to surprise
Kings, against whom they no way practiced any revenge. We endured persecution,
says Saint Paul, yet were we not vanquished, in that, as witnesses S. James,
James, 1,
That the persecution of our faith, molded us in patience, whereby all the
work of a Christian is accomplished.

For this cause he taught his scholar Timothy, 1, Tim, 1,
to make prayers for Kings, Princes, and Governors, to the end he might live
peaceaably: albeit such as then reigned in his time, were Pagans and Idolaters.
1, Pet, 2,
S. Peter enjoined the like to the Churches, to honor their Kings,
acknowledging that they were established of GOD, who ordained that all persons
should be subject to the higher power; He commanded they should be obeyed,
and if any one offered to resist them, he went against the ordinance of God.

Notwithstanding, who ruled in his time? Was he a Christian Prince? or any
King that looued true Religion? He was a barbarous Nero, inhumaine, an
Idolater, the most cruel of all the world. Did the Apostles resist his
tyranny by Arms, although he was not their natural Prince? Acts, 13
S. Paul reverenced Agrippa and Felix, he honored Lithius the Proconsull: he
never lifted weapon against the Princes, after he had rid himself of those
Arms, which at first he bare against Christ Jesus. Of a Woolfe, he became a
Lamb: of a blood-seeker, peaceable: of a sedicious, humble and obedient: of a
mutiner, soft and tractable: this change he made of himself, after he was
brought into the yoke of the Evangelical doctrine. On the contrary, madly
these false Apostles, have thrown off this manner of life, forsaken Christian
Religion, given place to rebellion, enemies to GOD, the Church and Princes:
sedicious, robbers, spoylers, murderers, and in all points like to the Prince
of dissension.

For who-soeuer comes into the Church, is conducted by the Spirit of peace,
1, Cor, 13,
endures all things, rendereth good for evil: and according to the words of
Christ, Math, 5,
loves his enemies, does good to them that hate him, pray for them that
persecute and afflict him, surmounting the wicked, not in evil, Rom, 13,
but in good. But he that is abandoned to the evil spirit, is ruminating on
bad thoughts, prepares trains for his brother, and by force seeks to lay hold
on his enemy. And in all these actions is not found any one more detestable
against God and man, then to rise against the person of a King or Prince, to
smite or murder him: for he is hallowed and anointed of God, of whom he
represents the majesty, though he be but a man, and mortal as others are.

Thou vnder-proppest thy hateful will, to kill this King as thou did the
last, with the examples of Iaell and Judith, the first whereof killed Sisera,
chief of the Army to Iabin King of Chanaan: Judge. 4,
he flying to save his life in her house, and she perceiving him a sleep,
took a nail of the Tabernacle, and a hammer in her hand, and so drove it
through the temples of his head. Judith, 13,
The other leaving the City of Bethulia, and brought into the Pauillion of
Holophernes, Captain of the Army to Nabuchodonozer, seeing him drunk and a
sleep, occasion presenting it self, she cut off his head, and brought it away
in a bag by her servant.

These acts truly were very gracious in these Dames, and worthy of great
commendation, in respect they attempted not against their King or Prince: but
against such as would ouer-throw the estate royal of their Country, and
there-against opposed themselves with all their strength. Do these examples
excuse thy villainy and faith-breaking with thy King? In those times, Iabin and
Nabuchodonozer had no right over those people, they came as strangers and
enemies against them, (as at this day thy aliens and confederate Leaguers, come
against our King, against his estate, and against his subjects,) and therefore
were they so entertained by them.

But after that God had permitted, that one of them should command his
people: what was he that would not endure it patiently, and (as we have said
before) did not use prayers in Jerusalem, for Nabuchodonozer and Balthazar his
Son?

I could stand long upon the reasons and examples of elder times, to testify
the obedience and reverence, that the first Christians bare to their Emperors
and Kings, they that were both Pagans and Ethnicks: acknowledging their dignity
to be venerable, albeit they would not follow their Religion. Which has been
approved by the Can. Iu^ianus, Can. qui resistit ^otestati. Can Impe^atores, et
Can. seq. 11 q. 3.
Canons of ancient Popes, and delivered in their own Decretalles: as before
me has been very well noted, by the Author of the Labyrinth of the League.
They all have agreed, that the pretense of Religion what soever it be, could
not give any color to a Christian man, to mutiny and rebel against his
Prince, to take his life from him and his estate.

They ordinarily pronounced this sentence, Tertul. in his Apol.
Malumus occidi, quam occidere, that they loved rather to be killed, then to
kill. For although they were unjustly afflicted by their Princes: rather would
they submit themselves to the death, then lift Arms against them. Therefore not
to grow tedious to the Reader by prolixitie, I will cease from bringing in the
ancient Ecclesiastical Histories, and testimonies of the Fathers: considering
that diverse other have largely discoursed thereon.

Thou pretendest a color of liberty and ease of the people, but do thou
therefore bring any remedy? Do thou discharge them when thou pillest and
ransackest the poor, and burnest what-soeuer thou can not carry away? Thou
would call the King to judgment, according to the fable of the Aesop Apolo.
Woolfe and the other Beasts: to the end, that under the shadow of reason,
thou might use violence and murder him.

Do we read of the ancient Prophets, that they complained of Occas^^ taken
by imposts the (...) publique^^
exactions of their Princes, and that thereon they grounded occasions to make
war against them? All their care was, to show the Princes their faults, and
to admonish them of Gods vengeances: not to provoke the people, and to incite
the^ to lift Arms against them. And it is not to be doubted, but such as
governed in their time, were well worthy of reprehension: for which cause, Esaias
in the beginning of his prophecy, thus delivered his words to the people of
Israel. Esaias, ^
Thy Princes are wicked, and companions of thieves, they love gifts altogether,
and gape after rewards. As for the fatherless, they help him not to his
right, neither will they let the widows causes come before them. Therefore
says the Lord God of Hosts, the mighty one of Israel: Ah, I must ease me of
mine enemies, and avenge me on my adversaries, and set thy Judges again as
they were sometime, and thy Councellers as they were from the beginning, and
then shall thou be called the righteous City, the faithful City.

Thus this good Prophet foretold the judgment of God against these Princes,
and the restoring of the good Judges and Counselors: considering that the
reprobate were the cause of the evil happened in Israel. A little after, he
says. ^say, 3,
My people, thy Leaders deceive thee, and corrupt the way of thy footsteps.
The Lord shall enter into judgment with the Elders and Princes of the people,
and shall say unto them. It is you that have burnt up my Vineyarde, and the
spoil of the poor is in your houses.

The Prophet Ezechiell sufficiently witnessed and noted the vices of the
Princes in his time, saying, they we^^ as (...), 45,
Woolues that ravished the pray, that effused blood, that they lost their
souls, and gave themselves to avarice. He brought in GOD, speaking against
their exactions and imposts, and admonished them to keep only a just
balance. Amos calls them ^^os, 4.
Kine of Basan, outrageous to the needy, and oppressors of the poor. Micheas
delivering them before God, reprooueth them ^ich, 3,
that they hated the good, and loved the evil, they plucked off the skins of
the people, and their flesh from their bones. Sophonia calls the^ (...) 3,
roaring Lions: all which tytles sufficiently testify, that the Governors and
Judges in their times, were very wicked. Yet notwithstanding, none of the
Prophets, although they beheld the people to sincke under the exactions, as
despoyled of all, and brought into poverty, did at any time, under pretense
of the Weale-publique, counsel the people to mutiny or rebel against their
Princes, but rather vehemently persuaded them to patience.

Call thou in question any Pagans, or of the doctrine of Mahomet, or
Heretics, who for maintenance and advancement of their deceitful and false
opinions, have wickedly conspired against their Princes? Alexander, who was
slain by a Soldier, that prostrated himself at his feet before the City
of Tauris. Amurath, the first King of that name in Turkey, who after he had
discomfited the Despote of Seruia and Bulgaria, was traitorously put to death
by a slave of Bulgaria, who feigned that he came to save his life. King
Sigibert, environed with all his people, who at the motion of Fredigonde, was
assailed and murdered by two aduenturous Gentlemen. Certain people of
Phenicia, holding the Law of Mahomet, called murderers, otherwise Beduines,
dwelling in hollow nookes of the most spacious Mou^tains, living under a Lord,
whom our predecessors knew by no other name, then the Ancient or Great of the
Mountain: they under imagination of a Paradise of pleasure, which he had
persuaded into their heads, bare this mark on them, that they made a sollemne
vow to massacre all Princes they could lay hold on, that were contrary to
their sect and opinion.

By them was the County of Tripoli put to death, Edward of England taken, and
many other great Lords, who by them were either slain or held as prisoners.
From them came first the word of murder, as when one commits slaughter or
such like cruelty, by watching for spoil. I know that diverse other raised
themselves against their Kings and Princes, under the couerture of Religion:
but I deny that such murderers, (seeing necessarily we must so call the^) were
Christian Catholics, or that for the true faith they enterprised such
massacres, so often and many times condemned in the holy Scripture.

Moreover, Alexander and Amurath were not Princes and Superiors to such as
slew them, the other likewise were led by a sathanicall spirit, even as these
murderers or Beduines were; And the ^^eiden in (...) of estate of ^^^^gion.
Anabaptists, who within this little while preached the advancement of the
Kingdom of GOD, teaching all Princes to crowde in with their feet likewise.

Then tell me Leaguer, what remedy is left for thy evil? What excuse can save
thee for thy late murder? Thy leueying of al thy Arms and hostility against
thy last Prince, and his so worthy successor our Alcides, the restorer of the
estate, and the Father of his Country?

Say thou he is a Tyrant, or an Heretic, if thou gyuest him these tytles,
it is only but thy passion that leads thee, because of the death of the Duke
of Guyse and his brother: for before their death, the pernicious book which
thou did cause to be imprinted, in favor of thy tyranny, entitled, An
answer of the true Catholic Frenchmen, to the advertisement of the English
Catholics, for excluding the King of Navarre from the Crown of France,
published abroad in Paris since the Barricados: exalted him, and called him
the enemy of heresy, in the leaf 125. beside, named him, the most religious
and devout of all the Kings of France, or through the world, leaf five
hundred seauentie-three, and five hundred sixtie-one. That he was very foolish
and a beast, who should imagine him to favor an heretic, leaf one hundred
fortie-sixe, and five hundred sixtie-two. That the Catholics ought to serve
him faithfully, and by all manner of good words to adore him, leaf thirty. How
comes it to pass then thou art so suddenly changed, and gone so far from
thy duty toward thy Prince, by thee acknowledged so Catholic, and void of
all suspicion of heresy? But if belying thy self, thou would
notwithstanding term him to be a Tyrant, lysten the resolution of Thomas of
Aquine against Tyrants.

^^omas of ^^uine in first (...) and (...) Chapter the go^^^nment Princes.
Truly, (says he) if there be an excess of tirannie, it were much better to
suffer for a time this mys-gouerned tyranny: then in contending against it, to
be wrapped in many great dangers, more full of grief and trouble, then the
tyranny it self. For it may so fall out, that they which make head against
the Tyrant, and lift themselves in reproof of him: cannot get the vpper-hand,
and so by that mean the Tyrant shall be irritated and provoked to become more
cruel. But if any one should go beyond the Tyrant, and vanquish him: from the
same success oftentimes ensues great discord and dissension among the
people: either meanewhile the presumption is offered against the Tyrant, or
after he is brought under, for then the multitude divide themselves in diverse
parts, touching the quality and manner of their government.

It happens also sometimes, that when the people give chase to the That it is
(...) lawful kill a (...), nor ^ould a (...) ther^^ offend ^^mselfe.
Tyrant, by the aid and Arms of any assistant: the helper attributes the
power to himself, and becomes tyrannous likewise: so that the fear to
endure another, considering what they did with him against the first, presses
down the people with a more troublesome and grievous thought of servitude. For
it falls out by custom in tyranny, that the last is more insupportable then
the first: when the Tyrant gives not over his predecessors extortions, but
himself (following the malice of his own heart) inuenteth new and far more
worse.

For this cause, as oft-times else it happens, in the City of A nota^^^
example (...) w^rthy m^^mory.
Siracusa, each one desired the death of Dionisius the Tyrant: yet a certain
old Woman prayed continually for his health, and desired that he might live
after her. The Tyrant being advertised of the earnest prayer of this old
Woman, demanded of her wherefore she did so, and what was her meaning thereby:
whereto she thus answered. When I was a young Maiden, and our Country at that
time had a very troublesome Tyrant: I desired he might die, when not long
after he being slain, there succeeded him another far beyond him in cruelty.
Then thought I, we should be most happy indeed, if we might behold likewise
the death of him: but he being dead, the third Governor became worse then
both the other. Now therefore if you should die, doublesse one more cruel
would come in your sted, and therefore I pray that we may keep you still.

But if the excess of tyranny be too intolerable, some are of the opinion,
that it appertains to the virtue of courageous and valiant men: to kill the
Tyrant, and expose themselves to the danger of death, for deliverance of the
people, as of the like we have example in the old Testament. For Judge, 3.
Aioth gave a stroke with his dagger in the belly of Eglon King of Moab, who
oppressed the people of God with exceeding great servitude: and killing him,
himself was made Judge over the people. But this deed is not conuenable,
neither does it agree with the doctrine Apostolical. ^. Pet. 2.
For S. Peter teaches us, to be obedient, not only to good and civil Lords
or Princes, but also to the wicked and troublesome. For this is most gracious,
when for the cause of conscience and love of God, any one endures injury, or
suffers unjustly.

In this case then, when so many Roman Emperors persecuted tirannously the
faith of Jesus Christ, and a great multitude as well of the Nobles as also the
meaner sort, were converted thereby to this faith: they were praised and
commended because they resisted not, but endured pacientlie and with courage
the death, for the love of Christ Jesus, as we may see manifestly in the holy
Legion of the Thebanes. Should we then rather judge and esteem, that Aioth
had killed an enemy, then one that was a Governor of the people, albeit he was
a Tyrant.

By this reason we read in the old Testament likewise, that they were put to
death which killed 2. Kin. 25,
Ioas King of Judah: although he had left the service of God, and the sons of
them were reserved alive, according to the commandment of the Law.

Now this shall be dangerous to the people and their Governors, if any one by
particular audaciousnes and presumption, attempt the death of such as present
the chief office, although they be Tyrants: for oftentimes in such dangers,
the bad comes sooner in place then the good, and the Empire or signeurie of
Kings, is as burdenous and intolerable, under the The wi^^ked will i^^dure as
(...) under (...) as under Tyrants.
wicked, as under tyranny, therefore according to the sentence of Solomon: The
wise King does dissipate the wicked and ungodly.

Then by the like presumption, the loss of the King brings more danger and
damage to the people, then profit and remedy by the end and cutting off a
Tyrant: Likewise, that it is more necessary to proceed against the cruelty of
Tyrants, rather by public authority, then by particular wilfulnes or
presuming. But if any people have right to provide themselves of a King, and
that by them he is chosen: for just cause, the King so established, may by the
people be suppressed, or his authority taken from him by them that created him
King, because so tyrannously he abused the Majesty royal. Now are the people
to be judged unfaithful, in forsaking and subiecting this Tyrant, because
before he was never Governor of himself, neither carried that faithful and
honorable mind, as is required in the office of a King: Thus misleading and
misgouerning his people, he deserves not that his subjects should keep the
promise they made and swore to him.

So the Romans chased out of the Kingdom (...) the (...).
Tarquine the proud, whom they had received as their King: but because of the
tyranny of him and his son, they subjected themselves to a lesser authority,
namely of Consuls. In like case ^omitian Tyrant.
Domitian, who succeeded the most modest and debonnaire Emperors, Vespasian his
Father, and Titus his brother: because he excercysed tyranny, he was slain
by the Roman Senate, and by their decree were revoked and annihillated, all
such things as he badly had established and ordained against the Romans. For
this cause S. John the Evangelist, John the ^^^ngelist.
the beloved Disciple of Christ, who was sent in exile by Domitian, into the
I Will of Pathmos: was recalled from thence, and sent by the Senate to Ephesus.
But if any superior Governor, has right to give a King to the people: he
ought to regard his dealing, and to yield remedy against the malice and
wickedness of the Tyrant.

Hereof ^rchelaus (...) to (...) Herod
Archelaus may remain example, who having begun to reign in Jury, in the
place of King Herod his father, began to imitate him in wickedness and cruelty:
when the Jews framed a complaint against him before Augustus Caesar, then
first his authority was deminished, the name of King taken from him, and the
moitie of his Realm divided to his two brethren. And because by this mean he
could not be kept from using tyranny: Tyberius Caesar sent him in exile, to
the city of Lions in France.

And if it be not possible to have human succor against a Tyrant, let us
make our recourse to God, the King over all, who will help the oppressed in
trybulation: for it is in the power of God, to convert the heart of a Tyrant
into mildness, according to the words of Prou. 2
Solomon: Cor Regis in manu Dei; quocunque voluerit, inclinabit illud: The heart
of the king is in the hand of God, he may turn it whether soever he will. For
he turned into meekenes the cruelty of Hest. 6
King Assuerus, who prepared to put the Jews to death.

He likewise converted and changed the cruel King Nabuchodonozer, that he
became a Preacher of the divine power, saying: Dan. 4
Now therefore I Nabuchodonozer, praise, extol, and magnify the King of
heaven, whose works are al truth, his ways judgment, and those that walk in
pride or arrogancy, is he able to humble and abase. But as for Tyrants, they
are reputed by him unworthy of conversion, he will cut the^ off, or bring them
into base estate, according to the words of the Wiseman Eccle. 1.
God destroieth the seats of proud Princes, and sets on them such as are
meek and humble in their sted. He it is who seeing the affliction of his
people in Exodus 1.
Egypt, and hearing the cry of them: overthrew the Tyrant Pharao with his Army
in the Red Sea. It is he, that not only threw from the throne Roall the
forenamed ^an, 4.
Nabuchodonozer, who was become very proud, but also deprived him of the
company of men, and changed him into a beast.

His arm is no whit shortened, but he can and will deliver his people from
Tyrants. For he promised to his people by the Prophet Esaias, (...) 40.
that he would give rest to the travail, confusion, and troublesome servitude,
wherein they were before subjected. And by Ezechiell he says: ^ze. 34.
I will deliver my flock from the mouths of such sheepheards, as do nothing
but feed themselves.

But to the end the people may obtain this merciful benefit from God, it is
necessary for them to leave their sin: because that in vengeance thereof,
the wicked and ungodly (by divine permission) get hold of the principality;
And God says by the Prophet Osee: ^see. 3.^12.
I will give thee a King in my fury, and in Job it is written: that he will
suffer the hypocrite to reign, because of the sins of the people. It is
requisite the^ to take way the fault, to the end GOD may cease to punish us by
the means of Tyrants. Hitherto Thomas Aquinus showed the error of such as
lifted themselves against Princes, albeit they were Tyrants, and did entreat
their Subjects cruelly.

Say thou then under this pretense of tyranny, that justly thou may raise
thee against the King, to kill him, murder him by treason, and so to take his
estate from him? For the first, he is no Tyrant, and though he should consent
to make any tyrannous Act, (as therein thou say most false) yet thy words
favor of most abominable error, and are condemned by the The co^^^sell of
Co^^stance.
counsel of Constance, who above all things would have abolished and rased
forth such a pernicious doctrine: That it should be lawful to kill a
Tyrant, for any cause what soever it be. They declared such people to be
wicked, erroneous in faith and manners, reproouing and condemning them as
Heretics, or scandalous preparers of the way to frauds, deceites, dreams,
periuries, and treasons.

This holy Sinode declared furthermore and ordained, that such as obstinatly
affirmed and maintained this doctrine, were heretics, and ought to be
punished according to the holy and Canonical ordinances.

Then tell me Sorcerer, art not thou an heretic, having murdered not a
Tyrant, but a just, debonnaire and lawful King? Art not thou an heretic, to
pursue the life and estate of his admirable successor? whom thou art enforced
to confess and account for a mighty, generous and affable Prince, gracious
even toward his very enemies, a conseruer of Religion, although he make
profession of that is contrary to thee. But thou fear (as it seems) that
being the head of his Subjects, he will not change his Religion, but rather
his clemency into rigor and severity: this proceeds but from the fardle of
thy malice.

As concerning the matter of Religion, I have thereto answered thee already:
but for the alteration of his kind nature into another more rigorous, I am
persuaded that he is established by GOD to do justice to the wicked. Beside,
he is so soundly acquainted with mercy and gentleness, as he will never from
them degenerate: but will pardon his simple Subjects that gave but consent to
rebellion, and were not authors or procurers thereof.

Does it then appertain to thee to judge thy Prince? ^om. 6.
Men (says the holy Scripture) see the outward part, but God only regards
the inward. God reserueth to himself the examinations of the intents and
thoughts of men: wherefore presumest thou then to judge the heart of thy
Sovereign, when thou say he will do but as such a King, or such a Queen?

Art thou a Prophet, or has GOD revealed to thee the mind and thoughts of the
King? It is not for thee, being a servant and Subject to judge thy Master,
^om. 14.
but it appertains to the Master to judge his servant: thy offenses are the
cause of this temerarious judgment.

A man can have no better censure of others then of himself: for he is of this
nature, that he thinks others do err in what himself erreth, so because thou
art a liar and deceiuer of thy King, thou iudgest his Majesty after thine own
affections, and in respect thou art not capable of any good, therefore thou
attributest an evil end to all good works, either because thou valuest them as
nothing, or for the envious will thou bear to the King.

The Sun, whose radiant beams passes through the glass, receives his
color of the same glass: in like sort, the judgment which passes the heart
of a wicked man, must needs be wicked, because his heart is painted with a
wicked color: so thy evil opinion of the Kings deeds, proceeds but from
thine own evil disposition.

A wande thrust never so right into the water, seems crooked and broken: even
so thy broken, vicious, and rebellious heart, censureth the sound actions of the
King to be broken: as the sicke-man that rejects good wholesome meats, and
imagines them to be bitter, because himself has lost his taste.

The devil, seeing he could not overcome by slander the good works of Job.
1.
Job, judged wickedly of him, that what he did, was done to an evil end, and
therefore he said to God: The good which Job did, was rather for his own
profit, then his love. 1. Sam. 10
King David with a holy intent, sent to visit Ammon King of Ammon, to comfort
him after the death of his Father Nahas: but the people said incontinent, that
David had sent privy Spies for invasion of the Kingdom.

So Leaguer, in like manner thou interpretest to an evil end the good
endeavors of the King, as also of his followers and faithful Subjects. The
better sort of people, because they are well minded, judge euer-more the better
way, and will themselves excuse the bad dealings of their neighbors, so much
as in them lies to perform.

Joseph in Egypt excused so much as he could, the malice of his Brethren, who
enuiously had sold him into that Kingdom, saying to them: Gene. 45
That God had permitted it for their profit, and the succor of so many
people. Acts. 7.
Saint Stephen excusing before God the malice of his persecutours that stoned
him, said: they did it through ignorance: so to make lesser the fault of his
enemies. Even so the malice or good inclination of each ones heart, is cause of
their judgments good or evil.

The natural heat in a man, that is healthful, of good nature and
complexion, consumes all that he eats, and conuerteth it into good blood: as
by the like example, the man that fears God, and is enflamed with his love,
turns what-soeuer he beholds to profit thereby, but the wicked conuerteth
every thing to evil. A good man gives credit to all good words, (says
Prou. 1.
Solomon:) and this facillitie in belief, is not to be blamed in him, but
rather commended. This is the holy simplicity of the Dove, which Mat. 10
Jesus Christ commended to his Apostles, wherein consisted: that they should
not be malicious, they should judge well of all, and take in good part
what-soeuer they saw done by their Brethren.

The Joshua. 5
Gabaonites came to Iosuah with an evil disposed will, and betrayed the holy
person and people of GOD by their falsehood and deceits: and so long as Iosuah
with his followers did well, these Gabaonites would not believe, but that they
were come to beguile them. Charity thinks no evil, or misiudgeth of any
one. A good man has no eyes to look on the faults of another: but thou that
art wicked, having lost both charity and the virtue of obedience, thou
considerest rashly, thinking others to be sinners, and thy self just.

Our Savior reprooueth thee, where he says: Luke. 6
Hypocrite, thou see not the great beam in thine own eye, but thou well
notest the little moate in thy neighbors eye. It is a great matter, that not
caring for thine own conscience, thou art become so busy an examiner and
inquisiter of the deeds of thy Superiors, as thou wylt see and pry into their
thoughts: wherein thou show thy self but a fool, that having to correct so
many faults, by thee committed being a Subject, thou will presume to judge of
thy King and Prince, as also his Servant, whose deeds employed to a good
end, by thee are misconstrued and judged after thine own fancy. In the old
Law, God forbad the Priest to judge presently of the Leper, but to let Leuit.
13.
7. days first be past. If then God would not permit the priest to judge so
suddenly of the Leper, whom he manisfestlie beheld: think thou he will
suffer thee (being a Subject) to judge of thy King, and of the malice (which
thou say) is in his heart, where-into thou have no eyes to discern?

Thou Leaguer, thou examiner of the heart and thoughts of thy King, remember the
chastisement of God on the Bethsamites, because they would needs so curiously
look and search into the Arc of the Testament, as it passed through their
Country: ^. Sam. 6.
God smote to death threescore and ten men of the chiefest sort, and fifty
thousand of the common people. The heart of thy King is as the Arc,
inscrutable, and much more interior and secret are the intentions of a Kings
heart and his servant: then were the tables of the Law, the vessels for the
Manna, or the rod which was within the Arc of Israel. If then thou weenest so
curiously to sift and examine the thoughts and meaning of thy King, being good
and just, yet notwithstanding interpreted by thee to an ill end, thou can
not escape the punishment which God inflicted on the Bethsamites: judge not
then rashly, nor detract thy King. The Apostle says Romans 1.
detracters are abominable before God: then speak we in general, how much
more abominable are such subjects, as dare detract against their King and
Superiors? All these detracters and slaunderers, promise to themselves by
their rebellion, a high step into glory; having hitherto lived at their ease,
on robberies and spoils made on the faithful Frenchmen. But o God! how
far of are they from their account, having in hatred the bridge of true
repentance, with solemn acknowledgment of their offenses, over which all
sinners that are Christians must of necessity pass. What-soeuer good the K.
does, thou art in such sort possessed with the spirit of dissension* as thou
say it is no more then a Dream or fantasy.

Thou blamest the Catholics, that they are allied with such as thou call
Huguenotes, for maintenance of the royal authority in the house of Burbon,
the most famous of the world. Did thou imagine them to be so mad, after the
slaughter of their most Christian King, as to defend the cause of murderers?
And then when no question was to be made of the estate, would thou have them
falsely break their bond to their natural and legittimate Prince, to who^ by
duty they owe all fidelity? Thy term of Religion, ought not hinder the
assistance due to him by allegiance: for the Prince is elected of God, what is
he the^ that shall refuse and be disobedient to the heavenly appointment? And
who has made this alliance or conjunction of the Kings Catholic and
faithful servant together, for the placing him in his estate, but thy self
Leaguer? that did betray and kill a most Catholic King, to trans-fer the
Crown whether thou please.

Art not thou thy self leagued with certain Protestants, who every day make a
preaching in thine Army, and commit great indignities in the Churches, which
thou both know and beholdest? But hereof I need not make any wonder, for
thou art content, that thy zealous The Leauers may ^oe what ^hey please, and
yet it is ^o sin ^ith them.
Catholics shall spoil even to the high Altar, and yet not be sacriligious.
Thou pillest Churches, and our King uses them as a defense for his person: so
according to thy malice inuetterated by nature, thou immediately turnest all
his good works into poison, as all things else likewise of this virtuous Prince.

The The Pope ^or money, ^ispenseth ^ith all Regions.
Pope himself, did he make any dyfficultie in matters of estate, to consent
heretofore with the Huguenotes, by means of a certain anuall pension, for the
conservation of the County of Auignon, which appertained to him? The Emperor
Charles the fifth, and Phillip his son King of Spain, the source and support
of the League: did they find any fault in assembling their troops and Arms,
composed of men of all religions, for the aid and defense of their business?

Thou Sorcerer, do thou oppose to me by the mouths of thy false Prophets,
that 2. Ch^
Iosaphat was contented by the Prophet Iehu, to join in affinity with Achab?
And by the prophet Elizeus he was likewise united to Ochozias King of Israel,
he being given to do ill? That King 2. Ch^
Asa for making a covenant with Benhadad King of Assiria, was tempted? That
God by the mouth of Esaias, as also by the Kings of Judah, said: Esaias.
Evil be on you that walk to go down into Egypt, and have asked no question
at my mouth, but seeking strength in the aid of Pharao, have knit your selves
with the number of Egypt, therefore shall the strength of Pharao be your
confusion? That in Jeremy we read the like words, Iere. 4^
and how GOD commanded his people, not to make any alliance with the
Cananites, Amorites, and other Infidel Nations? I answer to these arguments,
that the prohibition made to King Iosaphat, reached no further then to himself
particulerly: because he was joined with a King not only irreligious, but
also impious. And Asa is reproved, because forgetting God, he trusted in
humane power, whereto in like manner tends the reprehension of Esaias. But a
Christian Prince, that believes in God, may not he (according to occasion and
time) receive the amity and alliance of another Prince, different in Religion,
especially in the affairs of the estate? Said not (...) to the^ ^^dged (...).
^^ut. 20.
Moises, When thou co^mest near to a City to fight against it, thou shall
offer them peace. If then they answer thee again peaceably, and open the
gates to thee, then let all the people that is found therein, be tributarie to
thee and serve thee.

Did not (...). 5.16
Iosuah receive the Gabaonites into alliance: which (albeit he had discovered
their fraud and treason) he would never after break? What say thou to the
alliance (...). 20
Abraham made with King Abimelech? Was not (...). 23, (...) 27.
David in such sort joined in amity with king Achis, as himself was made of
the Guarde to the person of the King? Did he not bear like amity to (...).
29.
Nahan King of the Ammonites, and allied himself with him? His Son (...). 5.
Solomon, did not he the like with Hyram King of the Tyrians? Of whom by the
mean of alliance, he received both matter and worke-men, to build the Temple
of God in Jerusalem?

It is not then unnecessary, that Catholic faithful Subjects, should join
themselves with their natural and legittimate Prince, although he differ from
them in Religion: and with those also of contrary opinion, in so just a cause:
and if they should do otherwise, who doubts but they are to be attainted and
convinced, of the self same crime as Rebels are?

What say thou then now? Will thou make the Law? appertains it not to the
King to do it, who relieth on no body else but God? Dare thou attempt against
his Majesty? Dare thou yet oppose thy self against Gods anointed? Hydra,
does more heads still bud forth, having already lost so many? Who doubts but
hell is called hell? Thou have murdered Henry the third, a Christian King, and
yet thy violence is not therewith pacified. Thou have striuen, and still do
daily strive, to glut thy false and most cruel heart with the blood of our
present King, who has been so kind and debonnaire to thee, and being able to
do nothing by force, thou have recourse to Magique-artes and Charms: but the
goodness of God is far beyond thy malice, and in pity he will not permit,
but that the King and his poor Subjects, who suffer by thee so many abuses and
enormities, shall have the vpper-hand in these weighty affairs, and that it is
his pleasure, to let us shortly see thy nose flatted to the earth, with thy
neck broken, and never heere-after to be better then thou art: as I am fully
persuaded thou can not be, being clothed with such cruel passions and
violent executions. Spare not (for us) still to lighten the war with thy
ambition, that thou take to thee thy Spanish King and Master, that thou bestow
on him the supreme power, that thou associate thy self with men of spoil,
and fit for the halter, robbers, thieves, murderers, and such like, and that
all such are the most grateful and welcomest guests to thee: we expect no
other, but the end of thee and them at the ^he only of (...) and ^^ytors.
Fourca or Gallows.

Thou braggest a little, that thou have some Gentlemen of good birth, whose
Fathers (with the price of their lives,) did valiantly defend the crown:
these have thou in such sort inueigled, by thy wicked wrappings and enchaunting
persuasions, as their fault and themselves are alike, and their crime of Lesae
Maiestatis, bears witness of their virtue. They Idoll-like honor thee, and
willingly are charmed with thy Siren persuasions, thy sweet songs and affecting
blandishments, because thou layest thy self wide open to their lightness. But I
attend the time, that according to the good nature they received from their
Ancestors, if any at all be left within them: they coming to discover how
hidious thou art, how false and full of all detestation, in the end will set
their feet on thy neck, before they be swallowed in this depth altogether; as
already many of the better advised are; who find themselves drawn forth of
this Labyrinth, even as it were by the thredde of Ariadne.

An advertisement to the small company of Noble men, that follow the League.
YOU Gentlemen of honorable mind and birth, that make love to this deceitful
Courtezane, good God! how are you abused? Do ye not behold, that in promising
she plucks from ye? and in giving, she takes away? Despoyling ye of your
Noblesse, renown and honor? See ye not that she cherishes ye, to the end to
slack and weaken ye to your King and Country, by making ye drunk with her
unlawful love? Know ye not the cunning of this withered Geryon, that would
separate and divide ye, in the end to triumph over ye? Do ye not yet discover
her malice? Have ye yet your eyes sealed up? will ye not purge them of the
powder of so many colors and false pretenses, as are thrown into them, that
ye might cleerelie discern your selves to come into a good way?

The League you reverence so much, is like a Tree secretly and subtillie
planted in the midst of you, (...) very apt militude ^f ye Lea^ue.
the fruit whereof at the first beholding, seems fair, yet are they very
bitter and poysonable to poor France: how happens it the^, that they are so
sweet and sauorie to you whose tastes are so fine and delicate? Know ye not
that such Leagues, confederacies, and particular associations of Subjects
amongst themselves, or with other Princes, under what-soeuer pretense it be,
are forbidden by Monarchs? Yea, the King of Spain himself that thus beguiles
ye, has by express Edicts inhibited his Subjects from the^: yet shall this
old Reynard (by the same means) spoil and destroy you? Are ye ignorant (my
Lords) that there was no accusation more great, against Jews Duke of Orleance,
slain by means of the Duke of Burgundy.
Jews of France Duke of Orleance, after he was slain by the policies of the
Duke of Burgundy: then because he was allied and leagued with the English Duke
of Lancaster? Nor can ye defend your selves with the authority of the late
most worthy Prince, the Cardinal of Burbon, whose integrity and holy zeal
to Christian Religion, the Master whom you serve, under the aforementioned
pretense of piety and Religion abused. And doubtless as much would he do, to
this honorable, virtuous and religious Prince, the Cardinal of Burbon his
Nephewe, if he did not well perceive, that so great a Prince and Prelate, by
his wisdom and most careful foresight, (instructed by nature, and confirmed
from his youngest tender years, by the virtuous documents he received of
Mounsieur de Bellozane, a sharp sighted, good Catholic, and most faithful
Frenchman) would discover his fraud and coniuration, and find ready at his
fingers ends, what he intended to his King and all other of his blood. It was
not lawful for that great Prince, the late Cardinal of Burbon, of praise
worthy memory, so kindly and easily (notwithstanding his authority) to league
himself, or to give any occasion or couerture of a League: because it
pertains to none but the King to doit, or to command or consent to Leagues,
he having the only sovereign authority. But the enemies to the King, the
estate and his honor, very easily deceive him, under the color of Religion
and the Weal public.

You are capable of reason, then conceive what I say. Forsake the error of this
vile kind of people, that are dulled and infected with this dangerous poison:
defend your selves with this preservative, and consider, that these Rebels
have their weapons in hand even against you, seeing they menace* the estate,
which you ought and are bound to maintain and defend, because thereon
depends your Noblesse, goods, and lives. The Leave would ^^one pe^^sh, if
these ^ewe would ^orsake it.
The enemy has diverse times received shrewd checkes, but that your assistance
and hostility relieved him: had we your fidelity, with all the rest of this
noble body, soon should both the check and mate be given him* or rather this
Hydra with so many heads, should be overthrown and utterly vanquished.

Abandon and give over this Sorcerer, vnwrappe your selves out of these snares,
if you be wise, and knit your self in a Gordian knot unto your King, our
Hercules, who holds his arms wide open to receive you courteously, albeit ye
have so greatly offended. Would ye by any badde deed of perfidie, loose the
name of Frenchmen, heretofore so admyred among strangers, as that for the
ancient Nobleness of the French, it was attributed by the Oriental Zonar. in
the History of Mich and Alexand. Comines. Othofrising. Cron. Lis. 7. c. 4.
Vrsperg. de expeditione Godfrey de Bullen.
Greeks, before all the Latins and people of the West?

Can ye endure that the Spanyard, who would command every where, shall distaine
your names and famous race? Will ye let your selves loofe the natural
enfranchise and liberty, so long time frequent among the ancient french,
before it was peece-meale rent by manners and opinions of strangers, now when
ye have nothing left more dear, then your honor and reputation? Never think
to make your selves great by that which you ruinate, but think what shall
become of you and yours in such accidents. The difficulties and occurrances
that happen in an estate, troubled with affairs of partialities, are the
moreful of dangers, in that they depend on what may ensue, and cannot easily
be referred to any certain rule; so that providence must there have greater
place the^ knowledge. But the humane spirit is so blinded with selfeloue, and
dazeled with things present, carrying show of delight: as it imagines such
pleasures ought always to endure, and little cares for ought may afterward
come to pass: the next way to use special regard hereof, is not to
entertain our thoughts with flattering desseignes or opinions.

So GOD, who to himself has reserved all power, destributeth no otherwise his
gifts to men, but that oftentimes he ouer-throwes their determinations so
soon as they are conceived: and sometimes, foreseeing the scope of men's
drifts, conuerteth the enterprise to the ruin of the inuenter.

Then flatter not your selves concerning the part you take, which is directly
against God, against the estate, and against your King, and so co^sequentlie,
to the extirpation of all the French Nobility: for the Stranger, accompanied
with a multitude of base peasants and grooms, will loose and betray you to the
Switzers. If any one of the wiser sort, that attendes on which side the wind
will turn, and now are half Spaniards, now on the Kings side, according to
the occurrences, shall say unto me, that I show my self over passionate: I
answer him, that in general deuisions, a man ought to take one party, for
otherwise he should show himself to be faulty, standing as a Neuter, and
so deserve the punishment ordained by Solon for such people. As for me, reason
tells me, that I fail not in taking and following the part of my King, whom God
has lawfully and by the degree of succession given us, to govern and relieve
this poor afflicted kingdom, which does nothing else but stagger, being so
extenuate and weak, as if his Majesty (assisted by God) did not sustain and
restore it, hardly should she find any other to help her with recovery of
health: albeit this is not the first time that France has been divided into
Leagues and partialities, after which it has been reunited and reconciled.

For the disease of this estate is so sharp and violent, albeit the cause
thereof is well known to all: as if it find not an aunswerable remedy, by the
admirable prescription of some special and no vulgar Physician, undoubtedly
immediate death will ensue.

Which were great pity (my Lords) that Rebels should so do, after they have
mangled, dissipated and spoiled it, under color of reformation, and pretense
of Religion: have likewise brought in the Spanyard, even to the very heart of
the estate, and then caused him to descend into Britain and Province, to
enrich himself with the public ruins and havoc of French-mens goods.

Do ye not already behold, that the Spaniards are Masters within The (...)
ho^ Spanya^^ behave himself Paris, (...) places (...) where (...) preuail^^
Paris? Do ye not see them gorging the riches and treasure of the Citizens?
See ye not likewise how they handle the foolish people, that when they come to
acknowledge their fault, they are so feeble and faint-harted: as they easily
chase and drive them forth of their houses, whereof they presently will have the
authority and disposing; beside, either by fair means or force, deal with
their wives, their daughters, and their servant.

Ode 4 Pythi.
It is easy (as Pindarus says) for the rude and base multitude, to trouble
and ouer-turne a great City: but to bring and re-establish it in the former
flourishing esttae, requires a little more pain and travail. For such only
can do that, to whom God (as the true Governor) gives the means and counsel
how to perform it. The King alone can re-establish Paris, and the Spanyarde,
assisted with the Rebels both without and within, gapeth but for the general
ruin thereof. The King labors to preserve it, as being his proper heritage,
and principal seat of the Kings: the Spanyard imployeth his daily pain for
the loss thereof, and accounts it best to use it as a garrison, a pernicious
garrison, a garrison which will be the miserable end of the greatness and
excellency of Paris: for whose safety, the King endured before it the
discommodities of a long siedge, desiring rather to recover it by reason, and
reknowledging of offenses past, the^ to take it by force, and so commit it to
sack and the Soldiers spoil.

Therefore thou need not accuse the King because so long time he besieged
(...) cause the K. (...) such (...) and (...) Paris.
Paris, with no other intent: rather hereby thou should conceive an
argument, of most wonderful and debonnaire kindness, or rather a princely
fatherlines toward his Subjects, who are as dear to him as his natural
Children. What man is he so foolish, that will thrust fire into his house,
under shadow that it is occupied by his enemies: if he have the means left to
chase them away, or to make them become his Friends? What Father is it,
being never so grievously offended with his Son, will therefore immediately
work his death or destruction? Will he not rather use discretion, and tarry
the time, wherein by necessity, or other kind of traversing, he may bring
him again into the right way, or acknowledgement of his fault? In vain were it
to doubt otherwise: marry if the son persevere long time stubborn, and the
Father be severe, in the end he will chastise him according to his deserts. The
King then has proceeded like a good Father of a family, having used
incredible patience and kindness, even till the extremity, when he might have
ruined and confounded all his enemies. God therefore will permit him a double
recompense, and if hereafter the Rebels be handled by his Majesty more
rigorously, themselves thereof have given him just occasion.

It is hard to order or well guide an advice and deliberation, for reducing a
Kingdom vexed with troubles and sedicions, into a sound assurance: as the
Pylot (what-soeuer experience he has,) finds it difficult for him to guide
the Ship, when he is hindered with exceeding rough Seas, and extraordinary
tempests: when he shall be driven from his right course of Navigations, and see
the vessel begin to splyt and shyuer against the Rocks, being unable longer
to man the stearne. But GOD gives grace to the King, as a most good, assured,
and expert Pylote, to recover the Barque of the Commonwealth of France, so
menaced and in danger of shipwreck: to the confusion of all his enemies.

And now to return to you my Lords, love ye better to live miserably, under
the tyranny of them that would destroy ye: then under the sweet and agreeable
subjection of the most gracious King on the earth? Who makes no spare of
himself, but stands exposed to all dangers, to win you by his Arms, and
by the assistance of so many great Lords and Gentlemen, to re-seate peace,
quiet and tranquillity. As ^de 8. (...).
Pindarus writes, comparing Peace to a fair and mylde weather, which causes
abundance, and fertility of all good things, and is (as he says) the soul
of the spirit and thought, the daughter of Justice, that conserueth and
maintains the greatest Cities, having the most excellent keys of counsel,
and good deliberation.

Will not you then travail with your King, to gain this fair and precious
Jewel? Will not you follow him, to chase hence the cruel dysquieters of your
Country? Love ye better to consent to their invasion, to loose and bury your
selves in their Conquests: then live united to your King, in peace, in your
Houses, and Castles, with your Wives and Children? Will ye suffer your selves
to fall headlong into this discord, which ingendereth nothing but confusion,
which in such sort dazeleth the very greatest spyrits, as they shall not see
and know what is good for them? How sovereign a virtue is it to counsel well,
and how equal therewith is it, to listen good counsel and follow it?

It is greatly to be feared, considering the malice of these Rebels: that it
be not said of this estate, as Cicero wrote of the Roman commonwealth: the
shaddowe whereof, (to our great pain) remains in this kingdom. Cicero Cattle.
Sedition is lightly moved, and oftentimes on very small occasion, but
suddenly it engenders diverse troubles, as raging storms and tempests, that
sundry ways toss and turmoyle the Commonwealth: and sometimes it falls out,
that the Author of these broils does as the Bird, who having got bird-lyme by
chance into her wings, the more she strives to loose her self, the faster
her wings cleave together with the lyme. If then we would have the
Commonwealth to live and flourish, let us live in agreement with our King: for
concord is the very soul of the Commonwealth.

The unity which you have followed until this present, is contrary both to
your quiet and welfare of the state. Perceive ye not by the disorders here
engendered by the enemies of the Realm, that their entrance was made only to
triumph over you? And will ye forget your selves so much, as to imagine it may
any way redownde to your profit and advantage? be not I entreat you so easily
deceived. What misfortune is it to The sta^^ of Fraun^^ in forme^ times.
France, that heeretosore has been a refuge to other afflicted Nations: a
terror to the very proudest people that reigned in Greece, in P^lestine; and
has been renowned through Europe, Asia, Africa: has astonished the Almaignes,
conquered the Gauls, commanded in Italy, oftentimes combatted the hardy
English, with-stood Emperors, and other great Monarchies, chased the Sarrasins
of Spain, (who nevertheless have left behind them too many of their seed.)
What mishap is it (I say) that France should now be constrained to send for the
succor of Strangers, not to augment her glory, to conquer from the enemy the
ancient patrimony of the Crown, and thereby to erect Trophies of your
victories, according to the famous testimonies left by your Ancestors: but to
deliver up herself to them as a pray, to expose to their pillage, holy
Temples, Palaces and Castles: to give them ransom, or rather to sell them
her Gentlemen, peaceable Citizens, Merchaunts, handicrafts-men, women,
children, and sucking infants: yea, even against herself to conjure so
resolutely?

Behold the estate wherein you may now see this poor King, beggered (well
near) by the means of your League, glyding under the species (albeit a false
pretense) of Religion, here too long a time. Will ye not (my Lords) by the
accustomed fidelity of true Frenchmen, unmask your eyes, see into what
Labyrinth you are entered, and join in this most just cause, to recover with
your King the happy times, that were in the reigns of K. Jews the 12.
Fraunces the first, and Henry the second, whom your Fathers and Grandfathers
faithfully served?

Who is the French Historian, that now can say of the three estates of this
Realm, as Titus Liuius wrote of the good accord of the three orders ordained
in Rome? Titus (...) concern the (...) good (...) in Ro^^
Certainly (says he) the City of Rome is very happy, invincible and
eternal by her concord: the Knights are excellent men, and worthy to be
praised: the people kind and dutiful: the mildnes and humanity of the
Senate, only conquers, through the prompt and voluntary obedience of the
people. The Antithesis here is most apparent, for The (...) trary est^^ of the
(...) of Pari^
Paris is brought into such estate, as she may call herself unhappy, and near
her destruction. The Ecclesiastical persons, that ought to maintain this
great City in peace and concord: they breath forth nothing but blood and fire
sowing no other seed but of dissension, and persuading the people to force
justice, and abuse the Magistrates.

Consider my Lords, you that have read Histories, how discord and partiality
(the cause of sedition and troubles) has wrought the fall and unfortunate end
of most mighty Empyres and flourishing Commonweals, that strange enemies never
brought them such misery and calamity, as their own domestical disquietnes:
where under the countenance of Weal public, liberty, and such like
pretenses, (even as the Leaguers do at this instant) they conspired and
compassed the universal ruin of the estate.

It has been well noted from time to time, that never was any flourishing
City destroyed by an Army of Strangers, if first of all she nourished not
civil wars in her own bosom: then must it needs follow, that after long
civil war, either her estate is changed, or else by the stranger, she is
brought into a lamentable condition. Do not your selves here behold the
like? Paris, is it not already (and that very willingly) in the Spaniards
government, under color of deliverance, seeing it remains now at his
devotion.

O ^ho so (...) as (...), that ^^ully run their (...) de^^ction.
blinded Frenchmen! who for rejecting the sweet Laws of peace, abjure the
fidelity you owe to your King, and to sheeld ye from the punishments due to
your breach of faith, became Rebels and murderers of the late King: making
recourse to your enemy, who has circkled you with his Arms, that knows right
well how to raise his profit on your insolences, as already ye see what he
has done? Were it not better for you to acknowledge your faults, and desire
pardon of the King, who naturally is inclined to mercy? And you my noble Lords,
who through misgouernment have suffered your selves to be carried away with the
passions of the League, shall do much better to reioyne again with your King
and head, you being (as you are) principal members of the estate: whereby at
once will be quenched sedition, discord, war, and partialities, as also the
stranger chased away, who smiling in his sleeue at our deuisions, by these bad
affairs returns himself good profit. I beseech ye consider what Plato says
Plato (...) de (...)
Civil war is nothing else but sedition, a capital and pernicious plague to
the Commonwealth, which infecteth with the contagion thereof, all the
partakers therein: and most commonly it proceeds of covert and small
occasions, like unto a pyning Ague, which being not at the first perceived,
and by medicines prevented, consumes the body by little and little to just
nothing. This civil war is then the more dangerous, in that it is
enterprised against the King and the estate, under a false pretense: which will
cause, (if you open not your eyes, and God vouchsafe to hold strong hand with
the true and holy intent of the King) such civil spoil among our selves, as
we shall be made forreiners in our own Country.

For thus will the Spanyard (if he can) deal with ye in the end, set foot
upon your throats to rid himself of you, and then will make war on ye: not
as a friend or confederate, but as an enemy both to one and other; Not as a
Protecter, or Deliverer (as the foolish rebellious people vainlie term him)
but as a proud Usurper and blood-thirstie Tyrant. Can ye think his coming
into France is for any other intent? If ye dream on any other friuelous
opinions, ye but abuse your selves. Prevent then in good time this slye
deceitful Spanyard, beat back his stratagemes with other of more honor: for
if ye withold your selves ouer-long from asswaging this discord, which is
daily and hourelie advanced by your mortal enemy, that already leads ye
with him as captives in triumph: ye shall find it as hard to get any remedy or
help, as to heal the Fever Ethique, that has got the maisterie in a
languishing body.

This rebellion hatched so long time by the practices and devises of the
Spanyard, who already vaunteth that he has ye in possession, and (as it
were) tied fast in his snares: is every hand-while moved and enflamed, as ^
apt si^^tude of French (...).
a fire kindled in a thick wood, and as the one with the wind, so the other
with smooth shadows, sweet speeches, and notorious trecheries, is dispersed
with such violence, as the greater part of France is rent and mangled; The
rest that is left, and abides in obedience to the King, receives wonderful
discommodities. Notwithstanding, they are resolved not to forsake him, or to
participate with a thought of this rebellion, because they are not ignorant,
that GOD has expressly commanded in so many places, (as heer-tofore we have
declared) to obey our sovereign Princes and Magistrates: and beside, they know
right well by the behavior of Rebels, that the greatest evil in sedition and
treason, as Cornelius Tacitus and others have learnedlie described, is;
^^rnelius ^^^itus, his (...) on (...).
That every one would command, having no other counsel or reason, then their
own will. Moreover, the most factious and turbulent, will ever presume on most
authority: by whom the Magistrates and peaceable Citizens are ordinarily
suspected, and are in danger to be prescribed, robbed, killed, or banished.
There is such mixture of defiances, as nothing is ingendered but hate,
suspicion and privy dissembling: so that all honesty, all Faith and
humility, is utterly forgotten and violated, and true reconciliation euer-more
hindered.

All things amongst Rebels are very miserable, yet if there fall out any thing
to their own desire: nothing is more miserable then such a success, as not
only makes them to be more arrogant and intractable, but rather entertaines or
nourishes them more and more in mischief. Do ye not behold, that (of
necessity) the Duke The (...) de Main (...) the (...) Duke o^ Parma i^ a
contrar^ mind.
De Maine must do all things by the advice and will of the Spaniards, although
by them he pretends to conquer? Marie, the Duke of Parma, he is too fine to
serve them as a Servant, he rather would usurp for himself (if he could) a
cruel and tyrannical government: to maintain himself by force, ouer-throw
the Noblemen of this Country and afterward, beat down the people with fear
and terror.

Will not you then take advantage offered against these Rebels? If ye love
your King and Country, as I think ye do, lay hold yet on the valor of your
Ancestors, who valiantly repulsed the Spanyard when he would have entered
France, and made a famous slaughter of all his followers. Consider the
unfortunate fall and ruin of the ancient estate of Greece, and very latest
Empire thereof, of Carthage, Rome, Italy, and infinite other Commonweals,
kingdoms and Signories, which only happened by partialities and deuisions.

Phillip de Commines hereof wrote well and truly. ^hillip de ^omines.
Such dissension and discordes (says he) are very easily sown amongst
rebellious people, and they are a true signal of the ruin and destruction of
a Country or Kingdom, when they take root therein, as they have done in
diverse other Commonweales and Monarchies. And to this purpose, (if I were not
well assured, that the malice and ambitions of the rebellious Leaguers, rather
the^ destenie, is the cause of the desolation of this estate) I could say, as
Salust sometimes said of Rome. ^alust, his ^nion of estate of (...).
I am persuaded, seeing all things that had beginning must have end, that then
by destiny, the ruin of Rome shall approach: when the Citizens fight against
the Citizens, and so being spent and weakened, shall be exposed as a pray, to
some King or strange people: otherwise, all the Nations of the world assembled
together, cannot ouer-throwe this Empire. But any man, (not sinisterlie carried
away) does evidently perceive, that the original and source of the
downe-fall of this estate, except God set his hand to in time: arises from the
rebellion of these Leaguers, so long time practiced by the Spanyard and his
adherents.

To escape then from so great an evil, withdraw your selves (my Lords) to
this party, reconcile your selves to your King and relieve your Country,
exposed by the Rebels as a pray to the Spanyard, who has no little while been
plotting and practicing this device for his purpose. Demosthenes foreseeing
the ruins of Greece, (through the underminings and policies of Phillip King of
Macedon, who kept it in deuisions, not only City against City, but the
Citizens divided against each other in every City, by corruppting the chief
Governors that were drawn to take part with him:) employed all his pains to
reconcile the Athenians and other people of Greece, from such dangerous
factions, and to regard the maintenance of their estate. For my self, I have
not the eloquence of Demosthenes wherewith to persuade ye, but this I plainly
give you to understand, that an other A (...) be^tween (...) of (...), and
Phillip (...) Spain.
Phillip, King of Spain, has used the like deceits in France, whereby to
spoil and ruinate the Country, as Phillip King of Macedon did in Greece, to
make himself Lord thereof.

Fly my Lords, fly this partiality, cause of so great troubles, pernicious to
the public society and private kind of life, evermore ready to hurt, and
which brings no mean damage, according to the occasion and occurrences of
the time, your selves do daily behold the effects hereof, for the Army of the
Leaguers being hemde in with this partial Monster, as well among the
Frenchmen as the Spaniards; it will come to pass, that without any great
labor bestowed by the King, their own division will both frustrate their
enterprises, and hinder the victory they live in hope to have: even as it
happened in the battle of Cannas, where the Romans lost the day, through the
partiality of the two chief Leaders, Paulus Aemilius and Terentius Varro.

I cannot think that the Duke De Maine and the Duke of Parma, the only
commanders of the League, will agree long time together, but that the one must
give place to the other: for the Spanyard is too brave and arrogant, to hold
yoke with the French Rebels, having occasion so fair and fit for the purpose,
whereby to get the maisterie over them now or never. My Lords, you that are
faithful Gentlemen and Servant to the King, me thinks this one cause should
induce a good accord and union among ye, for the service of his Majesty, and
that ye should be both jealous and envious of the charge and honors
distributed by his highness, not to have the^ trans-ferred to such as are so
far under you in worthiness: and unless this fire of jealousy kindle the
sooner in ye, it will redounde to the great disadvantage of the public
affairs, and your own proper ruin. As for the rest of you my Lords, that
side it with the Rebels, wrap not your selves in their offenses, loose not your
selves altogether in the heap of their discords, nor yet forget, that you but
defend their perfidie and impiety: in so miserable a confusion, forsake such
part-taking.

Large an^ liberal pr^^testations, but no dee^des ensuin^ them.
They can talk enough, that the public Laws and common rights ought to be
kept, as also the ancient received religion of Christian Catholics, the
liberty of the estates, the comminalty of the Cities, the authority of the
Princes, Officers of the Crown, the Magistrates, and Parliaments: yet
notwithstanding they travail day and night (as by their effects is plainly
discerned) to trouble all these by disorder and sedition, and to thrust the
estate into the hand of a stranger, who makes himself assured thereof
already, except (next the help of God) you join with us to remedy this
danger.

The Leagues and deuisions that were in Gaul, between the Now called
Burgon^ans.
Sequani and The Iris^ people.
Autini, when as Julius Caesar there arrived, was the cause that brought the
Gauls under the Roman obedience.

This League of Rebels is more pernicious and dangerous to the estate, were it
not we have a King that well enough will prevent them: but God especially on our
side, who hitherto has ouerthrown the enterprises of the Rebels and their
Defenders, and will confound the one with the other, that in the end we may
have the maisterie over them. Behold how the Spanyard would reconcile, and
bring ye into quiet, if it were possible for him: if so be the King and his
fair forces had their hands bound, to give leave to these Rebels and their
gracious Deliuerers, to use them at their pleasure.

Do not ye remember the civil The wars ^etween the ^ouses of ^rleance and
^urgundie, ^hen the K. ^f England ^ntred into ^raunce, ^heron en^^ed most
^^range mis^^aps.
wars, that endured so long time in the reigns of King Charles the sixth, and
Charles the seventh, occasioned through the partialities and dissentions,
between the houses of Orleaunce and Burgundy, when the Burgundians caused the
King of England to enter France? The times were then so full of calamity and
misery, the French being afflicted with war, famine and pestilence so
cruelly, as the Fields were long time fallowed and unmanured, the Cities
ransacked, the houses and Fortresses, ruined, destroyed and burned, the great
Lords and loyal Officers of the Crown, the most worthy, heroyick and valiant
personages kilde, massacred or banished: then was justice prostituted and
brought into bastardie, merchandise and public negotiation abolished; In
brief, all religion and humanity violated, and for certain years was so
great a mortality in Paris, as the Woolues could not be kept out, but entered
the City, and devoured the dead bodies. Are we not now in danger to behold
the like times? If the French Rebels get not some whol-some Elleborus, and
become wise by the remembrannce of passed examples: well may they doubt to see
far worse troubles.

For the violence of this war (so long time closely practiced and intended)
took beginning by excess of treasonable offenses, and afterward proceeded by
murder of the King: the progress and end cannot but presage, but to be worse
then the wars I have already alleged.

Let us be advised by what we have seen, because the testimony of sight is
more assured and certain, then that which we receive by hearing: and we know,
that there is nothing so divine, human, holy, religious, chaste, nor any
thing so well established and ordained, but the rebellion of these Leagues has
troubled, spoiled, broken, violated, defaced and ouer-thrown.

See ye not already a most deplorable estate of all the Leagued and
rebellious Cities? Semblable to the opinion of Thucidides, who speaking of
the universal dyssention which in his time happened in Greece, most
ellegantlie in these terms set down his mind.

Theucid^^des in the book of his Greeci^ history.
So soon as any novelty or insolence is understood to be committed in a
City, there are such as presently practice how to make it worse: provoked
(moreover) to enterprise new stratagems, either to declare themselves more
insolent, or for their burning desire to be revenged. And what-soeuer evil is
done, they have arteficiall names to disguise it withal, which (for their
excuse) they change into contrary signification, as if they were no such
matters as they call them. For they term rashness, to be hardiness and
magnanimity, so that such sudden fellows, are called valiant defenders of
their friends. Softnes or temporising, they name honest fear: modesty,
covert cowardlines: violent rage, courageous resolution: wise and discreet
deliberation, cloked dissimulation. So by these means, he that is most
vehement and audacious, is reputed faithful, and (as they say) very zealous,
and well affected to the cause: and he that will not ad-here to the^, is held
suspicious.

As for him that bravely executes their enterprises and reuenges, he is a wise
and able man: but much more he, that knows best how to foresee and discover
the intent of his enemy, and prouides that no man on his side shall depart
from the faction, or stand in fear of the Resister. In brief, who most
readily out-rageth or offends others, is praised, but especially, he that can
induce another to execute his determinations. Such a faction is far greater
among strangers, the^ friends or kindred, because they are disposed to all
enterprises, without any excuse: even so, conspiracies and assemblies, are not
done by authority of the Laws, or for the weal public, but for avarice,
against all reason: and the faith kept among such, is not for Religion (as they
would have it seem) but to entertain such contagious evil in the
Commonwealth.

Thucidides declared, that such was the valor and courage among these
partialists, as the one party thought nothing that proceeded from the contrary
faction, and altogether tended to no other end, then the extermination and
destruction the one of the other. As for any appointment or reconciliation
made with their sollemne oath, there was very slender assurance in their words,
when they had neither fear or reverence in an oath: because they would keep
them no longer, then while they found occasion to lay hold on their
adversaries, or somewhat returned to their own advantage.

These Faction^ customa^^ ensue the row cou^^^tousnes (...) ambition
factions proceeded of covetousness and ambition, and they that were the chief
hereof in the Cities, made an honest pretense of every partiality. Each one
in words debated the defense of the Commonwealth, but their deeds did
witness the contrary: because that without having any regard to the
common-good, they labored but to satis-fie their own greedines, making profit
of others spoil, and executing vengeances as themselves pleased. If there were
any one that showed himself a newter, he was forthwith assailed by both
parties: where because he was affected to neither side, or the envy of them to
see him in quiet, he was thrust into the evil which the other suffered.

^he (...) that such ^^^fusion ^^^edeth.
In such civil divisions, the mishaps are so great, that without consideration
of good turns and benefits received, or the virtuous actions of excellent
men: the people so furiously cast themselves upon them, as they cease not to
pursue them, even to death or banishment. As it happened in Athens to
Themistocles, Aristides, Demosthenes, and Phocion: in Rome, to Coriolanus,
Camillus, Scipio Affricanus, Cicero and others.

Behold ye not my Lords, you that should see more clearly the^ the rest,
even a like form of estate among these Leaguers and Rebels? Will ye not
acknowledge it to be an extreme disorder and insolence? See ye not here
tyranny in place of Monarchy? which is the most perfect, firm, and surest
form of a Commonwealth, so highly commended by Homer. ^omer ^ad.
It is not good (says he) that many have an equal authority, but one sole
King to have the prehemenence: to him has God given a golden scepter, therewith
to command and well govern his Subjects. Here you see in stead of an (...)
princi^^us.
Aristocratia, (which is the just and civil administration of certain
virtuous personages, who have all their thoughts and deliberations provided for
the Weale-publique, being called by the Latins The chief ^ble (...) in a
^^mmon-weale, (...) whom t^^ rest are t^ be goue^^ned.
Optimates, such as through the will and consent of the sovereign Prince, have
evermore been joined to this Monarchy, to keep it in a temperate state and
condition:) is now grown among us a confused Where few facti^^ hold the
regimen^
Oligarchia, which is the government of the most mighty and factious. And in
the end, by unbridled liberty, in many places and Cities where the Rebels
are, you shall behold not any where (...) people (...) ye rule (...) out any
periour.
Democratia, or populer estate, well and pollitiquely governed by the Laws, but
rather a most miserable A conf^sed rule (...) multitud
Olocratia, an insolent domination of the multitude, or rather a many headed
Anarchia, the oppression whereof is most horrible and pernicious. For you know
that the people either serve humbly, or command imperiously, and tasting a
little of the bayte of liberty, exemption of taskes, subsidies and charges: in
fury they reject and throw off the yoke of obedience to the King, Superiors
and Magistrates, themselves weilding and managing the highest authority.

Then pretending an equality, they practice nothing else but seditions,
malice, robberies, spoils, insolences, and destructions: whereupon Plato
thus spoke very notably. Plato hy^ iudgeme^^ of the Co^mon-we^^^^
The whole Commonwealth shall decay and perrish, when it is to be governed by
Brass or iron, that is to say, by foolish men, such as are borne rather to
serve and obey, then to rule and command. For albeit that men are (both the
one and the other) composed of soul and body, and that in the soul is
bestowen the seed of the divinity, which ought to be received, tilled, and
husbandred by reason, to the end it may bring forth fruit according to the
seed: yet is not the culture or husbandry in all men alike, but there is found
a great difference between their spirits: so that in some it appears, that
the divine seed poured and thrown into a barren field, is either smoothered and
lost, or takes so weak root, that it cannot prosper and increase. Such is
the variety and difference among men, as some for the exercise of reason and
virtue, are more noble, valiant, and ^orne, (as it were) to command: others
again, for their rusticitie and ignorance, seem more proper or aptly
disposed to serve.

Therefore Plato held this opinion notable ^^inion of ^^ato.
that God in the creation of man, did so distinguish and separate their
natures, that such as were naturally apt and proper to command: them in
generation he formed (as it were) of fine gold: such likewise as were meet and
convenient for their aid and assistance, he constituted not of so precious a
metal, yet of pure silver: the third sort, as laborers and workmen to
attend on the other, of a more gross matter, to wit, brass and iron.

GOD established Superiors to command, and made the other to obey, the one
estate worthy of honor, the other, not to presume so high: as the Potter
(according to the Apostles words) of one self same matter makes a vessel to
honor, and annother, servant to meaner things. You see my Lords the trouble,
dysorder, and universal confusion of your partakers, yet will ye follow them,
and give the^ your voice? Will ye employ your courage, put on your Armor,
draw your swords, for the defense of their unjust cause, and to advance the
Spaniards usurping? Where is the virtue and honor which Trogus Pompeius in his
time attributed to the French Nation? when he thus spoke of them. Trogu^
Pompeiu^ his prai^^ the (...) Nation.
They are sharp, hardy and valiant, and the first of them, next Hercules (who
therefore was admirable and reputed immortal) reached the height of the
invincible Alps, they being not passe-able by reason of the cold, and managed
sundry battles, having vanquished the people of Pannonia, which at this day
are called Austria and Hungaria. Ah open your eyes my Lords, and come to your
Prince whom you ought to acknowledge, consider what before I have declared to
ye out of the word of God, to bring again the strayed and rebellious people in
obedience to their King.

Herein ye may perceive, that a Subject cannot find or pretend any occasion to
rebel against his King* notwithstanding any cause what-soeuer it be. But
perhaps thou will tell me, that in the war for the Weale-publique against
King Jews the eleventh, certain of the chiefest sort entered Arms, moved with
a discontent against the King, because they were not honored and recompensed
as their deeds had deserved: yet he gave to such as were unworthy, men
utterly unknown and of small acquaintance.

They reconciled themselves to their King, and did not as these Leaguers do,
who under color of reconciliation, troubled the estate, and in the end
bereft the King of life. And that which is most horrible to speak, and
scandalous to men of sound Religion, they practiced with an unhappy Iacobine
Friar, making him the instrument and Executioner, of their accursed conspiracy
and monstrous cruelty. As for the other thou talkest of, they only were but
Malcontent, as they well declared by their appointment and reconcilement with
their King: but these Leaguers, breaking all order and policy divine and
humane, after they had proditoriously by a traiterous Friar, or rather a very
devil of the Cloister, massacred and murdered the late King: would change the
estate, or as the truth is, they would transport a stranger out of one house
into another. Have not these Leaguers despoyled the good nature of the ancient
French Nation, unnaturally to participate with the treason of the Spaniards?
And if they term themselves good Frenchmen, look on their pernicious
damnable complots, against the King, and the estate of France. Do they not
apparently be-lie Julius Celsus, who thus speaks of the Frenchmen in his fifth
book. Julius (...) in hy^ book.
The French (says he) are men sound and plain, no deceivers, or
troth-breakers: and by custom, they will rather fight for virtue, then for
fraud, malice, treason or such like. How can these Leaguers then by any right,
attribute unto themselves this fair and excellent French title: seeing they
are Rebels, enemies to the Country, and Traitors to the estate they should
most labor to preserve? Do not all Nations of the earth detest the perfidie
of Rebels against the Majesty royal, which is the image of the Divinity, the
King being Lieutenant and Vicegerent of God, in the kingdom which he has put
into his hand? Have not the Allemaignes good occasion at this present, to call
the^ A wor^^ very gre^^ disgrace the (...) tongue, wit, villa
Schellums, having in such sort dispoyled the natural faith of true Frenchmen
toward their King? coniuring against him, atempting his estate and life.

Can they be so ignorant as not to know, that the K. has the sovereign power
next under God, and that no subject of his can take it from him, without full
condemnation of Crimen lesae Maiestatis in the highest degree, a most horrible
Traitor, and more to be detested then if he had murdered his own Father?

See ye not also my Lords, that God (who is just) does daily pursue them with
vengeance and punishment, by the fidelity of so many generous and magnanimous
Princes of the blood royal of the house of Burbon, that only remains heir
to the Crown, besides, with so many great Lords of France, so many Gentlemen,
and all the good and loyal Frenchmen? You likewise, that are issued of
Fathers so virtuous and faithful to the Crown, who (for the most part) made
prodigal expense of their blood, for the defense of this most royal estate:
see ye not now how a stranger would ravish and carry it away?

Will ye be so blinded, as to employ your forces in so bad a cause? Are ye so
unnatural, as willingly to betray your King and Country? Will ye turn your
backs in so true and just a cause, and subject your selves to the injurious
rebellion of the Leaguers? The other Lords and confederates of this Crown,
are moved with us, and resolved to pursue such monstrous injustice: will you
then be so blinded and deceived, with the false inducements and persuasions of
the League, as to maintain the ruin and overthrow of the estate, and of your
own selves likewise?

Ah that it might please ye, to lend your ears a while to this my simple and
not deceyuing declaration, perhaps some one of you, being touched either with
hate, envy, or some other coffeehouse, or the bond of affection he bears
to the chief of the contrary part: will enter into consideration, that he
cannot do this, without blemish to his honor and reputation, which he ought
to esteem more dear than any thing else, so that rather then he will consent
to such a detestable rebellion, and general spoil of his native Country, the
love whereof he ought to prefer before all other vain passions: he will
imitate the example of worthy A no^ example Scipio A^^^^canus.
Scipio Africanus, who thought it better to withdraw himself to Linternum,
then be the cause of trouble and sedition in Rome, albeit the Commonwealth
had dealt with him very unthankfully. Would ye my Lords purchase the tytles of
Rebels, with this rude heap of people? which cannot agree with you: in that
between your courage and those of the vulgar sort, there is no simpathie or
likelihoode, but even so great a difference, as is between vice and virtue.
Would ye my Lords have the dishonored name, of factious enemies against the king
and the estate? Ah think what a hell and eternal infamy, follows such as
are condemned of high treason, breach of faith and rebellion: are ye ignorant
that the end of all pernicious complots devised by rebels, by the help of God,
return to their own everlasting shame and confusion?

In every Kingdom and Commonwealth, we ought principally to regard the
benefit thereof. The op^^nion (...) Thucidi^^^
For if the Estate be in prosperity (as says Thucidides) every one
particulerly shall profit and feel the blessing thereof: but if it be destroyed
and ouerthrownt, all the particular members, notwithstanding whatsoever
Treasure or riches they have, shall therewith be lost and utterly spoiled. When
I speak of the good of the Commonwealth, I mean not only the rich, and
hazard of fortune: but also ^ne good more firm and assured to the better part
of man, which is of the Spirit, whereby the commo^wealth is made more happy,
and is defended against all the assaults of Fortune. In a private man's house
are these virtues: in a Commonwealth good laws and manners, prescribed and
established by wise Kings, Princes, Governors, and sovereign Magistrates, to
well order, command and govern their servants in a direct compass, ye people
likewise to obey dutifully, thereby to live in peace and tranquillity. (...)
of me^, (...) of the (...).
For the felicity of men, and of the Commonwealth, comes both from one
self same fountain, to wit, reason, which ought to rule in all things: and
such are the Cities, as are the Citizens, whose lives and behavior makes the
City happy or unhappy.

(...) his ^^ kinds (...).
Plato in the City which he reformed, instituted two kind of disciplines: the
one for the exercise of the spirit, which he called Music, to wit, an
harmony or concordance of the spirit, when the actions agree and consent with
the virtues. The other was for the exercise of the body, which he termed
(...) exer^^^ of wrest or such exercises ^he body
Gymnas^eum, which augmented and maintained the strength of the body: to
declare, yt these two exercises coupled together, did uphold an estate
pollitique, as they make a man fit and aptly composed.

Will not you (my Lords) travail to recover this good and quiet for your
country? Will ye yet longer time consent to their disorders and insolences,
that do nothing else but hinder us from this good? Ma^e ye so little account
of your honor, as to hold hand with them in their execrable complots? You
should immitate the Pilot, who least the ship should be altogether rent and
mangled, wisely fore-seeth and advises, least he should be accounted wise
after the hurt is received. For it is a most simple and foolish kind of speech,
to say after the injury and danger is gotten: I never thought on this. When
the ship is beaten with outrageous tempests, and so fiercly assailed with the
winds, as there remains no hope of bringing her to some Port, whereby she
might escape the perrill and ship-wracke: the skill of the Pilot then serves
him to no purpose. The shun you these Rocks, fly from these tempests and
dangers in due time, although ye begin when it is almost ouer-late: yet me
thinks he said wisely, that better is late, then not at all.

But if on the side you now follow, you vainlie promise your selves, some
happy issue of your guilefull deseignes and imaginations: consider my Lords
what our Elders have said, A sayi^^ worthy (...) be note^
Man has desire in his power, but not Fortune, for what shall happen is
unknowen to man. Let the Leaguers purpose what they will, devise their
enterprises and the execution of them, leuey so many men and strange forces as
they can, and use what stratagemes shall come into their heads: yet the divine
providence, who has established in this estate the order of Sup^rioritie and
the Majesty royal, whereby to command us, with the most happy and assured
form of a Commonwealth: As I have already said, will dispose of all,
according to his infallible and never changing will. In vain then do these
Rebels repose their trust on strange forces, against him that can consume them
all, and their imaginary deliberations, which are no other (as Pindarus says
of man) then a (...). 12. de (...).
dream or shaddowe. The hopes of mortal men remove many things, sometimes
high, sometimes low, feeding but on vain fantasies and oppinions. There is no
man living in the world, that can conceive a certain sign of his future
actions: because of things to come, the councels are concealed, and many
occasions happen to men, far different from their liking and expectation. Yet
some there are, that being smitten with tempests of grief and sorrow:
immediately the evil is turned into as great a good.

These things you should think on, that attend an unjust cause of Rebels,
who have troubled the estate, slain their King, and now continue disobedient
to their Prince, whom GOD by lawefull succession has given us: that they will
be deceived in their attempts, and all their opinions are but vain and
frivolous. They imagine one thing, and an other will happen: they think to
ouer-goe the Estate by the force and assistance of the Spanyard, and the
Spanyard will vanquish and spoil them by themselves. But although GOD
permits, for our correction, and proof of the ancient constancy and
fidelity of the French, that these leagued Rebels should afflict and
ouer-trauaile us: yet his justice will never suffer, that they shall confound or
tread under foot, the estate Royal, or to dispose it where they please, having
placed and established it for so many ages, in the royal Lynage of S. Jews.
But in the end he will take vengeance on their crimes, treasons, periuries,
murders, with other horrible disorders and shames, giving them as a pray, even
unto those people, whom now they hold as their great friends and
confederates: the worst is, The Spa^nyards ha^^ no regard but make havoc o^^
all.
that they will destroy a great number with them, which never did partake in
their detested treason.

Some subtle cunning Rebel, as a color or shaddowe to such disloyalties,
will say unto me. That all things are subject to alteration and change, and
there is nothing that perpetually continues in one self same estate, for
heaven it self is not exempt from change and ending. I answer, that I am very
certain of this alteration, likewise that there is a course of ages and
dispositions of things in the world, as in our human body: to wit, after they
are borne, they have their infancy, childhood, and state of a young
stripling: then they increase in manly strength, and so continue a while in
force and vigor: afterward they become aged, declining, and in the end
perishinge. For this is a maxim in Phisique, that all things composed by
generation, are dissolved by corruption, and the end of the one is the birth
of the other. Such variety and change comes not only to private men, who
declare sufficiently these effects, by the mutabillitie of their desseignes and
enterprises, suffering themselves to be carried away with novelties, that
makes a confusion of their wits, and in the end is their utter spoil; but
likewise to Families, who at the instant when they imagine they have freely
builded their fortune, and triumph in the conceit of their own greatness:
they behold their present fall, and all their foundations thrown on a heap
together.

I know likewise, that Empires, Kingdoms, Signories, and the most flourishing
estates, are no less exposed to remoouings, varieties, and changes: as it may
seem a natural revolution, that oftentimes makes the state of a Commonwealth
to change and rechange. But what is the cause of the change that thou would
make? Is it not the change of thy manners? of thy fidellity into disobedience?
of thy mild and gentle nature, into audacious behavior? of thy loyalty, into
breach of faith: of thy duetifull office of a true subject, into all loose
liberty and licenciousnes? Is it not ambition and greedy desire to reign,
that in this sort transporteth men of high courage, being madded with their
enterprises, that without fear and reverence of Religion, (which does defend
them from such tyrannies) or care of their faith and love to their Country,
they strive to attain the sovereign place of commanding? covering themselves
with the maxim of Eteocles i^ Euripid.
Eteocles, as it is in Euripides, or practicing as Julius Caesar.
Julius Caesar did, and other Usurpers. For at this day, in such remoouements
as tend to this end, the pretenses of Religion and the Weale-publique (as I
have before declared) serve to no other end, then to bring a sleep the most
simple and foolish, who are ravished with the deceitful eloquence and fair
persuasions, of thy factious and rebellious Preachers. I say unto thee
moreover, that the better to hide the co^iuration of the Leaguers, thou
might lay before me this place of Plato. Plato.
That there is a certain fatal revolution, and changing of Kingdoms and
Comm-weales, which is done by the course and inclination of heaven and the
stars. To which I thus reply. That Christians in judging better, attribute
the cause of such reuolutions to the providence divine: which moderates and
gouernes this huge frame, and all things else therein comprehended.

God has established Kingdoms and sovereign estates, he does maintain and
preserve them, he suffers them to be afflicted with diverse calamities, he
overthrows or trans-ferreth from one to an other, from Family to Family, and
from Nation to Nation. Hereof we have example by the Monarchies of the
Assirians, the Babilonians, the Persians, and the Romans: the Empire of
Greece, such as it has been since the division made between the two parties
of the East and West: but without more remembrance of these aforesaid changes,
we shall be sufficiently furnished, with the wonderful alteration, which the
Turk has there brought in. And not to use these externe examples, let us
look on them that are our own particular and domestical: In this estate the Sea the hi^^orians, ^^at have ^ritten of (...) origi^all of ^ugh Capet ^oth
aunci^nt and ^oderne.
Merouingians first of all reigned, and after them the Carlingians, to whom
Hugh Capet succeeded, being issued of the Merouingian blood, and legitimate
Princes of France, by reason whereof, he was placed in possession of that,
which had been usurped on his Grandfathers the Merouingians, and was willingly
obeyed beyond all the Monarchs and Kings in the world. Nor shall ye find any
race that has so long endured, (as thanks be to God it still continues in the
sex The King ^f France that now is, ^iscended of ^he Mero^ingians from Hugh
Capet
Masculine) then this whereof we now speak: if we should search all
Monarchies both ancient and modern.

I confess that sometimes happens the alteration of Monarchies, namely by
the divine permission, and that they are trans-ferred from one house to
another: but herein I yield not, that God will have the change made by
disloyalty, breach of faith, and treason, committed by subjects against their
Prince, to whom he has commanded them expressly to be obedient. For the King is
the anointed of God, and who-soeuer resists the King (as I have amply
declared in the second part of this discourse, by the authority of holy
Scripture) resists God, the establisher of Kings and Princes on the earth, to
govern in his sted. And if it so fall out, that subjects by force or violence,
attempt the estate and life of their King: they do against the ordinance of
God, and early or late they shall be chastised. Hence then it came, as I have
breeflie touched, that the Carlingians, having perforce held the Realm
against the Merouingians, by the Arms of Pepin a stranger prince: God pleased
that the Crown should return by Hugh Capet, of whom our Kings are descended to
this present day, in the race of the Merouingians, who thereof was a while
unjustly frustrated.

Will ye then permit (my Lords) that our King Henry the fourth, a branch of
the Merouingians, by Hugh Capet, and S. Jews of the self same race, should be
deprived of the succession which appertains to him in right and justice: Will
not you assist him against such as seek to hinder his peaceable possession?
Are ye so weak of mind and spirit, as to let him be smitten and conquered by
his enemies, without giving the assitance you owe him of duty? Take ye such
delight in your own ruin, as it stirs ye not, when the stranger treades
your state under his feet, but you draw your weapons to help him to his
enterprise? Know ye not that alteration in all things, but chiefelie in these
public affairs, is most dangerous?

Without wandering for far fetched examples, ^hillip de ^^^mines ^he strife
(...) the (...) of ^^^caster York.
Phillip de Commines delivers one of the Realm of England, where through the
partialities between the Houses of Lancaster and York, each aspyring to the
Crown: dyed in eight and twenty years, more then four-score persons all of
the blood royal, with the very flower of the English Nobility, and infinite
other valiant men, the only and best Soldiers in all the Land. The other
Lords were thrust in prison or banished, passing the remainder of their lives
very miserably in strange Countries. In the end, the two Houses being united by
the marriage of Henry the seventh, with Elizabeth daughter to King Edward
the fourth, all these troubles ceased.

See the hurt that ensues by such deuisions, what more strange matter are we
then to expect in such a huge rebellion as this is of the Leaguers? Find you it
any way reasonable, that the true and natural successor of the Crown, should
endure any other to call his right in question, and by force of Arms to take
it from him, that is the most hardy and valiant Prince on the earth: and who
has learned to have his Armor oftener on his body, then the habit royal, or
the pomp and service that other Princes have which live in quiet?

It is the common cause of all Monarchies, to maintain against the Subjects
the estate of a just and lawful King, and you being Noblemen, that hold
assurance of your noblesse, goods and faculties of your King, will not you
maintain the same against his Subjects and rebellious enemies?

The Law and custom of France received at the first establishing of the
Kingdom, did always refer the Crown to the next Male issue of the blood
royal: our Kings then heerin being given us by nature, me thinks there is
no reason that any occasion should remove our estate. The Crown is seated in
this so ancient, illustrious and royal House of Burbon, next succeeding that
of Valoys, descended of the lineage of Orleance.

In the time of K. Charles the sixth, through the practices of the Duke of
Burgundy, who had made a League with the King of England, against (...) Dol^^^
of ^ince dis^^ed by ^ather, ^^olpen ^od to ^ight in end.
Charles Dolphine son to the King: beside the exheriditation his Father made
of him, depriving him of succession in the kingdom, there was a certain
judgment given against him, in an assembly held at Paris, whereby he was exiled
and banished the Realm, being declared unworthy there to succeed. On this
unjust judgment, he appealed to God and his sword, when the justice of his
cause being assisted by the invincible power of GOD: the Crown was preserved
for him, and he established with very wonderful victories through all all his
kingdom, from whence he chased the Englishmen, being reconciled to the Duke
of Burgundy, and deceassed, to the great grief of all his Subjects, leaving
them in good peace and quiet.

Whereby you may perceive, that albeit every one was set against the true heir
to the Crown, yea, the Father himself: yet God in his admirable providence,
would not permit, that the kingdom should be trans-ferred from the race and
lineage of S. Jews, neither is it to be doubted, that his grace preventing,
with the deuoire of all good and faithful Frenchmen: but that it will be
continued to all his posterity, whereof this most famous and royal House of
Burbon, is the very nearest and only heir to the Crown.

What cause then is there to prolong these civil wars and troubles for the
estate, seeing we have the legittimate successor? Ah, nothing else but absurd
and monstrous ambition. But some zealous Rebel tells me, that he is an
Heretic: tush, these are old stale lies, this point, if he were so, seeing he
demands and offers to be better instructed, is not as yet discided.

To be an heretic, (as else where I have said) is obstinately to hold an
opinion concerning Religion, and rather to die then to forsake it. See thou
in our King any such headdie or obstinate resolution? How many times has he
given thee to understand his ready will and intent? Moreover, this is no
argument and good consequent: The friu^^lous objection of t^^ Leaguers.
The King is not of our Religion, therefore he is dishabled from succeeding in
the Crown. Thou argumentest very ill, and not like any good Logitian. The
debate thou vrgest for the Crown, makes a greater breach and blemish into
Christian religion, then if willingly thou did consent and give him place,
as in duty thou art bound to do: seeing that right, neither thou or he can
hinder from him to whom it appertains, which thou have neither eyes to
behold, or wit to conceive. If heerin thou might prevail, could thou be
termed a good Christistian? that flies and abhors as a plague the ininfamous
note of rebellion, yea, fosakes lands, goods, wife, children and all, to
follow his King. That term thou may return upon thy self, though now thou
call his Highness followers, pollitiques and heretics, as pleases thee
to baptize the^: notwithstanding, they are more assured of their faith then
thou art, and better Chritians then any that take part with thee.

Of what Religion were our first Kings of the Merouingians race, until Clouis
the fi^t king of France, and first Christian King? Were they any Christians,
or knew they what the name of a Christian was? What were their subjects having
received the Christian faith? Did they for this cause refuse the obedience they
ought in duty? Did they reject, chase or kill them? Ye shall not find one such
point, or any History that makes such mention.

But you Rebels (that are too much at your case) will not acknowledge your
King, who so many times has protested to ye, to preserve and maintain ye in
your estates, and in the Christian Catholic Religion, (under a shadow, say
thou) himself not being a Catholic. Do thou know the inward of his words
and purpose? Is there any one can say, that ever he falsified his faith? He
has sollemnely sworn to defend the Catholic religion, as his proper life:
think then if it should be hindered, although he never will go against his
own commandment, thy self must be the only cause thereof. Obey the^ the
King, let the estate be brought again into quiet, and then thou may assure
thy self, that when the King would alter any thing in Religion (whereon I am
persuaded he never so thinks But to keep hy^ own con^^ence sted^ fastlie to
GOD.
) he cannot do it, nor is it any part of his intent. You rather ought to pray
to GOD with us, that he will grant him grace steadfastly to embrace the
Catholic religion, and to plant it here mildly, by reason and not force,
violence or fire: likewise to love and esteem so many valiant good French of
contrary opinion, that sell not (as our zealous Leaguers do) their King and
Country to the Spanyard. It is not by blood and death to win men's
consciences, but by the doctrine, proof and good example, which greatly
wants in your false Apostles.

I believe there is not any Christian Catholic, a faithful member to the
Crown, but would earnestly desire, that the King, (enriched with such store of
virtues, required in so great a Prince as he is) should likewise be a Christian
Catholic, to the end, that as we ought to have but one King, so we might
also have but one faith and Religion, wherein, as in the fear of God, our
Prince earnestly labors to have us live. Hereof not only the Philosophers and
Christian Doctors, but also Emperors are assured witnesses, by many
constitutions recited as well in the Ecclesiastical hystories, as also in the
books of Theodosius and Justinian, who greatly travailed to maintain the
union of the Christian Catholic Church. When there is unity in religion in
an estate, who doubts but al things do prosper the better? We desire (without
offending our selves, against them that are contrary to our religion) that they
would lovingly become partakers with us: and not (pursued to the death, by the
animositie wherewith the Rebels follow both them and us,) subject us together
under one selfsame detection or An iniu^^ous accu^^tio^, where ^^od and bad
^^e regarded ^^like.
Categorie.

We desire (I say) that according to the good and holy custom held of old,
the King should be sacred and anointed at his Corronation, and take the oath
of a Catholic Prince, that is, to maintain the Catholic Church, and all
the rights, franchises, and privileges thereof. We know well, that since the
reign of Clouis, France has been constantly maintained in the Catholic
Religion, which is the same (as say the I. C. de ^^mma Tri^it. et fide ^ath. L.
Re^e^tes. C. eod. ^^it.
Emperors Gracian, Valentinian, and Theodosius,) that was given and taught by
Saint Peter to the Romans, and which both holy Emperors, Bishops and
Councels have ever since followed, for which cause it is yet called Apostolic
and Roman. We are not ignorant (although some call us heretics, because
that acknowledging the Princes authority, according as God has commanded us,
we have withdrawn our selves to his side:) that many See (...) Chronice^^
Genebra which t^^teth of matter* (...) larminu* Costerus, others.
great personages have shown as much by authority of the holy Scripture: that
the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church, both Greeks and Latins: that
the Catholic Religion is the only and true Religion, which has been from
the Apostles unto this present by continual succession, always taught and
preserved in the Roman Church. But we are certain withal, that through the
vices which have slipped thereinto by fault of the Pastors, the estate of that
Church has much more need of reformation the^ others. We know likewise, that
we are admonished by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, to live in concord and
unity with God, as S. Paul witnesses in these words: The God of patience and
of consolation, give you the grace to know one only thing amongst ye,
according to Jesus Christ: to the end, that with one sole courage, and with
one mouth, you may glorify God his Father. Marcel lib. 22.
Religion is a constant virtue, teaching the true adoration of God, which is
done with an entire spirit: and the unity thereof is figured by the garment of
Christ Jesus, wouen without a seame, that it was not to be cut or divided. This
is in truth, a fair assembly of such as are knit in one brotherly unanimity
and consent, as well in religion as policy: whereof the Prophet David sings,
being assured that to such, God will send blessings, and life everlasting.

To this effect, Plato and Cicero (albeit they were both Pagans) have written:
^^ato (...).
That there is nothing more agreeable to the highest God, that governs the
whole world, than the assemblies of men, that associate and meet together in
self same will and affection. There is but one Catholic Church (says S.
Paul) which frames all Christians of one mind and spirit: concerning the
doctrine whereof, it were in vain to dispute, after so many ancient ^eneus
ad^^s. haeres. ^^ant. de (...) sap. li. 4 ^^tul. de ^cript. ^^rian li. 1. ^. 8.
lib, 3. ^. 11. li. 4. ^. 8. ^ugust. ^. 162. (...) other ^^hors. (...) Geua^^^
de pri^^^u Petri
Doctors of the Church, and religious Counsels.

We desire nothing more, then that the King (according to the most Christian
title of his Predecessors) and his people should be united in Christian
Religion, as for preserving peace in his Kingdom, he is declared the Defender
and Protector of the Catholic Religion: with protestations so oftentimes
reitterated, so to preserve it as his proper life. Nor is he ignorant what
Cicero says: That Religion being troubled, the whole Commonwealth is
troubled, because the disquiet and change that happens therein, does nothing
else but cloy the spirits of men with disorder and confusion: whence
proceeds contempt of Gods true worship, and he being offended, punishes
and afflicts with diverse wounds and calamities, the Country that is fallen
into such a misery. This therefore his Majesty would foresee by his wisdom,
desiring that Religion should be preserved, even as (before God) the
government of the estate is put into his hand. God has given us such a one,
adorned with so many heroycall virtues, as makes him admirable to all Nations
of the world: Would you then have us go ranging about, and urge a belief
contrary to that we do believe? Is it possible we should do so? Faith is the
gift of God, and is not imprinted in men's consciences, by strokes of swords,
or any other weapons: it is necessary that the spirit of God should be in
quiet: all the hearts of men, especially of us that are his subjects, would
herein dye and be consumed. Of necessity is it, that this grace comes from
above, and we can do no otherwise, but pray to God for his Majesty, and that
he will grant us to be still mindful of our duties, he is our King, we
ought to obey him, and he ought to preserve and maintain us, according to the
Laws and statutes of the Country, as all other Kings his predecessors have
done.

But what shall thou gain by desiring the thing thou do? I believe, that if
the King were such a Catholic as thou would have him, and for one Mass,
he should dispose himself every day to hear two: yet the Rebels would say no
less of him, then they did of the late King, that he did it for hypocrisy,
and to be quiet in his estate. What can we else judge? seeing their intent is to
exterminate his life, with all the generous and royal lineage of Burbon, to
follow the service of a Stranger. But (as I have said) GOD has euer-more
preserved that race, even for six hundred years and more, to this present:
and yet by his holy will still continues it, for the good and quiet of this
poor distressed kingdom.

These Arms that you have taken against him (o Rebels) will turn to your own
ruin and confusion, seeing God forbids ye so to do, what-soeuer pretense ye
make of Religion. Religion should move ye to pity and not to rage: to
compassion, and not fury: to love and regard of your King, and not to rancour
or hatred: to a natural French-affection of his service, and not to an
obstinate will, to wound, destroy, and take his life from him, if ye could.

Now say my Lords and Gentlemen, if yet ye have not sufficient manifestation,
that even against Tyrants, Religion cannot serve for any cloak or color?
The Spanyard, has not he declared so much, who tearming himself in France,
Protector of the Catholic Religion, has not he (nevertheless) suffered
Paganism in many places of Granado, Andalozia, and Arragon, for the great
^eligion, any thing ^^es the ^^^nyard, if (...) may get (...) profit (...) it.
profit he got by it many years together? Will ye not yet bethink your
selves, what good affection the Spaniards have (of old) borne to the French?
Did they not (no long time since) kindly entreat the^ at Florida: where they
plucked out their eyes, to make them die the more miserably? Their drift is, to
be Commanders over ye, and if you have goods and fair wives, to put you and
your heirs to death, to possess your wives and your goods: as they have
practiced the like in Flaunders, Naples, Millaine, and in every place where
they by force do domineere. It is the Crown, it is the Crown that all this
debate is for, although we having (as I have proved) a lawful succeeder, there
cannot be gathered any occasion for such a debate.

When heere-to-fore there happened any such like strife, they had recourse to
the estates of France: as it chanced after the death of Jews the 10. called
Hutin, that the Crown was adjudged to Phillip le Long his brother. And after
Charles le Bell to Phillip de Valloys his Cousin, against Edward king of
England, who pretended the cause of his Mother, the daughter of Phillip le Bell,
and sister to the last three kings: but there she had no right, by force of the
Salique Law, which excludes the daughters of France from any succession. It
is now no question of holding the estates, in this regard, seeing no one makes
doubt, but that the Crown appertains to Henry of Burbon, by who^, for his
race and admirable perfections, with his happy fortunes in war, amidst so many
trauerses: the estate receives more honor, being governed by such a king, the^
the King does of the estate, which comes to him by succession, as being the
very nearest heir to the Crown.

Then you brave Lords and Gentlemen of France, whose famous Grandfathers
defended this Kingdom by their virtuous strength, and made their glory
wondered at through the world: spend not your valiant and noble blood to your
eternal destruction, but as your spirits are rocks of far more excellent
perfection, so seek such ways as are more worthy and commendable for ye. To
bring again this estate, with the whole body of the Nobillity, who have ever
stood with the King, and from whom through false impression your selves are
dismembered: into her former splendor and honorable quiet. Unite your selves to
your king your sovereign Lord to extirpate this rebellion, and chase hence
your entertained evils, the Spaniards, your ancient and mortal enemies:
thereby to bring and re-establish this poor afflicted Realm, into such peace
and tranquillity, as all good minds desire, and is promised by your
generositie and force, with the grace and blessing of God: who I pray to open
your eyes, to let you wade no further in the love of this unlawful League,
that like a subtle Thais, is provided of a thousand baytes and sleights to
catch ye withal. But if ye continue in her service, ye shall find your selves
between two stools, wher-through (as the Proverb is) the tail falls to
ground: and too late repentance, with most pitiful end, will be the
recompense of your pernicious pursutes, and the dishonest pleasures you have
had with her.

Follow, follow then the steps of the most magnanimous and valiant Princes
of the blood, so many great Lords, Marshalles of France, Dukes, Earls,
Marquesses, Barons, and Gentlemen of mark, the number whereof is infinite and
innumerable, al which expose them selves and their deuoire, for the service of
his Majesty, the relief of the estate, to preserve you (if ye forget not your
selves) in your goods, priueledges, and immunities, seeking nothing but the
quiet and prosperity hereof.

God give them grace, and you likewise, to make some profit of this
fore-warning, to the end, that we having occasion more and more, to be
thankful to the King for his infinite bounty, and those faithful subjects
that attend on him: the celestial favor and assistance accompanying the Kings
power, your amendment and reconciliation, may turn to the happy success of
these public affairs, the rest and re-establishment of this disolate
Kingdom.

FINIS.
A. M.


