THE DOCTRINE of the Mass book, concerning the making of holy Water, Salt,
Bread, Candels, Ashes, Fire, Insence, Pascal, Pascal La^be, Eggs, and Herbs,
the Marying king, the Pilgrims Wallet, Staff. and Cross, truly translated
into English. Anno. Domi, M. D. LIIII. the xx. of May.

From Wyttonburge by Nicholas Dorcastor.

Lord increase our faith.

To the Christian Reader.
HEre have thou (gentle Reader) the making of holy water, and such other of
their supersticious trumpery, faithfully translated into thy mother tongue,
whereby thou may see, what a derogacion it is against our only Savior
Jesus Christ. They have, and do yet make me believe, that they do it in
remembrance of the shedding of Christ's blood, but when they make it upon
Sondaies, then they can say, they make it to drive Devils away. If this be not
blasphemy against Christ, and his precious blud, I know not what is blasphemy.
They say to Salt, I (...) the, you creature of Salt. etc. that al such as
receive the, thou may est be to the^ health both of soul and body. Came Christ
into this world, and took out nature upon him for any other purpose, but to
heal both our bodies and souls: Ye a, has he not done it in ^ede. If the
scripture be true (as it is most true) what riede has our shame^ nation to
desire God that Salt may be health both of soul and bodi, when Christ has
done it already, for all such as believe in him: Have we need of an other
Savior: Has not God the father given us him to be our sufficien^ic, to be our
atonement maker, ours buckler, our shield, our strong fortres and helper in all
needs* Does he not make daily intercession for us unto God his father: Yea,
has not he declared unto us, that whatsoever we ask the Father in his name,
he will give it us, meaning for our healp and comfort, in all our troubles and
necessities: There is no name under he auen wherein we must besaued, but only by
the name of Jesus. It is no maruayl^ (Christen Reader) that they be so loath that
their service should be in English, for whose heart would not melt (if he had any
spark of knowledge in gods truth) to hear such charming against God and his
truth. For god has commanded, whatsoever he bids us do, that observe and
do, and not out own imaginations, contrary to his word. But O you Priests
that be learned, with what conscience can ye say these shameful blaspemies
every Sunday? Do ye believe that that ye say is true? then have you no part
in Christ. For if ye may make at your pleasure such chinges to drive devils
away, and to heal both body and soul, what need have ye of Christ, of his
death, of his resurrection, in which consist our whole salvation.

And you that are unlearned priests, that understand not what ye read, when
ye make your holy water, this is partly setfurth for you, yt ye should take heed what ye do, for ignorance shall not excuse you, nor yet your Ordinaries
commandment, which ye^^ane so much to. You have been taught Gods truth, ye
have consented unto it, ye need say for fear (for thanks be to God) in the
time of the gospel, ye were handled ge^tly, almeane^ possible sought to bring
you to the truth. You were not turmoyled and persecuted, as now the most part
of you, seek al means possible ^o hurt your pore brethren, that do but onc^
look a wrye upon your Teremonies, If he speak one word of the Scripture to
you, Lord what rage at ye in? how swel ye then? then out goth your two
arguments Fire and halter, straight to chapter corte with him, and how pore
me^ are shamfulli handled there, it shall be in another book (god willing) openly
showed. In Christ's Church, there was no tyranny used, as is now in England
among the stout sturdy bishops, and charmyng priests. There is no stone but
is removed of them to set up them selves again* But they daube in vain. Wha^
God shall pour^ down his showers of rain upon their daubed walls, it will
fall spite of the^ all. Yet on ye other side, I am not ignorant, but that a
great sort of pristes yt be simple me^ for whose cause (I sai) thy^ is partly
set surth, forasmuch as they cannot understand it in Latin, that wha^ they
read it in English, they may be a frayd of Gods vengeance to do yt his holy
word does not warrant. For without dought, God has blessed all his creatures,
and possible it is not to make them better than he has made them. He has made
them to serve us, for our necessaries, and we ought to give him all the thanks
for them, and not to make Gods of them For God says, I will give my glory to
none other. Therefore let us leave the abusing of Gods good creatures, and use
them to his honor and glory. In all our troubl^s and necessities let us call upon
God the Father, that is able and will help, even for Jesus Christ's sake, who
ever keep the and al those that love the Lord vnfainedli, and those that be
ignorant to bring them to his truth, that as me have one shepherd: so we may
be one flock to his praise and honor. Amen.

The benediction of the salt and Water.
Every Sunday throughout the year, let there be a benediction of Salt and
Water after the first Chapter, made by the Priest at the step of the
Chauncell, after this manner.
I Conjure the, thou creature of Salt by the living god: by the true God: by
the holy God: even by the God that through yt Prophet Elizeus commanded the to
be cast in the water, that the barronnesse of the Water might be healed: To
the intent that thou may be made a coniured Salt to the salvation of them
that believe: and that unto all such as receive the, thou may be health of
Health both of body and soul, by ^oniured Salt.
soul and body: and that from out of the place, wherein thou shall be
sprenkled, may fly away and depart, all phantasy and wickedness, or craftines
of the deuyls soteltie, and every unclean spirit being coniured, by him
Diuils driven away by co^iured Salt.
that shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and the world through fire.
Amen Then follows the prayer without Dominus vobiscum. (The Lord be with you)
but only with Oremus (Let us pray.) Almighty eternal God, we humbly be seche
thy infinite goodness vouchesafe of thy gracious benyngnitie, to bless and
sanctify this creature of Salt, which thou have granted to the use mankind:
that unto al such as receive it, it may He prays ye coniured salt may save
both mind and body.
be salvation, of mind and body: that wha^soeuer shall be touched or sprenkled
by it, may be void of al uncleanness, and of every assault of spiritual
wickedness: by our Lord Jesus Christ thy son Amen. Here follows the
conjuring of the Water.

I Conjure the, thou creature of Water, in the name of God the father
almyghtie, and in the name of Jesus Christ his son our Lord and in the virtue
of the holy ghost: that thou be a coniured Water, to expel all power of the
enemy, and that thou may be able to root out and utterly to displace the
enemy himself with his Angels of Apostasy: By the Holy water displaceth and
hu^teth away ye Devils.
virtue of the same our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall come to judge the quick
and the dead, and the world through fire. Amen. Then follows a Prayer
without Dominus vobiscu^, but with oremus.

O God, which for the salvation of mankind have ordained all the greatest
Sacraments in Yet ye will tell us that your bread god is ye greatest sacrament.
the substance of Waters: be thou mercifully present at our inuocacions, and
unto this Element prepared for manifold purificatio^s. Pour thou out the
virtue of thy benedi^tio^, that thy creature serving thy mysteries, to the
casting out of Devils, and driving forth of diseases, may take effect of the
divine grace: That whatsoever this water shall sprinkle in houses or in places
of the faithful, may If this medisyne be true, then let your maiden Pry.
be void of al uncleannes, delivered from harm, that no noisome spirit
remain there, no corrupt air: that al y^ layinges awayte of the privy enemy
may avoid* and that if there be any thing that is contrary either to the
health or quietness of ye inhabitours, stes wash the^ selves withal, to keep
the^ chaste.
it may through the sprinkling of this water depart away: that wholesomnes
optained by the invocation of thy holy name, may be defended from al assaults:
through our lord Jesus Christ.

Here let the Priest put the Salt into the Water crossewyse, saying thus
without note: LEt there be made a co^mi^tion (or minglyng) of Salt and water
together: in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.
Ame^. The Lord be with you. Let us prai. The Prayer.

O God, the Author of such stre^gthe as never is overcome, and ^iing of an
invincible power, thou that also art ever an excellent Triumpher: which
repressest the violence of the contrary Lordshyp: which preuailest against the
crueltye of the roaryng enemy: which mightly beatest down the wickedness of the
adversary: We reverently and humbly beseech and pray thee (O Lord) that thou will graciously accept this creature of Salt and Water, favorably cause it to
be had in estimacio^, and of thy accustomed goodness sanctifye Oh blasphemy
against Christ and his death
it, that whersoeuer it shall be sprinkled by the invocation of thy holy name, al
noisomnes of the unclean spirit, may be cast out, and the terror of the
venomous scrpent expelled far away: and the presence of the holy Ghost
vouchsafe every where to be with us, requiring thy mercy: Through our Lord
Jesus Christ thy Son, who reigns God with the in the unity of yt same
spirit world without end. Ame^

While the Water is sprinkled, let this Anteme be song, Asperges me Domine.
etc. (that is to say: Thou shall sprinkle me (O Lord) with Issope, and I shall
be cleansed: thou shall wash me, and I shall be whyter the^ Snow.) The Psalm
Miserere mei Deus. etc. (That is: have mercy on me (O God) after thy great
mercy.) Asperges. The verse, Et secundum multitudinem. etc. (that is to say:
and according to the multitude of thy tender mercy, biotte thou ou^ mine
iniquity.) The ansro^r, ^spe^ges. The verse, Gloria patri. etc Sicut crat.
^auabis (y^ shall wash. etc.) AFter the sprinkling of the water, let the Priest
say at the s^ep of the Chau^cel, the verse Ostende ^^bis. etc. Show us, O
Lord, thy mercy. The answer. And grant us thy salvation. Then follows a
Prayer without Dominus vobis^um, but o^li with Oremus. The Prayer.

HEar us, O holy father almighty eternal God, and vouchsafe to send from heaven
thy holy Angel, which may preserve, cheatysh, defend, visit and ^epc a^ y^
dwell in this habit acion, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

The making of their holy Bread.
The blessing of the Bread. Benedicite (that is, bless ye) Dominus. Let us
pray. The Prayer.

Bless thou, O ^orde, this creature of Bread, as thou dyddest Holy bread
heals both body and soul, so yt Christ died in vain
bless the five loaves in the wilderness: that as many as taste of it, may
rec^aue health, both of bo^ye and soul: In the name of the father, and of the
son, and of the holy ghost, Ame^. And let holy water be sprinkled upon it.

Another blessing of the Bread.

A Diutorium nostrum. etc. (that is, our help is in the name of the Lord, who
has made heaven and earth. The Lord be with you, and with thy spirit.

The Prayer.

O Lord holy father almighty eternal God, vouchsafe to bless this Bread with
thy holy spiritual benedictio^: that unto al those which receive it, it may
Holy Bread a salve for all sores.
be salua^ion of mind and body, and a safegarde against al diseases, and a^
layings awaite of the enemies. Through our Lord Jesus Christ thy sonn^, the
Bread that came down feo^ heaven, and gives life and salvation unto the
world, and that lives and raygneth God with thee, world without end. Amen.

The halovving of Ca^dels upon Candelmas day.
IN the purificatio^ of the blessed Hirgin Marye, when the sixth hour is song,
let there be made solemply a halowing of light, by the Bishop or Priost,
having upon hun a Cope, with other priestly vestime^tes, at the highest step of
the altar, turnyng him t^ the South beginning thus: The Lord be with you. And
with thy spirit^, Let us pray. The Prayer.

O Lord Jesus Christ bless tho^ this creature of a waxen taper at our humble
supplicacion, and by the virtue of ye holy cross, pour thou into it, an
heavenly benediction: that as thou have granted it unto ma^s use for ye
expelling of dar^nes, it may receive such a strength ^ blessing, through the
token of thy h^ly cross: that in what places soever it be lighted or set, the
devil may avoid Now they pray that wax may do as much as holy water.
out of those habitacio^s, and tremble for fear, and fly away discouraged,
and presume no more to unquiet the^ that serve thee: who with God ye father and
the holy Ghost lyuest and raygnest God, world without end. Amen.

And all the Prayers are said with Oremus under the same tune. Dominus vobiscu^
is not said, save only before the first prayer. Let us pray. The Prayer.

O Lord holy father almightye eternal God, who have created al things of
naught, and by thy commandment through the works of Bees haste caused this
lycour to come to the perfection of Tapers, and that this day did fulfill
the peticion of just Simeon: We humbly beseech thee, that thou will vouchsafe to
bless and sanctify these Candels, prepared unto the uses of men, and health
of bodies and souls, as well on the land, as in the waters, by the invocation of
thy holy name, and by the intercession of the holy mother Our lady said, what
soever christ bid ye do, that do. Tho. iii
and perpetual Pirgin (whose solempuities we this dai devoutly celebrate) and
by the prayer^ of all thy saints: That out of thy holy heaven, and from the
seat of thy majesty, thou may hear ye voice of this thy people, whose
desire is to bear them solemplye in Where has God co^man^ded to praise him in
carrying of a Candell. Gloria^ur
their hands, and to rejoice in praising the: and that thou may be merciful
to al such as cry unto the, whom thou have redeemed with the precious blood of
thy Son: Who with thee and with the holy Ghost, lives and triumphs God,
world with out end, Amen. Let us pray.

The prayer.

O Almighty eternal God, who this day have willed thy only begotten son to be
received in the arms of holy Suneo^, and preseted in thy holy temple: we
humbly be sech thy gracious goodness, that you will vouchsafe to bless and
sanctifye, and with the candle of heavenly benediction, to lighte^ these
Tapers: which we thy servants taking in the honor of thy name (when they are
lighted) desire to bear: So as we worthelye offering them unto thee, the Lord
God has commanded us to offer our hearts unto him, and ye desire y^ Candels
may be ofsted.
our God, and being kindled with the holy fire of thy most sweet love, may
deserve to be presented in the holy temple of thy glory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ thy son, who lives and reigns God with thee, in the unity of the
holy Ghost; world without end. Amen. The Lord be with you. And with thy
spirit. Lest us lift up our hearts. We lift them up unto ye Lord. Let us give
thanckes unto the Lord our God. It is mete and right so to do.

Truly mete and just, right and wholesome is it, that we always, and in all places
give thanks unto thee, O Lord, holy father almighty eternal God, y^ well
spring of original of al light: who with the clearnes of thy glory, haste
illuminated the world, in sending unto us thy only begotten son, through the
womb of the chaste Virgin, even him who^ y^ did promise long before in the
scriptures of ye prophets* haste thou at the last sent to be y^ ligh^ unto the
people that sat in darkness. Wherefore Lord we beseech the, y^ thou with thy
benediction wylt vouchsafe to bless these Candels prepared unto thy name: thou
that have translated us from the power of darckenes, into the light and
kingdom of thy beloved son, by whom unto those that are true of heart, there
arose up eue^ in darkness, the light and joy of eternal salvation. Thou also,
who did accomplish the expectacion of just Simeon, that he should not se
death, before he did see the visible incarnation of the same Christ thy son,
the light and salvation of the whole world. Replenish us so, with ye light of
thy clearnes, that thou drive away from us al darckenes of infidelitye. And as
thou this day did let thy servant depart in peace, so vouchsafe to govern
us in the peace of thy holy church, that we may be able to enter the haven of
everlasting quietness: So as we being endewed with the beams of the true light,
may there in the day of judgment, with the thank^ul queres of the Angels
reioy^e to behold the presece of the ever shinyng Sun. Indefessi solis.


Here let him change his voice as itwere in readyng Qui te. etc. Per omnia.
etc. Amen. Here let the Candels be sprinkled with holy water, and senced. Then
is said, Dominus vobiscum: The Lord be with you. Let us pray. The Prayer.

O Lord holy father almightye, thou vnfailyng light, which art the maker of
all lyghtes: bless this light that is to be b^rne of thy faithful to the
honor of thy name, so as we being sanctified and blessed by the, may be
kyndled with the light of thy clearenes, and be illuminated. Vouchsafe also
mercifully to grant, that as thou sometime with the same sire, did show
light unto Moses thy servant, so thou illuminate our hearts and minds, that
we may merit to come to the vision of eternal clearnes, through Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A prayer.

ALmighti everlasting God, who into the world have sent thine only son,
begotten of the before all times, but incarnate in time of Mary the Virgin,
even him that is the true and never failing light, to drive away the darckenes
of mankind, and to kindle the light of faith and truth: Grant mercifully, yt
we may deserve to be shined upon, as well inwardly, with the spiritual light,
as outwardlye with the corporal, through yt same our Lord. etc.

When the halowyng of the Candels is done, let the Ca^dels be lighted, and
distributed: and in the mean while, let there be song the Ante^e, Lumen ad
reuelatione^. etc. (that is to say: A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the
glory of thy people Israel.) Then all the Psalm Nunc di mittis, with Gloria
patri, and after every verse let y^ Antem be repeted. Thus ends the halowyng
of the Candels.
The halovving of the Ashes.
The Mass book says, that upon Ash^edensdaye, when the Priest has
absolved the people. etc. then must there be made a blessing of the Ashes
(without Dominus vobiscum, and without Oremus) by the Priest, being turned
toward the East.
ALmightye eternal God, who have mercy upon al, and hate nothing of those
things that thou have made, forbeari^g men's sins because of repentance, who
also in deed helpest those that are in distress: vouchsafe to besse and
sanctify these Ashes, which because of humility, and of holy religion for ye
clensyng out of our trespaces, thou haste appointed us to carry upon our heads
after the manner of the Ninevites: And grant, that through the inuocacio^ of thy
holy name, al they that bear the^ upon their heads for the optaining of thy
mercy, may merit of the to receive forgiveness of al their trespaces? Bearyng
of Ashes merit fo^geuenes.
and so this day to begin their holy fastinges, that in the day of the
resurrection they may deserve with puryfied minds, to approach to the holy
Easter, and receive eternal glory in y^ world to comet, horow our lord. etc.
Here let holy water be sprinkled upon the Ashes, and then is said, Dominus
vobiscum and Oremus The Prayer.

O God which requirest not the death but the repentance of sinners: behold
most graciously the frailty of man's condition. And these Ashes (which we to
declare humility, and to deserve forgeuenes, have appointed to lay upon our
heads) vouchsafe thou according to thy goodness, to bless and sanctify: to the
intent that we, whom thou, have advertised to be Ashes, and which know that
for our frowardnes sake, we shall turn again unto dust, may deserve
mercyfully to optain remission of al our sins, and the rewards promised to
those yt repent. Per dominu^. etc* Then

The^ let them distribute the Ashes upon the heads of the Clarckes, and of the
lay people: the worthier persons making a sign of the cross with the Ashes,
saying thus: Memento homo quod cinis. etc. Remember man that thou art Ashes,
and into Ashes shall thou return. In nomine patris ^t filii. etc. ANd in the
mean while let the Anthemes following be song Exaudi nos Domine. etc. Here us
(O Lord) for loving is thy mercy: according to the multitude of thy tender
mercyes, behold us O Lord. The psalm. Save me O God, for there ar waters entered
in eue^ unto my soul. There is said no more, save only the first verse of the
Psalm, but immediately let there follow Gloria patri, and then let the Antheme
Eraudi be repeted. Another Antheme.

I ^xta vestibulum. etc. that is to say: Near unto the porche and the altre,
wept the priests and Levites the ministers of the Lord, saying: Spare O Lord,
spare thy people, and destroi not the mouths of them that cry unto thee O
Lord.

Another Antheme.

IMmutemur habitu. etc. Let us change our apparel in Ashes and heyry cloth. Let
us fast and lament before the Lord, for our God is very merciful If god be
merciful to forgive sines, why desire ye that salt and water man do it.
to forgive our sins.

When this ministration is done, let the Priest at y^ step of the chau^cel,
say Dominus vobiscum, and Oremus. etc. The halovving of Palms.
When the gospel is ended, let there follow the halowing of flouers and
branches, by the priest, being araied with a red Cope, upon the third step
of the altar, turni^g him toward the South: the Palms with y^ flouers being
first laid aside upon the altere for the Clerks: and for the other upon the
step of the altere on the Southe side. I Conjure the thou creature of flo^ers
and branches in the name of God the father almighty, and in the name of Jesus
Christ his son our Lord, and in the virtue of the holy Ghost. Therefore be thou
rooted out and displated from this creature of flouers and branches, al thou
strength of the ad ^ersary, al thou host of the devil, and al thou power of
the enemy, eue^ every assault of Devils: That thou overtake not the foot steps
of them that haste unto the grace of god. Through him that shall come to judge ye
quick and the dead, and the world by fire. Ame^. Then are prayers said without
Dominus vobiscum, but only with Oremus. A Prayer.

ALmightye eternal God, who at the pouring out of the floude, did declare
to thy servant Noe by the mouth of a Dove bearing an Olive branch, that
peace was restored again upon earth: we humblye bescche the, that thy truth
may sanctisie this creature of flouers and branches and slips of Palme^ or
bows of trees, which we offer be fore the presence of thy glory: that the
devout people bearing them in their hands, may merit to obtain the grace of
thy benediccion: Through Chris^e. etc.

And all the prayers are said under the tune of a le^sson, and with Oremus. A
Prayer.

O God, whose son for the sal nacio^ of mankind descended down from heaven
into the earth, and when the hour of his passion drew near, would come to
Jerusalem, sitting upon an Ass, and be called king and praised of the people:
Increace yt faith of those that trust in the, and graciously hear the prayers
of the humble. Let thy mercy (O Lord) come upon us, we beseech thee, and
vouchsafe to bless these branches of Palm and other trees: that al they
which shall bear them, may be replenished with the gift of thy benediction.
Grant therefore O Lord, that as the children of the Hebrews crying Osanna in
the highest, did mete the same thy son our Lord Jesus Christ with branches of
Palms: even so we likewise bearyng bows of trees, may with good works mete
Christ, and come to eternal joy, through the same Christ.

A Prayer.

O God which gatherest things that are dispersed, and preservest such as are
gathered together: thou that dydst bless the people which carried Branches of
Palm trees to meet Christ Jesus: Bless also these branches of Palms and
other trees, which thy Sruauntes at the benediction of thy name do faythfullye
take: that into what place so ever they be brought, all the inhabitours of ye
same place, may optaine thy blessing, so as al sickness being chaced away, thy
right hand may defend them who^ it has redeemed, through the same Christ.

Here let the flowers and branches be sprinkled with holy water, and censed.
The^ says the Pressed Dominus vobiscum, and Oremus. The Prayer.

O Lord Jesus christ, thou maker and redemer of y^ world, wh^ for our
delyueraunce and salvation have vouchsafed to com down from the highest tower
of heaven, to be incarnate, and to suffer passion: who also of thine accord
approchyng and coming to the place of the same passion, would (of the
people that met the with branches of Palm trees) be praised and commended,
and with loud voice to be called the blessed king tha^ comes in the name of
the Lord: vouchsafe thou now to accept the praise of our confession, and to
bless and sanctify, these branches of Palms and other trees and flouers,
that who soever in the service of thy virtue shall take any thing there of, being
sanctified with the benediction of heaven, may deserve to enjoy remission of
sins, and the rewards of eternal life, through the Jesus Christ thou savior
of the world, who with the father and the holy Ghost live and reignest god
world without end. Amen.

So when these things are fynyshed, let the Palms immediately be distributed,
and in ye mean while let these Anthemes following be song, the Chaunter
begi^ning: Pueri Hebreorum. etc. The Children of the Hebreues taking Olive
branches, met the Lord, crying and saying: Osanna in the height. Another
Antheme.

The Children of the Hebrews strowed their garments in the way, and cried
saying: Osanna to the son of David: Blessed is he that commetl^ in the name
of the Lord.

The halovving of the fire on Easter Even.
This wise let there be a station unto the fire:
LEt the priest stand by the fire, turnyng himself eastward, and let ye deacon
stand on his left hand, the subdeacon at the leaft hand of the deacon: Let
one taper bearer stand against the priest: At the ryghtha^d of the taper
bearer, let there stand a child, holding the book nerer unto the priest. And
let the other taper bearer stand behind the Priest. At the right hand of the
same taper bearer, let him stand that carries the water nerer unto the priest.
And in the last place behind all on the west side, let him stand that be^reth
the long staff with the taper, Beside ye fire, namely on the south side, let
him stand that must cast in cense, to take fire into the Censor after the
benediction. At these ministers being turned toward the priest, the quire in
the mean season standing round about, namely on the northside, a^ hereafter
appears, Let there follow a blessyng of the fire solemply, the priest sayng
thus, Dominus vobiscum, and Oremus. A Prayer.

O Lord our God almighti, thou light that never faylest, thou maker of all
light: Hear ^s thy servants and bless this fire, which through thy
sanctifying and been diction is consecrated. Thou that geuest light unto every
man coming in to this world, illuminate the consciences of our heart, with the
fire of thy charity, that we being kindled with thy fire illuminated with thy
light, the darkness of sins being driven away from our hearts, may merit to
come unto eternal life, thou being the light geuer, Per Dominum. etc.

And all the prayers are said with Oremns under the tune of a lesson. Holy
water must be at y^ end of al their doings.
Here let holy water be sprinkled upon the fire. Then is said Dominus vobiscum.
Oremus. A Prayer.

O Lord holy father almighty eternal God, vouchsafe thou to bless and
sanctifi this fire, which we unworthy through the invocation of thy only be
gotten son our Lord Jesus Christ, presume to bless: Sanctify thou it most
gracious father with thy benediction, and grant it to come forward to the
profit of mankind. th^row the same. etc.

A Prayer.

Prevent us O Lord, we beseech the always here and every where with the light
of heaven that the mystery whereof thou have wylled us to be partakers, we may
both behold with a pure sight, and enjoy with a worthy affection. Through
our Lord. etc.

The halovving of the Insence.
I Conjure the thou most unclean spirit, and every fantasye of the enemy in
the name of God the father almighty, and in the name of of Jesus Christ his
son, and in the virtue of the holy ghost: that thou with all thy false sotiltie
and wickedness, go forth and depart from this creature of perfume or insence,
that this thy creature may be sanctified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ:
that all they which taste, touch or smell it, may enjoy the virtue and help
of the holy ghost, so that whersoeuer this insence or perfume shall be, thou in
no wise be bold to approach near there, nor presume to trouble: But what foul
spirit soever thou art, thou with all thy crafty falshoode, fiye and depart
far from thence, being straightlye charged by the name and virtue of God the
father almighty, and of his son ou^ Lord Jesus Christ, who in the holy Ghost
shall come to judge the quick and dead, and the thou traitorous offender, and
the world through fire, Amen. Let us pray. The Prayer.

O Lord holy father almighty eternal God, we beseech thy everlasting and most
rightuous goodness: that thou vouchsafe to bless this kind of perfume or
insence, that it may be an insence accepted unto thy Majesty for an ^doure of
swetenes: Let this kind be blessed of the, let it be sanctified by the
invocation of thy holiname: So that where soever the smoke thereof shall come,
alkinde of devils may be expelled and driven away, as the insence of the
fishes Liver, which s^aphael the Archau^gel taught thy servant Tobias, when he
went up to deliver Sara, Per Christ^^. etc.

LEt thy blessing (O Lord) come down upon this kind of inse^ce and persume,
like as in it whereof David thy prophet has song (saying: Let my prayer be
directed as insence in thy sight) Let it be unto the sauoure of consolacion,
swetenes and grace, that through this smoke every fantasy of the enemy of mind
and of body, may be driven away, that we after the voice of the Apostle Paul
may be a good odor unto God. Le^ every assault of devils fly away from the
presece of this insence or perfume as the dust from before the wind, and smoke
from the face of the fire. And grant O most gracious father this insence of
good odor, to the work of thy church because of Religion continually to
remain, that by the mistical signification, the pleasant savor* may declare
unto us the swetenes of spiritual virtues. We beseech the therefore O almighty
god, vouchsafe with thy right hand of thy infinite majesty to bless this
creature, made together of the co^mirtio^ of diverse things. that whersoeuer the
perfume of y^ spices thereof shall breathe, it may be able wonderfully in the
virtue of thy holy name, to drive away al fantastical assaults of unclean
sprites, and (health being restored) to expel al diseses, and in most pleasant
odor to smell unto the with perpetual sweetenes. Per Dominum nostrum. etc.

AFter the halowing of the insence let the Censor be filled full of coals with
insence, and let the new fire be se^ced. Afterward let the taper up on the
long staff be lighted out of the new fire, the other lights of the Church
being first put out, and let it be borne in procession, unto the place where
the Pascall is hallowed, and let the procession come again after the
accustomate manner in the quyre. In returninge, let two Clerks of the second
form in Surpleses sing Inuentor. etc. let the ^uyre repeat the same after
every verse. The halovving of the Pascall.
AFterward let follow the halowyng of the Pascal by the Deacon himself (ha^ing
on apparel to the procession) after he has taken b^esing of him that
executes, turning him Northward at the stepp of the priests seat: the taper
bearers sta^dyng by the deacon, the one on the right hand, the other on the
left, being turned unto him, and the tapers being put out, saving that only
upon the long staff. Over against him let stand the subdeacon by whom let him
stand that carries the Long staff. Likewise behind the deaco^ let him turn
himself and stand that must cast incense, the deacon saying: Exulteth iam
angelica. etc. That is to say: NOw let the angelical company of heavens
rejoice: Let the divine misierye rejoice, and for the victory ofso great a king
let the trumpe of salvation blow. Let the earth be glad, that it is shined
vppois with so great lyghtnynges, and bewtified with the brightness of the
eternal king: let it pereciue, that it has lost the dark mist of the whole
world Let the mother the church also rejoice being adourned with the clear
shinynges of so noble a light, and with great voices of yt people, let this
court triumph again: Wherefore most dear brethren, seeing ye stand by at the
wonderful cleartiles of this holy light. I beseech you ral upon the mercy of
almyghtie God with me: that he who with out my merits has vouched safe to
take me within the noumber of Levites, may through the inspiring grace of his
light, acco^plithe to make plentiful the praise of this taper. The row our
Lord Jesus Christ his son, who lives and reigns God with him in the unity
of the holy ghost, world without end. Amen.

The Lord be with you.
And with the spirit.
Lift up your hearts.
We lift them up unto the Lord.
Let us give thanks to our Lord God.
It is mete and right.
Verily, for incte and right it is, with whole affection of the heart and
mind, and with the ministration of the voice, to praise the invisible god, the
father almyghtie, and his only be gotten son our Lord Jesus Christ (with the
holy ghost.) Who unto his father, paid Adams debt for us, and with his
gracious blood wiped awa^ the obligacion of the old offense.

For these are the solemnities of Easter, in the which that true lamb is
slain, and the posts consecrated with his blood. This is the night, in the
which when our fathers the children of Iscael were first brought out of Egypt,
thou made them to pass through the red sea dry shod. This therefore is the
night, which with the illumination of the cloud, has pourged the darcknes of
sins. This is the night, which this day through out the whole wourlde,
restores unto grace, knitteth unto holiness, such as believe in Christ, being
separated from the vices of the world, and from the dark mist of sines. This
is the night, in the which the bands of death being destroyed, Christ came up
from beneth a couquerour. For nothing has it profited us to be borne, except
it had been ourwelth to be redeemed. O the wonderful grace of thy favorable
beningnitie about us. O the inestimable affection of love, that thou have
given over thy son, to redeem thy servant. O the necessari sin of Adam and
ours, verily, which with the death of Christ is put out. O happy fault,
which deserved to have such and so noble a redemer. O blessed might verily,
which only deserved to know the time and hour, wherein Christ rose again from
beneth. This is the night whereof it is written: And the night shall be as
clear as the day, yea the night is my light in my pleasant delights.
Therefore the sanctifiynge of this night, expels heinous sins, washes
faults, and restores innocence to them that are fallen, and gladness to the
sorrowful: it drives away hatreds, prepares concord, and brings down
dominions. Wherefore in the grace of this night, receive thou

(here let the deaco^ put incence upon the taper or upon the candlestick
Rubricke
in manner of a cross. O holy father the evening sacrifice of this incense,
which holy church from out of the works of Bees, does render unto the in this
solemn oblation of the taper, by the hands of mynisters. But now we know the
co^mendations of this pillar, which ye clear fire does light to the honor of
God.

Here let the taper be lighted out of the new fire, and not put out before
Rubricke
Compline be ended the day so lowinge: Here let the taper bearers light their
tapers, throughout the Church. Which though it be denied into parts, cannot
hurt the borrowed light. Norished it is with meltig wax which the Be has
brought forth in to substance of this precious light O blessed iiyghte,
which spoiled the Egiptia^s, enriched the hebrews: The night, wherein heavenly
things are joined unto earthly. We pray the O Lord, that this tap^r consecrated
to y^ honor of thy name, may not fail to continue, to destroy the dar^e mys^
of this night: Being accepted for an odor of swetenes, let it be mixed with
lights from above. Let the day sprig of the morning find out the flames
thereof: the same day spring (I say) which knows of no going down: even
he, who when he returned from beneth, shone bright unto mankind. We beseech the
therefore O Lord, that the quietness of times being granted, thou will vouch
safe in these solemnities of Easter, to preserve v^ thy servants all the
Clergy and most They must prai for their father.
devour people with our father the Pope N. and our king, N. and also our bishop,
N. Thou that always live, reignest, rulest and triumphest only God only the
highest Jesus Christ, with ye holy ghost in the glory of God the father. Amen.

The halovving of the Pascal lamb, eggs, and herbs, on Easter day.
Dominus vobiscum. Oremus. The Prayer.

God, thou governor of heaven and earth, which geuest food unto al flesh, and
replenishest every living thing with blessyng bless, and sanctify this
creature of the pascal lamb, and unto (...) receiving the gifts, grant
health of soul and body. Through Christ our Lord Ame^.

O God, who are ye maker of al flesh who gave co^man^deme^ts unto No^ and his
sons concerning clean and un clean beasts, who have also permit^ed mankind
to care clean. iiii. footed beasts, eue^ as eggs, and grene herbs: Moreover,
you that upon Easter even did co^man^d Moses and thy people in Egypt to eat
the pascal lamb, in figure of the la^ve our Lord Jesus Christ through whose
blood you have redermed unto thy self out of the world al first borne, and
gave commandment, the same night to smits every first borne fir Egypt,
preseruyng people that was marked before with the blood of the la^be: Vouchsafe
O Lord God almighty to bless and sa^ctify this Pascal lamb, that al such of
thy people as faithfully shall eat thereof, being filled with (...) heavenly
benediction and with thy grate, may be replenished in good^^s: thou O Lord by
whom al things (...) made, and created at the beginning (...) savior of the
world, who live and ^^ig^lest god world without end. Amen. (...)

Afterward, let al be sprinkled with (...) holy water, and censed by the
priest. The halovving of the woman's Ring at wedding.
THou maker and co^seruer of mankind, geuer of spiritual geace, and grau^ter
of eternal saluaci ^ Lord send thy blessing upon Is not here wise ^eare.
this Ring, that she which shall wear it, may be armed with the virtue of
heavenly defense, and that it may profit her to eternal salvation, Through
Christ. etc. Amen. Let us pray. A Prayer.

Halow thou Lord this ring, which we bless in thy holy name: that what woman
soever shall wear it, may stand stast in thy peace, and continu^ in thy will,
and live and gro^ and w^^e old in thy love, and be multiplied into yt length of
days, through our Lord. etc.

Then let holy water be sprinkled upon the flyng. The halovving of the Pilgrems
Walet and Staff.
AFter the rehearsal of certain psalms and prayers in Latin over the Pilgrem
lying flat before the altar, he must rise up, and then must follow the halowing
of his Wa^let and Staff, after this manner. The Lord be with you. Let us pray.
The Prayer.

O Lord Jesus Christ, who of thy unspeakable mercy and by the commandment
of the father, and ^ cooperatio^ of y^ holy Ghost, woldes^ come down from
heaven, and seek the sheep yt through the disceitfulnes of the devil was lost,
and bring it again upon thine own shulders unto ye flock of ye heavenly
country: who also have charged the Children of the Mother the Church, in
praying, to ask: in living well, to seek: and in knocking, to continue, yt.
they may the rather find the rewards of the life of salvation: we humbly call
upon the, yt thou will vouchsafe to bless this Wallet and Saffe, That
whosoever for the love of thy name does endeuer him self to take yt same by
his side as an armor of humilytye, and to hang it about their necks, Is not
here ioly gear, it was a merry world when this was used say our Priests.
or to carry in their hands, and so going on pilgremage (having meke deuoti on
for a co^panio^ of their journey) to seek the helps of saints, they being
preserved with the defense of thy right hand, may merit to come to the joys of
the eternal vision, through thee thou savior of ye world, who live. etc.

Here let holy water be sprinkled, and let the Priest put a Wallet about^ the
Pilgrems neck saying: In ye name of our Lord Jesus Christ take thou this
Wallet, the habit of thy pilgremage, that being well chastcned and saved, thou
may merit to come to the places of the Saints, thither as thou desyrest to
go: and that when thy journey is done, thou may returue unto us safe and
sound. Through the same our Lord. etc. And so let it be done unto others, if
there be mo. Here let him deliver a Staff to one, saying: Take this Staff to
hold the They ar mad Dyuels that will let pilgrems go to saints.
by, in the iurney and travail of thy pilgremage: that thou may be able to
overcome all the rables of the enemy, and come without fear to the places of
the Saints whither thou desyrst to go, and that when the course of obedience
is finished, thou may return to us again with joy, Through Christ the
Lord. And so let him sai to the other, if there be mo. The halovving of the
Cross, of him that goes to Jerusalem, with Dominus vobiscum, and Oremus.
O Thou God of invincible power, of infinite goodness, and help of al consolation
of such as goo on pilgremage, thou that unto thy servants geuest most
invincible weapons: we beseech the vouchsafe to bless this cross of devout
humility. That the banner of the reverend cross, the figure whereof is marked
in it, may be the most invincible strength, of thy servant against the most
wicked te^^acions of the old enemy. Let it be in the way a defense, let it be
in thy house a protection, let it be every where a help unto us, through our
Lord. etc. Here let holy water be sprynkled upon the vesture. Afterward if
any of the^ be for to go to Jerusalem, let there be given him a cote (or
vesture) marked with a cross, ye priest saying: Take the vesture marked with the
cross of the Lord our savior yt to go forth prosperously unto his sepulcher
there may through it, accompany the, salvation, blessing and virtue. Qui cu^ De^
patre. etc. And so let him do unto the other, if they be mo. FINIS.

