THE COLLEGIAT SVFFRAGE OF THE DIVINES OF GREAT BRITAIN,

CONCERNING THE FIVE ARTICLES CONTROVERTED IN the Low Countries.

Which Suffrage was by them delivered in the Synod of Dort, March 6. Anno 1619.
Being their vote or voice foregoing the joint and public judgment of that
Synod.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Milbourne, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Greyhound. 1629.

The five Articles controverted in the Low Countries, and discussed in the
Synod of Dort.
1. Concerning Gods Predestination. 2. Of Christ's death, and man's Redemption
thereby. 3. Of Freewill in the state of corruption. 4. Of conversion unto God,
and the manner thereof. 5. Of the Perseverance of the Saints.
THE SVFFRAGE OF THE DIVINES OF GREAT BRITAIN CONCERNING THE FIRST ARTICLE:
That is of Election, That is of Reprobation,
First of Election, Orthodoxall, which we lay down and confirm. First of
Election, Erroneous, which we reject and confute. The Positions, Orthodoxall,
which we lay down and confirm. The Positions, Erroneous, which we reject
and confute.

THE FIRST ORTHODOXALL POSITION.
THe decree of Election, or predestination unto salvation is the effectual
will of God, by which according to his good pleasure, for demonstration of his
mercy, he purposed the salvation of man being fallen; and prepared for him such
means, by which he would effectually and infallibly bring the Elect to the
self same end.

THE EXPOSITION AND CONFIRMATION OF THE POSITION.
WE call this Decree of Election an effectual will of God, because it respects
not merely and only a way set down and leading to life, leaving man so
ordained in the power of his own free will, (after such manner as Adam was
ordained to happiness) but it does respect and fore-appoint the very issue of
this Ordinance. For this will is conjoined with the power of God, Ephesians. 1.11.
Esa. 14.24. The Lord of hosts has sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought,
so shall it come to pass, and as I have purposed, so shall it stand. Psalm.
113. Whatsoever the Lord would, that did he in heaven and in earth: (upon
which place see St. Austin, Enchirid. c. 75.) Romans 8.30. Whom he has
predestined, those he glorified. John 6.39. This is the Fathers will that
sent me, that of all, which he has given me, I should lose nothing. And verse.
37. All that the Father gives me shall come unto me.

We acknowledge no other moving cause of this will, besides the mere good
pleasure of God. Romans 1.18. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy. Ephesians.
1.11. Being predestined according to the purpose of him, who works all
things according to the counsel of his own will. Romans 9.11 Before the
children were borne, when they had done neither good nor evil; that the
purpose of God according to Election might stand.

But God does deal with certain men after this especial manner for
manifestation of his own mercy. Romans 9.23. That God might make known the
riches of his glory toward the vessels of mercy. Yea and to them considered in
the state of Adams fall, namely for the freeing them out of the mass of
perdition. Ephesians. 1.4. In him [to with Christ] he has chosen us. 1 Timothy 1.15.
Christ came to save sinners.

Finally, lest Gods working in time should vary from his eternal purpose, he
who did effectually destinate the elect unto salvation, does also afford them
means agreeable to this foresaid intention; that is to say, those means,
which God knew would without fail bring them to salvation. 2. Tim. 1.9. He
has saved us with an holy calling. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. God has chosen you unto
salvation in the sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth, to
which he has also called you by our Gospel. Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us,
that we might be holy and without blame. Mat. 13.11. To you it is given to know
the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven.

Out of which testimonies of Scripture it is evident, that God by his foregoing
decree of Election has subordained all these things (to wit, the knowledge of
the Gospel, Vocation, Faith, Justification, Sanctification, and Perseverance)
for the obtaining of the foredetermined salvation.

Out of many sayings of the Fathers we gather a few.

Aug. de praedest. Sanct. c. 19.
When he predestined us, he foresaw his own work, who makes us both holy
and without blame.

Idem de corrept. and great. c. 14
When God determines to save a man, no will of man resists God: for to will
or to nill is so far forth in the power of him that wills or nils, that it can
neither hinder the will of God, nor yet surpass his power.

He does so teach them, Idem de great. Christ. cap. 13.
who are called according to his purpose; bestowing at once both to know what
they are to perform, and also to perform what they know.

Although a great part of mankind do either reject or slight the grace of
the Savior, Prosp. de vocat, lib. 1. cap. 9.
yet the elect, and those which are foreknowne, and so differenced from the
many, are reckoned for a certain special collective body, so that out of the
whole world another entire world may seem to be freed.

There is a portion of mankind, Idem Devo^^^ lib. 2. cap. 3.
which is promoted by the means of faith, enspired from God to high and
eternal salvation by special graces.

THE SECOND POSITION.
CHrist is the head and foundation of the Elect: so that all saving graces
prepared in the decree of Election are bestowed upon the elect only for
Christ, through Christ, and in Christ.

GOD, in the eternal Election of particular men, by one and the self same
act, both does assign Christ their head, and also does appoint them according
to his good pleasure the members of Christ: out of which purpose even before
their vocation (which is afterward performed in time) God does behold them as
given unto Christ, and chosen in him, and accepted of himself. Ephesians. 1.3. He
has blessed us in all spiritual benediction in Christ. v. 4. He has chosen
us in him. v. 7. In whom we have redemption and remission of sins. v. 13. In
him we are sealed.

Whatsoever is intended to the Elect from all eternity, is (as we may so say)
shut up in the will of God, neither is it immediately imparted unto us, but for
Christ, in Christ, and by Christ. Coloss. 2.3. In whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. v. 7. We are rooted and built up in him.
v. 10. Ye are complete in him. Lastly, he is the fountain, from which all the
streams of saving grace do flow to us. John 1.16. Of his fullness have all we
received grace for grace. 2 Timothy 1.9. He has called us with an holy calling,
according to his purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before
the world began.

As he was predestined that one, Aug. de praedest. Sanct. cap. 15.
that he might be our head: so we being many, are predestined, that we might
be his members.

God calls many predestined his sons, Cap. 16.
that he might make them the members of his own predestined only Son.

After the fall of man, De bon. persev. cap. 7.
God would have it an act of his mere grace alone, that man should come unto
him. And this grace he placed in him, in whom we also have obtained this our
lot, who were predestined according to his purpose.

THE THIRD POSITION.
FAith, Perseverance, and all gifts of grace leading home unto salvation, are
the fruits and effects of Election.

WE acknowledge in some men certain gifts of grace, which are to be reduced to
the common supernatural providence of God. But those gifts, which have an
infallible connection with glory, and do work effectually for the obtaining
thereof: (as justifying faith and persevering) are the very effects of eternal
election. Act. 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed. Tit.
1.1. The faith of the Elect of God. 1 Pet. 1.5. We are kept by the power of God
by faith unto salvation.

Prosp. epist. ad Aug. 361.
By this predestination of the purpose of God, they are faithful, who are
foreordained unto eternal life.

Aug. de praedest. Sanct. c. 10.
The predestination of God is the preparation of grace, and grace is the very
effect of predestination. When therefore God promised to Abraham, that the
Gentiles should believe in his seed, he made not this promise with respect to
the power of our will, but out of his own predetermination: for he promised
that which he himself would do, and not what men would do.

Cap. 16.
Has he not said, Not of works, but of him that believes? He has taken
wholly even this from man, that he might attribute the whole to God.

Cap. 17.
Let us understand the vocation, by which they are made the Elect, not as if
they were chosen, because they had believed, but they are chosen, that they may
believe. For if they were therefore chosen, because they had believed, they had
chosen him first be believing in him, that they might so come to be chosen.

These gifts of God are given to the Elect (who are called according to the
purpose of God) of which kind of fruits these are, namely both to begin to
believe, and to persevere in faith to the end of this life.

THE FOVRTH POSITION.
THe decree of Election is definite, not conditional; it is irrevocable, and
immutable, so that the number of the Elect can neither be increased, nor yet
diminished.

IN predestination the means to salvation are no less absolutely decreed,
than salvation it self. For howsoever salvation, in the execution thereof,
depends upon the conditional use of the means, yet the will of God electing
unto salvation is not conditional, incomplete, or mutable: because he has
absolutely purposed to give unto the Elect both power and will to perform
those very conditions, namely, repentance, faith, obedience, and perseverance.
For the Decree of God predestinating cannot be conceived after this form, I
will choose Peter to eternal life, if it shall so happen that he does believe,
and persevere: But rather after this manner: I do choose Peter unto eternal
life, which that he may infallibly obtain, I will give unto him persevering
faith. 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure, God knows who are
his. Romans 9.11. That the purpose of God might remain according to election.
Romans 11.28, 29. Beloved according to Election. For Gods gifts and calling are
without repentance.

Prosp. ad Cap. Gall. Resp. 8.
This adoption of the sons of God, this fullness of the Gentiles, was
foreknowne and preordained in Christ, which from the beginning unto the end is
built up with living and choice stones. Of these stones not one is cast out,
not one lessened, not one snatched away.

Erroneous Opinions, or unsound Doctrines, concerning Election, which we reject.
THE FIRST.
THat the Decree by which God has purposed in Christ, and for Christ, to save
those, which repent* and believe unto the end, is the whole and entire decree
of predestination unto salvation.

TRue indeed, this is Gods decree declaratorie of salvation to be proclaimed to
all equally and without difference; as also prescribing the manner by which the
elect are to be brought to salvation. But in this the whole fabric of Gods
praedestination (set down in the holy Scriptures) is not explained. For the
decree of predestination does infer some certain particular persons to be
predestined, those being known to God, and severed from others by this very
decree of Election, Matt. 20.16. Many are called, but few are chosen. Romans
11.5. A remnant according to Election. 2 Timothy 2.19. The Lord knows who are
his. But the abovenamed decree does predestinate no man de facto, or by
certain event; it severeth none from the rest; it writes no name in the book
of life.

Though such a decree be established, yet might all men notwithstanding be
reprobates: God might neither have now, nor have had, nor have hereafter any
Church upon earth. Which absurdity being granted not only that promissory
decree might fail, Matt 28.30. I am with you always unto the end of the
world, but even the whole Scriptures might be annihilated, which does
necessarily suppose a church in being, to which, and for which the Scripture
was indicted.

Lastly, if there were no other decree of predestination then this, Christ
himself should not be appointed by any foregoing decree of God, to be for
certain the head of the Church; because to him there should be no members
infallibly assigned; neither could Christ be said infallibly (...), to have the
pre-eminence, as a King, except there were given unto him by the positive
decree of God, some, who were to be certainly his subjects. When yet the
Scripture does no less intimate unto us the certain and irrespective decree
of God in making Christ our head and King, then it does concerning his taking
our flesh, and suffering for us. The Apostle ( Ephesians. 1.) having set down the
mystery of our Redemption, by Christ's Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension,
presently adds verse. 22. (as flowing from the same decree) and gave him to be
the head over all things to the Church which is his body, Lu. 1.33. Of his
kingdom there shall be no end. Act. 2.30. God has made him Lord.

This predestination of the Saints is nothing else, Aug. de persev. cap. 14.
then Gods foreknowledge and preparation of those benefits, by which they are
most certainly freed, whosoever are freed.

THE SECOND ERRORNEOVS OPINION.
THat the peremptory Election of particular persons is made upon the fore sight
and consideration of their faith in Christ, and of their perseverance in the
same faith, as upon a Condition fore-required in electing.

FAith foreseen, and perseverance in faith do follow the decree of vocation
according to Gods good purpose. But such vocation does depend upon the
foregoing decree of predestination. Romans 8.30. Those whom he predestined
those he has called. Act. 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal life,
believed.

1. God foresees no man as persevering in faith and holiness unto the last
gasp, but him, whom he decreed by his foregoing will so to keep, but him, whom
he really guides and directs through his whole course of life, and
preserves in the way of salvation by an operation, and special protection
flowing from Gods foresaid will. John 10.28, 29. My sheep shall not perish for
ever, neither shall any one take them out of my hand, neither can any one of
them take them out of my Fathers hand. Mat. 24.24. That they should seduce, if
it were possible, the very Elect.

Since therefore perseverance in faith is grounded upon the Election of God,
Election cannot proceed from the fore-required condition of persevering faith.

2. Furthermore, the decree of giving glory and salvation unto steadfast
believers in the end of this life, as the reward of faith and obedience
performed, is an act of Justice, or at least of faithfulness and truth. But
according to the Scriptures, Election is a free act, not of debt, but of grace,
an act of love and special mercy founded upon the mere good will of God. Luke
12.32. It is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom. Ephesians. 1.11.
Being predestined according to the purpose of him, who works all things
after the counsel of his own will.

3. By the like reason faith foreseen is to be excluded from Election, as
foreseen works: that is to say, God may be said as well to have elected holy
men for the condition of sanctification, as believers for the condition of
faith. For who sees not, that this faith foreseen does in truth pass into
the nature of a work? which appears more evidently by the annexed condition
of perseverance; by which is intended nothing else, but the fruits of obedience
and holiness, and the whole harvest of all good works.

4. Lastly, by granting this Election upon Gods foresight, it follows that
Christ was chosen by us, before we were chosen by him, contrary to that Ioh.
15.16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. Which divine Oracle is
often urged by St. Augustine, to this purpose.

Neither does faith it self go before that Election, Aug. de Pers. Sanct. c.
10.
which the Lord intends saying, ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen
you; for he did not choose us, because we have believed, but that we may
believe; lest we should be said to have chosen him first.

No merits of man-doe go before the Election of grace: Prosp. ad excep.
Genuin^. resp. ^.
yea and faith it self, whence begin all merits, is the gift of God; lest
grace should not be grace, if any thing should go before it, for which it may
be given.

THE THIRD ERRONEOVS OPINION.
THat faith and perseverance in faith are not fruits or effects of Election to
salvation.

IF God (who is the only giver of persevering faith) before he gives such
faith, or decrees to give it, does foresee, that it will by the very giving of
it, bring salvation to the receiver, then without doubt he gives it also with
this intent, and absolute purpose, that it shall bring salvation. But so to
give, is to give out of a foregoing purpose infallibly to save, which is all
one as to give by the decree of Election. Therefore persevering faith is the
fruit of this decree, or a special grace prepared in this decree. Whence it is
called. Tit. 1.1. The faith of the elect of God, Ephesians. 1.5. Having
praedestinated us into the adoption of Children. But into the actual estate of
this adoption we are admitted by faith, Ioh. 1.12. He gave them the power (or
privilege) to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his name;
Therefore faith it self arises from praedestination.

THE FOVRTH ERRONEOVS OPINION.
THat Election to salvation is not one and the same, but that there is one
indefinite, another definite; and this either incomplete, revocable,
changeable: Or complete, irrevocable unchangeable

ALthough there are diverse acts of Gods Election, which may be assigned
according to diverse objects, namely, of the end, and of the means; yet the
Scripture no where makes mention either of the diverse degrees or kinds of
Election.

1 For Election is a certain infallible ordaining of several persons to
salvation, in the mind and will of God. Therefore this indefinite Election
(here supposed) is no true election, because it ordaines no singular person to
salvation, but it only shows and prescribes the manner of coming to
salvation promiscuously to all.

2 Besides, seeing Election is perfited with one act, and ex natura rei,
according to the nature of the thing it self, is as the Schoolmen speak, in
the number of those things which do not grow and increase by degrees, (as
sanctification, mortification, and such like) but which do consist in
indivisibili, without latitude, (such as justification or absolution from
sins) surely it cannot be imagined to be capable of intention or remission,
and therefore by no means does it admit a graduall perfection, that it may be
thought to be incomplete, or unfinished to day, and complete or fully finished
to morrow: Much less can this maimed halfe-election be accounted election,
which does not ordain to salvation infallibly, but disposes only by some
quality or contingent act, which in the judgment of the very devisers
thereof, has no necessary connection with eternal life.

3 Lastly, that which is said to be revocable, and changeable, cannot be true
election, because election signifies the constant purpose and unchangeable
counsel of God ordaining the elect unto bliss. Heb. 6.17. (...), God shows
unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel.

Aug. quesi. disp. de praed. Act. 10.
Two things follow predestination, an affording of aid to obtain the end, and
the very obtaining of the end it self.

He that will have Gods disposal of things to be changed according to the
mutability of free will, Prosp. ad Cap. Gall. resp. 8.
professes that the judgments of God can be searched by him.

THE FIFTH ERRONEOVS OPINION.
THat the object of peremptory and complete Election is man considered no
otherwise than in the end of his life.

1 IN the end of this life a believer is considered not as to be elected, but
to be brought into the kingdom prepared for him before the foundation of the
world. 2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought a good fight. I have finished my course:
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day. The Apostle did not say,
henceforth now God shall elect me to the Crown of righteousness, but shall
give it.

2 Furtherfmore, if election should begin at the end only of this life, the
reason or argument drawn from predestination or election could confer
nothing at all to the faithful, for finishing their course in faith and
godliness. But predestination extends it self as well to the means in the
way, as to the end in the conclusion of our life, and as it were carries the
Elect by infallible means to the appointed mark or goal. Romans 8.30. Whom he
did predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called, them he also
justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified. But if man
considered only as in the last moment of this life, were the object of
complete election, all those things should be inverted thus, Whom he called,
those he will justify, and whom he justifies, those he will hereafter
predestinate.

3 Moreover, 2 Timothy 1.9. We are called with a holy calling, according to his
own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world
began. This purpose of God since it goes before this holy calling, and
forelayeth the foundation to it, considers man as the subject of a sure
election, according to this purpose, not as he stands in the end of this
life, but as he was before the beginning of this life, yea before the world
began, appointed by Gods purpose to a most complete Election. Neither truly
can there be settled any definite election, to eternal grace, to faith, to
adoption, ( Ephesians. 1.5.8.) if these things be considered as hanging in
uncertainty; neither shall the future perseverance of the Elect be
foreordained by God, but only foreseen in the man to be elected, and so this
act of God shall be only an approbation following, (such as may be performed
by man, that knows not what is to come hereafter) not a foregoing and
operative Election: such as all elections, in reason, and by force of the name
of Election, must needs be.

4 Last of all. John 10.16. The Gentiles not yet called, much less settled in
final perseverance, are by our Savior styled his sheep, being indeed then
separated by the foregoing mark of entire and complete election.

He that makes men sheep, Aug cont. Ep. Pelag. l. 4. c. 6.
does make free men's wills unto obedience* but why does he (with whom there is
no acception of persons) make those men sheep, and makes not others? O man who
art thou that replyest against God?

Ye say that Jacob was elected for his future works, Lib. 2. cap. 6.
which God knew he would do, and so you contradict the Apostle, saying: Not of
works: as if he could not have said, Not of present works, but or works of
come.

Aug. de praedest. Sanct. cap. 17.
They are elected before the foundation of the world, by that predestination,
in which God foreknew what he would do; they are elected out of the world by
that calling, by which he fulfilled that which he did predestinate.

THE SIXTH ERRONEOVS OPINION.
THat in this life no man can receive any fruit or perceive any sense of his
own election, otherwise then conditional.

Filial adoption is the proper, natural, and unseparable fruit of Election,
and is to be perceived by the Elect in this life, the spirit of adoption
revealing it to their hearts. Gal. 4.6. Because ye are sons, God has sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba Father. If a son,
then an heir of God. Romans 8.15, 16 Ye have received the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry Abba Father. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit
that we are the children of God. Ephesians. 1.14. Ye were sealed with that holy
Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. He says the
earnest of our inheritance, which is an infallible sign, that we shall never
be dis-inherited, but shall at length obtain our inheritance. Romans 5.2. We
glory in the hope of the glory of God. And v. 5. This hope makes us not
ashamed. Neither is there any falsehood in this solid peace of conscience, in
the glorying of the godly, or in this infused hope, because these gifts are
both sent by God to the elect; and to this end are they fastened in their
minds, that they may be certain arguments of their unchangeable election.

We confess, our election is not to be perceived by us a priori, by the
causes: but the proper effects of it may be known. And from the proper effect
upward to the cause, the argument is good.

We likewise grant that the assurance of election in the children of God
themselves, is not always so constant and continual, but that oftentimes it
is shaken with temptations, and for a time suppressed, so that not only the
degree of assurance is lessened, but even election it self, in respect of the
sense and apprehension of the Elect, seems uncertain, and ready to vanish.

Lastly, we confess that the Elect justified, when they fall into grievous
sins and cleave unto them, are not only deprived of the present taste of
their election, but also conceive a great fear of the contrary, namely of Gods
wrath and revenging justice: and that deservedly: seeing the holy Ghost
vouchsafes not to communicate this heavenly and sweet Manna of comfort to a
defiled conscience, yet wallowing in its own filthiness, but only to a
clean heart, and such an one as exercises it self in the practice of faith,
repentance, and holiness. But we think that the minds of the faithful being
wakened, and rising out of their pollutions, are renewed by God and comforted
again, with a sweet sense of eternal life, prepared for them before the
foundation of the world, and in due time undoubtedly to be conferred upon them.

Clem. Alex. Stromat.
A faithful man has received by faith, that which is uncertain to others,
and lays hold on the promise.

Tertull. advers. Mar. lib. 5.
That it might be certain that we are the sons of God, he has sent his
Son into our hearts crying, Abba, Father.

Who is just, Bern. Epist. 107
but be that returns love to God, that loved him, which comes not to pass
but by the spirit revealing to a man by faith the eternal purpose of God
concerning his salvation. Which revelation is nothing else but an infusion of
spiritual grace, by which while the works of the flesh are mortified, man is
prepared to that kingdom, which flesh and blood does not possess, receiving
together in one spirit, both whence be may presume he is beloved, and whence
he may return love, lest he should be loved in vain, or without returning
love again.

THE SEVENTH ERRONEOVS OPINION.
THere is no election of Infants dying before they have the use of reason.

IF one absurdity, or unsound doctrine be granted, more of the like will
follow. This here follows upon that, that they require in all divine Election,
faith foreseen, upon which it may be grounded, which indeed cannot be
foreseen in such infants. But we on the contrary evidently prove that these
tenets are against all Divinity.

1 They who have an entrance in time unto life eternal, without all doubt were
elected to life eternal before all time. Otherwise the number of them that are
glorified should exceed the number of them that are predestined, which is
impossible. For that proposition must be understood reciprocally with equal
extension of both terms. De Predest. c. 17.
Whom he has predestined, those he has glorified, namely, these and no
other, (as Saint Austin infers.) But the Scripture supposes the names of
some Infants to be written in the book of life, and that they must appear
before the judgment seat of God, Rev. 20.12. and be admitted into the new
Jerusalem, Rev. 21.27. of such is the Kingdom of heaven, Luke 8.16.

2 Whosoever are admitted only into the Kingdom of Heaven, were before out of
Gods free good pleasure chosen unto the Kingdom of Heaven. But to as many
infants as enter into Heaven, eternal life is a gracious gift through Jesus
Christ, Romans 6.23. therefore they were chosen to that Kingdom in Christ.

But if this be the meaning of this Position; That there is no election of
Infants, that is to say, of infants one before another, as if al were
promiscuously saved; neither truly has that supposition any good ground; nor
this being granted, will the foresaid position follow. For the circumstance of
age is impertinent, and has no operation to the establishing or taking away
of Gods election. Suppose therefore all infants to be saved, not one being
rejected, yet because Election and praeterition look upon the common heap,
not the age, they are segregated, though not out of the number of infants, yet
out of the whole lump of sinful mankind; Which segregation is no less then a
true election.

The riches of the goodness of God have been poured forth upon the first
beginnings of some infants, Prosp. de arbitr. ad Ruff.
in whom neither the precedent, nor the future piety was the motive for Gods
choosing them.

Infants having no wills, Prosp. Epistola ad Aug.
no actions of their own, are segregated not without the judgment of God; Some
being taken as heirs, some are let pass as debtors.

God helps those infants, Aug. de bono persever. cap. 11.
whom he will; though they neither will, nor run, whom he has chosen
before the foundation of the world in Christ.

THE EIGHTH ERRONEOVS OPINION.
THat the good will of God, by which out of many possible conditions, he has
decreed to choose faith only, and to accept it for the condition of bestowing
salvation, is that only or chief good pleasure of God, whereof the Scripture
speaks, and out of which all singular persons are chosen.

WE do not deny, but that there is such a good pleasure of God, laid open in
the Gospel, by which he has decreed to choose faith as a condition for
conferring salvation, that is, by which he would have the actual obtaining of
salvation, (especially of those which are of ripe years) to depend upon the
condition of foregoing faith. And this is the joyful and saving message to be
published to all Nations in the name of Christ.

But this is not the very decree of Election, properly taken, and so much is
set forth by the Apostle Paul.

1 For that decree is Active, ordaining some particular persons to salvation,
not disposing in things, or of the connection of things in order to salvation:
and it is confined to the creatures themselves, not unto qualities, Ephesians. 1.4.
He has chosen us, to wit, Men, Romans 8. Those whom he has predestined, that
is to say, Men, Mat. 20. Few are chosen, That is, few Men.

2 But the quality it self of faith is not in this sense called Elected, but
prescribed to the Elect, and given and prepared from eternity. For it is one of
the chief spiritual blessings, all which the chosen receive in Christ, Ephesians.
1.2.

3 Lastly, it is not rightly affirmed, that particular men are elected out of
this good pleasure, by which faith only is ordained, as the condition of
bestowing salvation. For to be elected, is to be destinated to life eternal,
others being ouerpassed. But in the foresaid decree, no person is chosen) no
one person passed by, but all are alike called, and designed to salvation by
one and the same condition.

In God the disposing of future things, Aug de bano persever. cap. 16.
by his unfallible and unchangeable foreknowledge, is no other thing then to
predestinate.

II. OF REPROBATION.
THE FIRST ORTHODOXALL POSITION.
REprobation properly called, or not-electing, is the eternal decree of God,
by which out of his most free will he has decreed, not so far to take pity
of some persons fallen in Adam, as to rescue them effectually, through Christ,
out of the state of misery, and without fail to bring them to bliss.

THe proper act of Reprobation, as it is opposed to Election, we think to be
no other, then the denying of the same glory, and the same grace, which are
prepared for the sons of God by Election. But glory and effectual grace, are
prepared for them in the decree of Election, and with this very intent, that it
should be effectual, that is, that by such grace the sons of God might
without fail come to the foresaid glory. Such grace and glory to be prepared
for Reprobates, we deny.

This non-election, we avow to be grounded upon the most free will of God. Romans
9.11. That the purpose of God, according to election might stand, not of
works, but of him that calls. It was said, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have
I hated. (That is) I have not so loved him, as that through grace I should
certainly bring him to glory. And v. 18. He has mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will he hardens: Again, ( verse. 21.) Has not the Potter
power over the clay, of the same lump, to make one vessel unto honor, and
another unto dishonor. And Ioh. 10.26. ye believe not, because ye are not of my
sheep.

Moreover, the glory of Heaven is due to none, but is the free gift of God, To.
6.23. Therefore God according to his most free will, can choose whom he will to
glory, and overpasse whom he will, and that without any aspersio^ of injustice
or hard dealing: since that in the bestowing of freegifts there is no place
left for injustice. Neither is it any incleme^cy or cruelty, to deny that to
any man, which is no way due unto him: especially when in the person presented
unto there is found the highest demerit or desert of punishment, which is so
far from expecting free gifts, that it cannot choose, but call for most just
judgments: of which sort is the whole state of mankind represented to God,
when he was to choose, or refuse whom he would among them. And what is here
said of the bestowing of glory, is likewise to be understood of the giving
effectual grace.

Aug. de praedest. cap. 6.
Behold mercy and judgment, mercy in Election, judgment upon those that are
hardened.

Idem de corr. et great. 13.
They which do not pertain to the most certain and happy number of the
predestined, are dismissed and left to their own free will, etc.

De bono persev. cap. 14.
They which by Gods deep judgment are not severed by the predestination of
grace from the lump of perdition, to them are not applied Gods promises or
workings, through which they might believe, if they should hear or see such
things.

THE SECOND POSITION.
THis not electing or over-passing does not presuppose in the man overpassed
any quality or other condition, then that which is in the elect, and which is
common to the whole corrupted heap.

GOd choosing out of his mercy does find every elect person in the corrupted
heap, overwhelmed in the same misery with the rest, and by his present
condition subject to death. Romans 9.15. I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy. and ver. 23. That he may make known the riches of his glory on the
vessels of mercy which he had prepared to glory. Also ( ver. 22.) God willing
to show his wrath and make known his power, etc.

So equal objects and persons of the same condition being propounded, why God
should free some, and not all, why these rather then them, he does not fetch
the reason out of any disparity among them, but only out of Gods free pleasure
to show forth here his rich glory, there his just wrath, when he makes these
(such as they were not) vessels of mercy, those, (such as they very near were)
vessels of wrath.

A type hereof is represented unto us, Ezekiel. 1.16. where the natural impurity
of all men is set down ( v 4.) and the goodness of God choosing, ( v 6.) When
thou wast in thy blood, I said unto thee, live* yea I said unto thee (others
being left in their impurity.)

Aug. de bon. persev. cap 7. Idem con^^. 1. Julian. lib 5. c. 3.
He which is freed let him love Gods grace, he which is not freed, let him
acknowledge his own debt, although all men out of the same mass of perdition
and damnation, according to the hardness of their heart, do treasure up for
themselves wrath, as much as in them lies, God notwithstanding through his
merciful goodness does bring from that state some to repentance others
according to his just judgment be does not bring.

Prosp. de voc. gent. lib. 1. c 17.
Grace does find some, whom it may adopt among the most wicked at their last
end, when many, which seem less guilty, have no part in this gift.

THE THIRD POSITION.
WHen God affords his saving Gospel to save Nations, he does not this out of
consideration of special worth in them: And when he denies this benefit to
others, there is always a concomitant unworthiness in them, to whom it is
denied. But the mere will of God is the only cause, why to these he will not
show that mercy, which out of his good pleasure he vouchsafed to others no
less unworthy thereof.

Deuteronomy. 9.4. Say not in thine heart, for my righteousness, the Lord has
brought me in to possess this land, when for the wickedness of those Nations
he has driven them out from before thee: and ( v. 5.) That he might perform
the word that he swear unto thy Fathers.

Upon the like motives God always finds in all places why he should not give
his Gospel to be preached, or why he should take it away being once given. But
where he affords it to a people, it is not for their righteousness, or
less wickedness, then is otherwhere found; as if it were out of a kind of
congruity or desert, but for his good pleasure and freedom of his spirit,
which blows where it lists, and as long as it will.

Prosp de voc. gent. lib. 1. c. 16.
If we will ascribe this to the merits of men's wills, that grace should be
said to pass by the bad, and choose the good, the state of many innumerable
Nations will confute us, to whom for so many ages the light of heavenly
doctrine has not shined.

Neither can we say that their posterity were better men, of whom it was
written; The Gentiles, which sat in darkness, have seen a great light.

THE FOVRTH POSITION.
TO some of those, to whom the Gospel has shined, although they be endued
with many gifts of grace, yet of their own accord, and withal infallibly,
they, by Gods permission, fall into those sins, in which being forsaken and
so remaining till death, they make themselves liable to just damnation.

WE do not deny but these though being not elected, yet receive many effects
of grace, such as reckoned up, Heb. 6.4. Illumination, taste of the heavenly
gift of the good word, and of the powers of the world to come. All which they
turn to their own greater destruction, being left to their own wills, and
not being founded upon Christ according to the decree of Election, Romans 11.7.
The election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded.

He that falls away from Christ, Prosp. ad cap. Gall. resp. 2.
and ends his life being an alien from grace, shall be damned for his last
sins. And because his Apostasy could not be hidden from Gods foreknowledge,
nor frustrate the same, without doubt God never chose such a man, be never
predestined him, yea he never set apart from eternal death him, who was to
perish.

Some receive the grace of God, Aug. de correp. es gral. cap. 13.
but for a time, they persevere not, they forsake God, and are forsaken of him:
for they are left to their own freewill.

THE FIFTH POSITION.
GOd damnes none, or destinates to damnation, except in consideration of sin.

1 GOd dispenses the gifts of grace to his free will. Matt. 20. 15. It is not
lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Yet he never appoints the
evil of punishment, but upon the foreseen guilt of men. Romans 3. 9. The Jews
and Greeks are all under sin. (v. 19.) That every mouth may be stopped, and
all the world guilty before God. Romans 2. 9. Tribulation and anguish be unto
the soul of every man that works evil.

2 Moreover, damnation is an act of vindicative justice, and therefore it must
necessarily presuppose a precedent fault.

Prosp. ad Cap. Gall. Sent. 14.
A man that is not predestined, perishes by voluntary, not by constrained
infidelity.

Ibid. ad cap. Gall. resp. 16.
The predestination of God has neither excited, persuaded, nor forced the
falls of those which perish, nor the untowardnesse of wicked men, nor the
wicked desires of sinners, but God has foreordained his own judgment, by
which he will render to every one according to that he has done.

Erroneous Opinions.
THE FIRST.
THat the decree, by which God from all eternity, and that irrevocably, has
purposed out of lapsed mankind, to leave none but the impenitent, and
incredulous, in sin, and under the wrath of God, as being aliens from Christ,
is the whole andentire decree of Reprobation.

1 THis we deny, for the reasons alleged by us against the first erroneous
position of Election.

2 Besides, in this decree, there is not contained the special will of God,
not to take pity of whom he will, in which the decree of reprobation (as it is
opposed to Election) is formally contained.

3 Add to this, that if this decree were granted, it might come to pass that
God might passed by none, but that all might he chosen, and brought to
eternal life.

THE SECOND.
THat Reprobation from salvation is not of one kind only, but is either
indefinite and general, or else definite and particular: and that this is also
diverse, either incomplete, revocable, mutable: or else complete, irrevocable,
immutable.

REprobation, which is the negation of Election, does set down to us the
immutable will of God, by which he has decreed not to take pity of that
person, whom he passes by, so far forth as to bestow upon him eternal life.
Now this will of God does not admit any change at all. Esa. 46.10. My counsel
shall stand. Malach. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not.

Hereto may be added what we have formerly set down at the fourth orthodoxall
position, and at the fourth erroneous position concerning Election.

Prosp. de vocat. Gen^. lib. 2. c. 33.
All the children of adoption, before the foundation of the world, were chosen:
In which election what man soever was not foreknowne in Christ, shall not by
any means be joined unto him.

THE THIRD.
THat no man after Adams fall was overpassed by the mere will of God, but all
reprobation of particular persons was made upon consideration of their
antecedent infidelity, and final perseverance in the same.

MOst certain it is, that God from all eternity did know, that those, whom he
should pass by, would dye in their infidelity. But it is false that this
foreseen infidelity should be the cause of his not-electing them.

1 For all men, and every man in particular, if not elected to persevering
faith, are foreseen, as persevering in infidelity; and no man is foreseen as
with out fail persevering in his infidelity, but he, whom God in the disposing
of effectual grace by his antecedent decree has passed by, Ioh. 20. 26. Ye
believe not, because ye are not of my sheep. 1 Ioh. 2. 19. If they had been
of us, they had continued with us. The Apostle fetches this preterition, or
non-election from the mere will of God; as it is manifest out of the forecited
places, at the first Orthodoxall position concerning Reprobation, and at the
second error concerning Election.

2 To conclude, if we shall set down for a ground, that no man is reprobated,
but for his foreseen impenitence, and final incredulity, there should be no
mystery in the decree of Reprobation, nothing unsearchable, nothing beyond our
reach; quite contrary to that of the Apostle, Romans 11.33. Oh the depth, etc. to
that, Romans 9.20. What art thou O man, who disputest against God?

Aug. Epist. 107.
We know that grace is not given to all men, and that where it is bestowed, it
is not given according to the merit of their works, neither yet according to
the merit of their will, to whom it is given.

Ibid.
Many are not saved, not because they would not be saved, but because God will
not. That is, because God is not pleased to bestow special effectual grace
upon them.

THE FOVRTH.
THat no man is considered of God, as reprobated, passed by, or not elected,
except in the very moment of death.

THis is manifestly false, because the consequents of this preterition, are
apparently showed toward them, whom God does paste by, even in this life. Such
are those descriptions obvious in the holy Scriptures. Of not calling according
to the purpose of God; Gods permitting men to walk in their own ways, that
their hard hearts are not mollified. With whom God deals after this manner,
those he considers, as men, whom he had formerly passed by, or not-eglected,
To. 9. God hated Esau before he had done either good or ill. Mat. 13. To some
it is not given to know the mystery of the Kingdom of Heaven.

The Suffrage concerning the second Article.
THE FIRST POSITION.
OVt of an especial love and intention both of God the Father, and of Christ
himself, Christ dyed for the Elect, that he might effectually obtain for
them, and infallibly bestow on them both remission of sins, and salvation.

THis first proposition declares, that the Elect shall without fail have
remission of sins, and eternal life by the death of Christ, and that out of
the especial love and intention of God the Father, and Christ. This is proved
out of the holy Scriptures, which do show forth the efficacy of the death of
the Son of God in respect of the Elect, John 11.51. Jesus must dye for the
Nation, and not only for that Nation, but that he might gather into one the
son of God, which were dispersed, Ephesians. 5.25. God loved the Church, and gave
himself for it, that he might sanctify it, etc. In which words is declared
the intention of Christ offering himself, as the same offering concerns the
infallible bestowing of salvation.

THE SECOND POSITION.
OVt of the self same love by and for the merit and intercession of Christ,
faith, and perseverance, are given to the same Elect, yea and all other things,
by which the condition of the covenant is fulfilled, and the promised benefit,
namely, eternal life is obtained.

THis position shows, that out of the death and intercession of Christ, those
gifts of grace do flow to the Elect, by which they are effectually brought to
life eternal. Romans 8.32.33.39. He that spared not his own Son, how shall
he not even with him give us all things? Heb. 8.10. I will give my laws into
their minds, and in their hearts I will write them. For that grace, which is
given unto the Elect for the death of Christ, is the grace of effectual
redemption. Now we understand by the grace of redemption, not such a grace, by
which men may be redeemed, if they will, but by which they are in event
mercifully redeemed, because God so wills.

THE THIRD POSITION.
GOd taking pity on mankind being fallen, sent his Son, who gave himself a
ransom for the sins of the whole world.

IN this oblation of Christ we consider two things: the manner of calling of
men to the actual participation of this sacrifice, and the benefit diverse
ways redounding unto men by the same sacrifice.

As for the manner, there is no mortal man, who cannot truly and seriously be
called by the Ministers of the Gospel to the participation of remission of
sins, and eternal life by this death of Christ. Acts 13.33.39. Be it known
unto you that remission of sins is preached by Christ. John 3.17. He that
believes not, is condemned, because he has not believed in the Son of God.
There is nothing false, nothing colourably fained in the Gospel, but
whatsoever is offered or promised in it by the Ministers of the word, is after
the same manner offered and promised unto them by the Author of the Gospel.

Touching the benefit by the death of Christ, in which is contained an infinite
treasure of merits, and spiritual blessings, the actual fruit does redound to
men after that manner, and that measure, and by the same means, as seems good
to God himself.

Now it pleases God even after the acceptance of this sacrifice, no otherwise
to bestow actually upon any man remission of sins and eternal life, then by
faith in the same Redeemer. And here that same eternal and secret decree of
Election shows it self, in as much as that price was paid for all, and will
certainly promote all believers unto eternal life, yet is not beneficial unto
all; because all have not the gift of fulfilling this condition of the gracious
covenant. Christ therefore so dyed for all, that all and every one by the
means of faith might obtain remission of sins, and eternal life by virtue of
that ransom paid once for all mankind. But Christ so dyed for the elect, that
by the merit of his death in special manner destinated unto them according to
the eternal good pleasure of God, they might infallibly obtain both faith and
eternal life.

THE FOVRTH POSITION.
Upon this merit of Christ is founded that general promise of the Gospel,
according to which all that believe in Christ may really attain remission of
sins, and eternal life.

THat this promise is universal, and founded only upon the death of Christ,
it is evident out of the 10. of the Acts 43. To him give all the Prophets
witness, that they shall receive remission of sins, by his name, as many as
believe in him, etc. Romans 3.24.25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood. Therefore although this promise be not divulged
unto all in every time and place, yet it is of that nature, that it may be
truly published to all and every one: For the nature of the promise extends it
self perpetually to mankind, although the knowledge of the promise according
to the special providence of God, is published sometimes to these, sometimes
to other Nations. Mark 16.15. Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature. He that believes, etc.

THE FIFTH POSITION.
IN the Church, wherein according to the promise of the Gospel salvation is
offered to all, there is such an administration of grace, as is sufficient to
convince all impenitents and unbeleevers, that by their own voluntary default,
either through neglect or contempt of the Gospel, they perish, and come short
of the benefit offered unto them.

CHrist by his death not only established the evangelical covenant, but
moreover obtained of his Father, that wheresoever this Covenant should be
published, there also, together with it, ordinarily such a measure of
supernatural grace should be dispensed, as may suffice to convince all
impenitents and unbeleevers of contempt, or at least of neglect, in that the
condition was not fulfilled by them.

Here two things are briefly to be explained. Whereof the first we put down
for a supposition: That some measure of grace is ordinarily offered by the
Ministry of the Gospel.

The second for a position: That that grace is sufficient to convince all
impenitents and incredulous persons, either of contempt, or at least of neglect.

The first is plain out of the Scriptures. Esaias 59. and the last verse. This
is my covenant with them, says the Lord: My Spirit that is upon thee, and my
word, which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth from
henceforth, and for ever. Hence it is evident that the word and the Spirit are
inseparably joined together by the promise of God in the Ministry of the word.

Hence the Ministers of the new Testament are called the Ministers, not of the
letter, but of the spirit, not of the killing letter; but of the spirit that
gives life. 2 Cor. 3.6. The ministry of the Gospel. v. 8. is called (...):
The ministration of the Spirit. Hence is the Gospel styled, Tit. 2.11. (...),
saving grace, or the grace that brings salvation: and (...), 2 Cor. 5.19. The
word of reconciliation. And our Savior, Luke 10.9.11. when he sent the 70.
Disciples to preach the Gospel, commanded them, that they should say to the
people, to whom they preached it, The kingdom of Heaven is come near unto
them. Because that some supernatural grace is offered unto them, to whom the
Gospel is preached.

It is not well said, Prosp. ad cap. Gali. resp ad ob. 4.
that all those are not called to grace, to all whom the Gospel is preached,
although there may be some, who obey not the Gospel.

The second is proved out of the 15 of John 22. If I had not come and spoken
unto them, they had not had sin, but now have they no cloak for their sin.
Out of this place it is certain, that Christ in propounding the Gospel, did
withal dispense that internal grace, which so far forth sufficed, that in
that they accepted not, or rejected the Gospel, they might be justly taxed of
positive infidelity. John 3.19. This is condemnation, that light is come into
the world, and men loved darkness rather then light. So are men justly damned,
because they turn away from the light of the Gospel. Heb. 2.3. How shall we
escape if we neglect so great salvation? For the neglect of salvation offered
in the Gospel, we are subject to just punishment: therefore salvation is
offered in the Gospel.

Heb. 4.12. The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two
edged sword, piercing even to dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.
Hence it comes to be manifest that there is such power and efficacy of the
word, that it insinuates it self even into the secretest closets of the soul,
and as it does without fail quicken those which truly believe; so it does
truly inflict a deadly wound upon the stubborn.

Lastly, the Scripture threatens most bitter punishments to those, who do not
receive; who neglect, who despise, the preaching of the Gospel. Mat. 10.14.
Whosoever shall not hear your words, It shall be easier for Sodom. Heb. 6.4.
It is impossible for those, who were once enlightened and have tasted of the
good gift of God, etc. For the earth which drinks in the rain, and yet
bears thorns, and briars, is nigh unto cursing.

THE SIXTH POSITION.
NOtwithstanding this general Covenant of saving those that believe, God is
not tied by any covenant or promise to afford the Gospel, or saving grace, to
all and every one. But the reason why he affords it to some, and passes by
others, is his own mercy and absolute freedom.

1 CHrist has no otherwise established this covenant, then that the
communicatio^ of this covenant should remain, in the free and full power of the
Father. But God in giving one grace is not tied to the giving of another. Matt.
10.15. Is it not lawful for me to do with my own what I will?

No such covenant or promise is to be found in the Scriptures. God promises in
the old Testament, that the preaching of the Gospel should be communicated to
the Gentiles. In the new Testament the partition wall is broken down, and it
is given in charge to the Apostles, Mark 16.15. Go into all the world and
preach the Gospel unto every creature: but God no where promised, that
universally in the world, at one and the same time it should be preached.

Epistola ad Russ. and de vocat. gent. lib. 2 cap 3.
Nay rather (as is well noted by Prosper,) Even at that very time, in which the
preaching of the Gospel was sent to all Nations, he, who would have all men
to be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth, yet forbad the Apostles
to go to some places. And so by this stopping or delaying of the Gospel, many
were so foreslowen, or hindered, that they dyed without the knowledge of the
truth, and without sanctifying regeneration. Let the Scripture speak what was
done. But passing through Phrygia, and the Region of Galatia, they are
forbidden by the holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia, but after they were
come to Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia, but the spirit suffered them
not; Thus far Prosper.

2 Moreover, it is plainly evident (notwithstanding this universal Covenant,
which was of force even in the old Testament) that God revealed not the
knowledge hereof unto the Gentiles, Psalm. 147.8.19.20. He shows his word
unto Jacob, he has not dealt so with any Nation, and therefore they knew not
these laws. Acts 14.16. God in times past suffered all Nations to walk in
their own ways. Yea and in our days scarce the sixth part of the habitable
world have given their names to Christ. But if in fact and event God has never
vouchsafed the preaching of the Gospel to all and every one, certainly then he
is not bound so to afford it. For he does, whatsoever he has bound himself to
do.

The same also is to be said of saving grace. We no where in the Scriptures
meet with any mention of any promise, by which God has bound himself to
impart this grace to all and every one. Nay rather the Scripture makes mention
of Gods liberty in commiserating, Romans 9.18. God has mercy on whom he will
have mercy, notwithstanding this covenant grounded in the blood of Christ. And
although God does bless with many benefits all men, yea even the most
ungrateful, which live without the lists of the Church, and although all men (as
being sinners) stand in need of saving graces, yet is he obliged to none,
either to bestow the one or the other.

3 Lastly, it is concluded out of the holy Scriptures, that some are judged and
condemned for sins committed only against the law of nature, Romans 2.14.15.
Whereby is employed, that upon invincible ignorance they are excused for not
fulfilling the Law of faith. Which excuse can have no place, where God
proclaims his Law, and men are bound to obey.

ERRONEOVS OPINIONS rejected by us.
THE FIRST.
THat Christ's death being granted, God has no other intention of saving any
particular persons then conditional, and suspended upon the contingent act of
man's faith.

1 FOr the refuting this; sufficient grounds are laid by us in our former
positions and reasons concerning the first Article, in which the election of
particular persons is established, and incomplete Election confuted.

Item, where the certain means of salvation flowing from the decree of
Election are set forth. Lastly, in this second Article, at the first and second
Positions, where is proved, that Christ dyed with that intention, that he
might bestow special graces upon the elect.

2 All theological Arguments drawn from the Scriptures and analogy of faith,
by which Christ's incarnation, humiliation, and exaltation, are either proved or
confirmed, do tend to the demonstration of Gods express intention, for a
fruitful effect of this so great a mystery, not producing it upon condition,
(namely, if men would that this fruit might hence arise, when it was equally in
their power to nill the same) but effecting it without fail, the power of God
working it.

3 Moreover, the house of God being to be built ex hominibus, of men, has not
sufficient firmness and solidity, if it be built ab hominibus, by men: this
fabric must be reared by Gods own hand. Mat. 16.18. Upon this rock will I
build my Church. 1 Cor. 3.9. Ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building.
Ephesians. 2.20. Being built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
Christ himself being the chief corner stone: In whom all the building fitly
framed together grows unto an holy Temple, etc. In whom you also are builded
together. Ephesians. 4.16. From whom the whole body fitly joined together, and
compacted by that which every joint supplies according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, etc. Therefore God building a Church for
himself, does with his own hand prepare the stones, polish them, and cyment
them: he does not expect that they should by hap hazard fit themselves, and
join themselves to the foundation.

4 Upon no less certainty of a special decree, the salvation of the Church is
foreordained to be effectually brought to pass by Christ, the^ that by which
Christ himself is sent. The same voice of God which at first promised Christ
to be exhibited, does also seal unto us by an absolute promise the effect
thereof, without any condition. Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman shall break
the Serpents head. But the Serpent is not crushed, but by the certain freeing
of some men from the captivity of Satan, and transplantation into the kingdom
of the Son of God. Esa. 53.10. When thou shall make his soul an offering for
sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days. Hebr. 2.13. Behold
I and the children which God has given me. Therefore the decree of God,
concerning the continuance of his seed to be adopted into the household of
Christ, is inseparably knit to the decree of laying down Christ's soul for
sin: and unto Christ offering himself for a sacrifice children are given,
not by or of themselves, but of God, who indeed gave Christ unto them.

5 If the fruit of Christ's passion be only conditional, then the benefit
redounding from the second Adam is not more certain then it had been from the
first Adam, for to him salvation was propounded under this condition (Do this,
and live,) which condition that he might perform if he would, ability was given
him by God, yet not so that he should without fail perform it actually. But
in the new Testament, grace being obtained for us by the death of Christ,
salvation is not only offered unto us under a condition, (believe and thou
shall be saved) but God brings to pass by his holy Spirit, that we believe
actually. Heb. 8.6. He is the Mediator of a better covenant, which was
established upon better promises. And what that promise is, it is evident, v.
10. I will put my laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts.

THE SECOND ERRONEOVS OPINION.
THat it was the proper and entire end of Christ's death, that he might purchase
right and power unto God the Father, to save men upon what conditions he would.

1 IF the death of Christ did purchase nothing else for us, then to open a
means for the making of any new covenant with mankind, then are we not freed
from the yoke of the Law, because notwithstanding this, it shall be free for
God the Father, yea even after the payment and acceptance of this sacrifice,
again to impose upon us the condition of performing the Law. But Christ to
take away the curse of the Law, was for us, that is, in our stead, and that
once, made (...), a curse, Gal. 3.13. Therefore we cannot, in respect of the
Law not performed by us, be made again guilty of the Law, and (...), the
second time accursed.

2 Christ by his death has merited for us the very reconciliation of our
persons with God, yea and grace to be actually imparted to us, Ioh. 1.16. Of
his fullness have all we received; Otherwise the second Adam (being the Lord
from Heaven) had bin less helpful to his, the^ the first Adam (being from the
earth earthly,) had been harmefull to his, both in respect of imputation, if
Christ had not undergone punishment for us, and also in respect of transfusion,
if no propagating grace be derived from Christ the head into his members.

THE THIRD ERRONEOVS OPINION.
THat Christ's death has obtained for all men, restitution into the state of
grace and salvation.

1 SAlvation is a thing promised by the new covenant, neither is it promised,
but upon the condition of faith. Whosoever believes shall be saved. Since
therefore all men have not faith in Christ, under which only condition salvation
is promised, it is certain that the death of Christ did not obtain for all,
but for the faithful alone, a restoring into the state of grace and salvation,
which is abundantly proved, by that of the Apostle, Romans 5.1. Being justified
by faith we have peace with God. By peace in that place we understand our
reconciliatio^ with God, who were formerly enemies, and our restoring into the
bosom of grace. This is also further enforced by those places, Romans 3.4. Gal.
2.16. Which prove that we are justified by faith alone in Christ, that is,
accounted by God for just persons.

2 Without faith in Christ, man does remain in the state of damnation, John
3.18. He is already judged. John 3.36. He shall not see life, but the wrath of
God remains on him. But they whosoever are restored into the bosom of grace,
every one of them has remission of sins, which makes men happy, Psalm. 32.1.
neither do they remain in condemnation; neither does the wrath of God remain
upon them. They therefore who want faith, are not restored, by the death of
Christ, into the state of grace or salvation, since through the name of Christ
no man obtains remission of sins, except he who believes in him, Acts
10.43.

3 If so be the death of Christ has obtained restitution for all, then are
they restored either then when Christ from all eternity was destinated to
death, which is false; For so no man should be borne a child of wrath, neither
should original sin any whit damage mankind, being according to this
opinion from all eternity forgiven them, neither should infants and other need
the laver of regeneration: which is contrary to the assertion of our Savior,
John 3.5. Except a man be borne of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. Or else they were restored in the person of our first
parents, when the promise of the seed of the woman was proclaimed. Which cannot
be. For our first parents were not restored into the state of grace, but by
faith in Christ, and consequently their posterity in like manner. Therefore not
all, whether believers or unbeleevers, are restored. Or lastly, when Christ
himself suffered death upon the Cross, which cannot be. For so no man before
that moment should have been restored, which will not be granted by any:
neither are all restored from that time, because without doubt even at that
moment and afterward, the anger of God waxed hot against some of his accusers,
condemners, crucifiers, and mockers.

Their Suffrage concerning the third and fourth ARTICLES.
First of the strength of freewill in man after the fall.
THE FIRST POSITION.
THe will of man being fallen, is deprived of the supernatural and saving
graces with which it was endowed in the state of innocence, and therefore to
the performing of any spiritual actions it is able to do nothing without the
assistance of grace.

THat the will of man was endowed with excellent graces, it is hence manifest,
because man was made after the Image of God. But the jmage of God had the prime
place in the chief faculty of the soul, and what these graces were with which
the will of man was beautified in the Creation, it is evident out of those
things, which are restored for the making whole again of this Image, Ephesians.
4.24. Put ye on that new man, which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness. And that this righteousness, holiness and uprightness of our
will was lost by the fall, it is clear by this second receiving the same,
being recovered by the grace of God in Christ. For we are to put on anew, that
which we put off in Adam, when he was stripped and left naked.

And that such a will as this of ours availes nothing to the performance of
supernatural actions, the Scripture clearly witnesses, John 15.5. Without me
you can do nothing. Romans 5.6. When as yet we were of no strength, etc. 2 Cor.
3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves.

L^chirid. c. 30.
Hence is that saying of St. Austin, What good can a wicked man do except so
far forth as he is freed from perdition. And again, Our will is so far
said to be free, as it is freed.

THE SECOND POSITION.
THere is in the will of a man being fallen, not only a possibility of
sinning, but also an headlong inclination to sin.

THis possibility was in the will, even when it was incorrupt, as it is too
evident by the event. But after the fall, even by the fall, there was over and
above added, a greedy thirst and desire to sin. Job 15.16. Man drinks
iniquity like water. A content and delight in sin, Prove. 2.14. Who rejoice to
do evil, and delight in the frowardness of the wicked, Genesis 6.5. Every
imagination of the thoughts of man's heart was evil continually. A slavery
under sin, Romans 6.17. Ye were the servants of sin. Lastly, death in sin,
Ephesians. 2.2. You were dead in sins and trespasses.

Neither can the case stand otherwise in corrupt man not yet restored by the
grace of God, since that such is the nature of the will, that it cannot remain
single or utterly unfurnished, but falling from one object, to which it did
adhere, it pursues another eagerly to embrace it. And therefore being by a
voluntary Apostasy habitually turned from God the Creator, it runs to the
creature, with an unbridled appetite, and in a lustful and base manner commits
fornication with it, being always desirous to set her heart and rest on those
things which ought only to be used on the By, and to attempt and accomplish
things forbidden. What marvel then if such a will be the bondslave of the
devil? Luke 11.21. When a strong man armed keeps his place, his goods are in
peace, etc.

The will without charity is nothing but a vicious desire. Augu. Retract. 1.5.


Of those things that go before Conversion.
THE FIRST POSITION.
THere are certain external works ordinarily required of men before they be
brought to the state of regeneration, or conversion, which are wont sometimes
to be performed freely by them, and otherwhiles freely omitted, as to go to
Church, to hear the word preached, or the like.

THat such things are required it is manifest, Romans 10.4. How shall they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard. And that they are in our power
both reason tells us, seeing it is in every man's power to rule his moving
faculty; and experience proves it, because we see, in outward things, men, as
they will themselves, do this or that, or omit both. They can therefore sit at
home, when they should go to Church. It is in their power to stop their ears
when the Preacher speaks. Mark 6.20. Herod heard John gladly. Acts 13 46. The
Jews refuse to hear the Gospel. Psalm. 58.4. The wicked stop their ears like
the deaf Adder.

THE SECOND POSITION.
THere are certain inward effects going before conversion, or regeneration,
which by the power of the word and Spirit are stirred up in the hearts of men
not yet justified; As are, a knowledge of Gods will, a sense of sin, a fear
of punishment, a bethinking of freedom, and some hope of pardon.

THE grace of God is not wont to bring men to the state of justification (in
which we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ) by a sudden
Enthusiasme, or rapture, but by diverse degrees of foregoing actions taming and
preparing them through the Ministry of the word.

1 This we may see in those, who upon hearing S. Peter's Sermon, feel the
burden of their sin, are stricken with fear and sorrow, desire deliverance,
and conceive some hope of pardon: All which may be collected of those words,
Acts 2.37 When they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said to
Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?

2 This the very nature of the thing requires; for as in the natural
generation of man there are many previous dispositions, which go before the
bringing in of the form: so also in the spiritual generation, by many actions
of grace which must go before, do we come to the spiritual nativity.

3 To conclude, this appears by the instruments which God uses for the
regenerating of men. For he imployeth the Ministry of men, and the instrument
of the word, 1 Cor. 4.15. I have begotten you through the Gospel. But if God
would regenerate or justify a wicked man immediately, being prepared by no
knowledge, no sorrow, no desire, no hope of pardon, there would be no need of
the ministry of men, nor of the preaching of the word for this purpose:
neither would any care lie upon the Ministers, dividing the word of God aright,
fitly and wisely first to wound the consciences of their auditors with the
terrors of the Law, then to raise them up with the promises of the Gospel, and
to exhort them to beg faith and repentance at Gods hand, by prayers and tears.

THE THIRD POSITION.
WHom God does thus prepare by his Spirit through the means of the word, those
does he truly and seriously call and invite to faith and conversion.

BY the nature of the benefit offered, and by the evident word of God we must
judge of those helps of grace, which are bestowed upon men, and not by the
abuse, or the event. Therefore when the Gospel of its own nature calls men to
repentance, and salvation, when the incitements of divine grace tend the same
way, we must not suppose any thing is done fainedly by God. This is proved by
those earnest and patheticall entreaties, 2 Cor. 5.20. We pray you in Christ's
stead be ye reconciled unto God. Those exhortations, 2 Cor. 6.1. We beseech
you that you receive not the grace of God in vain: those expostulations, Gal.
1.6. I marvel that you are so soon removed from him, that called you to the
grace of Christ: those promises, Apoc. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and
knock; if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him.

But if God should not seriously invite all, whom he vouchsafes this gift of
his word and Spirit, to a serious conversion, surely both God should deceive
many, whom he calls in his Sons name, and the messengers of the Evangelical
promises might be accused of false witness, and those, who being called to
conversion do neglect to obey, might be more excusable. For that calling by
the word and the Spirit cannot be thought to leave men unexcusable, which is
only exhibited to this end to make them unexcusable.

THE FOVRTH POSITION.
THose whom God has thus disposed, he does not forsake, nor cease to further
them in the true way to conversion, before he be forsaken of them by a
voluntary neglect or repulse of this initiall or entering grace.

THe talent of grace once given by God is taken from none, but from him, who
first buries it by his own fault. Mat. 25.28. Hence is it that in the
Scriptures every where we are admonished, that we resist not the Spirit, that
we quench not the Spirit, that we receive not the grace of God in vain, Heb.
3.7.
that we depart not from God. Yea that is most evidently noted to be the
reason of Gods forsaking man, because God is first forsaken by man. Prove. 1.24.
Because I have called and you refused, I will laugh at your calamity. 2 Chronicles.
24.20. Because ye have forsaken the Lord, he has also forsaken you. But never
in the Scriptures is there the least mention that God is wont, or is willing,
at any time, without some fault of man going before, to take away from any man
the aid of his exciting grace, or any help which he has once conferred toward
man's conversion.

Thus the Orthodoxe Fathers, who had to do with the Pelagians ever taught.
Aug. vel Prosp. ad (...) 7.
It is the will of God that we continue in a good will, who before he be
forsaken forsakes no man, and oftentimes converts many that forsake him.

THE FIFTH POSITION.
THese foregoing effects wroght in the minds of men by the power of the word
and the Spirit, may be stifled and utterly extinguished by the fault of our
rebellious will, and in many are, so that some, in whose hearts by the virtue
of the word and the Spirit, some knowledge of divine truth, some sorrow for
sin, some desire and care of deliverance have been imprinted, are changed
quite contrary, reject and hate the truth, deliver themselves up to their
lusts, are hardened in their sins, and, without all desire or care of freedom
from them, rot and putrify in them.

Matthew. 13.19. The wicked one comes and catches away that which was sown in
his heart. 2 Pet. 2.21. It had been better for them not to have known the way
of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment delivered unto them. But it is happened to them according to the
true Proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit. Heb. 6.4. It is impossible
for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gifts, and
were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God,
and the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to return them
again to repentance.

Many do quickly entertain the light of the mind, Prosp. de vocat. lib. 2.
cap. 2.
but the understanding it self has not the same force or power in all, and
many when they seem enriched with faith and understanding, yet they want
charity, and cannot hold fast to those things which they see by faith, and
understanding, because there is no persevering in that which is not loved with
the whole heart.

THE SIXTH POSITION.
THe very elect in those acts going before regeneration, do not carry
themselves so, but that for their negligence and resistance, they may justly be
relinquished and forsaken of God, but such is the special mercy of God toward
them, that, though they do for a while repel and choke the grace of God,
exciting or enlightening them, yet God does urge them again and again, nor
does he cease to stir them forward, till he have thoroughly subdued them to
his grace, and set them in the state of regenerate sons.

John 6.37. Whatsoever my Father gives me shall come to me, and him that
comes unto me I will in no wise cast out. Ier. 14.7. O Lord, though our
iniquities testify against us, do thou it for thy names sake: for our
backslidings are many. And 32.39. I will give them one heart and one way, that
they may fear me for ever. Philip. 1.6. He that has begun a good work in
you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.

But if God should not go on thus to follow even those that hold off and
retire from him, no calling would be effectual, there would be no filial
adoption, and even election it self, grounded upon the good pleasure of God,
would be frustrated.

Since the fall of man, Aug. de persev.
God would have it ascribed to his grace that a man does come unto him, neither
will he have it ascribed to any thing but his grace, that a man does not go
from him.

THE SEVENTH POSITION.
THose that are not elected, when they resist the Spirit of God, and his grace,
in these acts foregoing regeneration, and extinguish the initiall effects of
the same in themselves, by the fault of their own free will, are justly
forsaken by God, whenever it pleases him: whom by their own fault so
forsaken, we truly pronounce to remain by the same demerit hardened and
unconverted.

WE think it to be without all doubt, that no mortal man does so carry himself
toward God, but that either by omitting that, which he should have done, or
committing that, which he should not have done; he deserves to have the grace
taken from him, which he has. Which ground being forelayed, it is clear,
that God without all injustice and cruelty may take from such men that grace,
which he has extended to them, and leave them to the hardness of their own
hearts, Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
will he hardens. God owes this to no man, that when he resists enlightening
and exciting grace, and serves his own lusts, he should then soften and
mollify him by that special grace, which no hard heart does resist, Romans
11.35. Who has first given unto him, and it shall be recompensed unto him
again? Again he, that is thus forsaken, being not converted, perishes through
his own fault, John 5.34.40. I say these things that ye might be saved, and
ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life. Acts 28. The heart of this
people is waxed gross, lest they should be converted and I should heal them.

Of conversion, as it designs the immediate work of God regenerating men.
THE FIRST POSITION.
GOd does regenerate, by a certain inward and wonderful operation, the souls
of the elect, being stirred up and prepared by the aforesaid acts of his grace;
and does, as it were, create them anew, by infusing his quickening spirit, and
seasoning all the faculties of the soul with new qualities.

HEre, by regeneration we understand not every act of the holy Spirit, which
goes before or tends to regeneration, but that act, which as soon as it is
there, we conclude presently this man is now borne of God.

This spiritual birth presupposes a mind moved by the spirit, using the
instrument of Gods Word, whence also we are said to be borne again by the
incorruptible seed of the word, 1 Pet. 1.23. Which must be observed, lest any
one should idly and slothfully expect an Enthusiasticall regeneration, that
is to say, wrought by a sudden rapture without any foregoing action either of
God, the Word, or himself.

Furthermore we conclude that the spirit regenerating us, does convey it self
into the most inward closset of the heart, and frame the mind anew by curing
the sinful inclinations thereof, and by giving it strength, and infusing into
it a formal original cause or active power to produce spiritual actions
tending to salvation, Ephesians. 2.10. We are his workmanship created in Christ
Jesus to good works. Ezekiel. 36.26. I will take away your stony heart, and give
you an heart of flesh.

From this work of God comes our ability of performing spiritual actions
leading to salvation. As the act of believing, 1 John 5.1. Whosoever believes
that Jesus is the Christ, is borne of God. Of loving, 1 John 4.7. Every one
that loves is borne of God. Lastly, all works of piety, John 15.5. Without me
ye can do nothing.

Prosper says that Grace creates good in us. De lib arb.


The Schoolmen do not deny so manifest a truth. Quaest disp. de verit. art. 2.
Thomas Aquinas affirms, that this grace, of which we speak, does give a
certain spiritual being to the soul, that it is a certain supernatural
pertaking of the divine nature, that it is, in respect of the soul, as health
is in respect of the body.

THE SECOND POSITION.
IN this work of regeneration, man is merely passive, neither is it in the
power of man's will to hinder God regenerating thus immediately.

John 1.13. Which were borne, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor
of the will of man, but of God. For if in the natural creation it be true that
God made us, and not we ourselves, much more in the spiritual recreation, Ier
13.23. If the Ethiopian cannot change his skin; neither can man defiled with
sin correct his natural corruption.

In the will depraved there is the passive power to receive this supernatural
being, coming from without, but not the active to produce it of it self, or
with another, Ier. 17.14. Heal me O Lord, and I shall be healed.

In quickening of men God does expect no beginning from man's will, Epistola
Synodica Episcopo^is African.
but he quickneth the will it self, by making it good.

Bern de great and lib. ar. Bern ibidem.
What does freewill? I answer briefly; It is saved. This work cannot be
effected without two* one, by whom it is done, the other, in whom it is done.
God is the Author of salvation, freewil is only capable of it.

Aug. de cor. and gra. cap. 14.
Our creation in Christ was made into the freedom of the will, and without us;
if into freedom, then not out of freedom; If without us, then it is not in us
to hinder this work of God.

When God determines to save, no will of man resists.

Of Conversion, as it imports what man himself does in turning to God by faith
and saving repentance.
THE FIRST POSITION.
Upon the former conversion follows this our actual conversion, wherein out
of our reformed will, God himself draws forth the very act of our believing,
and converting: and this our will being first moved by God, does it self also
work by turning unto God, and believing, that is, by executing withal its
own proper lively act.

1 IN order of time the work of God converting man, and the act of man turning
himself to God, can hardly be distinguished, but in order of causality or
efficiency, Gods work must needs go before, and ours follow; An evil tree,
naturally bringing forth evil fruit, must needs be changed into a good tree,
before it can bear any good fruit: but the will of an unregenerate man, is,
not only as a bad, but as a dead tree* Therefore if it bring forth good fruit,
it does it, not that thereby it may be bettered, or that by its own
cooperation it may be quickened; but it does it, because it is already changed
and quickened.

This is elegantly expressed by Saint Austin. A wheel (says he) does not
therefore run well, Ad Simpli. lib. 1. q. 2.
that it may be round, but because it is round. So say we, the will runs
well, not that it may be regenerated, but because it is already regenerated.

De Sacram. fid. page 242.
Hugo de sancto Victore to the same purpose: Renewing grace (says he) causes
a reformed will first to exist, then gives power to this will to be moved:
first it works the will, afterward it works by the will.

2 Secondly, we say that God does not only worked this habitual conversion,
whereby a man gets new spiritual ability to believe and convert, but also, that
God does, by a certain wonderful efficacy of his secret operation, extract
out of our regenerated will the very act of believing and converting. So the
Scripture speaks in diverse places. John 6.66. The Father gives us power to
come unto the Son, that is, to believe. Phil. 1.29. To you it is given to
believe, (...), the very act of believing. 2 Timothy 2.26. God gives repentance.

But if God by infusing some strength into us should only give us a possibility
or power of believing, a possibility or power of converting, and so leave the
act to the free will of men; surely we should all do as our first father did,
by our free will we should fall from God, neither should we ever bring this
possibility into act. This therefore is that excellent special grace granted to
the elect in Christ, whereby they not only can believe if they will, but also
will believe then when they can. Phil. 2.13. God works in us the will and the
deed. This working grace the Fathers of the Catholic Church have maintained
against the Pelagians. God commands a man to will, In Epist. Synod. African.
but he also works in him this very thing, namely, he commands him to do, but
also works in him the doing.

Aug de great. Christ. cap. 14.
Every one, that has learned of the Father, has not only power to come, but
comes indeed: where there is both the progress of our possibility, the
desire of our will, and the very effect of action.

Aug de praedest. Sanct.
God effects our faith, working in our hearts after a wonderful manner to
make us believe.

3 Lastly, this also we add, that this action of God in producing faith, does
not hinder, but rather is the cause that the will does work together with God,
and produce its own act. And therefore this act of believing, howsoever it is
sent from God, yet, because it is performed by man, is attributed to man
himself. Romans 10.10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness. 2 Cor.
4.13. I believed: therefore have I spoken.

Aug. de persev. lib. 2. cap. 2.
It is God, not who believes all things in all men, but who works all things
in all men: it is certain we believe when we believe, but it is God who brings
to pass that we believe: we are they that work, but God works in us the
very working.

THE SECOND POSITION.
THis action of God does not hinder the freedom of the will, but strengthen it,
neither does it root out the vicious power we have to resist, but it does
effectually and sweetly bestow on a man a resolute will to obey.

1 HEre we deny two things; first, that by the divine operation there is any
wrong offered to the will. For God does so work in nature, even when he
raises and advances it above its proper sphere, that he does not destroy the
particular nature and being of any thing, but leaves to every thing its own
way and motion to perform the action. When therefore God works in the wills
of men by his Spirit of grace, he makes them move in their natural course,
that is, freely: and then do they work the more freely, by how much they are
the more effectually stirred up by the Spirit. John 8.36. If the Son shall
make you free, you shall be free indeed. 2 Cor. 3.17. Where the Spirit of the
Lord is, there is liberty. Verily it seems incredible to us, that God, who
made our wills, and gifted them with liberty, should not be able to work on
them, or in them, after such a manner, as that without hurting the natures of
them, he may freely to produce any good action by them.

Aug. de cor. c. 14.
He does what he pleases with the wills of men, and when he pleases: having
an all-sufficient power to incline men's hearts which way he lists.

Prosp. de vocat. gent. l. 2. cap. 36.
We so believe this more abundant grace to be powerful, that we withal deny
it to be violent.

2 A second thing which we here disclaim, is the whole extirpation of
corruption. For although God in the very act of regeneration does work so
powerfully upon the will, that actually the present power to resist is
suspended for that time, yet does he not pluck up by the roots, no not for
that time, the remote power of resisting, which (as the Schoolmen speak) is
potentia in actu primo posita, a power of the first and youngest growth, but
he suffers it to lurk and lie hid in the bitter root thereof. For so long as
that root of corrupt and corrupting concupiscence remains in the soul of man,
certain it is that there must needs be there withal, not only a possibility
but also a pronenesse to resist the motions of the holy spirit, Gal. 5.7. The
flesh lusts against the spirit. But this reluctant power, by reason of the
most forcible, and yet sweet or gentle motion of grace, cannot in this case and
at this time break forth in actum secundum, into present operation and
exercise. Pro. 21.2. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, he turns it
whithersoever it pleases him. And consequently the hearts of other men less
free.

This grace cannot be resisted, Robertus Sarisbur. de veritate great. page 20.
because first it works in us to will, that is, not to resist: for he can no
farther resist, from whom to will to resist is taken away; as excellently
writes our Reverend late Bishop of Salisbury.

THE THIRD POSITION.
GOd does not always so move a converted and faithful man to godly ensuing
actions, that he takes from him the very will of resisting, but sometimes he
suffers him, through his own weakness, to stray from the direction of grace,
and in many particular actions to follow his own concupiscence.

WE must always put a difference between those principal acts, without
which the Elect cannot be saved (such as are, to turn unto God, to believe, to
persevere) and particular ensuing acts, which being considered by themselves,
are not absolutely necessary to salvation, as the avoiding of this, and that
sin; the not omitting of such and such a good deed. For the performing of the
former actions, grace does so work that it gives the Elect both power and will
to accomplish them. But, as for the latter, there is not wanting unto us, the
motion and guidance of Gods Spirit through the whole course of our lives; yet
so, that we may be wanting unto those motions of grace; yea and too too often
we are wanting unto them, and ever and an on we both freely and foully obey
our own corruptions. Hence that of the Apostle, Gal. 5.16. Walk in the
spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve
not the spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. For
they are said to grieve the holy Spirit, who resist the guidance thereof, and
with a servile liberty go after their own concupiscenes, contrary to the
motion of grace, and suggestion of their own conscience.

Erroneous Opinions which we reject.
THE FIRST.
THat the will is not capable of spiritual gifts; and that therefore there
never were any spiritual gifts in the will of man before his fall; that these
graces were never severed from the will of man upon his fall, and that such
graces are never infused in regeneration into the wills of men.

THe holy Scripture, in placing Gods spiritual gifts in the heart,
acknowledges also them to be in the will. As namely uprightness or truth,
Psalm. 32.12. Rejoice all ye that are true in heart: purity, Mat. 5.8. Blessed
are the pure in heart: goodness, Luke 8.15. They are those, which with an honest
and good heart hear the word of God and keep it.

1 But if any man shall refer these graces to the affections, and place them
without the will, he shall (which were a foul enormity) settle the chiefest
gifts of divine grace in the unreasonable part of the soul. Moreover, the very
habitual conversio^ of the will unto God the Creator, and the aversion or
turning away thereof from the inordinate desire it had to commit fornication
with the creature, without doubt is to be counted a chief and principal gift.
And that the will was capable of this gift, it does hence plainly appear,
because it was created with such uprightness. For God in the beginning made
man righteous. But that this righteousness is lost, it is over manifest by the
effects, seeing that now the will being carnal, cannot choose but enjoy and
rest in those things which it ought only to make use of, and use the things
which it ought rather to enjoy: forasmuch as a whole trope of sinful
dispositions have rushed and broke in upon the will.

2 Furthermore, as the will of a mere natural man, is said to be vicious from
a certain inbred and inhere^t wickedness, which in a wicked man even the^ when he
does nothing, is habitual, so again we must acknowledge that in the will of
the regenerate there is a certain righteousness, infused and given from God,
which is presupposed in their religious actions

Saint Austin in many places sets forth this habitual righteousness.

The good will of man goes before many graces of God, Enchir. cap. 32.
but not before all, and this good will it self is to be reckoned among those
gifts which it self cannot precede.

But lest any man should dream that this goodness of the will is not an
inward gift infused into that very faculty, but only a bare denomination
fetched from the act of the will; De vocat. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Prosper calls it the first plantation of the heavenly husbandman. Now a
plantation notes something engrafted in the soul, not an act or action flowing
from the soul.

THE SECOND ERRONEOVS OPINION.
THat that grace, by which we are converted is only a gentle and moral
swasion or inducement.

WE deny not, but in the work of conversion, whether in fitting us for that
future grace, or in confirming us therein, as already performed, God uses the
persuasive force of his threats, promises and exhortations, by which he
allureth, stirs, and ploweth up the fallowes of men's hearts. But moreover,
for adding without fail the last close to this operation, he works more
powerfully and unconquerably, according to the exceeding greatness of his
power, and the working of his might, Ephesians. 1.19. Neither is swasion
sufficient, which no more then contingently affects and inviteth the will.

1 For moral swasion, moves only by way of object, and so far forth as the
end propounded can allure. But the Philosophers rightly determine, that, as the
inclination of any one is, accordingly he apprehends the end; So long
therefore as a man is carnal and unregenerate, his will cannot so be affected
with supernatural benefits proposed unto it, that by the desire of them he
should be thoroughly enflamed to believe and convert. But the will must be
overcome and changed by a powerful operation exceeding all swasion, that so it
may effectually embrace the good represented unto it.

2 If men should be converted unto God only by a moral swasion, then this
question, why, upon profer of equal grace, one man believes, another does not,
might be answered out of the free wills own power of willing or nilling,
neither should we have herein any cause to admire the unsearchable wisdom and
justice of our God. But this sound doctrine has always been defended against
the Pelagians, Aug. de persev, l. 1. cap. 7.
That conversion and faith comes from the secret grace of God, which according
to his mercy is afforded to some, and according to his justice is not
vouchsafed to others.

3 If men were converted only by moral swasion, he which receives this
swasive grace might truly say, I have separated my self: For I have received
this gentle and swasive grace, which has solicited me to faith and conversion,
but no more then it solicited others: they, by the liberty of their free will,
did reject this moral swasion, and therefore they still remain unconverted;
but I, by the liberty of my free will, have given way and embraced the same
swasion, and therefore I am converted. To what purpose then is that of Saint
Paul, Who has separated thee? What have thou, which thou have not received?

Aug. de praedest. cap. 9.
Faith both begun and perfected is the gift of God, and no man, who does not
oppose most manifest Scripture, will doubt, but that this gift is given to
some, and not given to other some.

THE THIRD ERRONEOVS OPINION.
THat, presupposing all the operations of grace, which God uses for the
effecting of this conversion, yet the will of man is still left in an equal
balance, either to believe, or not to believe, to convert, or not to convert
it self to God.

1 IF after all the workings of grace the will of man be left in eaven point,
it will necessarily follow, that, not God by his grace, but man by his
free will, is the chief cause and author of the very act of believing and
converting. For he, who by the utmost dint and strain of his grace prevailed
no further, then to raise up a man's will to an indifferency, or estate of
equal balance, does not concur, as a principal and predominant, or
over-ruler, but only as an associate, and contingently, that is, upon this
condition, if so be that the will, by its own natural power, first shall have
removed it self from that equality. That therefore which is of less moment,
the will receives from God, namely, that it should be placed in a certain
middle estate, equally inclined to believe, or not to believe, but that, which
is of greater moment, as specifying the very event, that is, actually to
believe, this the will by its own power has performed.

2 It would else follow, that God affords no more grace to the Elect, then to
those, who are not elected, and that those owe no more thank to God, then the
other: in as much as the hand of God has wrought in both nothing else, but an
eaven stand of the will: which equally consists in a point, and is not capable
of any latitude, or degree.

3 The grace of conversion is given with that intention, that it shall become
effectual, and shall not only set a man forward on his way, but also bring
him to perform the very act of faith, whither although such grace might
perchance sometime reach by the sway of man's will, equally poised to embrace
and follow the motions of grace, yet no less often should such grace be
frustrated by reason of the same free will, likewise placed at eaven balance,
and freely thence settling it self to refuse grace, and to resist it. For in
level counterpoise there is always presupposed an equal hazard of settling to
either side.

Aug. de praedest. Sanct. c. 8.
This grace is refused by no hard heart: For it is therefore given, that the
hardness of the heart be first taken away.

THE FOVRTH ERRONEOVS OPINION.
THat a man cannot do any more good, then he does, nor omit any more evil
then, he does omit.

THis is most false and absurd, whether it be spoken of an unregenerate and
natural man, or of one that is regenerate, and supported by sanctifying grace.

1 First, concerning the state of a natural man, although he cannot put off
his inbred corruption, nor shake off the dominion of sin in general, yet can
he repress many outward actions, in which he lets loose the reins to his own
concupiscences. Corrupt concupiscence enclines a wicked man to all kind of
evil, yet it does not determine or confine him unavoydably to commit this or
that sin in particular, as to act this murder, that robbery, that adultery.

2 This is manifest also in that the very lewdest men attempt their wickedness
not without some precedent deliberation, and most free contriving of the means
tending thereto, and being ready to commit the act, they have power to hold in
and restrain themselves, being awed by the reverence of some other man, or
through some present fear of danger.

3 Lastly, punishments by the Laws of men should be without cause menaced, if
no man could omit those crimes which he does commit.

But as for actions which are in themselves good, certain it is that
unregenerate men do omit many outward moral acts, which for the substance of
the work they could perform, and for the voluntary neglect of such actions
they are justly condemned. Matt. 25. 42. I was an hungry, and ye gave me no
meat: I was athirst, and ye gave me no drink, etc.

Likewise the same is to be avowed concerning those that are regenerated and
truly sanctified; to wit, that although they are freed from the dominion of
sin, Romans 6.14.18. Being made the servants of righteousness. Romans 8.1. Which
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit: They can notwithstanding, and
that voluntarily, step out of the strait path of righteousness, even then
also, when they do not transgress: In like manner then, when they fell or
slipped, they were able by the help and power of grace, through their free
(that is, freed) will, to have resisted their own concupiscence, and to have
avoided those manifest works of the flesh recounted, Gal. 5.9. Fornication,
uncleanness, debate, contentions, etc. What man of sound judgment will say
that David could not but commit adultery, and, that being committed, that he
could not choose but by a lewd and deliberate plot take away the life of him,
to whom he had offered that extreme wrong? But (that we go not far for
examples) we appeal unto the consciences of all godly men. Who is he, that
daily praying unto God, Forgive us our trespasses, does not also acknowledge
that through the grace of God it was in his power to perform diverse good
works which yet he has omitted, and likewise to overcome diverse temptations,
to which he notwithstanding has yielded. 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above that you be able, but will even give
the issue with the tentation, that you may be able to bear it.

Their Suffrage concerning the fifth ARTICLE.
Which is of the perseverance of the Saints.

IN this Article when question is made concerning the perseverance of the
Saints, it is to be understood, that we treat of those Saints only, which are
come to the use of reason, and are justified by the Act of faith formed in them
by the preaching of the Gospel; and who are supposed by the act of their own
wills to persevere in the same faith, or else to fail in their perseverance.

Collat. Hag. Bert. part. 2. page 10.
1 It is manifest out of the fifth Article of the Remonstrants, that they are
here intended, who are grafted into Christ by a true actual faith; But those
only who are of ripe years, are grafted into Christ by a lively faith.

2 It is also proved by the connection of the Articles. For in the fourth
article the Remonstrants labor to prove, that God works faith in men by such
a power and grace, as man may resist; and consequently that God by a resistible
power, does keep and preserve faith already wrought in the hearts of the
faithful; whereupon they infer, that, that man, who once had faith, may lose
the same, as further appears in the state of this controversy set down by
the Remonstrants. Collat. ibidem. page 150.
But God does effect and preserve faith in that manner in those only, who are
grown to ripe years: For as much as they only have power freely to withstand
grace.

3 Thirdly the Remonstrants affirm, that perseverance, of which we treat here,
to be a gift offered equally to all the faithful with this condition, namely,
if they shall not be wanting to themselves in the entertainment of this
sufficient grace: which assertion plainly supposes, that this Article ought to
be understood concerning the perseverance of them, who are come unto ripe
years, only they being able through the use of their freewill, to be wanting
to this sufficient grace, as those, in whose power the use of this liberty is.

If the Remonstrants had more diligently weighed these things, they might have
foreborne their argument taken from infants baptized, to avow the Apostasy of
the justified; especially those who deny that there is any donation of real
grace in the baptism of Infants. Ibidem. Page 19.


Because in this Article two things there are which are usually questioned, the
one, whether they, who are not Elect, may ever come to the state of
sanctification and justification, whereby they may be reckoned among the number
of the Saints, the other, whether the Elect, who are justified and sanctified,
do at any time wholly fall off from this estate. Therefore in the first place
we set down those Positions, by which we show how far they, who are not
Elect may go on in the way.

Touching those who are not Elect.
THE FIRST POSITION.
THere is a certain supernatural enlightening granted to some of them, who
are not elect, by the power whereof they understand those things to be true,
which are revealed in the Word of God, and yield an unfaigned assent unto them.

THe truth of the position concerning the first part, namely the enlightening
of their minds, is plainly collected out of the Scriptures, Heb. 6.4. Where
the Apostle makes mention of such as sinned against the holy Ghost, affirming
that they were enlightened, and in the 10. Chap. and 26. Verse. he intimates
that they might wilfully sin after they had received the knowledge of the
truth. The Apostle Peter also, 2 Pet. 2.22. makes mention of some, who, when
they knew the way of righteousness, nevertheless turned from the holy
commandment which was given unto them. Judas was the son of perdition, Ioh.
17.12. yet he was furnished with the knowledge of the Gospel; and thereupon
was sent by Christ with the other Apostles to preach the Gospel to the house
of Israel, Mat. 10.7. And Christ threatens the like punishments to them that
despise the preaching of Judas, as of (...) 9. All those were enlightened with
a supernatural knowledge of the truth of the Gospel. Which illumination
proceeding from the holy Ghost did beget a true knowledge in the minds of
these men: out of which knowledge they, as occasion required, brought forth
actions suitable to the same. Yea it may come to pass, that an heathen
Philosopher may apprehend more accurately and distinctly the mysteries of
Christ's Incarnation, and in his understanding more subtly discern the unity
of the person and distinction of natures, then an unlearned Christian.

Concerning the unfeigned assent which may be, and often is, yielded to the
Gospel by some, who are not elected, there is the like evidence, Luke 8.13. The
seed which fell upon the stony ground notes to us such hearers, as for a while
believe, that is, those which give assent to things revealed from above; See
Calvin upon that place.
and especially to the covenant of the Gospel. And thereby it is plain, that
this their assent was no way fained, because they received the word with joy.
Acts 8.30. Even Simon Magus himself believed Philip preaching concerning the
Kingdom of God, and was baptized for testimony of his faith. Hymenaeus and
Alexander made shipwreck of their faith, which was not dissembled, or fained,
but true. For it is not to be imputed for a fault to any man, that he is fallen
from an hypocritical faith, neither can shipwreck be made of a fained faith,
but only a detection and manifestation of it. Nor indeed can he suffer
shipwreck who never was in the ship, 2 Pet. 2.20. Some are said to have
escaped from the filthiness of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord,
whose latter end is worse then their beginning. This knowledge does intimate,
not a bare apprehension, but withal an assent yielded unto the things known,
whence came that escape from the filthiness of the world, John 12.42. It is
recorded that among the chief Rulers many believed on him, but because of the
Pharisees they did not confess him, least they should be cast out of the
Synagogue: for they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God. They
believed with an unfeigned dogmaticall faith which then lay secretly hid in
their hearts, but never showed it self in any outward profession, for fear of
danger ensuing. Who, as St. Augustine speaks, if they should go on forward
upon their entrance into faith, Tract. 53. upon Saint John.
would also overcome the love of humane glory by their farther progress in
faith.

All backsliders of this kind are justly reproved, and punished, not because
they fained that faith they never had, but because they forsook the faith they
had: and they sin in a far greater measure, which depart from the grace of
faith conferred upon them, then they who never tasted of the glad tidings of
the Gospel, as our Savior teaches us, John 15.22.

THE SECOND POSITION.
IN these forementioned there does arise out of this knowledge and faith, a
certain change of their affections, and some kind of amendment of their
manners.

OVt of this said illumination and assent of faith, there does arise in such as
are not elect, some kind of mutation of their affections, as also amendment of
their lives. The first is plainly set down, Mat. 13.20. They heard the word,
and received it with joy. As also 1 Reg. 21, 27. And it came to pass when Ahab
heard those words, that he rent his clothes, and put sackcloath upon his
flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly. These behaviors were
evidences of his true sorrow conceived through the Prophets words, as appears
in that God rewarded this his humiliation, by removing temporal punishments,
as it is, v. 19. because he has humbled himself before me, I will not bring
the evil in his days.

Heb. 6.4. The Apostates there described, were not only enlightened, but had
tasted of the heavenly gift, the good Word of God, and the power of the world
to come. And in the 6 verse. it is intimated, that they were after a sort
renewed; and in the 10. Chap. and 16. verse. They who had received the
knowledge of the truth, verse. 24. are said to tread under foot the blood of the
Covenant, by which they are sanctified, Mat. 6.20. Herod heard John the Baptist
gladly.

Concerning some amendment of their conditions, the same is testified by the
example of the same Herod, who received John the Baptist, and when he had heard
him, did many things likewise, 2 Pet. 2.20. Some had escaped from the
filthiness of the world, through the knowledge of their Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. These had eschewed the pollutions of the world, by the operation and
knowledge of this faith; some also chap. 1. verse. 9. forget that they were
purged from their old sins, and out of such the unclean spirit is said to
have departed, Mat. 12.43.

In these, as the enlightening and assent, yielded to the truth revealed from
above, was not fained, but trve in its own kind and degree; so likewise was
the change of their affections and manners: namely these beginnings or
entrances were not fained or colorable, but proceeded out of the power of
those dispositions unto grace, and from the inspiration of the holy Ghost,
which they felt in themselves for a time, as is evident by their affections,
their joy, sorrow, and zeal, which they do not so much feign and make a show
of, as find to be truly in themselves.

Aug de correct great. cap 9.
Of such Saint Augustine thus speaks, They were not sons then when they were
in the profession, and had the name of sons, not because they fained their
righteousness, but because they remained not in that righteousness.

THE THIRD POSITION.
Upon those good beginnings, testified by the external works of obedience,
they are reputed, and by a charitable construction ought to be taken for
believers, justified, and sanctified men.

THey, who to these inward gifts of the holy Ghost, have added the outward
profession of a Christian faith, together with the amendment of their lives,
ought of right to be reckoned by us (who cannot find out or search into the
inward secrets of men's hearts) in the number of the faithful, of the
justified, and sanctified. This is plainly proved out of the Apostle Saint
Paul, who in his Epistles which he wrote to particular Churches, at Rome,
Corinth, Ephesus, etc. entitles them all promiscuously, beloved of God, Saints,
sanctified, Romans 1.7* 1 Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.1. Phil. 1.1. In like manner the
Apostle Peter, in the beginning of his first Epistle speaks unto the
dispersed strangers, in this form of speech; To the Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father, De Corr. et great. cap 9.
through the sanctification of the spirit. Add we to these the note of Saint
Augustine speaking of those, who were not elect. These, because they live
godly, are called the sons of God. And afterward again; There are some, who
are called of us the sons of God, because of the grace received by them for a
time, but yet they are not the sons of God.

THE FOVRTH POSITION.
THey, who are not elect (although they thus far proceed) yet they never
attain unto the state of adoption and justification: and therefore by the
Apostasy of these men, the Apostasy of the Saints is very erroneously
concluded.

ALthough they, who are not elect, being brought up and cherished in the
Churches bosom, are in their minds, will, and affections disposed by the
aforesaid preparatives tending in some sort to justification, yet are they not
thereupon placed in the state of justification or adoption. For they still
retain thoroughly settled in their hearts the strings and roots of their lewd
desires, to which they give themselves over, still they remain wedded to the
love of earthly things, and the hardness lurking in the secret corners of
their hearts is not taken away: so that either persecution or tentation
arising, they retire from grace, and being either entangled with the love of
pleasures, and enticements of the flesh, or carried away with some other vicious
affections, at length they show that they are lovers of themselves, and lovers
of pleasures, rather then lovers of God, and that they enjoy nothing less then
God, howsoever they may flatter themselves, but indeed that they would make use
of God, De Civit. Dei Lib. 15.
that they may enjoy the world, as S. Augustine speaks. Whence it is manifest
that they never really and truly attain that change and renovation of the
mind and affections, which accompanies justification, nay nor that which does
immediately prepare and dispose unto justification. For they never seriously
repent, they are never affected with hearty sorrow, for this cause, they have
offended God by sinning, nor do they come to any humble contrition of heart,
nor conceive a firm resolution not to offend any more; unto them is not given
repentance unto life, which is mentioned, Acts 10.18. nor that godly sorrow
which works repentance to salvation never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10.
they are not poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of God, Contra Julian.
lib. 5. cap 3.
Mat. 5.13. To this purpose is that of Saint Augustine, who speaking of the
reprobate, says, God brings none of them to that wholesome and spiritual
repentance, by which a man is reconciled to God in Christ. Add also that such
do never feel in themselves an earnest desire of reconciliation: They do not
hunger and thirst after righteousness. For such shall be filled, Matthew. 5.6.
And to them shall be given of the fountain of living water, which shall be in
them a well of water springing up to eternal life. John 4.14. Also they do
neither deny themselves, nor seriously bid defiance to their own lusts, nor
do they once feel in their hearts any such accounting of all things but loss
that they may win Christ, as the Apostle did, Phil. 3.8. And to conclude,
they never attain to that unfeigned lively faith which justifies a sinner, and
works through love, 2 Timothy 1.5. For this faith is the peculiar of the Elect,
and is not afforded to the not elected.

Furthermore, that only the Elect are justified, it is plain by that golden
chain of the Apostle, Romans 8.30. Whom he did predestinate, them he also
called, and whom he called them he also justified. De praedest. Sanct. cap. 17.
Those only, and no other, as out of S. Augustine we have shown at the first
Article.

Again the same Saint Augustine, Cont. advers. leg. and prophet. lib. 2. cap.
11.
God does not forgive the sins of all men, but of those whom he foreknew and
predestined.

It is plain also out of the Scriptures, that they, who are not elect, never
come unto the estate of adoption; For first the estate of adoption Ephesians. 1.5.
Who has predestined us, unto the adoption of Children by Christ Jesus.

Secondly, the state of adoption, as also the For as many as received him, to
the^ he gave power, that is, aright and privilege that they should be the Sons
of God, John 1*12*
to wit, to such as believe in his name. Also, ye are all the sons of God by
faith in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3.27.
But this faith is proper to the Elect as was before declared.

3 All that are adopted for sons are regenerated, and that by the
incorruptible seed, 1 Pet. 1.23.
by the word of the living God. 1 John 3.9.
Whosoever is borne of God does not commit sin, because his seed remains in
him.

Romans 8.17. Gal. 4.7.
4 Those adopted sons are also heirs, heirs of God, and coheires with Christ,
and do receive the earnest of their inheritance. But they who are not elect
are never regenerated by this incorruptible seed, neither have they the seed of
God remaining in them, neither are they assigned to be heirs with Christ.
Hence is that of Saint Augustine. De corr. and great. cap. 9.
They were not in the number of sons, no not when they were in the faith of
sons. Again, As they were not the true Disciples of Christ, so neither were
they the true Sons of God, yea even when they seemed to be and were so
called. De Jacob. cap. 6.
And Saint Ambrose: What, can God the Father make void those gifts he has
bestowed, and banish those from the grace of his fatherly affection whom he
has made his sons by adoption?

C. 3. Distinct. 10. q. 1* art. 1.
Gabriel Biel says, It is plain that those whom God foresaw are not his
adopted sons because they are not preordained by the will of God unto
everlasting inheritance.

Apostasy is only of those, who never reached home to true justification, and
to the state of adoption. But as for those, who are the chosen sons of God,
and endued with true sanctity, their perseverance is certain and undoubted,
as we shall show afterward. Either therefore the Apostasy of the true sons of
God ought to have been proved by evident places of Scripture, or else that
offensive name and title, of the Apostasy of the Saints, should have been
forborne.

Of Perseverance, As it concerns the Elect, and of the certainty thereof in it
self.
THE FIRST POSITION.
BEsides that dogmaticall faith and some kind of amendment in affections and
manners, there is in due time given to the Elect justifying faith, regenerating
grace, and all other gifts, by which they are translated from the state of
wrath unto the state of adoption and salvation.

WHen God deals with his Elect, he stays not in certain preparatives, and
initiall operations, but always finisheth his work, by induing them with a
lively faith, by justifying and adopting them, and by changing them from the
state of death to the state of life. This the Apostle shows, Romans 8.30. Whom
he has predestined, those he also called, and whom he called he has also
justified, and whom he has justified he has also glorified. And Colos. 1.12.
I give thanks to the Father, who has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, and has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son. Out of
which places it is plain that God gives to all the Elect a certain continued
connection of spiritual benefits, which never leaves them, but plyeth them
onward even unto the state of glory.

THE SECOND POSITION.
ALthough the Elect, being set in this estate, omit some thing in every good
work by reason of the remainder of concupiscence, and commit daily smaller
sins od surreption, negligence, and inconsiderateness, yet neither from
thence is the state of justification shaken, nor the benefit of their claim to
the inheritance of the Kingdom of heaven thereby interrupted.

ACcording to the rigor of the Law every sin, yea the very least is mortal,
and excludes the offender from the favor of God and kingdom of heaven. But
God never deals in that strict manner with his sons adopted and justified in
Christ. There are indeed some sins, for which God denounces his anger and
indignation upon these his sons, yea and threatens banishment from heaven,
and also eternal death, of which we may read, 1 Cor. 6.10. Gal. 5.25. Coloss.
3.6. which we will handle in the positions following. There are again some
other sins, for which our merciful God is not wont, no not for a time, to
deprive his children of the light of his countenance, or to terrify them with
the fear of death or damnation: of which kind are the rebelling motions of our
concupiscence, whereof the Apostle complains Romans 7. also the defects and
stains which do cleave to the best works of the regenerate: Lastly, those
daily trippings and scapes of humane infirmity, which are committed without any
determinate purpose of committing them, and which are forgiven by our daily
craving of pardon: of these St. James cap. 3. v. 2. In many things we offend
all: and St. John 1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves.
Notwithstanding these sins every faithful man may rightly say, Rom 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; yea even in the
midst of these infirmities, God says to every justified man, 2 Cor. 12.9.
as he said to the Apostle, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength
is made perfect in weakness. And sure they cannot be said to fall by their
infirmities from the state of justification, through whose weakness the power of
God is made perfect, and who all this while may boast that the power of Christ
dwells in them, as it is in the same place.

THE THIRD POSITION.
THese very same, thus regenerated and justified, do sometimes through their
own default fall into heinous sins, and thereby they do incur the
fatherly anger of God, they draw upon themselves a damnable guiltiness, and
lose their present fitness to the kingdom of heaven.

IT is manifest by the examples of David and Peter, that the regenerate can
throw himself headlong into most grievous sins, God sometimes permitting it,
that they may learn with all humility to acknowledge, that, not by their own
strength or deserts, but by Gods mercy alone they were freed from eternal
death, and had life eternal bestowed upon them.

Whilst they cleave to such sins, and sleep securely therein, Gods fatherly
anger arises against them* Psalm. 89.31. If that they profane my statutes* and
keep not my commandments, then will I visit their transgression with the rod,
and their iniquity with stripes. Romans 2.9. Tribulation and anguish upon every
soul of man that does evil.

Besides, they draw upon themselves damnable guilt: so that as long as they
continue without repentance, in that state they neither ought nor can persuade
themselves otherwise, then that they are subject to eternal death. If ye live
after the flesh, ye shall dye, Romans 8.13. For they are bound in the chain of a
capital crime, by the desert whereof, according to Gods ordinance, they are
subject to death, although they are not as yet given over to death, nor about
to be given, (if we consider the fatherly love of God) but are first to be
taken out of this sin, that they may also be rescued from the guilt of death.

Lastly, in respect of their present condition they lose the fitnes, which they
had of entering into the Kingdom of Heaven, because into that Kingdom, Apoc.
21.27.
there shall in no wise enter any thing, that is defiled, neither whatsoever
works abomination; For the Crown of life is not set upon the head of any but
those, 2 Timothy 4.8.
who have fought a good fight, and have finished their course in faith, and
holiness. He is therefore unfit to obtain this Crown, whosoever as yet
cleaves to the works of wickedness.

THE FOVRTH POSITION.
THe unalterable ordinance of God does require, that the faithful so straying
out of the right way, must first return again into the way by a renewed
performance of faith and repentance, before he can be brought to the end of
the way, that is, to the Kingdom of Heaven.

BY the decree of Election the faithful are so predestined to the end, that
they are (as along the Kings high way) to be led to this appointed end, through
the means set down by God, otherways not to attain the same. Nor are Gods
decrees concerning the means, manner, and order of such events, less fixed and
sure, then the decrees of the end and of the events themselves. If any man
therefore walk in a way contrary to Gods ordinance, namely, that broad way of
uncleanness and impenitencie, (which leads directly down to hell) he can
never come by this means to the kingdom of heaven. Yea and if death shall
overtake him, wandering in this by-path, he cannot but fall into everlasting
death. This is the constant and manifest voice of the holy Scripture, Luke 13.3.
Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. 1 Cor. 6 9.
Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, etc. shall inherit the
kingdom of heaven. They are deceived therefore that think the elect wallowing
in such crimes, and so dying, must notwithstanding needs be saved through the
force of election. For the salvation of the Elect is sure indeed, God so
decreeing: but withal (by the decree of the same our God) not otherwise sure,
then through the way of faith, repentance, and holiness. Without holiness no
man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. The foundation of God stands sure. Let every
one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19.

As therefore it was sure out of the decree and promise of God, that all those,
who sailed in the ship with Saint Paul, should escape alive out of shipwreck,
and notwithstanding Paul's saying was also as certain, Acts 27.31.
Unless these remain in the ship, ye cannot be saved. So also it was certain
that the elect servants of God, David and Peter, should come to the kingdom of
heaven: yet withal it was no less certain, that if they had remained
unrepentant, the one in his homicide and adultery, the other in his denying and
forswearing Christ, neither of them both could have been saved.

For that Theological rule is most true, Any one defect makes a thing bad:
Malum oritur ^^ quovis defectu: Bonum non nisi ex causis integri^^
but to make truly good, no parcel requirable must be wanting. Therefore for
that incomparable good of life eternal, we are not fitted out of that only
that we are elected, unless there concur other things, which are by Gods
decree necessarily required to the accomplishing of Election. If any of these
things be wanting, nay if the contrary hereto be in the elected, there seems
then to arise a strange impossibility thwarting on both sides. As for example,
It is unpossible that Paul, being chosen, should perish. It Is also unpossible,
that Paul, being a blasphemer against Christ, and an unbeleever, (if he dye in
this state) should not perish. Or thus; It is unpossible that David being
chosen, should perish. It Is also unpossible, that David, being a manslayer, and
an Adulterer, (dying impenitent) should not perish. But Gods providence and
mercy does easily loose this knot, by taking care that none of the elect dye in
such estate, by which, according to some ordinance of Gods will, he must be
excluded from eternal life.

THE FIFTH POSITION.
IN the mean time, between the guilt of a grievous sin, and the renewed act
of faith and repentance, such an offender stands by his own desert to be
condemned; by Christ's merit and Gods decree to be acquitted; but actually
absolved he is net, until he has obtained pardon by renewed faith and
repentance.

THere can be no question of the merit of damnation, for such a sin. They
which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.21.
Notwithstanding in such a guilt the faithful are not in the like case with the
wicked. To the faithful the blood of Christ is a prepared antidote at hand
ready to be applied, which, as soon as their faith is awaked and rouzed up,
they can use, to the overcomming of this deadly poison. But to the unfaithful,
this inward active cause is wanting, to wit, faith, without which the remedy,
though sovereign in it self, is as if it were laid afar off, out of reach,
neither can it be made their own, or actually applied to them.

Ad moreover hereunto Gods special love, which, though it does not hinder, but
that his fatherly indignation arises against an undutifull son; yet it
keeps of hostile hatred, such as carries with it a purpose of condemning, 1 Corinthians. 11.32. When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
should not be condemned with the world.

Notwithstanding in this case the Father of mercies, who will not condemn
(with the world) his children, though bound with the guilt of sin, yet on the
other side he will not have them lie still sleeping in their sins, together
with the world. And therefore has he set down this order, that the act of
repentance must go before the benefit of forgiveness, Psalm. 32.5. I
acknowledge my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I said I
would confess my transgression unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity
of my sin. Ezekiel. 18.27. When the wicked man turns away from the wickedness
that he has committed he shall save his soul alive.

If any man therefore would know the very moment, in which, after the guilt
procured by a grievous sin, he becomes actually absolved; Saint Cyprian
seems manifestly to have shown it, in these words; When I see thee sighing in
the sight of God, Cyprian, deca^^^ Domini.
I do not doubt but the holy Ghost breaths with thy sighs: When I behold
thee weeping, I perceive God forgiving.

THE SIXTH POSITION.
IN the foresaid space the right to the Kingdom of God is not taken away,
universal justification is not defeated, the state of adoption remains
undissolved, and by the custody of the holy Spirit, the seed of regeneration,
with all those fundamental graces, without which the state of a regenerate man
cannot stand, is preserved whole and sound.

Our right to the Kingdom of Heaven is not founded on our actions, but on the
free gift of adoption, and on our union with Christ. And consequently the right
to the Kingdom of Heaven, is not taken away, unless that be first taken away,
upon which it is founded: Romans 8.17.
If Children, then heirs, heirs of God, and coheires with Christ. Therefore
adoption remaining, and the engrafture into Christ, the faithful may wander
out of the way, which leads to the Kingdom of heaven, but he cannot be said
to lose his right of inheritance to that Kingdom. For as he, which fell into a
leprosy, was debarred from his own house until he was cleansed, and yet in
the mean space lost not his right to his own house: So the adopted son of
God taken with the Leprosy of adultery or murder, or any other grievous sin,
cannot indeed enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, unless he first be purged
from this contagion, by renewed faith and repentance; yet all this while his
hereditary right is not quite lost.

Furthermore, that universal and most properly called justification (which the
Apostle so lively sets forth, Romans 3.24, 25.) is not frustrated by the
enterposed guilt of a particular sin, though heinous and grievously wounding
the conscience. For against this justification is directly opposed, not every
guilt of every sin, but the universal unremitted guilt of all sins, nor
the guilt of every person whatsoever, but the guilt of unbeleevers, not yet
washed in the blood of Christ, nor the guilt of any, whatsoever degree, but
such a guilt, as for which the hostile anger and vengeance of God lies heavily
upon the guilty person. Whosoever is justified by a true faith can never
afterward be guilty after this manner.

We may therefore say, that the effect of justification is for a time suspended
by the intercourse of such a particular sin: because the person, by reason of
this new guilt, needs a particular absolution. But we cannot say, that the
state of justification is dissolved: forasmuch as the same person does not fall
from the general pardon of his forecommitted sins, nor is deprived of that
special intercession, which our Savior has promised to all the faithful,
nor of the free love of God his Father.

The same case holds in adoption. For God never adopted to himself a Son in
Christ, whom afterward he either must or would dis-inherit, and cast out of
his family. The children of God may indeed sin, and that very grievously;
but the providence and mercy of God will not suffer them so far to sin, as
that they should thereby be bereft of their heavenly home and Father. John ^.35.
The servant abides not in the house for ever, but the son abides for ever.
Ambr de Jacob. and vit. beat, lib. 1. cap. 6.
For (as Saint Ambrose speaks) God does not make void the gift of adoption.

To conclude, the seed of regeneration, with those fundamental gifts (without
which the spiritual life cannot subsist) are preserved in safety. This is
hence evident, because that the same holy Spirit, who does infuse this seed
into the hearts of the regenerate, does imprint into the same seed, a certain
heavenly and incorruptible virtue, and does perpetually cherish and keep the
same, John 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall
never thirst: but the water, that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of
water springing up unto everlasting life. 1 John 3.5. Whosoever is borne of God
does not commit sin: for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin,
because he is borne of God. This seed of life remaining in them, it is
altogether impossible that the gifts of lively faith and charity should be
quite extinguished.

Hence Gregory rightly says, In holy men's hearts the Spirit always abides,
Moral. lib. 2. cap. 42.
according to some virtues or graces, according to others he comes to depart,
and departs, to return; but in the hearts of his Elect, he remains in those
virtues, without which, eternal life is not attained.

THE SEVENTH POSITION.
THat the regenerate do not altogether fall from faith, holiness, and
adoption, proceeds not from themselves, nor from their own will, but from Gods
special love, divine operation, and from Christ's intercession and custody.

IT is certain, that if God would deal with us upon strict terms, he might
most justly for our ungratitude and untowardnesse withdraw from us his fatherly
favor, and gifts of saving grace. But for as much as (even by the
determination of the Schoolmen) sin does not take away grace efficiently,
that is, by certain expulsion; but by way of demerit, that is, deservingly,
surely; unless it can be proved, that God deals with his according to their
deserts, it will not follow, that, upon the committing of a grievous sin,
they lose faith, or fall away from the state of justification and adoption. For
that, which, in regard of our ill desert, might justly be done, is, by the
mercy of God, and by Christ's intercession, and the operation of the holy
Ghost, hindered from being done. Romans ^.39.
No creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans 16.20.
Not the Devil: for God shall bruise him under our feet. John 5.5.
Not the world: for Christ has overcome the world. And he does so work in all
his, that they also at length overcome through faith. Lastly, not (those things
from whence is our greatest danger) our own weakness, the inclination and
pronenesse of our own free will to wickedness: for the goodness of God is
always showed in this weakness of the faithful, and, through the
intercession of Christ for them, is obtained, that they shall not fall off from
their faith. Luke 22.32. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. John
17.20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on
me through their word. We do not therefore fetch this perseverance of the
faithful in their faith, and Gods grace, from their own free will, but from
Christ, that frees them. The Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and
will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.18.

To this purpose are those words of Saint Augustine, Aug. de bon. persev. cap.
6.
We live safer, if we trust all to God, and do not commit our selves partly
to God, and partly to our selves.

As God works, Ibid. cap. 7.
that we come to him, so he works also, that we depart not from him.

THE EIGHTH POSITION.
THe perseverance therefore of holy men is the free gift of God, and is derived
unto us out of the decree of election.

THis conclusion arises out of those things, which are said before: but that
it may more manifestly appear, we will add somewhat more.

First, that it is the free gift of God, is proved out of the words of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7. What have thou that thou did not receive? Now if thou
did receive, why do thou glory as if thou had not received? If any thing
can give a just cause to men of glorying, surely this, that they have
persevered in good unto the end, then when they could at their own pleasure
not have made use of those means, which in themselves were sufficient for
perseverance. Either therefore this does betide the faithful by way of
special gift, or they have something which they have not received, in which
they may greatly glory. But we affirm on the contrary, whether by
perseverance be understood either that power, which does propp and hold up the
faithful, or the stabilitie it self, and the unconquered firmness of their
faith; or lastly, the very act of persevering, that there is none of these,
which is not the gift of God.

Touching that power, by which the will is stayed up, In respon. ad Walach.
page 75.
that it may persevere, the Remonstrants easily grant, that it is the only
grace of GOD which does arm a man with this strength to persevere.

Touching the stability and firmness, which is considered as the manner or
adjunct of true faith, this also is to be numbered among the gifts of God. For
he which does give the thing it self, to wit, faith, does also give the manner
of the thing, to wit, the stability and firmness of the same faith, 2 These.
3.3. The Lord is faithful, who shall establish you. 1 Cor. 1.7.8. Ye come
behind in no gift, waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless. Out of which words it is
manifest, that faith is the gift of God, as well in the increase, and
stability, as in the entrance, and beginning thereof.

Lastly, if we desire to take out of the Scriptures the true forms of
speaking, we ought to call the very act of perseverance the gift of God. For
if the Scripture does not only call the quality it self of faith the gift of
God, but does declare, Phil. 1.19.
that to believe is given freely to men, then also ought we to acknowledge, as
Gods gift, not only perseverance, but also the act it self of persevering.
This is most manifestly taught in the place alleged, where the Apostle says,
that it was given to the Philippians, not only to believe in Christ, but to
suffer for his sake. Which, what other thing is it, then to persevere in the
faith of Christ under the Cross of persecution.

De persev. c. 10.
To this purpose Saint Anstine. We affirm that perseverance is the gift of
God, by which we abide in Christ constantly unto the end. And it is reckoned
among the Errors of the Massilians, Epist. Hilar. ad Aug.
that they denied that such perseverance is given to any, from which he is not
suffered to stray. Which Error Saint Austine refutes in his book of
Perseverance, chap. 6.

It remains now, that we prove this gift of perseverance to spring from the
fountain of Election; to the confirming of which we will produce one argument
only.

That, which is given out of an effectual intention to save without fail that
person, to whom it is given, that, without question, does flow from the decree
of election. For what is it else to elect one, then to ordain him to obtain
salvation without fail? But now such is the force and nature of this gift,
that we cannot conceive, that perseverance is ordained, or given unto any,
except upon a former intention both to order and bring the same man infallibly
unto salvation. For whatsoever benefit does accrue unto any by any divine
grace, that wholly without doubt the Author of that grace decreed to confer
upon him, to whom he vouchsafed to impart the same grace. But by the
immovable purpose of God whosoever shall persevere, shall be saved. Therefore
to whomsoever God purposed to give perseverance it is a manifest evidence that
the same man was destinated to salvation by the foregoing decree of God. To
this purpose is that of Mat. 24.24. Where the impossibility of being seduced in
respect of certain persons known to God, is grounded upon this foregoing
Election of them: and that of Saint Paul, Romans 11.5. where the remnant of those
few, which fell not from God, is said to be caused according to the election of
grace: But of this see more in Saint Austine de bon. persev. cap. 16.

Of the certainty of perseverance in respect of our selves,
THE FIRST POSITION.
EVery faithful man may be certainly persuaded, that, through the mercy of
God his Father, he shall be kept, and be brought uvnto eternal life.

WE treated before of Perseverance, in respect of the certainty of the object
or thing it self; Now are we to treat of it in respect of the certainty of
the subject, to wit, in as much as, that thing, which is certain in it self,
is also by us, in whom it is brought to pass, apprehended as certain and
infallible.

We, admitting every one of the faithful into the partnership of this benefit,
do avow it to be not a privilege afforded to a few of the faithful, but a
gift bestowed on all the faithful, as they are faithful, without distinction.

Moreover we say rather, that the faithful may, or can have within themselves
this persuasion, then that they are always actually so persuaded* because this
certain persuasion, although it proceeds from the very nature of faith, yet
does it not always, as it might and ought, put forth into action, but is
sometimes suppressed, as we will hereafter declare.

Nevertheless here we affirm, that every true faithful man has in
readiness at home within himself always, and upon all occasions, such a
foundation sure enough, whereupon, if he rightly weigh his own condition, and
Gods promise and custody, he may build up this actual confidence of his own
preservation in faith unto eternal life.

1 First, it is not enough unto God, in regard of his own glory, that he
preserve us, unless he also ascertaine us of this his preservation. Blessed be
God by whose power we are preserved through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.
Now we do not particularly bless God for those things which we know not to
have received.

2 To Christ our Savior it was not sufficient to pray that Peter's faith might
not fail, (from which prayer that gift was made certain in it self) unless
Saint Peter also should know it, and thereupon enjoy in himself the full
persuasion thereof, Luke 22.32. I have prayed for thee Peter that thy faith
fail not.

3 It is not enough for us for our comfort, that we, being wafted in the ship
of the Church, go on toward the haven of salvation, except also we be fully
persuaded, that we cannot by any tempest be defeated of our wished harbor. It
was not enough for Noah to be shut up safe in the Arc, but he was by the
promise of God secured against shipwreck for the confirmation of his
confidence. Genesis 6.18. With thee will I establish my covenant, and thou shall
come into the Arc.

4 This assurance of persuasion does flow from the very nature of special
faith, which not only is directly carried unto that which is promised, but also
does reflect upon it self, and its own apprehension. Of the former act are
meant those speeches in the Scripture, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith we
have peace with God. John 10.28. My sheep shall never perish. Of the latter
those, 1 John 2.3. We do know, that we know him. 1 John 5.10. He that
believes on the Son of God, has the witness in himself. Also, 1. Cor.
2.12. We have received the Spirit, which is of God, that we might know the
things which are given us of God. Therefore every faithful man through the
inmost operation of his own faith believes the preservation of the same faith
in himself.

5 The same is confirmed out of the testimonies of this faith. Spiritual joy
is a manifest evidence. 1 Pet. 1.8. Believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakeable
and full of glory. And this joy will not vanish. John 16.22. Your joy no man
shall take away from you. Also spiritual glorying. Romans 5.2. We have access
by faith into this grace, wherein we stand and boast, in hope of the glory of
God. And this glory is carried upon its object, as present, and already
attained, although indeed it be but future. So Chrysostom upon this place:
Every man glories of those things, which he has already. Now because our hope
of future things is as certain and evident, as of things already received, the
Apostle says, we also glory of these.

6 Lastly the certainty, not only of perseverance, but also of the perseverer,
is warranted by the mutual pledges laid down between God and the faithful:
on that side our pledge kept in the hand of God on this side Gods earnest
penny laid up in our hearts: A double pledge is given for the securing not
both parties, but one only, to wit, us. And this double pledge, although it be
possessed on both sides, yet is surely kept by the fidelity of one part only,
to wit, of God.

Of the former, Saint Paul treats in the 2 Timothy 1.12. I am not ashamed, for I
know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that,
which I have committed unto him, against the last day. That which I have
committed, there is the pledge of salvation: Able to keep, there is a sure
preserver: I know and am persuaded, there is faith: I am not ashamed, there is
confidence.

Concerning the latter pledge left with us, the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 1.13,
14. Ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of
our inheritance: and 2 Cor. 1.22. Who has given the earnest of the Spirit in
our hearts. But if God, having once given this earnest, should not also give
the rest of the inheritance, he should undergo the loss of his earnest: as
Chrysostom most elegantly and foundly argues in his third Sermon upon the 2
Cor. 1. And likewise in his second Sermon upon the Ephesians. 1. They, that truly
partake of the spirit, know that it is the earnest of our inheritance.

THE SECOND POSITION.
THis persuasion of faith cannot come into the act and vigor, without the
endeavor of holiness, and use of the means.

THe firm persuasion of Gods bestowing the gift of perseverance, and of our
attaining of life everlasting, we attribute to the mercy of God alone; and the
intercession of Christ, as to the original cause: but so, as we withal
refer it to sanctification, as an unseparable companion, and a most sure
sign. This is laid down, as an evidence of a solid faith, 1 John 2.3. Hereby
we are sure, that we know him, if we keep his commandments. This is set
forth as the proper passion of justification, Romans 8.1. There is no
condemnation to them, that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit.

But we measure this holiness, not by the degrees of it, but by the endeavor,
and settled purpose of him, that has it: and withal we profess, that this
holiness and persuasion of faith may and ought to be forwarded and confirmed
by watching, fasting, prayer, and mortifying the flesh, and other means
thereto appointed by God, Mat. 14. 38. Watch, and pray, lest ye enter into
temptation, 1 Cor. 9.17. I beat down my body, and bring it into subjection,
lest I my self should be reproved. Notwithstanding in the mean while let us
so reckon this our diligence, and pious use of these means; in the number of
the exercises of our freed will, that withal we account that very diligence
and endeavor amongst the helps of assisting grace and motions of the holy
Spirit dwelling in us.

Now it is certain that this firm persuasion, of which we speak, cannot put
forth it self without these holy endeavors.

1 Because sanctification (the companion of justification) cannot consist
without the intent of obedience: An habitual purpose whereof (although
interrupted by many slips) is sufficient to the Elect for the maintaining the
state of justification entire in it self. But for the present comfort of this
confidence, is necessarily required an actual purpose of such obedience;
neither can any man out of the testimony of the spirit speaking to his heart,
say, I do now confidently believe, that I shall remain in the state of grace
to the end, unless he also add, out of the sincere intent of his mind, I do
now most constantly purpose with my self to walk in the ways of Gods holy
Commandments.

2 Much less can it be imagined, that this lively act of our confidence can
stand with an actual and direct purpose of sinning. For as one habit is
opposed to another habit, so also an act is opposed to an act. Neither can we,
without a senseless contradiction, imagine a man concluding after this manner,
I am confident, that life everlasting cannot be taken away from me: and yet
withal I resolve with my self to be a slave to my alluring affections. Our
Savior shows that these contrary resolutions cannot stand together, Mat. 6.24
No man can serve two Masters.

THE THIRD POSITION.
THis persuasion has not that degree of certitude, that can always shut out
all fear of the contrary, but is sometimes lively, sometimes languishing,
sometimes, (as in great temptations) none at all.

IN spiritual gifts, with which we are furnished in this life, sincerity is
required, perfection of degrees is not to be expected; Even that gift which is
the hand, by which we lay hold on all the rest, has its diseases, and
weaknesses; so that the persuasion of the faithful concerning their own
salvation and perseverance, cannot always enjoy the highest degree of
certitude.

1 The first infirmity arises out of the ground it self, whereupon this
personal confidence is built, which seems to be of lower degree, then the
certitude of dogmaticall faith. For the Articles of the Catholic Faith do
work upon our assent, as immediate and original principles: but the truth of
this special faith is not enforced thence, as a necessary consequent, but is
added thereto by way of assumption. Therefore there can be no greater certainty
of that conclusion, which frames this persuasion, then such as is in the
weaker of the premises. But that assumption is grounded upon experimental
arguments, weighed and applied by a man's private conscience; which arguments or
marks, since they are sometimes questioned whether or no they be true and
concluding evidences, nay often times are hid under the cloud of temptation, so
that they the while cannot shine forth to our present comfort, what wonder, if
so bethe faithful have not always at hand a lively and firm persuasion
concerning their eternal salvation.

Nay, which is more, the very principles of the Catholic faith, howsoever
they are, by the light of revelation, clear in themselves, yet for as much as
they are known to us, by the certainty, not of evidence, but only of
adhesion, they do not procure in us an assent of such uniforme stabilitie, as
is yielded unto Mathematical demonstrations, and inbred notions admitted by
all men. But in our contemplating these revealed principles, our of the
remainder of our carnal diffidence, sometime there arise, (as we may so say)
certain vapors, or mists, through which the light of divine truth (in it
self immutable) to our weak eyes seems to tremble, and suffer a kind of
refraction. How much more frequent and more lasting is that mistake, which may
betide any of the faithful in the viewing his own personal confidence? Their
eyes truly would always waver, except both this common revelation of the
Catholic Faith, and also that personal application, made by the conscience,
were confirmed and sealed unto our hearts by the holy Ghost, bearing witness
to our spirit, that we are the sons of God. And this very testimony of the
Spirit, although the seed thereof be never utterly extinguished, yet in regard
of the fruit and sense thereof, sometimes it either withdrawes it self, so
that our own infirmity may be evident to us, or else for a time it is, as it
were, raked up under the ashes by our rebellion and ingratitude.

2 Therefore that other weakness does arise from temptations, by which this
persuasion is assaulted. And those are partly afflictions, which seem to
menace us with the evil of punishment, and partly our own perverse
concupiscences, which do brand our souls with the evil of sin, and guilt
thereof, and partly the snares and assaults of the Devil, by which he does set
upon us in both those kinds. But the maine skirmish consists in the mutual
wrestling and struggling of the flesh and spirit. Whilst this wrestling lasts,
our faith is weak: but if so be the spirit overcomes the flesh, then our
spirit cheeres up, and triumphs in this manner: Who shall separate us from
the love of Christ? But if (which often falls out) the spirit, thus wearied and
weakened, receive the foil for a time, being either overborne with the load of
afflictions, or tainted with the spots of heinous sins, then there remains
no such actual persuasion, a stop is made of al spiritual comfort, and the
light of Gods countenance is hidden from us. Hence those mournful complaints
of holy men: Job 6.4. The arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison
whereof drinks up my spirit, the terrors of God set themselves in array against
me. Lament. 3.42. We have transgressed and rebelled. Thou have not pardoned,
thou have covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayers should not pass
through. But if the waves of temptation arise yet higher, and the fiery darts
of the devil do wound the conscience already pressed down with its own
burden, then not only this sweet persuasion is banished, but also a persuasion
utterly contrary comes in stead thereof: by force whereof holy men, thus
affrighted, do apprehend God as an angry Judge, and seem to themselves to be
now falling headlong into the open gates of Hell. This case is set down in
those almost despairing speeches of Job, Job 3.2.
Let the day perish wherein I was borne: And that of David, I said in my haste,
Psalm. 31.22.
I am cut off from before thine eyes.

THE FOVRTH POSITION.
WHen a faithful man, after much struggling, has got the upper hand of these
temptations, that act, by which he does apprehend the fatherly mercy of God
toward him, and eternal life to be conferred without fail upon him, is not
an act of floating opinion, or of conjecturall hope, such as may be built on a
false ground, but it is an act of a true and lively faith, stirred up, and
sealed in his heart by the spirit of adoption.

AS it fares in nature, so in grace, after the cloud is removed the day is the
clearer, and certain diseases, after they are overcome, prove occasions of
future health. A faithful man, escaping out of the waves of great tentations,
does not only receive the confidence, which was almost extinguished, but gains
a greater measure thereof. For he is made stronger by the conflict, and more
cheerful by the conquest; Nay, if in this wrestling some of his bones be
broken, after they be set again, they will knit the stronger, Psalm. 51.10. The
bones which thou have broken shall rejoice.

1 Because the life and state of a regenerate man is spiritual, he may be
said, while he is transported by the force of sin or tentation, to be withheld
from his natural place. The spirit therefore does easily return back again
to his own bent, and again acknowledges his former confidence in the fatherly
mercy of God. This is manifest out of the examples of the Saints, who have
expressed their own vehement conflicts, still ending in the lively voice of
faith. Jonas 2.5.
So Jonas being in the belly of the Whale, said, I am cast out of thy sight,
yet I will look again toward thy holy Temple. Romans 7.24.
And Saint Paul, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. In them, both their
conquest following their conflict breaks forth into a vigorous act of faith.

2 Because the panting soul, thirsting for Gods fatherly reconciliation, does
run more greedily to the fountain of living waters, and relisheth more sweetly
that, whereof it perceived it self for a time debarred, namely the fruition of
God appeased. Thence it acknowledges in it self the seed of faith, by the
force whereof it arises again to repair the very breaches made upon faith:
whose root indeed spreads the further by this loosening, and sends forth new
tendrells, from which sprout our new shoots of greater certainty. By this
conflict and affliction the faithful Christian learnes patience, by which he
mortifieth himself: Romans 5.
by patience probation, by which he searches himself: from probation he
mounts up to an hope of overcomming likewise future tentations. 2 Cor. 1.10.
Who delivered us from so great a death, and will deliver us, in whom we
trust, that he will yet deliver us: and of persevering, and consequently
attaining eternal life; 1 Cor. 1.18. Who shall confirm you unto the end, that
ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. And this same hope
makes not ashamed; as it follows in the same Apostle. It is not therefore a
fleeting opinion, or uncertain conjecture, but an hope, which, as it springs
from faith, so it has the same certainty with faith, and therefore is solid
and undeceivable.

We have in David an example of this renewed and confirmed confidence after
that his spot of that great sin was washed away Psalm. 51. After that the
assault of that dangerous temptation was abated, Psalm. 73. In both these cases
there are to be seen, clearly shineing forth, the spirit of prayer,
spiritual joy, and the seal of adoption. Take not thy holy spirit from me.
Thou have holden me by the right hand. Thence proceeds that confident
conclusion; It is good for me to draw near unto God, and to trust in the Lord.

Erroneous Opinions rejected by us.
THE FIRST.
THat the perseverance of those, who are truly faithful, is not an effect of
Election, but a benefit offered equally to all, upon this condition, namely, if
they shall not be wanting unto sufficient grace.

WE have confuted the first part hereof at the first Article in our third
Position, and in the third Erroneous Opinion, and also in this fifth Article,
in the eighth Position, Of the certainty of perseverance in it self.

The second part of this Opinion contains many incongruities.

1 It is not true that perseverance is a gift only offered, and not given
also. For the Scriptures witness, that God does not only offer unto his the
grace of perseverance, but also that he gives it them, and puts it into their
hearts. Ier. 32.40. I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me. John 4.14. The water that I shall give him shall be in him a
well of water springing up unto eternal life. 1 Cor. 10.13 But will with the
tentation make a way to escape.

2 It is false, that it is offered equally to all, as appears out of our
Positions set down before in the first Article: Where we have proved that
perseverance in faith does belong to the Elect alone.

3 It is false that perseverance is a grace offered upon condition: for it is a
gift promised absolutely by God without any respect at all of condition. The
reason is this: Some promises of God are touching the end, others touching the
means which conduce to the end. The promises, concerning the end, that is to
say, Salvation, are conditional. Believe and thou shall be saved. Be
faithful unto the death, (that is, persever) and I will give thee the Crown
of life. But for as much as no man is able to perform the conditions, God also
has made most free and absolute promises to give the very conditions, which he
works in us, that so by them, as by means, we may attain the end. Deuteronomy.
36.6. And the Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, to love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live. The end here
promised is life, which the Israelites could never attain without the
performance of the condition, namely, their love of God. But here God promises
absolutely, that he will give unto them this condition. Since therefore the
promises of Faith, and perseverance in Faith, are promises concerning the
means, they are expressly to be reckoned among those absolute gifts, by which
God, (considering man's disability both to attain the end without the means,
and also to perform the means or conditions of himself,) does promise that
he will make them able to perform the conditions. God promises life to those
that constantly fear him: the promise of life is conditional: but of constant
fear, it is absolute. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they may not
depart from me.

4 Be it so that this gift were conditional, yet it is not offered upon this
condition, if men will not be wanting to themselves in the entertainment of
this sufficient grace. Against this condition those reasons are of force, which
we brought before against the strength of free will in man's conversion: to which
we add also these.

1 First it will follow out of this condition, that we do in vain entreat
God in the behalf of any men, that he would give unto them the gift of
perseverance, because of course he offers them universal and sufficient grace,
to which, if they themselves will not be wanting, they shall persevere.

2 This is an idle condition. For it makes perseverance to be the condition of
perseverance. For to persevere is nothing else, but not to be wanting unto this
sufficient grace. If therefore God offers perseverance upon this condition, he
offers the same upon condition of it self.

3 Lastly, the second part of this opinion is soundly confuted by Saint
Austine, de corrept. and great. cap. 11. and 12. of which disputation this is
the sum, It was given to Adam that he might, if he would, persevere in good:
but it was not granted to him to will to persevere. But such grace is given to
us, who are truly engrafted into Christ, that not only we may, if we will, but
also that we shall will to persevere in Christ. Again in his book de unitate
Ecclesiae, cap. 9. the same Austine does contemn this very opinion maintained
by the Donatists, namely, that Men believe, if they will; if they will, they
persevere in that which they believe; if they will not, they persevere not.

THE SECOND.
THat perseverance is a condition required in the new Covenant and foregoing
Gods Election.

SEE the second and fifth Erroneous Opinion rejected by us in the first Article.

THE THIRD.
THat he, who does truly believe, may sin against the Holy Ghost.

These reasons confute this Opinion; 1 FIrst, to sin against the Holy Ghost,
is to sin unto death, 1 John 5.16. Those who are truly faithful cannot
sin unto death; Because to sin unto death is to commit that sin, upon
which death shall surely follow, to wit, that eternal and second death, which
never has power over those, who are truly faithful, as being those, who dye
unto sin, and do rise again from their sins unto newness of life, Apoc.
20.6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection: on such
the second death has no power. 2 They, who sin against the Holy Ghost, shall
never come unto glory, or unto the Kingdom of Heaven; to which all true
believers do without fail come. For it is the same to be a true believer, as
to be justified, and to be the adopted Son of God; but the justified shall
come to glory; Romans 8. Whom he justified, them also he glorified; and the
adopted sons of God shall attain the Kingdom of Heaven, Gal. 4.7. If
sons, then also beires of God through Christ. 3 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is
borne of God (as is every true believer) does not commit sin, which (by the
Apostles own interpretation, ver. 8. He that commiteth sin is of the Devil,
is to be understood of those sins which estate a man under the Kingdom and
power of the Devil, such as principally the sin against the holy Ghost is.
Hither tends the speech of the Apostle, 2. Tim. 4.18. The Lord shall deliver
me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdom.
What? From every evil work without exception? Not so; But from every such
evil work, which might wholly deprive him of all right to the Kingdom of
Heaven; of which kind no question, the sin against the holy Ghost, is, not
only for the inward malice, but also for the final impenitency joined to it.


THE FOVRTH.
THat no true believer, or regenerate person, can be assured in this life of
his perseverance and salvation, without special revelation.

OF the first part of this position, we handled before in this Article. But
now, that a man may know that his perseverance for the future may be secured
without any special revelation, we prove by this reason. It Is confessed that
some Saints (especially Saint Paul) did obtain this certainty. Romans 8. I am
persuaded that neither life nor death, etc. But Saint Paul did not fetch this
persuasion from extraordinary revelation, but from those grounds, which are
common to him with other the faithful. verse. 32. He, that spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely
give us all things? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is
God that justifies. verse. 33. It is Christ that makes intercession for us.
What? was Christ only given for Paul, and not for other believers also? Was
Paul alone the Elect of God? Does God justify Paul only? Or does Christ make
intercession for Paul alone? Since therefore out of these premises common to
the whole Church of the Elect, Saint Paul in that place inferres that confident
conclusion, Who shall separate us? and, I am persuaded, etc. certain it is,
that other believers also, who have interest to the same means of salvation,
may hence deduce and apply unto themselves this full persuasion of their
salvation and perseverance.

The same conclusion every faithful soul is able to make out of other
ordinary premises.

1 From the faithfulness of God, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not
suffer, etc.

2 From experience of his former good will, Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this
very thing, that he, which has begun a good work in you, will also perfect
it, etc.

3 From the practice of good works performed in faith, 2 Pet. 1.10. If ye do
these things, ye shall never fall; and what those things are, it is evident out
of the 5. and 6. verses.

4 From the testimony of the conscience, 1 John 3.21. If our hearts condemn us
not, then have we confidence toward God.

5 By the testimony of former led life, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought a good fight:
hence forth is there a Crown laid up for me.

6 Lastly the testimony of the Spirit does seal all these things to us, Romans
8.16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, etc.

These and other evidences of the like kind, are obvious to every faithful
soul, and therefore likewise the conclusion.

But if this certainty should issue only from an extraordinary revelation,
Saint Peter should in vain exhort all the faithful, thus; 2 Pet. 1.10. Give
diligence to make your calling and election sure.

THE FIFTH.
THat as often as any grievous carnal sin is committed, so often is the
state of justification and adoption lost.

AGainst this opinion these arguments, besides others, are of force.

1 Man cannot by any sin make void any act of Gods. But justification and
adoption are Gods acts, and those flowing from his own good pleasure: Ergo.
When therefore it is questioned whether or no there may be an intercision of
justifying grace, caused by the sins of the flesh, the question is, not only
whether a man can lose any quality by sin, but we must fetch this question
much further, to wit, whether man's sin be of force to make void Gods acts, or
to alter that doom of God, by which he in himself has already pronounced us
just, and adopted us into the right and title of Sons. In vain in this case
some oppose against us the defect of the subject, or failing on man's part:
Whereas God does continually repair the subject (which of it self, without
doubt, would fail) by giving the faithful perseverance, that they may not
fail. For to the end that by faith he might keep us, he keeps also that very
faith in us: De veritate gratioe.
as elegantly that reverend late Bishop of Salisbury.

2 So far it is that every grievous sin of the flesh should altogether
divest a faithful soul of the state of justification and adoption, that on
the contrary, it is held, especially by practical Divines, that God does
permit those sins very often in justified and adopted persons, that both
their justification and adoption might be afterward the more confirmed unto
them; according to that of the Prophet, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me, that
thou have humbled me, that I might learn thy statutes. This is evident in the
falls, not only of David, but also of Hezekias, and Peter, whereby
occasionally the endevor of holiness, the acknowledgement of their own
infirmity, and a more vehement suit unto God for the gift of perseverance were
increased in them. We conclude therefore, that neither justification is broken
off, nor yet adoption lost, by the falls of the Saints, but that hence it comes
to pass, that, rising again, they do so much the more warily work out their
own salvation with fear and trembling.

THE SIXTH.
THat the doctrine of the certainty of perseverance and salvation, is of its
own nature both hurtful unto true piety, and pernicious every way to Religion.

BOth Gods truth, and man's experience easily wipe off this aspersion. For this
Christian persuasion of perseverance, and salvation, not only in respect of
its own nature, But also according to the very event in the Church, does, by
Gods blessing, produce a quite contrary effect.

1 First in respect of the thing it self, the certainty of the end does not
take away, but establish the use of the means. And the same holy men, who upon
sure grounds promise unto themselves both constancy in the way of this
pilgrimage, and fruition of God in their everlasting home, know also that these
are not obtained without performance of the duties of holiness, and the
avoidance of contrary vices: and therefore they turn not their backs from
these means, but industriously embrace and prosecute them. 1 John 3.3. Every
man that has this hope in himself, purifieth himself, even as he is pure.
Esaias 38.5. When Hezekiah had received that promise of God of an addition of
fifteen years to his life, he did not therefore neglect the use of medicines
or meats, but, that this promised event might be brought into act, he applied,
for the cure of his body, the plaster, which was prescribed unto him by the
Prophet. The Apostle does altogether reject this consequence of carnal
security imputed to this doctrine, and that with a kind of indignation. Romans
6.1. Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid. How shall
we, which are dead to sin, live any longer therein? As if Saint Paul would
intimate unto us, not only the incongruity, but also impossibility of such a
sequel.

2 As touching the event, true it is, that any the most wholesome truth of God
may be perverted by the abuse of men. But upon this doctrine we cannot
acknowledge that there grows any such inconvenience, no not de facto, that
is, in the event it self. Let us take a view of the Reformed Churches, in
which this confidence of perseverance and inviolable adoption is believed and
maintained. Do we find that thereupon the bridle is let loose unto riot? That
piety is trampled down? We give thanks unto God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, that among ours (who enjoy this full persuasion of spiritual comfort,
and are confident, that there is an inheritance, which cannot be lost, laid up
for them in heaven) there is not found less care of godliness, nor less
endevor (so far forth as man's infirmity will suffer) to live an unblameable
life than is to be found among any sort of those, who pin their perseverance
on their own free will, and will not grant it to flow from any foregoing
Election of GOD.

THus have we set down our joint Suffrage concerning these five controverted
Articles; which our judgment we believe to be agreeato the word of God, and
suitable to the Confessions of so many reformed Churches. From which, that this
one of the Low Countries should be separated, it neither will seem safe, nor
pious unto those, who have any grain of wisdom, or spark of true piety.

And this our most Gracious and Mighty King of Great Britain Defendor of the
Christian Faith, and the most earnest maintainer of it, (out of his hearty
wishes, that in these flourishing Provinces, the faith might remain sincere,
and the peace of the Church and Commonweal be entirely preserved) has
especially aimed at, when he gave in charge to us, appointed to be sent
hither, that we should as much as in us lies, by our moderate advises set
forward the public peace of your Church; and that we should exhort our
Reverend Brethren assembled in this celebrious Synod, that they should not
determine any thing in their Synodicall Suffrages, which might thwart the
received Doctrine, which has been established in so many public Confessions
of the Churches.

This received doctrine has not long since seemed distasteful to the palate of
some ill-affected to Innovation, which doctrine though they have by all means
and helps endeavored to disgrace and suppress, yet nevertheless, like a
kind of heavenly fire, it has sent forth the clearer rays by the very motion
and agitation. We truly with from our hearts unto our brethren, called
Remonstrants, that the eyes of their understanding may be enlightened, and that
their minds may not be estranged from the study of peace: as also unto the rest
of our reverend brethren, such charitable affection toward them, that they may
not cease, to wish well unto the persons of those men, whose errors they
oppugn.

And here we crave leave a little to turn our speech to the most illustrious
and mighty States, and to their most judicious Delegates, and finally to all
the rest, that sit at the stern of the Commonweal in this Country. It is
your parts (most noble Lords) no less to take care lest the Orthodox Religion,
then the Commonweal, committed to your trust, should receive any damage. For
Magistrates serve God in this, when for his service they do those things,
which none can do, but Magistrates. In this case therefore there needs, not
only your piety and good example, but also your power and commands: Let your
power restrain that, which here goes by the name of liberty of prophesying.
Upon presumption whereof some are wont, first lightly to nibble at, then openly
to impugn, and at last to cry down the most established grounds of our faith.
If it shall be lawful for every one to impeach the Orthodox doctrine,
approved by the common consent of all the reformed Churches; it is to be
feared, that they who through the connivence of the Magistrate, have begun to
innovate in the Church, will afterward, against his prohibition, as occasion
may serve, attempt the like in the Commom-wealth.

But they little need our exhortation, who to their great pains and cost have
already taken the best course, that could be wished, for the renovation and
consummation of peace and truth in these Churches. Therefore we think it
unlawful to doubt of their constancy, of whose singular prudence, piety and
care we have had experience: And will pray unto God, that those things, which
have proceeded from them with a pious intention, may be finished with happy
success.

And now beloved brethren and fellow Ministers, we will also in a few words
address our selves to you, from whose wisdoms it cannot be hid, that among
these principal Controversies so much discussed, there be sometime slight
questions intermingled, which neither have the same certainty of belief, nor
are of any great moment to true piety. But as for those which are of that
nature, that, unless they be maintained, the free grace of God, in the
provision for man's salvation, is infirmed, and the free will of man set up in
Gods Throne, for those you ought constantly to stand, as for the freehold of
Religion; neither by any means ought you to endure, that the certainty of our
salvation should be revoked from the stability of Gods purpose to the
inconstancy of man's freewill. But if among these any questions come in, which
being not yet determined by the Reformed Churches, are probably disputed by
godly and learned men either way without any damage to the rule of faith, it
becomes not grave and moderate Divines to thrust upon other men's consciences,
as determinations of Faith, their own private opinions herein. In such Tenets
there is no danger, so long as you take heed, that diversity of opinion do not
either among the Ministers dissolve the bond of peace, or among the people sow
the seeds of faction.

Moreover (that we may give no further caution) among those things, which are
certain, and soundly grounded upon the word of God, some there be, which are
not to be inculcated to every auditory without difference, but only to be
touched warily in due time and place. Among these is that high mystery of
Predestination, a most sweet doctrine, and full of comfort, but to those only,
who are rooted in faith, and exercised in piety, to which kind of men, in
great conflict of conscience, it may be instead of a strong tower of defense.
But when they, who have not yet well learned the first foundations of Religion,
and whose minds are wholly carried away by their carnal affections, are by the
indiscretion of some Preachers, called on to dive into this depth, this comes
of it, that, while they brabble about the secret decree of Predestination, they
neglect the saving knowledge of the Gospel, and, while they dream of nothing
else but Predestination unto life, they never care to set foot in that way, in
which they must walk, who are Predestined unto life.

And concerning the mystery of Reprobation, greater care is to be had, that it
be not only handled sparingly and prudently, but also in the explication
thereof those fearful opinions, and such as have no ground in the Scriptures,
be carefully avoided, which tend rather unto desperation, then edification,
and do bring upon some of the Reformed Churches a grievous scandal.

Lastly, we are so to determine of the precious merit of Christ's death, that
we neither slight the judgment of the Primitive Church, nor yet the
Confessions of the Reformed Churches, nor (which is the most principal point
of all the rest) weaken the promises of the Gospel, which are to be propounded
universally in the Church.

These brief admonitions are here given by us, rather that we might testify
our love toward our Venerable brethren, then that we thought they needed this
our advise.

There remains nothing now, but that we humbly beseech Almighty God, that the
counsels of the States, the endeavors of the Ministers, the assistance of
foraine Divines, and the endeavors of all may aim at this, and obtain this
end, that the Church of the Low Countries, all errors being rooted out, and
dissensions composed, may enjoy the Orthodox Faith, and a settled peace for
ever, through him, who is the Advocate of our peace, our Lord and Savior JESUS
CHRIST. Amen.

Subscribed by George Carleton D. in Divinity, Bishop of Landaff, afterward
Bishop of Chichester. John Davenant D. in Divinity, now Bishop of Salisbury.
Samuel Ward, the Lady Margarets, professor of Divinity in the University of
Camb. and Master of Sidney College there. Thomas Goad D. in Divinity. Walter
Balcanquall, then Bachelour in Divinity, since D. in Divinity, now Deane of
Rochester.



