IHS.

MARIA JOSEPH.

THE PRACTICE HOW TO find Ease, Rest, Repose, Content, and Happiness.

Written by a Religious man of the congregation of St. ELIAS the Prophet, and
of the Order of our Blessed Lady of mount Carmell, restored by the Blessed
mother Teresa.

THE SECOND PART.

Containing directions how to end all Controversies, and take away all
discontentments, and evils, and attain unto true joy of mind, and content of
heart, and all good.

Stand upon the Ways, and behold, and ask for the old Paths, which is the
good way, and walk therein, and you shall find rest for your Souls. Ierom.
6. 16.

AT ROAN.

By Jacques Fouet, with permission of Superiors. 1619.

TO THE KINGS MOST ECCELLENT MAJESTY: The Author wishes all Content and
Happiness.
AMongst all our Labors in this life (most dread SOVEREIGN) there are none
better employed then those, which are spent in seeking after, and in
establishing in our selves, and others, true Content, and Happiness: For what
does it profit a man, if Math. 16. ^6.
he gain the whole world, and sustain the damage of his soul? or what
permutation shall a man give for his soul? and deliver it to be afflicted in
this life with temporal discontent, and in the other with eternal torment:
Will he take to be an Emperor, or King of the whole Globe of the earth; to
reign with discontent, for seven years, over all the people in the world? It
is so hard an exchange, that none endued with reason would accept of such
conditions: for what is an Emperor, a King, or any man, but his Content, and
Happiness? To be, and not to be happy, is but to be by a privation of well
being, wretched, and miserable. Neither is it sufficient to Happiness, that a
man think himself happy, and be not, for this is but an increase of misery;
not to seem to be, that which he is, until it be too late, to obtain that
which he would; true Content: whereby we see, that true Happiness is more
worth then Kingdoms; and true Content is more to be esteemed, then all the
treasures of the East, and West Indyes, since it indueth Emperors and Kings
with whatsoever true goods they have, and fills Subjects with what they can
desire, if they will not desire that which is hurtful to themselves: Insomuch,
as let but a Prince establish in himself, his Court and Subjects, the practice
of true Happiness, they rest and remain, each one reioicing at others good, and
all well content, with that which every one has of his own: and let him but
permit, false, and deceitful Happiness, to be practiced in himself, and
Subjects; and do what he can, he and they will become wretched, and
miserable, in all things else, saving in imaginations: which considerations
have moved me to seek out the paths of Content, and set down at large the
way to true Happiness, and Rest, that I might thereby as much as in me lies,
call all my Country men from the disgustes, and dissentions of this age (which
the iniquity of heresy has brought forth) to a rich Repose, and Joy in our
Lord.

And having Dedicated our First part, unto the most worthy Prince CHARLES your
Son (whom God Almighty long preserve.) I could not set out these our Second
labors, under the protection of any other, but your Majesty: For seeing I am
to speak of Content, and Happiness, to whom may I more fitly dedicate our
labors, then to my Sovereign, unto whom above all men living I heartily wish
them. Accept therefore most dread Sovereign, the protection of this our work
against all calumniators; and be well pleased, that true Content, and
Happiness, which your Majesty cannot but desire to your self, may with your
Gracious favor, and under your protection, be communicated to all your
Subjects: that all dissentions and discontentments taken out of your Highness
Kingdoms: it may be verified of your Monarchy; which was spoken of Sion the
Temple of God: The habitaiton in thee, is as it were of all Rejoicing, Psalm. 86.
which is that I desire, and heartily pray for, and so humbly submit my self,
and rest,

Of your Majesty's Subjects, the meanest: SI: STOCK.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Dear Reader, though so great be the force of Happiness to draw all men to
seek after it; that there is not to be found, any one so lost or forlorn, as
publickely to profess, that he loves afflictions and griefs; as they are
vexations, and pains: yet such is the pride and obstiancie of many, that
rather then they will be convinced to be men of evil lines, they will defend
that to be Happiness, which they love, and not that which is Happiness indeed:
and so heartily loving carnal liberty, and sensual life, under false
pretexts, of Liberty of the Gospel, Justification by Faith only. Assurednes
of salvation, etc. have put Content and Happiness in sensuality of life, and
not to be discovered, that they are Hogs (as Horace Hor. lib. 1 Epist. 4.
says) of the Heard of Epicures, do craftily color their Carnal liberty,
under the veil of Religion, and so persuade as many as will believe them.

First that abstinence, or fasting from meat, drink, and sleep, at certain
times, and upon Luther in lib. liberate Christiana. Calvin. lib 4. Inst. and
their folowers.
certain days, is superstition, contrary to the word of God, and the
liberty of their Gospel, so that they cannot be happy without the liberty
of eating, drinking, and sleeping, as much as they will, and when they will.

Secondly, that it is not possible to live Chaste, so to their Content, Luth.
in lib. libert. christiana
and Happiness, according to their Doctrine, it is necessary Call. lib. 2
institut. cap. 7. and their followers.
that they have always a Woman.

Thirdly, that man has no freewill, or power to resist the putting in practice
of his evil Luther in lib deseruo arbitrio. Calu. lib. 2. instit. cap. 2 and
in antidoto Co^cilij Tridentini. and their followers
thoughts, suggestions, or Carnal desires; whether they be of theft,
fornication, adultery, or heresy, etc. Whereupon it follows that according
to their Doctrine, they cannot be happy without the liberty of committing
Fornication, adultery, theft, and preaching whatsoever suggestions of the
devil, or thoughts shall arise in their minds etc. Since as they say, they
have not Freewill, or power to resist them, or do otherwise, and he was never
esteemed happy, who was bound to observe, that which was above his power and
might.

And accordingly to this, they teach, and preach for Religion, that all the
actions of men are of their own Nature mortal sins, worthy of everlasting
pains, as well the best as the worst: that all sins are equal: that evil
thoughts not consented unto are mortal sins, and that as grievous mortal
sins, as if they had committed the fact: Whereupon they infer that it is
not possible to keep the Commandments of God, or merit any thing by well
doing, and so craftily coloring their Epicurisme under the pretext of
Religion, they seem to their followers, neither to deceive, nor be deceived
in their opinions, or practice of Happiness; but by this craft preserve their
credits, and live without suspicion of wretchedness; and yet take to themselves
liberty to do, what their Flesh or concupicences do desire, without respect
either to God or man, more then the wariness, not to incur the forfeitures,
and pennalties of Penal Laws: Insomuch as that they have put Conscience
(which in Catholic times, men used to carry in their hearts, and souls) into
their neighbors eyes; that if he see them not doing amiss, to accuse them to
a Judge, and bring them within the compass of some penal Law, all is well;
Call lib. 3 inst ca. 14. Mela^ct. in locis anni 1521. tit. de peccato: and their
followers. Cicero de leg.
In the sight of God, their best, and worst works, are of their own nature
(as they say) all equally mortal sins; And he who fears nothing but a
Judge, and a witness (as Cicero a Heathen man well observed) What will not he
do in the dark?

And this policy, these Libertines have borrowed from Epicurus, a heathen
Philosopher, who heartily loving carnal liberty, and sensual life; not to be
of all men contemned, and accounted as a beast, would not in plain terms
defend publickely: That man had no other happiness then sensual life, but
colored his Lasciniousnesse under pretext of Religion, and taught for truths:
That the Soul of man was mortal: and that after death there was no reward for
good deeds, and so by denying of merit for good works, and punishment
condign to wicked deeds (with the Lutherans and Caluenistes English Creed
Art. 11.
of this age) he founded his Sect, Happiness, and Religion, upon the grounds of
Faith only, without merit for good works, or exercises of virtue: and by
this craft, did what his concupiscences desired, and yet preserved his credit,
of being a Philosopher; and found many followers in all ages: Insomuch as St.
Augustine (before his Conversion to our Catholic Church) if he could have
believed the Epicurian Articles, had made himself of the Sect of the Epicures,
as he says in these words: Nothing did call me, from the deep gulf of
carnal August. lib. Conf. 8. cap. 16
pleasures, but the fear of death, and the Judgment of God to come, which
(notwithstanding the diverse opinions I held) never departed from my breast: And
I did dispute with my friends, Alipius, and Nebridius of the ends of good, and
evil: and Epicurus had carried away the prize in my mind, had I not believed
that after death, there did remain a life of the Soul, and places
proportionable to our merits, which Epicurus would not believe. So S. Augustine.

And from this Epicurian Doctrine of Protestants, and liberty of their
Gospel, proceeds their abundant fruits, and works of the Flesh; which are
so copious, that as their own Authors do testify; In Flaunders Richard
Iefferie in his Sermon. printed 1605. page 31.
was never more drunkenness, In Italy more wantonness, etc. In Jury more
hypocrisy, In Turkey more impiety, In Tartarie more iniquity, then is
practiced generally in England. The people (of Stubbes in his Epistle
dedicatory before his Book of good Works.
England says another of their Authors are) in most places dissolute, proud,
envious, malicious, disdainful, covetous, ambitious, careless of good works.
So these two English Protestant Authors; yet the one affirms Iefferie
that he spoke what he had plainly seen in the course of some travels, and
the Stubbes
other what he had found in traveling the whole Realm round about. And
according to the testimonies of these two, is the Lamentation of the Puritans,
in their mild defense, alleged in Mr. Powels Book, of things indifferent,
saying: What eye so blind, that it does not gushe out with tears, to behold
the misery of our supposed glorious Church, I mean the great ignorance, the
Superficial worship of God, the fearful blasphemies, and swearings in houses
and streets, etc. The dishonor of Superiors, the pride, cruelty,
fornications, adulteries, drunkenness, covetousness, vsuries, and other like
abominations, etc. O behold and pity, the woeful and lamentable estate of our
Church in these things. And with this agrees the testimony of their Apostle
Luther, saying: The world by this Doctrine In Postil. super Euang: Domini.
Aduentus
(of Protestants) is daily made worse: Again in the same Postile: In so bright
a light of the Gospel (of Protestants) men are more covetous, more crafty,
more unjust, more cruel, more froward, and to conclude they are much worse,
then they were before in the Papacy. Again: Before time when we were seduced
by the Pope, every man did willingly follow good works, and now no man, says
or knows any thing, but how to get all to himself, by exactions, pillage,
theft, lying, usury, etc. Again: It is (says he) a wonderful thing, and
full of In Sermon. coni. Ger. Fer. 5.
scandal, that from the time, in which the pure Doctrine of the Gospel was
first called to light, the world should daily grow worse. Of this Henry the
eight, after he was a Protestant lamented, saying: I am sorry that the Readers
of the word of GOD, follow it in Fox Act. 1 page 1124
doing so faintly, and coldly. For of this I am sure, that Charity was never
so faint amongst you, and virtuous and Godly living, was never less used, nor
God himself amongst Christians, was never less reverenced, honored, and
served. And with this testimony of K. Henry the 8. agrees the testimony of
Fox, saying: Fox considerat. 4.
To rip up all our deformities in particular, I mean not here; neither need
I, the same being so evident to all men's eyes, that who cannot see, our
excessive outrage in pompeous Aoparell, our carnal desires, and unchaste
demeanors, without fear of God, our careless security, without Conscience,
as though there were no Judgment to come! our studdy upon this world, as if
there were no other Heaven? And the same also affirms Calvin, saying: In cap*
11 Dan. 5. 34
Ampugst the small number of those, who have withdrawn themselves, from the
Idolatry of the Papists; the greater part is full of treachery, and craft, they
counterfeit indeed great zeal, but if thou look into them, thou shall find
them full of deceit. Again: There is scarsely to be found the In com. 2 Pet.
1. 2.
tenth (Protestant) who has for any other end, given his name to the Gospel,
(of Protestants) then that he might with greater liberty, flow in all
Laciuiousnes. Whereupon Andreas Musculus, another In libro de nouissimo die.
Protestant says: If we would confess the truth: then are we compelled to
witness this of us Gospellers, that there are not to be found in the whole
world, men more given to whooring, usury, cousening, and deceit then we.
Again: the thing it self does speak, and truth does compel us to confess,
(although In the same book
against our wills) that now men are become worse, and more irreligious, more
ingrate, more unfaithful, more shameless, and that greater wickedness, and
sins, cannot be found in the whole world, no not amongst the Turks truly,
or the Jews, or Pagans, then in those places, where the word of the Lord (of
Protestants) is most diligently preached. Again: I am compelled to say,
because Musculus in Prophetia Christi.
it is true, that there are not to be found, no not among the heathen, Jews,
or Turks, men more selfe-willed, in whose minds the sparks of all virtues
are extinct, and amongst whom sin is accounted nothing: then amongst the
professors of the Gospel (of Protestants) amongst whom the Devil altogether
loosed from his chains, and in free liberty does flourish; And that I may in
few words tell all, it is even so, and this is the estate of us Lutherans, that
if any be desirous to see a great multitude of Knaves, Athists, Usurers, and
Coseners, he must go to some City where the Gospel (of Protestants) is
preached, and there he shall find of this sort of men, by multitudes, and
repeating almost the same words in another place, he says: The case stands
thus with us Lutherans, that if any be Musculus Domi. 1* Aduentus
desirous to see a great table of Knaves, of persons turbulent, deceitful,
coseners, usurers; let him go to any City where the Gospel is purely
Preached, and he shall find them there by multitudes; for it is more manifest,
then the day light, that there were never among the Ethnicks, Turks, and other
Infidels, more unbridled and unruly persons, with whom all virtue, and
honesty is quite extinct, then are among the professors of the Gospel. And
Iacobus Andreas another Protestant says: The other part, and multitude Andreas
adu. 11. Luc.
of Germans do give liberty indeed, to the Preaching of the word: But there
is not perceived an amendment of manners amongst them, but horrible Epicurisme,
and beastly life is seen amongst them, in their conuersations, compositions of
body, desires, etc. In stead of fasting they attend wholly to feastings, and
drinkings night and day. And Melancton a Protestant says: The thing it self
does speak Ad cap 6. Math.
that in these Countries (where the Protestant Gospel was preached) almost all
their studies are employed, in sumptuous preparations for banquets, and
drunkenness, and exceeding great cups, etc. Such barbarousnes is in the
people, that the most part persuade themselves, if they should fast one day,
the night following they should dye. So these Protestants of the fruits of
their own Doctrine.

Of the coming of these Epicures, Libertines, and loose livers, three of the
Apostles prophesied saying: In the last days 1 Timothy 3. 1.
shall approach perilous times, and men shall be lovers of themselves, Covetous,
Haughty, Proud, Blasphemous, not obedient to their Parents, unkind, wicked,
without affection, without peace, accusers, incontinent, unmerciful, with out
benignity, Traitors, stubborn, puffed up, and lovers of voluptuousnes, more
then of God, having an appearance indeed of piety (every one his Bible) but
denying the virtue thereof, the keeping of the Law. Again: In the last days
shall come mockers in deceit, walking 2 Pet. 3. 3
according to their own concupicenses. Again: my dearest be mindful of the
Iud. 1.
words, which have been spoken before by the Apostles of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who told you, that in the last times shall come, mockers according to
their own desires, walking in impiety. These are they which separate them
selves, Sensual, having not the Spirit of God, whose fruits are Charity, Joy,
Peace, Patience, Gal. 5. 22
Benignity, Longanimitie, Goodness, Mildenes, Faith, Modesty, Continency,
Chastity; but the Spirit of the Devil, and Flesh, whose works are
Fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, Gal. 5.
leacherie, serving of Idols, Witchcraft, enmities, Contentions, emulations,
angers, brawles, dissension, Sects, enuyes, murders, drunkenness,
banquettings, and such like, forbidden works by the Commandments of God.

For the discovering of whose deceits (out of love to my Country, and desire
to gain some, who out of ignorance, are fallen into these follyes, and
deceitful contentments in Carnal liberty, and sensual life) I have written
this our Second part of Ease, and Rest: to show unto them the means how to
attain unto true Joy of mind, and Content of heart, and suppress these base
desires, which are common to men with Beasts: that all evils, Contentions,
Strifes, Suites in Law (the lamentable Civil wars of this Land) being taken
away, and true goods, and pleasures, ingrafted in their places, Without fear
being delivered out of the hands of Luc. 1. 74
our enemies, we may serve God in Holiness, and Justice Isay. 32. 17.
before him all our days. And the works of justice shall be Peace, and the
service of justice Silence, and security for ever. And my people (says God)
shall sit in the beauty of Peace, and in the tabernacles of Confidence, and in
wealthy rest: According as it was promised to true Christians, by the
Prophets, in both Testaments, saying: There shall arise Psalm. 71. 7 Romans 14. 16.
in his days Justice, and abundance of peace, until the Moon be taken
away, for the Kingdom of God (upon earth) is not (says St. Paul) meat and
drink, but Justice and Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost, according to the
words of our Savior, saying: Peace I leave to you, John 14. 27.
my peace I give you, not as the world gives, do I give to you: Not such a
Peace or Content, as the world gives to her favorites, does our Savior give
unto his followers, but ^uch a Peace and Content as is without trouble, and
servile ^eare, as follows immediately in his wor^es, saying: Let not your
hearts be troubled or Luc. 1. 74
fear. Without fear (says the Prophet Zachary) delivered from the hands of
our enemies, we may serve him, in holiness, and justice all our days. This is
the Ease, Rest, and Peace, which every where is promised to Christians, the
followers of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, a peace or content, without
servile fear, or trouble: not as the world gives peace, does our Savior give
peace, and Content; The peace which the world gives to worldlings, is a
feeding of their inordinate Concupiscenses, and carnal desires, with a Carnal
and Sensual delight, mixed with servile fears, Ielousies* and troubles; The
peace, and content which our Savior does give unto his followers, is a peace
without servile fear, Jealousy, or trouble; A Peace (which as the holy Ghost
says) passes all understanding; A Peace Rest, Repose, Phil 4. 7.
and Content to their bodies, by bringing their passions, appetites and carnal
affections, under the obedience of right reason, that they may live in
Corporal peace and rest, and keep their bodies free from servile slavery,
and vile subjection to their inordinate passions, which are unreasonable
Masters: Peace to their hearts, and souls, by possessing all good; Peace with
God, by loving him with all their hearts, and keeping of his Commandments;
Peace with their Neighbors, by loving them, as themselves: no man commencing a
Suite against himself; Peace with their enemies, by patient suffering
whatsoever injuries they shall lay upon them; Peace with the Angels and Saints
in Heaven by Union with them in a mystical body; Peace with the Devils in
Hell, by having authority over them; Peace with all the Creatures of the
earth, by using them according to the end they were created: That it may be
verified which was spoken by the Prophet Isay, saying: Isa. 66. 12
I will decline upon her a flood of peace: Again, And I will make thy
visitation Isa. 60. 17
peace, and thy overseers Justice. Iniquity shall no more be heard in thy
Land, waste, and destruction in thy borders, and Salvation shall occupy thy
walls, and praise thy gates. This is the Ease, Rest, Repose, Content, and
Happiness, which we speak of, and desire to Preach unto all Phil. 4. 7.
people. The peace of God which passes all understanding. The Legacy which
our Lord and Savior left us, saying: Peace I leave to you, my John 14.
peace I give to you: A true Joy, and Content of heart, and mind, which he
commanded us Math. 10. 11.
to Preach unto all the Families of the earth, saying: Into whatsoever City or
Town you shall enter, enquire who is worthy, and there tarry, And when you
enter into the house, salute it, saying: Peace be to this house, according to
whose commandment, we Preach it unto thee, dear Reader, and say Peace be to
thee; and so rest thy humble Servant.

OF EASE, REST, REPOSE, CONTENT, and Happiness.
CHAP. I. That Man has a complete Joy and Content, proportionable to his being.
Almighty God having created all things of Ps. 113. 1^.
nothing, according to the disposition of his will; as a pious Parent, and
merciful Creator, has given to every thing a Content and Happiness; which
had, then it is so well satisfied, that it seems to desire no more, but
rests (and after his manner rejoices) as content, and well pleased.

As we see by experience, that he has given to a Stone, a Content, to be in
his Centure; Water, a Rest, in the hollow places of the Earth; Air, a Repose,
in his Region; and Fire, in his Sphere; Trees, Plants, and Herbs, a Delight,
in the fat and firmness of the Earth, tempered according to their properties;
Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, a Pleasure, in Meats, Places, Company, and
sensual Delights.

And out of his infinite goodness, in creating every thing, has also annexed
unto it such a disposition to order, and such a propension to his good, and
content; that take but out of his place, a piece of Earth, (which of all the
creatures of God Almighty is the meanest) and give it all things you can
devise, and make the most of it that possible you can invent, yet it will tend
thither, and never be quiet, until it return; insomuch, as do but take away
that which holds it up, presently it goes thither of it self, and that
infallibly.

And if by some accident, a subtle Vapor become to be enclosed in some hollow
place, or cave of the Earth, where it has, as it were, a chamber prepared for
to rest in; it will be so unquiet, that it will tear in pieces Rocks and
Mountains, overthrow Castles and Towers, and, as angry, shake the whole
Earth, to ascend up to his place; and if it find but an issue, or you make but
a passage, it is gone.

Or if a gross vapor, by the heat of the Sun, be drawn up into the Region
of the Air (as though it should be exalted to higher dignity) and there come,
to be environed about with clouds, that it cannot descend, but must stay there,
it takes his exalting in such disdain, and stays with so great discontent,
that by collision of bodies, and through earnest pressing, it throws fire
down from Heaven, and causes such a thunder, as though it would tear the
Heavens in pieces, and all to descend to his place of rest, there to remain,
where it was ordained, that it should be, in his first creation.

And the same we may observe in Birds, Beasts, and Plants: put them in a Soil
not accommodated to their properties, and they die; or take from Birds or
Beasts, their natural Company, Foodes, Places of abode, etc. and give them
what other thing else you can, yet out of anguish and grief they will pine away;
and let them but loose, they are gone, to their ordained Company, Meat, and
Rest.

Whereby we may infer, that since all creatures whatsoever have a Content
and Rest (which once had, then they seem well pleased, and desire no more)
that also Man has his Rest and Happiness, wherein also he may be satisfied
and well pleased.

And seeing God Almighty, as a most prudent Creator, has given to every
thing a Content, proportionable to his being; it must needs be, that Man,
being a far more excellent creature, then any of the Elements, Birds, Beasts,
Fishes, and Plants, must have a more excellent Content, then any of them;
unless we should esteem God Almighty injurious to the nature of Man; which
cannot be, His Mercies (to Man) exceeding all Ps. 144.
his Works, being duly considered.

So having found out, that Man has a Happiness, and Content; it will be
worthy of our labor, to seek, wherein it consists, and set down the
means, how to attain unto it; which we will do, by Gods grace, in the
ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. II. That there is a God.
THe fool has said in his Ps. 1^.
heart, there is no God. Fools, whose grievous sins and horrible crimes have
extinguished the right use of Reason, deny the first Cause. Agent, Mouer, and
Creator of all things; and descend to such gross ignorance, as that they
attribute that to Nothing, Chance, Fortune, or Accident, which proceeds from
God: as though Nothing, or that which has no being, were more potent then that
which is; and could give being, beginning, and motion to all things.

To dispute against fools, obstinate, and wilful people, who have lost wit
and reason, is but to become foolish. To convince them, there is no better
argument, then to put them to the practice of their Doctrine; as when they are
sick, hungry, afflicted, or want any thing, to let them have no other help,
or succor, then their Nothing, or Chance, to help them, until they change
their Opinions; since, in their judgments, Nothing is so potent, and active,
as that it can give being, motion, and action to all things; it must of
necessity also, in their judgments, be of sufficient force, to help them in
their necessities, to rest and content, without any other assistance.

Aristotle setting down common places, and means how to find out arguments to
convince errors, and establish truths, against Atheists would not dispute, but
set down this for an argument, saying, Such as do doubt, whether Top. lib. 1.
c. 9.
they should honor the Gods, or no, stand in need of pains. Such as are become
so deprived of reason, as to think, that there was no God, nor honor due unto
God; to convince them, were necessary pains, sicknesses, and torments; that
the Truth, which Arguments, derived from Reason, could not prove (against such
as had lost the right use of Reason;) yet Affliction and Pains might force
them to confess. So the Devils in Hell, though they cannot love GOD Almighty,
or serve, or adore him, as they ought, for that they are confirmed in Malice,
and multitude of Sins; yet compelled by Affliction and Pains, Believe, that
there Ia. 1. 19.
is one God, and tremble: So forcible an argument is Pains and Afflictions
against Atheists, who deny God in their hearts; that it is of force sufficient
to convince even the Devil, that there is a God.

So do but leave these Atheists, who deny that there is a God, and esteem
all things to happen by Chance and Fortune; in their Distresses, and
Afflictions, to Chance and Fortune; and permit nothing else to help them:
then they will not only believe, that there is a God, but also earnestly
persuade others, that there is a God; and that he is the rewarder of those,
who show and use mercy to others; and punishes the cruel, and hard-hearted:
According as it is written in the Scriptures, saying, Blessed Mat. 5. 8.
are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. And in Mat. 7. ^.
what measure you meat, it shall be measured to you again. And God will
render to every Mat. 16. 27.
man according to his works: As it fell out of late years in a certain
English Soldier, in the Garrison at Flushing in Zealand; who whiles he was
well in health, could not be persuaded, that there was a God; but falling, by
lewdness of life, into many diseases, wherewithal he was grievously
afflicted and tormented, he cried out unto him for help and mercy: Their
infirmities were multiplied, Ps. 15. 3.
after they made have to seek for remedies, and to call upon God for help.

And this for proof against Atheists, that there is a God.

CHAP. III.That God is the content of Man, and that it is not possible for Man
to find any true Joy, or Content, without enjoying of God Almighty.
MAn having lost by sin that which was given him by grace and favor, the
Content and Pleasure of Paradise, Genesis 1. 8.
wherein, after his creation, he was placed, still seeks to recover his
ancient inheritance, Ease, Rest, Repose, Joy, Content, and Happiness; old,
and young; rich, and poor; Kings, and Pesants; wise men, and fools; all seek
after Ease, and Content: No man so forlorn, or decayed from the first
original of his Happiness, that loves and affects Affliction, Torments,
and Pains, as they are Vexations and Griefs: but every one, how corrupt
soever his nature is, through sin, yet he desires Repose, and Happiness.

O Sons of Adam! seek that you seek; but there it is not, where you seek
it: you seek for Ease, Rest, Repose, Content, and Happiness, in the Honor,
Glory, Riches, Wealth, sensual Pleasures, and Commodities of the World; where
never yet was found, but their Opposites; Griefs, Anguishes, Discontents, and
Unhappiness: And whom shall we call for witness of this truth? the fools of
the World? No; hear the Wise man speak: I have seen Eccl. 1. 14.
all things that are under the Sun; and behold, all are vanity, and
affliction of mind.

Is it possible, that the sons of the Earth cannot remember their Parents
fall? That in the enjoying, and familiar conuersing with God in Paradise, the
place of Pleasure, was all Ease, Content, and Joys; and banished from thence,
they were put, with all their posterity, into a cursed Land, of Pains and
Travels: Cursed is the Genesis 3. 17.
Earth in thy work; with much toyling shall thou eat thereof all the days of
thy life; thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to thee. Great is the
ignorance of Mankind, that looks to gather Grapes of Thorns, and Figs of
Thistles; Mat. 7. 16.
to seek for Ease, Rest, Repose, and Content, in the commodities of a cursed
creature; in the Mettalls, Herbage, skins of Beasts, dead Fish and Flesh,
sensual Pleasures, and corruption of the Earth: base minds, to be deluded with
such base contents, and gross ignorance, against which no reason or experience
can prevail.

God Almighty, in creating of Man, out of his infinite goodness, gave him
Understanding, Will and Memory, according to his own Image, as it is written;
God created Genesis 1. 17.
Man to his own Image, to the Image of God he created him, male and female he
created them; their souls, and formed their bodies of the slime of the earth:
God formed Man of the Genesis 2. 7.
slime of the earth, and breathed into his face the breath of life, and Man
became a living soul, bearing in his mind the Image and likeness of God,
Understanding, Will, and Memory.

Understanding, to understand what was the chiefest good; God his Creator, of
infinite Goodness, Beauty, Glory, Majesty, Excellency, and Perfection.

And a Will, to will, love, and seek him at all times.

And a Memory, to remember him in all his actions; with such a capacity of
him, and hunger after him, that whatsoever else he seeks, he should err,
and whatsoever else he should find, yet he should want; that, as it were
perforce, though otherwise he would not, yet he must needs seek after his
glorious Majesty; since nothing else is able to content the soul of man, but
God: as Cicero, a Pagan man, well observes; there were never any De Leg. lib.
1.
people in the world so barbarous and irreligious, but that, although they knew
not what God they ought to serve, and adore, yet they knew, that they ought to
serve and adore some God. The light of reason, in the most barbarous people,
manifesting to them, that there could be no true Content and Happiness, but in
serving and adoring God: though, for want of grace, they erred in the manner,
and through ignorance, were deceived, in their opinions, of his divine
Majesty; yet all, with one consent, cried out, that God was to be served,
loved, and adored; seeing that there could be no true content, without the
enjoying of him.

God Almighty being only He, that is Sum qui sum, I am Exo. 3. 14.
which am, and all other things being by participation from his goodness,
depending upon his Apo. 4.
will; no creature can have any true good content, or rest, but in him, and
from him: he being all Ease, Rest, Repose, Content, and Happiness, holds
them in his hand, and co^municateth them to his creatures at his pleasure;
according to the saying of the Prophet: Thou have made the Ps. 35. 11.
ways of life known to me, thou shall make me full of joy with thy
countenance, delights are in thy right hand, even to the end.

Again, Thou openest thy hand, Ps. 103. 28.
and fillest every living thing with thy blessing.

All things created, being finite, and having limited perfections, cannot
satiate the heart of Man; as we see by experience, in the most famous Mynions,
and greatest Potentates of the Earth; who though the world (ambitious to show
and set forth her pride and iolitie) has raised to the highest fortunes and
greatest glory she had; yet could she never bestow upon them one moment of
true Content, or Rest; but forced them to march, like galld-backt Mules,
covered over with painted Saddles, and burdened with heavy burdens of Cares
and Iealousies all the time of their lives; after death, to descend into
eternal Miseries and Torments.

And to begin with Nynus, who lived in the third hundredth years after the
Flood, and was the Earths first famous Mynion, exalted by her to that height of
worldly honor and dignity, that his Father Belus, and his Grandfather Nemrod,
were styled Gods, his Father called Jupiter, and his Grandfather Saturn, as
Sator Deorum, the Father of the Gods; that for Nobility of Birth, Styles,
Titles, Discents, and Dignities, he was not inferior to the highest that ever
was upon the Earth: and that his earthly power and might, might be
correspondent to his Styles Oros. li. 1. c. 1. et 4.
and Titles, he was advanced to the Monarchy of the Assyrians, Medes, and
Persians; so large Dominions, that upon the first view, he alone seemed to
enjoy all the pleasures and best commodities of the Earth, from the South, unto
the Sea Euxinus, of four Empires: Yet if we seriously look into the Content
he had in this his Greatness, you shall find nothing, but that the poor man
was deceived with bare Imaginations; lived forty years, the time of his
reign, under a heavy burden of Cares, Iealousies, Wars, and Dangers, to
die a miserable death (wounded with an Arrow, shot from his enemies) without
any other benefit of all his worldly Greatness, Majesty, and Might, then
increase of eternal Torments.

The same we shall find in 4. Reg. 18. 19.
Senacherib, the Earths second Favorite; whom she raised to the Monarchy of
the Assyrians, and made Conqueror of many Kingdoms, and Vanquisher of many
Kings, to adorn him with all their Treasures and Pleasures: All which could
not endue him with one moment of true Content, but loadened him for eighteen
years, the time of his reign, with many Troubles, and much Discontents;
afterward, to be miserably murdered by two of his own sons, so to descend
into eternal Torments.

The like we read of Nabucadonosor, Dan. 2.
another Mynion of the Earths; Monarch of the Chaldeans, and over so many
Countries and Nations, that Daniel affirmed of him, that he had all earthly
things under his power: yet this was so far off from yielding him true
Content, that he was put to live like a Beast.

Cyrus, so high a favorite of 1. Esd. cap. 1. Just. lib. 1. Oros. li. 2. c. 6.
et 7.
the Earths, that he had the Monarchy of the Medes, Persians, and Chaldeans,
conquered King Cressus, and posfessed all his Wealth; yet therein could find
so little content, that after two and twenty years, the time of his reign,
passed in Wars, Troubles, and Afflictions of Mind, he was killed miserably
by a woman, and so descended into eternal Torments.

The like we shall find in Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar, Aniball, and
all Heathen or Christian Kings, who lived unchristian lives (and did not seek
after God with all their hearts) that they lived in this life in perpetual
anguish, and affliction of mind, and died Wretches, discontent, and miserable.

This is the general malady of all the sons of Adam; but especially, of the
Princes and Nobles of the Earth; who pretend to be wise, and will by no means
seem to be deceived; and yet all deceive themselves, and that so egregiously,
as that by pretending pleasures, they are turned into pains, and by seeking
for Riches, Ease, and Content, they fall into Penury, Disgusts, and eternal
Torments; for that they seek them where never yet they were found, in the
sensual pleasures of the earth, and ugly pretentions of sin (which obtained,
loathe; and ended, breed affliction) when they are only to be found in God
Almighty: who being of infinite wisdom, beauty, riches, honor, glory, with
all that is great, precious, and delicious, that thou can wish, is able to
endue thy soul with Happiness, and thy body with true Content. So that having
him, thou may have all things; and possessing him, possess all things; and
knowing him, know all things; and loving him, be filled and ravished with all
divine delights. Seek him, and He heals all Ps. 10^. 3.
thy infirmities; follow him, and He redeemeth thy life from deadly falling;
serve him, and He crowns thee with Mercy, and Commiserations; love him, and
He replenisheth thy desire in good things; enjoy him, and thy youth shall be
renewed as the Eagle.

As the Soul is life of the Body, from whom the Body has his lively motions,
sensible gustes, and pleasures; so God Almighty is God, and life of the Soul,
from whom, in whom, and by whom, she has her spiritual divine motions,
heavenly gustes, pleasures, and delights. Whereupon the Prophet called our Lord,
The God of his Ps* 4. ^.
life. And as the Body, howsoever it may have some false and deceitful
contents of his own, without the consent of the Soul, or Spirit, as
witnesses S. Paul, saying, For that Romans 7. 15.
which I work, I understand not; for not that which I will, the same I do,
but that which I hate, that I do: Yet it cannot have any full Content,
Pleasure, or Delight, without the consent, pleasure, and concurrence of the
Soul, or Spirit: as is manifest by experience, when the will of the Mind
resists the desires of the Flesh; so the Mind, or Spirit, howsoever it may
have some false and deceitful contents, which it may enjoy without the will and
consent of God Almighty (such as are, Ambitious Thoughts, vain Imaginations,
and pride of Mind) yet it can never have any true Content, perfect Pleasure, or
Delight, without the full consent and concurrence of the will and consent of
God Almighty: according as it is written, Without me you can Io. 15. 5.
do nothing, that is good, or of true content. Again, Our 2. Cor. 3. 5.
sufficiency is of God. So our Savior exhorting us, says, Seek first the
Kingdom of God, Mat. 6. 3^.
and the Justice of him (which is his Will, and Law) and all these things
(Meat, Drink, Apparel, etc.) shall be given you besides. Whereupon S.
Augustine De Ciuit. Dei li. 19. c. 25. et 26.
says, As it is not of the flesh, but above the flesh, that which makes the
flesh live; so it is not of man, but above man, which makes man to live
happily: Wherefore, as the life of the flesh, is the Soul; so the happy life
of man, is God. Whereby it is manifest, that happy life cannot be, without the
enjoying of God Almighty.

CHAP. IIII. That Faith, or belief in God Almighty, is necessary to Man's
Content and Happiness: but not only Faith, without the conjunction and
connextion to other virtues.
THat Faith, and belief in God, is necessary to Man's Content and Happiness,
is first manifest by reason: for that the first thing which is to be sought
for, in any Question, is, Whether the thing be, or no; and Arist. post. li. 2.
c. 1.
until we believe it to be, it is in vain to seek how, or after what manner
it is.

Secondly, by the Scriptures, which say, that without faith, it Heb. 11. 5.
is impossible to please God: for he that comes to God, must believe that he
is, and is a rewarder of them that seek him. Again, He that believes not,
shall be Mat. 16. 16. Io. 3.
condemned. Again, He that does not believe, is already judged.

Yet that Faith only, without the connection to other virtues, is not of it
self sufficient to Happiness, is manifest by the light of Grace and Nature.

First, For that we believe many things to be, which we would not have, nor
enjoy; as Hell, and eternal pains.

Secondly, To believe that there is Happiness, is not to be happy; otherwise,
the Devils, and damned souls in Hell, should be happy, since they believe,
that there is Happiness, and lament for the loss of it, saying, We Sap. 5. 4.
senseless, esteemed their life madness, and their end without honor:
Behold, how they are accounted among the Children of God, and their lot is
among the Saints.

Thirdly, Faith ends with 1. Cor. 13. 12. 1. Io. 3. 2.
this life: so, if Happiness consisted in only Faith, there were no
Happiness after death.

Fourthly, Faith may stand with sin, and malice: sin, and malice, is
wittingly to do against that we believe in conscience; and so one might be
both happy and wretched together; which is contrary to experience.

Fifthly, If only Faith were sufficient to Happiness, without the connection or
conjunction to other virtues, there could be no impiety committed; nor no man
should be wicked, unjust, or unhappy, for any fact, how horrible soever,
unless he denied Articles of Faith: and all Laws, and execution of Justice
upon any one whosoever, but upon such as denied Articles of Faith, should be
Tyranny and Cruelty; as made, to put to death a happy and just man, who had
committed no unhappiness, or impiety.

Sixthly, It is contrary to experience, that a man should be happy by Faith
only: For though the whole English Clergy of Protestants, in the eleventh
Article of their English Creed, affirm in these words, That we are justified
by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine, and very full of comfort; yet we
shall never hear, or find, that any of their Clergy has left the comfort of
a Benefice, good Fare, fine Apparel, worldly Riches and Commodities, to
practice and enjoy this most wholesome Doctrine, and very full of comfort,
Happiness by faith only. Neither will they be well content, to be put to the
practice of their Doctrine, and live separated from all other Contents, to
enjoy no other comforts, but what they can receive by Faith only, without
connection or adherence to any other virtue.

Again, the Scriptures never absolutely affirm, but absolutely deny
Justification by Faith only, saying, By Works Ia. 2. 23.
a man is justified, and not by Faith only. Again, Do not 1. Cor. 6. 9.
err, neither Fornicators, nor seruors of Idols, nor Adulterers, nor the
Effeminates, nor the Liars with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor
Drunkards, nor Raylers, nor Extortioners, shall possess the Kingdom of
Heaven. Again, The works of the flesh Gal. 5. ^.
are manifest, which are Fornication, Uncleanness, Immodestie, Lechery, serving
of Idols, Witchcraft, enmity, co^tentions, angers, brawles, co^messations, and
such, I foretell you, as I have foretold you, that they which do such things,
shall not obtain the Kingdom of God. Not only such as want faith, shall go
to Hell, but also the Apo. 21. 8.
fearful, and incredulous, and execrable, and Murderers, and Fornicators, and
Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, their part (as well as the
incredulous) shall be in the Poole, burning with fire and brimstone, and the
smoke Apo. 14. 11.
of their torments shall ascend up for ever and ever.

And our Lord esteems those who should hear the Scriptures read, or
preached, and do not practice what they say, to be so far off from
Happiness, that he accounts them fools, saying, Every one that hears
these Mat. 7. 26.
my words, and does them not, shall be like a foolish man, that built his house
upon the Sand. And to convince fools, there cannot be found a more forcible
argument, then that of Aristotle's; When they are in affliction, necessity, and
pains, to let them have neither the love of God, nor love of their Neighbors,
to help, comfort, or give content unto them, but their comfortable Doctrine of
only Faith; and you shall see how quickly they will not only believe with S.
James, that by works a Ia. 2. 23.
man is justified, and not by faith only; but also preach the doctrine of our
Savior, and his Saints: Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain
mercy. Mat. 5. 7.
Again, Get you away from me, Mat. 25.
ye cursed, into fire everlasting, which was prepared for the Devil and his
Angels: for I was an hungered, and you gave me not to eat; I was thirsty, and
you gave me not to drink; I was a stranger, and you took me not in; naked,
and you covered me not; sick, and in Prison, and you did not visit me: as long
as you did it not to one of these lesser, neither did you it to me: And these
shall go to punishment everlasting, not for want of faith, but for want of
good works.

That S. Paul, in his third Epistle to the Romans, and third to the Galathians,
says, that we are justified by faith; he there, and many times, explicateth
himself, saying, The Romans 3. 22.
Justice of God by faith of Jesus Christ. Again, Justifying him Romans 3. 26.
that is of the faith of Jesus Christ: whose faith was, as he faith, not to
break the Law, but to fulfill. For assuredly I say unto Mat. 5. 18.
you, until Heaven and Earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall not pass of
the Law, until all be fulfilled. This is the faith, of which S. Paul speaks
of: a faith, that does establish the Law; as he himself in plain words
confesses, saying, Do we then destroy the Romans 3. 31.
Law by faith? God forbid: but we do establish the Law.

Whereas S. Paul, in the same Chapters, seems to speak against Justification
by works, he disputes against works done without faith in Jesus Christ;
such as are Circumcision, the Ceremonial Law, and works done before our
Conversion to the Faith; as is manifest by his words, in the same Chapters and
places, saying, What pre-eminence Romans 3. 1.
has the Jew? or what is the profit of Circumcision? Again, Romans 3. 29.
Is he God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the Gentiles? for it is one God
that justifies Circumcision by faith, and Prepuce by faith. Do we then
destroy the Law by faith? God forbid: but we do establish the Law, by denying
Justification by Faith only, without Works, and Justification by Works
only, without Faith in Christ Jesus; he established the Law and the Prophets.

The same Lawgiver Moses, and the same Law which tells us, that we ought to
observe it; the same also tells us, that we ought to believe Deu. 18. 13.
in Christ Jesus. A Prophet Act. 3. ^^.
(says Moses) shall the Lord your God raise up to you, of your brethren, as
my self: And Deu. 18. ^5.
it shall be, every soul that shall not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed
out of the people. So the Apostle, by denying Justification by Works of the
Law only, without Faith in this Prophet, our Savior, and by denying
Justification by faith only, without observing the Law, saying, Not the
hearers of Romans 8. 13.
the Law are just with God, but the doers of the Law shall be justified,
establishes the whole Law; Faith in Christ, and keeping the Commandments of
God.

And for the understanding of many places of S. Paul, thou must observe, that
the Faith which Saint Paul speaks of, when he says, that we are justified by
faith, is a Faith, that works by Charity, a Faith rooted Gal. 5. 6.
and founded in Charity. Ephesians. 3. 18.


So likewise, when our Lord promises salvation by faith, saying, He that
believes in me, Io. 21. 26.
shall live, etc. He means such a faith, as is rooted and founded in
Charity. Faith without Charity, being but a dead faith, deserves not the
name of faith, no more then a dead man deserves the name of a man: As it is an
error in speech, to discourse of men without addition, and mean dead men; so
it should be an error in speech, to speak and discourse of faith, without
addition, and mean a dead faith; which serves those, who have it, for
nothing else, but increase of eternal Torments: According to the Testimony of
our Lord, who says, He Luc. 12. 47.
that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes. Faith, Ia. 2. 17.
if it have not Works, is as dead in it self. Without Love Aug. in Joan.
trea. 10.
(says S. Augustine) Faith is vain: the Faith of Christians is with Love, the
Faith of Devils without Love. Again, If neglecting De Fide et Operib. c. 1^*
tom. 4.
the Commandments, we might be saved by only Faith, which without Works is
dead; how should it be true which he will say to them, whom he shall place on
his left hand, Go ye into eternal fire, which was prepared for the Devil and
his Angels? neither does he find fault with them, for that they did not believe
in him, but because they did not good Works, etc. So they shall go into
everlasting combustion, there shall be an everlasting combustion, as of Fire,
and they shall go into it, says Truth, whose not Faith, but good Works, he
has declared to be wanting. So Saint Augustine. Whereby is manifest, that
Faith is necessary to Content and Happiness, but not Faith only.

CHAP. V. That Man cannot be content, and happy, without embracing and
believing the Faith which was planted upon Earth by our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, the Son of God.
Having found out, that Faith is necessary to Man's Content and Happiness, and
excluded the Faiths of all sorts of Protestants, who defend Justification by
Faith only, from ever finding any true Content, or Happiness; it follows, to
seek out, what Faith is necessary to Man's Happiness, that we may embrace it,
and be happy.

First, That it is the faith which was planted upon Earth by our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, is manifest to reason; for that the Faith which our Lord
planted, teaches us many Truths, Secrets, and Mysteries, which to the greatest
Philosophers were not known, neither in any other Doctrine, can or may they be
learned; as of the Trinity, the Creation, and Redemption of the World, the
Communion of Saints, the Forgiveness of Sins, the Resurrection of the Dead,
the Life to come, and many things more, of the greatest content and comfort
that can be to the heart of Man; which were not made known unto the World, but
by the Son of God, our Savior; that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken
by the Prophets, saying, The Orient from on high Luc. 1. 78.
has visited us, to illuminate them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow
of death: to direct our feet in the way of peace. Again, The Land of Zabulon,
and Land Mat. 4. 16.
of Nephtali, the way of the Sea, beyond Jordan of Galilee, of the Gentiles,
the people that sat in darkness, has seen great Light; and to them that sat
in a Country of the shadow of Death, Light is risen to them: By knowing Truths
and Verities, before the coming of our Savior, not known unto the World.

Secondly, It is manifest by the Scriptures, that the Faith which conducteth us
to Happiness, is the Faith which was planted by our Lord and Savior, Jesus
Christ; for that, when the Scriptures say, that we are justified by faith, they
intend the Faith planted by our Savior; as, Justifying him Romans 3. 26.
that is of the faith of Jesus Christ. Again, We also believe in Jesus Gal. 2.
Christ, that we may he justified by the faith of Jesus Christ. Again, Gal. 3.
23.
The Scriptures have concluded all things under sin, that the Promise, hy
faith of Jesus Christ, might be given. Whereby is manifest, that none can be
truly content, or happy, who do not believe and embrace the Faith planted
upon Earth by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Son of God. Wherefore it
is necessary, that we seek it out, that thou may embrace it, and lay a
sure foundation of thy happiness; which I will do in the three next ensuing
Chapters.

CHAP. VI. That our Catholic Faith, which Protestants call Papistrie, is the
Faith of God, planted by our Lord and Savior upon Earth, is proved by the
light of Reason in general.
FIrst, by reason taken from the unity of our Catholic Faith; that people of
all Nations, Tribes, and Countries, differing in Languages and Government,
dispersed over the whole Earth, should all believe as one, and one as all, and
all with one voice, and in one sense, and signification, profess one and the
same Articles of Faith; and those of so deep understanding, high mysteries,
and secrets, as in particular, the reason of Man is not able to reach, or
comprehend, is a sufficient demonstration to any reasonable Man, that our
Catholic Faith is the Faith of God, planted by our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: For as God Almighty is, so must his Faith and Religion be. God
Almighty (as Aristotle found out by the light of Reason) is most Simple, One,
Actus purus, without composition; so must his Faith and Religion be one, most
simple, and without composition of diverse Faiths; as Saint Paul says, One God,
Ephesians. 4. 5,
one Faith.

Again, God Almighty is One, and of infinite Goodness, without Malice or
Division; and so could not plant a Faith, or Religion, that should divide Men
into Sects, Dissentions, and Divisions in Faith, because it is contrary to his
Goodness, and Unity in himself; he being God 1. Cor. 14. 33.
of Unity, and Peace, and not of Dissension: So, that Faith, and Religion, by
all reason, must be his, which can endure no Disunion, or Disparities, in
matters of Faith: which all men see to be our Catholic Faith; which with such
zeal maintains her unity, that she rejects all that differ from her in
matters of Faith, as Heretics, and Schismatikes; and refuses to make
composition of her Faith with any other, in any the least thing, upon any
condition or benefit whatsoever. Insomuch, as that the unity of our Catholic
Faith is one, as Punctum, a point, Vnum, one, or Indiuisibile, that which
cannot be divided; unto which you can neither add, nor abstract any thing, but
they pass either into nothing, or into things of another nature, as to be a
line, a number, or a body. So to our Catholic Faith, if either you add any
Opinion, or take away any Article, it is no more Catholic Faith, but humane
opinion, Schism, or Heresy. As for example; if you take away the Real
Presence of the Body and Blood of our Lord, in the Communion, and affirm, that
it is but a sign; then it is Zwinglianisme, of Zwinglius, who was the first
Author of this Opinion. Again, if you add any thing unto it, and say, that
both the Body and Blood of our Lord is there really, and also the Bread, then
it is Lutheranisme; and so forth, of any other Article of our Catholic Faith.
And if any oppose and say, that some esteemed Catholics have or do
obstinately maintain any one point of Doctrine, contrary to the Catholic
Faith (held and received over the World) and would not, nor will not, submit
his or their judgments to the Catholic Church, and her Superiors; I answer,
that he or they were, and be, Schismatikes, or Heretics, and have, or are, to
perish everlastingly: According to the Article of our Creed, which says,
Whosoever Athana. Creed.
will be saved, it is needful, before all things, that he hold the Catholic
Faith; the which, unless each one shall keep whole, and inuiolate, he shall,
without doubt, eternally perish. Insomuch, as that it is impossible for any one
of our Catholic Church to dissent obstinately from our Catholic Church, since
he is bound by his Faith, to believe inuiolately, and before all things, all
the Articles of our Catholic Faith; and if he obstinately fail herein, in
any one point of Faith, he is bound to believe, that he shall, without doubt,
eternally perish, according to our Creed.

So that the words which S. Ireneus (who lived so near the Apostles times,
that he affirmed to have seen S. Policarpe, who was S. John the Evangelists
Scholar) used against the diverse Sects of Heretics in his time, we may use
now, without exchange. The Church, sown throughout the World, does diligently
keeps is preaching, which it has received, and this Faith, as we have said,
as it were dwelling in one house, and does believe them, as if it were having
one soul, and one heart, and consonantly does preach, teach, and deliver these
things, as if it had but one mouth. For although in the world there are
different Languages, yet the virtue of Tradition is one and the same. So that
neither the Churches which are founded in Germany, do believe otherwise;
neither otherwise do deliver these which are in Spain, neither those which
are in Aragon, neither those which are in the East, neither those which are in
Egypt, nor those which are in Libia, nor those which are founded in the midst
of the world. So Saint Ireneus, in his first Book, and second Chapter, against
Heresies; and we with him.

Protestants, though they have but few affirmative Articles, which in the same
words and sense they defend as matters of Faith, and are but few in number, in
respect of Catholics; yet are they in them few Articles first generally
divided into many Sects, as into Elizabethians, Lutherans, and Caluinists; and
many more lesser Sects, as Anabaptists, Brownists, Desperates, Pig-Recusants,
or Trasquites, etc. The Elizabethians defend, that a woman may be Head of the
Church, and hold the Supremacy, in all causes, and over all Ecclesiastical
persons whosoever, and put those to death as Traitors, who refuse to swear it
as true; and give Authority to Parliaments, to alter forms of Religion:
Lutherans and Caluinists deny both. Caluinists deny the Authority of
Bishops, and Ordination of Ministers by Bishops; Lutherans and Elizabethians
defend both. The Lutherans defend Consubstantiation in their Supper, which they
esteem a Sacrament; both Caluinists and Elizabethians deny it. And secondly,
besides this Division into general Sects, they are all so particularly
divided, one from all, and all from every one, that there cannot be found any
two of them, which agree in unity of Faith; one to believe the same Faith, in
the same words and sense, that his companion does believe, to Salvation: All
believing, that the whole The English Creed, art. 19. et 2^.
Church and general Councels may err; yet every one believes of himself in
particular, that he is assured to be saved, and that he cannot err. So that
Faith which one Protestant believes, to be saved by, all the rest doubt,
whether it be true, or no: And no other else will believe that which his
companion believes, for an Article of Faith; videlicet, That Titius is assured
to be saved, and cannot err. Whereby they are divided into as many Sects, as
Men. So that supposed, that unity of Faith, in the same sense and meaning,
were necessary to Salvation, Content, and Happiness, as it is; and that any
one Faith professed by any one Protestant man, could save, and bring to Content
and Happiness; yet of all the Protestants that are, or ever were, or shall be,
one only can be saved, and happy, since only one agrees with himself in
unity of faith, and with none of his companions Protestants whosoever.

Secondly, it is manifest by reason, taken from the goodness of God Almighty,
that our Catholic Faith is the Faith of God, planted by our Savior; for that
God Almighty is of infinite goodness, and virtue, and so could not plant a
Faith, or Religion, whereby men might be saved, and attain to all goodness,
content, and happiness; but it must consist of all virtues: because he cannot
do contrary to his will; which is always to will good, and virtue: which is
our Catholic Faith, which teaches, that it is not possible for any man to be
saved, or enter into Heaven, or enjoy God, or have any true content, that has
any vice, or iniquity in his soul; as S. Paul says, If any man 1. Tim. 6. 3.
consent not to that doctrine which is according to piety, he is proud,
knowing nothing: because all men may and ought to know, that God Almighty is
of infinite piety, and so cannot plant a Faith, or Religion, which is not
pious, and teaching all virtues, as necessary to salvation, and union of heart
with him, their happiness.

Thirdly, that Faith and Religion, in all reason, must be the Faith and
Religion planted by God, which teaches and shows men the most and best
means how to love God; this being an Argument in Nature and Grace, That every
one loves his own. 3. Reg. 3. 26. Ioh. 5. 19.
Whereby is manifest, that our Catholic Religion is the true Faith; for that
it teaches us, how to love God with all our hearts, and how to obtain
Salvation, and Happiness, by loving God: Whereas Protestants do teach
Salvation, by only Faith; and that it is impossible to love God, or keep the
Commandments. And can there be a more vile and wicked Religion invented, then
to teach, that it is impossible to love God Almighty with all our hearts?

Fourthly, by general consent of all People and Nations, though of different
Religions; who all generally say and affirm, That Catholics, living according
to their Faith, and Religion, may be saved, and have a sparing (as some term
it) saving Faith: And the consent of all People, and Sects, and Nations, cannot
err in Reason.

CHAP. VII. That it is as certain, that our Catholic Faith, which Protestants
call Papistrie, is the Faith of God, planted by our Savior, as it is certain
that God Almighty cannot lie, or be forsworn; and how easily to end and
determine all Controversies, by maintaining the Oath of God as true.
BY my own self have I sworn, Genesis 22. 16.
says the Lord to Abraham; because thou have done this thing, and have not
spared thy only begotten son for my sake, I will bless thee, and I will
multiply thy Seed as the stars of Heaven, and as the sand that is by the Sea
shore; thy Seed shall possess the gates of his enemies, and in thy Seed shall
be blessed all the Nations of the Earth, because thou have obeyed my voice.

Again, our Lord promised to Isaac, saying, In thy Seed Genesis 26. 4.
shall be blessed all the Nations of the Earth, for because Abraham obeyed my
voice.

Again, our Lord promised to Jacob, Thy Seed shall be as Genesis 28.
the dust of the Earth; thou shall be dilated to the West, and to the East, and
to the North, and to the South, and in thee and thy Seed all the Tribes of the
Earth shall be blessed.

Of these Promises, the Prophet Esaias speaks, saying, Israel shall flourish,
and spring, Isa. 27. 5.
and they shall fill the face of the world with Seed. Again, I Isa. 61. 8.
the Lord, that love Judgment, and hate Robbery in Holocaust. And I will give
their work in truth, and make a perpetual Covenant with them. And they shall
know their Seed in the Gentiles, and their Budde in the midst of Peoples: All
that shall see them, shall know them, that those are the Seed which the Lord
has blessed.

And of this Oath, the same Prophet speaking, says, As in the days of Noe, is
this thing Isa. 54 9.
to me; to whom I swear, that I will no more bring the Waters of Noe upon the
Earth: so have I sworn, not to be angry with thee, and not to rebuke thee:
for the Mountains shall be moved, and the little Hills shall tremble (before
the Day of Judgment) but my Mercy shall not depart from thee, and the
Covenant of my Peace shall not be removed, said our Lord, thy Miserator.

Of this Oath, the Prophet Daniel, in the Captivity of Babylon, makes
mention, saying, Take not away thy Dan. 3. 35.
Mercy from us, for Abraham thy beloved, and Isaac thy servant, and Israel
thy holy one, to whom thou have spoken, promising, that thou would multiply
their Seed as the stars of Heaven, and as the Sand that is in the Sea shore.

Of this Oath, the Prophet David speaking, says, I will Ps. 88. 28
put him, the first begotten, high above all the Kings of the Earth; I will
keep my Mercy unto him for ever, and my Testament faithful unto him: I will
put his Seed for ever and ever, and his Throne, as the days of Heaven. But if
his children shall forsake my Law, and will not walk in my Judgments; if they
shall profane my Mercies, and not keep my Commandments; I will visit their
Iniquity with a Rod, and their sins with stripes: But my mercies I will not
take away from him, neither will I hurt in my Truth: Neither will I profane my
Testament; violate his Oath. Again speaking of this Oath, and these Promises,
he says, He has been Ps. 104.
mindful for ever of his Testament, of the Word which he commanded unto
thousand of Generations, which he disposed to Abraham, and his Oath to Isaac,
and he appointed it to Jacob for a Precept, and to Israel for an eternal
Testament.

That this Oath of God, and Promises to the Patriarchs, were to be fulfilled in
Christ Jesus, and in Christians, maintaining and professing the Faith of God,
planted by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Scriptures abundantly do
testify. Our Lord expounding the Parable of the Cockle of the field, says, He
that Mat. 13. 37.
sows the good Seed, is the Son of Man, and the Field is the World, and the
good Seed those are the Children of the Kingdom, dispersed over the World,
according to the Oath of God to Abraham. Again, our Lord says, Do Mat. 5. 18.
not think, that I come to break the Law, or the Prophets; I am not come to
break, but to fulfill. Again, All things must needs Luc. 24.
be fulfilled, which are written in the Law of Moses, and the Prophets, and
the Psalms of me.

Our Blessed Lady, speaking of the fulfilling of this Oath in our Savior, and
his Seed, the Christians, says, He has received Israel his Luc. ^. 54.
Child, being mindful of his mercy, as he spoke to our Fathers, to Abraham,
and his Seed for ever. And Zachary, replenished with the Holy Ghost,
prophesied, saying, Blessed be Luc. 1. 68.
our Lord God of Israel, because he has visited and wrought the redemption of
his people, as he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, that are from the
beginning, to remember his holy Testament, the Oath which he swear to Abraham
our Father.

Of the fulfilling of this Oath, and these Promises, in our Savior, and
Christians, S. Peter speaks, saying, You are the Children of the Act. 31. 24.
Prophets, and of the Testament, which God made to our Fathers, saying to
Abraham, And in thy Seed shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed.

That this Oath of God to Abraham, was to be fulfilled in Christians, S. Paul
every where witnesses, saying, Of Act. 13. 25.
his Seed, God* according to his Promise, has brought forth to Israel a
Savior, Jesus. Again, We preach unto Act. 13. 32.
you the Promise, which was made to our Fathers, that God has fulfilled the
same to our Children. Again, Paul Romans 1. 1.
the Servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated in the Gospel
of God, which before he had promised by his Prophets, in the holy Scriptures of
his Son, by whom we receive grace and Apostleship, for obedience to the
Faith, in all Nations. Again, Abraham contrary to Romans 4. 18.
hope, believed in hope, that he might be made the Father of many Nations,
according to that which was said to him, So shall thy Seed be, as the stars
of Heaven, and the sand of the Sea. Again, Know ye therefore, that they that
are Gal. 3. 7.
of Faith, the same are the children of Abraham. And the Scripture foreseeing,
that God justifies the Gentiles by Faith, showed unto Abraham before, that in
thee all Nations shall be blessed. Again, Christ has Gal. 3. 17.
redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, that on the Gentiles, the blessing of
Abraham might be made in Christ Jesus, that we may receive the Promise.
Again, to the Galathians converted to Christianity, he says; We brethren
according to Isaac, are the children of the Promise.

And speaking of this Promise of God to Abraham more at large, says; God
promising Heb. 6. 13.
to Abraham, because he had none greater by whom he might swear, he swear by
himself; saying: Unless blessing I shall bless thee, and multiplying I shall
multiply thee, etc. for mensweare by greater then themselves, and the end of
their controversy, for confirmation, is an oath: Wherein, God meaning more
abundantly to show to the Heirs of the Promise the stabilitie of his Counsel,
he interposed an Oath, that by two things immovable, whereby it is impossible
for God to lie, we may have a most strong comfort, who have fled, to hold fast
the Hope promised, which we have as an Anchor of the Soul, sure and firm. So
S. Paul.

Whereby thou see, dear Reader, that our Catholic Faith is as certain the
Faith of God Almighty, planted by our Savior, as it is certain, that God
Almighty cannot lie, or be forsworn: since there is not, nor ever was, any
one Faith, or Religion, so dilated over the World, as our Catholic Faith is at
this day; in the East, West, North, and South, in Europe, Asia, Africa, and
America, ouerflowing the Isa. 66. 12.
glory of the Gentiles; according to the Oath of God, and Promises to the
Patriarks and Prophets.

Though Sects and Heresies have sometime occupied many parts of the World; yet
they either in short time returned to the union of our Catholic Church, or
else were conquered by barbarous Nations, and made their slaves, according to
the Promises and Prophecies: As the Arrians in Lumbardie, and other places, by
the Goths; the Donatists in Africa, by the Vandales; the Greeks, by the
Sarazens, and Turks. The Brittans (ancient Inhabitants of this Island)
admitting of the Pelagian Heresy, were soon after conquered by the Pagan
Saxons, and their name extinguished, and they, for the most part, destroyed;
that poor remnant of them excepted, which were hemmed up in that part of the
Realm which is now called Wales: For a few years before the coming of the
Saxons into this Land, the Pelagian Heresies were brought in, says Beda in his
first Book and 15. Chapter.

Since Schismatikes and Heretics will not honor God, by maintaining his
Oaths and Promises to his Seed, and return unto the union of our Catholic
Church, that they may be partakers of his Blessings; God Almighty will be
honored, by manifesting the fulfilling of his Maledictions and Curses upon
them: that the Just may see, and fear and Ps. 51. 8.
confess, that God is true and just in all his Words and Oaths. Revenge is
mine, says Deuteronomy. 32.
our Lord, and I will repay them in time, that their foot may slide. They have
provoked me, in that which was no God, and have angered me in their vanities;
and I will provoke them, in that which is no People, and in a foolish Nation
will I anger them. And in this, God Almighty has been so faithful in his
Promises, that he always raised up the most barbarous foolish Nations of the
Earth, to be their Conquerors.

And as for Protestants; if ever there has been any Kings, Kingdoms, or
Nations, which have made profession of that Faith Protestants do now, before
King Henry the eight; we see by experience, that the Curses and Maledictions
of God Almighty, spoken of by the Prophets, has so fallen upon them, that
they were as people that descended into Hell quick; Ps. 54. 16.
of whom there is no memory in any Book, Chronicle, Antiquity, or History:
Those enemies of God, upon whom the Prophet Moses speaking, says in the
Person of GOD: I said, Deuteronomy. 32. 26.
Where are they? I will make their memory to cease from among Men. In such
sort, that there is less memory of them, then of Sodom and Gomorra, which
was destroyed by fire from Heaven; or of Core, Dathan, and Abiron, who were
swallowed up into the Earth quick; of whom yet there is some mention made, in
other men's Writings: But of Protestant Kings, Kingdoms, or Nations, professing
the Faith Protestants do now, there is not any mention, or memory. Yet a
little while, and the Ps. 36. 10.
sinner shall not be; and thou shall seek his place, and shall not find it.
The enemies Ps. 36. 20.
of our Lord, forthwith as they shall be honored and exalted, vanishing, shall
vanish as smoke. I have seen the Impious highly exalted, and advanced, as the
Caedar of Libanus, And I passed by, and behold he was not: and I sought him,
and his place was not found. The Unjust shall perish together, the remains of
the impious shall perish. Again, He loved Cursing, and it shall come Ps. 108.
to him; and he would not Blessing, and it shall be far from him: In one
generation let his name be clean put out.

Which Prophecy we see, of late years, to be fulfilled in Henry the eight,
King of England, and Henry the second, King of France. Henry the eight was
the first founder of the Parliamentarians, and author of giving authority to
Parliaments, to determine matters of Faith and Religion: Henry the second,
Serres in the life of Henry the second.
King of France, became Protector of the Protestants of Germany, rebelling
against Charles the fifth, their lawful Emperor; and went in person to their
aid, with thirty thousand men.

Henry the eight had six Wives, and five or six Children: Henry the second
had five Sons; Francis the second, after, King of France; Lewis, Duke of
Orleans; Charles, after King of France; Henry the third, King of France; and
Hercules, after called Francis. Yet in one generation, both the names of these
potent Kings were extinguished from the face of the Earth, according to this
Prophecy: so faithful is God Almighty in fulfilling of his Word.

So, supposing thou beleeuest, that God Almighty cannot lie, not be forsworn,
and that thou, as a creature of his, wilt glorify him, and maintain both in
words and deeds, the fulfilling of his Oath and Promises, that he may bless
and glorify thee; I set down these Acts of Faith following, thereby to end
and determinate all matters of Controversies, or Differences in Faith, or
Belief; that hereafter thou may remain always firm, stable, and
immovable, in the Faith Ephesians. 2. 20.
built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the highest corner Stone, in whom all Building, framed together, grows
into an holy Temple in our Lord: Which is that I wish unto thee; and desire
thee to pardon me, if I speak for thy content, boldly.

Acts of Faith.
GOd forbid, dear Lord, that I should ever think, that thou have broken the
Oath and Testament, which thou have spoken to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, thy
Servants, saying; By my Genesis 22.
self have I sworn, I will multiply thee, and I will multiply thy Seed as the
Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand that is upon the Sea shore: Thy Seed shall
possess the Gates of his Enemies, and in thy Seed shall be blessed all the
Nations of the Earth. Thy Seed shall be as the dust of Genesis 28.
the Earth, that shall be dilated to the East, and to the West, and to the North,
and to the South: and in thee, and thy Seed, shall be blessed all the Tribes of
the Earth.

I detest (O Heavenly Father) as Suggestions of the Devil, all opinions
whatsoever, which are contrary to the unity of the Faith, dilated over the
World.

O God of Heaven, I believe most firmly, that the Christians, dilated over the
World, professing one Faith, are the Seed of Abraham, the Genesis 22.
Children of thy Kingdom, the Wheat that thou did sow, the Mat. 1^.
Sheep that thou do feed, and Ioh. 10.
the Blessed, which at the last day Mat. 25.
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Dear Lord, I believe most firmly, that if we be Christ's, Gal. 3. 29.
then we be the Seed of Abraham, and must profess the faith dilated over the
World.

O Lord, of Infinite Majesty, I humbly beseech thee, for thy tender Mercies,
that I may be one of the great Multitude, Apo. 7. 9.
which no man could number, of all Nations, and Tribes, and People, and
Tongues, which are to be signed with thy Mark, and to be conducted by thee to
the Living Fountains Apo. 7. 17.
of Waters.

I detest (Eternal God) more then Death, or Hell, to hold, or maintain, any
opinion, which the Catholic Church, the Seed of Abraham, dilated over the
World, does not approve.

Dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I undoubtedly believe, that thou art the
Son of the living God; to whom this Promise is made: I will give thee the
Gentiles for Ps. 28.
thy Inheritance, and for thy Possession, the ends of the Earth.

I believe, dear Lord, all the Articles of the Catholic Faith; and for the
truth of any one of them, by the assistance of thy grace, am ready to die, not
one death, but if it were possible, as many deaths, as all the Martyrs have
suffered from the beginning of the World until this day.

O Lord of infinite Majesty, while I live, I will faithfully believe, and
heartily confess, with thy servants, S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine, That the
holy Church does Him. SS. Amb. et Aug.
confess thee, throughout the World.

I believe most firmly (O living God) that thou art the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob; keeping thy Covenant with them for thousand of Generations,
and maintaining thy Promise, of multiplying their Seed as the Stars of
Heaven, and possessing the Gates of their Enemies, until the end of the World.

Grant dear Lord, that I may rather die a thousand deaths, then not confess
with thy Servant S. Athanasius from my heart in a Catholic sense, That
whosoever will be saved, it is needful, before all things, that he hold the
Catholic Faith; the which unless each one shall keep whole and inuiolate, he
shall without doubt eternally perish.

Man may lie, and mine own judgment may be deceived; but I believe firmly,
that God Almighty cannot be forsworn, deceive, or be deceived in his Oath.

I believe most firmly (dear Lord) that the Christians professing one Faith
multiplied, as the sand that is by the Genesis 28.
Seashore, and dilated to the West, and to the East, and to the North, and to
the South, are the Seed of Abraham thy servant, the children Ps. 104.
of Jacob thy elect, and there is no salvation in any other. Act. 4.


I do most firmly hold, and do no ways doubt, but that not only Aug. li. de
side ad Petrum.
all Pagans, but also all Jews, Heretics, and Schismatikes, who do die out
of the Catholic Church, are to go into everlasting fire, which was prepared
for the Devil and his Angels.

Bear witness, O ye Heavens, and be testimonies all ye that dwell upon the
Earth; that I undoubtedly and most firmly believe, that God Almighty has and
does visibly multiply the Christians (professing in unity the Faith planted by
our Savior) as the stars of Heaven, and as the sand that is by the
Seashoare; according as he spoke Luc. 1. 55.
to our Fathers, to Abraham and his Seed for ever.

Let me never live* dear Lord, to believe, or think, that thou have broken
thy Oath and Promises to the Patriarchs and Prophets; and can lie, and be
forsworn, in permitting the Catholic Church to err, or vanish away from the
face of the Earth.

Dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by the assistance of thy grace, though as
great torments as the sensible pains of the torments of Hell should fall upon
me for it; yet will I confess, that thou art the true Messiah, and came to
fulfill the Oath and Promises which God made to Abraham, the Patriarks and
Prophets; and not to break them.

These Acts grounded upon the Oath and Promises of God, you are to make often,
and with simplicity and sincerity of heart; and they will so direct you to know
and find out truth, that your own conscience will not permit you ever to be
an Heretic, Jew, Infidel, or Protestant, of any Sect or sort whatsoever.

And by these Acts, without disputing of Controversies, thou put an end to
all Controversies and Disputes in matters of Faith and Religion; and believing
them, thou art as sure that thou beleeuest aright, as that it is certain that
God Almighty cannot be forsworn, or that our Savior was the Messiah promised
to the Patriarchs and Prophets; and excludest all Errors, Heresies, and
Temptations of the Devil in matters of Faith, and infallibly setlest thy
understanding in the Faith and Word of God, planted by our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ upon Earth, to the great Content, Ease, and Rest of thy mind, and
assuredness, of knowing divine Truths and Verities, without deceit; because
God Almighty cannot deceive thee, nor fail of his Oath, and Promises,
whereupon they are grounded.

So Saint Paul tells the Colossians, and in them, all Christians, that they
shall be holy, and immaculate, and blameless Col. 1. 27.
before God, if yet you remain in the Faith, grounded, and stable, and
immovable, from the hope of the Gospel, which you have heard, which is
preached among all Nations that are under Heaven.

CHAP. VIII. How our Catholic Faith is so founded upon the Oaths and Promises
of God, that it is not possible for any man to be an Heretic, or Protestant,
of any Sect, or sort, without affirming in effect and deed, that God Almighty
is perjured and forsworn.
OUR Catholic Faith, which Protestants call Papistrie, is not founded upon
Men, as Protestant Ministers tell thee, but upon two things immovable, The
Oath of God, and, That it is impossible for God to lie. By my self Genesis 22.
have I sworn, says our Lord, I will multiply thee, and I will multiply thy
Seed as the Stars of Heaven, and as the sand which is by the Seashore: thy
Seed shall possess the Gates of his enemies, and in thy Seed shall be
blessed all the Nations of the Earth. Not only the Brittans, in an Island,
divided from the whole World, but all the Nations of the Earth. The Scripture
foreseeing, that God Gal. 3. 8.
justifies the Gentiles by Faith (by Faith, that works by Gal. 3. 22.
Charity) showed unto Abraham before, that in thee shall all Nations Gal. 5. 6.
be blessed. For God promising Heb. 6. 13.
to Abraham, because he had none greater by whom he might swear, he swear by
himself; saying: Unless blessing, I shall bless thee, and multiplying, shall
multiply thee, etc. for mensweare by greater then themselves, and the end of
all their controversy, for confirmation, is an oath: So God meaning more
abundantly to show the heirs of the Promise the stabilitie of his Counsel,
he interposed an Oath, that by two things immovable, whereby it is impossible
for God to lie, we may have a most strong comfort, who have fled, to hold
fast the Hope proposed, That in the Seed of Abraham, our Savior, not one, or
few Nations, but all the Families of the Earth Act. 3. 25.
should be blessed.

Upon these two things immovable, are founded our Catholic Church, and holy
Faith; the Oath of God, and That it is impossible for God to ly, or violate his
Oath and Promises; every where spoken of in the Scriptures, to be fulfilled
upon Christians, believing in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, of the Seed of
David, of the Seed of Abraham, that in his Seed Genesis 22. Luc. 1. 55.
should be blessed all the Nations of the Earth, as he spoke to our fathers,
to Abraham and his Seed for ever.

So, that it is not possible for any man, by any means, to become an Heretic,
or Protestant, of any Sect or sort, unless he affirm in effect, and deeds,
that God Almighty is a liar, and forsworn; nor possible for any man sincerely
to maintain or defend in effect, and deeds, that God Almighty cannot lie, or
be forsworn, but he must be of that Religion which Protestants call Papistrie,
do what he can.

Whereupon S. Paul says, An Heretic sins, being condemned 1. Tit. 3. 10.
by his own judgment: For that he knows, that he preaches against the
Oaths and Promises of God; and pronounces in his works, and deeds, God
Almighty to be forsworn, and a liar: and hereupon our Savior says, He that
does not believe, is already judged. He that will not believe God Almighty,
when he swears, and renews his Oath so often as he does in the
Scriptures; there are no means left to convince him, but by Aristotle's
argument, viz. Punishment, and Pains: Those who Li. 1. Top* ca. 9.
doubt (says Aristotle) whether they should honor the Gods, or no, stand in
need of Pains. And according to this, are the words of our Savior, where Luc.
16. 30.
he says, If they hear not Moses, and the Prophets; neither if one should
rise from the dead, will they believe. Such as will not believe the Oaths of
God Almighty, recorded by Moses, and the Prophets, there is no other means
left, for to make them confess truth, but by eternal Torments.

Eua believed the Devil, that God Almighty could lie, when he told her, No;
you shall not die, whereas God Almighty Genesis 3. 4.
had told her, that she should, if she eat of the forbidden fruit; and by
this means deceiving her, he deprived her and all her posterity of the Joys
of Paradise, and brought them to Miseries, and temporal Death. Take thou
example by thy Mothers fall, and do not believe the Devil, or Sectaries, when
in effect and deeds they shall persuade thee, that God Almighty can lie, or be
forsworn, and suffer his Catholic Church to err, fail, and decay, contrary
to his Oath and Promises; that they draw thee not from the Content and
Happiness of Grace in this life, and Glory in the other, into the horror of
all temporal Discontents, and after death, into eternal Torments.

Saint Augustine in his time urged the Donatists with this foundation of our
Catholic Faith, the Oath of God, and the Impossibility for him to lie; saying
to them, as we, in his words, say now to Protestants; changing only
Donatists for Elizabethians, and Africa for Brittanie.

To you Elizabethians, the Catholic Church does say: O sons of men, how long
are ye of heavy heart? Why do you love vanity, and seek after a Lie?
Wherefore have you divided your selves, by a wicked sacrilegious Schism, from
the unity of the whole World?

You give ear to Falsehoods, which are told you of Man, either lying, or
erring, from the tradition of the Scriptures, that you may die in your
Heretical Separation, And do not attend what the Books themselves say, that
you may live in Catholic (...).

Wherefore do you open your ears to Men, telling you that which they could
never prove? and are deaf against the Word of God, which says, Our Lord Ps.
2. 7.
said to me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: Ask of me, and
I will give thee, the Gentiles for thine Inheritance, and thy Possession, the
ends of the Earth.

To Abraham are the Promises Gal. 3. 16.
made, and to his Seed: he does not say, to his Seeds, as in many, but as in
one, and to thy Genesis 22.
Seed, which is Christ, In thy Seed Gal. 3. 8.
shall be blessed all Nations.

Lift up the eyes of your hearts, and consider the whole Globe of the Earth,
how in the Seed of Abraham all Nations are blessed. Then it was believed of
one, when it was not yet seen; now you see it, and yet you envy it.

The Passion of our Lord, is the price of the whole World: he redeemed the
whole World, and you, with the whole World, for your gain, cannot agree; but
rather to your loss, in a part do strive, that you may loose the whole.

Hear in the Psalm; They Ps. 21. 19.
have divided my Apparel amongst them, and upon my Coats they cast Lots. Why
will you be diuiders of the Apparel of our Lord? and will not hold with the
whole World, the Coat of Charity, wouen above, which his Persecutors have not
divided.

In the same Psalm it is said, Ps. 21. 28.
that all the World shall hold it; he says, All the ends of the Earth shall
remember, and be converted to our Lord, and all the Families of the Gentiles
shall adore in his sight.

Open the eyes of your heart, Ps. 49. 1.
and hear; for the God of Gods, our Lord, has spoken, and he has called the
Earth, from the rising of the Sun, even to the going down; out of Sion the
beauty of his comeliness.

If you will not hear this, hear the Gospel, our Lord speaking, and saying,
by his proper mouth: All things ought to be fulfilled of Christ, which of him
are written, in the Law, and Prophets, and Psalms; and Penance, and Remission
of sins, in his Name, to be preached throughout all Nations, beginning at
Jerusalem.

That which is said in the Psalm, He has called the Earth from the rising of
the Sun unto the going down. This is understood in the Gospel, by all
Nations. And that which in the Psalm is said, out of Sion, the beauty of his
comeliness, in the Gospel is said, beginning from Jerusalem.

Wherefore do you believe, that the Cockle has grown, and has filled the
World, and the Wheat to have diminished, in Brittanie only to have remained?
Do you call your selves Christians, and yet contradict Christ. He says,
suffer both to grow until the Harvest. He did not say, let the Cockle grow,
and the Wheat diminish, He said, the Field is the World, and did not say, the
Field is Brittanie. Thus Saint Augustine, Epist. 171. and we with him.

So dear Reader, not to live, seeking after lies, and publicly professing in
deeds and actions, that God Almighty is forsworn; when Satan shall tempt
thee in matters of Faith; or any controversy arises between thee and some
Protestant, about Religion; as about the Real Presence, Prayer for the Dead,
Intercession to Saints, etc. make some of the aforesaid Acts, set down in the
former Chapter, with zeal and feruor; and hold fast the hope proposed, which
Heb. 6. 18.
we have as an Anchor of the Soul, sure and firm, the Oath of God, and that
it is impossible for God to lie. Be not removed away from the two things
immovable, the Oath of God, and Impossibility for God to lie. Whereupon is
grounded all the whole course of the Scriptures, and founded the House of God,
the Church of the 1. Tim. 3. 15.
living God, the Pillar and ground of Truth, And neither Death, Romans 8.
nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, neither things present,
nor things to come, neither might, nor height, nor depth, nor other creature,
shall be able to make thee a Protestant, Sectarie, or Heretic, and separate
thee from the unity of our Catholic Faith, the Faith of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

And in arguing and disputing with Sectaries, who deny our Catholic Faith;
put them to prove, that the Oath of God, the Promises, and Prophecies, are
verified and fulfilled upon their Sects; and then thou shall find, that their
Doctrine proceeds from this Sourse, or Gulf, that Satan is increased in
Pride, has got him a new Coat, and reformed his Religion. Whereas heretofore
he was wont to go like a Serpent, and preach out of a Tree, and taught, that
God Almighty could lie, and men that would believe him, should be as Gods; No,
you shall Genesis 3.
not die, you shall be as Gods: now he has increased his Pride, and got a new
Coat, and goes like a Precisian Minister, and preaches out of Pulpits, and
has reformed his Faith, and Religion, teaching for, God can lie, and you shall
be as Gods; God can be forsworn, and you are Gods; and cannot lie, err, or be
deceived, but be assured to enjoy Heaven: and upon this, has founded his
reformed Religions; the violating of the Oaths of God, and public profession
in acts and deeds, that God Almighty is perjured and forsworn.

Heb. 6. 17.
God meaning more abundantly to show the heirs of his Promise the stabilitie
of his Counsel, in performing what he did promise; for the establishing of
the hearts of men, in the infallibility of our Christian Catholic Faith,
Church, and Priesthood, swore two Oaths; the one, in confirmation of the
Priesthood of our Lord for ever: Ps. 129. Heb. 7.
Our Lord has sworn, and it shall not repent him, thou art a Priest for ever
aecording to the Order of Melchisedeck. The other, this which we treat of, The
Oath of God to Abraham; Act. 3.
Of multiplying Genesis 22.
his Seed as the Stars of Heaven, and as the sand that is by the Sea-shoare:
Thy Seed shall possess the gates of his enemies: In thy Seed shall be blessed
all the Families of the Earth. And upon these Oaths is founour Catholic Faith.

And the Devil meaning more abundantly to show his malice and power in the
hearts of wretched men, the heirs of his Myseries and endless Torments; has
brought them to plant a Faith and Religion, grounded and founded upon the
denying, in actions and deeds, of the fulfilling of both these Oaths of God:
First, by winning men to deny in effect and deeds, that God Almighty has
multiplied Christians, his children, as the Stars of Heaven, possessing the
Gates of their enemies; and moving them to affirm in acts and deeds, that for
many hundredth years together, God Almighty has failed in fulfilling of his
first Oath; he has planted in their hearts his new Ministerial Doctrine. And
secondly, by winning Men to deny in action and deeds, that our Lord was a
Priest for ever, according to the Order of Melchisedeck; and moving them to
affirm in acts and deeds, that he was a Priest but for once; and that
according to the Order of Aaron, in offering up of himself once upon the
Cross, he has destroyed all the Christian Priesthood, life, and Religion,
which was amongst them. And so by moving men in acts and deeds, publicly to
profess, that God Almighty has been twice forsworn; the Devil has founded
and planted amongst them his new reformed Religions, grounded and founded upon
two co^tradictories to the grounds of our Catholic Faith: viz. God Almighty
cannot lie, or be forwsorne; God Almighty is perjured, and can lie.

Which is so manifest, that if Malice and Passion do not blind thy heart, and
extinguish the light of reason in thy understanding, I will make thee touch it,
as we use to say, with thy finger.

For grant me but that God Almighty cannot be forsworn nor violate his
Oaths; and in every opinion of Faith and Religion, as a creature of God
Almighties, maintain in act and deed, that he cannot be perjured or forsworn;
and thou caust not be a Protestant of any Sect or sort, by any means possible;
but of necessity be of that Faith and Religion Protestants call Papistrie.

As for example; the question is, whether our Catholic Church, or your
Protestant Congregation, be the true Church of God. Let us go to the Oath of
God, and as creatures of God Almighty, let us in actions and deeds firmly and
faithfully believe this Oath of God to Abraham to be true, and submit our
understandings and judgments unto it, as unto the most infallible and most
certain truth that can be: and as willing to honor God without passion or
malice, let us simply seek whether this Oath of God (By my self have I
sworn, I will bless thee, and will multiply thy Seed as the Stars of
Heaven, and as the Sand that is by the Sea shore: Thy Seed shall possess the
Gates of his Enemies, and in thy Seed shall be blessed all the Nations of the
Earth) be more verified upon our Catholic Church, or your Protestant
Congregation.

First, for Temporal blessings, all the Christian Kings and Kingdoms, that
ever have been flourishing upon the face of the Earth, before Henry the
eight, were so Catholic, that thou can not name me one, who was in Faith and
Religion a Protestant, and held the Religion Protestants now maintain.

For spiritual blessings, we have written in all Ages, Books, and Volumes, of
the Spiritual blessings and gifts of God, the gifts of the holy Ghost bestowed
upon us; Exercises of Spiritual life, love and union of heart with God:
amongst you, there is not any one professing such things, all denying inherent
grace and infused virtues.

And whether the Seed of Protestants, or Seed of Catholics, have been
multiplied as the Sand that is by the Seashore, possessing the Gates of their
enemies; not only all the Chronicles and Histories of Countries and Nations,
do bear witness for us; but even Protestants themselves; convinced with
truth, do confess it: Perkins upon the Creed, page 307. affirms, That
during the space of nine hundredth years, the Popish Heresy has spread it
self over the whole Earth. Fulke in his Treatise against Stapleton, page 25.
affirms, That some Protestants have written, that the Pope has blinded the
World these many hundredth years; some say, a thousand; some say, one thousand
two hundred; some, nine hundred years. And Napper in his Treatise upon the
Revelations page 68. affirms, That between the year of Christ three
hundredth, and three hundredth and sixteen, the Antichristian and Papisticall
reign begun, reigning (says he) universally, and without any debatable
contradiction twelve hundred and threescore years: and page 145. says, The
Pope and his Clergy during all that time possessing the outward visible Church
of Christians. So these English Protestants. And it is a thing of it self so
manifest, that Protestants are not able to name any one Minister or Preacher
for one thousand four hundred years together, who held and maintained the
Doctrine they now teach.

And to let pass other States, Countries and Towns, and make instance in the
City of Venice: The Goths Michele Zappulo in his History of Venice.
afflicting Italy, many Catholic Italians flying the fury of those barbarous
people, did retire themselves into that place of Venice which is now called
Riualta, before called Lupa; which being then not inhabited, and unknown to
the Goths, with the consent of the Senate of Padoa, chose three Consuls,
Alberto Faliero, Thomaso Candiano, and Canone Dauolo, and by their help, begun
the Foundation of the City of Venice upon the five and twentieth day of March,
in the year of our Lord four hundred twenty and one, which has continued
ever since in the Catholic Faith, and union of the Church of GOD, dilated over
the World, without alteration or change in Religion or State; or having been
sacked or spoiled, as their Histories and succession of Men, from age to age,
do abundantly testify.

Whereby thou see, that our Catholic Church is so manifestly the true
Church, that unless thou will first affirm in effect and deed, that God
Almighty is perjured and forsworn, thou can not deny it; and that the
Church of the Protestants is so manifestly the false Church, that without
affirming in effect and deeds, that God Almighty may be forsworn, it cannot
in any one Article be defended.

And the same thou shall find in any other question: as for example; thou
would examine whether Catholic Priests, that offer to God the Sacrifice of
the Mass, or Protestant Ministers, who have no external Sacrifice, be true
Christian Priests: admit but of the Oaths of God for true, without malice and
passion, and the Controversy is ended; and it is as manifest unto thee, by
both the Oaths of God, that Massing Priests are true Christian Priests, as it
is manifest, that God Almighty cannot be forsworn. Of the first Oath we have
spoken before. The second Oath is; Ps. 109. Heb. 7.
Our Lord has sworn, and it shall not repent him, thou art a Priest for ever,
according to the Order of Melchisedeck. First, of Protestant Ministers, there
were none for many hundredth years together, visibly known in the World, as
they confess: so this eternal Priesthood of Christ could not be verified in
them, as in his Priests or Ministers.

Secondly, they have no external Sacrifice.

That Catholic Priests have been these many hundredth years offering to God
(as Ministers of his Son) his Body and Blood, under the forms of Bread and
Wine, according to the Order of Melchisedeck, as they do now; that,
Protestants confess; as we have immediately before set down.

So do but admit, that God Almighty is not forsworn in both these Oaths; and
of necessity thou must defend, that Massing Priests are true Christian
Priests, and Protestant Ministers false. And in all other Questions and
Controversies firmly believe the Oaths of God, which are the most certain and
infallible truths that may be; and such, as whereupon all the rest of the
Scriptures depend; and honor God Almighty, by maintaining them in words and
deeds, and think, that thy Understanding, Wit, and Judgment, may deceive
thee, as they many times do; but the Oaths of God cannot, and thou can not
but be a Roman Catholic, or Papist. So manifest it is, that our Catholic
Faith is founded upon the Oaths of God, and Protestantisme of all Sects and
sorts, is founded upon Public profession in acts and deeds, that God Almighty
is perjured and forsworn; that if passion and malice do not blind the light
of reason in thee, thou can not but see it, and confess it.

Thus having laid the foundation of our Ease, Content, and Rest, upon the
surest foundations which are to be found in Heaven or Earth; the Oaths of God:
hoping thou desire to find that Ease, Content, and Rest, and wilt not be
offended, for that I plainly defend the honor of my God; I proceed.

CHAP. IX. That hope in God is also necessary to the Content, and Happiness of
Man, but not only Hope, without other virtues. And how acts of Hope made by
Catholics, include Sacraments, and other Virtues, and not exclude them.
THat it is impossible to be saved, or find Content without hope in God, is
manifest by reason.

First, for that no man labors for that which he no ways hops to obtain,
nor yet is careful to keep that which he esteems impossible to enjoy.

Again, upon want of hope arises despair and pusillanimitie of mind; both
which being passions of sadness and discontent, deprive us of the Joy and
Content we seek after.

Secondly, it is manifest by the Scriptures, which in plain terms affirm,
That by Hope we Rom 8. 39. Romans 15. 4.
are saved. Again, What things soever have been written to our learning, they
have been written, that by the patience and consolatiof the Scriptures we may
have Hope. So Saint Paul says, The Romans 15. 13.
God of Hope replenish you with all Joy and Peace in believing, that you may
abound in Hope. In the Psalms it is said, They that Ps. 124.
hope in thee, shall not be confounded. Again, They that trust in Ps. 33. 9.
our Lord, as Mount Sion, he shall not be moved for ever. Again, Blessed is
that man that hops in Ps. 36. 4.
God. Again, He will take them Ps. 144.
away from Sinners, and save them, because they have hoped in him. Whereby is
manifest, that without the virtue of Hope, no man can be happy, or saved.

But as we said before, of only Faith; that Faith, without other virtues, is
dead to Grace in this life, and Glory in the other, and serves such as have
it, for nothing but for the increase of eternal torments: so also it is
manifest, that only Hope, without other virtues, is a vain and dead Hope;
without any true Content in this life, or in all eternity; as is manifest
first by reason.

Because Hope ends with Death: so if the Content and Happiness of Man should
consist in only Hope, there should be no Content in the other life.

Secondly, we see (some few excepted, who fall into utter despair) that all
men, of all Sects and sorts, and how wicked soever, hope for Happiness, and
Content: So, if Hope, without the assistance of other virtues, were sufficient
to Happiness, men might be happy and wretched both together; which is
contrary to experience.

Thirdly, to hope for Happiness, is not to be happy; since none hops for
that he has, but enjoys. Whereby is manifest, that only Hope is not
sufficient to be happy.

Again, the Scriptures say, Not every one that says, Lord, Mat. 7. 21.
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my
Father which is in Heaven. Again, Many shall say to me in that Day, Mat. 7. 22.
Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out
Devils, and in thy Name wrought many Miracles? And then I will confess unto
them, that I never knew you depart from me you that work iniquity.

And our Savior compares those who hope to be saved, and are negligent in
gaining other virtues, and using the means he has ordained for the salvation
of mankind, unto foolish Virgins; who invited to a Marriage, neglected to
prepare themselves for the Marriage until it was too late, and so were shut out
with this answer, Amen I say to you, I know you not. Mat. 25. 12.


Whereby is manifest, that the Promises are not made to a dead Hope, which is
void of other virtues, but to such a Hope, as is conioint to all other virtues,
and is void of all iniquity.

Here thou may observe, dear Reader, the error of many Protestants; who
being driven from the impious Doctrine of Justification by Faith only, fall
upon Justification by Hope only, without Faith, Charity, Sacraments, or other
virtues: and not knowing nor regarding what Faith they ought to profess, nor
what Commandments they have broken; presume to be saved by a vain Hope, in
the Passion of our Lord, and so perish in their presumption; thinking, that to
say only, I hope to be saved by the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, without
Faith, Charity, Sacraments, etc. is sufficient to remit their sins, and save
their souls, how evil and wicked soever they have lived; and so die Heretics
and Infidels; of no Faith nor Religion, for all their hope.

When Catholics say, they hope to be saved by the merits of the Passion of our
Lord and Savior; they do not exclude the Sacraments, Faith and other virtues,
but suppose them, and include them and all other means whatsoever God
Almighty has given or left us for our Salvation: yea, the whole merit or
benefit of his Passion, and things gained for us; as Faith, Hope, Charity,
Sacraments, assistance of the holy Ghost, etc. And the sense of the words are;
I hope to be saved by no other means, then those which thou have gained for me
by thy Passion.

And so likewise in all other acts of virtues, or Sacraments, Catholics do
include the whole merit of the Passion of our Savior: as whether they make
acts of Contrition; as, Lord be merciful to me a poor sinner: or of Love;
as, I desire to love thee, dear Lord, with all my heart: or of Hope; as, I
hope by the help of the Sacraments to be saved: they do not exclude any other
virtue, or means, but in all and every one of these Acts do include all the
means and benefits of our Lords whole Passion; offering up these Acts, and
whatsoever Christian work they do, to God the Father, in union with the
Passion of our Lord, upon the Cross, for the remission of their sins; and
use these Acts, Sacraments, and good Deeds, done in Grace, as a means which
God Almighty has ordained they should use, for the receiving of the merit and
benefit of the Sacrifice of the Passion of our Lord.

For though our Lord died fo all the World; yet none receive the benefit of his
Passion, but those who diligently and carefully use the means he has ordained
should be used, for the receiving of the benefit thereof; which are, Faith,
Sacraments, good Deeds, and acts of virtue: by these, as by instruments,
receiving the merit and benefit of our Lords Passion, his graces and favors
purchased for us. So Saint Paul exhorting us, says; Our desire is, that every
one of Heb. 6. 11.
you show forth the same carfulness, to the accomplishing of hope unto the
end, that you may become, not slothful, but imitaters of them, which by faith
and patience shall inherit the Promise.

The slothful servant received of our Lord a Talent; Mat. 25. 15.
yet because he did not increase it, he was cast into utter Mat. 25. 30.
darkness, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Neither can the Passion of our Lord, or merit of his Sacrifice upon the
Cross, as it sanctifies and justifies, be applied by parts; as that any one
might be sanctified and justified by only Faith, or only Hope in him, and also
have iniquity: for that grace which justifies, and mortal sin, or
iniquity, cannot dwell together in one and the same Soul. For what
participation 1. Cor. 6. 14.
has Justice with Iniquity; or what society is there between Light and
Darkness; and what agreement with Christ and Belial; or what part has the
Faithful with the Infidel. Again, No Mat. 6. 24.
man can serve two Masters; you cannot serve God and Mammon.

Not only Faith, nor only Hope, nor Faith and Hope, with Impiety, and Vice,
and want of other Virtues, are sufficient to Rest, Content, and Happiness.
There shall Apoc. 21. 27.
not enter into it any polluted thing, nor that does abomination, and makes a
lie: without (ever finding Rest, or Joy) are Dogs (Heretics, whom S. Peter
calls Dogs; for that they having been once converted to Christianity, are
returned to Infidelity) and Sorcerers, and the Unchaste, and Apoc. 22. 15.
Murderers, and seruers of Idols, and every one that loves and makes a lie:
according to the words of our Savior; saying, Mat. 7. 23.
Depart from me, you that work iniquity, I never knew you, and they shall go
into punishment everlasting.

As in Arts and Sciences, every one is made expert and cunning in his Art by
frequent acts: so in Virtues, every one becomes grounded in Virtue, Piety,
and Godliness, by frequent acts and exercises of Virtue: according to the
saying of the Holy Ghost; Ps. 17.
With the holy thou shall be holy, and with the perverse thou shall be
perverted. So it rests here, to set down acts of Hope in God.

Acts of Hope.
MOst merciful Lord, and my God, I most firmly hope, by means of thy help,
and the good works, which by thy particular grace, I intend to do; at the end
of my life to enjoy eternal glory.

Dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, although in every moment I commit many
Imperfections; yet I hope, by thy gracious help, to arrive to Christian
perfection.

Most merciful Lord, whose Mercies are above all his Works; if I alone had
committed all the sins, and enormious crimes, which have been committed
from the beginning of the World until this day; yet would I not despair of
thy mercy.

I hope most firmly (O Son of God, and my Redeemer) by means of thy holy
Sacraments, to come to possess eternal glory.

All my hope, dear Lord and Savior, is in the merit of thy sacred Passion:
Grant, sweet Savior, that I may use the means which thou have ordained
should be used by all those who shall receive benefit by it.

O Lord of infinite Mercy, there was never sinner that did call upon thee, to
whom thou did not show mercy: so I hope, that thou will have mercy upon
me, who calls upon thee with all my heart.

In thee only I hope, O Lord, Thou art the portion of Ps. 15. 5.
mine inheritance, thou art he that will restore mine inheritance unto me.

From them that resist thy right hand, keep me; as the apple of thine eye,
under the shadow Ps. 16. 8.
of thy wings, protect me from the face of the impious, that have afflicted me.

Our Lord is my firmament, and my refuge and my delivery; Ps. 17. 1.
my God is my helper, and I will hope in him.

Dear Lord, in all my tribulations, Ps. 21. 6.
I will hope in thee. In thee our Fathers have hoped; they hoped, and thou
did deliver them: They cried to thee, and were saved; they hoped in thee,
and were not confounded.

Lord of infinite power and Majesty, Although I Ps. 22. 4.
shall walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will not fear evil,
because thou art with me.

Our Lord is my salvation, whom should I fear? our Lord is the Protector of my
life, of whom shall I be afraid? If Camps stand together against me, my heart
shall not fear; If Battles rise up against me, in thee will I hope.

In thee O Lord have I hoped, Ps. 30. 1.
let me not be confounded. Be unto me for a God, a Protector, and for a house
of refuge, that thou may save me; because thou art my strength and my
refuge.

Into thy hands I commend Ps. 30. 4.
my spirit: thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth.

Be delighted (my Soul) in Ps. 36. 4.
our Lord, and he will give thee the petition of thy heart: Reveal thy way
unto our Lord, and hope in him, and he will do it.

Why art thou heavy, O my Ps. 41. 12.
Soul? And why do thou trouble me? Hope in God; because yet I will confess
to him, the Salvation of my Countenance, and my God.

CHAP. X. That Charity, or love of God, together with Faith and Hope, is
necessary to the Content and Happiness of Man.
THat it is not possible for Man to be content, and happy, without the love of
God, is manifest by the light of Reason.

For if I had what things soever can be given me, and yet did not love them, I
should not find; or receive, any true content, or joys, from them: and yet
those who love things that are not good, are deceived; and Time discovering
Deceits, they will remain afflicted. Again, those who love such things as
have an end; at their end, or parting, they will rest comfortless: whereby is
manifest by the light of reason, that true Content, and Joys, cannot be
without true Love; nor true Love, unless it be placed in loving a perpetual
Good. Again, this perpetual Good must be such, as I may at all times, and in
all places, love, talk with, and in some sort enjoy; which is God Almighty,
who is every where, and in all places, eternal, and of infinite goodness.

Neither is it less manifest by the light of Grace; the Scriptures every where
promising Happiness to such as love God Almighty with all their hearts; and
Misery and Wretchedness to such as fornicate from him; saying, If thou will
enter into Mat. 19. 17.
life, keep the Commandments; whereof the first is, Thou shall Mat. 22. 37.
love the Lord thy God from thy whole Heart, and with thy whole Soul, and with
thy whole Mind. Insomuch, as the holy Ghost pronounces them first Accursed,
who who do not love God with their whole hearts; saying, Cursed are they that
decline from thy Commandments. Ps. 118. 21.


Secondly, the holy Ghost accounts them Fools, without wit and
understanding; saying, Give me understanding, and I will search thy Law, and
Psalm. 118.
will keep it with my whole heart.

Thirdly, It terms them unjust, reserved for to endure Torments in the Poole
of Fire and Brimstone, for ever and evermore, saying, The unjust Ps. 118. 85.
have told me Fables, but not as thy Law. Wicked people, says the Prophet,
told him Fables, such like as these; that we may be saved and justified by
only Faith, or only Hope; but not as the Law of God, which teaches, saying,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God from thy whole heart, etc.

Fourthly, It esteems them to be malignant people; who out of their malice,
would fraudulently conduct others into Hell, and Torments, saying, Depart from
me, ye malignant, V. 115.
and I will search the Commandments of my God; which consist in Love, and not
in only Faith, or only Hope.

If I should have (says Saint 1. Cor. 13. 2.
Paul) Prophecy, and know all Mysteries, and all Knowledge, and I should have
all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and have not Charity, I am
nothing; and if I should distribute all my goods, for meat for the poor, and
if I should deliver my body, so that I burn, and have not Charity, it does
profit me nothing.

If we will believe Saint Paul; neither Prophecies, nor Science, nor
Knowledge, nor Faith, nor Almsdeeds, nor Martyrdom, for the Religion any one
professes, is sufficient to the attayning unto Happiness, without Charity;
and so he concludes, saying; Now these remain, Faith, Hope, and Charity:
these three; but the greater of these is Charity, according to the words of
our Lord, where he says; He that shall break one of M^^* ^. 20.
these least Commandments, and shall so teach men, shall be called the least
in the Kingdom of Heaven: But he that shall do, and teach, he shall be called
great in the Kingdom of Heaven.

So our Savior says, I tell Mat. 5. 21.
you, that unless your justice abound more then that of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Yet the Scribes and
Pharisees had Faith, as witnesses our Savior, saying, Upon the Mat. 23. 2.
Chair of Moses have sitten the Scribes and Pharisees. All things therefore
whatsoever they shall say unto you, observe ye, and do ye. Whereby is
manifest, that the Scribes preached faithful and true Doctrine; otherwise our
Savior would not have wished their Auditors, to observe and do whatsoever
they said: But they wanted Charity, in themselves, to do good Works, and
keep the Law; as witnesses our Savior, saying, But according Mat. 23. ^.
to their works do ye not; for they say, and do not: and so, for want of
Charity, or love toward God, they shall not (as our Savior says) enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven; or ever enjoy Rest, or Happiness, but endless Pains.

Again, our Savior says, If God were your Father, verily Io. 8. 42.
you would love me, for from God I proceed. Whereby our Savior gives us to
understand, that such as do not love God with all their hearts, according to
the Commandment, have not God for their Father, and are not the sons of
God, but of the Devil: As in another place he says, You are of your Father
the Devil, and the desires Io. 8. 43.
of your Father you will do: who though he believe that there is a God, as S.
James witnesses; Iam. 2.
yet he does not love God with all his heart, and keep his Commandments.
Whereupon it is written of our Savior, That for this appeared 1. Io. 3. 8.
the Son of God, that he might dissolve the works of the Devil; bring men
to love God Almighty with all their hearts, and win them to keep his Law:
and so says of the reprobate Jews, I have Io. 5. 42.
known you, that the love of God you have not in you: And of the elect
Apostles, You have Io. 16. 27.
loved me.

Love being the fullness of the Romans 13. 19.
Law, the want of love, is the work of the Devil, in the hearts of all the
wicked; and the love of God, the works of our Lord, in the hearts of the
elect. Whereupon our Savior says, Verily, verily, I Io. 8. 15.
say unto you, if any man keep my word, he shall not see death for ever: and
yet again says, He that loves me not, keeps not my words. So, love God
Almighty with all thy heart, and thou shall not see death for ever. He that
loves not, abides in Io 3. 14.
death; dead to Grace in this life, and to Glory in the other.

By which is manifest, that happy life cannot be, without the loving of God
Almighty with all our hearts: Insomuch, as if thou had Happiness and
Content, and yet did not love it with all thy heart, thou should not be
happy; as witnesses S. Augustine, saying, He is not De Ciuitat. li. 14. ca.
15.
happy, of whom happy life is not beloved: Which thou may find true by
experience; seeing thy self, and all others, to take comfort and content in
that which they love, and not in that which they neglect. Whereupon S. Paul
says, If any man love not 1. Cor. 16. 2.
our Lord Jesus Christ, be he Anathema; his body cut off from the communion of
the Catholic Church upon earth, and his soul excluded from the joys of
Heaven.

CHAP. XI. How to attain unto the love of God, and how to love his divine
Majesty with all our hearts.
SEeing that Divine Love, or Charity, is necessary to the Content and
Happiness of Man, it is requisite also to set down the means, by which thou
may attain unto this Divine Love, or Charity, that thou may be happy.

Charity (says S. Paul) is 1. Tim. 1. 15.
from a pure Heart, and a good Conscience, and a Faith not fained. So, that the
first thing which thou ought to do, if thou desire to love God Almighty
with all thy heart; is to separate thy self for a time from all other affairs
and businesses, only to attend unto the examining of thy Conscience, how thou
have spent thy life past; and to call to mind all thy cuill thoughts, words,
deeds, and unjust actions, which have stained and made filthy thy heart and
soul; to confess them, with contrition and sorrow, to one of the Pastors of
the Church of God, to whom God Almighty has given authority to forgive
sins, saying, Whose sins you shall forgive, Io. 20. 23.
they are forgiven; that thy sins being forgiven, thou may have a clean
and pure heart, fit to receive Divine Love, or Charity; and God Almighty will
bestow it upon thee, according to his Word, saying, Return to me, and I Mat 3.
7.
will return to you.

No body puts new Wine Mat. 9. 17.
into old Bottles, otherwise the Bottles perish: But new Wine they put into new
Bottles, and both are preserved together. So, if thou will receive the new Wine
of Divine Love, and Charity, thou must first lay away thy old Conversation,
Ephesians. 4. 22.
the old Man, which is corrupted according to the desires of Error; thy
self-love, proper judgment, private spirit, inordinate appetites, and
passions, and by sorrow for thy sins, and Penance, be renewed in the spirit of
thy mind, and put on the new Man, which according to God, is created in
Justice, and holiness of the Truth. Whereupon Saint John Baptist, speaking of
the way, or means, how to attain unto Content, and Happiness, says, Who
has showed Mat. 3. 7.
you to fly from the wrath to come? yield therefore fruit worthy of Penance.
Which is as if he should have said; If any one has showed you the way to
Content, and Happiness, and not by contrition, and detestation of sin, the
fruits of Penance; he has deceived you. So our Lord and Savior, in his
first Sermon according to Saint Matthew, taught Penance, as the first means to
Happiness; the Text saying, that Mat. 4. 17.
Jesus began to preach, and to say, Do Penance, for the Kingdom of God is at
hand.

Here thou may see, how many men, which are of short Capacities, and weak
and shallow Wits, and Understandings, are deceived; in framing to themselves a
conceit, that to do Penance, is to be tormented, dejected, and oppressed in
mind; when it is nothing less: but the greatest ease, remedy, and rest, to a
dejected and oppressed mind, that can be had, or found; and the way, and
means, to all true Content and Happiness. If thou will believe the
Scriptures, and Experience; Contrition, or sorrow for sin, does much differ
from the sorrow, or lamenting of worldly men; when out of self-love, they
lament the loss of their worldly Commodities, or Pleasures. The fruits of
this Sorrow, are Sadness, Oppression of Mind, and Discontent, as being
inordinate, and not ordained by God to be used as a means of finding
Happiness: whereas Penance, Contrition, and Sorrow for Sins, being means
ordained by God, to Content and Happiness; the more thou use them, the more
rest, and content of heart, thou shall find; because God Almighty does revive
the Isa. 57. 15.
heart of the Contrite, by the assisting of the holy Ghost, Gal 5.
whose fruits are Charity, Joy of heart, and Peace of mind; of which we are
to speak more in his place.

A second means of attayning unto the love of God, is often to Communicate,
according to the words of our Lord, saying; He that eats Ioh. 6.
my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, abides in me, and I in him: which is the
Charity we seek for.

A third means, is Meditation; seriously to consider all the benefits thou
have received from his divine Majesty; as, Creation, Redemption, Conservation,
and whatsoever graces thou have, or expectest; and likewise, to meditate often
upon his divine Attributes, as his infinite Goodness, Beauty, Majesty, and
Power, etc. for the only means to love any thing that is very good, fair,
pleasing, and beautiful; is but to look seriously upon it, and consider it
well, and the love or liking of it presently is begotten in thy heart. And it
being excellently good, the more thou think, or meditatest upon it, the more
the love of it increases in thee. So if thou will love much GOD Almighty, do
not omit thy Meditations.

A fourth means is, always to keep the Presence of God; that having always
before thine eyes an infinite Good, from whom all things else borrow whatsoever
good they have; thou can not but little esteem of all other goods, in
comparison of it, and love it with thy whole heart, and all things else, as
they may conduct thee unto it: of which Presence we are to speak in our third
Book.

A fifth means is, to make many Acts of the love of God: As in Arts and
Sciences, thy continual practice increases thy knowledge and skill; so the
making of many Acts of the love of God, increases in thee the love of God: And
to that end, here I set down these Acts following.

Acts of Charity, or Love toward God.
AS the chased Heart thirsts after the Fountain of Water; so I desire, that
my heart should perpetually thirst after thee, dear Lord.

O Lord of infinite beauty, that my heart were so wounded with thy love, that
out of fervor of spirit, I might in silent speech, perpetually breath forth,
When shall I come and appear before thy face.

O most amiable Son of the living God, take now possession of this my heart,
which was created for to love thee; and pierce it with a thousand wounds of
pure love, that I may for ever sweetly languish after thy eternal beauty.

How beloved are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts: my soul coueteth and
faints after the Courts of my God.

Decre Jesus, to thee I consecrate my heart.

O dear King of all beauty and glory, I will no other inheritance but thee.

O Life of my life, and more beautiful then all beauties created, put
together; inflame me with a most desired burning after thy eternal beauty.

O Lord of infinite mercy, how great are the multitude of thy mercies; that
thou command me to love thee; and if I do not, thou art angry, and
threatenest eternal miseries: when in loving thee, consists all my joys and
good.

O who will give to me my Lord, that I may die for thee; that by my corporal
death my soul may be ingulfed in thee, her rest, and chaste Bedchamber of all
divine delights.

Too late have I loved thee, Beauty, so ancient and so new; too late have I
loved thee: but pardon my negligence past, dear Lord, and grant, that this my
beginning may last, and increase for ever.

Thou, dear Lord, was within me, and I was without my self; and amongst
these fair things which thou have created, I sought thee, and fowly erred:
fair they were because thou createdst them, but to me foul; for that I loved
them, and loved them not in thee.

O how I lament, dear Lord, that my poor soul has been so deceived with
sensual love, and worldly vanity: now convert me so wholly unto thee, dear
Lord, that nothing created may please me, but the only loving of thy divine
Majesty.

Thou art all fair, my Love, thou art all fair, and there is not a spot or
stain in thee.

O my infinite Good, I resign to thee all that thy liberality has bestowed
upon me; that thereby I may please thee, and offer without ceasing, in the
Altar of my heart, my self in Sacrifice.

If I forget to love thee, my Lord, let all my pleasures be turned into
sorrows; and let my right hand be forgetful of her actions, if I do not
offer unto thee, upon the Altar of my heart, a Sacrifice of perpetual Love,
Morning, Midday, and Evening.

CHAP. XII. That true Content and Happiness cannot be without Charity, or
love toward our neighbors, and keeping of the Commandments of God.
SO great is the Obligation and bond of Society, interposed between all
things created; that the good of one, in some sort, depends upon the love and
society with the other: The Angels in Heaven rejoice one at another good and
Happiness, and receive increase of Content, by the increase of Glory bestowed
upon any one: The Heavens send down showers and dew, to water and make
pleasant the Earth; and the Earth shoots up all her fruits toward the
Heavens, as though she would, in gratitude, offer them to the Heavens, as a
Present, for all benefits received. The Elements live in a perpetual
interchange of amity; the Fire transporting it self into Air, the Air into
Water, and the Water into Earth; and the Earth condensing and becoming hard,
returns again to yield Fire; and their intercourse of friendship is
confirmed in so firm a league, that rather then the Earth should in any thing
perish by suffering vacuum; the Air, or Fire, forgetful of his own well, and
content; of his own will and desire, leaves his Region, to descend in have to
supply the Earths want, that vacuum be not found in Nature. The most vntame
Birds, and savage Beasts, keep company together, each one rejoicing at others
good; Insomuch, as that the wild Boar, or Bear, who amongst the beasts are
accounted the most savage, will not stick to turn against Man, when he
shall perceive that he has hurt or wounded any of his company. So strait is
the bond of Amity between all living things, in their kind, that the weal
of one seems, in some sort, to be the content of all.

And as for Man, the greater he is, the more need he stands of the common
people: Kings there could be none if Common people were not; nor yet Common
people live long in unity and peace, if Kings they had not: Princes and Peers
depend upon their meanest Subjects; and their Subjects live in peace, under the
Protection of their greatness. So Nature has combined all in unity and
friendship; that he must be a monster in nature, that should deny the love of
his Neighbor to be necessary to his Content and Happiness.

Again, some are so young, that they cannot help themselves; some so old, that
their forces are spent; some in Prison; many lame; and none so exquisite in all
Arts and Sciences, that he is able completely to furnish himself with
whatsoever he wants: Whereby appears, that there is nothing more manifest,
then that the love of our Neighbor is necessary to Man's Happiness.

And it is no less manifest by the Scriptures, and light of Grace, that the
love of our Neighbors is necessary to Content and Happiness; He that says
he is in the Light, Io. 2. 9.
and hates his brother, is in the Darkness, even until now. He that loves
his brother, abides in the Light, and scandal is not in him: But he that
hates his brother, is in darkness, and walks in the darkness, and
knows not whither he goes, because the Darkness has blinded his eyes.
Again, Every one Io. 3. 10.
that is not just, is not of God, and he that loves not his brother; because
this is the Annuntiation which you have heard from the beginning, That you love
one another. Again, Whosoever hates his 1. Io. 3. 16.
brother, is a Murderer, and you know, that no Murderer has life everlasting
abiding in him. Again, My dearest, 1. Io. 4. 7.
let us love one another, because Charity is of God, and every one that
loves, is borne of God, and knows God; He that loves not, knows not God.
If any man shall say, that I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar;
for he that loves not his brother whom he sees, God, whom he sees not, how
can he love? And this is the Commandment we have from God, That he which
loves God, loves also his brother: whereby, and by many more passages of holy
Scriptures, it is manifest, that the love of our Neighbor, is necessary to
Happiness, and Salvation; and that no man whatsoever, shall either in this
World, or in all Eternity, ever attain unto any true Content, or Happiness,
who does not keep the Law, or ten Commandments, which consist in the love of
God, and love of our Neighbor, as witnesses our Lord, saying, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God from thy whole heart, Mat. 22. 37.
and with thy whole soul, and with thy whole mind. This is the greatest, and
the first Commandment; And the second is like to this, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self: on these two Commandments depends the whole Law, and
the Prophets. So Saint Paul says; He that loves his Romans 13. 9.
Neighbor, has fulfilled the Law: For thou shall not commit Adultery. Thou
shall not Kill. Thou shall not Steal. Thou shall not bear False witness.
Thou shall not Covet. And if there be any other Commandment, it is
comprehended in this word; Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. The love
of thy Neighbor works no evil. Again, All the Law is fulfilled in one Gal.
5. 14.
word, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.

CHAP. XIII. The means how to become hearty wel-willers of our seuerest
Persecutors, and most alienated Adversaries.
ALthough it be easy to love men of meek and mild disposition; yet it may
seem hard, heartily to love, and pray for our enemies and persecutors:
especially for such persecutors, as have for office, to draw us (by spoil of
goods, loss of liberty, and life) from temporal and eternal Happiness,
into temporal and eternal Myserie; which is the case of our Persecution in
England: wherefore it is necessary here to set down the means, how to love
our most alienated enemies, or adversaries, and fulfill the Precept of our
Lord, which says, Love your enemies, do Mat. 5. 44.
good to them that hate you, pray for them that persecute and abuse you, that
you may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven, who makes his Sun
to shine upon the good and bad, and raineth upon the just and unjust. Again,
Revenge not your selves, Romans 12. 19,
my dearest, but give place unto Wrath; for it is written, Revenge to me; I
will reward, says our Lord: but if thy enemy hunger, give him meat, if he
thirst, give him drink; be not overcome with evil, but overcome in good, the
evil. If, says the Prophet David, I have rendered to them that repayed me
evil; let me worthily fall empty from mine enemies. Let the enemy persecute
Ps. 7. 6.
my soul, and take and tread down my life in the Earth, and bring down my
glory in the dust.

The practice of which Doctrine, though to worldly men it seem hard, and have
great difficulty; yet by the grace of God, and the good means which he has
left for us to use, it is light and easy: Of our selves, as 2. Cor. 3. 4.
of our selves, we be not sufficient to think any thing. But our sufficiency
is of God: Christ Romans 8. 34.
Jesus that dyed (for us) who is on the right hand of God, also makes
intercession for us: Who then shall separate us from the Charity of Christ?
Tribulation? or Distress? or Famine? or Nakedness? or Danger? or Persecution?
or the Sword? (as it is written) For we are killed for thy sake all the day, we
are esteemed as sheep of slaughter. But in all these things we overcome,
because of him that has loved us. I can all things (says the Apostle) Phi. 4.
in him that comfort me. Comfort us, O Lord, and we can do all things;
yea, love our heauiest Persecutors, as our selves.

Since from God Almighty proceeds all our good, and strength: the first
means of atteining unto the love of our Persecutors, as our selves; is much to
love his Divine Majesty: To them Romans 8.
that love God, all things cooperate in good. Again, If any Io. 14. 23.
love me, he will keep my word, (love his Enemies, and pray for his
Persecutors) Love is Cant. 8. 6.
as strong as Death: The Love of God nothing can overcome; Many Waters (of
tribulation) Cant. 8.
cannot quench Charity, neither shall Floods (of Persecution) ouerwhelme it.
Wherefore the first means, is much to love God Almighty, and often to make
the aforesaid Acts of Love, and Charity, toward God, set down in the
eleventh Chapter, and then thou will easily love thy most alienated enemies
with all thy heart.

The second means is, often to reflect upon the providence of God Almighty;
who since he intends to crown none, but such as 2. Tim. 2.
shall overcome in combat; first gives the grace and force to overcome, and
then permits miserable people to practice cruelties and persecutions upon
thee; that thou, by his grace, ouercomming them, and remaining, through
Patience and Charity, a Conqueror, he may crown thee with abundance of
temporal Content in this life, and after death, in the other, with eternal
glory, according to the words of S. James, saying; Blessed is the man that
suffers Iam* 1. 12.
temptation; for when he has been proved, he shall receive the Crown of
life, which God has promised to them that love him. Insomuch, as by
ouercomming, thy gain is so great, that if a persecuting King, Prince, or
Potentate, should spoil himself of his Scepter and Crown, and bestow them
both on thee, together with his Kingdom; yet, thou should not receive by
his means, so great a benefit, as the Martyr who^ he puts to death either
publicly, or by long private imprisonment, or other distresses for our
Catholic Faith: My Number. 23. 10.
soul die the death of the just, and my last end be made like to them.

So in truth and verity, there is no cause, why thou should hate or wish
any evil unto thy seuerest Persecutors; but much cause, why thou should
wish well unto them, and love them tenderly: since that by their means, and by
their loss, both of temporal and eternal Content and Happiness; thou,
perseuering in Charity, art to receive a greater benefit then otherwise thou
could expect ever to have received, viz. to be crowned with a Crown of Apoc.
3. 10.
eternal glory, to rest in the joy of our Lord, before the throne of God, and
serve him Apoc. 7.
day and night in his Temple, and be conducted by the Lamb, our Savior, to
the living Fountains of Waters.

And for this cause, the wisest men that be upon the face of the Earth, have a
pious envy at our happiness here in England, For that we are killed Ps. 43.
22.
all the day, we are esteemed as Sheep of slaughter, for the Catholic Faith,
which we profess; and go continually, as the Prophet David says, With our
lives always Ps. 118.
in our hands, to offer them to God Almighty in Sacrifice; knowing, that our
reward is very great in Heaven: for so Mat. 5. 12.
they persecuted the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, that were before us: To
whom our Savior says; You are they that have remained with me, in my
temptations; and I dispose to you, as my Father disposed to me, a Kingdom,
that Luc. 22. 28.
you may eat and drink upon my Table, and in my Kingdom, and may sit upon
Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.

Thou see what labor, pains, and dangers, every worldly man would be
content to take, if he might but hope to ascend up to be an earthly King, or
Prince, or come to attain some grace and favor in the Court; where, in truth
and verity, their greatest Pleasures are mixed with so many Woes, that if they
would but look upon them with reason, they have more cause to lament their
evil mishap, then to take glory in their seeming high estate. How much more
should thou be content, gladly, and willingly, to suffer some seven years
pains, and persecution, in hope to enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven, the glory of
the other life, and that eternally.

A third means is, to stir up and revive thy Faith in thee, by making many
Acts of Faith, founded upon the Promises, to patient suffering Injuries, and
Persecutions, for the love thou bear to God; as often to make these or the
like Acts.

He that will save his life, Mat. 16. 25.
shall lose it, and he that shall lose his life for me, shall find it.

What does it profit a man, if Mat. 16. 26.
he gain the whole world, and sustain the damage of his Soul.

What permutation shall a man Mar. 26.
give for his Soul? What will thou take, that the Devil may have thy Soul,
for to burn in Hell eternally? and try but for a quarter of an hour, how
thou can endure thy hand, or foot, to be burnt in this fire, upon Earth? And
then thou will laud the mercies of our Lord, that by his Grace, and thy
suffering patiently so little pains; he has ordained, to redeem thee from
eternal Torments.

We suffer with Christ Jesus, Romans 17.
that we may be glorified also with him.

The sufferings of this time are not condign to the glory to Romans 8. 18.
come, that shall be revealed in us.

Our tribulation, which is momentarie, 2. Cor. 4. 17.
and light, works above measure exceedingly, an eternal weight of glory in
us. If 2. Tim. 2. 11.
we be dead in Christ, then we shall live also together with him. If we shall
sustain, we shall also reign together.

So to live by Faith, according as it is written: The just Gal. 3. 12.
lives by Faith; for without Faith it is impossible to please God: For he
that comes to God, Heb. 11. 6.
must believe, that he is, and is a rewarder of them that seek him.

And this is the Faith of the Saints; so renowned, and often spoken of in the
Scriptures: the Faith of Henoch, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses,
Gedeon, Barac, Sampson, Iephte, (and the Apostles) who by Faith overcame
Kingdoms, wrought Justice, obtained Promises, stopped the mouth of Lions,
extinguished the force of Fire, repelled the edge of the Sword, recovered of
their Infirmities, had trial of Mockeries, and Stripes, of Bonds, and Prisons,
were Stoned, Hewed, Tempted, dying in slaughter of the Sword, went about in
Sheep skins, and Goats skins, needy in distress, afflicted, of whom the
World was not worthy, wandering in Deserts, in Mountains, and Dens, and in
Caves in the Earth. As thou see, Religious men, and Priests, and Lay
Catholics do, in the time of this our persecution in England; who firmly
grounded and founded in the infallible certainetie of the Oaths and Promises
of God, do think whatsoever they can suffer, or endure, in this life, too
little to manifest the constancy of their Faith, and Hope, in the Promises of
God; that as S. Paul writes of the Romans, so we may say of the English
Catholics, Your Faith Romans 1. 8.
is renowned throughout the whole World, and will be, in all Ages, in this
life, and after death, for all eternity, in Heaven.

A fourth may be, to remember, that it is the Precept of our Lord, saying, Love
your enemies, do good to Mat. 5. 44.
them that hate you, pray for them that persecute you, and abuse you.

Thou see what pains the Pursuinants take, at the commandment of their
Masters, to apprehend, take, spoil, and torment Priests, and Catholics; and
in all equity, it must needs be a great shame unto thee, that the
commandment of a Man should have more force to move men to break the
commandments of God, then the commandment of God has to move thee, to
keep them; especially considering, that all which they can get, is but to
divide the spoils between their Masters and them, and the good countenance
of their Masters to themselves: And thou expectest the Kingdom of Heaven, the
happy Vision of God, and eternal Glory.

A fifth may be, to consider, what it is that thou desire: Is it not Content,
and Happiness? Would thou not be Content, and Happy? This is the Way.
Look after all those, who ever attained unto high degree of Rest, and Joy, and
observe their steps; and thou shall find, that they are all gone in this
path of outward Tribulation, and Persecution. And supposed, that thou could
find another way to Rest, and Joys; would thou forsake the comfort of so
good company, to go alone, when as by so doing, thou should but deprive
thy self of much Ease and Joy.

The servants of God, who willingly take pains, and readily suffer persecution
for the love of God; in their sufferings, and persecutions, do not suffer, but
in outward show, view, and sight of the World; having in their inward hearts,
and souls, more Joys, and Content, then any Pen, or Tongue, is able to
express.

God Almighty is more tender over his, who will willingly suffer persecution
for his love, then ever was the most affectioned Mother in the World over her
only Child: that give but thy consent, free will, and resignation of mind,
readily, by Gods grace, to suffer whatsoever persecution, or tribulation, it
shall please his Divine Majesty to permit to fall upon thee, and willingly
march on, in that way to Rest, by which he will conduct thee: and suffer pains
of torment thou never shall; but be so full of Joy, in the greatest seeming
pains, that if they were sensible to others, as they will be to thy self, thy
suffering would convert not one, but all the World. And if thou will believe
the Testimonies of all pious Men, in this Age, and in all Ages past; thou shall
find it most true, by their Testimonies, and Experiences, that either all
Content and Joys, which are to be found in this life, or the most part, are to
be found in suffering and enduring outward pains, labors, and persecutions,
for the love of God: such are the Promises of God, as we have said immediately
before; and God Almighty is just and faithful in all his Promises, if there
be no defect on thy behalf. So the Prophet David affirms, saying, According
Ps. 93. 19.
to the multitude of my sorrows in my heart, thy consolations have made my
soul joyful.

Again, Thou have proved us, O Lord, by fire; thou have Ps. 65. 9.
tried us, as Silver is tried; thou have brought us unto a Snare; thou have
laid Tribulations on our backs; thou have set men upon our heads; we have
passed through fire, and water, and thou have brought us out into refreshing.
So Saint Paul often affirms, saying, As the 2. Cor. 1. 5.
Passions of Christ abound in us, so also by Christ does our comfort abound.
Again, We make 2. Cor. 8. 2.
it known unto you, Brethren, the grace of God, that is given in the Church of
Macedonia, that in much experience of Tribulation, they had abundance of Joy.
Again, to the Corinthians, living in persecution, and tribulation, he
writes, saying, Our hope is firm for you, 2. Cor. 1. 7.
knowing, that as you are partakers of the Passion, so shall you be of the
Consolation also: And further affirms, saying, All Discipline, for the
present, truly Heb. 12. 11.
seems not to be of Joy, but of Sorrow: but after, it will render unto them
that are exercised in it, most peaceable fruit of Justice. So S. Peter
witnesses, saying, My dearest, communicating ^. Pet. 4. 12.
with the Passions of Christ, be glad, that in the revelation also of his
glory, you may be glad, rejoicing. If you be reviled in the Name of Jesus
Christ, you shall be blessed, because that which is of the honor, glory, and
virtue of God, and the Spirit, which is his, shall rest upon you: The holy
Ghost will rest upon you with his gifts, and fruits; from whose communication,
proceeds all our Content and Happiness, as we will show in his place. So
Saint Paul concludes, That all men, without exception, shall find Content by
Persecution, saying, All that will live godly 1. Tim. 3. 12.
in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution.

Whereby thou see, that if either the light of Reason, or Grace, may prevail
with thee, thou have no cause to hate, or wish evil unto the persons of the
Pursuinants, or seuerest Persecutors; but to hate and detest their sin,
impiety, and wickedness, and love, cherish, and do all the serviceable
offices thou can, unto their persons: since that by patiently enduring the
evils and wickedness they practice upon thee, God Almighty has disposed, to
conduct thee to more temporal, and eternal Rest, Content, and Happiness,
then ever otherwise thou could have expected to have received.

Which considered, thou ought to have great compassion upon those poor,
miserable, and wretched people, which serve for nothing else, but, by God
Almighties permission, to conduct thee to Happiness; after, to descend
themselves into eternal Torments: and out of compassion, to pray much for
them, if peradventure, God Almighty will have mercy on them also; that they
may see their errors, and come to love God Almighty with their whole hearts,
and their neighbors as themselves, and save their souls; that those whom thou
have had as persecutors upon Earth, thou may have as companions of Glory in
Heaven; which God Almighty grant us: and to that end I set down these Acts
following.

Acts of Charity, or Love toward our Neighbor.
O King of Kings, in whose hands are the hearts of all Kings; for thy tender
mercies, I beseech thee, grant, that my King, Queen, and Prince, may so live
and serve thee upon Earth, that after death they may be found in the great
Multitude, which no Apoc. 7. 9.
man could number, of all Nations, Tribes, and Peoples, and Tongues, which are
to be signed with thy Mark, and to be conducted Apoc. 7. 17
to the Fountain of living Waters.

O Lord of infinite Majesty, let the petition of thy servant be accepted in
thy sight, and grant, that this my King, and his Seed, may be numbered amongst
that Seed, to which thou promised, I will put his Seed for ever, and Ps. 88. 30.
his Throne as the days of Heaven.

Thou art faithful, dear Lord, and just, and right, without any iniquity,
and have promised, That whosoever shall 1. King. 2. 30.
glorify thee, thou will glorify him, and they that contemn thee, shall be
base. Grant, dear Lord, that this my King, Queen, and Prince, may so
glorify thee in all their actions and deeds, that thou may glorify them
upon Earth, and in Heaven eternally.

Most merciful Lord, I beseech thy infinite Goodness so to illuminate the
hearts of all sinners, that they may come to do hearty penance for their
sins, and seek to love thee with all their hearts.

Grant, dear Lord, for the Passion of thy only Son Jesus Christ, that all
those Schismatikes and Heretics, who in effect defend, that thou have failed,
in maintaining thy Oath and Promises to Abraham, the Prophets, and Patriarchs,
for many hundred years; may see their errors, and return unto our Catholic
Church; in which are abundantly fulfilled all thy Oaths and Promises.

Forgive, sweet Savior, all those who persecute me; and grant, that they may
come so to love thee in this life, that after death, they may for ever enjoy
thee in Heaven.

I beseech thee, my Lord, by the bowels of thy infinite mercy, that all such
as seek after Ambition, and earthly Dignities, may turn all their Affections
upon thee, who art their only true felicity.

Grant, dear Lord, that I may rather die, then not heartily love and pray for
my seuerest Persecutors.

Dear Lord, for thy infinite mercies, I beseech thee, so to illuminate the
hearts of all the Protestant English Clergy, our dear Countrymen; that they
may see thy Oaths and Promises fulfilled in our Catholic Church, and return
unto it with all their hearts.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the wretchedness and miseries into which those fall, who live
in breach of the Commandments of God, and do believe, that it is not
necessary, or impossible, to keep them.
Having showed thee, (dear Reader) that it is not possible for thee ever to be
happy, or find any true Content, Ease, or Rest, unless thou keep the
Commandments of God; and also having set down unto thee the means, by which
thou may easily keep them: Now it rests, to set down the miseries, and
wretchedness, into which those fall, who live in breach of them, and esteem
it a thing impossible for to keep them; that either for the love of thine own
good, and content, or else for fear of thy falling into miseries and torments,
thou may be won to keep them zealously, and so be happy; which is that I
heartily wish unto thee.

First, those who do not love God with all their hearts, and keep his
Commandments, are spiritual Idolaters, and do live in spiritual Idolatry.
For our Savior explicating of the first Commandment, which is made against
Idolatry, and the having of Exodus 20. 1.
strange Gods, says, Thou shall Mat. 22. 37.
love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, and with
thy whole mind: This is the greatest, and the first Commandment, says our
Savior. So, if thou will believe our Savior himself, thou must confess,
that those, who do not love God with their whole hearts, and keep his
Commandments, are Idolaters. And the part of Idolaters Apoc. 21. 8.
(says S. John) shall be in the Poole burning with fire and Brimstone.

An Idol, of it self, is not 1. Cor. 10. 19.
any thing (as witnesses Saint John) but the love and affection which any one
bears to any creature, imagination, or conceit, more then to God, contrary
to the first Commandment; whereupon, covetous men are called Idolaters,
because that Col. 3. 5.
they love Gold and Riches more then God; and lascivious Men, or Gluttons, are
said Phil. 3. 19.
to make their bellies their God: And according to this, our Savior says, You
cannot Mat. 6. 24.
serve God and Mammon. God will have all thy heart, and love, or none.
Whereupon S. John says, Every one that In his 2. Epist. Ver. 9.
reuolteth, and persisteth not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God, that
is, has no true God, but is an Idolater. Again, He that says he knows God,
and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar.

Whereupon it comes to pass, that howsoever these, who think it impossible
to keep the Commandments of God, seem to adore, laud, and praise God, and
have the Lord, the God, always in their mouths, and sing Geneua Psalms in
their Congregations; yet they do neither serve their God, nor acknowledge him
in their words or song: but commit spiritual Idolatry; apprehending under
these terms, the Lord, the God, etc. such a God as they have feigned, and not
such a God as he is indeed. All Heathen and Cicero de Leg. li. 1.
Pagan people that ever were, have acknowledged a God, and have sung songs in
praise; but they did not acknowledge him to be as he is, but as they feigned
him to be; as those do, who affirm, that they are assured to be saved,
without keeping the Commandments of God; confess, that there is a God, a
Trinity, etc. but do not confess him to be such a God as he is; that is, a
God, who curses all these who decline from his Commandments, Psalm. 118.
according to his Mat. 25.
word; but such a God, and Trinity, as they have feygned; that is to say, a
God which will admit and receive into Heaven filthy souls, stained with
Pride, Idolatry, Fornication, Covetousness, etc. when there is no such God,
but only in their imaginations; as witnesses Saint Paul, saying, Do not
err, neither ^. Cor. 6.
Fornicators, nor seruers of Idols, nor Adulterers, nor the Effeminate, nor the
Liars with mankind, nor Thieves, nor the Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Raylers,
nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God: For he that has done
injury, shall Col. 3. 25.
receive that which he has done unjustly, and there is no acception of Persons
with God. There shall Apoc. 22.
not enter into Heaven (says S. John) any unclean thing, or that does
abomination, or makes a lie. Whereby is manifest, that all those who do live
in the breach of the Commandments of God, and do believe, that either it is
not necessary, or else, that it is impossible to keep them, are spiritual
Idolaters, and do adore and serve strange Gods in their souls and spirits,
contrary to the first Commandment; as it is also manifest to experience: for
ask of any one of these Ministers, if when he Prays, or Preaches, and
says, The Lord, The God, he do not mean the Lord, the God, that sent him to
Preach, that it is impossible to keep the Commandments of God; and he will
say, Yes: and yet there is no such God, but in there imaginations, as we have
proved before. Again, ask of these Ministers, if they do not adore as God,
the Lord, the God, who sent them to Preach this, and the like doctrine; and
they will say, Yes: Moreover, ask of their Disciples and followers, if they
do not believe in the God, who sent these Ministers to Preach Justification by
Faith only, without keeping the Commandments; and they will say, Yes: and yet
if thou will believe the living God, there is no such God, but in their
imaginations, as we have showed in the former Chapters. Whereby is manifest,
that all those who live in the breach of the Commandments of God, and do
believe, that it is not necessary, or impossible to keep them, are Idolaters,
and have made to themselves strange Gods, Gods who will save, and make happy
by Faith in them, or belief in them only, without keeping their
Commandments, or loving them with all their hearts: Strange Gods, that are so
black and ugly, that it is impossible for men to love them with all their
hearts.

Secondly, they are sons of the Devil, as witnesses our Savior, saying,
You are Io. 8. 44.
of your Father the Devil, and the desires of your Father you will do, that
is, break the Commandments; as our Savior testifies, saying, He was a
man-killer from the beginning, Io. 44.
and he stood not in verity. And the Law of God is Ps. 118. 242.
verity. So our Lord says of Judas, that he was a Devil; Have I not chosen
you twelve, Io. 6. 71.
and one of you is a Devil, and he meant Judas: who by living in the breach of
the Commandments of God, became a Devil. Saint Paul says, Give not place to
the Devil: He Ephesians. 4. 27.
that stole, let him now not steal. He that does not love God with all his
heart, does not steal from men, but does steal from God the love and respect
which is due unto his divine Majesty: whereupon Saint John says, He that
commits sin, is of the Devil, 1. Io. 3. 8.
because the Devil sins from the beginning: For this appeared the Son of
God, that he might dissolve the works of the Devil; which are the the
violating of the Commandments of God. Again, In this are the Children of God
manifest, and the Children 1. Io. 3. 10.
of the Devil; Every one that is not just, is not of God, and he that loves
not his brother, is not of God, because he fulfilleth not the law; for all the
Law is fulfilled in one word, Thou Gal. 5. 14.
shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Thirdly, the Devil dwells in them, as in his house, and home; as witnesses
our Savior, saying; And when Mat. 12.
an unclean Spirit shall go out of a man, he walks through dry places
(mortified men) seeking rest, but finds not. Then he says, I will return
into my house whence I came out; and coming, he finds it vacant (of good
works) Then goes he, and takes with him seven other Spirits, more wicked then
himself, and they enter in, and dwell there. Again, of Judas Io. 13. 26.
it is said, When our Savior had dipped Bread, he gave it to Judas Iscariot,
and after the morsel, then Satan entered into him. And our Savior cast out of
Mar. 16. 9. Luke 8. 2.
Mary Magdalene seven Devils, which dwelt in her before her Conversion.

Thou must not imagine, that all those who have the Devil dwelling in them,
are sensibly Lunatike, and Mad: neither Mary Magdalene, nor Judas, were
sensibly Mad; but had the Devil dwelling in them vnsensibly, and secretly,
keeping and possessing their souls, as his right. Those who are sensibly
Lunatike and Mad, are generally of the two, the least possessed by the Devil:
for that such as are sensibly Lunatike, may be possessed only in body (to do
outward foolish corporal actions) and not be possessed in soul, to give free
consent of heart to what they do; whereas, the other, who live in breach of
the Commandments of God, are possessed in spirit, with a spiritual frenzy,
giddiness, and madness, in spiritual things, to the perdition of their own
souls and many others, and to the committing of grievous sins, by the union
of their spirits, and free consent of mind, to the desires of the Devil,
though it be neither sensible to themselves, nor others.

Fourthly, the Devil is their Master in spiritual things; insomuch, as they
must do, for the most part, what he will: for they being void of inherent
grace, and of the assistance of the holy Ghost, Which will Wis. 1. 4.
not enter into a malicious soul, nor dwell in a body subject to sin; for
what agreement 2. Cor. 6.
is there with Christ and Belial? and having none other strength or force to
resist him, dwelling in them, more then their natural forces, he obtains of
them, for the most part, what he will: according to the words of our Lord, You
are of your Father Io. 8. 44.
the Devil, and the desires of your Father you will do. What the Devil
suggesteth unto them, that they will do, being obedient unto him, as sons to
their Father; and so he calls their hearts his house, saying, I will return
into my Mat. 12. 46.
house: his house, and home; where, as a Master, he commands, and as
captives, they obey.

Such as resist truth, says Saint Paul, are entangled in the snares of the
Devil, Tim. 2. 25.
of whom they are held captive Ps. 118.
at his will; and the Law of God is truth. So, by resisting the Law of God, and
not keeping his Commandments, they become slaves and captives of the Devil:
so thou must not marvel, that these (who affirm it, to be impossible to keep
the Commandments of God, or that the keeping of them is not absolutely
necessary to Salvation) do Teach and Preach, in effect and deeds, that God
Almighty is forsworn, by suffering his Church to decay, and become invisible,
for many hundredth years together, contrary to his Oaths; and that now after
1500. years, they are sent from Heaven to Preach the Gospel, before not
known unto the World, and such like follies as these. For the Devil, as our
Savior says, dwelling in them, as in his house and home, holds them (as S.
Paul says) captives at his will; that they must say what he will, and obey him
as his slaves and captives. 2. Pet. 2. 19.
For wherewithal a man is overcome (says S. Peter) of that he is the slave
also. Whereupon S. Paul says, Romans 6. 16.
Know you not to whom you exhibit your selves servant to obey; you are the
servants of him whom you obey, whether it be of sin to death, or of obedience
to justice.

Fifthly, the Devil not only causes them to do what he will, as his captives
and slaves; but also, for the most part, makes them to think and believe what
he will: as witnesses our Savior, saying, Every one that hears the Word
Mat. 13. 19
of the Kingdom, and understands not, there comes the wicked one, and
snatcheth away that which was sown in his heart.

To these who do not keep the Commandments of God, the Devil becomes so
rigorous a Master, that they must not only do what he will, but also
believe, meditate, and think what he will: so, that if either they happen to
read any pious Book, or hear any Christian Speech, Sermon, or Exhortation;
the Devil will not permit them to think upon it long: but dwelling in their
hearts, presently snatcheth it out of their memory, and fantasy, and puts
in of his own suggestions: that they can never have, for any long space, any
one good thought; but must be occupied continually in thinking upon such things
as it shall please the Devil to suggest unto them, and sow in their hearts
and souls: As further witnesses our Savior, saying; He that sows the good
Seed, Mat. 13. 37
is the Son of Man (our Savior) and the Cockle are the Children of the
wicked one, (who do the works of their Father the Devil) and the Enemy that
sowed them, is the Devil.

The Devil, according to the testimony of our Savior, has such power and
authority over those, who do not keep the Commandments of God, that he
sows in their hearts, for the most part, what he pleases; insomuch, as they
must not have a thought long remaining there, that is not of his planting and
sowing. And from hence arises their assuredness of salvation, without keeping
the Commandments of God, and the feeling of the Spirit, as they call it;
which is a sensible delight, stirred up by the Devil in the concupiscible and
inferior part of their souls: whereby he puffs them up with such swelling
pride of mind, and self-conceit of themselves, of being endued with the holy
Ghost, as that presently they contemn the judgment, authority, and knowledge
of all others, as inferior to their own, and of less certainty, then is
their feeling of the spirit: Insomuch, as though you allege unto them the
Oaths of God, and Promises, and Prophecies of both Testaments, Councels,
Fathers, and experience of former Ages, nothing will prevail against their
private spirit; it tells them, that the whole Church, general Councels,
ancient Fathers, and all others, may be deceived; but they are assured, they
are not. And thus deceived by the Devil, they live in this life in a kind of
frenzy of spirit, in spiritual things; like the Devils in Hell, who being
confirmed in pride, and malice, think well of themselves, and basely of all
others.

For the sixth and last Misery of this people in this life, we put their
Blindness; which is so great, that living in all these Miseries, they cannot
see them, to have compassion of themselves: And who is more miserable, then he
that is in misery, and in danger to fall into eternal misery, and yet can
have no compassion of himself. Man, being a reasonable creature; and Sin,
and breach of the Commandments of God, being a work done, or made, against
reason; and it being a natural thing, for one contrary to destroy the other:
Hereupon it comes to pass, that those who live in breach of the
Commandments of God, become blind in their understandings, and void of the
true light of reason, and true discourse of things passed, or to come; and so,
as blind men, without discourse, or apprehension, of Dangers, Do spend their
days in sensual pleasures, and in an instant descend into Hell. The God of
this World (says 2. Cor. 4. 4.
Saint Paul) has blinded the eyes of the Infidels, that the illumination of
the Gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the Image of God, might not shine
to them. That which every one loves, he easily sees, and embraces; and
that which he loves not, though it be before him, he will fly from it, and
not see it; and being impossible for these, as they confess, to love God with
all their hearts; it is impossible for them to see or know his Truths. So our
Lord said, Io. 8. 17.
If any man will do the will of him that sent me (love God with all his heart)
he shall understand of the Doctrine, whether it be of God. Again, If any one
love me, he Io. 14. 23.
will keep my Word. Again, He that says he knows God, 1. Io. 2. 4.
and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar. Again, Every Io. 3. 20.
one that does evil, hates the Light; hates our Savior, who is (as he says)
Io. 9. 6.
the Light of the World. And what can thou expect from the haters of Light,
but Doctrine of Darkness, and Misery?

Our Savior speaking of their Miseries in the other life, says, that
receiving his Curse, they shall go into fire Mat. 25.
everlasting, which was prepared for the Devil and his Angels: that is to say,
they shall go into Hell; which is, as the Prophet Isay says, A profound Isa.
30.
and spacious room: His food is fire, and store of wood; the breath of our
Lords mouth does kindle the same, like a maine River of Brimstone: And there,
bound hands and feet, they shall lie in a Bed of Moathes, covered over with a
Couerlet of Worms, or Lice, and be delivered up into the hands of the Devils,
to pour out the wrath, vengeance, and rage of God Almighty upon them: as is
manifest by the Scriptures, saying, Mat. 22. 13.
Bind his hands and feet, and cast him into utter darkness. Again, Ps. 149.
This glory is to all his Saints, to do revenge in the Nations, chastisement
among the Peoples, to bind their Kings in Fetters, and their Nobles in Iron
Manicles. Again, Ps. 139.
Thou shall cast them down into fire: in miseries they shall not stand up.
Again, Isa. 14.
Thy Pride is drawn down into Hell, thy Carkas is fallen, the Moathe shall be
strowed under thee, and Worms shall be thy Covering: And lying thus, in this
woeful and lamentable estate, they shall be given up into the hands of Devils,
to heap yet more Torments upon them; as witnesses the holy Ghost, saying,
Eccl. 39.
There are spirits created to revenge, and in their fury, they have fortified
their Torments. When the final Day shall come, they shall pour forth the
force and rage of him that created them; Fire, Hail, Famine, Death, teeth of
Beasts, Scorpions, and Serpents. And besides these Torments, their Eyes shall
be tormented with ugly shapes of Devils, together with the horror of the Place;
wherein, as Job says, Job. 10. 21.
no order, but a perpetual horror does remain. Their Ears shall be tormented
with horrible Schrikes, Lamentations, Rorings, Curses, and Blasphemies of
Devils, and damned Souls. He loved Cursing (says Ps. 108.
the Prophet) and it shall come to him; and he would not Blessing, and it shall
be far from him: in all eternity, he shall never hear any. Their Noses
shall be tormented with stink: For sweet savor (says the Isa. 3. 24.
Prophet Isay) there shall be stink. The cursed Carkas of one damned man in
Hell, for want of charity, shall stink worse then all the carrion upon the
Earth: so imagine, if thou can, what a pestiferous stink all the carcasses
of the damned together, shall make. Their Taste shall be tormented with raging
hunger, and thirst, and yet they shall never taste so much as one drop of Water
to cool their Luc. 16.
Tongues. Their Touch, and whole body, shall be scorched with fire, and gnawne
upon by worms. Their Fantasy shall Isa. 14.
be frighted with ugly forms. Their Memory shall be afflicted with a perpetual
memory, and a continual thinking upon their miseries and torments; always so
present, as that they cannot possibly forget them, for that they are eternally
the same. Their Understandings shall be vexed with frenzy, folly, and
ignorance, according to the saying of the Prophet; Our Lord Ps. 2.
from Heaven shall laugh them to scorn. Their Wills shall be tormented with
the loss of eternal weal, and the possessing of eternal woe: And thus
confirmed in this rufull estate, without hope of ever finding any alteration,
comfort, or change, The smoke of Apo. 14.
their torments shall ascend up for ever, and ever.

And this is sufficient for to show unto thee, dear Reader, the miserable
estate of these, who live and die in the breach of the Commandments of God;
that if the love of thy own good and content do not move thee to keep them;
yet, the fear of misery, and torments, may win thee to observe them, that
thou may by one means, or other, attain unto the Ease, Rest, Repose,
Content, and Happiness, which I heartely wish unto thee.

CHAP. XV. That the Happy, Elect, and Just, and all those who shall be saved,
shall keep the Law, love God with their whole hearts, and their Neighbors as
themselves.
FIrst, it is an horror to Nature, that any man should be truly Happy, or
Content, who keeps not the whole Law, or Commandments of God: as, that a
Fornicator, Adulterer, Drunkard, Man-killer, Usurer, Extortioner, Perjured
person, or Hater of God, should be received into Heaven, or live with any
Content upon earth: for, because we see, that such as are guilty of these
crimes, and publicly profess in print, that they cannot love God with all
their hearts, or live chaste according to the Law, are not content to be styled,
or called, haters of God, Adulterers, or Fornicators; because of the
repugnance, which Nature has against the guilt of sin, and breach of the
Commandments of God: which repugnance, forces them to esteem the very style,
of being so called, as an infamous thing, and badge of unhappiness.

If the guilt of such sins were not a horror to Nature, there would be no
repugnance in such as profess, they cannot love God, or live chaste, to be
styled haters of God, fornicators, and adulterers: But they would like well of
those names, more then of others, as most agreeable to their Natures, and
correspondent to their Faith, and Religion.

And if the only styling of men, with these names, of fornicators, and haters
of God, which is but an extrinsecall denomination; be so disgustfull, that no
man, though guilty of the crime, for the good opinion, fame, and estimation,
he desires to have before men, will be content to take them for his name, and
be generally counted a fornicator, or hater of God: how much more will the ugly
guilt and crime of sin it self, be disgustfull, before men, Angels, and God
Almighty.

Whereby it is manifest to reason, that no man, living with the guilt, or
stain, of the breach of any one Commandment in his soul, can ever be
Content, or Happy, in this life, or in the other: but that the Happy, Just, and
Elect, shall keep the Commandments of God, love him with all their hearts,
and their Neighbors as themselves.

And with this reason agrees the consent of both the Old, and New Testament,
saying, Our Lord Deuteronomy. 31. 6.
thy God will Circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy Seed, that thou
may love our Lord thy God in all thy heart, and in all thy soul, that thou
may live. Again, Ezekiel. 11. 19.
And I will give them one heart, and will give a new spirit in their bowels,
and I will take away the stony heart out of their flesh, and give them a
fleshy heart, that they may walk in my Precepts, and keep my Judgments, and
do them; and they may be my People, and I may be their God. Again, This
Ier. 31. 33.
shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, After these
days, (says our Lord) I will give my Law in their Bowels, and in their hearts
I will write it: And I will be Heb. 8. 10.
their God, and they shall be my People. And, Saint Heb. 10. 15.
Paul making mention of this Prophecy, affirms, that the foresaid words of
Jeremy are to be verified upon Christians, saying; Our Lord has obtained a
better Mystery, (then Moses) by so much as he is Mediator of a better
Testament, which is established in better promises. For if the former had been
void of fault, there should not certainly a place of a second been sought:
for blaming them, he says; Behold, the days shall come, says our Lord, and I
will consummate upon the house of Israel, and upon the house of Judah, a new
Testament. For this is the Testament which I will dispose to the house of
Israel, after these days, says our Lord, giving my Laws in their mind, and
in their heart will I subscribe them; and I will be their God, and they shall
be my people. Whereupon the Prophet David says: The mouth of the Ps. 36. 30.
just shall meditate wisdom, and his tongue shall speak judgment. The law
of God is in his heart: and his steps shall not be supplanted. Again, The
Justice Ps. 102. 17.
of our Lord, is upon the Childrens Children, to them that keep his Testament,
and are mindful of his Commandments, to do them.

The Prophet Isay speaking of the estate of our Catholic Church to come,
says, All thy Children, taught of our Isa. 54. 13.
Lord, and a multitude of peace to thy Children, and in Justice thou shall be
founded, in keeping the law which is just, justified Ps. 18.
in it self: Whereupon our Lord says; That he came not to break the Law, but
to Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
fulfill it, and give grace unto every one, to love God with all their hearts,
and their Neighbors as themselves; without the which no man can be saved: as
witnesses our Savior, saying, If thou will enter into life, keep the
Commandments. Again, He that does the will of my Father, Luc. 7. 21.
which is in Heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Again,
Whosoever shall do the will of my Father that is in Heaven, he is my brother,
and sister, and mother: For this 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5.
is the will of God, your sanctification, that you abstain from fornication,
that every one may know to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor,
not in the passion of lust, as also the Gentiles that know not God; and that no
man ouergoe nor circumuent his brother in business, because our Lord is the
Revenger.

And according to this, Saint Aug. de fide ad Petrum.
Augustine says, Hold it most firmly, and doubt not any ways, that not all
which are baptized within the Catholic Church, shall receive life everlasting,
but they which being baptized, live well, that is, which have abstained from
the vices and desires of the flesh: For the kingdom of Heaven, as faithless
Heretics, and Schismatikes, shall not have; so sinful Catholics cannot
possess.

And our Savior praying for us, says, And not for the Io. 17. 20.
Apostles only do I pray, but for them also, that by their word shall believe
in me; that they all may be one as thou Father in me, and I in thee; that they
also in us may be one (by Charity) that the world may believe, that thou
did send me, to fulfill the Promises, which say, This Ezekiel. 11.
shall be the Covenant I will make with the house of Israel: After these days,
says our Lord, I will Deuteronomy. 30. Ier. 31. Heb. 10.
give my Law in their bowels, and in their hears I will write it, etc. and so
concludes his prayer, saying; I will, that the love Io. 17. 26.
wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them.

Whereby is manifest, that the Elect, and all those who shall be saved, shall
keep the Law, love God Almighty with their whole hearts, and their Neighbors
as themselves.

CHAP. XVI. What it is to be content and happy, and how Content, and
Happiness, consists in loving God Almighty with all our hearts, and our
Neighbor, for Gods sake, as our selves.
WE see by experience, that then every one is well pleased, when he has that
which he loves, and loves that which he ought. Of all the affections in the
soul, Love is the strongest; insomuch, as Love is said to be Cant. 8.
as strong as Death; and Jealousy, or fear, to lose that which we love, is
said to be as hard as Hell: every one being so loath to part from that which he
loves, that of all pains it is the greatest. So that in Loves motion, are
satisfied and filled all the other affections of our souls: for who is
delighted, but in that which he loves? or who hates, flies, or is
sorrowful, but for some evil, which may separate him from the good he loves?
or who hops, or despaireth, but in the difficulty he finds in obtaining
the good he loves? or who fears, dares, or is angry, but at the evil
which opposes it self to the good he desires? so that in Loves motions are
complete all our happiness, and affections. If a man shall Cant. 8.
give all the substance of his house for love, as nothing he will despise it.
He is violently carried, whom love drives; and he was never poor, or
discontent, that found what he desired: and all so earnestly desire that which
they love, as ask of any one whosoever, what is that which has greatest force
with him? and he will answer, his love, and pleasure: Yet all the pleasures
which a man can take, are in some special, good, that is, honest, profitable,
and delightful; for he that desires that which is dishonest, is ashamed; he
that desires that which is not profitable, loses; and he that desires that
which proves not delightful, repents; and he that obtains that which is
honest, and yet has not in it all honesty, is defective; and he that
obtains that which is profitable, yet has not all the profit that he is
capable of to receive, is still poor; and he that has that which delights
him, and yet not all delights, wants: whereby we gather, that the good which
may give us complete content, may be of all things honest, the most honest; of
all things profitable, the most profitable; and of all things delightful, the
most pleasing: and yet one it must needs be; for if in one thing I should love
honesty, and in another, profit, I should be divided; and division weakeneth
love, breaks affection, and brings affliction. Again, this one thing must
be every where, and in all places present unto me; otherwise I could not
always, and in all places, be present unto it, and happy.

Whereupon I answer, that according to the light of natural reason, Content
does not only consist in Love, but in loving one thing, which has in it, all
honesty, profit, and pleasure, and all other things for it; and that one
thing is to be every where, and in all places, which is, God Almighty, call it
what you will, This is my God, and Exodus 15. 2.
I will glorify him; the God of my Fathers, and I will exalt him; who is most
high, most sweet, most potent, most merciful, most just, most secret, most
present, most strong, most incomprehensible, most wise, most beautiful, most
happy; of infinite Honesty, Wisdom, Beauty, Content, and Happiness: who
gives all that any has, and yet is never the poorer; and accepts what is
given him, and yet is never the richer: in loving him, and all other things for
him, consists all our Ease, Rest, Repose, Content, and Happiness.

O deceived sons of Men! you seek Ease, Rest, and Content in the Earth, and
it is in your inward souls: turn, sinners, into your hearts, and there you
shall find it; it is within you, and you are without your selves; it is
present to you, and you are absent to it; it is before your faces, and you put
your selves upon your backs; you seek for it without, and it is within your
hearts: as witnesses the Prophet David, Ps. 72.
saying, God of my heart, and God my portion for ever; and in all places, more
present to you, then you are to your selves: For in him Act. 17. 28.
we live, and move, and be.

This is thy Rest, Repose, Content, and Happiness, The Mat. 6. 33.
kingdom of Heaven, the justice of our Lord, to love thy God Mat. ^2 37.
from thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul* with thy whole mind, and thy
Neighbor as thy self. On these two Commandments Mat. 22. 38.
(as our Lord says) do depend the whole Law and the Prophets; this is the
Mirth, Joy, Peace, and Content, which is not given to the wicked, but to such
as serve God gratis, whose Joy and Content he is.

This is happy life, O Lord, to Au. li. Con. 10. ca. 22.
rejoice in thee, of thee, for thee; this is it, and other there is none. O all
ye that thirst, come to the Isa. 55.
waters, and you that have no silver, make have, buy and eat, come buy without
silver, or without any exchange, wine, and milk: why bestow you silver, and
not for bread, Boethius li. 2. Pro. 4.
and your labor, and not for satietie. O mortal men! why seek you for your
happiness abroad, which is placed within your selves? Hearing, hear you me,
Isa. 55.
and eat that which is good, and your souls shall be delighted with
fatness; with content upon Earth, and happiness for all eternity in Heaven.
Blessed is the man whose will Ps. 1.
is in the Law of our Lord, and in his Law shall meditate day and night; all
things whatsoever he shall do, shall prosper. To them that love God, all Romans
8. 28.
things cooperate unto good, to such as according to purpose, are called to be
Saints. Love thou God Almighty with thy whole heart, and thy Neighbor for
Gods sake, as thy self, and all things will be pleasing, all things
delightful, all things profitable, all things that to thee, which thou
would desire, or wish in Charity, or the love of God, and our Neighbor, is
satisfied, and filled all our affections. Charity Col. 3. 14.
is the bond of perfection, which comprehends in it all other virtues.
Charity 1. Cor. 13. 4.
is patient, is benign; Charity enuieth not, deals not peruersly; is not
puffed up, is not ambitious* seeks not her own, is not provoked to anger,
thinks no evil, reioiceth not upon iniquity; but reioiceth with the truth,
suffers all things, believes all things. Charity 1. Tim. 4. 8.
never falls away, is profitable to all things, having promise of the life
that now is, and of that to come.

Whereupon, Saint Augustine says, The Apostle Paul, Tract. 8. in Joan. initio.
when against the works of the flesh he would commend the fruits of the
spirit, put Charity as head, saying, the fruits of the spirit is Charity, and
then puts the rest in order, as rising from this head, and bound to it;
which are, Joy, Peace, Longanimitie, Benignity, Goodness, Faith, Mildness,
Continence, Chastity. Which the Saint showing to be true, by experience,
adds, For who does well rejoice, but he who loves some good wherein he may
rejoice? who has any true friendship or peace with any, but with him whom he
sincerely loves? who death long persevere in doing good works, unless he be
hot in loving? who is benign, but he that loves those whom he may help? who
is good, unless he be made by loving? who is faithful to salvation, but by
that faith which works by love? who is courageously meek, but whom love does
moderate? who does abstain from that which may make him filthy, but he that
loves something, by which he may be honested? Worthily therefore does our
good Master so often commend Love, as though it were only to be commended;
without the which, other goods can nothing profit us, and which cannot be had
without other goods, wherewith a man is to be made good: so Saint Augustine.

And according to these words of Saint Augustine, are the words of Saint Paul,
saying, Circumcision is nothing, and Prepuce is nothing, 1. Cor. 7. 19.
but the observation of the Commandments of God. Again, In Christ Jesus,
neither Gal. 5. 5.
Circumcision avails ought, nor Prepuce, but Faith that works by Charity.
Again, These. 3. 12.
Our Lord multiply you, and make your Charity abound one toward another, and
toward all men, as we also in you, to confirm your hearts without blame, in
holiness, before God, and our Father, in the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with all his Saints: Who, when he shall come to Judgment, if we will believe
himself, shall condemn to everlasting pains all those who wanted Charity
toward their Neighbors, and have broken this Precept, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. Jews, Gentiles, and Heretics, who do not believe the
Oaths of God, and the Faith planted by our Lord, are already Ioh. 3. 18.
judged, because they do not believe in the Name of the only Son of God:
And shall arise only to receive their final doom, and damnation, with such
Catholics as had Faith, but wanted Charity, To feed Mat. 25.
the hungry, give drink to the thirsty, harbor the stranger, cover the
naked, visit the sick, etc. These (for all their faith, if we will believe the
Judge himself) shall go into punishment everlasting, which was prepared for
the Devil and his Angels: But the Just, such as feed the hungry, give drink
to the thirsty, etc. shall go into life everlasting; according to the
Prophecies, Our Lord Ps. 144.
keeps all that love him, and he will destroy all sinners. Whereupon S. Paul
says, That the 1. Tim. 1. 5.
end of the Precept is Charity, from a pure Heart, and a good Conscience, and
a Faith not fained. From a pure Heart; according to the words of our Lord,
Happy are the clean of Mat. 5. 8.
heart, for they shall see God: and a good Conscience; according to the words
of S. Peter, With modesty, and fear, 1. Pet. 3. 15.
having a good Conscience; that in that which they speak evil of you, they
may be confounded, which calumniate your good conversation in Christ: A Faith
not fained; not such a Faith as Protestants have: who feign, that they are
assured to be saved, without keeping the Commandments of God; when neither
the Apostles, nor Prophets, make any mention of any such thing: but a Faith
founded upon the Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the Ephe. 2. 20.
highest corner Stone; A Faith, which does establish the Law; Romans 3. 31.
a Faith conjoined to a good Conscience: according to the words of S. Paul,
Having Faith 1. Tim. 1. 19.
and a good Conscience; which certain repelling, have made shipwreck about
the Faith.

Saint Augustine speaking of this definition of Charity, says, Charity is
our fruit; Tract. 8. in Joan.
which the Apostle defines, of a pure Heart, and a good Conscience, and a
Faith not fained: by this we love one another, by this we love God; neither
should we love one another with true love, but by loving God: For every one
does love his Neighbor as himself, if he love God; for if he do not love
God, he does not love himself.

Since all Content and Happiness consists in loving of God, and all other
things for God; he depriueth himself of all true good and content, who does
not love God with all his heart: as in another place, the said Saint further
confesses, saying; Let us hear De mo^ib. Ecc. Catho.
O Christ, what end (or rest) of goods thou prescribest unto us, that is
without all controversy, the end, or rest; to which thou command us to
incline unto with all love. Thou say, thou shall love the Lord thy God from
thy whole Mat. 22. 37.
heart, and with thy whole soul, and with thy whole mind. Thither we are
altogether to tend; to that all our Counsels are to be referred; the chiefest
of all good, God is unto us. God is to us the chiefest good; neither are we to
remain lower, nor yet to seek any thing beyond him. The one is dangerous, and
the other is nothing. The following of God, is the desire of Happiness; and
the attaining God, Happiness it self: and we follow him, by loving him; and
attain to him, when we are not altogether made that which he is; but adorned
with his virtue, and sanctity, we are near unto him, and touch him after a
wonderful and understanding manner.

Again, For what other thing Aug. de morib. Ecc. Catho.
should be the chiefest good of Man, but that, to which to cleave unto, makes
most happy: and that is only God; to whom, verily, we cannot cleave unto* but
by Love and Charity. And if Virtue does lead us to happy life; I would
affirm, Virtue to be nothing else, but the casting of all our love upon God.
And therefore I will not doubt, to define these four (Cardinal) Virtues after
this manner: That Temperance should be Love, giving it self wholly to him
that is beloved; Fortitude to be Love, easily suffering or enduring all things
for the thing beloved; Justice to be Love, serving only the beloved, and
therefore rightly ruling; Prudence to be Love, wittily separating and
discerning those things wherewith it is helped, from those by whom it is
hindered. But we say, that this love is not of what thing soever, but of God,
that is to say, of the chiefest Good, chiefest Wisdom, chiefest Concord:
Wherefore we may also, after this manner, define these four (Cardinal)
Virtues, and say, That Temperance is Love, preserving it self whole and
unspotted to God; Fortitude to be Love, patiently suffering all things for God;
Justice to be Love, only serving God, and for his sake, well governing other
things which are under his charge; Prudence to be Love, well discerning these
things wherewithal it is helped into God, from these by which it may be
hindered.

Again, Charity is the most Aug. de Not. et gra. ca. 42. ibi. ca. 70.
true, the most full, and most perfect Justice; imperfect Charity is imperfect
Justice, increased Charity is increased Justice, perfect Charity is perfect
Justice: but we understand Charity from a pure Heart, and a good Conscience,
and a Faith not fained; which then is the most perfect that it can be in this
life, when for the love of it, life is despised. So Saint Augustine.

Whereupon the Council of Trent, Sess. 6. ca. 7. says, Although none can be
just, but to whom the mercies of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ are
communicated; that yet is done by the justification of the wicked, whiles by
the merit of his most holy Passion, the Charity of God, by the holy Ghost, is
poured into the hearts of them who are justified, and does inhere in them.
Whereupon, in Justification, with remission of sins, a man does receive all
these, infused together, by Jesus Christ; to whom he is ingraffed by Faith,
Hope, and Charity: For Faith, unless Hope be added unto it, and Charity,
neither does perfectly unite with Christ, neither does it make a living Member
of his Body. And according to this, are the words of S. Paul, saying of Romans
13. 10.
Love, That it is the fullness of the Law; Divine Love, or Charity,
comprehends in it all other Virtues, fulfilleth the whole Law, or
Commandments of God. If there be Romans 13.
any other Commandment, it is comprehended in this word, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self: The love of thy Neighbor works no evil. So Saint 1.
Ioh. 3 10.
John says, Every one that is not just (that keeps not the Commandments) is
not of God; and he that loves not his Brother: because this is the
Annunciation, which you have heard, from the beginning, That you love one
another. Again, Ioh. 13. 35.
In this all men shall know that you are my Disciples, if you have love one to
another. Whereupon Saint Augustine says, In 1. Ep. Ioa. tract. 5.
Therefore Love only discerns between the sons of God, and the sons of
the Devil: All sign themselves with the sign of the Cross of Christ; all
answer, Amen; all sing, Alleluia; all are Baptized; all come to the Church, and
build the walls of Churches. The sons of God are not discerned from the
sons of the Devil, but by Charity. Those who have charity, are borne of
God; those who have not charity, are not borne of God. Have a great Judgment,
have a great Discretion, or have what thou will, if this thou have not, the
other do nothing profit thee. Whereupon the Prophet David says, Blessed are
Ps. 118. 1.
the immaculate in the way, who walk in the Law of our Lord; and love God with
all their hearts, and their Neighbors for Gods sake, as themselves: Blessed
are they that search his Ps. 118. 2.
testimonies, that seek after him with all their hearts; for they shall be
happy upon Earth; and eternally blessed in Heaven: according to the words of
our Savior, saying, Blessed Mat. 5. 3. Mat. 19. 29.
are the poor in spirit; such as have left all things for the love of God:
Blessed are the Mat. 11. 2^.
meek; such as for his love, learn meekness of him: Blessed are they that
mourn; for that they have offended God, and broken his Law: Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after Justice; the keeping of the Law: Blessed are the
merciful; who feed the Hungry, give drink to the Thirsty, cloathe the
Naked, etc. Blessed are the clean of heart; such as have Charity: which S.
Paul defines to be, of a pure Heart, a good Conscience, and Faith not fained.
Blessed are the Peacemakers; such as teach men, to love their Neighbors as
themselves; thereby to take away all Suites, and Controversies: no man
commencing a Suit against himself. Blessed are they that suffer persecution
for Justice; out of their loves to God, defending his Honor, the fulfilling of
his Oaths, and seeking inuiolably to keep his Commandments.

Whereupon we conclude, that in the loving of God Almighty, with our whole
hearts, and with our whole souls, and with our whole minds, and our Neighbor
(for Gods sake) as our selves; consists all our Ease, Rest, Repose, Content,
and Happiness. So God grant thee (dear Reader) abundance of Charity toward
God and man, that thou may be abundantly happy.

CHAP. XVII. Of the temporal Blessing, and Contentments, which such enjoy, as
love God with their whole hearts, and their neighbor for Gods sake, as
themselves.
Having established our Doctrine, of Content and Happiness, and sufficiently
showed, that it consists in Charity, from a pure Heart, and a good
Conscience, and a Faith not fained, which comprehends in it, all other
virtues; and also having showed thee, how thou may become charitable: now it
rests to set down, the Blessings, Repose, and Happiness, which we may by
Gods grace, attain unto, by the practice of this Doctrine, The love of God
with all our hearts, and our neighbor for Gods sake, as our selves. And first,
it is necessary to speak of temporal blessings, and contentments; and after,
of spiritual, and eternal.

The practice of this our Doctrine (of loving God with all our hearts, and our
neighbors for Gods sake, as our selves) yields such abundance of temporal
Happiness, and Content, as that it takes away all the causes of temporal
discontent, and miseries, from amongst men, and planteth in their places, all
temporal Happiness, and Contentments: for supposed, that this our Doctrine
were practiced amongst men, and that every one would love God with all his
heart, and his neighbor for God, as himself; first, it would take away all
Usury, Theft, Murder, Fornication, Adultery, Suits in Law, Sects,
Controversies, Rebellions, Conspiracies, Envy, Hatred, Malice, Emulations,
Oppressions, Contentions, and whatsoever misery is in any Kingdom, State, or
Commonwealth; and all the evils which are prohibited and forbidden by Laws.
For if we did love God Almighty with all our hearts, we should be very
sorry to offend him: As we see by experience; every one has great care, not
to offend him whom he loves. So, if men loved God Almighty with all their
hearts; there would be no such sins committed, as are spoken of in the Ten
Commandments, or in any other Civil, or Common Law: According to the words
of our Savior, saying; If any love me, he Ioh. 14. 23.
will keep my Word. Again, He that loves me not, keeps Io. 14. 24.
not my words. So, establish the love of God in the hearts of men; and you
take away all Idolatry, Theft, Fornication, Adultery, Covetousness,
Extortion, Injustice, Sin, and Wickedness, forbidden by any Law: To the
verifying of the words, spoken by the Prophet Isay, saying; Justice shall be
Isa. 11. 5.
the girdle of his Loins; and Faith, the girdle of his Reins: The Wolf shall
dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie with the Kid: The Calfe, and
Lion, and Sheep, shall abide together; a little child shall lead them: The
Calfe, and the Bear, shall feed; their young ones shall rest together: And
the Lion shall eat Straw, as it were an Ox: And the Infant, from the Breast,
shall be delighted upon the hole of the Aspe: and he that is weyned, shall
thrust his hand into the hole of the Cockatrice. They shall not hurt, and they
shall not kill in all my holy Mountain; because the Earth is replenished with
the knowledge of our Lord, the love of God, and Man: for he that says, he
knows God, and keeps not his Commandments, 1. Ioh. 2. 4.
is a liar, and the truth is not in him. Whereby thou see, dear Reader, that
the practice of our Doctrine, takes away all temporal miseries, and
wretchedness, from amongst men; insomuch, as if that it were practiced, there
would be no need of Laws, nor any use of any Lawyers.

Again, supposed that every one would love his neighbor, as his second
self; then, all would relieve the poor, and every one would rejoice at
others good, and prosperity, as at his own; and all seek to advance one, and
one, all; and found a perfect Monarchy, in defense invincible; and in offense,
against the enemies of their common good, always conquerors: every one
faithfully seconding of his companion, as his second self, they would remain
invincible; and every one loving his neighbor as himself, every one would
willingly supply, to his power, his neighbors wants; and by this means they
would all live in happy and quiet temporal Content, like perfect friends,
confirmed in sociable amity; according to the Prophecies: Thy People all Isa.
60. 21.
just, for ever shall inherit the Land; the Budde of my planting, the work of
my hand to glory: The least shall be into a thousand; and the little one, into
a most strong Nation: the Lord, in the time thereof, will suddenly do it.
Again, I will make thy visitation, Isa. 60. 18.
Peace, and thy Overseers, Justice; Iniquity shall no more be heard in thy
Land, Waste, and Destruction, in thy Borders; and Salvation shall occupy thy
Walls, and Praise, thy Gates.

And this we see fulfilled, in the Christians of the Primitive Church: Of whom
it is said; The multitude Act. 4. 32.
of Believers had one Heart, and one Soul; neither did any say, that ought was
his own, of those things which he possessed: And is, even until this day,
fulfilled in all poor reformed Religious Orders, dilated over the World; who
never stand in need to use Suites, or Lawyers. And it is also fulfilled in all
Countries, more or less, accordingly, as they are Christians Catholic, or
stained with spots of Heresy.

All the temporal Blessings of Monarchies, Kingdoms, and States, are founded
upon the keeping of the Commandments of God; according to that Pact, or
Covenant, which Moses made with the people of Israel, which now we Christians
are, saying: If thou will hear Deuteronomy. 28.
the voice of our Lord thy God, that thou do and keep all his Commandments,
which I command thee this day, our Lord thy God will make thee higher then all
Nations that be on the Earth, and all those Blessings shall come upon thee, and
overtake thee; yet so, if thou hear his Precepts. Blessed shall thou be in the
City, and blessed in the Field, blessed shall be the fruit of thy Womb, and
the fruit of thy Ground, and the fruit of thy Cattle, the troops of thy
Herds, and the foulds of thy Sheep, etc. Our Lord will raise thee up unto
himself, to be a holy People, as he swear to thee, if thou keep the
Commandments of our Lord thy God, and walk in his ways. And all the people
of the Earth shall see, that the Name of our Lord is inuocated upon thee, and
they shall fear thee, etc. And our Lord will make thee the Head, and not the
Tail, and thou shall be always above, and not under; yet so, if thou will
hear the Commandments of our Lord thy God, which I commanded thee this day,
and keep and do them, etc.

Which we see to have been fulfilled, in all Ages, amongst Christian People,
Emperors, Kings, Empires, Kingdoms, and States: insomuch, as that these were
always the most renowned, happy, blessed, and fortunate Kingdoms, who most
followed the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and attended to the keeping of
the Commandments of God. As of Constantine the Great, Saint Augustine
writes, saying: Ciuit. Dei, li. 5. ca. 6.
Constantine the Emperor, not suppliant to Devils, but worshipping the true
God, received so many gifts and blessings from God, as none durst presume to
wish: This one Augustus, held, possessed, and defended the whole Roman Empire.
In administrating of War, he was just, and victorious; in vanquishing, and
repressing Tyrants, wonderful prosperous: being of great years, he died, of
sickness, and old age; his sons, Emperors, to succeed him.

Of Theodosius the elder, S. Augustine says, That he De Ciuit. Dei li. 5. ca.
26.
had wonderful success in all his affairs, because he was a pious Catholic
Emperor; that in the Battles he fought with his Enemies, their own Weapons,
Darts, and Arrows, were turned upon themselves; God Almighty fighting for him.

Of Honorius, a most Catholic Emperor, S. Augustine De Ciuit. Dei li. 5. ca.
28.
writes, That God did so fight for him, as in one Battle he slew, of the
Goths, above a hundredth thousand, and took their King, and his son,
prisoners; and not so much as one of his Army killed, or wounded.

Of Theodosius the younger, a very pious Emperor, writes Socrates, That making
Lib. 7. hist. ca. 18.
his prayers to God, while his Army skirmished with the Sarazens, a hundred
thousand of them were driven, by Angels, into the River Euphrates, and there
perished.

The same prosperity followed Iustine the elder, and Hieraclius, whilst they
were Catholic Emperors; but after they became Heretics, they never did any
thing prosperously.

And to let pass Charles the Great, Charles the fifth, and many more Catholic
Christian Kings, and Emperors; who attained to prosperous success, in their
affairs, as well in war, as in peace, by being pious Catholic Princes,
carefully seeking to keep the Commandments of God: And to speak of the
Kings and Princes of this Island.

In S. Austines time, there were seven Kings here in England: and the rest
extinguished, the Crown remained, together with the Monarchy, in the Line of
the West Saxons; who were, of all the rest, most Catholic, and pious defendors
of the keeping of the Commaundedements of God.

And if we look yet further into the estate of this Monarchy of England; we
shall find it most true, that the most flourishing times, that ever England
saw, was when it most zealously professed Catholic Religion, and piously
labored to keep the Commandments of God: as in the reign of Egbert; who
first reduced England into a Monarchy, in the time of Alfred his son; Edward
the first, and Athelstan, his son; Edmund, Edred, Edward the Confessor;
Henry the first, fourth, and fifth; to the verifying of the Promises and
Prophesies, saying: I would thou had attended to Isa. 48. 18.
my Commandments; thy Peace had been as a flood, and thy Justice as the waves
of the Sea: And thy Seed had been as the Sand, and the Stock of thy Womb,
as the gravel stones thereof: his name had not perished, neither had it been
destroyed before my face. Again, Whosoever 1. King. 3. 30.
will glorify me, I will glorify him: and they that contemn me, shall be base.

Whereupon the Prophet David says; Tribulation and Psa. 118. 143.
Distress have found me: Thy Commandments are my meditation: Thy testimonies
are equity for ever: give me understanding, and I shall live; by keeping them:
enjoying the Blessings and Promises of God; comfort, and help in all his
tribulations and necessities. Blessed are all that fear Ps. 127. 1.
our Lord, that walk in his ways; Because thou shall eat the labor of thy
hands: Blessed art thou, and it shall be well with thee; in this life, and in all
eternity: which God of his goodness grant thee, Reader.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the first spiritual Content, and Happiness, which such
enjoy, as love God with all their hearts, and keep his Commandments; which
is Beauty spiritual.
THe first spiritual Content, and Happiness, which God Almighty bestows
upon such as love him, is remission of their sins, cleansing and washing of
their souls with the water of life, and decking and adorning them with
spiritual Beauty: Let the impious forsake his way, and the unjust Isa. 55. 7.
man his cogitations, and return to our Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him; and to our God, because he is bountiful to forgive. So great are the
mercies of God Almighty, that at what time soever a sinner shall desist from
violating the Commandments of God, and return to love him with his whole
heart, he will have mercy on him, and observe with him, the faithful
mercies, which he promised to Abraham and his Seed, saying, Whosoever shall
Eze. 11. 32. 34. 37.
depart from his wicked ways, and turn unto me, I will receive him into the
Covenant; which he made with Abraham, David, and the Patriarchs, and their
Seed for ever. When Deuteronomy. 30. 1.
thou shall be turned (says Moses) with repentance of thy heart, and shall
return to our Lord, and obey his Commandments in all thy heart; our Deuteronomy.
30. 9.
Lord will turn to rejoice upon thee, in all riches, as he rejoiced in thy
Fathers; yet so, if thou hear the voice of the Lord thy God; and keep his
Precepts.

For thus says our Lord; Dissolve the bands of Impiety, Isa. 58. 6.
loose the bands that ouer-load; dismiss them free that are broken, and break
in sunder every burden. (Depart from sin, and do works of Charity.) Break
thy Bread to the hungry, and the needy, and harbourlesse, bring into thy
house; when thou shall see the naked, cover him, and despise not thy flesh:
then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thy health shall sooner
arise, and thy Justice shall go before thy face, and the glory of our Lord
shall embrace thee; with spiritual grace and favor in this life, and eternal
glory in the other: And so says, Cease to do peruersly, learn to Isa. 1. 17.
do good (to keep the Commandments) seek judgment, succor the oppressed,
judge for the fatherless, defend the widow, and come and accuse me, says our
Lord: if your sins shall be as scarlet, they shall be made white as snow; and if
they be red as vermilion, they shall be white as wool.

Presently upon the hearty conversion of a sinner from his evil ways, and
embracing the Commandments of God, and loving him with all his heart; our Lord
makes his heart pure, clean, and neat, his conscience good, and his faith not
fained: which he does by spiritual Water; according to his Word, saying: If
thou did Io. 4. 10.
know the gift of God, and who he is, that says unto thee, Give me to drink;
thou perhaps would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living
Water: He that shall drink of the Water that I will give him, shall not thirst
for ever; but the Water that I will give him, shall become a Fountain of
Water, springing up to life everlasting. Again, He that believes in me (with a
faith that works according to charity) as the Scriptures say, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living Water. Whereupon it is said, of such as
love God with all their hearts, and keep his Precepts, that they are whiter
Ier. Lam. 4. 7.
then Snow, purer then Milk, ruddier then the old Iuorie, fairer then Sapphire.
And moreover, the soul of a sinner, heartily converted to God, is made so
pure, and gracious, by Charity, that all the Saints and Angels in Heaven do
take pleasure and joy to behold it: as witnesses our Savior, saying; Luc. 15.
7.
There shall be joy in Heaven, upon one sinner that does Penance. And again,
Luc. 15. 10.
I say to you, that there shall be joy, before the Angels of God, upon one
sinner that does Penance. Neither at this must thou marvel; since a soul that
loves God, becomes, by his grace, so beautiful, as that God Almighty
takes her for his Spouse, and lives with her in chaste delights, as in his
bedchamber, house, and home; whereof we are to speak in the next Chapters.

Beauty corporal, is a proportion of the members, with a certain sweetness
of the mixture of colors.

Beauty spiritual, is a portion of virtues, with a certain sweetness of
divine splendour; which is of such excellency, that it cannot be expressed unto
thee, but by changing literal sense of words, into spiritual: so abstract
from thy senses; that thou may, in some part, understand what the Scriptures
say, of the Beauty of a soul, loving our Lord, and keeping his
Commandments, under these terms: How beautiful Cant. 4.
art thou, my Love, how beautiful art thou: Thy eyes as it were of Doves,
besides that which lies hid within thee: Thy hairs as the flocks of Goats,
which have commed up from Mount Galaad: Thy teeth as flocks of them that are
shorn, which have commed up from washing, all with twins, and there is not a
barren amongst them: Thy lips as a Scarlet Lace; and thy Speech sweet, as a
piece of Pomegranats, so are also thy cheeks, besides that which lies hid
within: Thy neck is as the Tower of David, which is built with Bulwarks, and
thousand Targuets hanging on it, all the Armor of the valiants: Thy low
breasts are low Faunes, the twinne of a Roe, which feeds among the Lillies.
Thou art all fair, O my Love, and there is not a spot in thee. So the
Scriptures; in expressing the beauty of a Soul, endued with Charity, and
loving God Almighty with all her heart. Whereupon S. Augustine says, How
shall Aug. in epist. Joan. tract. 9.
we become fair, or beautiful, but by loving him, who always is beautiful?
As much as the love of him does increase in thee, so much does thy beauty
increase, because Charity is the beauty of the soul.

And how great happiness it is, to have this beauty of soul, or cleanenesse
of heart; our Lord himself, in few words, sets it down, saying, Blessed
are the clean of heart, for they shall see God. For Mat 5.
this cause, God Almighty was incarnate, and suffered death, that he might
dissolve sin, and present us to God immaculate, and pure, that we might see
him, and enjoy him; in seeing and enjoying of whom, is consummated all our
happiness. For this (says S. John) 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
appeared the son of God, that he might dissolve the works of the Devil,
and present us to God pure and immaculate: according to the words of S. Paul,
saying; Whereas you were Col. 1. 21.
sometime alienated, and enemies in sense in evil works: yet now he has
reconciled you, in the body of his flesh, by death, to present you holy, and
immaculate, and blameless, before him. And again, Ephesians. 1. 3.
Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in
all spiritual blessings, in heavenly things in Christ, as he chose us in him,
before the constitution of the world, that we should be holy, and immaculate,
in his sight, in Charity. And yet adding, says; Christ loved the Church, and
Ephesians. ^. 15.
delivered himself for it, that he might sanctify it, cleansing it by the
Lauer of Water in the Word, that he might present to himself a glorious
Church, not having spot, or wrinckle, or any such thing; but that it may be
holy, and unspotted.

So, if it be a Content unto thee, to have and possess Beauty corporal, or
(clean Linen, soft Apparel, stately Palaces, rich Gardens) which are
nothing, but a proportion of earthly things, mixed with variety of works, or
colors; how far greater a Content and Happiness would it be to thee, to
have a pure Heart, and Soul, a good Conscience, and Faith not fained: Which,
the love of God, and keeping his Commandments, would bring thee unto; as
affirms S. Paul, saying, The end of the Precept is 1. Tim. 1. 5.
Charity, of a pure Heart, and a good Conscience, and a Faith not fained; from
the which things, certain straying, are turned into vanity of words, desirous
to be Doctors of the Law, not understanding, neither what things they speak,
nor of what they affirm: As we see, by experience, in the Solifidians of this
Age. And this, for the first spiritual Content, and Happiness, of such as
keep the Commandments.

CHAP. XIX. Of the second spiritual Content and Happiness, which such enjoy,
as love God Almighty with all their hearts, and their Neighbors as
themselves; which is, to be beloved of God Almighty.
WE see by experience, that to love, and not to enjoy, or not to be beloved
again, is painful: so having put all our Content, and Happiness, in loving
his Divine Majesty with all our hearts, and all other things for him; if we
should not be beloved of his Divine Majesty, nor enjoy him, we could not be
content, or happy.

So supposing, that thou firmly beleeuest, that God Almighty is faithful in
all his Promises, and cannot lie or deceive, but will perform whatsoever he
has promised, if there be no impediment on thy behalf; it is necessary to
show unto thee, how he has promised to love such, as love him with all their
hearts, and to make them his Children, Sons, and Coheires with our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, and endue them with his Spirit, the holy Ghost, his
gifts, and fruits, and maintain his Oath and Covenant with them, which he
spoke to Abraham and his Seed for ever. And first, for the Promises, to love
them that love him, and keep his Precepts, he says:

He that has my Commandments, Io. 14. 21.
and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me, shall be
beloved of my Father, and I will love him. Again, If any man Io. 14. 23.
love me, he will keep my Word, and my Father will love him. Again, If you
keep my Precepts, Io. 1^. 10.
you shall abide in my love, as I also have kept my Fathers Precepts, and do
abide in his love. Again, Io. 16. 27.
The Father himself loves you, because you have loved me. Again, He that
keeps 1. Io. 2. 5.
his Word; in him, in very deed, the Charity of God is perfited.

Whereby we see, that God Almighty cannot but love those, who love him with
all their hearts: and hereupon arises all these amorous terms, of chaste
love, betwixt God Almighty, and a soul that loves him; so often spoken of in
the Scriptures, and repeated in the works, and writings of the Fathers: as
Spouse, and Espouse; Kiss me with the kiss of his mouth, my love, my beloved,
my beautiful one: How beautiful art thou, my love, my sister Spouse, most
beautiful amongst women. And infinite other the like amorous terms, and kind
speeches, expressing the passages of chaste love, spiritual pleasures, and
delights, exercised between God Almighty, and a Soul, his favorite.

Whereupon S. Augustine, in his Book of Confession, calls God Almighty, His
sweet happiness, the God of his heart, God the light of his heart, the inward
bread of the mouth of his soul, and the virtue, marrying his mind, and the
bosom of the thoughts of his mind, etc. Insomuch, as all the kindnesses in
nature, and exchanges of lawful natural affections, used amongst creatures,
are but shadows, infinitely, a far off, imitating the kind passages, and
spiritual affections, between God Almighty, and a Soul, his love and
favorite; which are so great, that neither eye 1. Cor. 3. 9.
has seen, nor ear has heard, neither has it ascended into the heart of
(sensual) man, what things God has prepared for them that love him.

So thou must not marvel, though the friendship, and passages of amity, which
I write of, between God Almighty, and a Soul, that loves him with all her
heart, seem strange, and almost incredible; since such, he says they are, and
ought to be, as exceed the capacity of men: These are the works of God, and
they are marvelous in our eyes.

He that has my Commandments, Io. 14. 21.
and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me, shall be
beloved of my Father, and I will love him. And of this arises the filling
increase, or extention, of Loves motions; whereof the first is Feruor, which is
an increase of desire to our Lord beloved: whereof the Prophet David speaking,
says; My heart waxed hot within me, and in Ps. 38. 4.
my Meditation, a fire shall burn.

The second, is Languor, or languishing in love; which is an extension of
feruor to our Lord beloved; but not yet, in spirit, inioyed: and so remaining,
between extension of desire, and not inioying; little esteeming of any thing
else; sweetly languisheth after our Lord beloved: whereof the Spouse in the
Canticles speaking, says; Stay me up with Flowers, Cant. 2.
compass me about with Apples, because I languish with love.

The third, Extasis, which is a passing of the soul out of her self, that
she may be in our Lord beloved: Whereof the Prophet Jeremy speaking, says;
He shall Ierem. Lam. 3. 28.
sit solitary, and hold his peace, because he has lifted himself above
himself.

The fourth, is Liquefaction, which is a certain dilatation, or ratifying of
the heart, for the better receiving and inioying of our Lord beloved: Whereof
the Spouse speaking, says; My soul melted Cant. 5. 6.
as he spoke.

The fifth, Union, which is as it were a certain being together with our Lord
beloved; whereof the Spouse speaking, said, My beloved to me, Cant. 6. 2.
and ^ to him.

The sixth, Mutual inhesion, which is a cleaving to our Lord beloved; whereof
the Prophet speaking, says, It is Ps. 72. 28.
good for me to cleave to God.

The seventh, Penetration, which is an entering of our Lord into the bottom of
the soul, and union with all the powers; which cannot be better explicated,
then by the words of S. Paul, This is Ephesians. 5. 32.
a great Sacrament, but I speak in Christ, and the Church. The same union,
that is between Christ Jesus, and the whole Church; the same is with one
soul, his beloved: the Church as it is united with Christ, our Head, by
Charity, consisting of the just only; with whom he is so united, that they
are but one spirit: as man and wife are two in one flesh; so, He 1. Cor. 6. 16.
that cleaves to our Lord, is one spirit with him, says S. Paul.

Thou must not think, that God Almighty, in these delights, with the sons of
men, is altered, or changed; who is one and the same for ever: but that we are
changed by his grace, and favor; and so we speak of these things, according
to the changes which his grace does make in our souls, and explicate them the
best we can, by these actions of sensual love; which are, through the misery
of mankind, better known: and so, though our words sound carnal; yet if thou will understand our meaning, thou must abstract from the senses, and understand
them under spiritual conceptions. We speaking, of the love between a soul,
loving our Lord, with all her force; and our Lord rendering, by his grace, and
favor, mutual exchange of spiritual love: whereof the body, for the union
it has with the soul, has his part; at least in the two first, Feruor, and
Languor: though little in the latter; which happen, as S. Paul says, in body,
2. Cor. 12.
or out of body; I know not. The auersion of his intention was such, from the
senses of this life, in his Extasis, that he says, he knew not, whether it was
in body, or out of body: Aug. epist. 112.
That is, (says S. Augustine) whether (as it happens in vehement ecstasies)
his mind was alienated from this life into the other, the bond between it and
the body still remaining; or there was a full dissolution of his soul from his
body, as happens in complete death, he knew not.

And thou must not marvel at it: for first, the attention is so great, and the
objects so exceeding all things that this World can afford, that the admiration
drowneth all other thoughts. Secondly, he neither can, nor may, see or know
more, in vehement ecstasies, and rapts, then it pleases God Almighty to show
him.

The chiefest effect of all, or any one, of these Loves motions, is Zeal of
the honor and glory of God, and the keeping of his Commandments; and an holy
impatience, detestation, and horror of sin, as well in himself, as in
others: as is admirably to be seen in our Father Elias, the Prophet 3. Reg. 19.
David, Saint Paul, and all the Apostles, and Saints; as to our Father, our
Lord said, What do thou here, Elias? But he answered, With zeal have I
been zealous, for our Lord the God of Hosts; because the children of Israel
have forsaken thy Covenant: thy Altars they have destroyed, and thy Prophets
they have slain with the Sword, etc. And not to see these wickednesses, and
miseries; desired to die, saying: It suffices me, Lord, take my soul, for I
am not better then my Fathers. And the Prophet David, Who had 3. Reg. 15. 5.
done right in the sight of our Lord, and had not declined from all things
which he commanded him, except the matter of Vrias, the Hethite; had such a
detestation of his sin, that he says, My sin is before me always; Ps.
50. 5.
to detest, bewail, and lament it: and expressing his further sorrow, and
grief, for the said sin, says; For the voice of my Ps. 101. 6.
groaning, my bone has cleaued to my flesh; I am become as a Pelican of the
Wilderness; I am become as a night-Crow, in the house; I have watched, and am
become as a Sparrow, solitary in the house top: I did eat ashes as bread, and
mingled my drink with weeping. So great was the detestation, and sorrow, this
holy Prophet had for his sin, that he withered away, through sighing, and
groaning; fled the company of men for shame, and lived as a Crow, or Owl,
that flies only by Night; and as a Sparrow, who having lost her Mate, and
young, remains mourning all alone; and did eat ashes, as bread; and would
take no comfort, but in weeping: My tears have Ps. 41. 4.
been bread unto me, day and night; I have labored in my sighing: I will
every Night Ps. 5. 7.
wash my Bed, and will water my Couch with my tears.

And of his zeal against sin in others, he says: My zeal has made me
pine Ps. 118. 139.
away, because my enemies have forgotten thy words. Again, I saw the
Preuaricators, Ps. 118. 138.
and I pined away, because they kept not thy words. Again, Did not Ps. 138.
21.
I hate them that hate thee, O Lord, and pined away, because of thine enemies;
With perfect hatred, I did hate them: That is, he did hate their sin, and
love their persons, and seek their salvation: and in this, was so zealous,
that he would neither permit any one, who lived in the breach of the
Commandments of God, either to sit at his Table with him, or wait upon him, or
dwell in his Palace; laying: One of proud eye, and insatiable Ps. 100. 5.
heart, with him I did not eat; mine eyes are toward the faithful of the
Earth, that they may sit with me. A man that walks in the immaculate way, he
did minnister to me. He that does proudly, shall not dwell in the midst of my
house. And wishing all others to follow the same rule, says, With the Ps. 17.
16.
holy thou shall be holy, and with the innocent man, thou shall be innocent,
with the elect thou shall be elect, and with the perverse, thou shall be
perverted.

And out of his zeal of the glory and honor of God, composed the Psalms, and
prepared for the building of the Temple of God. The like example of Zeal we
may find in the Apostles, and Saints. Love cannot be idle, nor spiritual
Jealousy ever be satisfied, with laboring for God Almighty; and the more it
labors, and does, the less it esteems it has done: according to the
words of our Lord; When you have Luc. 17. 10.
done all things that are commanded you, say we are unprofitable servants.
The infinite mercies, and liberality, of God Almighty, so ouerwhelming and
drowning all their affections, in the Sea of his goodness; that they find no
pains, but in not suffering pains, and undergoing labors for his love. So
Saint Paul says; Who shall separate Romans 8. 35.
us from the Charity of Christ? Tribulation? or Distress? or Famine? or
Nakedness? or Danger? or Persecution? or the Sword? In all these things we
overcome, because of him that has loved us. Once wounded with his love,
farewell all the base pleasures, and delights, of the sons of Agar, and
estimation of the commodities, and vanities of the World. I have Phil. 3. 8.
made all things as detriment, and do esteem them as dung, that I may gain
Christ, and may be found in him; to know him, and the virtue of his
Resurrection, and the society of his Passion, configured to his death: If by
any means, I may come to the Resurrection, which is from the dead. Then, so
high an estimation of God Almighty, and of the glory of the other life,
enters into his soul, by the taste of a few drops of his grace, and favor;
that pains are turned into pleasures, and labors into delights, for his love;
and all earthly things, seem dung, base, and vile, as they are indeed, in
comparison of the enjoying God Almighty, and the attaining unto eternal life:
the force of Charity having so overcome the weakness of humane nature, that
now they live; not they, but Christ in them; Love having so drawn them out of
themselves, as that they are no more that they were, but that they love: To the
fulfilling of the Promises, and Prophecies; saying, in the person of our Lord:
I will Osce 11. 4.
pull them unto me, in the coardes of Love; in the bonds of Charity. Again,
This is the Iero. 31.
Testament, which I will make with them: After these days, Heb. 10. 15.
says our Lord, giving my Laws in their hearts, and in their minds will I
superscribe them. This is the Testament which God made with our Fathers; That
he would give us his Love, and Charity, in our hearts, and souls, and draw
and pull us unto him with coardes and chains of Love and Charity: This is it,
which our Lord promised, before his Passion, saying; If I be exalted from the
Earth, Io. 12. 32.
I will draw all things to my self. Signifying, that by his Passion he would
obtain so great Charity and Love for his Elect (who are all things; all
things being for them) That he would draw them to himself, into Heaven:
according to the saying of S. Paul, Our conversation is in Heaven; and Phil. 3.
20.
the words of our Lord, saying, For where thy treasure is, Mat. 6. 22.
there is thy heart also.

The treasure of the Saints, is our Lord Jesus in Heaven: and their hearts
being wounded with the abundance of his Love, and Charity; of them, it may
more properly be said, that they live in Heaven, then here upon Earth; for that
their hearts and affections are there, and man is said, rather to be there,
where his soul loves, then where his body lives: and according to this, our
Lord says; Father, whom thou have given Io. 17. 24.
me, I will, that where I am, they also may be with me; by grace in this life,
and glory in the other: and so says, Just Father, Io. 17. 2^.
I will, that the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in
them. This he said before his Passion, and before his Ascension: and by his
Ascension; He departed Aug. li. con. 4. ca. 12.
from our eyes, that we might return into our hearts, and find him: He
departed indeed, and yet he is here: He would not be long from us, and yet he
never left us: He is in our inward hearts, but our hearts have erred from him:
turn, sinners, into your hearts, and keep his Commandments that made you:
stand with him, and you shall stand; rest in him, and you shall find Ease and
Rest: which God of his infinite mercies, grant thee, dear Reader.

CHAP. XX. The third Content, and Happiness, which such enjoy, as love God
Almighty with their whole hearts, and their Neighbors for God, as themselves;
which is, the becoming sons of God, and coheires with our Savior.
THe next happiness of such as love God Almighty with all their hearts, is,
that they become the sons and children of God: according to the words of our
Lord, saying; Love your enemies, do Mat. 5. 44.
good to them that hate you, and pray for them that persecute and abuse you,
that you may be the children of your Father, which is in Heaven. Whereby thou
may see, how happy a thing it is, to live in persecution, and have
persecutors to love, and pray for: since God Almighty has ordained it, as a
means, for the greater increase of thy temporal and eternal Content, and
Happiness; and that, of so great a Happiness, as is to be the son of God:
And consider with thy self, what a great error it should be in thee, not to
pray daily, with hearty and sincere affection, for all such as persecute and
abuse thee; since, by doing such acts of high and perfect Charity, God
Almighty intends to advance thee to so great a dignity, as to be his son:
and with what great reason, our Lord said; Blessed are you, when they shall
revile you, and persecute you, and speak all that naught is (Felons, Traitors,
etc.) against you untruly, for my sake; be glad, and rejoice, for your reward
is very great in Heaven: so great a reward, as to be the son of God. And if
sons, heirs also; heirs Romans 8. 1and
truly of God, coheires of Christ. Again, Whosoever shall do the will of my
Father that is in Heaven, he is my brother, my sister, and mother. Such as love
God with all their hearts, do his will, and keep his Commandments; he is so
overcome with affection toward them, that he is not only content, to divide
what he has, amongst them, and communicate whatsoever he has, unto them, as
to his brothers, and sisters; but to obey them, as children do their mother.
And he went down with them, Luc. 2. 51.
and came to Nazareth, and was subject to them: and so says, If you abide in
me, and my Io. 13. 7.
words in you (that is, if you love me with all your hearts: for, God is
Charity; and he 1. Io. 4. 16.
that abides in Charity, abides in God:) You shall ask Io. 15. 7.
what thing soever you will, and it shall be done to you. Again, Ask, and you
shall receive, that Io. 16. 25.
your joy may be full. Such as love our Lord with their whole hearts, do never
ask any thing, that is good and convenient for themselves (for these two
Conditions are necessary in asking) but it is granted them. And thou may
observe, that he does not wish them to entreat, or beseech; but, Ask, Mat. 7.
7.
and it shall be given you: Verily, verily, I say to you, If you Io. 15. 7.
ask the Father any thing in my Name, he will give it you. Ask, Io. 16. 24.
and you shall receive: as if they had authority over God Almighty. And thou
must not marvel at it: If God have Romans 8.
not spared his own proper and only begotten Son, but has given him up to
death, for gaining us unto him; how can it be, that with him, he has not given
unto us all other things? Every one ^. Io. 4. 7.
that loves (says Saint John) is borne of God: not as the Women of this World
bring forth their children; who many times, after they be borne, put them to
Nurses, and then regard them no more: but with eternal Charity; which on his
part, never decays, but always remains, with such fervor, and constancy,
that before he would part from one soul, borne of him by Charity, he
professes, that he will rather abandon whole Nations. Ever since Isa. 48. 4.
thou have been gracious, and glorious in mine eyes, I have loved thee; and
for thy soul, will I give whole Nations. There is no mother so tenderly
affected toward her only son, as God Almighty is to such as love him: as he
also witnesses, saying; Can the Mother Isa. 19. 16.
forget her own Infant? Or can she not be merciful to the Child of her own
Womb? If she could, yet can I not forget or reject thee (Daughter of Sion:)
behold, I have written thee in my hands. Again, Touch not the unclean, and I
will receive you, and I will 2. Cor. 6. 17.
be a Father unto you, and you shall Ier. 31. 1.
be my Sons, and Daughters, says our Lord omnipotent. And if it be esteemed
a happiness, amongst the sons of Adam, to be borne Son and Heir to a King
of the World; where the greatest Possessions, are but pieces of Earth, and
power over mortal men, for some seven years; and afterward, God knows what
will become of their souls: when at the day of Judgment, they shall not only
give account of all their sins committed, but of all the good they have
omitted to do, and that to their eternal torment: See what 1. Io. 3. 1.
manner of Charity the Father has given us, that we should be named, and
be, the sons of God; Who has blessed us in all spiritual blessings, Ephesians.
1. 3.
in heavenly things, in Christ, as he chose us in him, before the constitution
of the World, that we should be holy and immaculate in his sight, in Charity;
Who has predestined us unto the adoption of sons, by Jesus Christ.

Whereupon, presently after his resurrection, our Savior sent this most
comfortable Embassage, to those who had left all things for his love: Go and
tell my brethren, Io. 20.
that I do ascend unto my Father, and unto your Father, unto my God; and unto
your God. By which two words of God, and Father, he expresses the happiness
of such as love him; signifying unto them, that God Almighty, of infinite
power, riches, glory, wisdom, beauty, is become so inamored of them, that
he bears them endless good will.

So God Almighty rejoicing at the Content he received, in a soul that loved
him with all his heart, says: Verily, Ephraim is an honorable Ier. 31. 20.
son to me; certainly, a delicate child: therefore are my Bowels moved with
a passionate affection toward him; pitying him, I will pity him, says our
Lord.

And this, for the third Happiness, and Content, which such enjoy, as love our
Lord with all their hearts, and their neighbors as themselves.

CHAP. XXI. Of the fourth Content, and Happiness, which such enjoy, as love
God Almighty with all their hearts, and their Neighbors as themselves; which
is, the dwelling of God Almighty in their hearts, and souls, as in his
Temple, house, and home.
SO great is the happiness of those, who fly sin, love God Almighty with
all their hearts, and keep his Commandments; that the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, the Blessed Trinity, one God, with all his Divine Attributes,
Excellencies, and Perfections, comes to dwell, by grace, and favor, in their
souls, as in his Seat, Tabernacle, Temple, and House of Content: according to
the Promises and Prophecies of the Scriptures; saying, Bear 2. Cor. 6. 14.
not the yoke with Infidels: for what participation has Justice with
Iniquity? or what Leuit. 26. 11.
society is there between light and darkness? And what agreement with Christ
and Belial? or what part has the faithful with the Infidel? and what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? For you are the Temple of the
living God. As God says, That I will dwell and walk in them, and I will be
their God, and they shall be my people.

God Almighty aduanceth those, who forsake sin and iniquity, to so high a
degree of Content and Happiness; that he electeth their souls for his Temple;
for his chiefest place of honor and glory; dedicated to the setting out of
his Magnificence, Lauds, and Praises, upon Earth: a place, where are to be
sung the Songs of Syon, Ps. 136. 3.
the Song of our Lord, in a Ps. 104. 27.
strange Land, and his wonders in the Land of Cham; for a place appropriated to
his recreation and pleasures: as God said; I will dwell and walk in them.
Again, I am come into my Garden, Cant. 5.
O my sister Spouse, I have reaped my Myrrh, with mine aromaticall spices; I
have eaten the honey comb, with my honey; I have drunk my wine with my milk:
Eat, O friends, and drink, and be inebriated my dearest, my sister Spouse is a
Garden enclosed, a Fountain sealed up. Thy Offsprings, a Paradise of
Pomegranates, with Orchard fruits, Cypres, with Spikenard, and Saffron, sweet
Cane, and Cinnamon, with all the Trees of Libanus, Mirrhe, and Aloes, with all
the chief Ointments: The Fountain of Gardens, the Well of living Waters,
which run with violence from Libanus. To the fulfilling of that which was
spoken by the Prophet Isay, saying; Our Lord therefore will comfort Sion, Isa.
5. 3.
and will comfort all the ruins thereof, and he will make her Desert, as
Delicacies, and her Wilderness, as the Garden of our Lord: Joy and gladness
shall be found in it, giving of thanks, and voice of praise. Making the soul of
such as love him with all their hearts, a kind of Paradise upon Earth: as God
Almighty said, I will dwell, and walk in them; in some sort, as he did in
Paradise, with our first Parents, Adam, and Eua; who Genesis 3. 8.
heard the voice of our Lord, walking in Paradise, at the afternoon air. To
the fulfilling of the words, spoken by the Prophet Isay, saying: They shall
Isa. 6. 11. 4.
build the Deserts from the beginning of the World: and shall erect the old
Mines; and shall repair the desolate Cities, that were discipated in
generation and generation. Whereupon our Lord says; If any man love me, he
Io. 14. 23.
will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and
will make our abode with him. Our Lord will not only dwell in the souls of
them who love him with all their hearts; but will make their hearts his house,
and home, and abiding place: Insomuch, as the souls of those who love God with
all their hearts, are a kind of Heaven here upon Earth: Our Lord said, Heaven
is my Isa. 66. 1.
Seat. Again, Our Lord has prepared his Seat in Heaven: Ps. 102. 19.
and of the souls of such as love him with all their hearts, he says, That
he will dwell, and walk, and abide in them. Whereby we see, that the souls
of such as love God Almighty with all their hearts, are, as it were, a kind of
Heaven upon Earth; where, God Almighty keeps his Court, walks, and
dwells.

As the hearts of Heretics, and those who live in breach of the Commandments
of God, are a kind of Hell, even here, upon Earth; pains, and confirmation
in malice, excepted: So, those who love God with all their hearts, keep his
Commandments, and seek to please him in their actions, are in a kind of
Heaven, here upon Earth; glory, and confirmation in grace, excepted.

Whereupon, our Lord promises to those who live chaste, Keep his Sabboths,
choose the things that he would, and hold his Covenant; saying; I will give
unto them, in Isa. 56. 5.
my House, and within my Walls, a Place, and a Name, better then Sons, and
Daughters; an everlasting Name will I give them, which shall not perish. That
is, he will give them, to be recollected within their souls, his Temple,
wherein he dwells, and abides, as in his House; as he said before: I will
dwell in them; we 2. Cor. 6. Io. 14. 2. Cor. 6.
will make our abode with him: You are the Temple of the living God. Whereupon
the Prophet David, speaking of his being recollected within his Soul, in his
Meditations, says: These things have Ps, 41. 5.
I remembered, and have poured out my soul in me, because I shall pass into
the place of a marvelous Tabernacle, even to the house of God. So, in like
manner, S. Augustine says, Our Aug. con. li. 12. ca. 31.
Lord is high, and the humble of heart are his house. Again, If we live holy,
and justly, whatsoever Aug. ser. 252. de tempore.
is done in Temples made with hands, the same is wholly fulfilled in us, by
spiritual Building. Whereupon Saint Paul says, Christ as the Son (is) Heb.
3. 6.
in his own house, which house are we. This is Sion, and new Jerusalem, Isa.
62.
upon Earth; the soul of him that loves God Almighty with all his heart: and
recollected within it, he has a place within the house and walls of God, his
own soul the Bedchamber of our Lord.

And he will give him a better name, then Sons and Daughters, which is his
Name Isa. 7. 14.
of Emanuel (which is, by interpretation, God with us) or the Luc. 1. 23.
Names of Gods, not by nature, but by grace, and participation, from his
Goodness: according as before it is said; I will dwell with them, we will Io.
10. 34.
make our abode with him. It is written in your Law, that I said you are Gods.
If he called them Gods, to whom the Word of God was made; those may be called
Gods, in whom God Almighty dwells, as in his Temple, house, and home.

Here Pens, and Tongues, and Thoughts, and Meditations, and Contemplation,
and whatsoever else, with excess of joyful Admiration, sweetly lose
themselves, with a happy loss of an infinite gain; and sit alone, in silent
speech, more eloquent then all the eloquence of Greeks, and Romans; sellers of
vain words: and cry out; Lord, Mat. 8. 8.
I am not worthy, that thou should enter into my Roof. Thy friends are
honored too Ps. 138. 17.
much. How beautiful are thy Ps. 83.
Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts: my soul coueteth, and faints, unto the
Courts of our Lord; my heart, and my flesh, rejoices toward the living God:
There the Sparrow has found her a House, and the Turtle a Neast for her self,
where she may lay her young. Thine Altars, O Lord of Hosts, my King, and my
God, Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, O Lord, for ever and ever they
shall praise thee. Blessed is the man, whose help is in thee; he has disposed
ascension in his heart, in the veil of tears, they shall go from virtue into
virtue, the God of Gods shall be seen in Sion. Whereof Boethius speaking, in
his third Book and tenth Verse, says.

Come hither, all ye that are bound;
Whose base and earthly minds are drowned
By such, which does them tie in cruel Chains:
Here is a Seat for men oppressed,
Here is a Port of pleasant Rest;
Here may a Wretch have refuge from his Pains.
No Gold, which Tagus Sands bestow.
Nor which on Herma's Banks does flow,
Nor precious stones, which scortched Indians get;
Can clear the sharpness of the mind:
But rather make it far more blind;
And it, in farther depth of darkness set.
For this, that sets our souls on work,
Buried in caves of Earth, does lurk:
But Heaven is guided by another Light;
Which causes us to shun the Dark:
And who this Light does truly mark,
Must needs deny, that Phoebus beams are bright.
CHAP. XXII. Of the fifth Content, and Happiness, which such enjoy, as love
God Almighty with all their hearts, and their Neighbors as themselves; which
is, the finding, knowing, and seeing of God Almighty in this life: not as he
is in his Essence; for so no man can see him, and live: but as the Saints say,
in the disposition of a visible matter; saving the vision of his Divine
Essence, for the glory of the other life.
HE that has my Commandments, Io. 14. 21.
and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and I will Io. 14. 9.
love him, and will manifest my self to him; and he that sees me, sees also
my Father. God Almighty will not only dwell and abide in his heart and soul,
that loves him with all his heart; but also will manifest himself unto him:
and thereby give him the greatest Content, Rest, and Happiness, that he is
capable to receive in this life; the seeing of God, or, God Almighty
manifesting himself unto him: not according to his Divine Essence; for so, man
is not capable of seeing his Divine Majesty, and live: but in the disposition
of a visible matter, saving his inuisibilitie; or, which is all one, by taking
that likeness which his Will has chosen, and not his Nature formed: as
affirms S. Ambrose, in Luc. ca. 1. S. Augustine, in his Epistle de videndo
Deo; S. Gregor. Nazia. cited there by S. Augustine; S. Athanasius, quaestio 12.
S. Hierome, de verb. Isa. vid. Dominum; S. Chrysostom, Hom. 4. de Dei Natura;
That he may walk by faith, and not by sight, 2. Cor. 5.
or happy Vision.

Moses, the Patriarks, Prophets, and Saints, did see God in this life, as the
Scriptures say; but not as he is in his Essence, or Divine Nature; for so, No
man has seen God Io. 1. 18.
at any time; nor shall see God, and Exo. 33. 20.
live: but under the disposition of a visible matter, saving his inuisibilitie.
Moses conuersing with God face to face, as a man is wont to speak to his Exo.
33.
friend, said unto him, Show me thy glory; or, as S. Augustine In Epist. de
videndo Dei.
translateth, Show me thy self: and our Lord answered, Thou can not see my
face (or Divine Nature) for man shall not see me, and live. Whereupon, our
Lord, to satisfy the desire of Moses, showed himself yet more manifestly to
Moses; but still, under the disposition of a visible matter; saving his
inuisibilitie, by taking that likeness which his Will had chosen, and not his
Nature formed: and so says to Moses; Behold, there is a place with Exo. 33.
21.
me, and thou shall stand upon the Rock, and when my Glory shall pass, I
will set thee in a hole of the Rock, and protect thee with my right hand,
until I pass; and I will take away my hand, and thou shall see my back parts.

In like manner, our Lord showed himself in the disposition of a visible
matter, saving his inuisibilitie, to the rest of the Saints, and Prophets: as
to our Father Elias, 3. Reg. 11.
in the whistling of a gentle Wind: To the Prophet Isay, like a Isa. 6.
man sitting upon a high Throne, and elevated; his Face and Feet covered with
the Wings of Seraphins: To the Apostles, and Saints of the Act. 2.
Primitive Church, the holy Ghost appeared, in Tongues, as it were of fire.
And S. John in Apo. 4. et 5. et 6.
the Apocalypse, often makes mention, to have seen God sitting upon a Throne.
And S. Augustine affirms, That Conf. li. 11. c. 8.
wheresoever he did look, he did see God, saying; How comes it to pass,
my Lord God, that wheresoever I I look, I see thee: but how I should declare,
or make others understand it, I know not? unless it be, because all that does
begin to be, and does cease to be, does then begin to be, and end, when it
is known, that it ought to begin or end with eternal reason. So the Prophet
David did see Ps. 15. 8.
God always: according to his words, saying; I foresaw our Lord in my sight
always: not with the eyes of his body, which daily decay; but with the eye of
his heart; which was renewed from day to 2. Cor. 4. 16.
day: according to the words of S. Paul, saying; God, that 2. Cor. 4. 6.
commanded Light to shine in darkness, he has shined in our hearts, to the
illumination of the knowledge of the glory of God. So our Savior says,
Blessed Mat. 5. 8.
are the clean of heart, for they shall see God: And Saint Paul Heb. 12. 14.
says, Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which, no man shall
see God. Whereupon Saint Augustine says, That Aug. ep. 111.
the wicked, though they shall rise in the Day of Judgment, yet they shall not
see God; Because they would not make clean their hearts, by a true Faith, that
works by Charity. For God is not seen in a Amb. in 111. ep. of S. Aug.
Place (says Saint Ambrose) but in a clean or pure heart. Whereupon Saint
John says, 1. Io. 4. 8.
He that loves not, knows not God: And Saint Paul defines 2. Tim. 1. 5.
Divine Love, or Charity, to be from a pure heart: And Saint Augustine further
Aug. ep. 111.
says, That great men truly, and most learned in the Scriptures, who have much
benefited the Church, and the studies of the faithful, as often as occasion
has been offered, have said, That the invisible God is seen inuisibly, that
is to say, by that nature, which in us, is also invisible; that is, by a pure
heart and mind. Again, Because that according Aug. ep. 112.
to the custom of speech, bodies are said to be visible; therefore, God is
said to be invisible, least he should seem to be a body: and not because he
does defraud clean hearts of the contemplation of his substance; seeing this
great and high reward is promised to the adorers and lovers of God. So, Saint
Augustine.

God Almighty, who is in all places, and every where present, is invisible to
the eyes of the body, and visible to the pure and clean of heart; yet not so
visible to the clean of heart in this life, as that they shall see him as he
is in his essence, or divine nature, or as he inhabiteth Light 1. Tim. 6. 16.
not accessible; whom no man has seen, yea, neither can see, and Exo. 33.
live: but as S. Paul says, in 1. Cor. 13.
a dark sort, in comparison of the blessed seeing of him in the other life: or
as the Saints say; in such sort, as his Will has chosen, and not his Nature
formed: whose delights are, as he says, to be with the children of men.
Whereupon Pro. 8. 31.
S. Augustine says: What do I Li. Con. li. 10. ca. 6.
love, when I love thee, my Lord? I do not love the beauty of Bodies, nor the
glory of Time, nor the brightness of Light, nor the sweet melody of all
kind of delightful Songs, nor the pleasing smells of Flowers, and Ointments,
and Spices; not Manna, and Honey, nor Members acceptable to the embracements of
the Flesh: I do not love these, when I love my God; and yet I love a certain
Light, and a certain Voice, and a certain Odor, and a certain Meat, and a
certain Embracing, when I love my God, the Light, the Voice, the Odor, the
Meat, the embracing of my inward Man; where does shine to my Soul, that which
Place does not comprehend; and where does sound, that which Time does not take
away; and where does smell, that which a puff of Wind does not scatter; and
where does taste, that which eating does not diminish; and where does cleave,
that which satietie does not take away: This is that which I love, when I love
my God.

So great are the mercies of God Almighty, and so infinite is his love toward
them, who love him with all their hearts; that since they are not capable,
living in this life, of seeing his substance, and Divine Nature, Essence,
Deity, and Glory; he will accommodate himself so, as that they shall find,
know, and see him, as they may: and so enjoy the greatest Ease, Rest, Content,
and Happiness, that they are capable of in this life; and rest, in some sort,
satisfied, quiet, and content, as a Stone in his Centure, Fire in his Sphere,
and Air in his Region: according as in other places our Lord says; Io. 17. 3^.
This is life everlasting, that they know the only true God, and whom thou
have sent, Jesus Christ. And again, I will see you again, and your heart
shall rejoice, and your joy no man shall take from you; and in that day you
shall not ask any thing: because they had, by seeing our Lord, all that they
could desire; and all Ease, Rest, and Content, that in this life they were
capable of: so much content, and so great, that we cannot express it, but by
saying, that they had more then enough, of Rest and Content; Thy friends are
Ps. 138.
honored too much. Insomuch, as there arises, many times, a pious contention,
between our Lord, and a soul that loves him: who knowing her own
unworthiness, how unworthy she is of any such favors; desires to love him,
and show her love toward him, only for his goodness, without receiving, in
this life, such infinite rewards: and therefore, with thankfulness, and
humility (as far as resignation to his will permits) refuses the
acceptance of his great contentments, and favors. And then God Almighty
being, as it were, more overcome with these her humble proceedings, pours
them out upon her the more: for in loving her humility, and making great
account of her resignation, and desire of loving him, only for his goodness;
as upon one fit to receive greater favors, he will communicate his goodness
more abundantly unto her: and so they both rest, as it were, more then
satisfied; God Almighty, in the humility, resignation, and faithfulness of
the soul that loves him; and the soul that loves him, in the infinite
mercies of her Lord.

Thou must not think, that I put Content and Happiness in Visions,
Revelations, Gustes, Consolations, or spiritual delights; such errors be far
from me: but I put them in Charity, and divine Love, the loving of God
Almighty with all thy heart, and thy neighbor for God, as thy self; according
to the Precept: and speak of those spiritual delights, as they do fill and
satisfy Loves motions; and so both give content, and increase thy content and
happiness, by moving thee the more to love his Divine Majesty, as having
tasted of his goodness: according to the prayer of S. Paul for the Ephesians,
saying; Hearing of your Ephesians. 1. 15.
faith, that is in our Lord Jesus, and love toward all the Saints, I cease not
to give thanks for, you, making a memory of you in my prayers, That God of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, give you the spirit of Wisdom, and of
Revelation, in the knowledge of him; the eyes of your heart illuminated, that
you may know, what the hope is of his vocation, and what are the riches of his
inheritance, in the Saints.

Thou may be happy, and neither have Vision, nor Revelation, nor yet many
sensible spiritual Consolations: yet more cause there is for thee to hope,
that thou art in a happy estate, the more thou partakest of the Promises,
which God Almighty has promised to such as are happy, and love him with all
their hearts: and so says; Blessed are your Mat. 13. 16.
eyes, because they see, the Son of God; and your ears, because they hear,
God Almighty speaking, and preaching: And, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Iona,
Mat. 16. 17.
because flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee. And again he says,
Learn of me, Mat. 11. 28.
for I am meek, and humble of heart, and you shall find rest; that is,
himself: who is all the Content, and Rest, that we either shall find, or can
hope to attain unto, in this life, or in all eternity. Whereupon it is said,
Seek God, and Ps. 68. 33.
thy soul shall live: not, that thou shall be happy, by only seeing him in
this life; but by loving him: he being an infinite Good, and the chiefest Good
of all Goods, and only sufficient to satisfy thy heart with complete content.
For by seeing him, he will so pierce thy heart with his love, and wound thy
soul, and all thy affections, with the excellency of his Goodness; that thou will say with S. Paul, I esteem all things to Phil. 3. 8.
be detriment, and as dung, that I may gain Christ. Though thou were the
greatest King, Queen, Prince, or Emperor of the Earth; as great as were
Assuerus, and Ester, who reigned over the Medes, and Persians, an hundredth
twenty seven Provinces: Est. 1.
yet would thou heartily say, with Queen Ester, to our Lord; Thou know,
Est. 4. 16.
Lord, my necessity, that I abhor the sign of my pride, and glory, which
is upon my head, in the days of my ostentation, and detest it, as the cloth of
a woman, in her monthly flowers, and did never rejoice, but in thee, O Lord,
the God of Abraham.

According to this, are the many sayings of S. Augustine: For that thou, O
Lord, to him that Conf. li. 12. 15.
loves thee as much as thou command, do show thy self, and art all that
he can desire; therefore he does neither decline from thee, nor to himself.
And so says of himself, That before his conversion to the Catholic Religion;
This was all his practice, Conf. li. 9. ca. 1.
not to will that which God Almighty would he should; and to will that which
God Almighty would he should not. But after that his Free Will was called, to
subject it self under the light yoke of our Lord; and his stout shoulders,
under the burden of Jesus Christ, his Redeemer; then he says: Of a sudden
how sweet it was made to me, to want the sweetness of Trifles; and those
things which before I feared to lose, now I rejoiced in shaking them off: For
thou, the true and chiefest Sweetness, did cast them from me; thou did
cast them out of me, and did enter thy self for them, who art more sweet
then all pleasures. Again, Late have Conf. li. 10. c. 27.
I loved thee, Beauty so ancient, and so new; late have I loved thee: and
behold, thou wast within me, and I was without my self; and there I did seek
thee: and amongst these fair things which thou have made, I foulely erred.
Thou wast present to me, but I was absent from thee: and these things did
separate me far from thee; which if in thee they were not, had not been.
Thou have called, and cried, and have overcome my deafness: Thou have been
bright, and have shined, and have driven away my darkness: Thou have burned,
and I have drawn breath, and breathe out after thee; I have tasted, and I
hunger and thirst: Thou have touched me, and I have burned after thy Peace, and
Rest. He which has known Verity, has Li. 7. ca. 10.
known it; and he who has known i^, has known Eternity. Charity has
known it. O eternal Verity, and true Charity, and dear Eternity! Thou art
my God, to thee I send forth sighs day and night: and when I first knew thee,
thou tookest me up, that I might see my self, as I was; and that I was not
yet, that which I would seem to be: and thou did beat the weakness of my
sight, excellently shining in me; and I trembled with love, and fear, and I
have found my self to have been far from thee, in a Country very unlike
thee: as if I should hear thy voice from above, saying; I am the Meat of
great ones, grow, and thou shall eat me. Again, What Li. 4. ca. 1.
am I, when it is well with me? but one sucking thy Milk, or one enjoying
thee, the Meat, which never corrupts. So, S. Augustine.

God Almighty in our hearts, is the Treasure hidden Man. 13. 44.
in the Field, which a man having found, did hide, and for joy thereof, went
and sold all that he had, and bought that Field. Finding once God Almighty,
farwell the world, and all his sensual pleasures. Then God forbid, that ^
should Gal. 6. 14.
glory, saving in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the World is
crucified to me, and I to it. Then unto me, to live is Christ, and to die is
gain. Phil. 1. 21.
Then thou need not wish him, go and sell all that he Mat. 19. 21.
has, and give to the poor, and follow our Lord; he will go, and do it of
himself, though he were King of the whole Globe of the Earth; and say with the
Prophet: What is to Ps. 72. 25.
me in Heaven? and besides thee, what would I upon Earth? my flesh has
fainted, and my heart, God of my heart, and God my portion for ever.

God Almighty manifesting of himself, in the hearts of these who love him, is
that precious Pearl, Which Mat. 13. 46.
the Merchant man having found, went his way, and sold all that he had, and
bought it; it being all Content. Whereupon S. Augustine says; Whatsoever Aug.
in Ps. 26.
is not God, is not sweet, and whatsoever my Lord will vouchsafe to give me,
let him take it away, and give me himself. God Almighty is all Love, and
Charity: and, If Cant. 8. 7.
a man (says the holy Ghost) shall give all the substance of his house for
Love, as nothing he will despise it.

This is the Kingdom of God upon Earth: of which our Lord speaking, says; The
Luc. 17. 21.
Kingdom of God is within you. But not every one that says, Mat. 7. 21.
Lord, Lord, shall enter into it; but he that does the will of God, which is in
it. He that loves Mat. 25.
God with all his heart, and his neighbor as himself, he shall enter Luc. 9. 60.
into the Kingdom of Heaven.

God Almighty manifesting of himself to the eyes of the hearts of these who love
him, is the light of the World: and men have Io. 9. 6.
loved the darkness, rather then the Io. 3. 19.
light: for their works were evil; even so evil, that they think it
impossible, or not necessary, to keep the Co^mandeme^ts of God. Whereupon S.
Aug. said to the Aug. li. 9. ca. 4.
dead deaf heretics of his time; O that they could see the inward eternal
Light! which I, because I had tasted, I was angry at my self, for that I could
not show it them, if they should bring unto me a heart in their own eyes,
without thee, and should say, Who will show us good things? Of this Light the
Prophet David speaking, says; The light Ps. 4. 7.
of thy countenance is signed upon us; thou have given gladness in my heart.
Again, With thee is the fountain of Ps. 35. 10.
life, and in thy light we shall see light.

This is that one thing necessary, which S. Marie Magdelen has chosen; the
best part, which shall not be taken away from her; the gracious presence of our
Lord in her heart and soul: according to the words of S. Aug. saying; Who will
give to me Li. Con. ^^.
(my Lord) that he may come into my heart, and make it drunk; that I may
forget all my evils, and embrace thee, my only good?

God Almighty manifesting of himself in the hearts of the^ who love him, is
the hidden Manna, which no man knows, but he that receives it; spoken of in
the Apocalypse, saying; He that has an ear Apo. 2. 17.
to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches: To him that
overcomes (sin) I will give him the hidden Manna, and will give him a white
Lot, and in the Lot a new Name written, which no man knows, but he that
receives. Whereupon the Prophet David says, Taste ye, and see, that Ps. 33. 9.
our Lord is sweet: and does not say, See, and Taste; because thou can not
see, comprehend, or imagine, as the Prophet says, How great is the Ps. 31. 20.
multitude of the sweetness which our Lord has hid for them that love him;
yntill thou taste it.

To have God Almighty dwelling in our souls by grace and favor, and manifest
himself unto us; is all the good, and content, that we are capable to receive
in this life. Moses said unto our Lord; Show me thy glory: and our Lord
answered; I will show thee all good: and showed unto him, himself, under the
disposition of a visible matter; as all the good that he, living, and remaining
in this life, was capable of to receive. Whereupon S. John says: And the Life
1. Io. 1. 2.
was manifested, and we have seen, and do testify, and declare unto you, the
life eternal, which was with the Father, and has appeared to us: and that
which we have seen, and have heard, we declare unto you, that you also may
have society with us, and our society may be with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ. And these things I write unto you, that you may rejoice,
and your joy may be full.

Do thou desire, dear Reader, to enjoy all the Content, Ease, Rest, and
Joy, which in this life thou art capable to have, and possess; cast out of thy
heart thy spiritual Idols, and renounce that false impious God, and wicked
Devil, and his ministers, who teach, that it is impossible to keep the
Commandments of God; and promise Ease, and Rest, and Salvation, and
Justification by Faith only: and cleave to our Lord, who created thee, and
keep his Commandments, and love him with thy whole heart, and thy neighbor
for his sake, as thy self; and thou shall most assuredly have and enjoy it:
according to the Promises, saying; When thou shall seek the Deuteronomy. 4. 29.
Lord thy God, thou shall find him: yet so, if thou seek him with all thy
heart. If you will seek him, Par. 15. 2.
you shall find; but if you forsake him, he will forsake you. And Par. 15. ^.
when they shall roturne, in their distress, to our Lord the God of Israel,
and shall seek him (says the Prophet Azarias) they shall find him: Yet so, if
they seek him with all their hearts. And Asa gathered together Par. 15. 9.
all Judah and Benjamin: and when they were come into Jerusalem, he went in,
after the manner, to establish the Covenant, that they should seek our Lord,
the God of their fathers, in all their heart, and in all their soul. And if
any man, quoth he, shall not seek our Lord, the God of Israel, let him die,
from the least to the greatest, from Man unto Woman. And they swear to our Lord
with a loud voice, in iubilation, and in noise of Trumpet, and sound of
Shaulmes, all that were in Judah, with execration: for in all their heart did
they swear, and with all their will did they seek him, and found him, and our
Lord gave them rest round about. If any Io. 14. 23.
one love me (says our Lord) he will keep my Word, and my Father will love
him, and we will come to him, and will make abode with him. Again, If you Io.
14. 14.
love me, keep my Commandments, and I will ask the Father, and he will
give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, the spirit of
Truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows
him; but you know him. And in this we 1. Io. 2. 3.
know (says Saint John) that we have known him, if we observe his
Commandments. He that says, he knows him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. He shall abide Io. 14.
17.
with you, and be in you. He that keeps his Commandments, 1. Io. 3. 24.
abides in him, and he in him.

Again, I will not leave Io. 14. 18.
you (that love me) Orphans; I will come to you: Yet a little while, and the
World sees me no more; but you see me, because I live, and you shall live (in
me.) In that Day you shall know, that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I
in you. Every one 1. Io. 3. 7.
that loves, knows God: He that loves not, knows not God, because God is
Charity.

Again, A little while, Io. 1^. 16.
and now you shall not see me: and again, a little while, and you shall see
me; because I go to the Father. They said therefore, What is this he says, A
little while; we know not what he speaks. And Jesus said, Now indeed you
have sorrow; but I will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your
joy, no man shall take from you. Ask, and you shall receive (himself into
their souls) that your joy may be full. These are the Promises of God: and (as
Saint Augustine says) Who can fear to be Conf. li. 12. c. 1.
deceived, when Truth it self does promise?

O sons of Men! How long Ps. 4.
heavy hearts? Why love you Vanity, and seek Lying? Wherefore will you still
walk Aug. Conf. li. 4. ca. 12.
hard, and painful, Ways? There is no rest, where you seek it. Seek that
you seek, but there it is not, where you seek: You seek happy life, in the
Country of Death; it is not to be found there. How will you find happy life,
where no life is? Our Life descended from hence, and took away our Death, and
has killed it, out of the abundance of his life; and thundreth out crying,
that we would return from hence unto him, into that Secret, from whence he
proceeded unto us. He departed from our eyes, that we might return into our
hearts, and find him. I seek my God in every body, Aug. upon the 41. Ps.
as well earthly, as heavenly, and I do not find him; I seek his substance
in my soul, and I find it. I have meditated the manner how to find my God,
and by those things which are made the invisible things of my God, desirous to
behold these things, which may be understood. I have poured out my soul in
me; and now there remains nothing which I may touch, but my God: For there is
the House of my God, above my soul he dwells; from thence he beholds me,
from thence he created me, from thence he governs me, from thence he
counsels me, from thence he stirs me up, from thence he calls me, from
thence he directs me, from thence he leads me, from thence he carries me
about. Thus Saint Augustine.

Whereupon Boethius, in his third Book, and eleventh Verse, says.

He that would seek the Truth with thoughts profound,
And would not stay in Ways which are not right;
He to himself must turn his inward sight,
And guide his Motions in a circled Round:
Teaching his Mind, what ever shall design,
Her self in her own treasure to possess:
She that which late lay hid in cloudinesse,
More bright, and clear, then Phoebus beams shall shine.
CHAP. XXIII. The sixth Content and Happiness which such enjoy as love God
Almighty with all their hearts, and their neighbor for God, as themselves;
are the gifts they receive from the holy Ghost dwelling in them, and the fruits
which he produces in them.
THe mercies which God Almighty shows to such as love him with all their
hearts, and their neighbors as themselves, are so infinite, that he does not
only dwell in their hearts, and souls, as in his house and home, and manifest
himself unto them; but also bestows inestimable gifts upon them, and decketh
and adorneth their souls, in this life, with his Jewels, and produces in
their hearts divine fruits; that it may be fulfilled, which was spoken by Isay
the Prophet, saying: Rejoicing, I will rejoice in our Isa. 61. 10.
Lord, and my soul shall be joyful in my God, because he has clothed me with
the garments of Salvation: and with the garment of Justice, he has compassed
me, as a Bridegroom decked with a Crown, and as a Bride adorned with her
Jewels: For as the Earth brings forth her Spring, and as the Garden shoots
forth her Seed; so shall our Lord God make Justice to spring, in the hearts of
all those who love him: according to the words of our Savior, saying; If you
love me, Io. 14. 15.
keep my Commandments, and I will ask the Father, and he will give you
another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, the spirit of Truth, he
shall abide in you, and be in you. He Io. 14. 26.
shall teach you all things, and suggest unto you all things, whatsoever I
shall say unto you: according to which words, Saint Paul says; We have 1.
Cor. 2. 12.
received, not the spirit of this World, but the spirit which is of God.
Again, If any have Romans 8. 17.
not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. Whereby we see, that the spirit
of Christ does remain in all those, who love him; by whose means, they become
wise, learned, full of counsel, strength, knowledge, piety, and fear of God:
according to the words of Isay the Prophet, saying; And Isa. 11. 2.
the spirit of our Lord shall rest upon him; the spirit of Wisdom, and
Understanding, the spirit of Counsel, and Strength, the spirit of Knowledge,
and Piety, and the spirit of the fear of our Lord shall replenish him. So
here, according to good Method, we should speak of the aforesaid gifts, or
effects, of the Spirit of Christ; the holy Ghost in us: But having occasion to
speak of them in our fourth Book; where we must treat of the interchange of
gifts, between God and Man: not to speak twice of them, we defer them
until then; and proceed to set down the fruits, which the holy Ghost does
produce in the hearts of those who love him, and keep his Commandments.

He that believes in me (says Io. 7. 38.
our Savior) as the Scriptures say, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of
living Water: and this he said, of the Spirit they should receive, which are
to believe in him: Whose fruits, or living Water, Saint Paul sets down,
saying; The fruit of the Spirit, is Gal. 5. 22.
Charity, Joy, Peace, Patience, Benignity, Goodness, Longanimitie,
Mildness, Faith, Modesty, Continency, Chastity.

These are the delicate fruits, which the Holy Ghost does produce in the
hearts of those, who love him with all their hearts; by which, they are made
beautiful, and happy: According to the words of Saint Paul, saying; 1. Tim.
3. 4.
For God, not by the works of Justice, which we did (of our selves, as of
our selves) but according to his great Mercy, 2. Cor. 3, 5.
he has saved us by the Lauer of Regeneration, and Renouation of the holy
Ghost, whom he has poured upon us abundantly, by Jesus Christ our Lord, that
being justified by his grace, we may be heirs, according to hope, of life
everlasting. The holy Ghost is the Tree, of which the Espouse in the Canticles
speaking, Can. 2.
says; Under his shadow, whom I desired, I sat, and his fruit was svveet
unto my throat: He brought me into the Wine-cellar, he has ordained in me,
Charity.

OF THE FIRST FRVIT OF THE Holy Ghost, which is Charity.
THe first fruit which the holy Ghost does produce in the Hearts of those who
love him, is Charity, or purity of Heart, goodness of Conscience, and a
Faith not fained: for so S. Paul and S. Augustine define Charity, saying; The
end 1. Tim. 1. Aug. tract, 8. in Io.
of the Precept is Charity, from a pure Heart, and a good Conscience, and a
Faith not fained: Whereby they do easily keep the Commandments; which
consist in Charity: and so live in a happy estate upon Earth; enjoying all
the blessings which are promised to the Charitable: which, in some part, we
have set down in the former Chapters; and more then we are able to express,
remain: for that Charity is the bond Col. 3. 14.
of perfection; and comprehends in it whatsoever is good, and of perfection:
By it we cleave to God; by it we love our Neighbors; by it we take away all
Evils, Wretchedness, and Miseries; by it we attain unto all good. Whereupon
Saint Augustine Aug. in epist. Ionn. tract. 5. S^c^. 2. q 23. ^^t 8.
says, Have Charity, and have all things. And S. Thomas affirms, Charity
to be the form of all other Virtues, by which their acts are addressed to
their last ends, and the end of all Virtues, and the Foundation, in which they
are sustained.

As all Virtues, if they be Virtues of Grace, and Favor, making us acceptable
to God, are grounded in Charity; as we have showed in the sixteenth Chapter:
so all the gifts and fruits of the Holy Ghost are founded in Charity, as
boughs, or branches in the Root: according to the words of our Lord, saying;
Whosoever shall do the Will of my Father Mat. ^^. 50.
(keep his Commandments) he is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother; he is
partaker of all Joys, Comforts, Contents, and Happiness whatsoever: For in
Christ Gal. 6. 15.
Jesus neither Circumcision avails ought, nor Prepuce, but a new Creature (a
pure Heart) and whosoever shall follow this rule, Peace upon them, ^. Tim. 1.
and Mercy; all Joys and Contentments. Whereupon our Savior says; He that
abides Io. ^5. 6.
in me, and I in him, the same bears much Fruit: And ^. Io 4. 17.
he that abides in Charity, abides in God, and God in him. And S. Paul
says; Charity 1. Cor. 13. 4.
is patient, is benign; Charity enuieth not, deals not peruersly, is not
puffed up, is not Ambitious, seeks not her own, is not provoked to anger,
thinks not evil, rejoices not upon Iniquity, but rejoices with the Truth.
Whereby is manifest, that all the rest of the Fruits of the holy Ghost are
founded in Charity. So God grant thee, dear Reader, abundance of Charity,
that thou may bear much Fruit of the holy Ghost, and be abundantly Happy,
and Content: For with the same Mat. 6. 38.
measure you do mete, it shall be measured to you again, says our Savior.

OF THE SECOND Fruit of the Holy Ghost, which is Joy.
THe second Fruit which the Holy Ghost produces in the hearts of such as love
God, is Joy; not such base joys, as have gaping hunters, when they have found
their prey; or sensual Men, in the Lute and Harp, and (...) ^0.
Timbrell, and Psalm, and Wines in their Banquets; for which cause, Hell has
dilated his Soul, and opened his Mouth without all measure, or limitation, and
the Strong, and High, and Glorious ones, shall descend into it* but Joy in our
Lord; according to the words of the blessed Virgin Mary, saying; My Spirit
has rejoiced Luke 1. 46.
in God my Savior. An exultation of the Heart and Soul in the living God;
according to the words of the Prophet David, saying: My Psalm. 83. 5.
Heart and my Flesh has rejoiced in the living God; who is all Pleasure,
Content, and Good. An inestimable Joy and content of Mind, and Spirit, to
find our Lord there; according to his Promise: Now indeed you have Io. 16. ^^.
Sorrow, but I will see you again, and your Heart shall rejoice, and your Joy
no man shall take from you: Because it shall be in their inward souls, with
God Almighty; which death will not take away, but increase: according to the
words of our Lord, saying; As my Io. 15. ^.
Father had loved me, I also have loved you; abide in my Love: If you keep my
Precepts, you shall abide in my love; as I also keep my Fathers Precepts, and
do abide in his love. These things I have spoken to you, that my Joy may be in
you, and your Joy may be filled with so great Content, that in this life you
are neither capable, nor would receive, or desire more.

Of this Joy, our Savior ^^* 17. 11.
further speaking; says: Holy Father, keep them in thy Name, whom thou have
given me, that they may be one, as also We: and these things I speak in the
World, that they may have my Joy filled in themselves.

Of this Joy, S. Augustine speaking; says: God forbid, Con. li. 10. ca. 22.
my Lord, that with what Joy soever I should rejoice, I should think my self
happy. There is a Joy which is not given to the wicked, but to such as serve
thee gratis, whose Joy thou thy self art; and that same is happy Life, to
rejoice at thee, of thee, and for thee: this is it, and other there is none.
Again, Con* li. 10. ca. 23.
Such as will not rejoice of thee, who only art happy Life, will not be
happy; for happy Life is Joy of thee, who art Truth, God mine illumination,
the health of my face, and my God.

And out of this Joy are the abundant Praises, and Joys of the Prophet David,
saying: Come, let us rejoice Ps* ^4.
to our Lord; Let us make iubilation to God our Savior. The habitation in
thee, as it I^. 8^. ^.
were of all rejoicing, Light is risen to the Just, and Joy to the right of
heart. Be glad ye Just (...) 1^.
in our Lord; and confess ye to the memory of his sanctification.

Of this Joy the Prophet A(...) (...)
writing, says; I will (...) our Lord, and will rejoice (...) my JESUS.

Of this Joy the Prophet (...).
Isay speaking, says: The joy of (...) Asses, the pastures of flocks, until
the Spirit be poured out upon us, from on high; and the Desert shall be as
Carmell, and Carmell shall be reputed for a Forest, and Judgment shall dwell
in the Wilderness; and Justice shall sit in Carmell. The Joys and
contentments of Men, before they he endued with the Spirit of God, are, as the
Prophet says, like the joys of wild Asses; all placed in eating, drinking,
sleeping, and following their carnal and sensual appetites: but after the
Holy Ghost be poured out upon them; then, they who were without Fruit, and as
such, abandoned, and forsaken, and left to the joys of wild Asses, shall be
as Carmell, or Carmelites, which is to say, knowledge of Circumcision, or a
Circumcised Lamb: and shall abandon and cast off all their wild Asses
pleasures, to become partakers of the Promises of God to our Fathers; saying:
Our Lord thy God will circumcise Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
thy heart and the heart of thy Seed, that thou may love thy Lord thy God
in all thy heart, and in all thy soul, that thou may live. Whereof S. Paul
speaking, Romans 2.
says: Circumcision of the heart in Spirit. Again, We Phi. 3.
are the Circumcision, which in Spirit serve God; and keep the Commandments.
And Carmell (the Mount from which we take our Name; and upon which, our
Fathers, Elias, Elizeus, and the sons of the Prophets, lived in
contemplation, and adoration of God in Spirit and verity) shall be so dilated
as a Forest; many giving themselves to contemplation, all over the World. And
Judgment shall dwell in contemplative Men: and Justice shall sit in Carmell;
in Carmelites, or Men having circumcised hearts, by the Spirit of God. As in
another place; the same Prophet speaking, says: Shall Isa. 22.
not yet within a little while, and in a short time, Libanus (another more
waste Mountain in Palestina) be turned into Carmell, and Carmell reputed for a
Forest: and in that day the deaf shall hear the words of the Book; and out
of the Darkness and Mist, the eyes of the blind shall see: and the meek
shall add ioyfulnesse in our Lord; and the poor men shall rejoice in the Holy
One of Israel, etc.

Again, of these Joys, Ease, and Rest, which men endued with Charity should
attain unto; the Prophet Isay further speaking, says: When Isa. 2.
thou shall pour out thy Soul to the hungry, and shall fill the afflicted
Soul, thy light shall rise up in darkness, and thy darkness shall be as
the Noonday: And our Lord will give thee Rest always, and will fill thy
Soul with brightness, and deliver thy bones; and thou shall be as a watered
Garden, and as a Fountain of Waters; whose Water shall not fail: And the
Deserts of the World shall be builded in thee. Thou shall raise up the
foundations of Generation, and Generation; and thou shall be called the builder
of the Hedges, turning the Paths into Rest. If thou turn away thy foot from
the Sabbath, from doing thy will in my Holy day, and call the Sabbath delicate,
and the Holy of our Lord glorious, and glorify him; whilst thou do not
thine own ways, and thy will be not found to speak a word: Then shall thou
be delighted upon the Lord; and I will lift thee up above the heights of the
Earth, and will feed thee with the Inheritance of JACOB thy Father; for the
Mouth of our Lord has spoken.

If the Joy of wild Asses be so highly esteemed by the Princes, and adorers of
the Earth, as that they put either all, or the most part of their content in
them; how much more are to be esteemed the Joys of the holy Ghost, which do
so far exceed all the Joys of wild Asses, and carnal pleasures of the
censuall Men of the Earth, as the Soul does the Body: The one being common to
pious Men, and Angels; the other proper to carnal Men, and Beasts.

OF THE THIRD Fruit of the Holy Ghost, which is Peace.
THe third Fruit which the holy Ghost does produce in the hearts of them that
love him, and their neighbor for him, is Peace: not such Peace as is given to
the wicked; who can find no other Rest, or Peace, but in the following, and
feeding of their inordinate appetites with sensual pleasures, like the beasts
of the Forest: But the Peace of God, which passes Phil. 4. 7.
all understanding; an Ease, Rest, Repose of heart and mind in God Almighty;
which exceeds the capacity, and understanding of all sensual men, which S.
Paul describes to be an union of our hearts, and all the understanding Phil. 4.
powers of our soul, in Christ Jesus.

Peace which was promised by the Prophet Isay, saying: When the Spirit shall be
poured Isa. ^2. 17.
out upon us, then the work of Justice shall be Peace, and the service of
Justice, Silence, and Security for ever: And my People shall sit in the
beauty of Peace, and in the Tabernacles of Confidence, and in wealthy Rest.
Resting of their Hearts and all the powers of their Soul, in Christ Jesus, as
a Stone in his Center.

Peace spoken of by the Prophet David, saying: Praise ^^. 147. ^.
thy God, O Syon, because he has strengthened the Locks of thy Gates, he has
blessed thy Children in thee, who has set thy borders Peace, and fills thee
with the fat of Corn. Again, In Peace, in the self-same, I will sleep and
rest. Whereupon, S. Augustine reading this verse after his Conversion from
Heresy, cried from the bottom of his heart: O, in Peace! O, Con. li. 9. 8.
ca. 4.
in the selfsame! O, what did he say! I will Repose and take Rest? Thou (O
Lord) art the selfsame exceedingly, who art not variable: in thee is Rest,
forgetting of all labors, for that there is no other with thee; neither are
there many more things to be had, which thou art not: But thou, O Lord, have
singularly settled me in hope. I did read, and did burn in love: Neither did I
find what I should do to the deaf dead (Heretics) amongst whom I had been
an unsavory yeller forth of infectious Doctrine, and blind against the
Letters honyed with the honey of Heaven, and lightened with thy Light. O that
they could see the inward Eternal Light! Which I, because I had tasted, I was
angry at my self, for that I could not show it them, if they should bring
unto me a heart in their own eyes, without thee, and should say, Who will show
us good things? So Saint Augustine.

The Peace, spoken of by our Savior, saying: Peace I Io. 14. 27.
leave to you; my peace I give to you; not as the World gives, do I give to
you. Again, In me you may have Io. 16. 55.
Peace, in the World you shall have Distress: Whereof the Prophet Isay
speaking, says; For this cause shall my people Isa. 52. ^.
know my Name in that day, because I my self that spoke (Peace I leave you)
lo am present. How beautiful upon the Mountains are the feel of him that
euangelizeth, and preaches Peace, of him that tells good, preaching Health,
that faith to Sion (the Soul which loves God with all his heart) Thy God
shall Isa. 9. 5.
reign? Because all violent taking of prey with tumult, and garment mingled
with blood shall be burnt, and food for the fire. For a little Child is borne
to us, and a Son is given to us, and his name shall be called Prince of
Peace: His Empire shall be multiplied, and there shall be multiplied, and there
shall be no end of his peace.

At this Peace, the Angels rejoiced, to see it prepared to be planted in the
Hearts of Men upon Earth: And Luke 2.
the Angels said, I euangelize to you great Joy, that shall be to all People,
beeause this day is borne to you a Savior, which is Christ our Lord; you shall
find the Infant swadled in Clothes and laid in a Maunger: And suddenly these
was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly Army, praising God, and
saying, Glory in the highest to God, and in Earth, Peace to Men of good will:
For Ephesians. ^.
he (our Lord himself) is our Peace, who has made both one; and dissoluing
the middle Wall of the Partition, the enmities in his Flesh. And coming, he
euangelized Peace to you that were far off, and Peace to them that were nigh,
for by him we have access both in one Spirit to the Father.

This is the Peace which Saint Paul wished to the Thessalonians, saying: The 2.
These. 3. 16.
Lord of Peace himself give you everlasting Peace in every place. And this is
the Peace which our Lord often wished to his Disciples after his Resurrection,
saying; Peace be to you.

This Peace (says S. Augustine) In epist. ad fratres in eremo.
Christ left by a Testament to the Apostles, as the chiefest good; without the
which none ought to live, etc. This is that glorious Peace which expels the
fruit of evil Thoughts, preserves the wavering Mind from hurt, and purges
the Conscience: He who has not the peace of Heart, of Mouth, and Work, ought
not to be called a Christian. O Peace! thou art the serenitie of the Mind, the
tranquillity of the Soul, the simplicity of the Heart, the bond of Love, and
companion of Charity. This is that high Felicity, which takes away Enmities,
appeaseth Wars, oppresses Angers, treads down the Proud, loves the
Humble, ends Strifes, makes Enemies friends, acceptable to all Men. So S.
Augustine.

And if the Peace of the Earth, which is but a cessation from worldly troubles
or affairs, and a satisfying of thy passions, be pleasing unto thee; of how
far greater Content and Happiness must the Peace of God be, which passes
all understanding; and keeps, as S. Paul says, Our Hearts, and all the Phi.
4. 7.
understanding powers of our Soul in Christ Jesus? which God of his goodness
grant thee, Reader.

OF THE FOVRTH fruit of the Holy Ghost, which is Patience.
THe fourth fruit is Patience; of which it is said: In Patience shall you
possess Luke 21, 19.
your Souls. Then a man is said to enjoy a thing, when he receives Content in
it, and uses it according to the end it was created; for he that possesses a
thing to vex, and afflict, has it not to enjoy, and possess, but to torment:
Whereupon it comes to pass, that angry and chollericke men do not possess
themselves, nor their Souls; since they want patience; and so* the having of a
Soul, serves them for nothing, but to be afflicted and tormented.

Whereby appears the excellency of this fruit of the Holy Ghost, Patience;
that it makes men Masters, or just possessors of themselves; in prosperity,
and adversity, always to be the same; and have, and exercise at all times,
the free use of reason, graces, and gifts, which God Almighty has bestowed
upon them: In Prosperity, not to be puffed up with pride, nor wanton with
external Joys; and in Adversity, not to be dejected, changed, or altered,
with Sorrow, or Grief: As patient Job said; Our Lord gave, and our Lord Job ^.
2^.
has taken away; as it has pleased our Lord, so is it done: the Name of our
Lord be blessed. And being beset on every side with afflictions; yet by
Patience so inioyed and possessed himself, that of him it is said: In all
these things JOB sinned not with his lips, neither spoke he any foolish thing.

And since by Patience we possess our Souls, what can we esteem to be of
greater worth then Patience? What Mat. 16. 26.
exchange will a men give for his Soul? and give it to be afflicted with
Temporal and Eternal Torments? What does Mat. 16. 2^.
it profit a man, if he gain the whole World, and sustain the damage of his
Soul?

By this thou may see how basely and lightly worldly men do esteem of
their Souls; seeing that many times they lose them through anger, and
impatience; rather then they will willingly part from superfluous Meat,
Drink, Apparel, esteem of the World, or such like earthly commodities.

O sensual Man! is not the life (or Soul) more then Mat. 6.
Meat, and the Body more then Apparel? Be not careful therefore for the
morrow. Be not angry, or afflicted, for that thou possessest not such worldly
things as thou would use to morrow, For the morrow day shall be careful for
it self; it will bring new cares with it, Sufficient for the day, is the evil
or malice thereof: Bear it patiently; and so the next day, and so the third
day, if thou live so long. If thou can not easily bear patiently the cares,
evils, or malice, which fall upon thee in one day, why will thou put the cares
and evils of many days together into thy fantasy; and provoke and engender
in thy self impatiencie, anger, fury, or wrath, to the loosing of thy Soul?
Is not thy Self and Soul more worth to thee then the worldly commodity thou
want? why then will thou be so foolish, as to be angry, and exchange away
thy Soul for a thing that is worse then it? For what art thou angry? Is it,
peradventure, for that thou can not enjoy some good? If it be not good, what
will thou do with it? or why should thou be angry, because thou can not
have that which is naught? If good it be, why will thou wish it so much evil,
as to desire that it should become subject to one, who has exchanged away his
Soul, and is run out of himself? Wherefore, thy right course is first to
possess thy Self and Soul; and seek (by Patience) the Mat. 6.
Justice of God; and all these things shall be given unto thee besides.

And from this fruit of the Holy Ghost, arises the unspeakable Patience,
which we have seen practiced and exercised amongst the English Martyrs, and
Confessors of our Catholic Faith here in England, in these late years of
Persecution: some having been in Prison twenty years, some twelve, some
eight, and almost all of them without any allowance from their persecutors, to
sustain life. Many put to torments, many to cruel death, and yet prayed
patiently for their persecutors, and preached (by example) Charity in their
greatest torments. Here is Apoc. 14. 12.
the Patience of the Saints, which keep the Commandments of God.

The Scriptures speaking of the reward which God will bestow upon those, who
seek by Patience to possess their Souls, says: Beeause thou Apoc. 3. 10.
have kept the word of my patience, I will keep thee from the hour of
temptation, which shall come upon the whole world, to tempt the Inhabitants of
the Earth; that is, he will free them from the temptations of the Devil: from
which, God of his goodness deliver thee, Reader.

OF THE FIFTH FRVIT of the Holy Ghost, which is Bountifulness, or Liberality.
THe fifth fruit which the Holy Ghost does produce in the Hearts of such as love
him, is Benignity, a readiness, and willingness of mind, to help, and do
good to our Neighbors; and freely to communicate unto others, such things as
God Almighty has bestowed upon us: which does wonderfully shine in all the
actions of our Savior, imparting of his gifts, graces, and favors, to all
that would prepare themselves to receive them, and has left this Benignity,
or Liberality, of doing good to our Neighbors, as a particular Legacy unto
us, saying; A new Commandment I give Ioh. 13. 14.
to you, That you love one another, so as I have loved you, that you also love
one another. In this, all men shall know that you are my Disciples* ^. Ioh. 3.
18*
if you have love one to another, not in word, nor in tongue, but in deed, and
truth; by Liberality supplying our Neighbors wants, with whatsoever God
Almighty has bestowed upon us.

Of this Benignity or Liberality, our Savior speaking, says: Do good to
them that Man. 5.
hate you, and pray for them that persecute you, and abuse you; that you may be
the children of your Father which is in Heaven: Who makes his Sun to rise upon
good and bad, and raineth upon just and unjust.

Whereby appears the excellency of this Benignity or Bountifulness toward
all; that it makes men true Disciples of our Lord and Savior, and sons of
God; whose Mercy and Liberality is above al his works, doing good, and using
of mercy to every one: and for this cause S. Paul writing to Timothy, says;
Command the ^. Tim. 6. 17.
Rich of the World not to be high-minded; to do well, to become rich in good
works, to give easily, to communicate (the riches they have, to others) to
heap up to themselves a good foundation for the time to come, that they may
apprehend the true Life; live happily in this life, and in the other, enjoy
eternal Glory; according to the words of S. Peter, saying; Brethren, labor the
more, that by ^. Pet. 1. 10.
good works you may make sure your vocation, and election; for doing these
things, you shall not sin at any time: for so there shall be ministered to you
abundantly an entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Whereupon our Savior says; Give and there shall be given to
Luke 6. 37.
you, to be the Sons of God, true Disciples of our Lord, Content and
Happiness, good Luke 6* ^5.
measure, and pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall they
give into your bosom: Do good, and lend, hoping for nothing thereby, and your
reward shall be much, and you shall be the Sons of the Highest, because
himself is beneficial upon the unkind, and the evil. Be ye therefore
merciful, as also your Father is merciful, that thereby you may be happy;
according to the words of our Lord saying* Blessed are the merciful, for Mat.
5.
they shall receive mercy.

OF THE SIXTH FRVIT of the Holy Ghost, which is Goodness.
THe sixth fruit is Goodness, by which they become really and truly good; not
by Nature, but by Grace and communication of the Holy Ghost: which produces in
them goodness, and an ability of doing good works; according to the words of
our Lord, saying: Every good tree Mat. 7. 18.
yields good fruits, and by their fruits you shall know them. Again, He that
abides in me, Ioh. 25. 5.
and I in him, the same bears much fruit, for without me, you can do nothing.
If any abide not in me, he shall be cast forth as the branch, and shall wither,
and they (the Angels at the day of Judgment) shall gather them up, and cast
them into the fire.

Whereupon, S. Paul says; Romans 11. 22
See the goodness and severity of God! upon them surely that are fallen, the
severity: but upon thee, the goodness of God, if thou abide in goodness;
otherwise thou also shall be cut off. Again; You were 1. Cor. 6. 21.
(Fornicators, seruers of Idols, Adulterers, etc.) but you are Washed, but you
are Sanctified, but you are Justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
in the Spirit of our God; because Ioh. 14. 17.
he shall abide with you, and be in you: by whose communication they shall be
renewed, as S. Paul says, in the Spirit of Ephesians. 4. 24.
their minds, and put on the New Man, which according to God is created in
Justice, and holiness of Truth; whereby they become truly and really good,
holy, and just.

And the excellency of this fruit is manifest by the words of our Lord, where
he says: The hour comes, wherein Ioh 5. 28.
all that are in the Graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, and they
that have done good things, shall come forth to the Resurrection of life: But
they that have done evil, into the Resurrection of Judgment. And by the words
of S. Paul, saying; Tribulation, and anguish, upon every Soul Romans 2* ^.
of man that works evil; But glory, and honor, and peace to every one that
works good. Do then good works, Reader, that thou may attain unto true
Glory, Honor, and Peace: which I wish unto thee.

OF THE SEVENTH fruit of the Holy Ghost, which is Perseverance.
THe seventh fruit which the Holy Ghost does produce in their Souls, who love
him, is Persouerance; a firm and constant purpose to persist in loving God
Almighty with all their Hearts, and their Neighbors for God, as themselves,
for ever.

It is not enough to begin to do well; but to persevere all the days of their
life in doing good to every one: for many have begun good courses, but for want
of perseverance have perished. Many false Prophets Mat. 24.
shall arise, and shall seduce many; and because Iniquity shall abound, the
Charity of many shall wax cold: But he that shall persevere unto the end (in a
pure Heart, a good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned) shall be saved.

And he that shall overcome Apoc. 2. 26.
(sin) and keep my works unto the end I will give him power over the
Nations (and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, and as the vessel of a
Petter shall they be broken) as I also have received of my Father: and I will
give him the Morning Star. He that has an ear, let him hear what the
Spirit says to the Churches.

He that shall overcome, shall Apoc. 3. 5.
be vested in white garments, and I will not put his name out of the Book of
Life, and I will confess his name before my Father, and before his Angels. He
that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.

OF THE EIGHT fruit of the Holy Ghost, which is Mildness, or Meekness.
THe eight fruit which the Holy Ghost does produce in the Hearts of those who
love him, is, as Saint Augustine calls it, a Courageous Tract. 8. in Joan.
meekness, or mildness, which does moderate the passion of anger, and direct
them to do good, with mildness, and zeal: as of our Savior it is said;
Behold my Servant Isa: ^^. 1.
whom I have chosen, my beloved, in whom my Soul has well liked: I will put
my Spirit upon him. He shall not contend nor cry out, neither shall any hear
in the Streets his voice. The reed bruised he shall not Mat. 12. ^8.
break, and smoking flax he shall not extinguish till he cast forth
judgment unto victory. Yet when he found in the Temple Ioh. 2. 14.
them that sold Oxen and Sheep. and Doves, and Bankers sitting; he made as it
were a whip of little C^rdes, and cast them al out of the Temple, the Sheep
also and the Oxen, and the money of the Bankers, he poured out, and the Table
he overthrew: to the fulfilling of the Prophecy, which said; The zeal of thy
House Ps. 68 10.
has eaten me.

In like manner our Savior says unto his Servants: Unless Mat. 18. 3.
you be converted, and become as little Children, you shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little
Child (which sat in the midst of them) he is the grea^^^ in the Kingdom of
Heaven: and yet says; That Mat. 10. 27.
which I speak to you in the Dark, speak ye in the Light: and that which ye
hear in the ear, Preach ye upon the house tops; And fear ye not them that
kill the Body, and are not able to hurt the Soul: Who are, as the Prophet
says, Ps. 51.
Mighty in iniquity, and love malice rather then benignity; iniquity,
rather then to speak equity: But the ways of Peace, the assents to Sion, the
paths to Jerusalem, they have not known; videlicet, Learn of me, for I am
meek, Mat. 11. 2^.
and humble of heart, and you shall find Rest: Because God 1. Pet. 5.
resists the proud; and to the humble he gives Grace, to find the assents
to Ease, and Rest: from the wise and prudent in their own conceits our Lord
has hid them, says our Savior; and revealed them to little ones: for he Mat.
11. 25.
that exalts himself, shall be humbled (with tribulation, and anguish, and
pains) and he that humbles himself, shall be exalted, to Ease, Content, and
Rest* as S. Peter witnesses, saying, Be ye 1 Pet. 5. 6.
humble therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in the
time of Visitation, into the Joy of our Mat. 25. 21.
Lord, which God grant thee, Reader.

OF THE NINTH fruit of the Holy Ghost, which is Faith.
THe ninth fruit is Faith, not such a Faith as is in Heretics, and Devils, who
have their spirits so full of malice and iniquity, that they think it
impossible to love God Almighty with all their Hearts: But a Faith in their
Hearts rooted Ephesians. 4. 17.
and founded in Charity, that they may be filled unto all the fullness of God,
and be now no Ephesians. 3. 19.
more Strangers, and Forrainers, but Citizens of the Saints, and the
Domesticals of God; treating with him in their Souls, by Faith, that works
Gal. 5, 6.
by Charity.

A Faith planted in a good Luk, 8, 15,
and very good Heart, which hearing the Word, does retain it, and yield fruit
in Patience, Mat, 13, 29,
some an hundredth fold, and other threescore, and another, thirty.

A Faith, Light of the World, Mat, 5, 15,
shining before men: that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in Heaven.

A Faith dilated all over the World; Teach ye all Nations: Mat. 28 19.
And they going forth Mar. 16. 20.
preached every where. Into Romans 16. 18.
all the Earth has the sound of them gone forth; and unto the end of the whole
World, the words of them. In the Col. 1. 6.
whole World it is, and fructifieth and grows.

A Faith, Wherein God meaning more abundantly to show the Heirs of the Promise
the stabilitie of his Counsel, he interposed an Oath: because he had none
greater by whom he might swear, he swear by himself, saying; Unless
blessing, I shall bless thee, and Multiplying, shall Multiply thee: that by
two things immovable, whereby it is impossible for God to lie; we may have a
most strong comfort who have fled, to hold fast the hope proposed in our Faith.

The Faith of Jesus Christ, Gal. 3. 22.
given to them that believe. The Justice of God by Faith Romans 3. 22. 31
of Jesus Christ, whereby we do not destroy the Law, but establish the Law:
according to the words of our Savior, saying; Do not think that Mat. 5. 18.
I came to break the Law or the Prophets; I came not to break, but to fulfill.

A Faith, which whosoever believes, and does according to that which he
believes, As the Scriptures say, out of his belly shall flow Ioh. 7. 38.
Rivers of living water. And Isa. 12. 3.
he shall draw waters in joy, out of the Fountains of our Savior, and be
inebriated with Psa. 35. 9.
the plenty of the house of God; and with the torrent of his pleasure, be made
drunk.

OF THE TENTH fruit of the Holy Ghost, which is Modesty.
THe tenth fruit which the Holy Ghost does produce in the Hearts of those who
love him, is Modesty, which is a decency, or honest temperature of the
motions of the Mind, and Body; by help whereof they always square their
actions to a beseeming comeliness, pleasing in the sight of God, whom they know
to be present.

So S. Paul exhorting the Ephesians, says: All naughty Ephesians 4 29.
speech, let it not proceed out of your mouth; but if there be any good, to
the edifying of Faith, that it may give grace to the hearers: And contristate
not the holy Spirit of God, in which you are signed unto the day of Redemption.

And again to Timothy: The Servant of our Lord must 2. Tim. 2 24.
not wrangle, but be mild toward all men; apt to teach; patient; with
modesty admonishing them that resist the Truth (Heretics and Schismatikes)
least sometime God give them Repentance to know the Truth, and they recover
themselves from the snares of the Devil, of whom they are hold captive at his
will.

Again, Let your modesty Phil. 4. 5.
be known to all men, our Lord is nigh. Whereupon S. Augustine says: He made
Conf. li. 4. ca. 12.
these things, and is not far off from them: for he did not make them, and
then go his ways; but of him, and in Act. 17. 28.
him, they are; for in him we live, and move, and be.

And by these means they grow, and increase daily in Piety, and tender
affection toward God Almighty, and live without any just cause of
reprehension amongst men; excelling in civility, and decent behavior, though
Modesty is practiced in all actions yet it is chiefly noted in the eyes;
insomuch, as of the Fool it is said: The eyes of Pro. 17. 24.
a Fool are in the end of the Earth, gazing after every thing. But the eyes of
the Ephesians. 4. 15.
Wise are in his Head, looking upon our Lord, who is our Head: and there so
content, that he little cares or desires to see any thing else, more then
necessity requires.

So the Prophet David says: To thee have I lifted up mine Ps. 122.
eyes, which dwells in the Heavens: Behold, as the eyes of Servants are to
the hand of their Master; as the eyes of the Handmaid, on the hands of her
Mistres; so our eyes, to our Lord God.

Again, I foresaw our Lord in my sight always, because Ps. 15. 8.
he is at my right hand, that I be not moved; for this thing my heart has
been glad, and my tongue has reioiced: moreover, also my flesh shall rest in
hope.

OF THE ELEVENTH fruit of the Holy Ghost, which is Continency.
THe eleventh fruit which the holy Ghost does produce in the Hearts of those
who love him, is Continency, which is a virtue, by which me^ living amongst the
occasions of using lawful sensual pleasures (to get the victory and conquest
over their carnal appetites) do abstain from them; that by denying to
themselves hings which many times be lawful, or indifferent; they may easily
attain unto grace, and force to overcome, and suppress their unlawful
Desires: thereby to bring their passions and inordinate affections, to a
subordination, under the obedience of right reason; and so live in great
liberty of Spirit, and latitude of Mind, free from consenting to base
Desires. Wherefore S. Paul says in the same Chapter, That against such there
is no Law; and adds the reason, for that they have crucified their Flesh with
the vices and concupiscences.

Continency in general, consisting in the acts of Abstinence, and
Mortification, does crucify or make dead the inordinate desires of the Flesh:
That the justification Romans 8.
of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the Flesh, but
according to the Spirit. For they that are according to the flesh, are affected
to the things that are of the flesh (as we see by too much experience in
carnal Heretics, who profess publicly in Print, That they cannot live
chaste) But they that are according to the Spirit, are affected to the things
that are of the Spirit, that is to say, to Continency, Chastity, Charity,
etc. For Romans 8.
the Wisdom of the Flesh, is death; but the Wisdom of the Spirit, life and
peace.

Such as live according to the concupiscences and desires of the Flesh, are
dead to Grace in this life, and to Glory in the other; But such as live
according to the wisdom of the Spirit, in Continency and Chastity, by
mortifying their inordinate appetites, shall live with the life of Grace in
this life, and of Glory in the other, and in Temporal peace of mind in this
life, and Eternal in the other: Because the Wisdom of the Romans 8. 13.
Flesh, is an enemy to God; for to the Law of God it is not subject, neither
can it be: for if you live according to the Flesh, you shall die; but if by the
Spirit you mortify the deeds of the Flesh, you shall live. For whosoever are
led by the Spirit of God (and mortify the deeds of the Flesh) they are the
sons of God. But if any man have not the Spirit of Christ (the Spirit of
Continency, and Mortification) the same is not his, but the Devils. Whereupon
Saint Paul yet further says: I say, walk Gal. 5. 16.
in the Spirit (that is, in doing acts of Mortification, and Continency) and
the lust of the Flesh you shall not accomplish; for the Flesh lusts Gal. 5.
17.
against the Spirit: so these are enemies one to another, and combat for the
victory.

If the inordinate lust and desires of the Flesh prevail so far with thee,
as that they bring thy Will, Reason, and Soul, to consent to their desires:
then, the inordinate lust, and concupisences of the Flesh, are Lords and
Masters; and thy Will, Reason, and Soul, become slaves to their own vassals;
and thou becommest a beast, and a beastly man, to run after thy fleshly
Lusts, and Concupisences; like the wild Asses and beasts of the Forest: and
that is thy life, and felicity.

If thy Soul, or upper part, make continent, and mortify thy Lusts, and
Carnal desires, and inordinate appetites of thy flesh; then thy Soul, or
upper part, is Lord and Master; and thou live like a man, or reasonable
creature, and not like a beast: and come, by perseverance in Continency and
Mortification, to enjoy these delicate Fruits of the Holy Ghost, which here we
treat of. And for this cause, the Life of Man is Job. 7.
called a Warfare. For the Flesh Gal. ^. ^7.
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh: for these are
adversaries one to another; that not what things soever you will, those you
do, without combat: But combating the lust of the Flesh with Continency, and
Mortification, which are the fruits of the Spirit, you come to enjoy
inestimable liberty, of doing always by combat what you will, and will
nothing but that which is reasonable; according as it is written: Where the
Spirit of our 2 Cor. 3. 17.
Lord is, there is Liberty. Again; Brethren, you are called Gal. 5. 13.
into Liberty. And S. Paul setting down wherein this liberty consists,
says: Make Gal. 5. ^3.
not this Liberty an occasion to the Flesh; but by Charity serve one another:
For the Law is fulfilled in one word; Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.

This is the Liberty unto which we are called; a Liberty of doing good,
always, and when we will, by being conquerers over the inordinate lust of our
Flesh, and wicked temptations of the World and Devil, by the assistance of the
Holy Ghost, his gifts and fruits in us.

Who shall deliver me (says Romans 7.
S. Paul) from the body of this death? the Grace of God, by Jesus Christ our
Lord. Again, The Grace of God our Savior 1. Ti^* 2. 1^.
has appeared to all men, instructing us, that denying impiety and worldly
desires, we live soberly, and justly, and godly in this World, expecting the
blessed hope, and coming of the glory of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ.

Whereby thou see (dear Reader) the excellency of Continency: since, that
by instructing thee how to deny impiety and worldly desires, it will bring
thee to live soberly, and justly, and godly in this world; even as one that
continually expects the coming of the great God to Judgment: which is the
greatest Happiness we can attain unto in this life; according to the words of
our Lord, saying: Blessed is Luke 12. 43.
the Servant, who, when the Lord comes, he shall find so doing; verily I say
unto you, that over all things which he possesses, he shall appoint him.

OF THE TWELFTH fruit of the Holy Ghost, which is Chastity.
THe twelfth fruit which the Holy Ghost does produce in the Hearts of those who
love him, is Chastity: which is an abrenuntiation of carnal pleasures, and
sensual delights; not absolute necessary to Nature; whereby they attain to
perfect liberty of Spirit, and freedom of Mind, and easily, and without
impediment, attend unto the Exercises of the Heavenly Jerusalem; according to
the words of S. Paul, saying: He that is 1. Cor. 7. 23.
without a Wife, is careful for the things that pertain to our Lord, how he
may please God. But he that is with a Wife, is careful for the things that
pertain to the World, how he may please his Wife, and he is divided, amongst
many Masters, that he cannot easily serve and love God with his whole heart,
according to the Commandment. So likewise S. Paul says: The Woman unmarried,
and the 1. Cor. 7. 34.
Virgin, thinks on the things that pertain to our Lord, that she may be
holy both in Body and Spirit: But she that is married, thinks on the things
that pertain to the World how she may please her Husband. And this I speak to
your profit; not to cast a snare upon you, but to that which is honest, and
that may give you power, without impediment, to attend upon our Lord.

If thou would observe it, thou shall find, that the thing which hinders
thee from meditating, and practicing spiritual courses, and pious exercises of
life, is thy unchaste mind; which seeking after the fornications of the World
and Flesh, perpetually distracteth thee from well doing, or thinking, by her
vntame thoughts, and wandering discourses, after the sensual pleasures and
vanities of the Earth: which, if by Chastity of mind thou could cut off;
thou should as S. Paul affirms, not only meditate upon the things that
pertain to our Lord, and be holy both in Body and Spirit: but also, without
impediment, attend upon our Lord, and live an Angelical life upon Earth:
according to the words of our Savior, saying; They Luke ^0. 35.
that shall be counted worthy of the Resurrection from the dead, neither Marry,
nor take Wives, neither can they dye any more, for they are equal to Angels.

Whereby thou see the excellency of chaste Life; that it will free thee from
Worldly cares and distractions, and will indue thee with such a facility in
serving God; as that thou shall be able (as S. Paul says) to 1. Cor. 7.
attend upon our Lord without impediment.

And this is sufficient in part, to show unto thee, the Joy, Ease, Rest,
Repose, Content, and Happiness, which God Almighty in this life bestows
upon those who keep his Commandments, and love him with all their Hearts, and
their Neighbors for his sake, as themselves: which Joys, and Contentments, do
increase in them, as the zeal of keeping his Commandments and Counsels does
increase, according to his Word, saying: Whosoever shall glorify me, I will
glorify him: and they that shall contemn me, shall be base. Whereupon the
Prophet David says: I am delighted Ps. 118.
in the way of thy Testimonies, as in all riches; I will be exercised in thy
Commandments, and I will consider thy ways: I will keep thy Law always; for
ever, and for ever, and ever. And I walked in largeness, because I sought
after thy Commandments. My portion O Lord, I said to keep thy Law. The Law of
thy Mouth is good unto me, above thousands of Gold and Silver. How have I loved
thy Law, O Lord! all the day it is my meditation; above mine enemies, thou have
made me wise, by thy Commandentents; because it is to me for ever, and ever.
Above all that taught me, have I understood, because thy Testimonies are my
meditations: I have understood more then ancient men, because I sought thy
Commandments. I have inclined my Heart to do thy Iustifications for ever;
because of the Reward, Corporal and Spiritual, Temporal and Eternal, Ease,
Rest, Repose, Content, and Happiness.

Wherefore, dear Reader, be no more deceived with vain imaginations, of finding
Ease and Rest, in the sensual pleasures and vanities of the World; but cast
out from thee those strange Gods, who in their eleventh Article of the English
Creed, do promise Happiness, and Justification by Faith only: And return unto
our Lord, in all thy Heart, and in all thy Soul, and keep his Commandments;
and our Savior, according to his promise, will ask the Ioh. 14. 14.
Father, and he will give thee another Comforter, that he may abide with thee,
and be in thee for ever: The Spirit of Truth Ioh. 14. 26.
he shall teach thee all things. He will teach thee Chastity, Continency,
Modesty, Goodness, Benignity, Patience, Peace of Mind, Joy of Heart, and
Charity toward God and Man: and thou shall possess Joy, and Isa. 51. Isa. 44.
Gladness; Sorrow and Mourning shall fly away: for I, even I my self (says
our Lord) will comfort you. I will pour out my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my
Blessing upon thy Stock; and they shall spring the herbs, as Willowes,
besides the running Waters: For the Shrub, Isa. ^5.
shall come up the Fur tree; and for the Nettle, shall grow the Myrtle tree.
For thy base afflicting sensual delights, he will give thee true Joys, and
Content, and Rest: When thou shall pour Isa. 58.
out thy Soul to the hungry, and shall fill the afflicted Soul; thy light
shall rise up in darkness, and thy darkness shall be as the Noonday. And
our Lord will give thee Rest always, and will fill thy Soul with brightness,
and deliver thy bones, and thou shall be as a watered Garden, and as a
Fountain of Waters, whose water shall not fail; which is the Content and
Happiness I wish unto thee.

THE Last CHAPTER. Of the complete Joy, Rest, Content, and Happiness, which
those shall have in Heaven, who upon Earth perseuered in loving God with all
their Hearts, and their Neighbors as themselves, until Death.
FIrst, All the Charitable shall be saved, and Happy; as witnesses our
Savior, saying: Come ye blessed Mat. 25.
of my Father, possess you the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation
of the World: For I was an hungered, and you gave me to eat; I was thirsty,
and you gave me to drink: I was a stranger, and you took me in; naked, and
you covered me; sick, and you visited me; I was in Prison, and you came unto
me: Verily, I say unto you, as long as you did it to one of these my least
brethren, you did it to me.

And for their particular Happiness; first, all their Corporal defects, as
lamenesse, crookedness, disproportion of their bodies, etc. by the power of
God shall be supplied; as witnesses S. Paul, saying: We shall Ephesians. 4. 13.
meet all in the unity of Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, into a
perfect Man, into the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ.

Secondly, they shall be endued with subtilitie, to penetrate and pass through
material bodies at their pleasures; as S. John affirms Ioh. ^0. 19.
of our Savior: That the door shut, Jesus came, and stood in the midst of the
Disciples. And in the Resurrection, our Savior will, as S. Paul says, Reform
the body Phil. 3. 11.
of our humility, configured to the Body of his glory.

Thirdly, they shall be endued with Agilitie, to move, and pass from one place
unto another, with the same swiftness, that their minds can desire; As the
Angels of God in Heaven.

Fourthly, they shall be endued with Impassabilitie, insomuch, as they shall
never suffer any more hunger, or cold, or heat, or sickness, or pains, or
any thing of disgust; as affirms S. John, saying: They shall no more Apoc. 7.
16.
hunger, nor thirst; neither shall the Sun fall upon them, nor any heat.

Fifthly, they shall be endued with Claritie; according to the words of our
Savior, saying: The Just shall shine Mat. 13. 43.
as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father.

Sixthly, their Corporal eyes shall be delighted with the sight of the glorious
Body of the Son of God, and of all the Saints, and with the Beauty of
Heaven, whose Wall is, as S. John says: Of Apoc. 21. 18.
Jasper stone; but the City it self (is of) pure Gold, like to pure Glass;
and the Foundations of the Wall of the City, are adorned with Precious Stone.
And the twelve Gates there, are twelve Pearls one to every one, and every Gate
is of one several Pearl; and the Street of the City, pure Gold, as it were
transparent Glass.

Seventhly, their Ears shall be delighted with the melody of Angels and
Saints, who sing by Quires always new songs.

Eighthly, their Senses of Smelling shall be delighted with delicate sweet
smells, which proceed from the body of our Savior, and from the bodies of the
Martyrs, and Saints in Heaven, whose Odor is as the Cant. 3. Osc. 1^.
Aromatical Spices of Mirrhe and Frankencense, and all the powder of the
Apothecarie. If the body of our Blessed Mother Teresa (the reformer of our
Order, and the restorer thereof to the observance of the first Rule) yield so
sweet a Smell here upon Earth, as that it exceeds the delight of all
flowers, as is testified by sufficient witnesses: Imagine, if thou can, how
exceeding sweet shall be the Smell of the body of our Savior, and all the
glorified bodies in Heaven?

Ninthly, their Taste shall be delighted with exquisite Meats; according to
the word of God, saying: To them Apoc. ^. 17.
that shall overcome (sin) I will Apoc. 2. 7.
give him the hidden Manna. I will give him to eat of the tree Apoc. 7. ^7.
of life, which is in the Paradise of my God. And the Lamb shall conduct them
to the living Fountains of Waters.

Tenthly, their Touch, and whole Body, shall be delighted with delitious
Raiment. And I saw (says S. John) a Apoc 7. 9.
great multitude, which no man could number, in the sight of the Lamb, clothed
in white Apoc. 19. 7.
Robes for the marriage of the Lamb is come and his wife has prepared her
self. And it was given to her, that she clothe her self with silk,
glittering, and White; for the Silk are the Iustifications of the Saints.

Those who lose their lives for the love of God, and innocence of his Law, and
oaths made to the Prophets, shall be crowned with Crowns of glory; according
to the Scriptures, saying: Be Apoc. 2.
faithful until Death, and I will give thee the Crown of Life; and also,
they shall for ever bear Palms of victory and triumph (over their
Persecutors) in their hands, as S. John witnesses, saying: I saw a great
multitude, which no man could number, standing Apoc. 7. 9.
before the Throne, and in the sight of the Lamb, clothed in white robes, and
Palms in their hands, etc. These are they which come out of great tribulation,
and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. And
Virgins who die in Charity, shall sing a Song, which none else in Heaven shall
sing but they: and also they shall accompany our Savior wheresoever he shall
go; according to the words of S. John, saying: I heard a voice from Apoc. 1^.
Heaven, and the voice which I heard, was as of Harpers harping on their
Harpes, and they sung as it were a new Song before the Seat of God* etc. and
none could sing the Song but those. These are they which were not defiled with
Women, for they are Virgins: These follow the Lamb wheresoever he shall go.

Eleuenthly, the Fantasies of the Charitable shall be delighted with
beautiful forms of glorious Bodies; according to the words of Saint Paul: Now
I know 1. Cor. ^3. 12.
in part, but then I shall know, as also I am known.

Twelfthly, their Memory shall be pleased, with a forgetfulness of all
Disgustes and Discontents whatsoever, and with an easy Remembrance of all
things which belong unto their Happiness: which shall be easy; for that in
Heaven there shall be no more Was, or Shall be, or this Past, or To come; to be
troubled with searching for them in the Memory: but Present for ever, and
altogether an Eternal Felicity, and Life Mat. 25.
everlasting; which is (as Boethius says) a perfect possession Boet. li. 5. Pro.
6.
altogether of an endless Life.

The Thirteenth, Their Understandings shall be delighted with Divine Wisdom,
Understanding, Counsel, Knowledge, etc. according to the words of Saint Peter,
saying; If you 1. Pet. 4.
be reviled in the Name of Christ, you shall be blessed, because the Spirit,
which is his, shall rest upon you; which is (as the Prophet Isay says) the
Spirit of Isa. 11.
Wisdom, and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Strength, the Spirit of
Knowledge and Piety, and the Spirit of the (Filial) fear of our Lord.

The Foureteenth, their Wills shall be delighted, and fully satisfied and
content with the enjoying, having, and possessing of God Almighty; who is all
the good they can desire: and shall be (as S. Paul says) all in all the 1.
Cor. 15. 25.
Saints.

The Fifteenth, their Minds and whole Man, shall be fully and compleately made
happy, by the seeing of God Almighty whom they have and possess; according to
the words of our Savior, saying: Blessed are the clean Mat. 5.
in heart, for they shall see God, August* epist 111. and 1^2.
not as they did in this life, under that likeness which his will had chosen,
and not his nature formed: But they shall see him (says S. John) as he is, in
his Divine Nature, Essence, and Glory; as further witnesses S. Paul, saying:
We see now by a glass 1. Cor. 23. 1^.
in a dark sort, but then, face to face. This seeing of God, whom they
possess all in all, is as Saint Augustine says, their chiefest good: for
though Aug. li. trinit. ca. 13.
many things do concur together to the making of us Happy, and Content: Yet
this seeing of God, Face to Face, and as he is in his glory, is the Fountain
of all good, and the accomplishment and perfection of full Happiness: which
our Savior signifies, saying; This is Life everlasting, that Ioh. 17. 3.
they know thee, the only true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. And
the reason is, for that God Almighty is only He, which is, as he said, I am,
which Exodus ^. 14.
am; and all other things being by participation from his Goodness, depending
upon his Will: As it is written; For thy Will they Apoc. 4. 11.
were, and have been created. All other Pleasures, and Contentments, which are
not God, are far more excellent in God himself, then they are in themselves,
or in their own natures: So that take whatsoever true Pleasure, which in this
Life thou art capable to receive, either in Body, or Soul, and when by happy
Vision thou come to enjoy God (as I desire thou should) thou shall enjoy
that same, in another degree, much more perfitly: according to the words of the
Prophet, saying; I shall be filled (Lord) Ps. 16. 15.
when thy glory shall appear. And hereupon it comes to pass, that the
seeing and enjoying of God by blessed vision, and as he is in himself, is
Happiness it self: for that whatsoever may truly delight either Body or
Soul, is there in him found altogether, and always most perfitly; even in
such sort, as that it is not possible for thee to imagine, wish, or desire any
Joy, Content, or Happiness whatsoever, but the same is found in God, in his
full perfection. Whereupon our Savior says: If you keep my Ioh 15. 10.
precepts, you shall abide in my love: as I also have kept my Fathers precepts,
and do abide in his love. These things I have spoken to you, that my joy may be
in you, and your joy may be filled. Again, He Ioh 14. 12.
that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he
that loves me, shall be beloved of my Father, and I will love him, and will
manifest my self to him; that is, he will bestow upon him all Goods,
Contentments, and Happiness, that can be imagined, or desired; according to
the words of God to Moses saying: I will show thee all good; Exodus 3^. ^^.
and showed unto him, Himself.

The Sixteenth, they shall be confirmed in this perfect Happy estate, that
they cannot but love it, and possess it for ever: so our Savior calls it,
everlasting life; Mat. 25 46.
and S. Peter calls i^, an eternal Kingdom; where ^. Pet. ^. ^^*
there are no Temporal Joys or Contentments, which are no sooner had, then
passed: But an Eternal Ease, Rest, Repose, and Happiness, and all goods, and
pleasures, always, and for evermore, remaining without End. Which I heartily
wish unto thee, dear Reader: and so conclude this our Second Part of Ease, and
Rest, with the words of Moses the Prophet, and faithful Servant of our Lords;
humbly beseeching thee, to consider, That I have Deuteronomy. 30.
set before thee Life, and Good; and contrariwise, Death, and Evil: That thou
may love our Lord thy God, and walk in his Ways, and keep his
Commandments, and thou may live (in the Happiness of Grace in this Life,
and Glory in the other.)

But if thy heart be auerted, and thou will not hear; and deceived with Error,
thou adore strange Gods (in Spirit) and serve them (either by puplike or
private breaking of the Commandments of the true and lining God) I foretell
thee this day, that thou shall perish (and the Wretchedness and Miseries
spoken of in the foureteenth Chapter of this Book, shall fall upon thee) And I
call for witness Heaven and Earth, that I have proposed to thee Life and
Death, Blessing and Cursing: choose therefore Life, that thou may live, and
may love our Lord thy God, and obey his voice, and cleave to him for he is
thy life, and the length of thy days.

To whom be all honor, and glory, now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
JESUS, MARIA, JOSEPH.
Errata.
Page 1. line 18. for this manner, ^ead his manner. p. 7. l. 1. seek wherein,
^. seek out wherein. p. 7. l. 16. as that they, ^. as they. p. 32. l. 21.
sin and malice, r. sin of malice 49 in Chap. 6. the Faith of God, planted,
r. the Faith, planted. 67. 19* above all the, r. above ^he. 77. 22. there has
been, r. there ^ere. 78 8. has so, r. have so. 106. 16. Faith, the Faith of,
r. Faith, and the Charity of. 109. 14. foun. r. founded. 112. 16. necessity
be, r. necessity m^st be. 123. 4. that, r. true. 139. 16. in thee, r. ^n this.
153. in the margent, Mal. 3. 7. 203. 15. 8. John, r. S. Paul. 205. 6. serve
their God r. serve God. 205. 17. in praise, ^. in his praise. 208. 2. he does
not, r. he does. 244. 13. may be, r. must be. 245. 8. I answer, r. I infer.
291. 21. thy low, r. thy two. l. 22. low Faunes, r. two Faunes. 333. 16. Mines,
r. Ruins. 369. in the Margent, Exo. 33. 397. 14. wast, r. vast. 417. 1. says,
r. say. 4^9. 2. liberality, ^, liberally.


