Encaenia.

THE FEAST OF DEDICATION.

CELEBRATED AT LINCOLNES INN, in a Sermon there upon Ascension day, 1623.

At the Dedication of a new Chapel there, Consecrated by the Right Reverend
Father in God, the Bishop of LONDON.

Preached by JOHN DONE, Deane of St. PAVLS.

LONDON, Printed by AVG. MAT. for THOMAS JONES, and are to be sold at his Shop
in the Strand, at the black Raven, near unto Saint Clements Church. 1623.

TO THE MASTERS OF THE BENCH, AND the rest of the Honorable Society of
LINCOLNES INN.
IT pleased you to exercise your interest in me, and to express your favor to
me, in inuiting me to preach this Sermon: and it has pleased you to do both
over again, in inuiting me to publish it. To this latter service I was the
more inclinable, because, though in it I had no occasion to handle any matter
of Controversy between us, and those of the Roman Persuasion, yet the whole
body and frame of the Sermon, is opposed against one pestilent calumny of
theirs, that we have cast off all distinction of places, and of days, and all
outward means of assisting the devotion of the Congregation. For this use, I
am not sorry that it is made public, for I shall never be sorry to appear
plainly, and openly, and directly, without disguise or modification, in the
vindicating of our Church from the imputations and calumnies of that Adversary.
If it had no public use, yet I should satisfy my self in this, that it is
done in obedience to that, which you may call your Request, but I shall call
your Commandment upon

Your very humble Servant in Christ Jesus. JOHN DONE.

The Prayer before the Sermon.
O Eternal, and most gracious God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and in
him, of all those that are his, As thou did make him so much ours, as that
he became like us, in all things, sin only excepted, make us so much his, as
that we may be like him, even without the exception of sin, that all our
sins may be buried in his wounds, and drowned in his Blood. And as this day
we celebrate his Ascension to thee, be pleased to accept our endeavor of
conforming our selves to his pattern, in raising this place for our Ascension
to him. Lean upon these Pinnacles, O Lord, as thou diddist upon Jacobs Ladder,
and hearken after us. Be this thine Arc, and let thy Dove, thy blessed
Spirit, come in and out, at these Windows: and let a full pot of thy Manna, a
good measure of thy Word, and an effectual preaching thereof, be evermore
preserved, and evermore be distributed in this place. Let the Leprosy of
Superstition never enter within these Walls, nor the hand of Sacrilege ever
fall upon them. And in these walls, to them that love Profit and Gain,
manifest thou thy self as a Treasure, and fill them so; To them that love
Pleasure, manifest thy self, as Marrow and Fatness, and fill them so; And to
them that love Preferment, manifest thy self, as a Kingdom, and fill them so;
that so thou may be all unto all; give thy self wholly to us all, and make
us all wholly thine. Accept our humble thanks for all, etc.

JOHN 10.22. And it was at Jerusalem, the Feast of the Dedication; and it was
Winter; and Jesus walked in the Temple in Salomons Porch.
SAint Basil in a Sermon upon the 114. Psalm; Basil.
upon the like occasion as draws us together now, The consecration of a
Church, makes this the reason and the excuse of his late coming thither to do
that Service, that he stayed by the way, to consecrate another Church: I hope
every person here has done so; consecrated himself, who is a Temple of the
Holy Ghost; before he came to assist, or to testify the consecration of this
place of the Service of God. Bern. Ser. 1.
Nostra festiuitas haec est, quia de Ecclesia nostra; says Saint Bernard. This
Festival belongs to us, because it is the consecration of that place, which is
ours, Magis autem nostra, quia de nobis ipsis: But it is more properly our
Festival, because it is the consecration of our selves to Gods service. For,
Sanctae Animae propter inhabitantem Spiritum; your Souls are holy, by the
inhabitation of Gods holy spirit, who dwells in them. Sancta corpora propter
inhabitantem animam; Your Bodies are holy, by the inhabitation of those
sanctified Souls. Sancti parietes, propter Corpora Sanctorum. These walls are
holy, because the Saints of God meet here within these walls to glorify him.
But yet these places are not only consecrated and sanctified by your coming;
but to be sanctified also for your coming; that so, as the Congregation
sanctifies the place, the place may sanctify the Congregation too. They must
accompany one another; holy persons and holy places; If men would wash sheep in
the Baptisterie, in the Font, those sheep were not christened. If profane men,
or idolatrous men, pray here after their way, their prayers are not sanctified
by the place. Neither if it be after polluted, does the place retain that
sanctity, which is this day to be derived upon it, and to be imprinted in it.

Our Text settles us upon both these considerations, The holy place, Diuisie.
and the holy person. It was the Feast of the Dedication: there is the holiness
of the place; And the holy person, was holiness it self in the person of
Christ Jesus, who walked in the Temple in Salomons Porch. These two will be
our two parts: And the first of these we shall make up of these pieces. First,
we shall see a lawful use of Feasts, of Festival days. And then of other
Feasts, then were instituted by God himself; diverse were so; this was not. And
thirdly, not only a festival solemnizing of some one thing, at some one time,
for the present, but an Anniuersary returning to that solemnity every year;
And lastly, in that first part, this Festival in particular, The Feast of the
Dedication of the Temple: that sanctified the place, that shall determine that
part. In the second part, The holiness of the person, we shall carry your
thoughts no farther, but upon this, That even this holy person Jesus himself,
would have recourse to this place, thus dedicated, thus sanctified: And upon
this, that he would do that especially at such times, as he might
countenance and authorize the Ordinances and Institutions of the Church, which
had appointed this Festival. And this, says the Text, he did in the Winter:
First, Et si Hiems, though it were Winter, he came, and walked in the Porch, a
little inconvenience kept him not off: And, Quia Hiems, because it was Winter,
he walked in the Porch which was covered, not in the Temple which was open. So
that here with modesty, and without scandal he condemned not the favoring
of a man's health, even in the Temple, And it was at Jerusalem, the Feast of the
Dedication; and it was Winter; and Jesus walked in the Temple in Salomons Porch.

In our first part, Holy places, 1. Part. Festa.
we look first upon the times of our meeting there, Holy days. The root of
all those is the Sabbath, that God planted himself, even in himself, in his
own rest, from the Creation. But the root, and those branches which grow from
that root, are of the same nature, and the same name: And therefore as well of
the flower, as of the root of a Rose, or of a Violet, we would say, This is a
Violet, this is a Rose: so as well to other Feasts of Gods institution, as to
the first Sabbath, God gives that name; he calls those several Feasts which he
instituted, Sabboths; enioynes the same things to be done upon them, inflicts
the same punishments upon them that break them. Leuit. 23.
So that there is one Morality, that is the soul of all Sabboths, of all
Festiualls; howsoever all Sabboths have a ceremonial part in them, yet there
is a Moral part that inanimates them all; they are elemented of Ceremony, but
they animated with Morality. And that Morality is in them all, Rest: for if
Adam could name creatures according to their nature, God could name his Sabbath
according to the nature of it, and Sabbath is Rest. It is a Rest of two kinds;
our rest, and Gods rest. Our rest is the cessation from labor on those days;
Gods rest, is our sanctifying of the day: for so in the religious sacrifice of
Noah, when he was come out of the Arc, Genes. 8.
God is said to have smelt, Odorem quietis, the savor of rest: upon those
days we rest from serving the world, and God rests in our serving of him. And
as God takes a tenth part of our goods, in Tithes, but yet he takes more too,
he takes Sacrifices, so though he take a seventh part of our time in the
Sabbath, yet he takes more too, he appoints other Sabboths, other Festiualls,
that he may have more glory, and we more Rest: for all wherein those two
concur, are Sabboths. Vacate and videte quoniam ego sum Dominus says God.
First vacate, Psalm. 46.10
rest from your bodily labors, distinguish the day, and then videte, come
hither into the Lords presence, and worship the Lord your God, sanctify the
day: And in all the Sabboths there is still a Cessate, Leuit. 23.
and a Humiliate animas, bodily rest, and spiritual sanctifying of the day.
Holy days then, that is, days seposed for holy uses, and for the outward and
public service of God, are in Nature, and in that Moral Law which is written
in the heart of man. That such days there must be is Moral; and this is
Moral too, that all things in the service of God be done in order; and this
also, that obedience be given to Superiors, in those things wherein they are
Superiors. And therefore it was to the Jews, as well Moral, to observe the
certain days which God had determined, as to observe any at all. Not that
Gods commandment limitting the days, infused a Morality into those
particular days: for Morality is perpetual; and if that had been Moral, it
must have been so before, and it must be so still; Gods determining the days
did not infuse, not induce a Morality there, but it awakened a former
Morality, that is, an obedience to the commandment, for that time, which God
had appointed that for them; for this Obedience, and Order is perpetual, and
so, Moral. We depart therefore from that error, which those ancient Heretics,
the Ebionites begun, and some labored to refresh in Saint Gregory's time, and
which continues in practice in some places of the world still; To observe both
the Jews Sabbath, and the Christians, Satterday, and Sunday too; because the
Sabbath is called Pactum sempiternum: Exodus 31.
for to that any of Saint Augustines Answers will serve; either that it is
called everlasting, because it signified an everlasting rest; (where be pleased
to note by the way, that Holy days, Sabbaths, are not only instituted for
Order, but they have their Mystery, and their Signification; for Holy days,
(as the Text calls them there) and New Moons, Col. 2.16.
and the Sabbath, were but shadows of things to come:) or else the Sabbath was
called everlasting to them, because it bound them everlastingly, and they might
never intermit it, as some other ceremonies they might. But their Sabboths bind
not us; we depart from them who think so; and so we do from them, who think
we are bound to no Festiualls at all, or at least to none but the Sabbath. For
God requires as much service from us, as from the Jews, and to them he
enlarged his Sabboths, and made them diverse. But those were of Gods immediate
institution: but all that the Jews observed were not so; and that's our next
consideration, Festiualls instituted by the Church.

Sine Mandato.
At first, when God was alone, it is but Faciamus, let us, us the Trinity make
man. This was, when God was, as we may say, in Coelibatu. But after God has
taken his spouse, married the Church, then it is Cadite nobis vulpes, Cant. 2.15
do you take the little Foxes, you the Church; for our vines have grapes; the
vines are ours; yours and mine says Christ to the Church: and therefore do you
look to them, as well as I. The Tables of the law God himself writ, and gave
them written to Moses: he left none of that to him; not a power to make other
Laws like those laws: but for the Tabernacle, which concerned the outward
worship of God, that was to be made by Moses, Exodus
Iuxta similitudinem, according to the pattern which God had showed him. God
has given the Church a pattern of Holy days, in those Sabboths which he
himself instituted, and according to the pattern, the Church has instituted
more: and Recte festa Ecclesiae colunt, Aug.
qui se Ecclesiae filios recognoscunt: They who disdain not the name of sons
of the Church, refuse not to celebrate the days which are of the Churches
institution. There was no immediate commandment of God for that Holy day,
which Mordechai, by his letters established; Ester 9.23
but yet the Jews undertook to do as Mordechai had written to them. There was
no such commandment for this Holy day, in the Text; and yet that was observed,
as long as they had any being. And where the reason remains, the practice
may; The Jews did, we may institute new Holy days. And not only transitory
days, for a present thanks giving for a present benefit, but Anniuersaries,
perpetual memorials of Gods deliverances. And that's our next step.

Anniuersaria.
Both the Holy days, which we named before, which were instituted with out
special Commandment from God, were so. That of Mordechai, he commanded to be
kept every year for two days, and this in the Text, Judas Maccabeus commanded
to be kept yearly for eight days, which was more then was appointed to any of
the Holy days, instituted by God himself, for the Festival alone. According
to which pattern, Felix.
one Bishop of Rome, ordained that the Festiuals of the Dedication of Churches
should be yearly celebrated in those places; Greg.
and another extended the Festival to eight days; at least at the first
dedication thereof, if not every year: that God might not only be put into
the possession of the place, but settled in it. God by Moses made the children
of Israel a Song, because, as he says, Deuteronomy. 31.19
howsoever they did by the Law, they would never forget that Song, and that
Song should be his witness against them. Therefore would God have us institute
solemn memorialls of his great deliverances, that if when those days come
about, we do not glorify him, that might aggrauate our condemnation. Every
fifth of August, the Lord rises up, to hearken whether we meet to glorify him,
for his great deliverance of his Majesty, before he blessed us with his presence
in this Kingdom: and when he finds us zealous in our thanks for that, he
gives us farther blessings. Certainly he is up as early every fifth of November,
to hearken if we meet to glorify him for that deliverance still; and if he
should find our zeal less then heretofore, he would wonder why. Gods
principal, his radical Holy day, the Sabbath, had a weekly return; his other
Sabbaths, instituted by himself, and those which were instituted by those
paternes, that of Mordechai, that of the Maccabees, and those of the Christian
Church, They all return once a year. God would keep his Courts once a year,
and see whether we make our apparances as heretofore; that if not, he may
know it. Feasts in general, Feasts instituted by the Church alone, Feasts in
their yearly return and observation, have their use, and particularly those
Feasts of the Dedication of Churches, which was properly and literally the
Feast of this Text. It was the Feast of Dedication.

Encaeuia.
As it diminishes not, preiudices not Gods Eternity, that we give him his
Quando, certain times of Invocation, God is not the less yesterday, Temple.
and to day, and the same for ever, because we meet here to day, and not
yesterday, so it diminishes not, preiudices not Gods Vbiquitie and
Omnipresence, that we give him his Vbi, certain places for Invocation. That's
not the less true, that the most High dwells not in Temples made with hands,
Acts 7.48.
though God accept at our hands our dedication of certain places to his
service, and manifest his working more effectually, more energetically in those
places, then in any other. for when we pray, Our Father which art in Heaven, It
is not (says Saint Chrysostom) that we deny him to be here, Chrysostom.
where we kneel when we say that Prayer, but it is that we acknowledge him to
be there, where he can grant, and accomplish our prayer. It is as Origin has
very well expressed it, Origin.
Vt in melioribus mundi requiramus Deum: That still we look for God in the
best places; look for him, as he hears our petitions, here, in the best
places of this world, in his House, in the Church; look for him as he graunts
our petition, in the best place of the next world, at the right hand, and in
the bosom of the Father. Deuteronomy. 30.13
When Moses says that the word of God is not beyond Sea, he adds, It is not
so beyond Sea, as that thou must not have it without sending thither. When he
says there, it is not in heaven, he adds, not so in heaven, as that one must
go up, before he can have it. The word of God, is beyond Sea, the true word,
truly preached in many true Churches there, but yet we have it here, within
these Seas too; God is in Heaven, but yet he is here, within these walls too.
And therefore the impiety of the Manicheans exceeded all the Gentiles, who
concluded the God of the Old Testament to be an impotent, an imperfect God,
because he commanded Moses first to make him a Tabernacle, and then Solomon
to make him a Temple, as though he needed a House. God does not need a house,
but man does need, that God should have a House. And therefore the first
question, that Christ's first Disciples asked of him, was Magister, vbi habitas,
they would know his standing house, where he has promised to be always
within, and where at the ringing of the Bell, some body comes to answer you,
to take your errand, to offer your Prayers to God, to return his pleasure in
the preaching of his Word to you. The many and heavy Laws, with which sacred
and secular stories abound, against the profanation of places, appropriated to
Gods service, and that religious custom, that passed almost through all civil
Nations, that an oath, which was the bond between man, and man, had the
stronger Obligation, if that were taken in the Church, in the presence of God,
(for such was the practice of Rome toward her enemies, Tango aras mediosque
ignes, to make their vows of hostility in the Church, and at time of divine
Service, (and such is their practice still, they seal their Treasons in the
Sacrament) such was Romes practice toward others, and such was the practice of
others toward Rome, (for so Anniball says, that his father Amilcar swore him
at the Altar, that he should never be reconciled to Rome, (And such is your
practice still, as often as you meet here, you renew your band to God, that you
will never be reconciled to the Superstitions of Rome) all these, and all such
as these, and such as these are infinite, heap up testimonies, that even in
Nature there is a disposition to apply, and appropriate certain places to Gods
service. And this impression in nature is illustrated in the Law, as the time,
so the place is distinguished, Ye shall keep my Sabboths, Leui. 19.30
there is the time, and you shall reverence my Sanctuary, there is the place.
But that they may be reverenced, that they may be Sanctuaries, they are to be
sanctified; and that's the Encaenia, the Dedication.

Even in those things which accrue unto God, and become his, Encaenia.
by another title, then as he is Lord of all, by Creation, that is, by
appropriation, by dedication to his use and Service, There is a Lay Dedication,
and an Ecclesiastical Dedication. I hope the distinction of Laytie, and
Clergy, the words, scandalize no man. Luther, and Calvin too might have just
cause to decline the words, as they did; when so much was ouer-attributed to
that Clergy which they intend, as that they were so Sors Domini, the Lords
portion, as that the world had no portion in them, and yet they had the
greatest portion of the world; and how little soever they had to do with God,
yet no State, no King might have any thing to do with them. But, as long as we
declare, that by the Layetie we intend the people glorifying God in their
secular callings, and by the Clergy, persons seposed by his ordinance, for
spiritual functions, The Layetie no farther remoou'd then the Clergy, The
Clergy no farther entitled then the Layetie, in the blood of Christ Jesus,
neither in the effusion of that blood upon the Cross, nor in the participation
of that blood in the Sacrament, and that an equal care in Clergy, and
Layetie, of doing the duties of their several callings, gives them an equal
interest in the joys, and glory of heaven, I hope no man is scandalized with
the names. The Lay Dedication then is, the voluntary surrendering of this piece
of ground thus built, to God. For we must say, as Saint Peter said to Ananias,
Acts 5.4.
Whiles it remained, was that not your own? and now, when that is raised
(saving that there was Dedicatio Intentionalis, a purpose from the beginning to
appropriate it, to this holy use) might you not, till this hour, have made
this room your Hall, if you would? But this is your Dedication, that you have
cheerfully pursued your first holy purposes, and deliver now into the hands of
this servant of God, the Right Reverend Father the Bishop of this See, a place
to be presented to God for you, by him, not misbecomming the Majesty of the
great God, who is pleased to dwell thus amongst us. What was spent in Salomons
Temple is not told us. What was prepared, before it was begun, is such a sum,
as certainly, if all the Christian Kings that are, would send in all that they
have, at once, to any one service, all would not equal that sum. They gave
there, till they who had the ouerseeing thereof, complained of the abundance,
and proclaimed an abstinence. Yet there was one, who gave more then all they;
for Christ says the poor widow gave more then all the rest, because she gave
all she had. There is a way of giving more then she gave; and I, who by your
favors was no stranger to the beginning of this work, and an often refresher
of it to your memories, and a poor assistant in laying the first stone, the
material stone, as I am now, a poor assistant again in this laying of this
first formal Stone, the Word and Sacrament, and shall ever desire to be so in
the service of this place, I, I say, can truly testify, that you (speaking of
the whole Society together of the public stock, the public treasury, the
public revenue) you gave more then the widow, who gave all, for you gave more
then all. A stranger shall not entermeddle with our joy, as Solomon says:
strangers shall not know, how ill we were provided for such a work, when we
begun it, nor with what difficulties we have wrastled in the way; but strangers
shall know to Gods glory, that you have perfected a work of full three times as
much charge, as you proposed for it at beginning: so bountifully does God
bless, and prosper intentions to his glory, with enlarging your hearts within,
and opening the hearts of others, abroad. And this is your Dedication, and that
which without prejudice, and for distinction, we call a Lay Dedication, though
from religious hearts, and hands.

There is another Dedication; Ecclesiastica
that we have called Ecclesiastical, appointed by God, so as God speaks in the
ordinances, and in the practice of his Church. Haereditary Kings are begotten
and conceived the natural way; but that body which is so begotten of the blood
of Kings, is not a King, no nor a man, till there be a Soul infused by God.
Here is a House, a Child conceived (we may say borne) of Christian parents, of
persons religiously disposed to Gods glory; but yet, that was to receive
another influence, an inanimation, a quickening, by another Consecration.
Oportet denuo nasci, holds even in the children of Christian parents; when they
are borne, they must be borne again by Baptism: when this place is thus given
by you, for God, oportet denuo dari, it must be given again to God, by him,
who receives it of you. It must; there seems a necessity to be implied,
because even in Nature, there was a consecration of holy places; Jacob in his
journey, Genesis 28.20.
before the Law, consecrated even that stone, which he set up, in intention to
build God a House there. In the time of the Law, Number. 7.1.
this Feast of Dedication, was in practice; first in the Tabernacle; that and
all that appertained to it, was anointed, and sanctified: So was Salomons
Temple after; so was that which was reedified after their return from Babylon,
and so was this in the Text, after the Heathen had defiled and profaned the
Altar thereof, and a new one was erected by Judas Maccabeus. Thus in Nature,
thus in Law, and thus far thus in the Gospel too: that as sure as we are that
the people of God had material Churches in the Apostles first times, so sure
we are, that those places had a Sanctity in them. If that place of Saint Paul,
1 Cor. 11.22
Despise ye the Church of God? be to be understood of the local, of the
material Church, and not of the Congregation, you see there is a rebuke for
the profanation of the place, and consequently a sanctity in the place. But
as soon as the Church came evidently by the favor of Princes, to have liberty
to make laws, and power to see them practiced, it was never pretermitted to
consecrate the places. Before that, we find an ordinance by Pope Hyginus (he
was within 150. after Christ, and the eighth Bishop of that See after Saint
Peter) even of particulars in the Consecrations. But after, Athanas.
Athanasius in his Apology to Constantius, makes that protestation for all
Christians, That they never meet in any Church, till it be consecrated: And
Constantine the Emperor least he should be at any time unprovided of such a
place, (as we read in the Ecclesiastical story) in all his wars, carried
about with him a Tabernacle which was consecrated: In Nature, in the Law, in
the Gospel, in Precept, in Practice, these Consecrations are established.

Vsus.
This they did. But to what use did they consecrate them? not to one use only;
and therefore it is a frivolous contention, whether Churches be for preaching,
or for praying. But if Consecration be a kind of Christning of the Church, and
that at the Christning it have a name, we know what name God has appointed
for his House, Domus mea, Domus orationis vocabitur. My House shall be called
the House of Prayer. And how impudent and inexcusable a falsehood is that in
Bellarmine, That the Lutherans and Caluinistes do admit Churches for Sermons
and Sacraments, Sed reprehendunt quod fiant ad orandum, They dislike that they
should be for Prayer: when as Calvin himself, (who may seem to be more
subject to this reprehension then Luther) (for there is no such Liturgy in the
Caluinists Churches, as in the Lutheran) yet in that very place which
Bellarmine cites, says Conceptae preces in Ecclesia Deo gratae; and for
singing in Churches, (which in that place of Calvin cannot be only meant of
Psalms, for it was of that manner of singing, which being formerly in use in
the Eastern churches, S. Ambrose, in his time, brought into the Church of
Millan, and so it was deriud over the Western churches, which was the
modulation and singing of Versicles and Antiphons and the like) this singing,
says Calvin, was in use amongst the Apostles themselves, Et sanctissimum and
saluberimum est institutum. l. 3.20. 32.
It was a most holy and most profitable Institution. Still consider
Consecration to be a Christning of the place; and though we find them often
called Templa propter Sacrificia, for our sacrifices of prayer, and of praise,
and of the merits of Christ, and often called Ecclesiae ad conciones, Churches,
in respect of congregations, for preaching, and often called Martyria, for
preserving with respect, and honor the bodies of Martyrs, and other Saints of
God, there buried, and often, often, by other names, Dominica, Basilica, and
the like, yet the name that God gave to his house, is not Concionatorium, nor
Sacramentarium, but Oratorium, the House of Prayer. And therefore without
prejudice to the other functions too, (for as there is a vae upon me, Si non
Euangelizauero, If I preach not my self, so may that vae be multiplied upon
any, who would draw that holy ordinance of God into a dis-estimatio^, or into a
slacknesse,) let us never intermit that duty, to present our selves to God in
these places, though in these places there be then, no other Service, but
Common prayer. For then does the House answer to that name, which God has
given it, if it be a house of Prayer.

Modus.
Thus then were these places to receive a double Dedication; a Dedication, which
was a Donation from the Patron, a Dedication which was a consecration from the
Bishop, for to his person, and to that rank in the Hierarchy of the Church,
the most ancient Canons limited it; and to those purposes, which we have
spoken of; of which, Prayer is so far from being none, as that there is none
above it. A little should be said, (before we shut up this part) of the
manner, the form of Consecrations. In which, in the Primitive Church, as soon
as Consecrations came into free use, they were full of Ceremonies. And many of
those Ceremonies derived from the Jews: and not unlawful, for that. The
Ceremonies of the Jews, which had their foundation in the prefiguration of
Christ, and were types of him, were unlawful after Christ was come; because
the use of them, then, employed a denial or a doubt of his being come. But
those Ceremonies, which, though the Jews used them, had their foundation in
Nature, as bowing of the knee, lifting up the eyes, and hands, and many, very
many others, which either testified their devotion that did them, or exalted
their devotion that saw them done, are not therefore excluded the Church,
because they were in use amongst the Jews. That Pope whom we named before,
Hyginus, the eighth after Saint Peter, he instituted, Ne Basilica sine Missa
consecretur. That no Church be consecrated without a Mass. If this must bind
us, to a Mass of the present Roman Church, it were hard; and yet not very
hard truly; for they are easily had. But that word, Mass, is in Saint
Ambrose, in Saint Augustine in some very ancient Councels; and surely intends
nothing, to this purpose, but the Service, the Common Prayer of the Church,
then in use, there. And when the Bishop Panigarola says in his Sermon upon
Whitsunday, that the Holy Ghost found the blessed Virgin and the Apostles at
Mass, I presume he means no more, then that they were met at such public
Prayer, as at those times they might make. Sure Pope Clemens, and Pope Hyginus
mean the same thing, when one says Missa consecretur, and the other Diuinis
Precibus: One says, Let the Consecration be with a Mass, the other, with
Divine Service; the Liturgy, the Divine Service was then the Mass. In a word,
a constant form of Consecrations, we find none that goes through our
Ritualls: the Ceremonies were still more or less, as they were more or less
obnoxious, or might be subject to scandalize, or to be mis-interpreted. And
therefore I am not here either to direct, or so much as to remember, that
which appertains to the manner of these Consecrations; only in concurring in
that, which is the Soul of all, humble and hearty prayer, that God will hear
his Servants in this place, I shall not offend to say, that I am sure my zeal
is inferior to none. And more I say not of the first Part, The Holy place; and
but a little more, of the other; though at first it were proposed for an equal
part, The Holy Person, That at the Feast of the Dedication, Jesus walked in the
Temple in Salomons Porch.

2. Part.
In this second part, we did not spread the words, nor shed our considerations
upon many particulars: the first was, Jesus in Templo.
that even Jesus himself had recourse to this Holy place. In the new
Jerusalem, in Heaven, there is no Temple. Apo. 21.22
I saw no Temple there says Saint John: for the Lord God Almighty, and the
Lamb are the Temple of it. In Heaven, where there is no danger of falling,
there is no need of assistance. Here the Temple is called Gnazar, 2. Paral. 4.9
that is Auxilium: A Helper: the strongest that is, needs the help of the
Church: And it is called Sanctificium, by Saint Hierom, Psalm. 78.69.
a place that is not only made holy by Consecration, but that makes others
holy by GOD in it. And therefore Christ himself, whose person and presence
might consecrate the Sanctum Sanctorum, would yet make his often repair to
this Holy place; not that he needed this subsidy of Local holiness in
himself, but that his example might bring others who did need it; and those
who did not; and, that even his own Preaching might have the benefit and the
blessing of Gods Ordinance in that place, he says of himself, Math. 26.
Quotidie apud vos sedebam docens in Templo, and Semper docui in Synagoga, and
in Templo; as in the Acts, the Angel that had delivered the Apostles out of
prison, sends them to Church, Acts 5.
Stantes in Templo loquimini plebi. The Apostles were sent to preach, but to
preach in the Temple, in the place appropriated and consecrated for that holy
use and employment.

Tempus.
He came to this place, and he came at those times, which no immediate command
of God, but the Church had instituted. Facta sunt Encaenia, says the Text; It
was the Feast of the Dedication. We know what Dedication this was; That of
Solomon was much greater; A Temple built where none was before; That of Esdras
at the return was much greater then this, An entire reedification of that
demolished Temple, where it was before. This was but a zealous restoring of an
Altar in the Temple: which having been profaned by the Gentiles, the Jews
themselves threw down, and erected a new, and dedicated that. Salomons
Dedication is called a Feast, 2 Chr. 5.3.
a Holy day: by the very same name that the Feast of unleavened bread, and the
Feast of the Tabernacle is called so often in Scripture, Ezra 6.16.
which is Kag. The Dedication of Ezra is sufficiently declared to be a solemn
Feast too. But neither of these Feasts, though of far greater Dedications,
were Anniuersarie; neither commanded to be kept every year; and yet this,
which was so much lesser then the others, the Church had put under that
Obligation, to be kept every year; and Christ himself contemnes not,
condemns not, disputes not the institution of the Church. But as for matter of
doctrine he sends even his own Disciples, to them who sat in Moses Chair,
so for matter of Ceremony, he brings even his own person, to the celebrating,
to the authorizing, to the countenancing of the Institutions of the Church, and
rests in that.

Now it was Winter, says the Text: Etsi Hyeme
Christ came et si Hyems, though it were Winter; so small an inconvenience kept
him not off. Beloved, it is not always colder upon Sunday, then upon Satterday;
nor at any time colder in the Chapel; then in Westminster Hall. A thrust
keeps some off in Summer; and cold in Winter: and there are more of both
these in other places, where for all that, they are more content to be.
Remember that Peter was warming himself, and he denied Christ. They who love
a warm bed, let it be a warm Study, let it be a warm profit, better then
this place, they deny CHRIST in his Institution. That therefore which CHRIST
says, Pray that your flight be not in the Winter, Mat. 24.20.
nor upon the Sabbath; we may apply thus, Pray that upon the Sabbath (I told
you at first, what were Sabboths,) the Winter make you not fly, not abstain
from this place. Put off thy shoes, Exodus 35.
says God to Moses, for the place is holy ground. When Gods ordinance by his
Church call you to this holy place, put off those shoes, all those earthly
respects, of ease or profit, Christ came, Et si Hyems.

But then, Quia Hyems, Quia Hyems
Because it was Winter, He did walk in Salomons Porch, which was covered, not
in Atrio, in that part of the Temple, which was open, and exposed to the
weather. We do not say, that infirm and weak men, may not favor themselves,
in a due care of their health, in these places. That he who is not able to
raise himself, must always stand at the Gospel, or bow the knee at the name
of Jesus, or stay some whole hours, altogether uncovered here, if that
increase infirmities of that kind. And yet Courts of Princes, are strange
Bethesdaes; how quickly they recover any man that is brought into that Poole?
How much a little change of air does? and how well they can stand, and stand
bare many hours, in the Privy Chamber, that would melt and flow out into
Rhumes, and Catarrs, in a long Gospel here? But, Citra Scandalum, a man may
favor himself in these places: but yet this excuses not the irreuerent manner
which has overtaken us in all these places; That any Master may think
himself to have the same liberty here, as in his own house, or that that
Servant, that never puts on his hat in his Masters presence all the week, on
Sunday, when he and his Master are in Gods presence, should have his hat on
perchance before his Masters. Christ shall make Master and Servant equal; but
not yet; not here; nor ever, equal to himself, how ever they become equal
to one another. Gods service is not a continual Martyrdom, that a man must
be here, and here in such a posture, and such a manner, though he dye for
it; but Gods House is no Ordinary neither; where any man may pretend to do
what he will, and every man may do, what any man does. Christ slept in a
storm; I dare not make that general; let all do so. Christ favored himself
in the Church; I dare not make that general neither: to make all places
equal, or all persons equal in any place.

It Is time to end. Basil.
Saint Basil himself, as acceptable as he was to his Auditory, in his second
Sermon upon the 14. Psalm, takes knowledge that he had preached an hour, and
therefore broke off: I see it is a Compass, that all Ages have thought
sufficient. But as we have contracted the consideration of great Temples, to
this lesser Chapel, so let us contract the Chapel to our selves: Et facta
sint Encaenia nostra, let this be the Feast of the Dedication of our selves to
God. Christ calls himself a Temple, Soluite templum hoc: John 2.19.
Destroy this Temple. And Saint Paul calls us so twice; 1 Cor. 3.16. and 6.19.
Know ye not that ye are the Temples of the Holy Ghost? Facta sint Encaenia
nostra: Encaenia signifies Renouationem, a renewing: Aug.
and Saint Augustine says that in his time, Si quis noua tunica indueretur,
Encaeniare diceretur. If any man put on a new garment, he called it by that
name, Encaenia sua. Much more is it so, if we renew in our selves the Image of
God, and put off the Old man, and put on the Lord Jesus Christ. This is truly
Encaeniare, to dedicate, to renew our selves: NaZian.
and so Nazian* in a Sermon, or Oration, upon the like occasion as this, calls,
Conuersionem nostram, Encaenia, our turning to God, in a true repentance, or
renewing, our dedication. Let me charge your memories, but with this note
more, That when God forbad David the building of an House, Because he was a
man of blood, at that time David had not embrued his hands in Vriahs blood; nor
shed any blood, but lawfully in just wars; yet even that made him incapable
of this favor to provide God a house. Some callings are in their nature more
obnoxious, and more exposed to sin, then others are: accompanied with more
tentations; and so retard us more in holy duties. And therefore as there are
particular sins that attend certain places, certain ages, certain
complexions, and certain vocations, let us watch our selves in all those, and
remember that not only the highest degrees of those sins, but any thing that
conduces thereunto, prophanes the Consecration, and Dedication of this Temple,
our selves, to the service of God; it annihilates our repentance, and
frustrates our former reconciliations to him. Almighty God work in you a
perfect dedication of your selves at this time; that so, receiving it from hands
dedicated to God, he whose holy Office this is, may present acceptably this
House to God in your behalfes, and establish an assurance to you, that God will
be always present with you and your Succession in this place.

Amen.

