A SERMON OF COMMEMORATION OF THE Lady Da^uers, late Wife of Sr. John Da^uers.

Preached at Chilsey, where she was lately buried. By John Done D. of St.
Paul's, Land. 1. July 1627.

Together with other Commemorations of Her; By her Son G. Herbert.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Philemon Stephens, and Christopher Meredith, and
are to be sold at their shop at the golden Lion in Paul's Church yard. 1627.

Errata.
Page 17. line 19. for her, read the. p. 27. l. 20. for Royal, r real p. 34
l. 5. for Germ, r. Johannes Baptista Vergerius. p 35. l. 15. for in, r. into.
p. 36. l. 6. for the power, r. the abused power p. 44 l. 12. for hic, r. huc.
p. 47. l. 16. for foundation (add) or openly disturbed the Church. p. 66. l.
9. for succession, best succession, from here. ^iques or at best from an
impr^bable example of the Nazarites. p. 67. l 13. in Sacerdotibus, etc. as an
unclean. Act. (add) in Marg. August. ep. 74. p. 75. l. 20. for Apostolical,
r. Apochryphall p. 93. l. 11. for coming, r. cunning. p. 99. l 13. dele our.
p. 123. l. 5. for prosued, r. pursued. p. 160 l. 10. woman (add) sat on a
Beast which had. p. 192. for Edward, r. Edwin. p. c 137. l. 16. for Devils, r.
damned with Devils. p. 248. l. 2. for Apostle, r. Evangelist. p. 275. l. 17.
cita Ferum in cap. 1 Io. (...). 1550. p. 34.

THE PRAYER BEFORE the SERMON.
O Eternal, and most Glorious God, who sometimes in thy Justice, Psalm. 79. 2.
do give the dead bodies of the Saints, to be meat unto the Fowls of the
Heaven, and the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the Earth, so that their
blood is shed like water, and there is none to bury them, Who sometimes, Psalm.
44. 12.
sel'st thy People for naught, and do not increase thy wealth, by their
price, and yet never leau'st us without that knowledge, Ps. 116. 15.
That precious in thy sight is the death of thy Saints, enable us, in life and
death, seriously to consider the value, the price of a Soul. It is precious, o
Lord, because thine Image is stamped, and imprinted upon it; Precious, because
the blood of thy Soon was paid for it; Precious, because thy blessed Spirit,
the Holy Ghost works upon it, and tries it, by his diverse fires; And precious,
because it is entered into thy Revenue, and made a part of thy Treasure. Suffer
us not therefore, o Lord, so to under value our selves, nay, so to impouerish
thee, as to give away those souls, thy souls, thy dear and precious souls,
for nothing, and all the world is nothing, if the Soul must be given for it.
We know, o Lord, that our Rent, due to thee, is our Soul; and the day of our
death, is the day, and our Deathbed the place, where this Rent is to be paid.
And we know too, that he that has sold his soul before, for unjust gain,
or given away his soul before, in the society and fellowship of sin, or lent
away his soul, for a time, by a lukewarmnesse, and temporizing, to the
dishonor of thy name, to the weakening of thy cause^, to the discouraging of thy
Servants, he comes to that day, and to that place, his Death, and Deathbed,
without any Rent in his hand, without any soul, to this purpose, to surrender
it unto thee. Let therefore o Lord, the same hand, which is to receive them
then, preserve these souls till then; Let that mouth, that breathed them into
us, at first, breath always upon them, whilst they are in us, and su^cke them
into it self, when they depart from us. Preserve our souls o Lord, because
they^ belong to thee; and preserve our bodies, because they belong to those
souls. Thou alone, do steer our Boat, through all our Voyage, but have a
more especial care of it, a more watchful eye upon it, when it comes to a
narrow current, or to a dangerous full of waters. Thou have a care of the
preservation of these bodies, in all the ways of our life; But in the
Straights of Death, open thine eyes wider, and enlarge thy providence toward
us, so far, that no Fever in the body, may shake the soul, no Apoplexy in
the body, dampe or benumbe the soul, nor any pain, or agony of the body,
presage future torments to the soul. But so make thou our bed in all our
sickness, that being used to thy hand, we may be content with any bed of thy
making; Whether thou be pleased to change our feathers into flocks, by
withdrawing the conueniences of this life, or to change our flocks into dust,
even the dust of the Grave, by withdrawing us out of this life. And though thou
divide man and wife, mother and child, friend and friend, by the hand of Death,
yet stay them that stay, and send them away that go, with this consolation,
that though we part at diverse days, and by diverse ways, here, yet we shall
all meet at one place, and at one day, a day that no night shall determine, the
day of the glorious Resurrection. Hasten that day, o Lord, for their sakes,
that beg it at thy hands, from under the Altar in Heaven; Hasten it for our
sakes, that groan under the manifold incombrances of these mortal bodies;
Hasten it for her shake, who^ we have lately laid down, in this thy holy
ground; And hasten it for thy Son Christ^Iesus sake, to whom then, and not till
then, all things shall be absolutely subdued. Seal to our souls now an
assurance of thy gracious purpose toward us in that day, by accepting this
days service, at our hands. Accept our humble thanks, for all thy benefits,
spiritual, and temporal, already bestowed upon us, and accept our humble
prayers for the continuance and enlargement of them. Continue, and enlarge
them, o God. upon thine universal Church, dispersed, etc.

A SERMON OF Commemoration of the Lady Da^uers, late wife of Sr. John Da^uers.
Nevertheless, we, according to his promises, look for new Heavens, and new
Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. 2 Pet. 3. 13.
I Propose to my self, and to this Congregation, two Works for this day; That
we may walk together two miles, in this Sabbath days journey; First, To
instruct the Living, and then To commemorate the Dead. Which office, as I
ought, so I should have performed sooner, but that this sad occasion surprised
me under other Pre-obligations and Pre-contracts, in the services of mine own
Profession, which could not be excused, nor avoided. And being come now to this
double work, whether I look up to the Throne of Heaven, and that Firmament,
for my first work, The Instruction of the Living, or down to the stones of
the Grave, and that pauement, for my second work, The commemoration of the
Dead, I need no other words than these which I have read to you, for both
purposes; For, to assist the Resurrection of your souls, I say, And to assure
the Resurrection of your bodies, she says, Nevertheless, we according to his
promise look for new Heavens, and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness.
But first let us do our first work, and pursue the literal purpose of the
Apostle, in these words. Which words, out of their connection, and coherence,
be pleased to receive, thus spread and dilated into this Paraphrase,
Nevertheless, that is, though there be scoffers and iesters that deride and
laugh at the second coming of Christ, (as the Apostle had said v. 3.) And,
nevertheless again, Though this day of the Lord will certainly come, and come
as a Thief, and as a Thief in the night, and when it comes, the Heavens shall
pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with seruent heat,
the Earth also, and all the Works that are therein, shall be burnt up (as he
had also said, v. 10.) Though there be such a scorn put upon it, by scoffers
and iesters, and though there be such a horror in the truth of the thing it
self, yet, nevertheless, for all that, for all that scorn, and for all that
horror, We, We, says the Text, We that are fixed in God, We that are not
ignorant of this one thing, (as he says v. 8.) that one day is with the Lord
as 1000. years, and 1000. years as one day, We that know, that the Lord is
not stacke in his promise, though he be long-suffering to usward (as he also
says v. 9.) We, According to his promises, that is, building upon that
foundation, his Scriptures, presuming upon nothing that is not in that
evidence, and doubting of nothing that is there, We expect, We look for
something, says our Text, which we have not yet; We determine not our selves,
nor our contentment, in those things which God gives us here; not in his
Temporal, not in his spiritual Blessings, in this life; but we expect future
things, greater than we are capable of here; for, We look for new Heavens,
and new Earth; in which, that which is not at all to be had here, or is but an
obscure In-mate, a short Soiourner, a transitory Passenger in this World, that
is, Righteousness, shall not only Be, but Dwell for ever; Nevertheless,
we, according to his promise, look for new Heavens, and new Earth, wherein
dwells Righteousness. So then, in this our Voyage through this Sea, which is
truly a Mediterranean Sea, a Sea betwixt two Lands, the Land of Possession,
which we have, and the Land of Promise which we expect, this Old, and that
new Earth, that our days may be the better in this land which the Lord our God
has given us, and the surer in that Land which the Lord our God will give us,
In this Sea-voyage be these our Land-markes, by which we shall steer our
whole course: First, the day of Judgment is subject to scorn, some laugh at
it; And then (in a second consideration,) it induces horror; The best man, that
is but man, trembles at it; But we, (which is a third branch) those that have
laid hold upon God, And (in a fourth place) have laid hold upon God, by the
right handle, According to his promises, We, (which will constitute a fifth
point,) We expect; We bless God for our Possession, but We look for a
greater Reuersion; which Reuersion (in the next room) is, new Heavens, and new
Earth; And (lastly) such Heavens, and such Earth, as may be an everlasting
Dwelling for Righteousness. And through all these particulars, we shall pass,
with as much cleerenesse, and shortness, as the weight, and number thereof
will admit.

First then, Scorns.
to shake the constancy of a Christian, there will always be Scorners,
Iesters, Scoffers, and Mockers at Religion. The Period and Consummation of the
Christian Religion, the Judgment day, the second coming of Christ, will
always be subject to scorns. And many times a scorn cuts deeper then a
sword. Lucian wounded Religion more by making Jests at it, than Arius, or
Pelagius, or Nestorius, with making Arguments against it. For, against those
professed Heretics, and against their studied Arguments, which might seem to
have some weight, it well beseem'd those grave and Reuerend^ Fathers of the
Church, to call their Councels, and to take into their serious consideration
those Arguments, and solemnly to conclude, and determine, and decree in the
point. But it would ill have become those reverend persons, to have called their
Councels, or taken into their so serious considerations, Epigrams, and Satyrs,
and Libells, and scurrill and scornful jests, against any point of Religion;
Scorns and Jests are easilier apprehended, and understood by vulgar and
ordinary capacities, then Arguments are; and then, learned men are not so
earnest, nor so diligent to overthrow, and confute a Jest, or Scorn, as they
are, an Argument; and so they pass more vncontrol'd, and prevail further, and
live longer, then Arguments do. It is the height of Jobs complaint, that
contemptible persons made Jests upon him. And it is the depth of Samsons
calamity, that when the Philistines hearts were merry, then they called for
Samson, Judge. 16. 24
to make them sport. So to the Israelites in Babylon, when they were in that
heaviness, that every breath they breathed was a sigh, their enemies called,
Psalm. 137. 3.
to sing them a song. And so they proceeded with him, who fulfilled in himself
alone, all Types, and Images, and Prophesies of sorrows, who was, (as the
Prophet calls him) Vir dolorum, Esa. 53. 3.
A man composed, and elemented of sorrows, our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus;
Mat. 27. 29
For, They platted a crown of thorns upon his head, and they put a reed into
his hand, and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him. Truly, the
conniuing at several Religions, (as dangerous as it is) is not so
dishonorable to God, as the suffering of Iesters at Religion: That may induce
heresy; but this do^'s establish Atheism. And as that is the public
mischief, so, for the private, there lies much danger in this, that he that
gives himself the liberty, of jesting at Religion, shall find it hard, to
take up at last; as, when Julian the Apostata had received his Deathes-wound,
and could not choose but confess, that that wound came from the hand, and power
of Christ, yet he confessed it, in a Phrase of Scorn, Vicisti Galilaee, The day
is thine, O Galilean, and no more; It is not, Thou have accomplished thy
purpose, O my God, nor O my Maker, nor O my Redeemer, but, in a style of
contempt, Vicisti Galilaee, and no more. And therefore, as David begins his
Psalms with Blessedness, so he begins Blessedness, with that, Blessed is
he, which sits not in the seat of the scornful; David speaks there, of
walking with the ungodly, but walking is a laborious motion; And he speaks
there, of standing with the sinner, but standing is a painful posture; In
these two, walking and standing, there is some intimation of a possibility of
weariness, and so, of desisting at last. But in sitting in the seat of the
scornful, there is denoted a sinning at ease; and, in the Vulgate edition, at
more that ease; with authority, and glory; For, it is In cathedra, In the
chair of the scornful; which implies a Magisteriall, a Doctorall kind of
sinning, that is, to sin, and to provoke others, by example, to sin too,
and promises no return from that Position. For as we have had diverse
examples, that men who have used, and accustomed their mouths to Oaths, and
Blasphemies all their lives, have made it their last syllable, and their last
gasp, to swear, they shall die, so they that enlarge, and ungirt their wits,
in this jesting at Religion, shall pass away at last, in a negligence of all
spiritual assistances, and not find half a minute, between their last jest,
and their everlasting earnest. Vae vobis qui ridetis; Woe be unto you that
laugh so, for you shall weep, and weep eternally.

Saint Paul preached of the Resurrection of Act. 17. 32.
the dead, and they mocked him. And here, St. Peter says, there will be, (that
is, there will be always) Scoffers that will say, Verse. 4.
where is the promise of Christ's coming? For since the Fathers fell asleep,
all things continue as they were, from the beginning of the Creation But do
they so, says this Apostle? Was not the world that then was, Verse. 6.
ouerslow'd with water, and perish't? If that were done in earnest, why do ye
make a jest of this, says he, Verse. 7.
That the heavens and the earth which are now, are reserved unto fire, against
the day of Judgment. 2. Tim. 3. 1, The Apostle says, That in the last days,
perilous times shall come; and he reckons there, diverse kinds of perilous
men; but yet, these Iesters are not among them. And then 1 Timothy 4. 1. The
Apostle names more perilous men; Seducing Spirits, and Seducing by the
doctrine of Devils, forbidding meats and marriage; and we know, who these men
are. Mat. 24. 24
Our Savior tells us, they shall proceed a great way; They shall show great
signs, and wonders; they shall pretend Miracles; and they shall exhibit false
Christ's, Christ's kneaded into pieces of bread; And we know, who these are, and
can beware of these proceedings. But Saint Jude remembers us of the greatest
danger of all, Verse. 17.
Remember the words, which were spoken before, of the Apostles of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that there should be mockers, in the last time. For, against all
the rest, the Church of God is better armed; But Perniciosissimum humano
generi, says Saint Augustine, This is the ruin, and overthrow of mankind,
(that is, of Religion, which is the life and soul of mankind) Cum vera and
salubris sententia imperitorum populorum irrisione sordescit; When true, and
sincere Religion, shall be cried down, and laugh't out of countenance, by the
scorns, and jests, of ignorant people. When to all our sober preaching, and
serious writing, a scornful ignorant, shall think it enough to oppose that
one question of contempt, Where was your Church before Luther? Whereas, if we
had had any thing from Luther, which we had not had before, yet even that,
were elder than those Articles, which they had from the Council of Trent, and
had not (as Articles) before; For Luthers Declarations were before the
Constitutions of that Council. So that we could play with them at their own
Game, and retort their own scorns upon themselves, but that matters of
Religion should move in a higher Sphere, and not be deprest, and submitted to
jests. But though our Apostles prophecy must be fulfilled, There will be, and
will always be, some scoffers, some iesters; Nevertheless, says the Text,
there is a Religious constancy vpheld, and maintained by others; And farther
we extend not this first Consideration of our danger.

But, 2 Terrors.
though I can stand out these scorns and jests, there is a Tentation, that is
Real; There are true terrors, sad apprehensions, substantial circumstances,
that accompany the consideration of Christ's second coming and the Day of
Judgment. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, if
I do but fall into his hands, in a fever in my bed, or in a tempest at Sea, or
in a discontent at home; But, to fall into the hands of the living God, so, as
that, that living God, enters into Judgment, with me, and passes a final,
and irreuocable Judgment upon me, this is a Consternation of all my spirits,
an Extermination of all my succors. I consider, what God did with one word,
with one Fiat he made all; And, I know, he can do as much with another word;
With one Pereat, he can destroy all; As he spoke, Psalm. 33. 9.
and it was done, he commanded and all stood fast; so he can speak, and all
shall be undone; command, and all shall fall in pieces. I consider, that I may
be surpised by that day, the day of Judgment. Here Saint Peter says, Vers^
10.
The day of the Lord will come as a Thief. And Saint Paul says, we cannot be
ignorant of it, Your selves know perfectly, 1 These. 5. 2.
that the day of the Lord so comes as a Thief. And, as the Judgment it
self, so the Judge himself says of himself, Apoc. 3. 3.
I will come upon thee as a Thief. He says, he will, and he does it. 16. 15.
For it is not, Ecce veniam, but Ecce venio, Behold I do come upon thee as a
Thief; There, the future, which might imply a dilatoriness, is reduced to an
infallible present; It is so sure, that he will do it, that he is said, to
have done it already. I consider, he will come as a Thief, and then, as a
Thief in the night; And I do not only not know when that night shall be,
(For, himself, as he is the Son of man, knows not that) but I do not only
not know what night, that is, which night, but not what night, that is, what
kind of night he means. It is said so often, so often rep^d^ed, that he will
come as a Thief in the night, as that he may mean all kind of nights. In my
night of Ignorance he may come; and he may come in my night of Wantonness;
In my night of inordinate and sinful melancholy, and suspicion of his mercy,
he may come; and he may come in the night of so stupid, or so raging a
sickness, as that he shall not come by coming; Not come so, as that I shall
receive him in the absolution of his Minister, or receiu^^^im in the
participation of his body and his blood in the Sacrament. So he may come upon
me, as such a Thief, in such a night; nay, when all these nights of
Ignorance, of Wantonness, of Desperation, of Sickness, of Stupiditie, of
Rage, may be upon me all at once. I consider, that the Holy Ghost meant to
make a deep impression of a great terror in me, when he came to that
expression, That the Heavens should pass away, Verse. 10.
Cum stridore, with a great noise, and the Elements melt with fervent heat, and
the earth, and the works that are therein, shall be burnt up; And when he adds
in Esaias, 66. 15.
The Lord will come with fire, and with his Chariots, like a whirlewind, to
render his anger, with fury; for by fire, and by his sword will the Lord plead
with all flesh. So when he proceeds in Joel, a day of darkness, 2. 2, 3.
and gloominesse; and yet a fire deuoureth before them, and a flame burns
behind them. 7. 9.
And so in Daniel also, His Throne a fiery flame, and his wheels a burning
fire, and a fiery stream issuing from him. I consider too, that with this
stream of fire, from him, there shall be a stream, a deluge, a flood of
tears, from us; and all that flood, and deluge of tears, shall not put out
one coal, nor quench one spark of that fire. Behold, Apoc. 1. 7.
he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him; And, plangent omnes, All
the kindreds of the earth shall wail and lament, and weep and howl because
of him. I consider, that I shall look upon him then, and see all my Sins,
Substance, and Circumstance of sin, Weight, and measure of sin, heinousness,
and continuance of sin, all my sins imprinted in his wounds; and how shall
I be affected then, confounded then to see him so mangled with my sins? But
then I consider again, that I shall look upon him again, and not see all my
sins in his wounds; My forgotten sins, mine vn-considered, vnconfest,
unrepented sins, I shall not see there; And how shall I be affected then,
when I shall stand in Judgment, under the guiltiness of some sins, not buried
in the wounds, not drowned in the blood of my Savior? Many, and many, and very
many, infinite, and infinitely infinite, are the terrors of that day;
Nevertheless, my soul, why art thou so sad, why art thou disquieted within
me? Thou have a Goshen to restin, for all this Egypt; a Zoar to fly to, for
all this Sodom; a Sanctuary, and Horns of the Altar, to hold by, for all this
storm. Nevertheless, says our Text; though there be these scornful jests,
though there be these real terrors, Nevertheless, there are a We, certain
priuileged persons; And the consideration of those persons, is our third and
next circumstance.

To those who pretended an interest in Christ, 3 Persons.
and had none, to those who would exorcise possessed persons, and cast out
Devils, in the Name of Jesus, without any Commission from Jesus, to those
sons of Sceua the Devil himself could say, Qui vos? Jesus I know, Act. 19.
15.
and Paul I know, but who are you? To those who live in an outward conformity
to Christ, but yet seek their salvation in the light of Nature, and their
power of resisting temptations, in their Moral constancy, the Devil may
boldly say, Qui vos, Jesus I know, and the Church I know; but who are you? I
would I had no worse enemies than you. Nevertheless we, for all his scorns,
for all these terrors, shall have an answer to his Qui vos? and be able to
tell him, that we are that Gens Sancta, and that Regale Sacerdotium, 1. 2, 9.
that this Apostle speaks of; That holy people; made holy by his Covenant, and
Ordinances; and that royal Priesthood, which, as Priests, have an interest in
his Sacrifice, his Son; and as Kings, have an interest in that Crown, which,
for his Sons sake, he has ordained for us. We are they, who have seen the
marks of his Election, in their first edition, in the Scriptures; and seen
them again, in their second edition, as they are imprinted in our consciences,
in our faith, in our manners; and so we cannot mistake, nor be deceived in
them. We are that Semen Dei, that Malachie speaks of; 2. 15.
the seed of God, which he has sowed in his Church; and by that extraction,
we are Consortes diuinae Naturae, Partakers of the divine Nature it self; 2
Pet. 1. 4.
And so grow to be Filij Dei, The Sons of God; And by that title, Cohaeredes
Christi, Romans 8. 17.
Ioint-heires with Christ; And so to be Christi ipsi, Christ's our selves; as
God calls all his faithful, Psa, 105. ^5
his Anointed, his Christ's; And from thence, we grow to that height, to be of
the Quorum, in that Commission, Dij estis, I have said you are Gods; and not
only Gods by Representation, but Idem Spiritus cum Domino; So become the same
Spirit with the Lord, that as a Spirit cannot be divided in it self, Romans 8.
38.
so we are persuaded, that neither death nor life, nor any creature; shall be
able to separate us from God. If any man be ignorant, 1 Cor. 14. 38.
let him be ignorant still. If he will not study his own case, let him be
subject to these scorns, and these terrors still; But, Christianus idiota
persuasissimum habet, Origin.
The vnlearned'st Christian that is (be he a true Christian) has learning
enough to establish himself so, that neither scorns, nor terrors can shake
his foundations. So then you see, what fellowship of the Faithful, what
household of the Righteous, what communion of Saints it is, that falls under this
denomination, We; We that have laid our foundations in faith, and made our
superedifications in sanctimony and holiness of life; We that have learned,
and learned by the right rule the rule of Christianity, how to put a right
value upon this world, and those things, which can but concern our body in
this world. Seneca.
For Multis seruiet qui corpori seruit, says the Oracle of Moral men. That
man is common slave to every body, that is a slave to his own body; That man
dares displease no man, that dares not displease himself; That man will
grouell, and prostrate, and prostitute himself, at every great man's threshold,
that is afraid to loose a dish from his Table, or a pillow from his bed, at
home; Multis seruiet, qui corpori seruit, and qui, pro illo, nimium timet; He
is the true coward, that is afraid of every inconvenience, which another may
cast upon his person, or fortune. Honestum ei vile est, cui corpus nimis charum
est; He that has set too high a price upon his body, will sell his soul
cheap. But if we can say of the fires of tribulation, as Origin says,
(whether he speak of the fires of conflagration at the last day, or these
fires of purification in our way to it) Indigemus Sacramento ignis, Baptismo
ignis, That all our fiery tribulations fall under the nature, and definition of
Sacraments, That they are so many visible signs of invisible Grace, that every
correction from Gods hand, is a Rebaptization to m^e, and that I can see, that
I should not have been so sure of salvation, without this Sacrament, without
this Baptism, without this fire of tribulation; If I can bring this fire to
that temper, which Lactantius speaks of, that it be Ignis qui obtemperabit
justice, A fire that shall conform it self to me, and do as I would have it;
that is, concoct, and purge, and purify, and prepare me for God; If my
Christianity make that impression in me, which Socrates his Philosophy did in
him, who (as Gregory Nazianzene testifies of him) In carcere damnatus, egit
cum discipulis, de corpore, sicut de alio ergastulo, Who, when he lay a
condemned man in prison, then in that prison, taught his disciples, that the
body of man, was a worse prison, then that, he lay condemned in; If I can
bring these fires to this compass, and to this temper, I shall find, that as
the Arc was in the midst of the Waters, and yet safe from the waters, and the
bush in the midst of the fire, and yet safe from the fire, so, though Saint
Jerome say, (and upon good grounds) Grandis audaciae est, puraeque
conscientque, It is an Act of greater boldness, than any man, as man, can
auow, and a testimony of a clearer conscience, than any man, as man, can
pretend to have, Regnum Dei postulare, and iudicium non timere, To press God
for the day of Judgment, and not to fear that day, (for, upon all men,
considered but as men, falls that severe expostulation of the Prophet Amos, 5.
18.
Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord; to what end is it for you? The
day of the Lord is darkness, and not light;) Yet I shall find, that such a
family, such a society, such a communion there is, and that I am of that
Quorum, that can say, Come what scorns can come, come what terrors can come,
In Christo omnia possumus, Though we can do nothing of our selves, yet as we
are in Christ, we can do all things, because we are fixed in him, Secundum
promissa; Which is our fourth and next branch, According to his promises.

I have nothing to plead with God, 4 Promissa.
but only his own promises. I cannot plead birthright; The Jews were elder
brothers, and yet were disinherited. I cannot plead descent; My mother was an
Hittite, 16. 3.
(as the Prophet Ezechiel speaks.) I am but of the half blood, at best; More
of the first, then of the second Adam; more corporal, then spiritual. I
cannot plead purchase; If I have given any thing for Gods sake, if I have done
any thing, suffered any thing, for Gods sake, all that, is so far from merit,
as that it is not the interest of my principal debt. Nay, I cannot plead
mercy; For, Ephesians. 2. 3.
I am by nature the child of wrath too. All my Plea is, that, to which he
carries me so often, in his word, Quia fidelis Dominus, Because the Lord is a
faithful God. So this Apostle calls him, 1. 4, 19.
Fidelem Creatorem, A faithful Creator; God had gracious purposes upon me,
when he created me, and will be faithful to those purposes; so St. Paul calls
Christ Fidelem Pontificem, Heb. 2. 17.
A faithful high Priest; graciously he meant to sacrifice himself for the
world, and faithfully he did it. So Saint John call him Fidelem Testem, Apoc.
1. 5.
A faitfull Witness; Of his Mercy he did die for me, and his spirit bears
witness with my spirit that he did so. And in the same Book, 19. 11. his
very denomination, his very name is Faithful. For this Faithfulness in God,
which is so often recommended to me, must necessarily imply a former promise;
If God be Faithful, he is faithful to some contract, to some promise, that
he has made; And that promise, is my evidence. But then, to any promise, that
is pretended, and not deduced from his Scriptures, he may justly plead Non est
factum; He made no such promise. For, as in cases of Diffidence, and Distrust
in his mercy, God puts us upon that issue, Vbilibellus, Produce your Evidence;
why are you icalous of me? Where is the bill of your mothers divorce whom I
have put away; Esa. 50. 1.
or which of my Creditors is it to whom I have sold you? So in cases of
presumption in our selves, or pressing God with his promises, (and so also, in
cases of Innovation of matter of Doctrine in his Church) God puts us to the
same issue, Vbi libellus, Produce your Evidence; where in my Scriptures, have I
made any such Contract, any such Covenant, any such promise to you? My Witness
is in Heaven, 16. 19.
says Job; But yet, my Evidence is upon earth; GOD is that Witness; but that
Witness has been pleased, to be examined Ad perpetuam rei memoriam; And his
testimony remains of Record, in the Church; And there, from his Scriptures,
exemplified to me, by his public Notary, the Church, I may lawfully charge
him, with his promise, his contract, his covenant; and else not. There is a
general, and a useful observation, made by Saint Augustine, Omnium
haereticoru^ quasi regularis est ista temeritas, This is a Regular
Irregularity, this is a fixed and constant Leuity, amongst all Heretics,
Authoritatem stabilissimam fundatissimae Ecclesiae quasi rationis nomine and
pollicitatione suparare; To overthrow the foundations of the Church upon the
appearance, and pretense, and color of Reason; God cannot have proceeded thus
or thus, because there is this and this reason against it. Now the foundations
of the Church are the Scriptures; And when men present reasons of probability,
of verisimilitude, of pious credulity, not deduc't out of the Scriptures, they
fall into that regular Irregularity, and into that constant leuity, which Saint
Augustine justly makes the Character, and Specification of an Heretic, to
seem to proceed upon reasons, and not deduce those reasons from the
Scriptures. When therefore they reason thus (as Bellarmine does) Non discretus
Dominus, That God had not dealt discreetly, if he had not established a Church,
a Certain, a Visible, and Infallible Church, a Church endowed with these and
these, with those and those, and such and such, and more and more Immunities
and Privileges, by which, that particular Church must be Super-Catholike, and
Super-vniuersall, a boue all the Churches in the world, we join not with them
in that boldness, to call Gods discretion in question, but we join with them
in that issue, Vbi libellus, Where is your evidence; which is your Scripture,
which you will rely upon for that, for such a Church? For we content not our
selves, with such places of Scripture, as may serve to illustrate that
Doctrine, to them, that believe it aforehand, without Scripture, but we ask
such places of Scripture, as may prove it to them, who, till they see such
Scriptures, believe, and believe truly, that they are not bound to believe it;
If I may plead it, it is a promise; and if it be an issuable promise, it is in
the Scriptures. If any distresses in my fortune and estate, in my body, and in
my health, oppress me, I may find some receipts, some Medicines, some words
of consolation, in a Seneca, in a Plutarch, in a Petrarch; But I proceed in a
safer way, and deal upon better Cordials, if I make David, and the other
Prophets of God, my Physicians, and see what they prescribe me, in the
Scriptures; and look how my fellow-patient Job applied that Physic, by his
Patience. And if any thing heavier then that which fell upon Job, fall upon
me, yet I may propose one, to my self, upon whom there fell more, then can
fall upon any man; for all mankind fell upon him, and all the sins of all
mankind, and Gods Justice, Gods Anger, for all the sins of all mankind fell
upon him, and yet he had a glorious eluctation, a victory, a triumph ouerall
that. And he is not only my rule, and my example, but my Surety, and my
Promise, That where he is, Ioh. 14. 3.
I shall be also; not only, where he is, in Glory now, but in every step, that
he made in this world; If I be with him, in his Afflictions, I shall be with
him, in his Eluctation, in his Victory, in his Triumph. St. Chrysostom,
falling upon such a meditation, as this, is loath to depart from it; He insists
upon it thus; Illine, qui a dextris Dei sedet, conform fiet hoc corpus? Will
God make this body of mine, like that, that sits now at his right hand: Yes; he
will Illi, quem adorant Angeli? Like him, whom all the Angels worship? Yes;
like him. Illi, cui adstant incorporales virtutes? Like him, to whom, the
Thrones, and Powers, and Dominations, and Cherubins, and Seraphins minister?
Yes; he will do all that, says that Father. But allow me the boldness, to
add thus much, Cumillo, I shall be with him, before; with him, wheresoever
he was in this world. I shall be with him, in his Agonies, and sadness of
soul; but in those Agonies and sadnesses, I shall be with him still, in his
Veruntamen, In his surrender of himself; Not my will, but thine, O Father, be
done. I shall be with him upon his Cross; but in all my crosses, and in all
my iealousies and suspicions of that Dereliquisti, That God, my God has for
saken me, I shall be with him still, in his In manus, In a confidence, and
assurance, that I may commit my Spirit into his hands. For all this I do
According to his promise, that where he is, I shall be also. Si totus mundus
lachrymis sumptis deflesset, (says the same Father) If men were made of
tears, as they are made of the Elements of tears, of the occasions of tears,
of miseries, and if all men were resolved to tears, as they must resolve to
dust, all were not enough to lament their miserable condition, who lay hold,
upon the miserable comforters of this World, upon their own merits, or upon
the super-erogations of other men, of which there are no promises, and cannot
find that true promise, which is impli'd in those examples of Job and Christ,
appliable to themselves. Nevertheless we, we that can do so, we, that can
read that promise, that where they are, we shall be, that what he has done
for them, he will also do for us, we according to his promise, declared in his
Scriptures, in the midst of Scoffers, and in the midst of Terrors, expect, and
look for more, than we have yea; which is another, there, and our fifth
consideration.

As God has provided us an Endlesnesse, The future.
in the world to come, so, to give us an Inchoation, a Representation of the
next world, in this, God has instituted and endlesnesse^ in this world too;
God has imprinted in every natural man, and does exalt in the super-naturall,
and regenerate man, an endless, and Vndeterminable desire of more, then this
life can minister unto him. Still God leaves man in expectation. And truly,
that man can scarce prove the immortality of the soul to himself, that feel's
not a desire in his soul, of something beyond this life. Creatures of an
inferior nature, are possessed with the present; Man is a future Creature. In a
holy and useful sense, we may say, that God is a future God; to man
especially he is so; Man's consideration of God is specially for the future. It
is plain, it is evident, that that name which God has taken in Exodus,
signifies, Essence, 3. 14. Ambros.
Being. Verum nomen Dei, Semper esse, Gods proper name is Always Being. That
can be said of no creature, that it always was; That which the Arrians said
blasphemously, of Christ, Erat, quando non erat, is true of all creatures,
There was a time, when that thing, was nothing. But of God, more than this may
be said; so much more, as that when we have said all that we can, more then
so much more remains unsaid. For, Nazian.
Totum Deum, nemo vno nomine, exprimit, sicut nec totum aerem haurit; A man may
as well draw in, all the air, at one breath, as express all God, God
entirely, in one name. But the name that reaches farthest toward him, is that
name, which he has taken in Exodus. Deo si coniungimur sumus; Greg.
In being derived from God, we have a Being, we are something; In him we live
and move and have our Being; But Deo si comparemur, nec sumus; If we be
compared with God, our Being with his Being, we have no Being at all, we are
Nothing. For Being is the peculiar and proper name of God. But though it be so
clear, that that Name of God in Exodus is Being, yet it is not so clear,
whether it be a present, or a future Being. For, though most of the Fathers
expressed, and our Translators rendered in the present, Sum qui sum, I am that
I am, and, Go, and tell Pharaoh that he whose name is I am, has sent thee;
yet in the Original, it is plain, and plain in the Chalde Paraphrase, that
that name is delivered in the future, Ero qui ero, I shall be that I shall be,
and, Go, and tell Pharaoh that he whose name is I shall be, has sent thee.
God calls upon man, even in the consideration of the name of God, to consider
his future state. For, if we consider God in the present, to day, now, God has
had as long a forenoone, as he shall have an afternoon; God has been God, as
many millions of millions of generations, already, as he shall be hereafter;
but if we consider man in the present, to day, now, how short a forenoone has
any man had; if 60. if 80. years, yet few and evil have his days been. Nay,
if we take man collectiuely, entirely, altogether, all mankind, how short a
forenoone has man had? It is not yet 6000^ years, since man had his first
being. But if we consider him in his Afternoon, in his future state, in his
life after death, if every minute of his 6000. years, were multiplied by so
many millions of Ages, all would amount to nothing, merely nothing, in respect
of that Eternity, which he is to dwell in. We can express man's Afternoon,
his future Perpetuity, his Euerlastingnesse, but one way; But it is a fair
way, a noble way; This; That how late a Beginning soever God gave Man, Man
shall no more see an end, no more die, then God himself, that gave him life.
Therefore says the Apostle here, We, We that consider God according to his
promise, expect future things, look for more at Gods hand hereafter, then we
have received heretofore; For his mercies are new every morning; and his later
mercies are his largest mercies. How many, how great Nations perish, without
ever hearing the name of Christ; But God wrapped me up in his Covenant, and
derived me from Christian Parents; I sucked Christian blood, in my Mothers
womb, and Christian milk at my Nurses breast. The first sound that I heard,
in the world, was the voice of Christians; and the first Character, that I was
taught to know, was the Cross of CHRIST JESUS. How many children that are
borne so, borne within the Covenant, borne of Christian Parents, do yet die
before they be baptized, though they were borne heirs to Baptism? But God
has afforded me the seal of that Sacrament. And then, how many that are
baptized, and so eased in original sin, do yet proceed to act^all sins, and
are surpised by death, before they receive the Seal of their Reconciliation
to Christ, in the Sacrament of his body and his blood; but God has afforded
me the Seal of that Sacrament too. What sins soever GOD forgave me this
morning, yet since the best (and I am none of them) fall seven times a day, God
forgiues me seven more sins, to morrow, then he did to day; and seven, in
this Arithmetike, is infinite. Gods temporal, Gods spiritual blessings are
inexhaustible. What have we that we have not received? But what have we
received, in respect of that which is laid up for us? And therefore,
Expectamus, We determine our selves in God so, as that we look for nothing,
but from him; But not so, as that we hope for no more from him, then we have
had: For, that were to determine God, to circumscribe God, to make God finite.
Therefore we bless God for our possession, but yet we expect a larger
reuersion. And the day intended in this Text, shall make that Reuersion our
Possession; which is, the day of Judgment.

Therefore, Expect.
in the verse, immediately before the Text, the Apostle accompanies this
Expectantes, with another word; it is Expectantes, and properantes, Looking
for, and hasting to, the coming of the day of God. We must have such an
Expectation of that day as may imply, and testify a love to it, a desire of
it, a longing for it. When these things begin to come to pass (says Christ,
Luke 21. 28.
speaking of the signs, preceding the last day) then look up, and lift your
heads, for your Redemption draws near. All our deiections of spirit, should
receive an exaltation, in that one consolation, that that day draws near.
August.
Seu velimus, seu nolimus, Whether we will, or no, that day will come; but,
says that Father, in that short prayer of his, the Lord has given thee an
entire Petition, for accelerating, and hasting that day of the Lord; When he
bids thee say, Thy Kingdom come, he means, that thou should mean, the
Kingdom of glory at the Judgment, as well as the Kingdom of Grace, in the
Church Christ says, 10. 14. 3.
If I go, and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto
my self, that where I am, you may be also. Now, Beloved, has Christ done one
half of this, for us, and would not we have him do the other half too? Is he
gone, to prepare the place, and would we not have him come to fetch us to it?
Certainly Christ speaks that in favor, he intends^ it for a favor, when he
says, Apoc. 22. 1^.
Behold I come quickly. It is one favor that he will come; and seconded with
another, that he will make speed to save us, that he will make haste to help
us. And to establish us in that assurance, he adds in that place, Behold I
come quickly, and my reward is with me; if the coming do not, if the speed
do not, yet let the reward work in you a desire of that day. The last words
that Christ speaks in the Bible (and amongst us, last words make deepest
impressions) are, Surely I come quickly; Verse. 20.
And the last answer that is made in our behalfes, there, is, Amen, even so,
come Lord Jesus. There is scarce any amongst us, but does expect this commings
They that fear it, expect it, But, that crown, that the Apostle speaks of, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
is laid up for them, that love the appearing of the Lord; Not only expect it,
but love it; And no man can do so, that has not a confidence in his cause;
Gregor.
Aduentu^ Iudi^is non diligit, No prisoner longs for the Sessions, no Client
longs for the day of hearing, Nisuqui in causa suase sciat habere iustitiae
meritum, Except he know his cause to be good, and assure himself, that he
shall stand upright in Judgment. But can we have that assurance? Assuredly ^
we may. He that has seen the marks of election, in both editions, in the
Scripture first, and then in his conscience, he that does not flatter, and
abuse his own soul, nor tempt, and presume upon God, he that in a sobe^ and
rectified conscience, finds himself truly incorporated in Christ, truly
interessed in his merits, may be sure, that if the day of Judgment came now,
now he should be able to stand upright in Judgment. And therefore, let
Schoole-boyes look after holy days, and worldly men after rent-dayes, and
Travelers after Fairedayes, and Chap-men after Market-dayes, Nevertheless,
We, we that have laid hold upon God, and laid hold upon him by the right
handle, According to his promises, Expectamus, We look for this day of the
Lord, and Properamus, We are glad it is so near, and we desire the further
hasting of it.

But then, Wait.
Beloved, the day of our death is the Eve of this day of the Lord; The day of
our death is the Saturday of this Sunday; the next day after my death, is the
day of Judgment, For, between these, these eyes shall see no more days. And
then, are we bound, nay, may we lawfully wish, and desire the day of our
death, as we have said, we are bound to do the day of Judgment; The Souls
of the Martyrs under the Altar in Heaven, cry unto God there, Apoc. 6. 9.
Vsque quo Domine, How long o Lord holy and true, do thou not judge, and
avenge our blood? That which those Martyrs solicit there, is the day of
Judgment; And though that which they ask, was not presently granted, but the day
of Judgment put off, for a time, yet God was not displeased with their
solicitation; for, for all that, he gave them then, their white robes;
testimony enough, of their innocence. If we could wish our own death, as
innocently, as harmlesly, as they did the day of Judgment, if no ill
circumstances in us, did vitiate our desire of death, if there were no dead
flies in this ointment, Eccles. 10. 1.
(as Solomon speaks) if we had not, at least, a collateral respect, (if not a
direct, and principal) to our own ease, from the incum brances, and
grieuances, and annoyances of this world, certainly we might safely desire,
piously wish, religiously pray for our own death. But it is hard, very hard
to de^est those circumstances, that infect it. For if I pretend to desire
death, merely for the fruition of the glory, of the sight of God; I must
remember, that my Savior desi^d that glory, and yet staid his time for it. If
I pretend to desire death, that I might see no more sin, hear no more
blasphemies from others, it may be I may do more good to others, than I shall
take harm by others, if I live. If I would die, that I might be at an end of
temptations, in my self, yet, I might lose some of that glory, which I shall
have in Heaven, by resisting another years tentation, if I died now. To end
this consideration, as this looking for the day of the Lord, (which is the word
of our Text) implies a joy, and a gladness of it, when it shall come, (whether
we consider that, as the day it self, the day of Judgment, or the Eve of the
day, the day of our death) so does this looking for it, imply a patient
attending of Gods leisure. For our example, the Apostle says, The earnest
expectation of the Creature, Romans 8.19.
waits for the manifestation of the Son of God; It is an earnest
expectation, and yet it waits; and, for our nearer example, Verse. ^3.
We our selves, which have the first fruits of the spirit, groan within our
selves; But yet, he adds, we wait for the adoption, the redemption of the
body. Though we have some ears, we wait for the whole sheaues. And we may be
content to do so, for we shall not wait long. 1. 2. 11.
This is the last time, says St. John; speaking of the present time of the
Gospel; In the time of nature, they were a great way off, from the
Resurrection; for then, the time of the Law was to come in. And in the time of
the Law, they were a great way off; for then the time of the Gospel was to
come in. But this is the last time; There shall be no more changes, after the
Gospel; the present state of the Gospel shall land us upon the Judgment. And
(as the Vulgate reads that place, Nouissima horaest, If God will have us stay a
little longer, it is but for a few minutes; for, this is our last hour. We
feel scorns, we apprehend terrors, Nevertheless we, we rooted in his
promises, do expect, we are not at an end of our desires, and with an holy
impatience that he would give us, and yet with a holy patience till he be
pleased to give us New Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness;
Which are the two branches, which remain yet to be considered.

As in the first discoueries New Heavens.
of the unknown parts of the world, the Maps and Cards which were made
thereof, were very uncertain, very imperfect, so in the discovery of these
New Heavens, the expositions of those who have undertaken that work, are very
diverse. First, Origin, citing for his opinion, Clement, whom he calls the
Disciple of the Apostles, takes those heavens, and that Earth, which our
Antipodes, (and generally those that inhabit^ the other Hemispheare) inhabit,
to be the new Heavens and the new Earth of this Text. He says, Oceanus
intransibilis ad reliquos mundos, There are Worlds beyond these Worlds, beyond
that Ocean, which we cannot pass, nor discover, says Origin; But, those
Worlds, and those Heavens, and that Earth shall be discovered before the last
day, and the Gospel of Christ be preached in all those places; And this is
our expectation, that which we look for, According to his promises, in the
intention, and exposition of Origin. Those that were infected with the heresy
of the Chiliasts, or Millenarians (with which heresy diverse great and learned
men, whom we refuse not to call Fathers in the Primitive Church, were infected)
upon the mistaking of those words in the Apocalypse, 20.4.
of reigning with Christ a thousand years after the first Resurrection, argued
and concluded a happy temporal state, of Gods Saints here, upon this Earth,
for so many years after that day. So that, though there should not be truly a
new Earth, and new Heavens, but the same Heavens, and the same Earth as was
before, for those future thousand years, yet, because those Saints of God,
which in their whole former life, had been in misery, upon this Earth, should
now enjoy all earthly happiness, upon the same Earth for a thousand years,
before they ascended into Heaven, these Heavens, and this Earth (because they
are so to them) are called a new Earth, and a new Heavens, by those
Millenarians. St. Jerome, and St. Augustine, and after them, the whole stream
run in another channel. They say, that these Heavens, and this Earth shall be
so purified, so refined, by the last fires of conflagration, as that all
corruptible qualities shall be burnt out of them, but they, in their
substance, remain still. To that, those words of St. Paul help to incl^ne
them, Perit figura, 1 Cor. 7. 31.
The fashion of this world passes away; The fashion, not the substance. For,
it is Melioratio, non interitus, The world shall be made better, but it shall
not be made nothing. But, to what end shall it be thus improu'd? In that, St.
Augustine declares himself; Mundus in melius immutatus apt accommodabitur
hominibus in melius immutatis. When men are made better by the Resurrection,
this World being made betterby those fires, shall be a fit habitation for
those Saints of God; and so even this World, and whatsoever is not Hell, shall
be Heaven. And, truly, some very good Divines, of the Reformation, Polanus.
accompany those Ancients in that Exposition, that these Heavens purified with
those fires, and super-inuested with new endowments, shall be the everlasting
habitation of the blessed Saints of God. But still, in these discoueries of
these new Heavens, and this new Earth, our Maps will be imperfect. But as it
is said of old Cosmographers, that when they had said all that they knew of a
Country, and yet much more was to be said, they said that the rest of those
countries were possessed with Giants, or Witches, or Spirits, or Wild beasts, so
that they could pierce no farther into that Country, so when we have
trauell'd as far as we can, with safety, that is, as far as Ancient, or
Modern Expositors lead us, in the discovery of these new Heavens, and new
Earth, yet we must say at last, that it is a Country inhabited with Angels,
and Arch-angells, with Cherubins, and Seraphins, and that we can look no
farther into it, with these eyes. Where it is locally, we enquire not; We rest
in this, that it is the habitation prepared for the blessed Saints of God;
Heavens, where the Moon is more glorious than our Sun, and the Sun as
glorious as He that made it; For it is he himself, the Son of God, the
Sun of glory. A new Earth, where all their waters are milk, and all their
milk, honey, where all their grass is corn, and all their corn, Manna;
where all their glebe, all their clods of earth are gold, and all their gold of
innumerable carats; Where all their minutes are ages, and all their ages,
Eternity; Where every thing, is every minute, in the highest exaltation, as
good as it can be, and yet super-exalted, and infinitely multiplied, by every
minutes addition; every minute, infinitely better, then ever it was before. Of
these new heavens, and this new earth we must say at last, that we can say
nothing; For, the eye of Man has not seen, nor ear heard, nor heart
conceived, the State of this place. We limit, and determine our consideration
with that Horizon, with which the Holy Ghost has limited us, that it is that
new Heavens, and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness.

Here then the Holy Ghost intends the same new Heavens, Righteousness.
and new Earth, which he does in the Apocalypse, 21. 1.
and describes there, by another name, the new Jerusalem. But here, the Holy
Ghost does not proceed, as there, to enamour us of the place, by a promise of
improuement of those things, which we have, and love here; but by a promise of
that, which here we have not at all. There, and elsewhere, the holy Ghost
applies himself, to the natural affections of men. To those that are affected
with riches, he says, Ver. 18.
that that new City shall be all of gold, and in the foundations, all manner of
precious stones; To those that are affected with beauty, he promises an
everlasting association, with that beautiful Couple, that fair Pair, which
spend their time, in that contemplation, and that protestation, Ecce tu pulchra
dilecta mea; Cant. 1. 15, 16. ^
Ecce tu pulcher; Behold thou art fair, my Beloved, says he; and then, she
replies, Behold thou art fair too; noting the mutual complacencie between
Christ and his Church there. To those which delight in Music, he promises
continual singing, and every minute, a new song; To those, whose thoughts are
exerciz'd upon Honor, and Titles, Civil, or Ecclesiastical, he promises
Priesthood, and if that be not honor enough, a Royal Priesthood; And to
those, who look after military honor, Triumph after their victory, in the
Militant Church; And to those, that are carried with sumptuous, and magnifique
feasts, a Marriage supper of the Lamb, where, not only all the rarities of the
whole world, but the whole world it self shall be served in; The whole world
shall be brought to that fire, and served at that Table. But here, the holy
Ghost proceeds not that way; by improuement of things, which we have, and love
here; riches, or beauty, or music, or honor, or feasts; but by an
everlasting possession of that, which we hunger, and thirst, and pantafter,
here, and cannot compass, that is, Justice, or Righteousness; for, both
those, our present word denotes, and both those we want here, and shall have
both, for ever, in these new Heavens, and new Earth.

What would a worn and macerated suter, Justice.
oppressed by the bribery of the rich, or by the might of a potent Adversary,
give, or do, or suffer, that he might have Justice? What would a dejected
Spirit, a disconsolate soul, oppressed with the weight of heavy, and habitual
sin, that stands naked in a frosty Winter of desperation, and cannot compass
one fig leaf, one color, one excuse for any circumstance of any sin, give
for the garment of Righteousness? Here there is none that does right, none
that executes Justice; or, not for Justice sake. He that does Justice, does
it not at first; And Christ does not thank that Judge, Luke 18. 2.
that did Justice, upon the woman's importunity. Justice is no Justice, that is
done for fear of an Appeal, or a Commission. There may be found, that may
do Justice at first; At their first entrance into a place, to make good
impressions, to establish good opinions, they may do some Acts of Justice; But
after, either an Vxoriousnesse to wards to the wife, or a Solicitude for
children, or a facility toward servants, or a vastness of expense, quenches,
and ouercom's the love of Justice in them; Non habitat, In most it is not; but
it dwells not in any. In our new Heavens, and new Earth, dwells justice. And
that is my comfort; that when I come thither, I shall have Justice at God's
hands. It was an Act of mercy, merely, that God decreed a means of salvation;
But to give salvation to them, for whom Christ gave that full satisfaction, is
but an act of Justice. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6.
It is a righteous thing with God, to recompense Tribulation to them, that
trouble you, and to you who are troubled, rest with us, says the Apostle. It
is an act of the same Justice, to save the true Believer, as to damn him, who
by unbelief, has made himself a Reprobate.

Justice dwells there, Righteousness.
and there dwells Righteousness; Of which there is none in this world; None that
grows in this world; none that is mine own; For; howsoever we do dispute, or
will conclude of inherent Righteousness, it is, indeed, rather adheherent, then
inherent; rather extrinsecall than intrinsecal. Not that it is not in my self;
in my will; but it is not of my self, nor of my will; My will was never able
to rectify, to justify it self; But the power of God's grace calls in a
foreign Righteousness, to my succor, the Righteousness of my Savior, and
calls his, and makes his, my Righteousness. But yet, Non habitat, This
Righteous^ dwells not unremovable, in me, here. Though I have put on that
garment, in Baptism, and girt it to me closer in the other Sacrament, and in
some acts of holiness, yet, my sins of infirmity slacken this garment, and
it falls from me, before I am aware, and in my sins of contempt, and
rebellion, I tear it off, and throw it away my self. But in this new state,
these new Heavens, and new Earth, Iusticia habitat, This Righteousness shall
dwell; I shall have an innocence, and a constant innocence; a present
impeccancy, and an impeccability for the future. But, in this especially, is
Righteousness said to dwell there, because this Righteousness, is the very Son
of God, the Son of Righteousness himself. And, this day, the day of his
second Coming, is the last day of his Progress; For, ever after that day,
these new Heavens, and new Earth shall be his standing house, where he shall
dwell, and we with him; as himself has said, Mat. 14. 43
The Righteous shall shine forth, as the Sun it self; As the Son of God
himself, as the Son of glory, as the Son of Righteousness himself. For,
God shall impart to us all, a mysterious Gauelkinde, a mysterious Equality of
fullness of Glory, to us all: God shall not whisper to his own Son, a Sede a
dextris, Sit thou at my right hand; nor a Hodie genuite, This day have I
begotten thee, nor a Ponam inimicos tuos, I will make thine enemies thy
footstool, and no more; But, as it is said of the Armies of Israel, That they
went forth as one man, so the whole Host of God's Saints, incorporated in
Christ Jesus, shall be as one man, and as that one Man, who was so the Son
of Man, as that he was the Son of God too. And God shall say to us all,
Sedete a dextris, Si^ ye all on my right hand; for from the left hand, there is
no prospect, to the face of God; And to us all, Hodie genui vos, This day I
have begotten you all; begotten you in the confirmation of my first Baptism,
in the ratification of my first Election; And to us all, Ponam inimicos
vestros, I will make all your enemies your footstool; For God shall establish
us there, Vbi non intrat inimicus, Aug.
nec amicus exit, Where no man shall come in, that troubles the company, nor
any, whom any of the company loves, go out; but we shall all, not only have,
but be a part of that Righteousness which dwells in these new Heavens, and new
Earth, which we, According to his promise look for.

ANd be this the end of our first Text, Commemoration.
as it is a Text for Instruction. Pass we now to our second, our Text for
Commemoration. Close we here this Book of life, from which we have had our
first Text, And, Surge quae dormis in puluere, Arise thou Book of Death; thou,
that sleep in this consecrated dust; and have been going into dust, now,
almost a Month of days, almost a Lunarie year, and do deserve such
Anniuersaries, such quick returns of Periods, and a Commemoration, in every
such year, in every Month; Arise thou, and be another Commentary to us; and
tell us, what this new Heaven, and new Earth is, in which, now, thou dwel'st,
with that Righteousness. But we do not inuoke thee, as thou art a Saint in
Heaven; Appear to us, as thou did appear to us a month ago; At least,
appear in thy history; Appear in our memory; that when every one of us have
looked upon thee, by his own glass, and seen thee in his own Interest, such,
as thou wast to him, That when one shall have seen thee, the best wife, And a
larger number, the best mother, And more then they, a whole Town, the best
Neighbor, And more then a Town, a large body of noble friends, the best
Friend, And more then all they, all the world, the best example, when thou have
received this Testimony from the Militant Church, as thou have the recompense
of all this, in thy Blessed Soul, in the Triumphant, yet, because thy body is
still within these Walls, be still content, to be one of this Congregation,
and to hear some parts of this Text re-applie'd unto thee.

Our first word, Nevertheless, Nevertheless.
puts us first upon this consideration, That she lived in a Time, wherein this
Prophecy of Saint Peter, in this Chapter, was ouer-abundantly performed, That
there should be scoffers, iesters in divine things, and matters appertaining
to God, and his Religion. For, now, in these our days, excellency of Wit, lies
in profaneness; he is the good Spirit, that dares abuse God; And he good
company, that makes his company the worse, or keeps them from goodness. This
being the Air, and the Complexion of the Wit of her Times, and her
inclination, and conversation, naturally, cheerful, and merry, and loving
facetiousnesse, and sharpness of wit, Nevertheless, who ever saw her, who
ever heard her countenance a profane speech, how sharp soever, or take part
with wit, to the prejudice of Godliness? From this I testify her holy
cheerfulness, and Religious alacrity, (one of the best evidences of a good
conscience) That as she came to this place, God's house of Prayer, duly, not
only every Sabbath, when it is the house of other exercises, as well as of
Prayer, but even in those weeke-dayes, when it was only a house of Prayer, as
often as these doors were opened for a holy Convocation, And, as she ever
hastened her family, and her company hither, with that cheerful provocation,
For God's sake let us go, For God's sake let us be there at the Confession. So,
her self, with her whole family, (as a Church in that elect Lady's house, to
whom John writ his second Epistle) did, every Sabbath, shut up the day, at
night, with a general, with a cheerful singing of Psalms, This Act of
cheerfulness, was still the last Act of that family, united in it self, and
with God. God loves a cheerful giver; Much more a cheerful giver of himself.
Truly, he that can close his eyes, in a holy cheerfulness, every night, shall
meet no distempered, no inordinate, no irregular sadness, then, when God; by
the hand of Death, shall close his eyes, at last.

But, return we again to our Nevertheless; You may remember, that this word
in our former part, put us first upon the consideration of Scoffers at the day
of judgment, and then, upon the consideration of Terrors, and sad
Apprehensions at that day. And for her, some sicknesses, in the declination of
her years, had opened her to an ouer-flowing of Melancholy; Not that she ever
lay under that water, but yet, had sometimes, some high Tides of it; and,
though this distemper would sometimes cast a cloud, and some half damps upon
her natural cheerfulness, and sociablenesse, and sometimes induce dark, and
sad apprehensions, Nevertheless, who ever heard, or saw in her, any such
effect of Melancholy as to murmr, or repine, or dispute upon any of Gods
proceedings, or to lodge a Jealousy, or Suspicion of his mercy, and goodness
toward her, and all hers? The Wit of our time is Profaneness; Nevertheless,
she, that loved that, hated this; Occasional Melancholy had taken some hold
in her, Nevertheless, that never Ecclipst, never interrupted her cheerful
confidence, and assurance in God.

Our second word denotes the person; We, Nevertheless We; And, here in this
consideration, Nevertheless she. This may seem to promise some picture, some
Character of her person. But she was no stranger to them that hear me now;
nor scarce to any that may hear of this here^ after, which you hear now, and
therefore, much needs not, to that purpose. Yet, to that purpose, of her
person, and personal circumstances, thus much I may remember some, and inform
others, That from that Worthy family, Daughter of Sir Rich sister of Sir Fran.
Aun^ of Sir Rich. Neupo^^, of Arcol.
whence she had her original extraction, and birth, she sucked that love of
hospitality, (hospitality, which has celebrated that family, in many
Generations, successively) which dwelt in her, to her end. But in that ground,
her Fathers family, she grew not many years. Transplanted young from thence,
by marriage, into another family of Honor, as a flower that doubles and
multiplies by transplantation, she multiplied into ten Children; Rich. Herbert
of Blachehall in Montgomery Esqu. lineally descended from that great Sir Rich.
Herbert in Ed. 4. time, and father of Ed. Lord Herbert Baron of Castle-Island,
late Ambassador in France, and now of his Majesty's Council of War.
Job's number; and Job's distribution, (as she, her self would very often
remember) seven sons, and three daughters. And, in this ground, she grew not
many years more, then were necessary, for the producing of so many plants. And
being then left to choose her own ground in her Widow-hood, having at home
established, and increast the estate, with a fair, and noble Addition,
proposing to her self, as her principal care, theeducation of her children,
to advance that, she came with them, and dwelt with them, in the University;
and recompenc't to them, the loss of a Father, in giving them two mothers; her
own personal care, and the advantage of that place; where she contracted a
friendship, with diverse reverend persons, of eminency, and estimation there;
which continued to their ends. And as this was her greatest business, so she
made this state, a large Period; for in this state of widowhood, she continued
twelve years. And then, returning to a second marriage, that second marriage
turns us to the consideration of another personal circumstance; that is, the
natural endowments of her person; Which were such, as that, (though her
virtues were his principal object) yet, even these her personal, and natural
endowments, had their part, in drawing, and fixing the affections of such a
person, as by his birth, Sir John Da^uers only brother to the Earl of Danby.
and youth, and interest in great favors in Court, and legal proximity to
great possessions in the world, might justly have promised him acceptance, in
what family soever, or upon what person soever, he had directed, and placed
his Affections. He placed them here; neither diuerted then, nor repented since.
For, as the well tuning of an Instrument, makes higher and lower strings, of
one sound, so the inequality of their years, was thus reduced to an evenness,
that she had a cheerfulness, agreeable to his youth, and he a sober
staidness, conform^ble to her more years. So that, I would not consider her,
at so much more then forty, nor him, at so much less then thirty, at that
time, but, as their persons were made one, and their fortunes made one, by
marriage, so I would put their years into one number, and finding a sixty
between them, think them thirty a piece; for, as twins of one hour, they
lived. God, who joined them, then, having also separated them now, may make
their years even, this other way too; by giving him, as many years after her
going out of this World, as he had given her, before his coming into it; and
then, as many more, as God may receive Glory, and the World, Benefit by that
Addition; That so, as at their first meeting, she was, at their last meeting,
he may be the elder person.

To this consideration of her person then, belongs this, that God gave her such
a comeliness, as, though she were not proud of it, yet she was so content
with it, as not to go about to mend it, by any Art. And for her Attire, (which
is another personal circumstance) it was never sumptuous, never sordid^ But
always agreeable to her quality, and agreeable to her company; Such as she
might, and such, as others, such as she was, did wear For, in such things of
indifferency in themselves, many times, a singularity may be a little worse,
then a fellowship in that, which is not altogether so good. It may be worse,
nay, it may be a worse pride, to wear worse things, then others do. Her rule
was mediocrity.

And, as to the consideration of the house, belongs the consideration of the
furniture too, so, in these personal circumstances, we consider her fortune,
her estate. Which was in a fair, and noble proportion, derived from her first
husband, and fairly, and nobly dispensed, by herself, with the allowance of
her second. In which she was one of Gods true Stewards, and Almoners too.
There are dispositions, which had rather give presents, then pay debts; and
rather do good to strangers, than to those, that are nearer to them. But she
always thought the care of her family, a debt, and upon that, for the
provision, for the order, for the proportions, in a good largeness, she
placed her first thoughts, of that kind. For, for our families, we are Gods
Stewards; For those without, we are his Almoners. In which office, she gave
not at some great days, or some solemn goings abroad, but, as Gods true
Almoners, the Sun, and Moon, that pass on, in a continual doing of good,
as she received her daily bread from God, so, daily, she distributed, and
imparted it, to others. In which office, though she never turned her face from
those, who in a strict in quisition, might be called idle, and vagrant Beggars,
yet she ever looked first, upon them, who labored, and whose labors could
not overcome the difficulties, nor bring in the necessities of this life; and
to the sweat of their brows, she contributed, even her wine, and her oil,
and any thing that was, and any thing, that might be, if it were not, prepar^d
for her own table. And as her house was a Court, in the conversation of the
best, and an Almeshouse, in feeding the poor, so was it also an Hospital, in
ministering relief to the sick. And truly, the love of doing good in this
kind, of ministering to the sick, was the honey, that was spread over all her
bread; the Air, the Perfume, that breathed over all her house; The disposition
that dwelt in those her children, and those her kindred, which dwelt with her,
so bending this way, that the studies and knowledge of one, the hand of
another, and purse of all, and a ioynt-facility, and opennesse, and
accessiblenesse to persons of the meanest quality, concurred in this blessed Act
of Charity, to minister relief to the sick. Of which, my self, who, at that
time, had the favor to be admitted into that family, can, and must testify
this, that when the late heavy visitation fell hotly upon this Town, when
every door was shut up, and, lest Death should enter into the house, every
house was made a Sepulcher of them that were in it, then, then, in that time of
infection, diverse persons visited with that infection, had their relief, and
relief appliable to that very infection, from this house.

Now when I have said thus much (rather thus little) of her person, as of a
house, That the ground upon which it was built, was the family where she was
borne, and then, where she was married, and then, the time of her widowhood,
and lastly, her last marriage, And that the house it self, was those fair
bodily endowments, which God had bestowed upon her, And the furniture of that
house, the fortune, and the use of that fortune, of which God had made her
Steward and Almoner, when I shall also have said, that the Inhabitants of this
house, (rather the servants, for they did but wait upon Religion in her) were
those married couples, of moral virtues, Conversation married with a
Retiredness, Facility married with a Reservedness, Alacrity married with a
Thoughtfulness, and Largeness married with a Providence, I may have leave to
depart from this consideration of her person, and personal circumstances, le^t
by insisting longer upon them, I should seem to pretend, to say all the good,
that might be said of her; But that is not in my purpose; yet, only therefore,
because it is not in my power; For I would do her all right, and all you that
good, if I could, to say all. But, I haste to an end, in consideration of some
things, that appertain more expressly to me, then these personal, or civil,
or moral things do.

In those, the next is, the Secundum promissa, That she governed her self,
according to his promises; his promises, laid down in his Scriptures. For, as
the rule of all her civil Actions, was Religion, so, the rule of her Religion,
was the Scripture; And, her rule, for her particular understanding of the
Scripture, was the Church. She never diuerted toward the Papist, in
undervaluing the Scripture; nor toward the Separatist, in vnderualuing the
Church. But in the doctrine, and discipline of that Church, in which, God
sealed her, to himself, in Baptism, she brought up her children, she
assisted her family, she dedicated her soul to God in her life, and
surrendered it to him in her death; And, in that form of Common Prayer, which
is ordained (...) by that Church, and to which she had accustom^td her self,
with her family wide (...) day, she joined with than company, which was about
her deathbed, in answering to every part thereof, which the Congrgationl is
directed to answer to with a clear understanding, with a constant memory, with
a distinct ^voyed, not (...) hours before she died (...) According to this
promise that is, the will of God manifested in the (...), She expected; She
expected this, that she has rece^ued; Gods Physioke, and Gods M^sicke a
Christianly death. For, death, in the old Testamen was a Com^^nation; but in
the now Testament, death is a Promise; When there was a Super-dying, a death
upon the death, a Morte upon the Mor^eris^ a Spiritual death after the bodily,
then we died a^cording to Gods threatening; Now, when by the Gospel, that
second death is taken off, though we die still, yet we die according to his
Promise; That Is a part of his mercy, and his Promise, which his Apostle gives
us from him, 1 Cor. 15. 51
That we shall all be changed; For, after that promise, that change, fallows
that triumphant Acclamation, Verse. 5^.
O death where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory? Consider us fallen
in Adam, and we are miserable, that we must die, But consider us restored,
and redintegrated in Christ, we were more miserable if we might not die; We
lost the earthly Paradise by death then; but we get not Heaven, but by death,
now. This she expected till it came, and embraced it when it came. How may we
think, she was joyed to see that face, that Angels delight to look upon, the
face of her Savior, that did not abhor the face of his fearfullest Messenger,
Death^ She showed no fear of his face, in any change of her own; but died
without any change of countenan^e, or posture^, without any struggling, any
disorder; but her Deathbed was as quiet^, as^her Graus. To another Magdalen,
Christ said up on earth, Touch me not, for I am not ascended ^ Being ascended
now, (...) (...) and she b^^ing gone (...) to him, as^^r she'e had awaited his
(...) so (...) ^yo^res, as that more, would^ (...) grown to be vexd^^on, and
s^rrow, was her last (...) horb, were, (...) my will to the will of God; so we
doubt not but the first word which she heard there, was that Euge, from her
Savior, Well done good and faithful servant, enter into thy mastersioy.

She expected that, dissolution of body, and soul; and rest in both, from the
encumbrances, and tentations of this world. But yet, she is in expectation
still; Still a Reuersionarie; And a Reuersionary upon along life; The whole
world must die, before she come to a possession of this Reuersion; which is a
Glorified body in the Resurrection. In which expectation, she return's to her
former charity; she will not have that, till all we, shall have it, as well
as she; She eat not her morsels alone, in her life, (as Job speaks) She
looks not for the glory of the Resurrection alone, 31. 17.
after her death. But when all we, shall have been mellow'd in the earth, many
years, or changed in the Air, in the twinkling of an eye, (God knows which)
That body upon which you tread now, That body which now, whilst I speak, is
mouldring, and crumbling into less, and less dust, and so has some motion,
though no life, That body, which was the Tabernacle of a holy Soul, and a
Temple of the holy Ghost, That body that was eyes to the blind, and hands, and
feet to the lame, whilst it lived, and being dead, is so still, by having been
so lively an example, to teach others, to be so, That body at last, shall have
her last expectation satisfied, and d'well bodily, with that Righteousness, in
these new Heavens, and new Earth, for ever, and ever, and ever, and infinite,
and super-infinite euers. Wee^nd all, with the valediction of the Spouse to
Christ^ His left hand is under my head, Cant. 8. 3.
and his right embraces me, was the Spouses valediction, and goodnight to
Christ then, when she laid her self down to sleep in the strength of his
Mandrakes, and in the power of his Spices, as it is expressed ^here; that is, in
the influence of his mercies. Beloved, every good Soul is the Spouse of
Christ^ And this good Soul, being thus laid down to sleep in his peace, His
left hand under her head, gathering, and composing, and preferuing hen dust,
for future Glory, His right hand embracing her, assuming, and establishing her
soul in present Glory, in his name, and in her behalf, I say that, to all
you, which Christ says there, in the behalf of that Spouse, Verse. 4.
Adiuro vos, I adjure you, I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye
wake her not, till she please. The words are directed to the daughters, rather
then to the sons of Jerusalem, because for the most part, the aspersions that
women receive, either in Moral or Religious actions, proceed from women
themselves. Therefore, Adiuro vos, I charge you, Oye daughters of Jerusalem,
wake her not. Wake her not, with any half calumnies, with any whisperings; But
if you will wake her, wake her, and keep her awake with an active imitation, of
her Moral, and her Holy virtues. That so her example working upon you, and the
number of Gods Saints, being, the sooner, by this blessed example, fulfilled,
we may all meet, and meet quickly in that kingdom, which hers, and our
Savior, has purchac't for us all, with the inestimable price of his
incorrup^tible blou^. To which ^^glorious Son of God, etc.

FINIS.
MEMORIAE MATRIS Sacrum.
AH Matter, quo te deplorem f^nte? Dolores
Quae guttae poterunt enumerare meos?
Sicca meis lacrymis Thamesis vicina videtur
Virtutumque choro siscior ipse tuo.
In flumen maerore nigrum si funderer ardens,
Laudibus hand ^ierem sepia iusta t^is.
Tantum istaec scrib^ gratus, n^ tu mih^ tant um
Matter: and ista Dolor ^^nc tibi M^tra parit.
(...)
(...)
Confer^^ lacrymas: Illa quae vos iniscuit.
Vestrasaue lauds, posoit and mixi as genas.
(...)
Pudorque constet vel solut is crinibus;
(...)
Decus mul^erum perijt: and metuunt v^r^
Vtrumqu^ sexum dote ne mulctauerit.
Non illa soles terere comptu lubricos.
Struices superbas at que turritum c^pute
Molita, reliquum deinde garr^ens diem.
(Nam post Babelem Linguae adest confusio)
Quin post mode stam, qualis integras decet,
Substructionem capit is and nimbum breuem,
Animam recentemrite curauit sacris
Adorta numen acr^ and igue a prece.
Dein familiam lustrat, and res prandij
Horti, colique distributim pensitat.
Suum cuique tempus and locus datur.
Inde exiguntnr pensa crudo vespere.
Ratione cer^^ vita constat and domus,
Prudenter inito quot-diebus calculo.
Tot a renident aede decus and suauitas
(...)
Solum dolores, and dolores, stellulae.
At tu qui inepte haec dicta censes fil^o,
Nato p^rentis auferens Enc^mium
Abito trunce cum t^is pudoribus.
Ergo ipse solum mutus at que excors ^ro
Strepent^ mundo tinnulis praeconijs?
Mihine m^tris vrnaclausa est vnico,
Herbae exo^etae, ros-marinus aridus?
Matrine linguam refero, solum vt mordeam?
Abito barde. Quam pi^ is^^c su^ impudens?
Tu vero matter perpetim laudabere
Nato dolenti: liter^ hoc debent tibi
Queis me educasti; sponte char^ as ^illinun^
Fructum laboru^ conse^^tae maximum
Laudando Matrem, cum repugnant inscij.
CVr sp^^ndes O Phoebe? ecquid demittere matrem
Ad nos cum radio tam rutilante potes?
At super at caput illa (...), quantu^ ipse cad^^er,
Men's superat; corpus solum Element a tene^t.
Scilic^t id splendes: haec est tibi causa micand^
Et lucro apponis gandia sancta tuo.
Verum he^^ si nequeas coelo demittere matre,
Sitque omnis motus nescia, tanta quies,
Fa^ radios saltem ingemines, vt dextera t^rt^s
Implicet, and matre^, matre manente, petam.
QVid nugor calamo fa^^ns?
Matter perpet^is v^ida gandi^s,
Horte pro t^nui colis
Edenem Bor^ae statibus inuinm.
Quin coeli mihi sunt mei,
Materni decu^^ and debita n^minis,
^umque his in^igilo frequens
Stellarum soci^s, pellibus Ex^^^r.
Quare Sphaeram egomet ^eam
Connixus, digitis impiger vrgeo:
Te, Matter, celebrans di^
Noctu^ te celebrans ^uminis aemulo.
Per to nascor in hunc globum
Exemploque tuo nascor in alterum:
Bis tu matter eras mihi,
Vt currat paribus gloria tibi^s.
HOrti, deliciae Dominae, marcescite tand^;
Ornastis capulum, noc superesse licet.
GAlene frustra (...)
Pallida(...)
Tam langue^s genitrix ^in^ri supp^sta fug^^^:
Veru^ augusta parens, sanctum os c^los^ lo^ (...),
Quale paludos^s iamia^ lictura ^^cessus
Praetulit Astraea, aut solio Themis alma v^t^sto
Pensilis, at que acri dirimens Examine lites.
Hunc vul^um ostendas and tecum nobile spect ^
Quod superest vitae, insumam: solisque ingales
Ipse tuae solum adnecta, sine murmr, t^^ensa.
Nec querar ingratos, studijs dum tabidus inst^,
Effi^xisse dies, suff^catamue Mineruam
Aut sp^s productas, barbataque somnia vertam^
In vicium mundo sterili, cui cedo cometas
Ipse suos tanquam digno pallantiaque astra.
Est ^ihi his quinis laqueata domu^cula tignis
Rure, br^nisque hortus, cuius cum ve^^ere sloru^
Luctatur spacium, qualem tamen eligit aequi
Iudi^ij dominus stores vt iunctius halent
Stipati, rudibusque volis imperuius hortus
Sit quasi fasciculus crescens, and nidus odorum.
Hic ego tuque erimus, variae suffitibus herbae
Quotidie pasti: tantum ver^^m ind^^ vultum
Affectusque mei similem; n^c languida misce
Ora meae memori menti ^ ne dispare cult^^
Pugnac^s, te^^ros ^^or^^^ tur b^mus odores,
A^qu^ inter reliqu^s bor^i cr^scentiafatus
Nostra etia^ paribus ^arcescant gaudia fatis.
PAruam piamque dum lubenter semitam
Grandireaeque praefero.
Carpsit malignum sydus hanc modestiam
Vinumque fell miscuit.
Hinc fremere totus and minari gestio
Ipsis seuerus orbibus
Tandem prehensa comiter lacernula
Susurrat aure qnispiam,
Haec fuerat olim potio Domini tui.
Gust^ proboque Dolium.
HOc Genitrix scriptum proles tibi sedula mittit.
Siste parum cantus, dum legis ista, tuos.
Nosse sui quid agant, quaedant est quo (...) music^^
Quaeque, olim fuerat cura, manner potest.
Nos misere flemus, solesque obducimus almos sa^ctis
Occiduis, tanquam displice nube, genis.
Interea classem magnis Rex instruit ausis:
Nos autem flemus: res ea sola tuis.
Ecce solut^ra est, ventos causata morantes:
Sin pluuiam: fletus suppedit asset aquas.
Tillius incumbit Dano: Gallusque marinis:
Nos flendo: haec nostrum tessera sola ducum.
Sic aeuum exigitur tardum, dum praepetis anni
Mill rotae nimijs impediuntur aquis.
Plura tibi missurus era^ (nam quae mibi laur^s,
Quod nectar, nisi cum te celebrare diem?)
Sed parte^ in scriptis etiam dum lacryma poscit,
Diluit oppositas candidus humor aquas.
NEmpe huc vsque notos tenebricosos
Et maestum nimio madore Coelum
Tellurisque Britannicae saliuam
Unjust satis arguit viator.
At te commoriente, Magna Matter,
Recte, quem trahit, aerem repellit
Cum probro madidum, reumque difflat.
Nam te nunc Ager, Vrbs, and Aula plorant:
Te nunc Anglia, Scotiaeque binae,
Quin te Cambria peruetusta deflet,
Deducens lacrymas prioris aui
Ne serae meritis tuis venirent.
Non est angulus vspiam serenus,
Nec cingit mare, nunc inundat o^^nes.
DVm librata suis haeret radicibus ilex
Nescia vulturnis cedere, firma manet.
Post vbi crudelem sentit diuisa securom
Quo placet oblato, mortua fertur, hero:
Arbor and ipse inu^r sa vocor: du^que insitus almae
Assideo Matri, robore vinco cedros.
Nunc sortipateo, expositus sine matre procellis,
Lubricus, and superans mobilitate salum.
Tu radix, tu petra mihi firmissima Matter
Ceu Polypus, chelis saxa prehendo tenax:
Non tibi nunc solifilum abrupere sorores
Dissutus videor funere and ipse tuo.
Vnde vagans passimrecte vocer alter Ulysses,
Alteraque hac tua mors, Ilias esto mihi.
FAcesse Stoica plebs, obambulans cautes.
Exutastrato carnis, ossibus constans,
Iisque siccis adeo vt os molossorum
Haud glubat inde tres teruncios escae.
Dolere prohibes? ant dolere me gentis
Ad^o inficetae, plumbeae, Meduseae,
Ad saxa speciem retrahentis humanam,
Tantoque nequioris optima Pirrha.
At forte matrem perdere haud soles demens:
Quin nec potes; cuipraebuit Tigris partum.
Proinde parco belluis, nec irascor.
Epitaphium.
HIc sit a foeminei lans and victoria sexus:
Virgo pudens, vxor fid^, seueraparens.
Magnatuque^ inopumque^ aequu^ certame^ and ardor:
Nobilitate illos, hos pie tate rapit.
Sic excelsa humilisque simull^^a dissita iunxit,
Quic quid habe4 tellus quicquid and astra, frue^s.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
EXcussos manibus calamos, falcemque resumptam
Rure, sibi dixit Musa fuisse probro.
Aggreditur Matrem (conductis carmine Parcis)
Funereque hoc cultum vindicat aegra suum.
Non po^ui non ire acri stimulante stagello:
Quim matris superans carmina posci^ honos.
Eia, agedum scribo: vicisti Musa; sed audi
Stulta semel scribo, perpetud vt sileam.

