A PROVFE OF CERTAIN ARTICLES IN RELIGION, DENIED BY M. IVELL, set forth in
defense of the Catholyke belief therein, by Thomas Dorman, Bachiler of Divinity
WHERE UNTO is added in the end, a conclusion, conteinyng.xij. Causes, whereby
the Author acknovvlegeth him self to have been stayed in his old Catholyke faith
that he was baptized in, vvysshyng the same to be made common to many for the
like stay in these perilouse times.

Augustinus contra literas Petiliani. lib. 2. cap. 16. Si quaeras, quibus
fructibus vos esse potius lupos rapaces cognoscamus, obijcio schismati^ trime^,
quod tu negabis, ego autem statim probabo. Neque; enim communicas omnibus
gentibus, and illis ecclesijs Apostolico labor fundatis. that is to say. If
thou demaundest (he speaks to Petilian the Heretic) by what fruictes I
know you to be rather the ravening wolves, I object to you the fault of
scisme, which thou vvilt deny, but I vvil out of hand prove. for thou do
not communicate with all Nations, nor with those churches founded by
the apostles labor.

Imprinted at Antwerp by John Latius, at the sign of the Rape, with Privilege,
Anno, 1564.

REgiae Maiestatis Priuilegio permissum est Thomae Dormanno sacrae Theologiae
Baccalaureo, vti per aliquem Typographorum admissorum impune^e ei liceat
imprimi curare, and per omnes suae ditionis Regiones distrahere, Librum
inscriptum, A prouf of certain articles in religion denied by M. Iuell: and
omnibus al^s inhibitum, ne eundem absque eiusdem Thomae consensu imprimant,
velalibi impressum distrahant, sub poena in Priuilegio contenta.

Datum Bruxellae. 14. Iul. Anno. 1564. Subsig. Facuwez.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL MASTER Thomas Hardyng Doctor of Divinity, Thomas
Dorman Bachiler of the same, sends gretyng and wyssheth health of body and
soul.
IT prycketh now fast (if my memory fail me not) right worshipful sir,
toward the poyncte of seuenteen years, when I, being a young nouyce of
Caluyns relygyon, was first by my friends brought, to that famous schole at
Wynchester, of bishop VVyckham his foundation. At which time it pleased you of
your goodness (being then one of them, who had for that year the right and
authority in that behalf) without monye, without reward, without commendation
of friends, upon the only contemplacion and respect of my pooer and nedye
estate, and some little hope (perhapps) conceived hereof, that once the time
might come, when I should not be altogether unprofitable, either to my
country that brought me forth, either to the place that should nouryshe me up:
to bestow upon me being then a futer for that purpose, your voice or suffrage,
for the obteinyng of a place emon gest the scholars there. By the benefyte
whereof, I was the same year made one of that number, brought home again to
Christ's church from whence I was strayed: and finally have obtained that
knowledge and small un derstanding (yfyet amongst the learned it may be
accounted any) to the which you now see me grown. True ytis, I can not deny
yt, that other helps God has sense that time provided for me, to the
furnyshyng and making perfect of that buyldyng, the foundation whereof, by your
hands he first disposed to be laid. To whom I mind not nether, to show my
self in time and place, of so great benyfytes by them received, either
unmindful or unthankful. In the mean season, if, as next after God, of that
profytt which I have taken in my study, what so ever yt be, I account you for
the author, and very founder thereof: so I do with the scripture (askyng quis
plantat vineam et de fructueius non comedit?) 1. Cor. 9.
offer to you (such as they are) the first fruictes thereof for a taste, who
pla^^^th a vyn ^ard, an ^ tastith not of the f^u^ctes thereof?
and that (upon the grounds of the law which will that the most ancient debt
be first discharges) before all other: none I trust, of my other friendly cre
dytours, will be therewithal offended.

This has been, right worshypfull sir, the very cause of my boldness, in
offering to you, this rude and simple treatise of mine. Wherein if any offense
on my part have been committed, impute it I pray you to the abundan^e of the
great good will that I bear toward you, and the necessity that I thought my
self to stand in, for the testifyeng of my mind, ready in some part to
discharge, as I was hable, my duty to you. Fare you well, at Aquicinctum the
seat of my banyshment.

your mastershyps to command. Thom. Dorman.
TO THE READERS.
I Am not ignorant (good Readers) of the manyfold dangers, wherinto (what so
ever he be) he wyllyngly, as yt were, casts him self, who publysheth any thing
to the world in writing. The which confy deration after that I had well
weighed, and deeply debated with my self, of what mind I was touching the
sendyng abroad of this little treatyfe of mine, any man may easily judge. For
I, besides those saucy snaphaunces, and murmuryng momi, whom no man's doyngs
can please but there own (which fortune I took to be common to me with many)
foresawe also my self, not without good cause in appearance, ready to fall in to
the just and lawful reprehension, even of those, whose judgments I have
always both loved, and feared: the wyser, the learneder and the better sort
also. Whylest after so godly, so grave, so exact a worck, most amply treatyng
of the same matter: I, of all other most unfit therefore, should seem to take
pen in hand to write again.

This one cause, appeared to me to be of such importance, that I was even fully
resolved to stay my hand, and travel herein no farther. When suddenly (behold)
amongst diverse other, it camme to my mind to thynck, on the earnest desire,
and godly greedy hunger of my pooer countrymen: (I mean not the Catholykes
only, but even of those whom simplicity not malice has caused to stray)
whereof I was to my great comfort daily informed, with what labor they fought
for, with what diligence they harckened after, with what sauory appetyte they
received in to there minds, and as it were devoured, such books as brought them
any tydyngs of the truth. Whereapon I discoursed farther with my self, that
even as in a plague of famyn or dearth^ he that having in his barnes no great
stoare of corn but yet sum, being once well minded, and charitably moved, to
employ part of that little which he had, to the comfort and relyef of his pooer
hungrye neighbors: should in all men's judgment do very ^uell, if afterward
upon the liberal almoise of some welthyer man, he should utterly wythdrawe
his, and because his habylytie serves him not to give as much, give nothing
at all: even so me thought it fared with me, who myndyng these two whole years
past, to confer some part of that small prouysyon, that allmyghty god has
bestowed on me, to publyke co^modytie, could not now, (I persuaded my self)
suppress and keep in the same, without the manifest offendyng of his holy
spyryt, who first moved me thereto, and some injury to him also, whose
liberality (to the hynderance perhapps of some) I should by this means abuse.

Thus much thought I necessary good Readers, to sygnyfye to you concerning this
enterprise of mine. Where in if happily I seem to some, over sclenderly to
have excused my self, them refer I to his judgment, for my meaning herein,
who shall once judge both me if I have not gonne vpryghtly but trodden a wrye,
and them if they have not judged syncerlye, but demed amysse. Fare ye well, at
Antwerp, the. 26. of July. Anno ^564.

Thom. Dorman.
THE ARTYCLES WHICH THE AVTHOR HAS TAKEN UPON HIM TO PROVE, AGAINST M.
IVELLES NEGATYVE.
THat the Bishop of Rome, is the head of Christ's universal

That the people was then taught to believe, that

That the communion was then ministered under one

That there was Mass said at that time, although

A PRAEFACE, OR INTRODVCTION TO THE FIRST PROPOSITION.
THe blessed Martyr of God S. Cyprian, Lib. (...). 3 epis^. 11.
writing to one Rogatianus a Bishop of his province has thiese words. I^tia
hae reticorum, and ortus atque conatus schis^aticorum mal^e cogitantium haec
sunt: v^ sibi placeant, vt praepositum superbo tu^ore contemnant. Sic de
ecclesia receditur, sic altar prophanum foris collocatur: sic contra pa^em
Christi, and ordination^m, atque vnitatem Dei rebellatur. Which is in english
thus much to say: The beginning of heretics, the first springing up, and
enterprise of schismatikes thinking amiss in matters of faith, grows of
pleasure that they take in them selves, and of that, that being puffed up with
pride, they contemn there head, and governor appointed over them. By this
means stray they from the church. Thus is a profane altar placed without the
doors, and thus rebel they against Christ's peace, gods ordinance and unity.

And again in an other place he writes thus: Lib. 4. epist. 9.
Vnd^e enim schismata and haereses obortae sunt, nisi dum episcopus qui v^us
est, and ecclesiae praeest, superba quorundam praesumptione conte^nitur, and
homo dignatione dei honoratus, ab indignis hominibus iudicatur? Where of
(says he) do heresies and schysm^s spring, but of this, that the bishop
which is one, and governs the church, is thorough the proud and arroga^t
presumption of certain, contemned, and set at naught, and being the man by
gods approbation allowed, and honored, is of unworthy men judged.

The very same thing, although in other words, does S. Basile in an epistle
written by him, Epistola. 61. ad Episcopos per Italia^ and Galliani.
to the bishops of Italy and France, bewailing there in the estate of his
time, most plainly declare. Whose words, because they do lively represent
unto us, the most miserable face of this our age: I have thought good to
allege, and set before your eyes. Ambitiones eorum qui dominum non timent,
praesidentias inuadunt, and in propatulo de caetero impietatis praemium
proposita est prima seeds. Quare, qui grauiores blasphemias protulit ad populi
episcopum potior habetur. Periit authoritas sacerdotalis, populi admoneri
nolunt, praesides dicendi libertatem non habent. Silent piorum ora, permissum
est autem dicere omni blasphemae linguae. Prophanata sunt sacra. that is to
say. The pride, and ambition of them which fear not our lord does invade and
set upon there heads, and openly the chiefest place, is proposed as a reward
for wyckednes. And therefore he that can utter against the bishop of the
people, most grieuouse and slaunderouse blasphemies, is accounted of gretest
price, and had in most estimation. The authorite of priestehood is lost. The
layte will not be admonished. The rulers be restreined of liberte to speak.
The mouths of good men keep silence. Every blasphemouse tongue is set at
liberty. All holy things ar made profane. Hitherto S. Basil.

To be short, there was never yet any heretic amongst so many as from time to
time, have continually troubled the church of god, that made not his first
entry into his heresies, by the proclaiming (as it were) of open war, against
the beautiful order of the church (which they have always forsene to be to
them, terribilis vt castrorum acies ordinata, terrible as is the froont of a
battle well set in order) and against the bishop of Rome, appointed by god to
be here in earth, the laufull governor and head thereof, not lacking also
therein great poli^ie, that by striking the shepherde they might the easelier
scatter the flock.

Thus did in the time of S. Cyprian, Lib. 6. cap, 30.
Nouatus that great herety k, who as Nicephorus reports of him, holding
between his hands, the hands of such as minded to receive of him, the blessed
sacrament of the altar: used to them these words. Adiura mihi per corpus and
sanguinem domini Jesus Christi nunquam te a me discessurum, and ad Cornelium
(Romanus is Episcopus fuit) rediturum esse. Swear to me quoth he, by the body,
and blood of our lord Jesus Christ, that thou wilt never forsake me, nor
return to Cornelius, who was then bishop of Rome. So did in our time the
scholars and folowers of Martin luther: So did John Calvin with his
congregation at Geneua: So do even at this time, in our unfortunate country,
those wicked men (upon whom I beseech almighty god to extend his mercy) who
occupieng the places, and (...) mes of catholic bishops being them selves
indurat heretics, cease not daily most cruelly to practice, that lesson
learned of there auncestor Nouatus. For what man admit they to any living, of
whom they exact not first this oath? Whom suffer they to continue in his
living, if he give not this oath? For the only refusal hereof, how many
notable men of the clergy, both for life and learning, suffer they to pyne
away in prison? I remember not hear, the great nombre of gentlemen, and other
mere lay men not included in the statute, of pooer young scholars of both the
universities, The ba^ishment of scholars from the vniuer sites for re fusing to
swear ageinstthe Pope.
who witheout all face of law (for, for the other theie pretended a color)
being not so much them selves spoiled of there colleages, as there colleages,
vniuersitees, yea there country self (which had of the most part of them been
likely to hauereceiued both help and comfort) spoiled and robbed of them:
wander now abroad in dispersion, lamenting the estate of there miserable
country.

Of the which they may, Epistola 70.
and we all justly now say, much more then did S. Basil of the persecution in
his time. He only complained that the church doors were shut up, that the
altars lacked that spiritual worship that should have been done upon them, that
there were no assembles of Christian men, that learned men bare no sway, that
there was no wholesome doctrine taught, that the feasts and holidaies were not
kept, that the prayers in the night were utterly ceased. A comparison betv^ene
the complaynt which S. Basile ma de of his time, and that which we may make
of our^^.
To that holy father it seemed a great outerage, that the churches were shut
up: what would he (thinck we) then say were he alive in these days, when of
our churches he should see, some made the dwelling houses of private men, other
some turned into barnes, or stables, other clean over thrown, and made even
with the ground, and those that remain whole (so much worse then if they had
been altogether shut up) left open for heretics to pollute, with schismatic
service and diuelysh doctrine? It grieved S. Basil that the altars should lack
the spiritual seru^ce, which was not nether for any mislike that men had
therein, but because in that grieuouse persecution of the Christians, theie
could not be found that durst do it. And could he have taken it well to have
seen the^ broken, defaced, and quite over thrown: yea,(which is a crime so
horrible, that to write it I tremble) in those places in which the altars
stood, whereon was wont in that spiritual sacrifice to be offered up, the most
precious body, and blood of Christ: Oxen and beasts more unclean, to befedde?
He lamented that learned men were not esteemed, that they were not provided of
lyuings: and would he not much more lament, to see them deprived of those which
they had, and shoemakers, weuers, tinckers, coweherdes, broom men, Russians
forfelonies burned in the hands to be put in there places? Then was no holsom
doctrine taught, now is there nothing else taught but poisoned and unwholesome.
Then were there no holidaies kept, nor hymns used in the night. Now ar they
accounted to be superstition.

Now as we felt none of all thiese miseries besides a thousand more, so long as
we kept our selves within the unite of one head: so is every man able to bear
me witness, that as soon as the devil the author of all heresies had once
obtained, and brought about the banishment in our country of that one bishop,
with the which (as you have hard out of S. Cyprian before) he uses always to
begin; all these russhed in upon us, as the door that should have kept them out
being set wide open. And as this is confessed, by the most ancient fathers
that have written sense Christ's time, The way to return to the vni t^ of the
church.
that by this means we first revolt from the church, by contemning, and not
acknowleging the head: so mu^t our return thither again be by the contrary,
that is by reuerencing him, by acknowleging him, by humble submission of our
self to him. So did those that after there fall with Nouatus, S. Cyprian
received into the church again, upon there submission testified in these
words. Epistola ad CornElium papam lib. 3.
Nos Cornelium episcopum sanctissmum Catholicae Ecclesiae, erectum a deo
omnipotente, and Christo D. nostro scimus. Nos errorem nostrum confitemur.
Circumuenti sumus perfidiae loquacitate factiosa amentes: videbamur qua si
quandam communicationem cum homine schismatico habuisse: Syncera tamen men's
nostra in ecclesia semper fuit. Nec ignoramus vnum deum esse, and vnum Christum
esse dominum, quem confessi ^umus, vnum spiritum S, vnum Episcopum in ecclesia
catholica esse debere. This Cornelius was B. of Rome.
We (say they) acknowledge Cornelius to be erected by god almighty, and Christ
our lord, to be the holy bishop of the catholic church. We confess our
error: we have been circumuented ronning mad by the factious babbling of
treachery: we seemed to have communicated as it were, with that schismatic man
Nouatus: yet was our sincere mind always in the church. Nor we are not
ignorant, One god, One Christ, One holy ghost, One Bishop.
that there is one only god, and one Christ our lord, and that in the
catholic church there must be one holy ghost, and one bishop. So did
Vrsatius and Valens forsaking the heresy of Arrius, offer up there recantation
to Julius then bishop of Rome. By this means (good Christian readers) returned
they to the church, by this must you return that have straied, what so ever
you be, if you will be saved.

Seeing now as I have declared, the going out of the church is by the contempt
of the head thereof, and the return home again, by the acknowleging, and
reuerencing of the same: persuade your self that it has not been for nothing,
that good men in all ages have been, and at this time ar, no less busyed in
defense thereof, then heretics, myssecreant^, and enemies to our faith, ar
ready with all there power to assault the same.

The consideration whereof has caused also me, in this enterprise of mine, to
begin first with the fortifieng of that, whereunto our enemies (as the very
fundacion of all true religion, the comfort and stay of the catholics, the
terror and utter undoing of all heretics) do most direct there battery. In the
handling where of I purpose god willing to take this order:

First, 1.
before I comme to the principal poinct thatlieth in question between us
(which is of the bishop of Romes supremacy) to prove to you by most plain,
and evident reasons, that the church of Christ here militant in earth must of
necessity for diverse and sondrie urgent causes, have one chief head and ruler
under Christ, to rule and govern the same.

Secondarily, 2.
that that one head must needs be a priest. Thirdly and so last of all, 3.
that of all priests the bishop of Rome is he, which must supply that place,
and that for so (that is head and ruler of the church) he has been, of the
ancient councels, and old fathers, with in the first six hundred years after
Christ's de parture, taken.

THAT CHRIST'S CHVRCH HERE IN EARTH, MVST OF NECESSITY HAVE ONE CHIEF HEAD,
AND GOVERNER UNDER CHRIST, TO RVLE THE SAME.
THe truth of this proposition (good Christian readers) is not only by the
whole order, and form of the estate of gods people in the old law, (which
was also the true church of god) long before the coming of our savior in to
this world, but by the daily experience also, of civil and polytike
gouuernenement, most manifestly confirmed. For who is there so blind that he
sees not, that in the whole frame of this world, there is no kingdom so
mighty, no realm so puysant, no city so populous, no town so welthy: yea on
the contrary part also, no village so littell, no family so small, finally no
societe of men, no not of those that have wrapped them selves in league, to
rob and spoil, that can any while continue without a head to govern them.
If therefore to live under the gouuernement of a head be a matter of such
importance, as without the which neither great nor little, rich nor pooer,
good nor bad can stand: how much more necessary shall we thinck it in Christ's
church here militant in earth, where the devil in his members, is
continually occupied in raising of schisms, in stirring up discord, to vex and
molest the people of god, to have this wholesome provision for the appeasing
thereof, and the restoring of the same being troubled to quietness again?

And because good Christian readers, you shall well perceive, that this is no
now devise, or fantasy imagined by m^: I will here lay before your eyes, the
judgment of certain notable men, whom god gave to his church to serve for a
wall for the same, against the incursions of the wicked Phylistins his enemies.
In whom you shall most plainly perceive, this order in Christ's church to be
so necessary, that the only breach or lack th^r^of, has been by them taken,
to be the high way, and very path that leads to all heresies.

And first to begin with that blessed martyr of god S. Cyprian, has he not
concerning this matter, in an epistle by him written to Cor^elius then bishop
of Rome, thiese words? Lib. 1. Episto. 3.
Neque enim aliunde obortae sunt haereses, aut nat^^ sunt schismata, quam inde
qu^^d sacerdoti dei non obtemperatur, necvnus in ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos,
et ad tempus iudex, vice Christicogitatur that is, neither yet truly do
heresies arise, or schisms grow, The high way to heresies to thynck that
there is not one judge in earth in the steed of Christ.
of any other cause, then thereof, that men obey not the priest of god, neither
do thinck, that there is in the church in the steed and place of Christ, one
priest, and one judge for the time.

Hitherto S. Cyprian. By the which words good christian readers, it is so
evident, that there must be one priest in the church, whom all other must
obey, that the same must be taken of us, for judge here in earth, in the stead
of Christ: The Apolog^e of the Englysh church reproved by S. Cyprian.
that you see I nothing doubt, great cause to condemn, the gross ignorance of
our late apology: Where in the authors, contrary to this doctrine of S.
Cyprian, most impudently pronounce, that in his church, Christ our lord uses
not, the help of any one man alone to govern the same in his absence, as he
that stands in need of no such help; and that if he did, no mortal man
could be found, hable alone to do the same: and finally with the same S.
Cyprian, who dyed a holy martyr, and is no dout a saint in heaven, to whom
the belief of both these two articles seemed not only not impossible, but also
very necessary; to live and dye in the obedience of this priest, and under such
a judge, then with a sort of lewd losels, The definition of the protestants
Church.
in whose church (being a certain secret scattred congregation unknown to all
the world beside, and to their own fellows toe) is another head, order,
obedience, neither yet certain rules or grounds where on to stay, to run
hedlong ye wot no more then your guides whither.

But S. Cyprian, was he trow you of this mind alone? No verily, Contr^ L^
^iferian^s.
for S. Hierom is of the same, as by thiese his words it is most evident.
Ecclesiae salus, in summi sacerdotis pendet dignitate, cui si non exors, and ab
omnibus eminens detur pote^tas, tot in eccles^a efficientur schismata quot
sacerdotes. The health (says he) and welfare of the church, depends apo^
the estimation of the chief priest, One chief prie^t to avoid sc^ism^^.
who, if he have not authority peareles^e, and above all other; ye shall have
in the church, so many schisms, as there be priests.

And again in an other place, speaking of the apostles he writes thus. Ad
(...).
Quod vnus po^tea electus est qui caeteris praeponere tur, in schismatis
remedium factum est, ne vnusquisque ad se trabens ecclesiane rumperet. that is,
That one was afterward chosen to rule the rest, that was done for a remedy
against schisms, least while every man would challenge to him self the church,
by such halyng and pullyng they might br^ake the same.

Leo, of whom the whole council of Calcedon, as one of the greatest for
nombre: so of all men accounted amongst the four general for authority,
reported so honorably, that they did not only with one voice all, openly
profess them selves to believe as he did, but called him also, by the name of
Sanctissimus and beatissimus, that is most holy and blessed of all other,
speaking of the mystical body of Christ's church writes after this sort.
Epis^ola ad Anastasi^^ Episcop^^ Thess^l.
Haec con^exio, totius quidem corporis vnanimitatem requirit etc. This
combination and ioining together, (he speaks of the body of Christ's church)
requires an unity of the whole body, but especially of the priests, amongst
whom although there be one dignity common to them all, yet is there not one
general order amongst them all. For even amongst the blessed apostles in
that similitude of honor, was there yet a difference of power: and whereas in
there election, they were all like, yet was yt given to one to, be above all the
rest. Out of which form is taken our difference of bishops, and by merueylouse
order and disposition is yt provided, that every one should not challenge to him
self every thing, Bishops.
but that in every province, there should be one, whose judgment amongst the
rest of his brethern should be chief, Ar^hebishops.
and of most authority. And agein certain appoincted in greater cities whose
care should be greater, Pope.
by whom to the only seat of Peter, the charge of the universal church
might have recourse, that nothing might at any time dissent from the head.

Hitherto have you hard good readers, beside the experience that we have of
civil policy, and worldly government, the opinions also of S. Cyprian, S.
Hierom, and holy Leo, all three agrei^g in one, that there must needs be one
judge in Christ's church in his steed, Ciprian.
that the health of the church depends upon the authority of the chief
priest, Hieron.
that if his authority be not above all the rest, there will so many schisms
break in upon us as there be priests, that for the avoiding of that mischief,
there was one chosen even amongst the apostles, to govern the rest: Lco.
Last of all, that that usage in christ's church to have one head, is no new
invention (as some men falsely report) but taken from the example of the
apostles them selves.

I can not hear stay, to examyne curiously every word in these ancient
fathers, but leaving that good readers to your discretion, and not douting but
that in these grave witnesses, in a matter of such weight and importance, as
whereapon depends the health of the whole church: you will be no less
diligent, then you would be in examining the depositions of your own
witnesses, or your adversaries in a trial of lands, or other temporal
commodity: I shall proceed to the consideration of the second reason, which
before I touched, of the people of Israel, if I first warn you to considre but
this by the way (that ye may trust those ancient fathers by there word the
better an other time) how many schisms, be burst in apo^ us in our country of
England, for one common received truth in the days of our fathers (when we
remained in the obedience of one chief priest and judge) which shake now so
myserably the same: how quietly in one love, in one truth, in one doctrine,
in one church, in one head thereof god almighty, and his ministre under him
appointed over the same, we lived then, and other in other places do now.

But to proceed. For the estate of the Iues, god by his servant moses did so
provide, to take away schisms that apo^ the doutefull words of the law might
arise, that he appointed them a place to resort unto, and aiudge to flee unto,
in all such ambiguites and doutes. For so is it written in the book of
Deuteronomium. Cap. 17
And shall we not by good reason thinck, that he has provided as well for his
church? except we will say, that he has been less careful of it, then he was
of that. Which must necessaryly follow, if he provided for them one chief judge,
to have recourse unto in hard and doutefull questions, and to us having no
less, yea far much more need then they: he left either at all none, or many
to make the matter more doutefull. For I remember a saying of Gregorius
Nazianzen^s. Vbi nullum est imperium, nullus ordo; vbi multoru^, Lib. 3. de
Theologia.
ibi seditio; vt and sic nullum imperium nullus ordo existat. Vtrumque
^nimeodem absurditatis perducit. Where is none to rule, there is no order:
Where many rule, there is sedition: so that after that manner of government
also, there is no government, there is no order for both to have none to
rule, and to have many, lead us to like inconvenience. How shall we then say,
Diligi^ dominus Syon super omni^ tabernacula Jacob? Our lord loves Syon above
all the tabernacles of Jacob?

There is no dout therefore, but that Christ has provided for his church,
which he redeemed so dearly, as with thexpence of his own most preciouse blood,
a judge and chief ruler, to end and determine so many controversies, as he
knew should mol^st and infest the same. They can not say, that a^ adversaries,
and kyck against this truth, that this which I allege, was in the old law,
and in a shadow, that these dai^s and this time requier other manners. For
that argument has there english apology soluted, and pronounced that so to
say, were plusqua^ ridiculum, seeing there was then, idem deus, idem spiritus,
idem Christus, eadem fides, eadem doctrina, eadem spes, eadem ^aer^ditas, idem
f^edus* eadem vis verbi dei, the same god, the same holy ghost, the same
Christ, the same faith, the same doctrine, the same hope, the same heritage,
the same covenant, the same strenght of gods word.

But yet this I protest, that upon the authority of there apology (which with
me is in that conceit, that it is with all honest and learned men, that is to
say, taken as in deed it is, for a fardle of lies:) I am no whytt the bolder
to reason thus. But because I have perceived, that god in that people, in there
law and priesthood, shadowed out unto us, like a cunnyng worckeman the whole
form and proportion of his church, as witnesses S. Paul. Lex vmbram habet
futuror^m bonorum non ipsam imaginem rerum, (...) 10.
The law contains a shadow of the good things to come, but expresses not
manifestly the truth of things: therefore I thought I might well reason from
the shadow to the body, from the resemblaunce and image, to the truth thereto
answering. From the which kind of reasoning, S. Paul sometimes absteined not,
as when he labored to prove, 1. Cor. 9.
that the law of the gospel would bear, that they which preached the gospel
should liu^ thereby: he reasoned after this sort. Nunquid secundu^ hoi^em haec
dico? Speak I this as a man? that is to say, prove I this by wordly reasons?
(...) 25
An and lex haec no^ dicit? Says not the law so toe? and so goes he forward,
and proves yt by this text of the old law. Thou shall not moosell or bind up
the mouth of the laboring Ox. as though he should have said: it was so in
the shadow, therefore yt must be so in the body and in the truth signified by
that shadow. Thus ye see good readers, that I ma^e say with S. Paul, have I
proved only by reasons fetched from the doings of men, by examples of all
common welthes and societes well go^erned, that in Christ's common weal there
must be also one to rule? have I affirmed this because S. Cyprian, S. Hierom,
blessed and holy Leo so said? Who yet were while they lived here but men,
although now saints in heaven. Nunquid non and Lex haec d^^it? says not the
law so toe? But here I know our adversaries will say that these proofs neded
not, to prove that Ch^istes church must have a head, and a judge to order and
determine doutefull questions, which happen ^mongest us, and where of the world
is now so full. For that will they say, they know as well as Cyprian, Hierom,
Leo, or any of them all; although they will not admit the same judge or the
same head that they do.

But what head thinck you good readers appoint they to govern christ's church
here in earth? what judge to determine controversies? Forsooth the head of the
church theie say (wherein we find no fault but say the same our selves) is
Jesus Christ, ^polog. Eccles. A^glic. sol. ^.
and the judge of all controversies arisinge therein, they call the scriptures.
Here suffer me a littell I beseech you, to shake these m^^^kers ow^e of there
cloutes, and to make open to the ^orld there great dissimulation and sottelty,
whereby under the name of Christ, and his most holy word, so glittring at the
first show in the eyes of the simple, yea perhaps of some of the wiser sort
also, that it is to be feared lest yt strike them blind altogether: they seem
to have purchased to them selves a double benefit at once: first, great
credit by pret^nding and using, nay rather abusing, the name of Christ and his
word: next great securite, both for there own p^^sones, and also for all such
dyuelish doctrine, as they or any other heretics list to utter. Whilst on
the one side, they take them selves to be out of all check of man, and may be
controlled of none, as they say, but of god only, (who if he let them alone
till that time that they thinck he will, then bid they us let them shift for
them selves, theie shall have time enough, in the mean season to preach, and
teach without controllment what they lift:) and on the other side, whilst by
provoking to the scriptures as there judge, they th^nk them selves to stand apo^
a suer ground: seeing they are already with the^ selves at a poinct, to receive
no other interpretaty on thereof, then shall make for there purpose, and they
also see, that amongst so many heresies as have hitherto troubled the church
of god, there was never yet any one so horrible and absurd, that the author
thereof has not by this means, in his own indgement, been right well, able to
sustein and defend. But of this I will entreat more largely hereafter. In the
mean season, that theie will have of Christ's church here in earth, no other
head but Christ him self, therein they fare me thincketh not much unlike, to a
certain ^elon, of whom I have hard, that being areigued (...) ^he bar for a
felony, when he had pleadid to the (...) not guilty, and was (after the
manner) demanded how he would be tried, he would (suspecting his own case, and
knowing that if he satisfied the law in putting him self upon the trial of the
country, there were no more ways with him but one) make thereto no other answer,
but only that he would put him self upon god, the righteous judge of all, who
although he said truly that god was the chief judge of all, as the
protestants do, in calling Christ the head of the church: yet was there in
his case an other judge here in this world under god, by whom he must have been
tried, as there is in theirs an other head here in the church to order them
and keep them under, and in whom Christ the chief head of all, uses in all
necessary knowledge to give answer. And as the felon knew well that there was
an other judge beside god, and appealed not to him, as though before him he
should have been acquitted, and proved not guilty: but only to gain a longer
time of life and liberty: so do (I dout not) our adversaries the protestants.
And truly to both thiese kind of men being both thieves, the one sort doing
violence to the body, the other to the soul, if such pleas might be allowed,
how so ever they be colored with the name of Christ, between them both, they
would freely rob the body, and murder the soul.

But let us now examine this reason of theirs whereof they are wont so much to
triumph: The common reason of the protestants against the Supremacy of the
Pop^.
Christ is head of the church, Ergo the pope is not, Ergo it c^a have no other
head. That Christ is the head of the church we granted before, and none of our
side did ever yet deny yt. But as it is most manifest that Christ him self is
the worcker of all his sacraments (for he baptizeth, he forgiueth sins, he
consecrateth his blessed body, and blood, he ioineth together in matrimony the
man and his wife) and yet, forasmuch as he should needs depart out of this
world, and could not always dwell with us, after a corporal manner, he has
chosen ministres, to dispense those his gifts by: And we say, and no fault
found therewith, that the priest his ministre baptizeth, that he forgiueth
sins, that he consecrate^h his most pre^ious body, and blood: So after the
same manner and for the same cause, that is to say because he could not be
always present with us, in such sort as we might see him, and speak with him
face to face, to be resolved at his mouth of such doubts, and questions as
should ar^se amongst us: he left us also one, that in that his absence should
govern, and rule his whole church. He remains nevertheless head thereof, he
rules, he reigns, he exercises his power and authorite in the same, but yet
by man his ministre, whom for that cause, most aptly the Scholasticall writers
have termed, How Christ is head of the church, and how the Pope.
ca^^^ min^^^eriale, that is to say a head, but yeat by the reason of his
service and ministry under an other, that is Christ ^ho is only absolutely,
simply, and without all relation to any other, the head thereof. Not, as though
he were not hable to rule the same, without any such help or instrument (which
he could have done also in the old law, where his pleasure was that the
people should resort to the chief priest, De^ter. 17
to be resolved in all doutes arising upon the law, and had no more need of
help then, then he has now) but, for that this way it has pleased him, to
(...) his ex^eding great love toward mankind, (...) of amongst men, such as
he will execute (...) world, (...) as he will use as his mouth, to (...) the
secrets of his hol^e pleasure to us, and f^^ally such as should represent to
us his own parson.

Because Ch^^st^s king of all kings, Apoc^^ip. Cap. 17.
and lord of all lord^^, because if it so pleased him, he could rule all this
world much better then it is ruled, without the help of any other (whereof he
has his absolute power considered no nede^) shall we therefore say, that there
be not, nor need to be, any kings here in ^^^the? 1. Cor. 11.
When S. Paul called the man the head of the woman, denied he therefore Christ
to be her head? King Saul when he was called by the prophet Samuel caput in
tribubus Israel, 1. Reg. 15.
the head of the tribues of Israel, was god thinck you excluded that he should
not be their head? To use examples more familier, th'archebishop of Cauntorbury
is the head of the bishopric, and diocese of London (as he is of all the
bishoprics within his province) and yet can not a man infer upon this, that
therefore the B. of London is not the head of that his diocese.

But Christ has no such need our adversaries cry still, to have any man to
be in his stead to succeed him in the whole enheritance. Nam and Christum
semper adesse eccle siae suae, and vicario homine qui ex ass in integrum
^uccedat non ^gere, these be their very words in their apology.

Here would I like a frinde advertise them, that for there pooer honesties sake
they harp not to much on this string, Hosiu^ the Cardinal sclaundre by the
heretics,
left by their so doing they comme as nere to the heresy of Suenkfeldius, as
he whom in their apology they falselie sclaunder therewith, is far both from
that and all other. For Suenkfeldius, amongst other his abominable heresies,
has also this, in my opinion the chiefest, that we ought to banish utterly
from amongst us all scripture: and (as Hosius writes of him) this heresy of
his, Lib. de Hae resib nostri temporis.
to derogate from the scriptures all authority, he went also about to prove by
scripture. But how I pray you good readers? By what reason thinck you would
he have proved this devilish, and most absurd doctrine? Believe me, or rather
your own judgments, seeing and perceiving most plainly that I lie not, by the
self same reasons, that our aduersareis do use to prove, that Christ's church
here in earth, can have under him, no head or chief governor to govern the
same. Thou must not be parfect in the scriptures, says this stinking heretic
Swenckfield. But why? because forsooth we must be taught at gods mouth,
because his word teaches truly, the scripture is not his word, but dead
lettres, and no more account to be made of them, then of other creatures,
amongst the which they are to be reconed. We must look to be taught from
heaven, not out of books. The holy ghost uses to come from above without
the help of means, as hearing, preaching, or reading the scriptures. Thie^e be
that wicked heretic his folish and unsavory persuasions. And what other thing
is it, I pray you good readers (judge indifferently) to say as the Huguenotes
and heretykes do, then to lean and rest, upon the same grounds for the
banishing of the head of Christ's churches, on which the Swenckfeldians do,
for th'abolishing of the scripture? For the one says, we must have no
scripture because god can teach us without: the other, we must have no head of
Christ's church because he is the head him self, and can rule us without any
other to be his vicair. The one says the scriptures ar but dead lettres, and
no more account to be made of them then of other creatures: the other says
that the pope is but a sinful man as other ar, and that therefore there is no
more account to be made of him, then of other sinful men. Finally the
Swenckfeldians bar god of all means to worck his will by, and so do the
protestants, while they allow him not a ministre to govern his church in
external government, but tell him that he is of age and able to do it him
self, and that therefore there is no remedy, but he must needs comme down
and give answer to all our wise demaundes in his own person.

And thus whilst most shamefully to the great dishonor of the whole realm
(under whose name as it were that fardell of lies, their apology was sent
abroad) they have not been ashamed, Hosius Cardinalis.
to charge with this heresy of Suenckfeldius, one of the greatest estates,
both for lerning and virtue that at this day Christendom has: we may see
that they have not only showed them selves to be very wicked, and shameless
men, (the truth to their utter and perpetual infamy and shame, had they any,
plainly to the contrary, in the worcks of him, whom they so selaundred,
bearing witness against them) but ar also run, into the same growndes
whereon Swenckfilde builded his heresy, their own selves.

For gods sake good Chrystian readers, for your own souls sake, and the love
that you bear thereto, give ear to no such seditious voices, how ever they be
cloked with the name of Christ, which the devil then does most inculcat, when
he would drive us sonest from him.

What other thing did their forefathers Ch^^, Dathan, Numer. 1^
and Abyron, in rebelling against Moses, and Aaron the ministres of almighty
god? what other persuasion used they to the people? what other reason brought
they to allure from their obedience to rebellion, from quiet rest to seditious
wandering without a head, the flock of god: then the very same, that these
miserable men (...) our time do? Their apology says, that there needs here
in the church no head to govern it, The protestants reason as Chore, Dathan
and Abyron did.
because Christ is always with it. And did not those wicked men in their
rebellion against Moses and Aaron use the same reason, when they told them to
their face: Sufficiat vobis, quia omnis multitudo sanctorum est, and in ipsis
est dominus? let it suffice you that all the multitude is holy, Numer. 16.
and they have god present with them, Cur eleuamini super populum domim? and
why then take you apo^ your selves the rule over the people of our lord? As
who would say, having no need of any other ruler, god being with them. But as
almighty god was then amongst his people and used yet nevertheless the
ministry of men: so is Christ (no dout) our savior now present always with
his church, and chief head and govern or thereof, and yet governs he the
same by man. And as Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, be gone before, swalowed alive
by hell, there to taste of those rewards which for such rebelliouse wretches
ar prepared: so must our Chore and his compagnio^s follow their trace, unless
by their repentance they molify, and assuage the just wrath of god.

But yet let us good readers, that nothing may remain that might in any wise
seem to blemish this truth, go one step farther. For as yet will our
adversaries I know well say, that I never can where it grew. For our case say
they, is far otherwise then you take yt: seeing that we utterly deny not, that
Christ worcketh by means, but only swerve from you, in that we take those
instruments and means, to be other then you do. For the scripture we say
which Christ has left to us, is the true mean, whereby in all doutes and
controversies, we may sufficiently content and satisfy our selves. This is
that judge, which can not deceive, this is that touchestone that can not lie.
Thus say our adversaries, with whom in that that they appeal to the scriptures
no man is offended, yea we praise them therefore, and do the like, our selves.
But in that that they hold the scripture to be of it self alone, to end and
determine all controversies, rising upon, The scripture not hable to determine
all the controversies that may rise upon the meaning of the lettre.
the doutefull meaning of the lettre, able and suffycyent: therein we utterly
dyssent from them, and as we thynck, not without great cause. For omitting
here, that almighty god commanded in the old law as before you have hard,
that his people the Iues, in doutefull questions arising apo^ the law, should
resort to the priests, and to him that was the chief judge for the time, to be
resolved therein: and bad them not, for the trial thereof which sense were most
true, to lay and confer one text with an other, (which without all dout had he
known it to be the best and surest, Deuter. 17
as it is the readyest and easiest way he would not have let to have done:)
experience also has taught us the contrary thereof. For amongst so many as at
all times have disquieted the church, what one heretic ar they able to recon
overthrown by the scryptures? was Arrius vanquished by them? Nay, if you
brought to convince him this text, Pater and ego vnum sumus, my father and I ar
one: he would tell you again that the same Christ that so said, said also pater
meus mayor me ests, my father is greater then I. what had you the^ won at his
hands, that would tell you, that one place of scripture must expound an
other, and that therefore your place must be expounded by his? And if you would
wade farther with him, he would interpret your place (as he did with the
catholics) to be understand of unity in will and not in substance, and bring
you scripture toe, although wrested from the true sense, that should seem well
to prove his distinction. As when our savior prayed unto his father in this
sort, ^^^an. 17.
Pater sancte, serua eos in nomine tuo, quos dedisti mihi, vt sint vnum sicut
and nos, keep them a holy father in thy name whom thou have given to me, that
they may be one, as we two at one.

In the exposition and right understanding of these few words, Hoc est corpus
meum, this is my body: how happens it that the Caluinistes and the Lutheranes
agree not, by conferring one place of scripture with an other, if that be so
ready a way? Does not Caluyn with all his, teach us that the sense and true
interpretation of thiese words, must needs be atteined by the conference of
one place of scripture with an other? and to that end do they not fondly
allege S. Paul calling Christ a rock, ^. Cor. 10.
yea Christ calling him self a vine, I^^an. 15.
when he was in deed, neither the one nor the other, but by a fimilitude? As
though because the apostle, or Christ himself uses a figure in one place, we
must think that in all other he never spoke other wise. By which abominable
doctrine what lets, if a man would be so wicked, to affirm that Christ the
son of god, and second parson in trinity, were not the true and natural
son of god, but by adoption only: and for that wicked heresy to bring this
text, dedit eis potestatem filios dei fieri, I^^an. 1.
he gave them power to be made the sons of god. Which words we know being
spoken by us men, must be understand by grace and adoption: and frowardly to
mainteyne, that all the places which any good man can bring for the defense of
the contrary, should be drawn to this text alleged by them, and expownded
and understand thereby.

The Anabaptystes who deny the baptesme of infants, lean they not thyncke you
to this ground of yours? yea truly, and good reason it is that being all
heretykes as you ar, although in some points dissentyng, yet all ioining and
agreing in one cancred hatred against the church, you should all use the same
rules and principles. For that I may here pass over that reason of the
Anabaptists which belongs to an other place, that therefore infants must not
be baptized because it is not expressed in scripture (a principle also of your
religion) but delivered unto us by tradition: say they not also, that they
have the scripture plain for them against us? Marc. 16.
where yt has, Qui erediderit and baptizatus fueri^, saluus erit, he that
believes and is baptized shall be saved: and again in an other place, vna fides,
vnum baptisma, one faith, one baptesme. By which places say they it appears,
that say the must go before, and baptism follow after. And when the
catholykes to repress, and utterly overthrow this bru^ysh and beastely
opinion answer: that for infants thus baptized the faith of the church is
sufficient, and accounted for theirs: cry they not as you do, that in this
controuers^e one place of scripture must expound an other? and that therefore,
where as the scripture requires in him that is baptized faith, that theie must
have it of their own, according to the apostles saying, Romans 10.
fides ex auditu faith comes by hearing, which infants can not have, and
according to the saying of the prophet, Abacue. 2.
Iustus ex fide sua victurus est, the just man shall live by his own faith

I am sorry that in answering to this fond reason, I have bin compelled to make
any mention of such horrible heresies as thiese ar, which I had much rather,
were with their first authors buried in hell, from whence theie came, where
neither they, nor their name might ever hereafter offend, the conscience of any
good christian man. But as I have necessarily laid before your eyes thiese,
that by a part you may judge of the whole: so have I willingly stayed my self
from rehercing whole swarms of such opinions, as being of all men taken for
confessed heresies, only depend upon this one false ground, that we need here
in earth no other judge, to decide and determine doubts arising upon the
s^ripture, then the scripture it self: which being (they say) laid and
conferred to gether one text with an other, will not fail to bring us to the
right understanding thereof.

If your hearts good readers be moved with thiese heresies in the reading, as
truly god I take to witness mine was in the writing, abhor those that
teach them, shonne and avoid such principles and grounds, as have been the
foundation not of thiese only, but of all that now reign in the world, and
may be of any other hereafter, that any desperate heretyke lysteth to invent.
Stick to those by which all heretykes have been and thiese shall be, to their
utter confusion vanquished. Shrincke not rashelie from that fundacio^, whereon
your elders and forfathers fastening them selves, have passed over so many
hundred years, in the true confession of one god, one faith, one truth, to
them that having yet scarce forty on there backs, have notwithstanding
emo^gest the^ (creaping all out of the filthy neast of one Martin Luther) so
many faythes and yet no faith, so many truths, and yet no truth, never a one
agreing with the other, as there be mad frantic heads amongst them. Give no
ear to that subtle generation walcking in the darck like blind battes,
without a head, without a judge, and all to thend there iuggeling might not be
espied. Tell them that you have seen them thrive so euel upon that presumption
of theirs, so many heresies, so many schisms and lewd opinions, brought in
thereby, that you ar at a poinct with your selves to leave them, and take that
way that S. Hierom in the like case has done before you: who although his
knowledge in the tongues were such, as by the report of most men, it passed any
others in his time: yet would not he take upon him, in the discussing of
doutes, to lean to that rule of theirs, to lay and confer to gether one text
with an other, S. Hiero^ in doutes referred him self to Peter's Seat
but referring him self to the sea of Rome he always protested, that by that
seat and faith praised by the apostles own mouth would he be counceled and
ruled, Beatitudini tuae id est cathedrae Petri communione consocior, Tom. 2.
epist. ad Damasum.
To your holiness (says he writing to Damasus then the bishop of Rome) that is
to say to Peter's chair am I joined in communion: and he adds a cause why,
The church builded on S. Peter's chair.
Super illam Petram aedificatam ecclesiam scio. I know that on that rock
(Peter's chair) the church is builded. Say unto them (as, S. Hierom, said unto
the the heretics, Vitalis and Miletus) because they are adversaries to this
seat that you know them not, ibid.
that they scatter and ar schismatikes altogether out of the church, that
gather not with Peter's successor. In quaest. veteris and noui testament. q. 110
Tell them boldly with S. Austen that you will owe neither suit nor service
to their chair of pestilence, nor be a membre of that body, that either
lacks a head, The heretics church a dead tro^ck, or a live monstre.
and is a dead tronck, or has many and is a live monstre. Ask of them with
what face they could so many years to gether, call king Henry the eight
supreme head of the church of England immediately under god, and now our
gracious sovereign lady his daughter, supreme governor in all ecclesiastical
things and causes over the same (which how so ever they please them selves
with fine fetches and colored devises, is with the other title in effect all
one) if this reason of theirs were good: Christ is head of the church,
therefore there is no other head thereof under him? And how was king Henry
then? if they say that their meaning is, that no man can, because Christ is
head of the universal church; be under him head of the whole, but may well be
of some particular church, as King Henry was, and the Queen's majesty now
is: then demand of them what reason they have to lead them to say, that a
particular membre of the church (as the church of England can be no more) may
have an other head beside Christ, and the whole body may not? and why one
member may have two heads, more then one body? Finally, if at that time they
flattred the king and gave him that which neither they could give, nor he
receive, and abused his good nature to the destruction of so many notable men,
as for the only refusal to say as they said, by most exquisite and
painful torments, lost there lives: say unto them, that they yet at lenght
acknowledge their fault, and admonish that good lady our maistres that she
consent not to use that title, which because it belongs to Christ, she may
not have, or if theie thinck and will stand in it that she may without offense,
that they do yet at the least confess, that reason of theirs to be very weak
and of no strenght: Christ is head of the church therefore it may have no
other. Except they will perhaps say, that he is head of all other churches,
and has only lest ours headles, so that because he is not head thereof, we are out of the fear of falling into that inconvenience of having many, and
may therefore choose some one amongst our selves whom we list.

Thus I trust good readers you see sufficiently proved, that Christ's pleasure
is for the repressing of heresies, and calming of tempestuouse schisms, that
there be one head of his church here in earth, supplieng his corporal
absence for the time: his honor in the mean season nothing thereby the more
diminished, then it is in other things wherein he also uses the ministry
and service of men.

It follows now that I show to you who is and of right ought to be that head:
if first I do you to understand, that it must necessarily be a priest, and
that so by just consequence neither lay man, woman nor child, can be capable
of that office.

THAT THE HEAD OF CHRIST'S CHVRCHE HERE IN EARTH MVST NEEDS BE A PRIEST.
GRegorius Nazianzenus, In oratione de modestia in disceptat. tenenda.
that ancient father and master to S. Hierom, in a certain oration that he
made, of the femelie order that ought to be in Christ's church, has thiese
words. Nemo delphinum vidit terram sulcantem neque bouem in vnda laborantem,
quemadmodum nec solemn in nocte crescentem, aut decrescentem, sieve lunam
interdiu, ignis flammam emittentem, which is in english to say thus much.
There is no man that ever saw the dolphin, forsaking the sea plowe the land,
or the ox leave the earth to swymme and labor in the water, no more then the
son in the night rising or falling, or the moon in the day shining. And as
thiese keep the order and course to them by god and nature appoincted, the
dolphin the water, the ox the land, the son the day, the moon the night,
without entremedling them selves either in others function: so is there (says
he) in christ's church an order taken, that one shall be a head to rule and give
council, some other in place of feet to go, some hands to work, other
some ears to hear and eyes to see, some shepherds to feed, other some sheep
to be fed, some in one office, some in an other. This most bewtifull order in
Christ's church, is on our behalfes (as many as will be accounted members
thereof) inuiolably to be observed, unless in obedience toward our creator,
we will by brute beasts suffer our selves to be vanquished and overcome. This
is that order, whereapon depends the welfare or illfare, of the whole world.
This is that order which so long as it remains whole and not broken, so long
common wealths florishe, so long unity and peace ar norished, so long
Christ's true religion triumphs: as contrary wise, the breach thereof, (when
the feet that should go, will usurping the office of the head presume to give
council, the eyes will hear, the ears will be eyes, the head will go, the sheep
feed their sheppherds, the scholar teach his master) is in very deed, the
breakeneck of all good order and common quiet. This is that orderly conjunction
of one membre with an other, and every one in his own place, which although
it be, and ever has been, a great mote in Satan's eye: yet never durst he or
any of his directly impugn it. And therefore has he by those his ministres,
whom in thiese our days he has sturred up against Christ and his truth,
found out such a bie way, as wherebie he may both remove this let which
hinders so much his course, and seem yet nevertheless, to stand stoutelie in
the defense thereof. For what? do our adversaries trow you, expressly
maintain that order is naught, that the scholar should teach the master, the
sheep feed there shepherd, that things should be so iumbled together, and such
a hochepot made of all estates, that it should be lawful for every man to
comptroll, one an other in his of fice? No no, they be wiser then so I warrant
you. For although in deed all their driftes tend to that end, yet covet they
to make men believe, that they mind nothing less. For if they should openly
pretend so much, then were the matter at an end, and there credit utterly lost,
And therefore for the sauegard thereof, they would cast before our eyes such a
mist, that we should believe, those that be in very deed scholars to be
masters, sheep to be shepherdes, the feet to be the head and the head to be
the feet, and that under such government, there were of order no breach at
all. This is no new or strange practice good christian readers, but used even
from the beginning, and continued daily, by that old enemy to mankind, and
wily serpent the Devil, to set up vice and overthrow virtue. Thus cloketh he
pride with the name of clenlinesse, covetousness he terms frugalitie,
prodigality liberality, adultery in other men solace, in priests and such
as have uowed the contrary, he covers it with the honorable title of
matrimony: although the ancient fathers of Christ's church, have not
doubted, some of them to call it, not as do the devils ministres marriage, but
adultery: as does S. Ambrose ad virg. lapsam Cap. 5.
S. Basil in orat. de virginitate.
and Theophilactus: in cap. 7 1. Cor.
some of them, as S. Hierom, lib. 1. contra Iouinia^.
S. Austen, lib. de bono vid. cap 10.
and Chrisostom, epist. ad Theododor. lapsum.
not adultery only, as do the other, but sacrilege and incest. This
practice I say of the devil their fathers, do those his ministres most
diligently imitate those clawebacks and princes parasites, whose favor when
they labor to win, that under the shadow thereof, their heresy may find
the better entreteinement, and to the poisoning of the world the freer
passage, they use to them thiese perniciouse persuasio^s, that they be here in
earth by almighty god placed in his church, to be the heads thereof, and not
members, to be fathers and not children, to rule in causes of religion, and not
to be ruled, that to them it belongs in the right of their crowune, to
approve doctrine or to condemn it, to alter at their pleasure the state of
religion by acts of parliament without the consent of their clergy, to
depose bishops and put other in their places, in their styles and titles
boldly to write them selves governors in their realms in all things and
causes, as well ecclesiastical as temporal: and yet no order all this while
broken, because forsooth theie be such as theie bear them in hand they are, that
is to say the heads, the rulers, the shepherdes, the fathers, masters and
guides in religion.

Thiese be theie therefore good readers that as the prophet says, call bonum
malum, and malum bonum, tenebras lucem, and lucem ^enebras, good euel and euel
good, darckenes light and light darckenes. Thiese be they that as their Idol of
Geneua (in this poinct truly) gives answer, Caluinus bro. 4. instit. capit.
20.
go about to make princes iustle with god. Finally thiese ar those lowsy
brokers, that leading as it were by the hand, their good and virtuous princes,
after this sweet poisoned bait, from the most pleasant and fertile valeis of
humility, to the top of the high barren, and craggy mountains of pride and
arroga^cie, showing them when they have them there, the riches and ornaments of
the church, the lands and revenues thereof (by good and virtuous princes
their predecessors and ancestors, The cause of endovvinge the church with
lands.
long time before for this intent especially thereto given, that the ministres
of Christ's most holy word and blessed sacraments being by having of their
own, delivered from that comberouse care of provision for them selves, that
afterward the holy ghost who was the procuror of such almoise, and stirred from
time to time the devotion of good men thereto, forsaw thorough the decay of
piety, and coldenes of charity toward the latter end of the world, they
were likely to fall into: might thereby the more quietly follow their
vocation:) promise of all the same to make them the lords and masters, if
they will do them homage, and fall down and worship them, that is to say,
harcke^ to their doctrine, submit them selves thereto, and grant to it within
their realms and dominions, favorable entreteinement.

And that this is true good readers, that they have thus shamefully abused and
deceived their princes, and not surmised or imagined by me to bring them in to
hatred, whom god I take to record I pity much and hate nothing: I hope by his
assistance who is the giver of all good things, ^o plainly to prove, that you
your selves shall at the eye see it, and they (if there remain yet in them any
sparcle of grace) shall not be hable to deny it. The which that I may the
better perform, I shall truly bring forth, as it were into the face of the open
court, all such evidence, of importance, as either part has to allege for
them self: so truly Itrust, that the council of the other side shall have no
cause to complain, that either I have suppressed and co^cealed, their
necessary proofs one way, or obscured their beauty in the bringing of the^
forth on the other.

But because an indifferent and upright judge, must always have an earnest eye
to the issue, (which is between us who should govern in ecclesiastical
causes, the prince or the priest) it shall not be amiss (because to be chief
governor in things and causes ecclesiastical, is nothing else but to have
the supreme jurisdiction thereto belonging) to examine first, in what poinctes
that consists, that so by conferring our evidence with the same, whether it
agree with every part, with none, with some, and with which: we may at the
length by good scanning comme to the knowledge of every man's own.

Jurisdiction therefore ecclesiastical, Eccle^iastical iuri diction ^^here in
it con^isteth.
consists especially in three poinctes: in authority to judge over doctrine
which is sound and which is other, in the power of the keys, that is to say as
our savior him self has expounded it, in loosing and binding, excommunicating
and absoluing, Matthew. 16.
in making rules and laws for the government of the church and in the
ministry of the word and the sacraments.

To the first of thiese three what title Kings and princes have, it shall if
theie have any, be seen hereafter. But for priests you shall see to begin
withal, an ancient commission out of the scriptures: where almighty god
speking to Aaron used thiese words: Leuitici. Cap. 10.
Praeceptum sempiternum e^t in gener ationes vestra;vt habeatis scientiam
discernendi inter sanctum and prophanum, inter pollutum and mundum, doc^atisque
filios Israel omnia ^egitima mea: that is to say, it is a precept that shall
ever endure thorough all your generations to have the knowledge to discern and
put difference, between holy things and profane, between clean and polluted:
and that you teach the children of Israel all my commandments.

To whom gave almighty god here the power to judge of doctrine? whom
commanded he to teach? any other then Aaron and his race which were priests?

In the book of Deutero^. Cap. 17.
says he not also that if there arise any hard or doutefull question, the
priest must be consulted, that he that of pride will spurn against his
ordinance shall suffer death therefore? cap. 21.
and agein in the same book in an other place, that upon the priests word all
causes shall hang.

Ezechiel the prophet does he not witness the same* Cap. 44.
and when there is any controversy (says he) they shall stay in my judgments
and give judgment.

Aggeus and Malachias, prophets both, bid they us enquier for the law of god,
at the priests hands, or at the kings? No assuredly, they send us not to
kings (which had they been the chief governors in those matters without
fail they would have done) but to the priests: whose lips they promise,
shall not miss to keep the true knowledge, Aggeus. 2.
because theie ar our lords angels. Malac^. 2.
Have we any such warrant of worldely princes? No truly. And were it not more
the^ necessary that we should if princes should rule them in matters of
religion, of whom thiese words be spoken?

But to proceed, is this authority give to them only in the old testament^ar
they not put trow you, in as great trust in the new? Or ar they thinck you
excluded, and kings admitted the^e^^^? If it had been so never would S. Paul
that bles^ed apos^le, ^. Cor. 12.
have made his accopte, that god had placed in his church, first apostles,
next to them prophets, then doctors, and so forth. Amongst all the which,
although that frantic fool that preaching not many yea^e^ sense at Powles
cross, went about with his railing Rhetoric, to make his audience as foolish
as he was ma^de, in bele^ing that this place should make against the authority
of the pope, because forsooth he could he said, find no room for him there:
and therefore of his charity (...) that if any good fellow amongst his
audience were we^rie of his room he might be placed the re: as verily ^ both
thinck and know there were many, that wished both them selves away, and him
in Bedlem amongst his compagnions never to come more in pulpit, especially in
that place, to dishonor the university his mother from whence he came, by such
unreasonable not reasoning but railing: although he I say, could find there no
place for the pope, he might yet have with his young sight found at the least
that, Lib. 4. I^^ sti. cap. 3. sect. 4.
which John Calvin could before with his old and dim eyes epsy out, that is,
that the chiefest place of government in Christ's church, belonged to the
apostles, and so to the bishops and priests their successors. Except his
brain would serve him to say, that Christ's church died with his apostles.

But if a man should ask this great clercke that has so narowely scanned the
text, what room he found there for Kings. I maru^ll what his wisdom would
answer. There is but one word in all the text that should seem to make place
for any tempora^l magistrate, and that has Calvin watered with such a gloss,
that it can in no wise serve his purpose. The word is gubernationes,
gouernements placed beside so far from the chiefest and first place, (if it were
to be understand of temporal magistrates) that it occupies the seventh. But
Calvin says it may not so be understand, but that the apostle meant by that
word such spiritual men, as were joined to the preachers for the better order
in spiritual government. And he adds a reason, why it may not be
understand of civil magistrates: because (says he) there were at that time
none of them christians. By which words this merry man may see, that if he
will needs dance after his master Calvin his pipe, he must say that there
is not, not only no room in this place for civil magistrates, but that he
is excluded al^o from the hope of finding for them any, That civil
magistrates should govern in the church, it can not be proved by the new
testament by Calui^s ^eason.
(I mean in the government in ecclesiastical causes) in any other place of
the new testament.

But not in this place only was S. Paul of that mind, that priests should
govern the church of christ, but in that notable sermon of his also, that he
made to the priests of Ephesus at his departure from thence, where he gives
them this exhortation, Attendite vobis and vniuerso gregi, Actuum. 10.
in quo vos spiritus sanctus posuit episcopos, regere ecclesiam dei. Look
says he to your selves, and to your flock in the which the holy ghost has
placed you to rule, and govern the church of god.

Can there be any plainer evidence then is this? Let them therefore either rule
(as S. Paul says they are appointed thereto, and that by the holy ghost) or
if princes must, let us deny saint Paul his authority, and say that the
spirit failed him, for surely both may not.

And thus for the scriptures (good readers) ye see, to whom of right that part
of ecclesiastical government, which stands in the alowing and condemning of
doctrine does apperteine. For that do the auctorites by me out of the old
testament alleged, expressly prove: as also do those brought out of the
new, by a necessary consequence, in that they give to them the whole
government and chief souereintie, of which this is, as is before said, a
part.

The next membre of spiritual government, is thepower as Christ him self
calls it of binding and loosing. Which power to excomunicate and to absolve
our savior gave to his apostles, Matthew. 19.
when he said to them: what so ever you bind in earth shall be bound in heaven,
and what so ever you loose on the earth shall be loosed in heaven. Wherein and
in the last which is to preach and ministre the sacraments, because thiese
peuish proctours pretend not as yet any great title for princes, but seem
rather to ground their action in the first: I will leaving them both as either
by the scriptures in all men's judgments sufficiently defended, or by our
adversaries them selves not assaulted, examine of what mind touching this
controversy, the holy doctors of Christ's church from time to time have been.
Not as though man's word should have with us more authority then gods, or
that it needs to be boulstred up there with, but for this causeonelie, that if
it happen the^ to wrangle, as their manner is, about the true interpretacion
thereof, all men may perceive that we give no other, then the fathers of
christ's church before us have given.

And here to begin with Ignatius that holy martyr, Ignatius.
who for the faith of Christ was with the teethe of wild beasts torn, and as
he writes him self, saw our savior in flesh: consider I beseech you in the
prescribing of such order for obedience in Christ's church as wherebie unity
might be preserved, Epist. ad Philadelphe^.
what place of preeminence he gives to Emperors (who ar of the laietie the
greatest estates) and what to bishops. his words ar thiese, Principes obedite
Caesari, milites principibus, diaconi praesbiteris sacrorum prefectis:
praesbiteri, diaconi and reliquus clerus, vna cum omni populo and militibus and
principibus and Caesa re, episcopo: episcopus Christo, sicut Christus patri, vt
ita vnitas per omnia seruetur. Princes (says he) obey your emperor, soldiers
your princes, deacons the priests which have the charge of religion: priests,
deacons, all the rest of the clergy with the people what so ever they are,
soldiers, princes, yea the emperor him self, be you obedient to your bishop:
the bishop to Christ, as Christ is obedient to his father, that so unity may
in all poinctes be observed. Here may we see good readers, that even in the
days of this holy martyr Ignati^s, it was then thought necessary and
expedient, that for the better observing of unity, the emperor him self
should obey the bishop. well I wot our adversaries will not restreine this
obe^ience to temporal government, and therefore it must needs be understand
of spiritual and in causes ecclesiastical. But if th'obseruing of this
obedience be the way to conserve unity, what shall we alas thinck of them that
labor to violat and break the same? as do all they that trauail to make
princes in matters of religion to rule, and bishops to obey.

The same worthy bishop and constant mart^ Ignatius, Epist. ad Smyrnens.
writing in an other place ad Smirnenses, bids he them not to honor first
god, next the bishop as bering his image, and then after the king.

Policarpus, Epist. ad Philippens.
disciple to saint John theuangelist, of priests and deacons writes thus,
Subiecti estote praesbiteris, and diaconis sicut deo and Christo. Be ye subject
to the priests and deacons as to god and Christ. Is this any other to say then
as thapostle said before him, Obedite ijs qui vigilant pro animabus vestris.
Obey you them which keep the watch for your souls?

Here considre I beseech you, ^. Cor. 12.
that S. Paul's placing of th'apostels, and in them the bishops and priests
their successors, in the first and chiefest place in Christ's church, Actor. 20
his calling of them the rulers thereof, and appoincted so to be not by man,
but by the holy ghost, was not to deceive us.

Remember, that if in matters of religion the ^ishoppes, and priests should
have solowed the civil magistrates ordinances, it had been in vain that
Ignatius and Policarpus bad the people, emperors and Kings none excepted, to
be obedient and subject to them. For wherein should they be subject, or in what
thing should they obey, if not in religion and matters thereunto apperteining?
Read over the ancient histories as well of the Griekes as of the Latins:
peruse the doings of Iues and Gentiles, paganes, heathen, or what so ever
people or nation you list, and you shall never find any to have been so
barbarouse or far out of order, that first they had not their religion, and
next their bishops, and priests to whom they wholly referred th'ordre and
disposition thereof.

But to proceed, Homel. 38 in ca. Mat. 21.
Chrisostom calls the priests the heart and stomach of the church. his
reason is, The prie^ tes chief governors in spiritual matters.
quia in rebus Spiritualibus per eos totus pop^lus gubernatur. because in
spiritual government all the people is governed by them.

Lo good readers here may you see that in Chrisostomes time, in that pure state
of the primitive church, all the people was in matters spiritual governed by
(not the kings or other civil magistrates) but the bisshoppes and priests.
Then were the priests in those matters judges; and emperors them selves
subjects. Then had emperors and kings this persuasion that they could
garnish their style with none more excellent title, or name more honorable,
then to be called the children of the church. ^o^stanti^^s.


Thus thought Constantinus the great, the first emp^rour that is reported to
have openly professed Christ. who as Ruffinus witnesses of him, Lib. 10. ^ap.
2. ^ccles. ^ist.
being present at the first general council of Nice which was assembled above
twelve hundred years ago, had there delivered unto him certain libelles and
bills of complaints, that the bishops had one of them put up against an
other. The which all as he received and put up into his bosom: so after that he
had refused to be judge in their causes, Con^tan^ine the emperor refused to be
judge in the bishops causes. Only god the judge of bishops causes.
affirming that it beca^ not him to judge them, to whom god had given power to
judge him, and that therefore their querels (what so ever they were) they should
refer to the judgment of almighty god, as having no other judge amongst
men: he caused without once opening them to see the contents, to be thrown
into the fire, that the brawle and discord he said of priests, might never go
farther into the knowledge of men.

But here our adversaries (as blame the^ I can not seeing they will needs be
patrones to desperate causes, if theie be glad to catch hold of a little) will
perhaps ^ay that I have indiscreetly behaved my self in alleging this
authority, which fardereth me not so much one way, as it hinders me an
other, in that by the history it ap^eareth that the emperor sat in the
council with the bishops. Well, of the alleging of this place who is like
to get shame, and who honesty, who to win and who to lose therebie (for our
adversaries also I am not ignorant thereof ar wont to bring this example for
them:) the trial thereof I leave till such time as it shall be laid more whotly
to my charge, which shall be hereafter in bringing to light such simple store, as
they have gathered together for the confirmation of their part, from the
examples of such emperors, as sense christ's time have reigned. Yeat this may
I be bold to say in the mean season, that as Constantinus sat in the council
with the bishops, there was never yet emperor nor king for bidden I dare
well say to sit, nor never I trow shall. And over this, that in there being
it is not very likely that he encroched any thing upon the spiritual
jurisdiction, both by that which you have hard before, and also for this,
Epist. 166
that being on a time as S. Austen reports of him, required by the Donatistes
to take upon him the hearing of the cause, which depended between them and
Cecilian, th'archebishop of Carthage: he refused to meddle there with all,
because (says he) non est ausus de causaeepiscopi iudicare, because he durst
not be judge in a bisshops cause. But leaving this for the while, let us
examine, the doings of other good and catholic emperors.

Valentinianus the emperor, Valentinianus.
was from that desire of governing in church matters and ecclesiastical
causes so far, Tripart. histor. lib. 7. cap. 12.
that as Sozomenus writes of him, being required on the behalf of the
bishops that inhabited the parts of Hellespontus and Bithinia, that he would
vouchesauf to be present with them to entreat of certain points in religion to
be reformed: he made them this asnwer. To me, Valentinian his answer being
required to enter. meddle in matters of religion*
being one of the people, it is not laufull to search out such things. But the
priests, to whom the charge thereof belongs, let them assemble them selves
where they list.

This is the same Valentinia^, who willing the bishops to chose a meet man
to the sea of Millain being by the death of Auxentius then void, T^eodorit.
lib. 7. hist. eccl. cap. 8.
used to the^ thiese words. Talem in pontificali constituite sede, cui and nos
qui guber^amus imperium sincer^ nostra capita submittamus, and cuius ^onita dum
tanquam homines deliquerimus, necessario velut curantis medicamenta
suscipiamus, that is to say. Choose you such a bishop, as to whom eue^ we
which govern the empire may syncerely submit our selves; and whose monicions,
while like men we fall, as pacients do the phisicions receiptes, Nicol^us papa
in epistola ad Faustu^^.
we may necessarily receive. This to be short is he, which would not so much as
be present when Sixtus the B. of Rome was charged with certain accusations, To.
1. council. de expurg. Sixti. Vale^tinia^ the son
but rising from the council left him to be judged of him self.

His son also Valentinian succeding his father in the empire, proclaimed he
him self chief governor in causes ecclesiastical? True it is, that being yet a
child, and seduced by his wicked mother Iustina, to favor the horrible
heresy of the Arrians: he began to affect that title. Lib. 5. epis^ol. 33.
But after S. Ambrose like a true bishop, and faithefull councelor, had told
him that it apperteigned not to him, to pretend any auctorit^e or right to
meddle with the oversight of gods matters, that to him belonged his palaces,
and to the priests the churches, that he should not auaunce him self but be
subject to god, and give to hi^ that which was his, Lib. 5. epi^t^l. 32.
reserving to Caesar that which was Cesars: after that he had proposed to him
the example of his father, who not only in words said, that it was not his
part to judge amongst the bishops, but established also a law, that in
causes of faith and religion, yea in th'examination of the manners of bishops
and priests, only ^ishoppes should be judges: after that he had willed him
to search the scriptures, where he should find that bishops ought in
matters of faith to be judges over Emperors, not they contrariwise ou^r
bishops: After that he had bidden him call to his remembrance, if ever he so
much as hard, that in a matter of faith thelay me^ weriudges over the
bishops, and finally told him that if he should give him such council, or
being vnminderfull of that right which belongs to priestehod, Our cou^trefeit
bi^s^ops proused true flatteres by S. Ambrose.
commit that to other which god had given to him, that he should not then
tread in the upright paths of tr^th and simplicity, but walck in the crooked
way of adulatio^ and flattery, and that at the lenght he should (he douted
not) him self, as he grew to more ripenes in years, well understand what
manner of bishop that were, that would submit the authority of priests to the
judgment oflay men. After I say all thiese persuasio^s, he found that good
emperor so well ^eclaimed, that him self reports of (...) an epistle which
he wrote to Theodosius, Epist. 34. lib. 5.
that where before he persecuted him, now he loved him, where before he took
him for his mortal enemy, now he reuere^ced him as his father. Which (S.
Ambrose never yelding in his or (...) gods right) the emperor would neue^
undoubtedly have done, had he not well known that S. Ambrose was in the right
and he in the wrong.

What should I here allege the words of Basilius the emperor, who being
present at the eight si^ode, the fourth of Constant^nople, made there a notable
or^tion in the which to the (...) he used thiese words: De vobis autem (...)
etc.^ of you that are lay men whether you besuch as have dignities in the common
weal or none: I have no more to say, but that in no wise it is lawful for
you to dispute or reason of causes ecclesiastical. For to search out those
things it belongs to the patriarchs, the bishops and the priests, who
have received the office to rule, who have the power to sanctify, to lose and
to bind, in whose hands ar the ecclesiastical and heavenly keys: not unto
us who must be fed, who have need to be sanctified, to be bound and to be
released fr^^ our bands. For the lay man, of how great devotion and wisdom
so ever he be, yea although he have all the virtue that is possible to be in a
man: yet whilst he is a lay man, he is in the place of a sheep.

Hitherto Basilius the emperor, to whom I might join both the doings and
saienges of many other, were it not that even of those earthely rulers who have
been tyrants and persecutors of the christians, we want not yet examples to
beat down thiese beastelie flatterers with all. Amongst a nombre of the
which that might be here brought, I shall for this time be contented to allege
only three: Gallio the proconsul of Achaia, Theodoricus king of the Goths,
and Aurelianus the emperor of Rome. Act. ca. 18.
Of whom the first although he were an infidel, yet refused he to he^re the
accusations laid in at Corinthu^ against S. Paul, and said in plain words:
Ego iudex horu^es^e nolo, I will not take on me to judge in thiese matters,
because th'accusation concerned religion where with he had nothing to do^. The
second although an Arrian, yet would not presume to be present at a certain
council of bishops whereunto he was called, In. 4. s^nod Romans sub Simacho
papa.
but modestly excusing him self, made this answer: that in matters of the
church he had nothing to do, In church matters what the prince has to do.
but only to bear toward them his reverence The third being an ethnike and
of the Christians a cruel persecutor, when the catholic bishops who had
excommunicated the heretic Paulus Samosatenus, and deprived him of his
bishoprike, Aurelianus
resorted to him for his help touching the removing of the said Paulus out of
the mansion house belonging thereto, the possession whereof he then kept:
Eusebius lib. eccle. hist. 7. cap. 26.
would not take upon him the knowledge of this matter where bishops were
parties, but referred the judgment thereof to the bishops of Italy and Rome.

If heretics good Readers, tirantes and Ethnikes, were yet so modest that they
would not, Psalm. 2.
or of the wrath of god (which brooseth into fitters the proudest of the all
like the sherdes of a potters pot, as continually was represented unto there
eyes, by the terrible examples of the two kings Ozias and oza) so fearful,
that they durst not with Saul cut any part of Samuels coat, with Oziasinuade
the priests office, and straie out of the limits of that jurisdiction which
god had given to them: what may then the kings and princes of our age say, who
by thiese ^urious fire ^randes have been so far abused, that they have not
douted to take on them that, which heretics and miscreants of conscience have
refused? For this by the way is well to be noted, that as thiese being
heretics and Ethnikes refused to intrude them selves in to ecclesiastical
jurisdiction: so was there never emperor sense first they became Christened,
unless he were him self an heretic or by heretics set on, that attempted to
do otherwise: and that immediately in so doing, what so ever he were, as he was
by heretics maintained: so by good and catholic bishops, such as of whose
both virtue and learning no ma douteth, was he both earnestly and sharply
reproved.

And here to begin with that inconstant Constantius, Consta^^ius.
who of a catholic emperor becam a wicked Arrian: Lib. 2. cap. 41.
in whose time as Socrates reports, there were no ^ewer them nine faithes.
When he began to take upon him the part of Ozias, a. paralip. cap. 26.
the priests office in deciding questions and matters of religion, in deposing
the catholic bishops and placing Arrians in their rooms, in prisoning some
in banishing more, in vexing and disquieting all: had not god think you his
Azarias ready to match with him?

Was not there first ^iberius the pope, Liberius.
of whom when he (meddeling in matters of religion,) most earnestly required,
that he would subscribe against A thanasius, (promising on the one side great
rewards if he did, and threatening on the other exquisite torments if he
refused) he received this answer. At^anas. in epist. ad solitariam vitam
age^^es.
Non ita ^e habet ecclesiasticus canon, neque vnquam accepimus talem a patribus
traditionem. Quod si omnino Imperator curam suam pro ecclesiastica pace
ininterponere quaerit, aut scripta a nobis pro Athanasio deleri iubet:
deleantur quoque ea quae contra eum scriptasunt, fiatque deinde
ecclesiaflicasynodus vbi nec Imperator praesto sit, nec Comes se ingerat, nec
iudex minetur. The rules of the church quoth he teach us no such thing, nor
we never received of our fathers any such tradition. But if the emperor will
needs be careful in procuring the peace of the church, or command that I
retract those things which I have written in the behalf of Athanasius: let
them also be called in that have been written against him, and let there be
after that, an ecclesiastical synod assembled, far from his palace, where
neither the emperor shall be present, neither his lieuetenant intrude him self,
nor judge threaten.

Thus was the emperor answered by that great good old man, Hosius.
and true confessor Hosius the bishop of Corduba in Spayn, Histor. eccles. lib.
5. cap. 16.
to whom as Theodoretus writes, Athanasius was wont to say that no man came
sick and wounded, that went not away hole and cured. This notable and ancient
father, this true confessor of Christ's faith (for so did also Athanasius call
him) when he saw that the emperor Constantius would needs take apo^ him the
government of the church which belonged not to him: first he proposed to him
the example of his brother Constans, who living like a virtuous prince within
his bounds never attempted the like, and after he writes thus. Ne te misceas
ecclesiasticis, Athanas. in epist. ad solitariam vitam age^tes.
neque nobis in hoc genere praecipe, sed potius a nobis ea disce. Tibi deus
imperium commisit, nobis quae sunt ecclesiae concredidit. Et quemadmodum qui
tuum imperium malignis oculis carpit contradicit ordinationi diuina: ita and
tucaue ne quae sunt ecclesiae ad te retrahens, magno crimini fias obnoxious.
Date (scriptum est) quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, and quae Dei deo: that is to
say. Entremedle not your self (o emperor) in ecclesiastical causes, nor take
not upon you to command us in those matters, but the things that belong
thereto learn you them rather of us. To you has god committed the empire, A
necessary admonition for princes that enter meddle in matters of the church.
and to us the business and affairs of the church. And even as he that will
with comptrolling eye check your government resists the ordinance of god:
so take you also good head, lest in drawing to you those things which
apperteine to the church, you incur a great and a heynouse fault. Give (it
is written) to Caesar that which is his duty, and to god that which is gods.

Athanasius speaking to this purpose says, Athanasius In epist. ad solitar.
vi^a^ agentes.
Siistud est iudicium episcoporum, etc. If this judgment belong to bisshops,
what has the emperor to do therewith? or if on the contrary part these
matters be wrought by the threateninges of Caesar, what need is there of any men
beside to bear the bare title of bishops? when from the beginning of the world
has it been hard of, that the judgment of the church has taken authority of
the emperor? A question to be ansvvered by the Huguenotes.
Or when has this been agnised for any judgment? Many synodes have there been
before this time, many councels has the church holden, but the time is yet to
comme that ever either the fathers went about to persuade the prince any such
matter, or that the prince showed him self to be curiouse in matters of the
church. Arrius he resie first brought in that princes should meddle in matters
of the church.
But now have we a spectacle never seen before brought in by Arrius heresy.

And toward the end of the same epistle, of Constantius attempting to meddle
in causes ecclesiastical he writes thus. Quid igitur hic quod Antichristi est
omistt? aut quid ille vbi venerit plus committere poterit? aut quomodo ille in
aduentu suo non repererit sibi expeditam uiam ad dolos abisto praeparatam?
Siquidemiam denuo in locum ecclesiasticae cognitionis, palatium tribunal earum
causarum constituit, seseque earum litium summu^ principem and authorem facit.
What is therefore says he, to be done by Antichrist, that Constantius has
omitted? or what can Antichrist do more at his coming then he has done
already? Or how can it be that he shall not find the way ready made by him
when he comes for all his disceytfull wyles. For even now again in the place
of the ecclesiaticall jurisdiction, A poinct^ of Antichrist for a lay man to
entremeddle in spiritual jurisdiction.
he has placed and appointed his own palace, to be the co^sistory of those
causes that should have been determined thereby, and he makes him self the
chief judge and arbitre thereof. And a little after he adds: Quis enim videns
eum in decernendo principe se facere episcoporu^, and praesidere iudicijs
ecclesiasticis: non merito eam ipsam abominationem de solationis dicat esse que
a Daniele praedicta est? Daniel capit. 9.
for who seeing him in judgment make him self the chief of the bishops, and
rule in causes ecclesiastical, may not worthily say that he is that
abomination of desolation that Daniel prophesied of.

Thus have you hard good Readers, how thiese ancient fathers, Liberius,
Hosius, and Athanasius, reproved the doings of Constantius the emperor, the
first (that we read of and yet him self an Arrian and provoked thereto by that
wicked brood) that took apo^ him to meddle in ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

Next after him succeeded in the empire Julian, Iulianus.
of the historiographers called apostata, for that that being once a professed
Christian, he afterward renied his faith and became a wicked infidel. He
robbed churches, he plucked priests from the aultars, Lib. ^. histor. eccles.
cap. 50.
and sent them to the wars. he did sacrifice and called him self as Sozomenus
writes of him by the name of bishop: and finally by contempt termed the
Christians Galilei, and was to them a more cruel scourge then any that went
before him. Of him it is likely that Gregorius Nazianzenus who lived in his
time would say no less, Oration. ad subdit ^i^ore perculs. and Imper.
irasc^^^em.
then of Valens the emperor plaieng not much unlike part he did. whom in the
midst of that ruffle which he made in the church he told to his face, that
his power was subject to his consistory and him self a sheep of his flock.

I can not here pass over in silence the answer (I wot not whether I may call
it more pleasant, more witty, or more godly) that Theodoretus in his
ecclesiastical history writes to be made by one Eulogius, Lib. 4. ca. 18.
a man for his virtues amongst his neighbors highly esteemed (the history
calls him primarium inter suos, the chief of the place where he dwelled) to
an officier of Valens the emperor touching this matter. This Vale^s favoring
the heresy of Arrius, encroched so far upon cclesiasticall jurisdiction, that
he fell to the depriving of bishops, and the placing of other in their
rooms, besides many other sundry enormites, and outrages. It happened so, that
coming on a time to a certain town in Mesopotamia called Edessa, where this
Eulogius was then governor, and thincking to do there as else where he had
(that was to place there a chaplain of his to be bishop) he was by this good
man and certain other withstand. The officer that had to do under the
emperor, travailed earnestly to get his consent, and amongst other
persuasions that he used to induce him thereto, A pleasant vvitty and godly an
svvere, to stop their mouths vvithall, who in matters of religion object
alvvaies the princes authority.
it chanced him to cast out thiese words. Coniungere cum imperatore, Be
contented man to join with the emperor. Set your heart at rest he will have
it so. Tumille (faith the history) placide and festiue Numquid vna cum imperio
etiam ille pontificatum est consecutus? why, answered he coldely and
pleasantly, was he made a bishop that day that he was crowned emperor? as who
would say, what although he be emperor, yet has he not thereby gotten
authority to depose bishops and ordeine new* which only bishops must
do. So strange a thing seemed it then good readers in Christ's church which
now we see so commonly done.

Long after thiese emperors start up Leo Isaurus, emperor of Constantinople
(he that made war with images.) Against him god raised up also his Azarias, one
to warn him of his duty, and that was that notable learned man John
Damascenus. Sermon. 1.
Give (says he) the apostle Paul cries, to every one his due, honor, fear,
pension, tribute, to each one that which they ought to have. The charge that
kings have, is to see well to their commonweals, the ordering of the
churches apperteineth to the pastors and teachers. This manner of inuading
other men's offices, I can term it no better my brethern then robbery and
plain violence. And a little after he has thiese words: Tibi o rex in ijs
quae pertinent ad presentis vitae negocia etc. As for those things o king
which concern only this present life, in those we willingly obey the. In
ordering the state of the church, we have shepherdes which have spoken to us
the word of god that is to say taught it us, and have left us rites and
ordres therefore. And in the same place he adds. Non recipio rege^ qui per
tyrannidem sibi sacerdotiu^ vsurpat. I acknowledge him for no king, that
usurps by tirany the priests office. And last of all to knit up the knot in
plain words he says. Non assentior vt regum legibus gubernetur ecclesia, sed
patrum potius traditionibus, sieve scriptae hae sint sieve non scriptae I consent
not says he that the church of god shall be governed by the laws of kings,
but by the traditions rather of our fathers be they written or unwritten.

And thus much hitherto good readers have I thought good to reherce, that you
may the better understand how the ancient fathers of Christ's church, have
not ceased continually from time to time, to resist the unlawful attempt of
such princes, as being heretics or enueigled theretoe by heretics (for of
other perdy it was never gone about, nor of all them neither) would contrary to
the express word of god, the custom of Christ's church from the beginning
continued, the allowed examples of all ages, of all commonweals Christian and
heathen hitherto practiced, mingle heaven and earth, holy and profane
together, by unlawful usurping to them selves, the supreme and chief
government in causes ecclesiastical.

To come nearer home to our own time and days, if in it any prince have
attempted the like, there has not lacked also stoare of diverse me^, singular
both for their virtuous life and exquisite learning, which have rather chosen
to withstand the same with the expense of their blood, and loss of this
present life, then to the utter destruction of both body and soul, and loss
of that which must continue for ever, to consent thereto. But if thiese
examples please not the deinty taste of the adversaries as being over stale: I
shall set before them their own dear derling, the pillar while he lived of
their religion, the very head of their church (if they be not all together
headless) their Idol and their god in earth, whose doctrine and opinions at
other times, and in other things, they have so rauenouslie devoured, John
Calvin him self. For if kings and temporal governors (as our adversaries
affirm) ought every one of them in their realms, signories, and dominions,
to govern in causes ecclesiastical and matters of religion: why did then
that monsterous beast in his comentaries upon the prophets Os^e and Amos, in
Ose^^. cap. 1.
rayl apo^ our late sovereign lord king Henry the eight, calling him homo
belluinus a beastelie man, Amos. 7.
and comparing him with Iehu, whom he terms wicked and naught? Why termed he
the^ blasphemers that first buzzed into his ears that vain desire to be
called chief head of the church of England (for of other you wot well he never
attempted to be nor ever was called) under Christ here in earth? If Calvin
have taught the truth, then have his scholars taught us and yeat do feed us
with lies. If they were blasphemers that called king Henry chief head of the
church of England under Christ, (which is to say in effect nothing else but
to be chief governor in all causes belonging to the same) who was yet a man
although lay, and thereto also of great wisdom and learning: in what degree
of blasphemy shall we place them, that give this title not to lay men only,
but to women also and children with out respect? If Calvin, who touching the
giving of this unlawful title to our late lord and master was utterly
innocent, complained yet that even his conscience was wounded not a little
there withal: how much more daungerousely wounded ought they to thinck them
selves, who of so many horrible and bloudly wounds (whereby for the refusal
to follow this example in christ's church never hard of before, so many godly,
learned and innocent men in this realm have died: some by heading, some by
hanging, some by quartering and tearing peace meal one membre from an other,
have by there false and untrue suggestions been the chief and only occasion?
who yet like cruel bloudsuckers and bloody bourre^aus, carry about in their
murdering and malicious mouths the naked knife, which were it laufull for them
they would sheathe in the throats of every one of us that thinck not as they
do.

But if now on the contrary part their master Calvin were deceauid, if they be
in the right and he in the wrong, why steppeth none of them forth, to defend
and vindicate from perpetual infamy, that prince of famous memory which by
his railing writings this wretched caytiff goes about to bring him into? why
have they left him so long undefended, who did no other thing then whereof them
selves were the authors and first beginners? Or why at the least purge theie not
them selves, of the horrible crime of blasphemy laid by him to their charges
and all such as theie ar? for if they were blasphemers that called king Henry
head of the church of England, what privilege have thiese that calling not
only him, but his son and daughter by the same title in effect, they should
not incur the same crime? Where is now their spirit of unity that they are
wont so much to brag of, which dissent not here in any small poinct, or from
any mean man, but even from the chiefest caterpiller (while he lived) of their
congregation? who not only in thiese places before by me alleged keeps as it
were with their proceadings a combat, but else where in his Institutio^s does
merueilous^y discredit the same. Lib. 4. cap. 11. sect. 4.
And in steed of many places which might be brought here out of his worckes:
I shall only for this time be contented to allege one, in such sort as I
find it in the french, because at the writing hereof I had not, nor could
getanie other copy. The place is thus: Pour tant ceulx qui despouillen^ l'
Eglise de ceste puisance, pour exalter be magistrate, ou la justice terriene,
non seuleme^t corro^pent le sens des paroles de Christ par faulse
interpretation, mais aussi accusent d' une grande vice, les sainctz euesques
qui ont este en grand nombre, depuis be temps des Apostres, comme ^iilz eussent
usurp la dignite and office du magistrate, subz fauls se couerture. That is to
say in english. Those therefore which to exalt the magistrate or earthely
justice, do spoil the church of this power (he means and speakith of the
order touching church matters) do corrupt, not only the sense of Christ's
own words by false interpretation, but do also accuse of a heynouse fault
the holy bishops, (whereof the nombre is not small) which have bin sense the
apostles time, as though they had usurped by false coloring the matter, the
office and dignity of the magistrate.

Now choose good readers, whether ye had rather believe Calvin mainteining the
authority and jurisdiction of the church, or our clawebackes and parasites
which impugn the same. The one has scripture to defend it. Deuter. 17.
The other has nothing to assault it. The scripture saeith that in doutefull
questions we should resort to the priests, Ezech. cap. 44
that at their word should all matters be decided, that they should judge, that
at their hands we should demand knowledge, ^ggeus. 2
that their lips be the kepers thereof because they are our lords angels.
Now comes the heretic, the peruerter of scripture, he tells us that we
must seek it at the princes hands, that he is gods chiefest ministre in
things and causes as well ecclesiastical as temporal. 1. Cer. 12.
The scripture reaconeth in the first place in Christ's church apostles, that
is to say priests (for we may not thinck that in that place the apostle
described a form of the church to endure but for that only age). The
heretic will have princes placed above and priests benethe. Actor. 20
The holy ghost appointed bishops and priests to govern the flock of
Christ, that is the church. The devil in his me^bres appoints civil
magistrates to rule, and priests to obey. So that herebie we may most
evidently see, how manifestly they pervert and corrupt the true sense and
meaning of gods word.

As for the other poinct which Calvin also lays to their charge, of accusing
of a most heynouse and grieuouse fault the ancient bishops that have bin
sense the apostles time, as though they had by unlawful means usurped to them
selves the office and dignity of the Magistrate: it is also if their doctrine
were true, most plain and evident eue^ at the eye. For first if kings must be
the chief governors in matters of religion, Ig^^tius.
and bishops their underlings, Epistol. ad Philadelphens.
who sees not then, how far Ignatius that holy martyr abused both him self
and us, to bid all men without exception, even the emperor him self by name, to
the obedient to the bishop, to tell us that after him next, the king is to be
honored. If this be true which they teach, Liberius.
who is he that can excuse Liberius that holy father, who for the determining
of matters concerning the cuhrche, would have a sinode kept where the emperor
should not so much as be present: Or that reverend father Hosius, Hosius.
who willed the emperor not to entremedle in ecclesiastical causes, nor to
comptroll or command the bishops therein, but to learn of the in those
things, to whose charge they were committed, not to his. Athanasius
Or Athanasius that strong pillar of Christ's church, who when he saw that
wicked emperor Constantius, do that which the heretics of this our time,
persuade the Kings and Emperors that now arre to do, as the Arrians did
those of their age: that is to take upon him the determination of matters
ecclesiastical, to make him self chief judge both of the bishops and
causes belonging to the church, called him that abomination of desolatio^
spoken of by Daniel the prophet, and pronounced that for his so doing his
impiety was such, as Antichrist when he should comme him self, should not be
able to go beyond: termed it a new devise brought in by the Arrians, and
finally demanded but one example ab oeuo condito, from the beginning of the
world, where by it might appear that the doings of the church should take
their authority from the emperor, till Arrius his time. Or Gregorius
Nazianzenus, Gregorius Nazia^zenus
who told the emperor, that by the law of Christ his power was subject to his
consistory, and that although he were an emperor, yeat was he not withstanding
a sheep of his flock. Or S. Ambrose, Ambrose.
that bad the emperor set his heart at rest, and not to think that he had by
the right of his crown, any authority in those matters that concerned
religion: that his palaice belonged to him, and the church to the priests. Or
Chrisostom, Chrisostom.
who comparing the power of a King, with the authority of a priest, calls
the one a prince as well as the other, Homilia. 5* de verbis Esaiae.
and greater the^ he toe, by so much as heaven is greater then the earth, and
adds that god him self to witness the same, has brought under the hands of
the priest the head of the prince. Heb. 7.
For that says he that is lesser is blessed of the greater. Who in an other
place says that the power which is given to priests is such, Libr. 3. de
sacerdotio.
as the like thereto was never given to Angels or Archangels, seeing that to
none of them it was ever said: what so ever you bind in earth shall be bound in
heaven, or what so ever you loose in earth shall be loosed in heaven. Or how were
it possible if this doctrine of our adversaries were true, to excuse Damascenus
Damascenus.
for reprehending Leo Isaurus (as you have hard before) the emperor, and many
a one more of the holy fathers, which for breuities sake I am here constreined
to pass over in silence.

Leaving therefore our adversaries thus at square, both with the old fathers
and their new doctors: it is high time good readers that I remember to
discharge my self of my promise, which was to lay before your eyes, such
evidence as in this matter either part had to bring for the^ self. Which as I
have for the catholics according to my simple wit and pooer knowledge
allreadie done: so shall I by gods grace on the contrary part for the
protesta^tes and Huguenotes, faithefully endeavor to do the like. And because,
for that as well of all the poisoned reasons touching either this matter, or
almost any other at this day in question, the late apology of the church of
England (for so is it by the authors termed) may well be called as it were the
some or abridgeme^t, as also for that there is as it should seem and sense has
been confessed, in it common consent of all the fantastical congregation, I
mean of them that trouble Christ's church in our country of England: I could
not me thought either for their part (which I coue^ to make as strong as the
naughtines of the cause will suffer) do better, or for mine own assurance
work more warily, then to take and cull out such proufes, as for the
maintenance of their opinion they have there heaped to gether. For them,
because there I persuade my self the reader may find, the very force and
strength of all that they have for the^ selves in this matter to say: as the
place where both of good reason they should, and for their crafty conueiance
I nothing doubt but they would, bring forth of their grounds the very best,
if they have any better then other. For my part or rather for Christ and his
churches whose quarrel although far unworthy, at this time I sustain, it
shall thus stand in steed, that if it fortune in your judgments good
Readers their said grounds and reasons to seem such, as any good man, yea
happily with some of them, some of them selves may mislike: they ca^ not yeat
flee to their old starting hole that it is but one doctors mind, as they use
being sore pressed customably to do, whereas the book both by the manner of
the publishing thereof appears, and sense has been acknowleged, to be no
private man's act.

The first argument therefore of theirs, The first argument of the protestants.
to prove that lay men in that they be kings may take on them the ordering of
matters in religion, that to them belongs the authority and oversight
thereof, is taken from the example of Moses, Moses.
who being a civil magistrate, received nevertheless at the hands of almighty
god, both the charge and order of all the religion and ceremonies, delivered
the same to the people, and when Aaron being a bishop had contaminat the true
religion by making the golden calf, he failed not sharply to rebuke and
reprehend him therefore.

To this argument good Readers which out of this example they frame, that
therefore by good consequence it follows that the kings, emperors, and other
civil magistrates of our time may do the like, thus do we answer: The
answer.
that, that authority which Moses had over the priests, was not because he
was a prince but in that he was a priest, Psalm. 9 4
as appears most evidently in the psalm where he is so called.

But against this answer labors (as they say) with toothe and nail, The
Reply.
the author of that book which walks abroad in many men's hands, under
the name of a harborough for faithefull subjects. whose reply is this, that
in that psalm how ever the old interpretors have given us the word, the
hebrew text has Cohanim, a word indifferent to signify priests or princes,
and that therefore such as do best understand the tongue give it thus: Moses
and Aaron inter ministros eius, Moses and Aaron amongst his ministres. And to
prove that it may well so be, the scripture he says calls David his sons
Cohanim that is to say ministres, for well he woteth that no man will be so fond
to say, that a kings sons were priests: yea he adds that the best
amongst the Hebrews interpreting thiese words give it in Chorei Shemo: Moses
and Aaron inter eos qui inuoca^t nomen eius, Moses and Aaron amongst them
that call upon his name. Thiese in effect be the reasons that moved the man to
think that Moses was no priest.

To be short. The solutio^, proving that Moses was a priest.
Whom he takes for the best, or whom he acco^pteth for the worst in the
hebrew tongue, or what his ability to judge thereof is, I confess in good
faith I know not. But of this I am well assured, that S. Hiero^, Pagninus and
(whose translation for his religion he need not to suspect, Sebastianus
Munsterus, amongst all men taken for singulerly learned in that tongue)
inrerpret the word to signify priests. And if all this satisfy him not, the
70. interpretours translate it so. For thiese ar their words: (...) that is,
Moses and Aaron in the nombre of his priests. And for so undoubted a truth
was it taken with S. Hierom, that he in the exposition of this psalm used
thiese words. Hieron. in Psalm. 9 8
Vterque Moses scilicet and Aaron, domini aduentum sacerdotali praeconio
nunciauit. Both of them, that is to say Moses and Aaron, did with their
priestly voice denounce before hand, the coming of our lord. Now touching the
indifferency of the word Cohanim to signify a minister or a priest, we grant
it to be true: but that because in some one place it so signifies, it ought
therefore so to be expounded in this, that we utterly deny. And for proof
hereof we bring Abrahamus Esdras, amongst the old Rabbini called
Sapientissimus. He expownding this place of the psalm, calls Moses and
Aaron by the name of priests. And because no man should cavil about the
ambiguitie of the word Cohanim, he grants it to be a word doubtful. But
to take away all such ambiguitie, and to make us assuredly understand when it
signifies this or that, he gives this rule, that being joined and applied to
the name of god, or any thing to him belonging (as here it is) it signifies
allwaies a priest: but otherwise referred to profane things, a minister: as
may be answered of David's children in the second book of kings the.8.
chapter. And surely so long as he stands upon his bare vauntes of the best
without naming at all any: I se no cause but that we may well rest in that
interpretacion which thiese ^ower, for their knowledge in that tongue of the
learned sort accounted most excellent, beside the nombre of the.70.
interpretours have delivered unto us, especially seeing that interpretacion
which the very best amongst the Hebrews he says have given upon that place,
that is, Moses and Aaron amongst them that call upon his name: I think to
him that considers well the words that follow Et Samuel inter eos qui
inuocant nomen eius, will seem and prove to be even the very wurst. But because
you shall well perceive that Moses was in deed a priest, beside the
testimonies already brought forth, I shall here allege certain other to prove
the same.

First S. Austen writing upon the same psalm where both he and Aaron ar
called priests, Psalm. 9 8
makes as it were against the priestehood of Moses a certain objection, and
afterward concludes that Moses was not withstanding a priest. His words ar
thiese: Ibi quidem non videtur sacerdos essenisi Aaron. Aper^e enim in illis
literis Aaron nominatur sacerdos dei. De Moyse no^ ibi dicitur quod sacerdos
erat. Sed si hoc non erat, quid erat? Nunquid mayor sacerdote esse poterat?
Expropriat psalmus iste quia and ipse sacerdos erat: Moses and Aaron in
sacerdotibus eius. Ergo erant illi domini sacerdotes. Exodus 28.
that is to say, there it seems that there was no other priest but Aaron: for
in that place is he plainly named a priest, but of Moses there is no such
word. But if he were not a priest, what was he then? Could he be greater? The
psalm vttreth that he was a priest: Moses and Aaron amongst his priests.
They were therefore both our Lords priests.

Here I beseech you good readers behold the false and uneven dealing of an
heretic, the author of the harborough, of whom a little before I made mention.
He minding to elude this manifest exposition of S. Austen, answers in this
manner: that S. Austen was ignorant in the Hebrew tongue, whereby being easily
deceauid and wrapped in thiese two places of scripture, wherein there seemed
contradiction, he leaves them at a jar as he found them, the one to say he
was a priest, the other to say that he was none. Which manner of interpretation
and reconciling of scriptures how it is to be liked, he leaves he says to
the learned reader to judge.

For answer to this mere cauillation of this vain iangler before I proceed any
farther, because he shall not abuse S. Austens ignorance in the Hebrew tongue to
the deceauing of you good readers, you shall understand that S. Hiero^ was not
ignorant therein, and yeat does he so expound the place. The.70. interpretours
chosen and picked as it were out of the best learned and cunning est in that
tongue (by all likelihood) that could be found: Sanctes Pagninus and
Sebastianus Munster, yea that most learned Rabbine, Abrahamus Esdras ^ Jew
born, were not ignorant but pearlesse Parago^s therein, and yeat do all thiese
expound the Hebrew word to signify priests as Saint Austen does. And where
he says that S. Auste^ being thus wrapped in thiese two contrary textes, was
driven to leave them as he found the^, the one to say he was a priest, the other
that he was none: in the one he has belied^ the holy scriptures, in the other he
has sclaundred that holy and learned bishop. For where, or what scripture
says, that Moses was no priest (as he says that one text said he was, an
other that he was none?) Let him show sum such scripture, or else has he
lied upon the scripture. He may show I confess where the scripture (as there
upon S. Austen made his objection) speaking of him, calls him not by the name
of a priest: which in many other places it does also of Aaron. Is this
therefore a good reason to say? The scripture in that place made no mention
that he was a priest: therefore it said that he was none. Yea truly, even as
good as is this. The scripture makes no mention that the apostles were ever
baptized: therefore it says that theie never were baptized. Or do thiese
textes make any jar, the one affirming the other denieng, to say Aaron the
priest in one place, and Moses and Aaron his priests in an other? But as this
is a lewd lie, so to go about to note S. Auste^ to the world of such ignorance
in the scriptures, as though he had not been able to undo this simple knot (a
knot if it be) but was forced to leave the two places at a jar unreconciled:
I can call it no better, but even by the name of wilful malice. As appears
by that, that guilefully in alleging after their manner without cotatio^, (the
easelier thereby to deceive the reader) this place of S. Austen: he left out
thiese later words, Ergo erant illi domini sacerdotes, therefore they were
(Moses, and Aaron) our lords priests.

Now here note I beseech you diligently that are of the learned sort, thiese
words of S. Austen, which import in them thus much. It may seem says he,
to some man, that Moses (because the scripture names there only Aaron by
the name of a priest and not him) were no priest: Exodus 28.
but of them that so gather I would know, if he were no priest what he was then,
whether they can make him King, Emperor, or any thing that should be greater.
And although the scripture in that place do not call him by the name of his
office, yet neither does it therefore deny him to be a priest, nor we are
destitute of other places to prove the same by, as namely this psalm, wherein
expresselie he is so called. Wherefore seeing neither that place or any other,
do say that he was not a priest, and there is plain scripture that does
call him one: I may boldly conclude, Erant ergo illi sacerdotes domini.
Therefore they were both our lords priests.

This is (no dout) the true sense of S. Auste^s words, wherebie you may see
how great the difficulties were, in which he was wrapped, and how he wou^d him
self out.

But then says this stout champion, there were two high priests at once,
which could not be by the law, and also Moses must needs be inferior to
Aaron, because Aaron and not he, is there called the high priest.

This objection has in deed a show of somewhat, although in their manner of
government, to have many heads were no great absurdity at all. But to this
objection answers most fully S. Austen him self in an other place, In
quaesti^. Sup. Leuit. Lib. 3. cap 23.
after this sort. Cum ergo videatur, etc. Seeing therefore that the high
priestehood, seems to have begone in Aaron, what think we that Moses was?
If he were not a priest, how did he the^ all those things which he did? If he
were, how say we that the high priestehood began in his brother Aaron? Although
the Psalm also where it is said, By the bisshoppes appare^l^ understand the
execution of the things be^longing (...)
Moses an^ Aaron amongst his priests, does remove all cause of ^oubte,
affirming that Moses was also a priest. Were they therefore Moses and Aaron,
both chief priests, or rather Moses the chief and Aaron under him? yea Aaron
also the chiefest in respect of the bishops apparel, and Moses the chief in
re^pect of a more excellent ministry. Exodus 4.
For ^t the beginning wa^ it said to Moses of Aaron. How Moses was chief
and how Aaron.
He shall be thy director in those thinge^ that are to be handled with the
people, and thou his, in such business as is to be done with god.

Hitherto S. Austen, by whom we learn that it is no absurdity, that two
should be chief in two several respects, the one in ouerseing and prescribing
what shall be doe^, the other in practicing, and putting in execution, the things
prescribed: the one absolutely without relation, the other in a respect by a
comparison. As in the new law (a figure whereof diverse well learned me^ have
expounded this priestehood of Moses and Aaron to be) Christ we see, is of his
church only, simply and absolutely the head: Peter and after him his
successors, no otherwise but in comparison of other inferior members. Moses
as he was with god more familier the^ any other, as he received immediately
(without the help of any other instrument to convey it by unto him) from the
mouth of almighty god his holy will and pleasure: he was there is no doubt
thereof, the high and chiefest priest. Aaron also, as he was by almighty god
chosen to publish to the people those things which Moses had given him in
charge: as he offered the sacrifices and executed the ceremonies, he had also
therein the souereintie and superiority.

And thus much for answer to that objection made of two high priests. But to
make this matter more evident and to follow my purpose, this is not saint
Austens mind alone, In oratione qua^ habuit in praesent. Gegor. fratris
Basilij de Moyse and Aaron.
that the man should so fret and fume at him therefore. For Gregorius
Nazianzenus, has of Moses and Aaron, in plain words, that they were both
priests, and alleges to prove it (as saint Austen did) the Psalm where
they are so called, with diverse other ancient writers whom because I take the
case to be clear amongst the learned I here forbear to allege: and am for
this time contented (to give to our adversaries the larger scope) to put the
case as though Moses had being no priest, corrected and reproved Aaron that
was one, Leuit. capite. 8.
that he prescribed to him what he should do, that he made him priest as it
appears by the scriptures he did. The which imagined to be true, I ask this
question, whether it do therefore follow that princes being lay men, may at
this day in matters of religion, comptroll the bishops, and prescribe unto
them what order they shall observe and follow therein? whether they may also
give ordres to priests, and consecrate bishops now, because Moses
consecrated Aaron then? No truly if you will believe John Calvin, Lib. Instit.
4. cap. 11. Sect. 8.
it is an untrue and a false collection* For that Moses says he, had both
the charges, that is of things as well ecclesiastical and spiritual as civil
and politic together: to that I answer that it was done first by miracle, and
seco^darily that that was but temporal, Caluins answer to the objection of
Moses.
till such time as things were better stayed. For afterward says he, as soon as god had ordained a form such as he ^ould should continue, there remained to
Moses but only the civil government, concerning the priestehood, it was
necessary that he should resign that to his brother Aaron. And good reason
whie^, for it passes natural power that one man should sustain both the
charges. Hitherto Calvin.

Now if it be so that this authority of Moses came to him by miracle, or that
he had it by especial commission, then can we not you wot, of either of these
two cases gather a necessary consequence. And thus might we answer our
adversaries good readers, even by their own Doctor. But cleaving to the
scriptures, and ancient fathers of Christ's church, we hold the first opinion
that Moses was a priest, and that in that respect he had authority over the
priests, and not as he was a prince.

The next example that they allege is of Iosue, The second example.
who being also a civil magistrate, received (they say) at the time that he
was appoincted to govern the people, express commandment and by name, Iosue.
of religion and worshipping of god. But by what words that would I feign
know. For in that chapitre by them in their apology alleged, can I find no
words wherebie there might be grounded in temporal men, as we call them, or
civil magistrates any such authority over matters of religion, as they
labor to induce. For first this is out of all question, that in one of these
two sentences it is which I shall here allege, or that else it is not there
to be looked for. The first of the which two is this: Confor^are and esto
robustus etc. Be of good comfort and be strong, that thou may keep and do
all the law, which Moses my servant has commanded the. Swerve not either to
the right hand or to the left, that thou may understand all things that
thou do.

Is there here good readers any authority given to meddle with religion? was
there not as much as this comes to, said to every one of the children of
Israel, that they should truly observe the commandments given to the^ by
Moses? Is there not as much said to every one of us touching the observing of
the commandments of almighty god? and yet had neither the children of Israel
then, nor we now, authority over religion pardie. The other sentence is this.
Non recedat volumen etc. that is to say: let not the book of this law
depart from thy mouth, but thou shall spend thy time both night and day in
the meditation thereof, that thou may keep and do all things that are
written therein. The^ shall thou direct thy way and understand the same.

Where I pray you is Joshua here commanded to meddle with religion? in that
that he is bidden to study the scriptures? Now surely that is far fetched and
needs no great refutacion. For this know I well will they grant, and for a
maxima and very principle is it holden in their religion, that thiese words
perteine to every man a like, as well to the cartar as to the king or duke, and
make as much for the one to be a king, as theie do for the other to
entremeddle in the order of religion. Well may every man and easelie perceive,
how much they would have triumphed, if they had had but one such text to
serve their purpose for kings, as the catholics have for priests out of the
holy scriptures many. If they could have found but one place in all the whole
corpse of the scriptures, where had been said that the lips of the civil
magistrate should keep the knowledge of gods most holy will and pleasure,
and his mouth be the treasour of the same, as is said of the priests: O lord
how is it likely that their lips, mouths, and tongues should have sowned
and clattered thereof long before this, that ruffle so with the example of
Iosue, because (or for no cause) that he was willed to study the scriptures?
dissembling in the mean season the.27. cha. of the book of Numeri where in
plain words it is to be found, that Iosue was subject to Eleazarus the high
priest, at whose bidding the scripture says he should go forth and come in,
he and all the children of Israel.

It follows, The.3. example.
that king David brought home the arcke, restored religion, was present not
only as to admonish or encourage them that accompanied it, 1. Paralip. cap.
13.
but delivered also to them psalms and himnes, disposed the order of every
thing, instituted the ceremonies and solemnitees, and ruled after a sort the
priests. That David brought home the arcke it can not be denied, to the house
at the least of Obed Edom. Although in an other place we read, ^. Paralip.
cap. 15.
how David being strooken with a merueilouse fear, for that which so lately
before he had seen happen unto Oza, for the only staieng (being no priest)
th'arcke, which otherwise was in great danger to fall: he would not presume
to carry the same into the tabernacle prepared to receive it, but called unto
him Sadock and Abiathar the priests, willing them in express words to carry
it to the place appointed therefore, The bringing home the arck without the
priests acknovvleged by David to be an unlawful act
lest happily god might strike them once again, for doing the like unlawful
act to that, which thorough their absence before they had done. He made
psalms and wrote himnes to the glory and praise of god. And who is there I
pray you, that at this day forbids any prince or king to do the like? He
appoincted and established to serve the temple for ever, some to sing, some to
play on the organes, some and a great some, the scripture has four
thousand, to keep the doors. And what conclude they hereof, if David had
appointed plaiers and singing men as he did not, 3. Paralip. ^^p. 15.
but willed the chief of the Levites to appoint some of their brethern thereto?
that therefore he was chief governor in all causes ecclesiastical. O what
new logic is suddenly sprung up with their new divinity. How many notable
Kings has our littell country had, which in their days have established for
the like purposes like fundations, by our adversaries at this day almost all
overthrown, of whom no one ever by this means, thought him self any thing
the more auctorised, to govern in matters of religion the clergy of his
country. But for this example that which I have allreadie said may suffice,
both because I think they lean not much theretoe, for that theie can show
no great store of Kings, yea I may be bold to say none at all, by them
persuaded to build any churches, or to establish any fundacions of such as
should there continually serve god, and also for that the place it self (how
ever in the apology the conclusion contain more then the premises) seems
not to be brought in directly to prove any such thing. For our apology which
alleges it, has only, and quodammodo praefuit sacerdotibus, that is, and in
a manner or after a sort he was above the priests. And therefore will I
proceed to their other examples.

Solomon (they say) builded and dedicated to god a church, Solomon. 3. Reg.
Cap. 8.
made to the people an oration concerning religion and worshipping of god,
deposed Abiathar the bishop placing Sadoc in his room.

Ezechias purged the temple, Ezechias 4. Reg. cap. 18.
commanded the lights to be kindled, encense to be done and sacrifice offered,
after the old accustomed manner: finally the brazen serpent which was then
worshipped by the people, to be utterly taken away and broken all to fitters.

Iosaphat Iosaphat.
took away the hills and wooddes whereby the people was hindered from the
common temple of Jerusalem.

Josias Iosiat.
warned the priests and bishops of their duties.

Ioas restreined their riot and insolency: Ioas.
and last of all, Iehu put the wicked prophets to death. Iehu.


These be the examples good readers which the adversaries to the truth bring
for the maintenance of the contrary, out of the old Testament. Which manner
of reasoning from examples in that age used, if it might be at these days in
all poinctes laufull to follow, what and how houge a nombre of inconveniences,
might by just consequence thereapon be easelie grounded and brought in, I need
not here to rehearse, any man but meanly exercised in the holy scriptures
may with him self easily conceive. If the miracles, examples significatiue, and
singular priuileages, doe^, practiced and granted in that age, might without
any danger, as well be to the present esta te of the church which now is,
drawn, applied and accomodate, as the moral precepts of that law may and
ar: why have not then the Kings now a days, as many wives as had King David
then? why should it not be as laufull for the clergy (I will not only say to
admonish and reprehend) to put Kings doing amiss at this time to death, as
it was at that for Samuel to cut in pieces with his own hands, 1. Reg. 15.
the body of Agag king of Amalech? why not for the^ to depose kings, as well as
kings to deprive them? For if they bring to us the example of Solomon, who
deposed Abiathar the priest, and placed Sadoc in his room, 1. Reg. 15. and. 16,
they shall hear of us again, that Samuel by gods own commandment pronounced
Saul deprived of his king dome, and settled David in the same. Numer. Cap. 25.
Phinees being a priest, killed with his dagger the Israelite and the Madianite
as they filthely abused themselves: and have priests therefore at this day
thinck we like jurisdiction? Or would god (is it likely) praise him for the
doing that would now do the like, as he then did him? No no good readers,
they tread not vprightely that so interpret the scriptures. And thus you see
how generally all these examples and auctorities, being even after this sort
answered, make no more for kings to rule in matters of religion, then other
places do for the clergy to depose kings, or to kill them, or other doing
amiss.

But to descend now more particulerly to the several examination of these
examples. I would gladly ask this question of some of these our new Rabbines,
that being granted to them by the way of reasoning which theie presuppose,
that is, that king David entremedled in the affairs of religion, how this
argument holds not withstanding: David being both a king and a prophet had
the rule of religion. Therefore the kings of our time must have the like. And
in deed thus must they reason, if they will reason truly. For so was king
David they can not all deny it. And as well am I able to prove, that if he had
any such power it was because he was a prophe te, and not in respect of his
kingedome, as they shall ever be, to prove the contrary. So that to make this
reason of theirs have, yea seem to have, some appearance of truth, of two
things must they needs do one, that is either prove our kings now a days
prophets also, or David in his days to have been but a king simply.

In Solomon also, is the case trow ye all so clear as they make it? For
touching the deprivation of Abiathar the priest, to that I answer, that as in
breaking the wicked pack of Adonias, Abiathar, and other their accomplices, who
had conspired to have put Solomon beside his kingdom: 3. Regum. cap. 1.
he used the council of Sadoc and Nathan to defeat them: so used he their
authority and ministry to punish them. Nor it forces not, that the
scripture says. Eiecit ergo Solomon Abiathar vt non esset sacerdos domini,
therefore cast Solomon Abiathar out, that he should no longer be our lords
priest, as though that therefore it were his own deed, and could be done by no
other, seeing that that is a phrase of speech common not in the scriptures
only, but in common talck also: as if for example a man should say, that
Queen Mary (whose soul god assoile) deprived Thomas Cranmer of the
archebishoprick of Cantorburie (whose treason also against her was no less
then that of Abiathar against Solomon) he should not say a miss. And yet was
not she god wot the chief doer thereof, but an instrument ioining with the pope
in the execution of his determination, touching the rooting out of that wicked
membre. So say we in like manner that the prince has made such a man bishop,
when in very deed he only commended him by his lettres or word, leaving the
free election notwithstanding to them, to whom of right it apperteineth, as
this placing of Sadoc in Abiathars office may welbe understand.

To the example of Ezechias I answer with the scripture, that of all those
things here rehearsed, Ecclesiastici cap. 48.
and what so ever else may be, he was only the executor, the council and
ordering thereof, coming always from Esaias the prophet: Who as the mouth
commanded the arm, that is the prince, to do and put in execution this or
that. In like manner I answer to the example of Iehu who killed the wicked
prophets, but by thaduertisement and sentence as it were first given against
them, 4. Reg. Cap. 9.
by Haelizeus the prophet, sent to Iehu as king, by him to be put in execution.

How Josias warned the priests of their office and duty, Cap. 22.
it appears in the fourth book of the kings, where he required the priests
to demand at gods hands council, what he and his people should do: so
that what so ever he did also, he ca^ be counted no otherwise to have done, but
as a ministre, upon the advertisement and relation of the priests.

Now as for Iosaphat and Ioas, if the one ouerthrewe the wooddes and hills
where the people lurcked from the temple, the other warned the priests to see
better to the reparation of the same: what great matter is this I pray you?
or how does this prove that kings ought to have, the chief rule over the
church? If princes that have been in times past, had so well looked in this
point to their duty as of right they ought, and all good men wish they had:
if they had scoured your luskes corners, and overthrown the wooddes, the
blind cellers and rotten barnes, in which you first vttred your poisoned
doctrine: neither had that made the^ rulers of the church but faithefull and
trusty ministers, nor you been here now, to trouble the church of god as you
do. As if on the other side, they had also followed the example of Ioas in calling
upon the reparation of gods house, neither would any good man have found
fault therewith all, nor any wise man have thought, that this should have made
the^ the chief governors in religion: nor finally so many churches lien at
this day flat on the ground, so many monasteries in which god was served and
the pooer relieved, made stables for horses, housen for sheep, or sties for
swine.

And thus may you see good readers, that all thiese examples alleged by our
adversaries ar to no purpose, as of the which some, as of king David (who was
not a king only but a prophet also) contain a manifest fallacy, other as
that of Iosue, that he should receive especial commandment of almighty god
to meddle with religion, an impudent lie: some as of Solomon, Ezechias, and
Iehu, a figure or phrase of speech, as by the scriptures I have proved, 4. Reg.
Cap. 22.
and as of Josias may be also truly answered, who enterprised nothing, before
he had caused the priests first, to go and consult what he should do: and
other some such, as of Iosaphat and Ioas, as no man ever denied to kings, yea
many wish that in the practicing thereof, they had in times past, and at this
day also would, show them selves much more forward then they have or do. And
last of all you may see, that all were it so that every example had plainly
concluded their intention, that yet it is no good reason to say, that therefore
our kings now a days must have the like authority: no more then this, that
if Moses had been no priest, it should follow that other temporal governors
might consecrate bishops, because he did being none consecrate his brother
Aaron, or that because David had many wives, therefore our kings also may: or
the clergy put to death kings because Samuel did, or priests kille
adulterers after the example of Phinees, or one spoil an other (I mean of them
that be of contrary opinions in religion) because the children of Israel
spoiled the Egiptians. Exodus 3. and. 12.


And here there comes to my remembrance an other cause, why that reason of
theirs should be naught which is this, that the priestehod of the Jews was
altogether carnal and fleshelie, and might therefore the rather be subject to
the kings, whereas the priesthod of the new testament is so much more
excellent then that, as by how much the matter and object about which it is
occupied, Psalm. 109.
the head, author, and chief priest thereof (which is no other then Christ him
self the eternal priest according to the order of Melchisedech) does far
surmount either the matter, the priest or priestehod of theirs. Which thing S.
Petre did not obscurely signify by these words: 1. cap. 2.
vos estis regale sacerdotium yo we are a kingelie priestehoode. as who should
say the priestehood before was not kingly, for that that kings ruled over
priests, but now is the priestehod kingly, for that to it be subject eue^
kings them selves. Which neither is any such great absurdity (if we
indifferently wey the matter) as some men would have it seem to be, That
kings should be subject to priests no absurdity at all.
considering that Ignatius disciple to S. John the evangelist, that all the
ancient fathers, do most plainly affirm the same: neither yet any great
reason why thiese words should be to any man cause of offense, seeing that when
all is counted, this honor of government rests not in the priests, but
goes farther to god him self whose ministres they are: as contrariwise the
dishonor, the contumelies and reproaches done unto them, ar done also to Christ
as him self witnesses. Lucae. 10.
Qui vos spernit me spernit, he that dispiseth you dispiseth me. The which
thing I would to god our adversaries which glory so much of the name of
Christians, vaunt them selves of the knowledge of the gospel, would not thinck
scorn to learn by the example of a pagane and infidel, I mean Alexander the
great. Who although he were by religion an ethnike, Lib. 4. histor. suae
by nature intollerably proud, so that not contentid as Quintus Curtius
writes of him, to be born of the race of mortal men, he co^ueighed his
petigrue from the gods, not suffering but commanding also, that upon peine
of his indignation all men should call him the son of Jupiter: and to
increase the more that naughty humor of his, and to pour as the proverb is,
oil in to the fire, by fortune so happy, that the whole world was in a
manner, by the dent of his sword conquered and brought under, that at his name
the proudest tirants trembled, and barbarouse nations stooped: he yet all this
not withstanding, being such and so mighty a Monarche, Iosepus lib. antiq. 11.
cap. 16.
when on a time he should enter in to the city of Jerusalem, as soon as he
once perceived Iaddus the high priest coming toward him, Origin. contra
Celsum lib. 5.
fell down and reverenced him. Whereat when Parmenio one of his trusty
friends marueiling not a little, had demanded of him, why he whom all other
men worshipped, Alexa^ders reverence toward the high priest.
and had in reverence, did worship the prince of the Jewish priests: his
answer was, that he worshipped not him, but god whose ministre he was.

By this which hitherto good Readers you have hard, forasmoch as it appears,
that our adversaries stand altogether destitute and as it were naked, of such
provision out of the scriptures, as with the vain title whereof, they
persuaded them selves their part to be well boulstred, and them selves against
all that would maintain the contrary, sufficiently furnished: it remains
now, that I first bring forth to you such examples, as having happened in
Christ's church sense his departure hence and his apostles, they allege for
them selves: then after, that I refell the same, and prove that they make as
little or less for their purpose, as do the other before brought forth of the
scriptures. Examples brought by the protestants.


And first for Constantinus the great, although by consent of all
historiographers it be well known and most apparent, (as before has been
showed) how far he was of all other, from that unlawful desire of
entremeddling in matters of religion: yeat for as much as the impudency of
thiese men is such, that they are not ashamed to abuse his name amongst other,
for the maintenance of their opinion, and that they labor to make him a
pillar to sustain and hold up their rotten building, alleging his calling
together of the council of Nice, his sitting there presently with the bishops
and fathers, his admonisshing them how to proceed, that is according to the
doctrine of the prophets and apostles: I will first answer thereunto, and
after proceed to the rest.

Constantinus the truth is, called together to the rooting out and utter
extirpation of the heresy of Arrius, that great and famous council of Nice,
as after him did diverse other good emperors, diverse other. But neither of
this act of his, or that of theirs can any man rightely gather, that either
the one or the other had over matters of religion any thing thereby the more
authority. But even as the hands or arms reaching a thing far of, A
similitude.
ar when it is brought nearer to sight, nothing therebie the more authorized to
judge of the value and goodness thereof, to dispose how it shall be ordered, but
that remains still in the head by whose council and commandment the hands
and arms reached it thither: even so in this case may it be said. In
Christ's church there is, and as it has been before proved necessarily must
be one head. As there is a head, so is there a body, arms, legs, and other
members answering to the same. Emo^gest the which, princes and kings have of
our elders not amiss, been termed the hands and arms to aid and succor the
head. If now the bishops of Rome for the time being (for theie ar under
Christ the true heads of this church, as hereafter by gods grace I shall
make it most manifestly appear) have amongst so many enemies and back
friends as Christ and his gospel had, been glad to bid the hands do their
duty, to call to the emperors and kings for help which had so long hindered,
if by this means they compelled them to comme in for fear of the temporal
sword, who feared not the spiritual: if theie used this rigorouse means where
lenity could have no place: who is so void of wit to think, that princes
had thereby authority over religion?

Naie but Constantinus (says our apology) did not only call together the
council of Nice, but he sat in the same with the bishops, nor sat there
barely as a cipher, but warned them how to proceed by the scriptures. Here
marcke diligently I beseech you good readers, either the manifest malice of
them that wittingly mangle the holy histories, or intolerable folishenes
which allege that that theie never them selves saw, but only have by
report of others: or last of all their gross ignorance, that thinck they have
to do with them, who without any farther searching of such places as ar by
the^ alleged, will straight ways give full credit to their bare honesties.
Libro. 3. de vita Constantini.
Eusebius who writes the history of Constantinus, Co^stantinus would not fit
in the council with the bisshops before he had asked leave of them, so to do.
and whole discourse of his life, witnesses, that coming into the council
last of all, having prepared ready for him a seat lower then any of the rest:
he would not before sit down in the same, then first he had asked of the
bishops and they granted him license so to do.

The very same does Socrates report of him, and even he out of whom the
apology alleges this example, Theodoretus him self: whose words ar these.
Lib. 1. Cap^. te. 8
Minore vero sede quam alijs posita, in medio eorum sedit, primo tamen petens
sibi hoc episcoporu^ iussione concedi. Hist. ecclestrip. lib. 2^ Cap. 5.
And having (that is to say) appoincted for him a place or feate meaner then
any of the other, he sat him down in the midst of them, desiring yet first,
that by the commandment of the bisshoppes it might be granted him so to do.
If this be true (as if the histories and old records do not witness the same
then let me never be farther beleuid) what means then this lieng generation to
bring in for example, to sustain and uphold their wicked doctrine, this
virtuous emperor Constantinus? then whom if they would have laid all their
heads together for that purpose, they should never have found one, whose
doings and whole life had made^ more for us, or more against them.

If he were chief of the council, and ruled all as theie say, why had he in
that place (where by all likelihood there lacked nothing that perteined to
semelie order) a seat less stately then hi^ inferiors? Places ar I know of
their own nature things indifferent and of no great account. yeat have theie
at all times, in all ages, and amongst all men, been taken for means to
distinct according to their worthiness in degree, one from an other. So that it
can be to no man doubtefull, but that, if of the council gathered and
assembled together he had been the head and chief, there should have been
prepared for him, if not a seat such as might by the majesty above the rest
well have declared the same: yet at the least such a one, as should not by the
baseness thereof compared with the other, well and plainly have proved the
contrary. If the whole some and order of religion belonged to him being
the emperor: Why then in that place whither they were all for that purpose (to
entreat of religion) assembled, had the head of that parle, no place but by
license? why asked he leave of the bishops to sit in the council and not
rather they of him?

Yea but he warned the bishops, how they should proceed in the council, that
is, by the doctrine of the prophets and apostles. If they would here have dealt
truly, and vprightely with us, and not rather have followed their father in
lieng and patching: they would not have rehearsed Gloria patri without Sicut
erat, nor taken a piece that seems to make for them, leaving out that which
makes against them. But because they are sworn to be true to their occupation
and so may not: I, who I thanck god therefore, am none of the company, will
take the pains to stoop, and do it for them. It follows in Theodoretus
after he had mentioned the oration which Constantin had in the council: Haec
and his similia, tanqua^ fi^^us amator pacis, sacerdotibus veluti patribus
offer^bat. These words and such like, as a son that loved peace, he offered
up to the priests as to his fathers.

Lo good readers, was not here trow you a great president for our Emperors
and kings to meddle with the order of religion? Well he was as the histories
bear witness, the first christian emperor that openly professed the faith and
name of Christ (for of Phillip the histories make no great account) and before
that time the church was governed, The church governed before Constantinus
time, either by priests or by infidelles or by none.
either by infidleles and tirantes, as Nero, Domitianus, and such other: or by
priests, or by none. And this was the very cause that they would so feign have
won to their part, the first Christian emperor.

The next example that they bring, is of Theodosius the emperor, that he not
only sat amongst the bishops, but was also the very chief of the
conference, between the Catholykes and the Arrians. That Theodosius did in this
matter nothing of him self, but all by the council of Nectarius the B. of
Constantinople, had not our adversaries, as they did before in the example of
Constantine, mangled the history, any man might easily have perceuid. Histor.
eccles. trip. libro. 9. cap. 18.
For read the beginning of the chapter, where this matter is mentioned, and
you shall find, that Theodosius called to him Nectarius then B. of
Constantinople, asked of him his advice, what order were best to be taken, for
thappeasing of that schism which then so miserably troubled the church: and
finally embrased him self, and commanded all other to receive, the same
doctrine, not which him self had determined to be true, but which Nectarius and
the other catholyke bishops had delivered and commendid to him. And truly
marvel had it been if he had otherwise done in matters of religion any thing,
to the prejudice of that authority, which bishops and priests of right
ought to have in those matters: who at other times had so often declared his
mind persuaded to the contrary, Concilium Aquileien se.
and namely in that council that he caused to be assembled at Aquileia: where
in the sommons of that Sinode he openly protested, that controversies arising
upon matters of doctrine, can not be better tried, then by being referred to
the bishops, that they quoth he, from whom the very grounds and principles
of doctrine have proceeded, may if there fall out any doubts, dissolve the
same. For the which words, being afterward rehearsed in the council, it
appears how greatly S. Ambrose praised him, when he said openly. Behold
what order the christian emperor has taken. he will not do any injury to
the priests, he refers to the bishops the interpretation of all doubts.
If Theodosius had taken apo^ him to judge in matters of faith, being a lay
man, could S. Ambrose think you that flourished under him have been ignorant
thereof? If he could not, would he have praised him for that he did not? would
he have asked of Valentinianus the younger beginning in his youth (although he
after repe^tid) to encroche apo^ the spiritual limits and jurisdiction: Lib.
5. ^pist. 32.
Quando audisti clementissime imperator in causa fidei Laicos de Episcopo
iudicasse? when did you ever hear most gentle emperor, that in matters of
faith lay men, have judged of the bishops doings? Might he not have
answered, (if it had been as our adversaries say) I have not hard only but
known also by experience, that mine own fellow in the empire Theodosius, has
done so, So that hereapon we may be bold probably to conclude (S. Ambrose
virtue, wisdom, lerning, long experience and great practice in Christ's
church well considered) that Theodosius attempted no such matter, nor did any
thing in religion without the council of such bishops as being catholic,
enstructed him what he should do, for thaduauncement and setting forward of
Christ's catholyke faith.

It follows in the apology. In the counsel of Calcedo^ the civil magistrate
condemned for heretics by his sentence, Dioscorus, Iuuenalis, Thalassius,
being all bishops, and judged them worthy to be degraded. Here would I feign
know in what place, or where they find this history written. If they say in
the. 5. book and tenth chap. of Socrates history, as the place is in the
margent coated, I must needs tell them that the place having been there sought
for, can not be found. And as littell hope is there of finding the same else
where, if a man may believe vehement presumptions. For if in that counsel,
Iuuenalis and Thalassius had been at all condemned by any magistrate either
ecclesiastical or civil, as well should it of all likelihood have been
mentioned in the acts and records of the counsel of Calcedon, as was the
condemnation of Dioscorus, they being all accused, and partakers of one crime.
True it is (although in the place by the^ alleged there be no such thing) that
in the acts yet of the council we find a record, where the civil
magistrates consented, that Dioscorus had well deserved to be of his bishopric
deprived, and of all priestely dignity degraded. But how, I beseech you
diligently to considre: if to the bishops, to whom god had committed the
charge to give that sentence, it should so seem good. And thiese are not my
words but his that was sent from the whole council to Dioscorus, Actio. 3.
(who then after the manner of all heretics fled from the face of the
council, and lurcked I wot not where) Ioannes the bishop of Germanicia, who
after he had told him in what terms he stood, that was, condemned by the
whole council, he added this clause, Si hoc placuisset sanctissimis episcopis,
quibus hanc infer a domino deo creditum est, if it so seemed good to the holy
bishops to whom god had committed the power to give that sentence.

This sentence afterward (the said Dioscorus continuing in his obstinacy) was
by the whole council allowed, Act. 3. Euag^ius Lib. 2. cap. 4.
and by the legates of the bishop of Rome in his name pronounced, no man's name
subscribed, or consent asked thereto, besides the only bishops. And thus
much for Dioscorus: for of Iuuenalis and Thalassius, till they show where, and
when they were condemned for heretics and worthy to be degraded: I can say
nothing. Although this in the mean season I may boldly say, that if they
(the civil magistrates I mean) gave any such sentence, it is very likely
that they would qualify it (as you hard before that they did in Dioscorus)
with this adiection, if the bishops thinck good, to whom that matter
belongs. Which if they did, what have they then gotten by th'alleaging of
such a sentence I pray you?

The next proof that they bring, Constantinus.
is out of the third council of Constantinople, where Constantinus (they say)
did not only sit amongst the bishops, but subscribed also with them to the
council.

To this I answer, that this being granted that Constantinus sat in the
council and subscribed also thereto, neither weakeneth our part, nor
stre^gtheneth theirs. For who ever yet denied that Christian emperors might
not be present at the councelles, The difference be tvvene the bisshops
subscribing in the Council, and the Emperors.
yea and subscribe thereunto also? The thing wherein we differ from them is, in
the only manner of subscribing. For we say that the bisshoppes subscribed, as
defining and judging, the emperors, as following and co^senting: that the
bishops ar necessary parsons in the councelles as without whom they can not
be kept, that the emperors ar ornaments and not of the substance. The which
difference of their presence, Ex relation. Sinod. Calcedon. ad B. papam Leon.
and the cause thereof there, if it were by no place else to be proved, this
only testimony which I will here allege of the council of Calcedo^, written
by the whole consent of the fathers and others there assembled, to Leo then
pope, How the Emperors government in the council is to be understand.
where they all professed that he (as the head) was in his legates that there
supplied his room, of all the rest (as members) the govern our: and that the
emperors governed there ad ornandum, to be an ornament: would be sufficient
to persuade.

This thing would also most manifestly have appeared, Concilio.
Constantinopolit. 3. Act. 18.
if our adversaries had faithefully alleged the words which the emperor used
in subscribing, which were (after the subscription of all the bishops, a
hundred and seventy in nombre) thiese. Note the difference between the
bisshops and the Emperor, Subscriptions in the old councels.
Legimus and consensimus. we have readen and given our consent. Whereas the
subscription of every bishop was, Definiens subscripsi, I defining have
subscribed. And thus should they if they will needs glory of the emperors
subscribing have alleged this example, that thereby might have been perceived,
the manifest difference between con^enting in the one, and defining in the
other: that men might yet at the least have wondered, if emperors and kings
bare the sway in religion, and ruled all, if the bishops and priests were
their underlings and governed by them, what should then mean that strange
manner of subscribing in them that should lead and rule, to say they subscribe
consenting, whereas the bishops that should be ruled by them, write that they
subscribe determining, and defining.

And thus much touching the diversity of subscribing, between the bishops
and the emperors: whereby may easily be judged, what authority the emperor
and civil magistrate had in the council. As for the other difference wherein
they and we vary, that the emperors presence in the council, is not of the
substance thereof, as is the bishops, they I thinck them selves, (except they
will say that the first council assembled after Christ's ascension in
Jerusalem, Act. 15.
was of no force: or of less, as though there were not all the parsones
necessary for the holding thereof) will not deny. No more then we do this,
that emperors have used to be present at such councels as have been kept, and
subscribed also thereto, but always as for the suerer confirmation, and trusty
execution (and yeat not that with the better sort neither, but with such as
regarded more, and stood in greater awe of present punishment in this world,
then of gods indignation in an other) of such things, as were agreed upon
there: that they seeing the emperors and rulers of the world (in worldely
matters) assenting thereunto: that the which they feared not in the bishops
and priests, propter conscientiam, they might fear in the civil magistrates
propter^iram. Council. 2 Aurasi^anum.
Thus deny we not that many years before this, in the second council
Aurasicane subscribed to the doings of the council, those notable lay men
(the example also of whom our adversaries object against us) Petrus,
Marcellinus, Felix and Liberius. But o lord god I would once at the length,
they would allege such things as they bring against us, simply, truly, and
as they find them in the originals with their circumstances. Then should they
have told us, that as these men subscribed to the council: so was it by
license of the fathers. Then would we have asked of them, why bring you then to
us that example, that makes not only not at all for you, but also much
against you.

But how I prove this perhaps you will ask. Forsooth by the acts of the
same counsel, about the end thereof. Where I find these words spoken by the
fathers. Et quia definitionem antiquor um patrum nostramq^e, How the lay men
subscribed in the council Aurasican
que suprascriptaest, non solum religiosis, sed etiam Laicis medicamentum esse
and desideramus and cupimus: Placuit, vt etiam illustres acmagnifici viri, qui
nobiscum ad praefatam festiuitatem conuenerunt, propria manu subscriberent. And
forasmuch say they as our desire is, that those things which be above written,
defined of old time by th'auncient fathers, and now presently by us, should be
not to the clergy only available, but to the profit and health of the laytie
also: it pleases us, that those noble men that have been assembled with us at
this present council or solemnity, should also with their own hands,
subscribe to the acts thereof.

Here note I beseech you good Readers this word, placuit, it has pleased us,
or wear content. Is this think you a phrase of speech meet for them that
can do no other? If these lay men had subscribed, by their own right, as
having an interest thereunto, would the bishops in the council have ever
showed them selves so presumptuously foolish, as to say to them, it pleases us
that you subscribe: who might have answered them by the rule of the law, Eius
est velle cuius est nolle what tell you us that you ar contented who can
neither will nor choose, he may only say he will or is contented, that can
say the contrary, that is, that he will not, or is not contented. Does not
this place argue most manifestly against the^, that the order touching matters
of religion, was all in the bishops hande^, as to whose doings they could
not so much as witness their consent by subscribing, unless the bishops had
first consented thereto? yea truly does it, except we have of those wise and
learned fathers that opinion, that we thinck they were all starcke fools. As
any man might have of our countrefeict bishops in England, if they should
assemble together and agree, that every Baron within the realm should have a
voice in the parlyament house.

This therefore being presupposed, as till they be hable to show the contrary
it must, that those bishops had their right wits, The protestants example
taken out of the council Aurasican makes against them.
and knew what they did, this argument holds very well: The fathers
assembled in the council Aurasican were contented, that lay men that were there
should subscribe to the council with the clergy. Ergo they might have
chosen. And then how makes th'auctoritie of this example for them? Nay who
sees not how much it makes against them?

It follows that Iustinia^ being a Christian emperor, Iustini^^.
deposed yet notwithstanding two popes, Siluerius and Vigilius. Hereby our
adversaries thinck, to have not a littel help to prove the superiority of
emperors and kings over bishops and priests. Truly that Justinian did
this, it is but barelie affirmed, nor any place in th'apologie is there coated
where a man that doubted might see it proved. And therefore with the same
authority might it be denied, with the which it is proposed to be believed.
True it is, that Theodora th'empresse as some write, being altogether given to
the heresy of Eutiches, after she had long travailed first with Siluerius, and
after Vigilius both bishops of Rome, to have Menna the catholic archbishop
of Constantinople deprived of his bishopric, and the heretic Anthimius
removed by Agapetus before restored again, and could not obtain at their
hands her wicked purpose: did upon displeasure conceived by this repulse ^
procure by the means of Belisarius Justinians chief ^apitaine, the banishement
first of the one, and after of the other. Who so ever deposed them, or who so
ever ban^shed them: true is it, that this was the cause thereof and no other.
Which being as in deed it is most true, let us now grant to our adversaries
that it was not the empress, but the emperor him self that deposed them: and
let us see how they be hable to prove thereby, that emperors and kings may
degrade priests, and depose bishops. If they will deal vprightely they must
to prove it ^eason thus: Justinian otherwise a Christian emperor, but in this
point a cruel heretic, tirannously deposed two popes, Siluerius and Vigilius,
only because they would not do wrong (that is deprive him of his bishopric)
to a catholic bishop, and restore an heretic laufully before deprived. Ergo
the emperor is above the pope. Ergo kings be above bishops. Is not this a
propre kind of reasoning trow you? Might they not have reasoned after this
sort that Nero deposed S. Petre, that Traian put down Clement, with a nombre
of such like examples? For to say that Justinian was a christian whereas
thiese were infidelles, is but a mist cast in to th'obiection to desell our
eyes. For who sees not, if he be not allreadie blind, that this deed (if it
should have been Justinians) to maintain and defend an open heretic, against
a faithefull and true catholyke, had been the act of a tyrant and infidel, not
of a Christian and good prince; and that it is no better reason to say and
conclude that he deposed them, and therefore justly, then it should be to say
that he defended the heretic Anthimius, and therefore rightefullie.

But seeing this example will not serve our adversaries turn, The adversaries
objection turned against him self.
let us assaie to make it serve ours. And first let us examine what should be
the cause, why Justinian should be so earnest with these two bishops of Rome,
to depose the B. of Constantinople, and to restore the heretic that stood
deprived? was he not emperor of all the world? had he not by the means
thereof, as our new doctors bear us in hand, the chief government over all
matters spiritual and temporal? was on the other side the authority of the
bishops of Rome at that time such, that it extended, I will not say out of
their own diocese to any other bishops in the Latin church, but to
Constantinople the chief of the Grieke?

Here ar they taken how so ever they answer. For first if the emperor had been
of that authority that they say the lay magistrates arre, why did he not
then by his own mere and absolute power, displace the one and place the other?
Might he not as well have deposed one bishop at Constantinople as two at Rome?
But if on the contrary part they answer, that the pope was he that must
necessarily place and displace, even at that time and in the Grieke church,
and not the emperor: why then should it be laufull at this time for emperors
or kings to do that, which was not laufull to be done then? Or why should it
not now be laufull for the B. of Rome which at those days was not unlawful?

Thus may you see good Readers how this history wholly and truly alleged,
makes not only not against us, but also much with us, if it had been true
that th'apologie says, that Justinian had deposed those two popes. Yea but
say they you can not deny, that the emperor made laws of matters of
religion, that he absteined not even in matters of the church, from thiese
terms, Sancimus, iubemus, we ordeine, we command, with such like. Truly
this can I not deny, Bishops and priests forbidden to marie by Justinians
Constitution.
and if I would there be whole constitutions of his, ready to be brought
against me: as that where he commands that none be made bishop that has a
wife, and of them that have had, such as have had one^ie one, the same no
widow, neither deuorced from her husband, neither forbidden by the holy
canons: and also that, where he commands that of priests no other be
received to that order, but such as vel coelibem vitam agunt, vel vxorem
habuerunt, aut habent legitimam, and eam vnam and primam, neque viduam, neque
diuortio separatam a viro, aut alioquii legibus aut sacris interdictam
canonibus. that is to say: as either lead a single life, or have had a
laufull wife, or presently have, and that one and the first, no widow, none
divorced from her husband or otherwise by the laws or holy canons forbidden:
and that of deacons also, where he gives commandment, Chastity vowed in
Iustinia^s time.
that if he that should be deacon, have no wife presently, he be not otherwise
promoted, except being first asked of him which gives the ordres, whether he
ca^ from thence forth live without a wife, he answer yea. In so much that
the emperor plainly pronounces, that he that ministers to him the ordres can
not dispense with him to mary after, and that if he should so do the bishop
which suffered it should be deposed.

But although this be true, that the emperor Justinian not only in thiese
matters which touched the clergy, but in many other also, has entremedled:
yet has he always so tempered the matter, as he has showed him self to be a
follower not a leader, a ministre to execute, not a gouerner to prescribe. The
which thing his own words, in all such places where he entreats of such
matters placed as it were for the nones, How Justinian made laws in matters
of the church.
to take away all such sinistre suspicio^, do manifestly declare. For either
he has these words: Sequentes ea quae sacris definita sunt canonibus following
the definition of the holy canons: or thiese, Sacras per omnia sequentes
regulas, in all poinctes following the holy rules, or such like: whereby he
would have testified to the world, The first four general councelles defined
the popes superiority not Phocas as the protestants maliciouly affirm
that he means by his penal laws, severely to execute the canons of the
church, and nothing less then to make new him self. In this sense used he
the word Sancimus, Constit. 131.
we ordeine: Where speaking of the first four general councels and the B. of
Rome, he has thiese words: Sancimus vt secundum eorum definitiones
sanctissimus veteris Romae papa, primus omni^m sacerd^tum sit. We ordeine
according to their definition (the first four general councels) that the most
holy pope of old Rome be the chief priest. Finally how in all like matters^
Justinian is to be understand, Epistola inter claras C. de sum. tri. and fid.
cathol.
if nothing else, his epistle written to Johannes then B. of Rome is able
sufficiently to enstruct us. where he most manifestly protests, to suffer
nothing that apperteigneth to the estate of the church, The. pope confessed by
Justinian the emperor to be the head of all churches.
to pass, yea although the truth thereof be perspicuouse and out of all
doubt, without the bringing thereof first to the knowledge of his holiness,
and he adds for a reason quia caput est omnium sanctarum ecclesiarum, because
he is the head of all the holy churches that be.

To conclude therefore, touching the examples brought from the doings of the
emperor Iustinia^, what so ever theie be, I answer that he did those things
as following the old canons and rules of councelles before, devising nothing
him self, but by his laws adding to them terror, to cause the^ to be of all
men the better observed, or else that what so ever he ordained him self and
put forth in his own name, he did first communicate with the B. of Rome (as in
the epistle before alleged he promised he would) and procured it to be
ratified by his authority. And these answers I hope you have hard by the
emperor him self in the places by me before alleged, sufficiently proved.

The substance and very strength of our adversaries reasons you have hitherto
hard. There remains one or two testimonies mo, brought of late by M. Haddo^
in answer to the learned epistle of Hieronimus Osorius, To. 13.
as that S. Paul says that every soul should be obedient to the higher
powers: in which words they say that neither bishop priest nor moncke is
excepted, and that S. Peter wills all men to be subject to every human
creature for gods sake, 1. Cap. 2.
whether it be to the king as to the chiefest and so forth. The which reasons
(if reasons theie may be called that consist of mere folly) because they are so
childishe that every child may in a manner answer them, and so foolish that
he is more then a fool that is by them moved: as loathe to spend so much time
invaine, or trouble your ears and eyes for nothing, I pass over. Only this
I say, that even as priests and all without exception, owe obedience to their
prince in those things that concern his jurisdiction, I mean things
temporal: so on the other side meant neither S. Peter nor S. Paul, to give them
any preeminence in matters ecclesiastical. For in those things, they call as
fast upon obedience to be exhibited toward the clergy, Hobr. 13.
namely S. Paul, who adds the reason to be, for that theie ar the watch
men, which watch to give the account for our souls. The which words ca^ no
more be understand of civil magistrates (who could then full euel be called
watchemen for other, being them selves fast a sleep and drowned as it were, in
the dead sleep of infidelity) then their other place of obedience toward the
king, can be understand of matters concerning religion. Which any man that
has but half an eye may easelie percea ue it ca^ not, if he cast but a
quarter thereof to that time in which S. Peter wrote those words: which was in
the reign of Nero. whom by all lykelihood (being to christ and his littel
flock an utter enemy, and extreme persecutor) he would never make or name to
be, (a cruel gredie, and rauenouse wolf) the governor and leader of the meke
and simple sheep. To bid them obeie him in matters of religion, had been to bid
them to disobey Christ, to refuse him and cast him of. Wherefore that
obedience must be restreined, which it can be to no other things, then such as
only consist in civil and politic government. Thus having I trust good
readers satisfied both you and my promise, it follows now that I show who
is that priest, that ought to be the head of Christ's church here in earth.

A PROVFE OF CERTAIN ARTICLES THAT THE B. OF ROME IS THE CHIEF OF ALL OTHER
BISHOPS, THE HEAD OF CHRIST'S CHVRCHE HERE IN earth, and that for so, the
first six hundred years after Christ, he has with the old general
councelles, the ancient fathers and doctors been reputed and taken.
THose blocks and stumbling stones being at the length removed and tumbled out
of the way good Christian readers, which they that entende then the breach of
all good order, nothing else, heretics and enemies to our faith had there
placed for the nones, to overthrow the weak: we are come to that principal
point of the B. of Rome his supremacy over all other bishops, his chief
government and superiority over Christ's whole catholic and universal
church. Wherein truly amongst all other things that are at this day called
in to controversy, I can not enough marvel at the shameless impudency of him,
that blows abroad that we have not one ancient doctor, one old general
council, one allowed example of the primitive church, to prove that the B. of
Rome was within the first six hundred years after Christ, called head of the
church, or for so taken. Whereas in good faith to me, thincking not lightelie
or sclenderlie upon this matter, and minding some thing to utter touching the
same to the world, and to imitate, at the least in good will, that honest
example of them, who having with great danger escaped them selves, the peril
of drowning, being now saufelie arrived on the land, think next of the
delivery of their pooer compagnions, who floting one while above the water, an
other struggling for life and death under the same, ar in danger to fall into
that which theie so lately before escaped: cast them either a boorde to bear
them up, or reach them a pole to draw them to the shore, or by such other
means as theie may, cease not busily to procure their spedie recovery:
there happened nothing more hard, then in such copy and variety of
substantial witnesses, to satisfy my self (for all neither my leisure would
serve me to allege nor the adversary demands many but even only one) in
the choice of those, that should for virtue and learning, gain with the honest
readers most weighty credit.

Here first of all, because I mind to keep me within the limits and term of
years by you master Iuell appointed to me: I will begin even with the first
pope S. Peter him self, from whom I make this argument: S. Peter was bishop
of Rome, S. Peter was called by thauncie^t fathers that wrote within the first
six hundred years, the head of Christ's church. That S. Petre was B. of
Rome.
Therefore the B. of Rome was with in the first six hundred years called and
taken for head of the church. Lib. 1. hist. apostol.
The first part of this sillogisme the mayor, that is that Peter was bishop
of Rome, I prove by Abdias a man of the apostles age: Lib. 7. cap. 6.
by Orosius who writes that he planted there the faith, Ado.
by Ado who bears witness that he was bishop there 25. years, Lib. de
praescript. aduers. haer.
until the last year of Nero his reign: by Tertullian, who in teaching us
how to try out heretics, Tertulli^^s rule to know an heretic.
which he says is if they be not able to derive their doctrine from some
church where the apostles have planted first the faith, either from Rome
where Peter was, or Smirna where S. Ihon the evangelist taught: does most
manifestly give us to understand, that they were both bishops in those places.
Lib. 1. Epistol. 3.
What shall I here remember S. Ciprian, who had called Rome in vain S. Peter's
chair, if he had never been bishop there? In Catalogo.
Or S. Hierom, who in one place reconeth how many years he possessed the
bishoprike there, and in diverse other calls Damasus the B. of Rome, Epist.
42.
successor in Peter's faith and seat. Or Optatus B. of Miliuetum in Africa,
Lib. 2. contra Do^atistas.
who told Parmenian the Donatist, that he could not allege ignorance, knowing
right well that the bishops chair was first given to Peter in the city of
Rome, in the which he sat being head of all the apostles. And to conclude,
would trow^ we (in skirmishing with the Donatistes) S. Austen have bidden them
view the bishops of Rome sense S. Peter's time, if he had never been bishop
there?

This therefore standing as manifestly true, it remains that I prove the
second part, which is that S. Peter being bishop of Rome was called head of
the church. The which thing is easy to be proved by the testimony of diverse
ancient writers and first of S. Austen. Who in a certain sermon of his
entreating of Peter's denial of Christ has thiese words. Sermon. 124. de
te^pore.
Totius corporis morbum, in ipso capite curat ecclesiae, and inipso vertice
componit membroru^ omnium sanitatem, that is to say. In the head of the
church it self (he means of S. Peter) has he cured the disease of the
whole body, and in the chief part thereof the very top, does he set in order
the health of all the members.

Leo the B. of Rome the first of that name, whom although Calvin (because he
saw in his doings so many tokens and signs of chief government over the
church as by no means he could avoid but that he so was) calls proud and
orgulouse: the substance yet of the world for learning and virtue, gathered
together at Calcedon honored with the name of ter beatus, thrice happy or
blessed, whom Martianus the emperor called Sanctissimus most holy: Sermon.
1. and 3.
he I say names Peter to be not only bishop of the sea of Rome, but primate
also and chief of all other bishops.

Chrysostom a doctor of the grieke church, Homil. in Math. 55. Cap. 16.
affirms the same in most plain and evident words, saing: Petrus futurae
ecclesiae pastor constituitur ac caput piscator homo. Hunc vniuerso terrarum
orbi Christus praeposuit. Peter a fissher man is appoincted to be the shepherd
and head of Christ's church that he will build. Him has Christ made ruler
over all the world. Homil in Math. 59.
And in an other place he says: Christus Petro ecclesiae primatum
gubernationemque per vniuersum ^^undum tradidit. Christ delivered unto Peter
the primacie of the church, and rule thereof thorough out all the world.

Last of all note I beseech you to this purpose out of Chrysostom, Lib. 2. de
Sacerdot.
thiese words. Quanam item de causa Christus sanguinem effudit suum? Certe vt
pecudes eas acquireret quarum curam tu^ Petro tu^ Petri successoribus
committebat. Which is in english to say thus much. For what cause I pray you
did Christ shed bis blood? Truly to redeem those sheep whose charge he
committed to Peter and to Peter's successors.

Here would I ask of you M. Iuel this question, whether you think that
Christ died for all his church, or for some part thereof only? Au
invincible argument that by Chrisosto^ the charge of the whole church was
committed to the BB. of To. Peter's successors.
Chrysostom in answering to this question for whom he shed his blood,
answers as has been said, for them whom he committed to Peter's charge and
his successors. If the whole church be not committed to Peter and his
successors, but only one part thereof, then follows it that either
Chrysostom thought he died for no other, or else did he euel solute his own
question. But for so undoubted a truth was it taken with Chrysostom and in
his time with all other, that S. Peter and the popes after him had the
universal charge of Christ's church, that he was not a fearde by such a
periphrasis or circumlocution to utter his mind, as every man he wist as soon as he hard would easelie understand.

You have here hard M. Iuell, for the confirmation of the minor of mine
argument or second proposition, not one but three substantial witnesses, that
have called S. Peter head of the church, Augustine.
bishop not of Rome only, Leo.
but of all other bishops the chief, that have affirmed that to him was
committed by Christ, Chrisost.
the government and superiority over the church thorough out all the world,
that he and his successors have the charge of those sheep for whom Christ
died. So that upon the co^clusio^ which necessarily follows (Ergo the
bishop of Rome was of one ancient doctor in the first six hundred years
after christ called head of the church) I might M. Iuell if I wou^d eue^ out
of hand (if you have already yealded to none other) challenge you for my
prisonier: your importune request being as you see sufficiently satisfied.

For you ca^ not say pardy, that although you grant

Secondarily you ar barred of this plea, because the

Last of all you can not use this friuolouse exception, Lib. 4. Inst cap. 6.
Sectione. 8.
who granting that Peter was in deed the head and chief of the apostles,
because he says the very order of nature requires, that in all companies
there be one to govern the rest, denies yet, that the B. of Rome succeding in
Peter's office, should be head of the church now, as S. Peter was of the
apostles which represented the same then, and that for so the, because that
which had place amongst a few, may not sodenlie be drawn to all the world,
for the government whereof no one man alone can suffice). For this gross
error is both by authority and also reason easy to be confuted. By the
authority of S. Chrysostom, who as ye hard before named in the government of
the church, as far forward the successors of S. Peter as S. Peter him self:
Lib. 2. de Sacerdotio.
By reason, because if there were such fear of disordre in twelve parsones, so
small a nombre, so well ordered and directed by the spirit of god as the holy
apostles were, that even amongst them for the avoiding thereof there must needs
be had one head: how much more need is it, to have one amongst so many
thousands, as the church consists of? If a few be likelier to agree then a
great nombre, if unity be named of one, because lightelie none iarreth or is
at dissension with him self, if the nearer that all nombres come to that one
the less confusion, and the farther we go from it, the greater is like to
follow: then is there no man I trust so blind but that he may easelie see,
that the same cause of schisms and disorder (yea so much more greater as the
church is more amplified and increased) to be feared, remaining still, Hi^ron*
ad Euagrium.
the remedy which is to have one head must also endure and continue still.
And as for that sorry shift of the compase and largeness of the church which
no one man is hable to rule, of what value and force that is, he that lists
to cast his eye, first to the time passed and government in those days, when
next under god all was governed by one, and then after to this miserable time
of ours, in which there be so many heads, one of the church of England, an
other of that of Geneua, one of VVittemberge, an other of Franckford, of every
church one and in all none: every one chalenging to him self merum imperium
absolute jurisdiction out of the check of any other, and to considre with him
self in each of these gouernementes their several effects, the quiet re^gne
of one truth in the one, the diverse sects and heresies in what part of the
world so ever theie sprang up overthrown and repressed, the sondrie triumphs
that Christ's church has had over them these fiftene hundred years: in
the other scarce yet of forty years cont^nuance, the tumultuouse hurliburlie,
the perniciouse and horrible heresies never before hard of, the sondrie
schisms and sects so many as there be heads, the arrogancy of the
capitaines and masters, while every one boasting of the spirit and vaunting
as S. Hierom says that he has the church on his side, will submit him self
to no other, the implacable hatred of the scholars and disciples, every one
standing upon his masters honor and reputation, with an infinite nombre and
whole swarm of euels mo which I reserve to an other place: shall be easelie able
without the help of any other him self to judge. I omit here touching this
foolish reason (that therefore there can not be now one head of the church
as in S. Peter's time there was, because the church is so increased that no one
man is able to govern the same) proceeding first from Calvin, and patched
afterward into our english apology: that seeing he, that at the beginning
appointed this one head where he might have appoincted more, and did not,
never changed that order sense, being all this while not ignorant to what
greatenes his church should after grow, it can to no man that has the use of
reason seem other, but that either he thought that one, ruling by such as he
should appointe under him, might suffice for the government of his church, or
suerlie at the least that he has not circumspectly provided therefore.

But if all these mere cauillations had been good and strong reasons, yet have I
showed you enough in this one B. of Rome S. Peter, (who has been called you
have hard how often, head of the church and chief of all bishops) to gain
you, if you will stand to your word to our part M. Iuell. Because
notwithstanding I would have you with your good will, I will yeat show you
the like titles given by the ancient fathers to other bishops of Rome. And
to frame my self the more to your humor (although I thinck you put no
difference between thiese terms head of the church, ruler of the church,
chief of all other priests with such like many other, that the fathers and
ancient general councels have not spared to use, as often as theie had
occasion to either write or speak, to or of, the B. of Rome) I will here first
allege unto you certain auctorities, where the B. of Rome has been called,
sense S. Peter's time (and yet within the first six hundred years) even in
express words head of the church: and then after the testimonies of diverse
other, who although theie use not the same words, affirm yet and confirm the
same preeminence and authority.

Vincentius therefore Lirinensis, Secundo commonito rio.
a man of singular learning and of the old age (for he flourished under
Theodosius and Valentinian, the emperors (writing of the bishops that were
assembled at Ephesus in the council there against the heretic Nestorius,
makes mention of two bishops of Rome, Foelix the martyr and Julius, whose
epistles after that he had told were there readen in the council against the
said heretic, he adds immedatlie after thiese words: Et vt non solum caput
orbis verumetiam ipsa latera illi iudicio testimonium perhiberent, The B. of
Rome head of all the world.
adhibitus est a meridie B. Cyprianus, a Septentrione S. Ambrosius, that is to
say. And that it might not be said that the head of the world only gave
witness to that judgment (against Nestorius) but the ribs also and sides:
there was present from the Southe blessed Ciprian, and from the North holy
Ambrose.

In the fourth general council assembled at Calcedo^ we find, that the
legates of the B. of Rome writing in a certain epistle to the emperor, Ex
Epist. Pasch^sini and alioru^ collegarum de dam^ natione Diosco^^.
what theie had done in the council touching Dioscorus, had these words: Vnde
s^nctissimus and beatissimus Papa caput vniuersalis ecclesiae, etc. whereapo^
the most holy and blessed pope Leo, head of the universal church, by us
his legates, the holy council consenting thereto, has deprived him
(Dioscorus) of his bishopric and degraded him of his priestehoode.

If the B. of Rome had not at that time amongst all men beneso reputed and
taken: is it credible that they would ever have been so bo^ld, nay impudent
rather, to give him upon their own heads any such title? Or if they would
have needs so called him being not so, durst they in their lettres to
the emperor? Well if they had only so called him, some brable theie might yet
perhaps have made thereabout, but seeing the whole body of the council, the
corpse of Christendom, the church it self (for such is every general
council laufullie assembled) in that epistle which they sent by common
consent, and is rightely termed the certificate of their doings, to Leo the
pope, wherein they called him the head and them selves the members, and in
that that they termed him the man to whom our lord committed the keeping of
his vineyarde, do most plainly affirm the same, there is now left to our
adversaries no starting hole to escape. Besides all this that you have hard,
there is a notable testimony of Justinian the emperor, who in his Codex
calls in plain words Ioannes that was then the pope of Rome, Epist. inter
claras ^desum. triuit and fid. Cath.
caput omnium ecclesiarum, that is, the head of al churches. And thus much for
such as within the first six hundred years, have called the B. of Rome by
this name head of the church.

To come now to those who although they have not used the same term, have
named him yet notwithstanding by the like, and have attributed unto hi^, and
acknowleged in him, in all poinctes the same jurisdiction and authority. I
shall first bring forth the testimony of that strong pillar, and immovable
rock of Christ's church Athanasius, Athanasius
and yet not him alone, but accompanied with the whole no^bre of the bishops
of Egypt, Thebaida, and Libia. Who writing to three several popes; Marcus,
Liberius, and Felix, called first Marcus, S. To. and Apostolicae sedis atque
vniuersalis ecclesiae papam, that is the bishop or pope (for the word is in
the ancient doctors used indifferently for both) of the holy apostles
seat at Rome, and also of the whole universal church of Christ, and the
church of Rome the mother and head of all churches: acknowleged in the
second written to Felix, that almighty god had placed the bishops of Rome,
The pope called the B. of the universal church of Christ.
insummitatis arce, omnium ecclesiarum curam habere praecepit in the chiefest
tower, that he had commanded them to take on them the charge, not of their
own propre and peculier church of Rome only, The first council of Nice
alleged by Athanasius for the Popes authority
as though their charge extended no farther, but of all churches universally:
witnessed beside, (whereof theie could not be ignorant, them selves being
present there, and then which they could not have brought a stronger proof to
prove the superiority of that See) that in the first council holden at Nice,
it was ordained and agreed upon, that no counsels should be holden or
bisshoppes condemned, without the authority of the B. of Rome. And in their
lettres last of all to Liberius the pope^, do so openly and manifestly
witness their opinion in this controversy, in saying that to him as pope was
committed the universal church of Christ, to labor for all, to help every
one: that I can not enough marvel at your impudency M. Iuell, who standing in
defense of the contrary, beat in to the ears of the people that this doctrine
of the popes authority is new, and has for warrante thereof not so much as
one ancient writers approbation, and that as suerly as god is god, the
Catholics (if they had vouchesaufed to follow the scriptures, the general
councels, the examples of the primitive church or opinions of th'auncient
fathers (would never have brought in the pope again, being once banished out of
the realm.

The several answers of every one of thiese popes, wherein they acknowleged
no less burden of charge then was by these fathers lai^d apo^ the^, I here
forbear to bring in, lest theie may by you perhaps be chale^ged, as
principal parts to the title in strife. The which because I know you can not
say, by S. Hierom S. Ambrose S. Austen and other such like, I shall here of
many allege some for the confirmation thereof. In praefat. in. 4. eua^g. Chief
priest.
S. Hierome called Damasus who was B. of Rome, the chief and highest priest.
S. Ambrose calls him ruler of the church. Ecclesia (says he) domus dei
est, 1. Tim. 3. Ruler of the church.
cuius hodie rector est Damasus. The church is gods house the governor
whereof at this day is Damasus. S. Austen says in writing to Bonifacius the
pope against the Pelagians, Ad Bonifac, contraduas epist. Pelagian. lib. 1.
cap. 1
that although the office of being a bishop be to them all common, that yet he
was in that care placed above the rest. And in an other place comparing
together the blessed apostle S. Peter and the holy martyr S. Ciprian, Placed
above all Bishopp^s.
he had cause to fear he said, least he might seem to be toward S. Peter
contumeliouse, not as though touching the crown of martyrdom they were not
both equal, but in respect of their seats and bishoprikes. Lib. 2. de
Baptismat. Cap. 1.
Quis enim nescit illum apostolatus principatum, cuilibet episcopatui
praeferendum? for who is quoth he ignorant, that that principality of
apostleship, is to be preferred before all bishoprikes?

To these shall I add Theodorite the B of Cyrus, who writes in this wise to
Leo the pope. Epist. commentar. in Pauli epist. pr^^fix.
Si Paulus praeco veritatis, tuba sanctissimi spiritus, ad magnum Petrum
cucurrerit, vt ijs qui Antiochiae de institutis Legalibus contendebant ab ipso
adferret solutionem: multo magis nos qui abiecti sumus pusilli, ad apostolicam
vestram sedem currimus, vt ecclesiarum vlceribus medicinam a vobis accipiamus.
Vos enim per omnia primos esse conuenit. If Paul (that is to say) the
messanger of truth, and trumpet of the holy ghost, ran unto mighty Peter to
fetch from him the resolution of such doubts, as rising upon the observation
of the Law, ministered to them occasion of strife that were at Antioche: much
more need had we which are weak and abject, to run unto your apostolical
seat, from thence to fetch salues for the sores of the church. For expedient
is it that in all points before all other, The church of Rome rules all the
world.
you have the preeminence. And a little after he adds, that the church of
Rome is of all other, maxima, praeclarissima, and quae praeest orbi terrarum
the greatest, the noblest, and that which rules all the world.

By occasion of this place of Theodoritus, calling the church of Rome the
chief of all other, (which yet he does not alone neither, for so did well
near two hundred years before his days Irinaeus, Lib. 3. Cap. 3.
when he would have every church, that is as him self expounds it, all
faithefull Christians from all parts of the world, to mete and conform them
selves to the imitation of this church, propter potentiorem principalitate^
says he, for the chiefest souereintie that it has: De vocat gentium lib. 2.
cap. 6.
and after him as well S. Ambrose whose opinion was that Rome has been more
honored thorough the preeminence and principality of the apostolical
priestehood, by having there the chief tower of religion, then it was before
when it had there the chief throne of worldly power and civil jurisdiction: as
also S. Auste^, Epist. 162.
affirming that in that church the preeminence and chief honor of the
apostolical priestehood has always flourished:) I shall here make this
argument, for the better confirmation of this controversy, that the B. of Rome
is the head and chief of the whole church (this allwaies presupposed that
you M. Iuell whom I desire to solute this argument ar stille of this mind
that the aun^ie^t fathers ar good grounds to build upon). A reason to prove
the pope head of the church.
Irinaeus, S. Ambrose, S. Austen and Theodoritus, affirm that the church of
Rome is the chief of all other churches. Ergo the B. and head of that church,
is chief and head over all other bishops and heads of all other churches.
And thus much by the occasion offered.

Stephan (to return from whence we have digressed) the archbishop of Carthage,
Chief bisshoppe of all bishops.
with three councels of Africa, called the B. of Rome pater patrum and summus
omnium praesulum pontifex: that is to say father of fathers, and chief B. of
all bishops. In confessione sua.
Constantinus the emperor in one place calls him summus pontifex the chief
bishop, and in an other vniuersalis papa, In aedicto.
universal pope. In which place he also commanded that the church of Rome,
should be called the head of all other in the world, and for so reputed and
taken.

Hitherto have I proved unto you, that the B. of Rome has been of the ancient
fathers of Christ's church, within the first six hundred years after
Christ's departure hence, called head of the church, ruler of the church,
chief priest, chief of all other bishops, bishop of the universal church
and universal bishop. Now will I show that the doctors and fathers in the
primitive church, have not only in words (which yet proceeding from the
mouths of such men as they were might to any honest man seem sufficient) so
termed him, but by several acts also of theirs well witnessed to the world,
that in their consciences for so theie took him. And even as in the law, to
prove the possession of a lordshippe or manor, it is a sufficient proof to
bring in evidence, that he who is disturbed therein has quietly without
interruption or contradiction, ma^ured and tylled the ground, reaped and
receauid the fruits, or in a controversy of jurisdiction, to prove the doing
of such acts as properly belong thereunto: even so in this case if I prove
unto you, that the ancient fathers of Christ's church (the same whom I named
to you before) have, some of them from the fardest part of the East church,
complained to the B. o^ Rome of wrongs don to them, some of them required him
to confirm their acts and ratify their doings, other some sent to him
their worckes by him to be examined and judged: I nothing doubt but you will
easelie grant, that these ar to induce and prove his jurisdiction over the
whole church, arguments most strong and invincible. To perform^ this the
better, call to your remembrance I beseech you, that which a littell before I
alleged to you out of S, Chrysostom, where he witnessed that Peter and his
successors had the charge of those sheep for whom Christ shed his blood, and
then judge I pray you whether of likelihood he thought not as he said, when
being chased from his fold and flock at Constantinople where he was
archbishop, and unjustly driven into banishement, he wrote unto Innocentius
then being pope and the chief shepherd, for help after this manner. Epist. ad
Inno^^^ tium (...) 5.
Obsecro scribas quod haec tam iniqu^ facta, and absentibus nobis and non
declinantibus iudicium, non habeant robur, sicut neque sua natura habent: illi
autem qui inique egerunt, poenaeecclesi^sticarum legum subiaceant. that is to
say. I pray you (says this holy father to the pope) address forth your
lettres to signify that those things, which have so unjustly been decreed
against me in my absence not proceeding of contumacy may be of no force, as of
their own nature theie are not, and that they which have given this unjust
sentence, may suffer the smart of the ecclesiastical laws.

Behold here good readers a most manifest place, to prove in those days the
universal authority of the pope. Two things there are here to be noted which
Chrysostom desires the pope to do: first to declare that all that was done
against him should be of no force, next that he would write that they might be
punished which had thus misused him. Now if the pope had had nothing to do
out of his own church, then had wot you well Chrysostom been a mad man, to
make labor to him to send his commandments to the Grieke church, to
entremeddle in the affairs thereof, who might easily have received of the
doers of those injuries which were members thereof (as Chrysostom was) this
short answer, to meddle with his own matters and to let the^ alone with
theirs. Or if he had had nothing to do in that cause, which was concerning the
archebishoprike of Constantinople: would he (is it like) have excommunicate
Arcadius the emperor with Eudoxia th'empresse, Niceph^. lib. 11 cap. 17.
for not permitting Chrisostom quietly to enjoy his said bishoprike, The tenor
of the excommunication pronounced by Innocentius the pope, against Arcadius the
Emperor.
as Nicephorus reports of him that he did by thiese words? Itaque ego
minimus, and indignus peccator, cui thronus magni apostoli Petri creditus est,
segrego and reijcio te and illam a perceptione immaculatorum mysteriorum
Christi Dei nostri. Episcopum etiam omnem a^t clericum ordinis sanctae dei
ecclesiae, qui administrare aut exhibere ea vobis ausus fuerit ab ea hora qua
praesentes vinculi mei legeritis literas, dignitate sua excidisse d^cerno. That
is to say. I therefore (Innocentius the pope) of all other the least and an
unworthy sinner, This was above a thousand years ago.
to whom the throne of the great apostle Peter is committed, do sequestre
and reject both the and her (the Empress he means) from the receiving of the
immaculate mysteries of Christ our god. The bishop or clerck within the order
of the holy church of god, which shall presume what so ever he be, from the
time that these letters containing the band of our ^xcommunication shall come
to your knowledge, to ministre the sacraments unto you: him pronounce I
deprived of his dignity. Now if he had then authority over Constantinople in
the Grieke church, why do you at thiese days M. Iuell, thrust him out of
England in the Latin church?

S. Hierom as you hard before, called the B. of Rome chief priest and
successor to Peter. If he had not thought as he said, would he ever have
penned his faith and sent it to him to be allowed, To. 1. (...). 42.
with thiese words? Haec est fides beatissime papa qua^ in ecclesia Catholica
didicimus, quamque semper tenuimus and tenemus. In qua si minus perite aut
paru^ caute aliquid forte positu^ est* emendari a te cupimus qui Petri and
fide^ and fede^ tenes etc. This is that faith most blessed pope which I have
learned in the catholic church, and which I have ever hitherto maintained and
still do. In to the which if any thing by me be either not cunningly, or
without due circumspection infarsed or put in, that desire I by you to be
corrected, who possess both the faith and seat of Peter. And if this
confession of my faith, be by the judgment of your apostleship allowed, who so
ever he be that will afterward carpe and reprove the same, prove he may well
him self a fool, or maliciouse, or not catholic, but me an heretic shall he
never prove.

Hitherto S. Hierome. with whom if one would after this sort expostulate:
What mean you S. Hiero^ to boaste so much upon the judgment of one, who as
he is a man (although learned yet not the learnedest in the world) so may he
both d^ceaue and be deceauid. Why say you that who so ever ^^ndeth fault
with your faith* after Damasus the popes approbation and allowance thereof,
shall never be hable to prove you an heretic? May not many heads find out
that, wherein one has failed? Me thincketh I say, to him that should thus
question with him, I hear him expounding his own words, and answering for
him self in this wise. What art thou man that find fault with my words,
and understand not my meaning? Am I thinckest thou he, that will pin my
faith to any man's back what so ever he be? Do not I know as well as thou,
that Damasus is a man, that he may deceive and be deceauid? yea truly. But
on the other side, as I know all this rightwell, so am I not ignorant that he
that sits in Peter's chair, that the B. of Rome in matters of faith can not
give wrong judgment. And therefore cease to marvel, if upon the trust of this
priuileage I challenge all the whole world, and say that of them all, there is
no one that can prove me an heretic, whom Damasus being thus qualified has
allowed for a good christian. It is not Damasus (so has this quality to be the
chief governor of Christ's church altered him) that I stay my self upon. It
is Peter, it is Christ him self. If upon any other persuasion I had used
thiese words* well might I have been said to have abused my self. But that
this was even from the beginning my meaning, and not inverted sense for my
defense: look once again to my words, where I say not simply I desire to be
corrected of the, but of the which hold Peter's faith and seat, nor yeat
spoke of the alowing of my faith by Damasus, but apostolatus sui iudicio by
the judgment of his seat, of his apostleship.

Thus much touching S. Hierom. of whose mind if any man yeat doubt in this
co^trouersy, him shall I pray to take the pains for his better instruction,
to read a certain other epistle of his to Damasus, Tom. 2. Epist. 41.
and upon these words which he vttred of Peter's chair: Quicunque extra hanc
domu^ agnu^ comederit prophanus est, who so ever eats the lamb (he means
receives the blessed body and blood of Christ) out of this house he is
profane, Erasmus judgment against the Protestants.
to search for the judgment of Erasmus: where he shall find in express
words, that S. Hieromes opinion was, that all churches should be subject to
the church of Rome.

S. Austen (as before you hard) called Peter B. of Rome, head of the church:
he told Bonifacius his successor that he was placed in Christ's church above
the rest of the bishops. And did he not well de clare by sending to the same
Bonifacius his book written against the two epistles of the Pelagia^s, to be
judged and examined by him, that he took him for no less in deed, then he
had pronounced of him in words? For truly S. Austens learning being such, as
in his age there lived not his match: for the perusing of his worckes both
had he had little need o^ his help, and if he had had much, there lived yet
many to have been consulted thereapon, better learned then he, and more nearer
to him toe, then was Rome to the place where he had his abiding: had it not
been that persuading him self as did S. Hierome in the like case before, he
had made his full and sure account, first that his judgment in that that he
was Peter's successor and head of the church, was by the very mouth of
Christ him self warranted, in matters of faith never to err, and next that
his work being confirmed by authority, such as was his, should so quell and
beat down to the ground the heretics his adversaries, as with the world
they should neither be hable to sustain their credit gotten, nor after that
gain new.

Theodoritus said of the B. of Rome: Vos enim summosesse conuenit. for you
must be the chiefest of all other, and of the church it self, that it was the
greatest, the noblest of all other, and that which governed all the world. It
is evident that he wrote as he thought, when being unjustly deposed he appealed
to the B. of Rome, desired his help, and that he would command him to
appear before him, there to plead his cause and show his right, as he did
in deed and was restored by him.

By these auctorities it appears M. Iuell, that the fathers of Christ's
church be not so thin sowe^ on our side, as you bear the world in hand
theie ar, seeing that I have here brought you not one alone as you demanded,
but many: not their bare words, which (although of the^ self most plain
and manifest) might perhaps have been subject to your wrangling
interpretations: but their several acts and deeds (the best expositors of
their own minds) confirming most manifestly the same.

Will you have now some allowed example of the primitive church to testify
the same? What better examples can you have, then that in all controversies
arising either between bishop and bishop privately, Examples of the primitive
church to prove the B. of Rome his supremacy.
or in the whole church publickelie sense the beginning, the B. of Rome has
been only he, to whom the parties grieved were they catholics or heretics,
good or bad have had recourse for help? What better examples then that
amongst so many appeals made unto him, there is not so much as one instance
to be given of some one, that laufullie and orderly appealed from him, and
whose such appeal took effect? Tripart. hist. lib. 4 cap. 6.
Who has cited to his co^sistorie even from the fardest part of the East
church (and as Theodoritus writes ecclesiasticam secutus regul^^ following the
rule of the church) offenders and transgressors of the holy canons? The
odorit. lib. 2. cap. 4.
The B. of Rome.

Who is it without whose license and consent, Triparti. histor. lib 4. cap. 9.
the primitive church forbad councels to be holden or bisshoppes to be
condemned? Truly the pope. The whole council of Nice affirming the same, if
we will give credit to Athanasius, Epist. ad Felicem.
who was present thereat and affirms it to be so, although the canon thereof
(for of. 70. there agree upon we have only at this day 20.) be perished and
not now to be had. Where I can not but note by the way, the circumspect
manner of writing used by Athanasius, who says not that the council of Nice
decreed or ordained this, but only that by their judgments they confirmed
and renewed the same. His words ar these. In Nicena synodo. 318. episcoporu^
concorditer ab omnibus roboratum* it was in the council holden at Nice by full
consent of all the bishops in nombre. 318. roborate or confirmed, non deberi
absque R. pontificis sententia celebrari concilia nec Episcopos damnari, that
without the authority of the B. of Rome neither councelles should be kept nor
bishops condemned. So that herebie we may gather that it was before taken for a
truth, but then by reason of some busy brains that began to call it in to
question, by the judgment of the council confirmed and put out of all doubt.

Who but he excommunicated all the churches of Asia and provinces bordering
upon it, Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 24.
no man finding fault with the doing thereof for lack of jurisdiction (which
would no doubt where parts be taken as at that time there were about the
keeping of the Easter day, of all other things first have been espied and
reprehended if it had been done with out authority) although some complained
of over much rigor, He lived in the year of our lord. 193.
and would have wisshed a little more discretion in Victor then pope which did
it?

But to go forward in thexamples of thauncient councels, Conciliu^ Constan.
about the year of our lord 369. ca. 5.
To whom did the second general council gathered at Constantinople declare
that the honor of being chief over all other bishops did apperteigne? To any
other then to the bishop of Rome?

In whose place was Cirillus president of the third general council holden
at Ephesus but in the B. of Rome his? Council. Ephesinu^ in the year of our
lord. 433.


Whom called the fowerth general council of Calcedon, Counciliu^ Calcedo^.
The year. 453. Act. 8.
vniuersae ecclesiae episcopum bishop or ouersear of the universal church,
but him? Who commanded the body of the same council that theie should in no
wise suffer Dioscorus the bishop of Alexandria to sit amongst them,
Sessione. 1.
but the pope by his legates? Why was Lucentius one of the popes legates
forbidden at the same time to accuse Dioscorus, but because the fathers told
him that the parsons of the judge and th'accuser must be distinct* and that
the judge might in no wise take on him the others name or office? And how was
Lucentius amongst them a judge? because he represented the popes parson. And
why was the pope his master judge? because he was the chief judge and head
in earth of the church. Can you tell any other cause M. Iuell? And for this
cause Lucentius gave over and Eusebius an other bishop accused him. Finally to
make an end with this council of Calcedon, know ye that after many reasons
on both sides and long debating toe and fro in the same touching the B. of
Rome his prerogative, the fathers at the length concluded the matter and knit
up the knot in this wise. Act. 16.
Ex his quae gesta sunt vel ab vnoquoque deposita perpendimus, The Conclusion
of the Counsel of Calcedon tovvching the Popes superiority.
omnem quidem primatum and honorem praecipi^um secundum canones, antiquae Romae
Deo amantissimo archiepiscopo confirmari. That is to say: By those things
which have passed amongst us or have been by every one of us alleged, we
perceive according to the canons, all souerentie and chief honor to be
confirmed, to the welbelouid of god tharchebishop of old Rome. Note here I
beseech you good indifferent readers (which a littell before I noted to you
out of Athanasius alleging for the B* of Rome his s^^erioritie the first
council of Nice) that the council of Calcedon determined here no new thing
of the popes authority, but confessed them selves by boulting out the truth
to have found, that the canons and rules of the church in times past had
given him that chief honor above all other, and that therefore theie perceived
that by them it ought to be confirmed. What can we here think of the council
of Calcedon referring it self to the canons, but that it me^t of the council
of Constantinople and Nice going before? And of the council of Nice what can we
judge, but that their confirmation had relation to the very institution of
Christ him self?

The fathers assembled in the two councels of Carthage and Mileuite, Concilium
Carthag. Mileuitanu^
of whom S. Auste^ was one, wrote unto Innocentius then pope of Rome to
confirm their doings against the two heretics, Apud August. epist. 90.
Pelagius and Celestius. The who le council of Carthage writing to the pope,
did so theie said: vt statutis suae mediocritatis etia^ apostolicae sedis
adhi^eatur authoritas, to the intent that to their ordona^ces which were but of
mean authority, the weight and majesty of th'apostolicall seat might add
the more. The fathers in the council Mileuitan, of their writing for the
confirmation of their decrees alleged this to be the cause, Quia te Dominus
gratiae suae praecipuo munere in sede apostolica collocauit, August. epistla^.
92.
that is, because our lord has placed you by the gift of his especial grace
in the apostolical seat.

To the first of these two councels Innocentius the pope making answer, August.
epist. 9^.
how does he praise and extol the fathers, for that that theie not leaning to
their own judgments, had (observing the examples of ancient traditions, Not
man but god has refer ued to the pope the determi nation of all doubts.
and being mindful of the ecclesiastical discipline, not contemning the
ordinances of the fathers in times past: who decreed, not by the sentence of
man but of god him self, that the determination of all doubts should be
reserved to the Sea of Rome, from whence all other churches should receive the
same, none otherwise then as all waters proceed from the head spring) referred
the whole process of their doings to his judgment?

To the other council he made answer, August. epist. 93.
that theie had behaved the^ selves both diligently and decently in
regarding the apostles honor, his honor quoth he I say, who beside the care
of external things has also to provide for all churches, in asking what was
to be followed in doutefull matters: wherein he said theie had followed the
form of the ancient rule. He added also that as often as there was any
doubt of matters of faith, his brothers and fellow bishops should refer
the same to no other but to Peter, in which doing theie should refer the^ to
the giver both of that name and the honor belonging theretoe, with many
other words to this end. And last of all in the same letters he
excommunicated both Pelagius and Celestius, commanding that his sentence
remained inviolable, that they entered not in to the churches, that theie
should have no pastoral charge, but yet that if theie repented pardon should
not be denied them.

Here perhaps some one will ask of me, why passing over the notable
testimonies touching this matter, of Anacletus, Clemens, Euaristus, Alexander,
Xistus, Telesphours of whom the last lived within seven score years after
Christ, I rather allege Innocentius, The year or our lord. 470
who although he be also ancient as li^ing well near eleven hundred years
ago, and prove right well ^he point for the which he is brought in, might yet
either for the one respect or the other, have given place to any of them. To
whom I make this answer, that as I have willingly and wittingly suffered my
self, to lack such necessary defense for the proof of this controversy, as
out of the writings of such grave fathers and holy martirs, our adversaries
them selves (I appeal to their consciences) know right well that we might
abundantly and in great store have heaped together, only because the
gainesaiers might happily have excepted against them, that not with standing
they were martirs, and in the whole course of their lives very apostles, yet
because they were bishops of Rome, theie were not in that cause which was their
own, indifferent witnesses: so would I also have forborne the alleging of
this answer of Innocentius for the same cause: had it not been that S. Austen
him self had justified his parson against our adversaries in this behalf. For
he writing to one Paulinus a bishop, Epist. 106
after long discoursing with him touching the heretics Pelagius and Celestius,
tells him at the length, how the councels of Carthage and Mileuite had
written about them and their heresies to Innocentius the pope, not only the
certificate of their doings but also certain familier letters beside. To all
the which says he, ille no bis rescripsit eode^ modo quo fas erat, atque
oportebat apostolicae sedis antistitem he answered us by his lettres again,
even as it was right and as was for the B. of the apostolical See meet.

Now I pray you considre here with your selves good Readers* if Innocentius
when he wrote to these fathers, to auaunce him self and his See, had being led
thereunto by blind affection, without the warrant of gods word, the usage
of the church, the authority of the canons, praised them, that keeping and
observing the examples of antiquity and having in remembrance the
ecclesiastical discipline, they had referred as theie ought their doings to
his judgment: if he had besides borne them in hand, that the ancient fathers
had decreed, not by man's judgment but by gods him self, that what so ever
were to be done were it of those provinces that were near to Rome or far of, it
should not be determined before that it were brought to the knowledge of that
seat of his: if he had excommunicate Pelagius and Celestius without
authority, and finally done and said so many things (as ar in his said
epistles more at large to be seen) for the prerogative of his church, and all
false: how had then S. Austen said truly, that he answered in all points
aright, and as the B. of the apostolical seat should? Shall we think that
S. Austen was ignorant and so deceauid, or that he flattred and so lied? Orcan
we justly think that S. Austen if he had not taken him as head of the
church, would ever have willed him to have cited Pelagius (being not then in
Britain but in the east parts as in the same epistle it appears) to co me
to Rome? Epist. 95
But thus much be said by the way to that question why I rather use the
authority of Innocentius, then any of those other popes before him.

I might here bring forth for examples allowed of the primitive church, seeing
hitherto they have been practiced and never disalowed, how that Vrsatius and
Valens two ringleaders and chief capitaines amongst the Arrians, at the
length being weary of their heresies and har telie sorry therefore, Epiph^.
heresi. 68. Athan. ^apolog. 2. Histor. trip lib. 4. cap. 34.
of al^ the bishops in the world went to no other but to only Julius the
pope to be absolved, and by him received into the church and admitted to the
communion and company of the faithefull, as witnesses Epiphanius and other:
how that the same Julius restored to their bishoprikes being unjustly
deprived, Socrates Lib. 2. cap. 15.
Athanasius to Alexandria, Paulus to Constantinople, Marcellus to Ancyra, and
Asclepas to Gaza, all in the East church, and therefore impossible to have
been doe^ had not his authority been universal. I might here put you in
remembrance of a nombre of bishops of Rome, that wrote their lettres in to
the fardest part of the world, sometimes commanding, other whiles forbidding
this or that: of the like that directed their commissions to this bishop and to
that, to execute their authority in countries and prouincies far from Rome: as
namely (to pass over Pius, Victor, Fabianus, and such other) of Leo the
first, who in Greece and the countries bordering thereapo^ appointed the B. of
Thessalonia, Epist. 85. 83. 89.
in France the B. of Arles, and in Spain Hormisdas an other bishop, to be
his vicaires and deputes in those parties. Which had been a matter of all other
to be laughed at, if they writing such letters, and making such delegations,
had had nothing or no more to do there, then other men.

But omitting many other both before and sense that have done the like, I
shall at this time only allege Gregory, the first of that name, him rather
then any of the rest, because in this controversy you bear your self on
his authority so bold. Did not he ordeine that Maximianus the B. of Siracusa,
Lib. 2. Epist. 4.
should in his stead ouersee all the churches of Scicilie? Did he not write his
lettres to all the bishops of Numidia commanding them that they should give
ordres to no Donatistes? lib. epist. 1. epist. 75.
Did he not direct his letters to Adeodatus the metropolitan of Numidia, to
take good heed that none were promoted to holy ordres by money? And will you yet
M. Iuell hearing this, persist in your lewd opinion, that S. Gregory (then
whom amongst all that range of bishops that have either gone before him or
followed after, you could never have found one that more makes in this point
for the catholic faith and less for you) should be a patron of your
heresy? S. Gregory's place brought by the Protestants against the Popes
supremacy examined.
But because it may the better appear to all men in what distress you ar,
that be driven to such shameful shifts and extreme refuges for the upholding
of your new found religion: I shall here (occasion so aptelie offering it
self) examine that place of S. Gregory, which you toss so co^monlie in your
mouths, repete so often in your books, where he sharp lie reprehendeth John
the B. of Constantinople, for taking upon him the name of universal bishop, a
title altogether (he says) profane and mete for antichriste, a title which
Leo his predecessor having offered unto him by the whole council of Calcedon
refused. Thus has S. Gregory.

To this authority the tr^the it self compelling me, I must needs follow in
answering, that excellent clercke and man for his lerning not in one thing or
two but Universally in all, amongst those of the old world worcester thie to be
reconed, (for for no less do the wise and learned judge him to be how ever
some foolish calfe have in vain murmured to the contrary:) who being urged as
you know by your self M. Iuell with this place, told you that it served
nothing to disprove the souereintie, as in deed it does not. For if you had
read S. Gregory so diligently as reason would you should before you had
alleged him so impudentlie, then had you found that allthough the B. of Rome
had never been called universal bishop, yeat had that been no proof that he
is not therefore head of the church, the^ would you not so foolishelie have
noted upon D. Coals worcester des in the marge^t of your book, that no B. of Rome
before S. Gregory's time would ever be called universal bi^shop: finally then
would you not so ignorantly have confounded together, The word universal B.
not taken with S. Gregory to signify the head of the church. Lib. 4. cap.
76.
these terms universal bishop and head of the church, as though theie had
in that place signified all one thing. The which that theie do not, no man
does more plainly express then S. Gregory him self, who writes of S.
Peter after this manner. The charge says he and supremacy of all the whole
church was committed to him, and yeat was he not called universal apostle.

Lo M. I^ell if you had taken the pains to have scanned the place of S.
Gregory alleged by you by this and such other, would you ever have brought in
to the light this dead mouse, this false argument and untrue consequent:
There was never any B. of Rome called, or that would be called by the name of
universal bishop, therefore* theie be not or ought not to be heads of the
church. S. Gregory expounded to make nothing for the protestants by his own
words.
Seeing that S. Peter as says S. Gregory had the charge of the whole church
although he were never called by the name of universal apostle. If S. Peter
might be head of the church, and without any absurdity have the charge
thereof as (S. Gregory thought) although he were not called universal apostle,
why should you thick it now any more impossible for the pope to be called
head of the church, although he be not called universal bishop? And so have
you by the way an answer to your wise demand also, that is, if no B. of
Rome would ever take upon him to be called th'vniuersall bishop or head of
the whole church for the space of six hundred years after Christ, where then
was the head of the universal church all that while, or how it could then
continue without a head more the^ now. For we say unto you, that that is
most false and untrue which you lay for a grounded truth, that is that no B.
of Rome would ever be called by the name of head of the church within the
first six hundred years after Christ, as has been sufficiently proved
before, and that also as we have declared, you abuse your self in the framing
of your said question, in taking for all one the head of the church and the
universal bishop. And thus have you one cause why this place of S. Gregory
makes nothing against the supremacy of the B. of Rome.

And other cause is for that, that John the B. of Constantinople by this name
or title of universal bishop, understood him self only to be a bishop
and none else. In what sense it is true that no B. of Rome would ever be
called universal bishop.
Which meaning neither in the first six hundred years nor at any time sense,
any B. of Rome that I could yeat hear of ever had. And that this is the true
meaning of S. Gregory and not forced by me, the very words of the same man
written to John archbishop of Constantinople do well witness with me. Qui
enim indignum te esse fatebaris, lib. epist. 4. Epist. 4.
vt episcopus dici debuisses, ad hoc quandoque perductus^ es* vt despectis
fratribus episcopus appetas solus vocari, that is to say: for thou (John B. of
Constantinople) which once grauntedst thy self to be unworthy the name of a
bishop, art now at the length comme to that pass, that thowe labourest to
be called a bishop alone. And a little after. Thou go about (says he) to
take away that honor from all other, which by singularity thou desire
vnlaufullie to usurp to thy self.

Thus may you see M. Iuell how this place being by the author him self
expounded, fardereth you nothing at all, and also by such auctorities and
reasons as have for our par^e been before alleged, understand, how
unadvisedly it was said of you, that the catholics as sure as god is god,
if theie would have vouchesaufed to follow either the scriptures, In the. 2.
answer to D. Coals. 2. letttres.
either the ancient Doctors and councils, would never have restored again the
supremacy of the B. of Rome after it was once abolished. Do you not hereby
give occasion to me^ to think that your lack of faith and mistrust in gods
omnipotency in other things, grows even thereof that you think god is not
god? For towching the supremacy, having in the scriptures nothing, in the
councels as little, in the fathers writings only thiese few words, that
might se me to impugn the same and yet do not: how will you be able to
discharge so many auctorities of the fathers, such consent of councels, such
conformity of examples and force of reasons, as have been and may be brought
against you? how will you satisfy your own conscience which tells you,
that so many ceremonies, so many ordonances, so many decrees of bishops of
Rome, as Thomas Beacon otherwise called Theodore Basile, or by what name so
ever he be else termed has heaped together, The antiquity of holy water.
delivered by them to the world, some of them, as amongst a nombre that which
of all other you make lest account of, holy water, within little more then a
hundred years after Christ, and the most part in the pure state of the
primitive church, would never have been by such common and general confent
without contradiction of any, received by the whole world, used and
frequented in all the churches scattred and dispersed thorough out the same,
unless the authors thereof had had universal authority to establishe that
which has been universally received.

Thus having hitherto touching the supremacy said so much as may presently
serve for your challenge, leaving the rest for a whole book either by me when
god shall send better laisure, or some other better able when he shall think
best, to be thereof made: I shall now pass to the next article in question.

THAT THE PEOPLE WAS TAVGHT WITHIN THE FIRST SIX HUNDRED YEARS AFTER
CHRIST, TO BELEVE that in the Sacrament of the altar (for so does S. Austen
term it) is contained Christ's body, Lib. 10. de ciuitat^ dei cap. 6.
reallie, substantiallie, corporalie and carnally.
TErtullian an ancient writer of Christ's church, Lib. de prescript. ad
^ersus. haer
reports of heresy that the nature thereof is, either when it is pressed
with the authority of scripture to deny it platlie to be scripture, or if she
receive it with additions and detractions to the framing of her purpose to
pervert it, or finally with false gloses and untrue expositions in such sort
to water it, that it may seem to have a far other sense, then had ever the
holy ghost the author thereof. This lesson and manner of old heretics was
never I trow more diligently put in execution or earnestly practiced, the^ in
this our most miserable and wretched time, nor in any controversy more
perspicuouse and easy even at the eye to be perceived, then in this of the
most blessed sacrament of Christ's own body and blood. For when our
adversaries demand of us scripture for the confirmation of our part, and we
bring them the words, not of Peter, not of Paul, not of any of the other
apostles, but of Christ him self that says: This is my body, and not
contented there with (least some man might otherwise construe his words
because he had at other times spoken by figures) adds, the self same which
shall be betrayed for you: (then which words if all the world would lay their
heads together, to devise how he might have spoken more plainly, theie
shall never find the way): they bring us a gloss clean contrary to the
text, that it signifies his body, that it is a figure thereof. But what?
seeing (as S. Ambrose says) our lord Jesus witnesses unto us that we truly
receive his body and blood, Lib. 4. de Sacrament. Cap. 5.
shall we dout of his credit and witness? Naie we have other council and
better by Cirillus, Super illud Lucae. Hoc est corpus.
who bids us not to doubt whether this be true or no, but to embrace in
faith the words of our Savior, who for as much as he is the truth it self,
we may well be suer can not lie.

Thus may you see good Readers what it is to deal with heretics, whose
property is always to cry for scripture, and in whose mouth there is
nothing so common as verbum domini verbum domini, the word of the lord the
word of the lord, and yet when all is done and their request satisfied, that
is scripture brought to them, theie are not asshamed (such is their impudency)
either to say that it is at all no scripture, or that it makes nothing
against them, or to call that evident for them that in the judgment of as
many as either ar wise or learned, is most evident against them. And of this
disease if you had not M. Iuell been dangerously sick, you would never
have put me or any man else to the pain, to labor any farther in the
boulting out of that truth wherein Christ has so plainly opened him
self, as neither has he need by any other to be expounded, nor easelie can
any such I trow be found, as shall be hable more plainly to express the
same, then has Christ him self our master allreadie done. Notwithstanding
because both you and your compaignions like cauilling Capernaites, stand
upon Christ's meaning, which as you say was not all one with his words, and
also on this that we have no old writers to maintain as it pleases you to
term it, our new doctrine of Christ's real presence in the sacrament: I
shall assaie to make you understand, at the least those good people whom you
have so far abused, that we have agreate sort more that say with us, that
Christ's blessed body after the words of consecration duly by the priest
pronounced, is reallie, substantiallie, and corporally, the same that was
borne of the virgin Marie, the same that he walcked in here in earth, the same
that as him self witnesses was delivered for us to be crucified on the
cross, present in the sacrament, then ever you or the best that takes your
part, shall in susteining the contrary, be hable of them all to give a right
answer to any one.

And here I shall first allege that ancient writer Tertullian, Tertullia^ in
the year of our lord. 200,
in whom (writing above thirtene hundred years sense) I find to this purpose
these words. Caro corpore and sanguine Christi vescitur vt and anima de Deo
saginetur: Lib. de Resur. carnis.
non possunt ergo separ ari in mercede quas opera coniungit. that is to say.
Our flesh feeds on the body and blood of Christ, that the soul also may
be made fat by feading on god: theie can not therefore be separated in reward,
which have been joined and coupled together in worcking.

Note here I beseech you good readers against our adversaries, that would shift
of this place with their old accustomed answer, that the bread is called his
body for that it signifies and represents no less unto us, those words of
Tertullian where he says, that the body and the soul can not be severed in
receiving their reward, whom one office o^ ministry ioineth together. If
the body feed upon bare bread as our adversaries affirm, and not upon
Christ's blessed body and blood as Tertullian says, how then ca^ theie be
said to concur in one ministry, where as either of them fedeth diuer^lie
on diverse things? Or will you say M. Iuell that flesh can feed upon signs
or figures? Truly whether it can or no I durst refer the resolution hereof
to your self, if being shut up without meat or drink two or three days in
some close room, it might be my chance to come to your spe^he at the last. I
think you would be^hrowe him that would r^ake you such an a^gument: You have
thought earnestly upon meat all this while therefore you have eaten your
fill. And would con him but little more thancke, that would painte on the
walls of your chamber the sign of a fat capon, and bid you eat and spare not.

But was Tertullian think we of this mind alone? No truly. For besides him
we have to confirm the faith of the church in this point all the ancient
writers, as many as by occasion make any mention of this most blessed
Sacrament. Ciprian* The year. 349.
Amongst whom I shall next allege S. Cipria^ that holy and blessed martyr.
Who in his work De duplici martyrio touching this matter has these words.
Reliquit nobis edendam carnem suam, Reliquit bi^^ndu^ sanguinem, vt per eadem
al^remur per quae sumus redempti. Christ has left us his flesh to eat* and
his blood to drink to the intent we might be noorished by the same things,
by the which we were redeemed. Truly if we be noorished by the same things by
the which we have been redeemed, then ar we not noorished we may be bold to
say, with a sign or figure of his body, which only and nothing else these
new found vpstartes would make us believe to be in this Sacrament.

The same holy martyr in an other place has to the same purpose these words.
Sermon. de (...) d^^i.
The bread which our lord delivered to his disciples, being changed not in
form or shape but in nature, by the omnipotency of the word is made flesh.

This place of S. Cyprian serves me to double use. For both it manifestle
proves the real presence, and (which you also deny and call a new
invention, Transubstantiation
v^knowen to thauncient fathers, and first hard of in the council holden at
La^er (...) under Innocentius the third) the transubstantiation of the bread
into Christ's natural flesh. Your common answer, that the base creatures of
bread and wine be after the consecration changed and transmuted from common
bread to be a Sacrament, to be a sign, a remembra^nce, a signification of
Christ's body and blood, yea to be in the stead of his body it self,
whereas before the consecration it was no such thing, can serve you no longer.
For all this induces no change in the nature or substance of the bread, no
more then if a cartar to day should be turned into a king to morrow, or
placed in his seat of majesty to represent his parson, he could be said to
be changed in nature.

Athanasius writing of the miracle that happened about a certain image of our
savior, Ath^nas. the year 379. Lib. de passione imagi^is Christi Cap. vl^.
whom certain Jews (M. Iuell) in a town named Berytus in Syria nailed unto
a cross, and so long continued their malice in persecuting the same after the
manner of their fathers cruelty toward Christ him self, or ourefalse
Christians behaueour toward his said image in these our days, that water at
the length and blood issued in great quantity out of the side thereof, has
these words. Nec esse ^liter aestimandum est a vere catholicis praeterid quod
a nobis scribitur, quasi ex carne and sang^ine Christi aliquid possit in mundo
inu^niri* nisi^illud quod in ara per manus sacerdotum quo^idie spiritualiter
efficitur. That is. Neither is it by true catholics otherwise to be thought
then we have allreadie written. As though there might be found any part in
the whole world of Christ's ^^eshe and blood, saving that which (...) on the
altar by the hands of the priests daily spiritually made.

Thus much touching this matter has Athanasius. But this authority I know
you will assaie to avoid, by cauilling upon the word, spirituallie made. In
which sense you will say, you deny not but that Christ's flesh and blood,
although not on the altar is yet nevertheless present on your communion table.
But against this sorry shifte we reply, that Athanasius said not in this
place that Christ's flesh and blood was spirituallie on the altar (which if
he had so long as he excluded not the corporal presence also, had made nothing
against us: for we both know and grant, that after both those manners his
blessed body is there) but that by the priest the same was spirituallie made,
as though by the adiectio^ of this word (spirituallie) he would take away
all occasion of offense* from such either weak or froward^ consciences, as
happily might imagine some other kind of making Christ's flesh and blood
then by the omnipotent power of gods most holy spirit. And that this was
the meaning of Athanasius and no other, it shall most manifestly upon the
knowledge of the cause for which he spoke these words appear. It is apparent
by the place that he was of this mind, whereas the bishop of Berytus caused
diverse vessels of glass to be made, and part of this blood that issued out
of the image to be put in the same, and to be distributed in to diverse parts
of the world, that all men might understand the marueilouse worcking of
almighty god: that that blood which was showed in many places in his time,
and said to be of Christ's, was part of this whereof he wrote. For truly
quoth he, saving on the altar, there is no where else in the world any other
part of Christ's flesh and blood.

Now I pray you good Readers judge in differentlie, if Christ's true flesh
and true blood had not been in the sacrament, but a sign or a representation
thereof only, is it likely that Athanasius would have made an exception of
that which was not at all? that he would have written so foolishelie, as no
noddie would have spoken? Every exception must be of some thing contained
under the rule, both law and reason say from the which the exception is
made. And therefore if one would say there is no man that runs saving such
a horse, he that should so say would be counted but an ass. We may therefore
boldly conclude that this ancient father and learned doctor, both spoke and
meant of Christ's body truly, naturally, and corporally present in the
sacrament: seeing that otherwise to have made in that place any mention thereof,
had not only been impertinent and nothing to the purpose, but fond also and a
thing most ridiculouse.

Eusebius Emissen. of this matter in a certain homely of his has these
words, Homil. 5. de Pasch^^.
Sicut autem quicunque, qui ad fidem veniens ante verba baptismi adhuc in
vinculo est veteris debiti, his vero commemoratis mox exuitur omni faece
peccati: ita quando benedicendae verbis coelestibus creaturae sacris altaribus
^^p^nu^tur, antequam inuo ea^ione summi nominis consecrentur* substan^i^ illic
est panis and vi^i, post verba autem Christi, corpus and sanguis Christiest.
Quid mirum autem est, si ea quae verbo cre^ r^ potuit, possit cr^at^
conuertere? The which words in our tongue sound thus much. Even as he that
coming to our faith what so ever he b^, before the words of baptesme
pronounced is yet still in the danger of the band of his old deb^e, and the
same being once rehearsed is now quit thereof and free from all spot of sin:
so when the creatures ar laid on the holy altars to be blessed with the
heavenly words, before theie be by the calling on the name of the highest
consecrated, there is the substance of bread and wine. But after the words of
Christ pronounced, there is his body and blood.

Terribilis est locus iste M. Iuell, This is a terrible place and able alone to
break the backs and stop the mouths, of all that brutishe brood crept in
to the world from the filthy neaste of Luther or Calvin his wings. This one
ancient father were hable if we had no other, to discredit you before all the
world, which have so impudentlie avouched that we have not all amongst us so
much as one ancient writer, to affirm no not colourablie, the doctrine of the
catholic church concerning transubstantiation. Transubstantiatio
Does not Eusebius in this place so affirm it truly without all manner of
color, that even the taking away of our sins by baptesme, is by him
compared with the departure of the substance of bread and wine in the
sacrament? If therefore there remain after the words of consecration any
substance of bread and wine, say also that after baptesme our old sins
remain still. For so reasons here Eusebius, that the one is as true as the
other, otherwise his similitude should halt and be of no force. And if you yeat
make strange to grant thereto, To allege the o^nipotency of god what had it
neded, if there had been no other change in the bread and wine the^ the
Protestants say there is?
do not his words that follow manifestly convince this to be his meaning,
where he asks this question: what meruell is it if he that could create all
things with his word, be able to turn and convert one thing in to an other?
But of that great nombre of testimonies which might be here for the
confirmation of this truth brought out of Eusebius, this one for this time
may suffice.

The next authority that I will here allege, shall be taken out of that
valiant champion of Christ's church and holy bishop of Millaine S. Ambrose.
Who is in this matter for us so plain, both in the controversy of the
presence, Ambrosius The year of our lord. 380
and also of that other of transubstantiation, as he that favors those
opinions most can not whatso ever he be, to that effect express his mind more
fully. His words I will here truly rehearse (as theie ar in his worckes to be
found) word for word in english. This bread (says h^) is bread before
the words of consecration, Lib. 4. de Sacrament cap. 4.
after the which of bread is made the flesh of Christ. Let us therefore
prove that which we say. How can bread be made the body of Christ? Note
that of bread the flesh of Christ is made.
By consecration. But this consecration with what words, or with whose is it
done? By the words of our lord Jesus. For thorough all the rest which are
spoken, thanckes ar offered unto god, prayers ar made for the rulers, for the
people and for other things. But when the priest is come to the consecration,
now uses he no longer his own words, but the words of Christ. It is
therefore Christ's word that makes this sacrament. What word of Christ?
Truly that, wherebie all things were made, that whereby our lord commanded
and heaven was framed, that wherebie the sea and land was created and every
other creature fourmed. See thou therefore of what power Christ's word is?
If it be of such force that of nothing it is able to make some thing, how much
more is it able to turn those things which were before made, in to some other
thing? Thus far S. Ambrose.

The same S. Ambrose in an other place has these words. Thou wilt perhaps
say I see an other thing, how do you tell me that I take the body of
Christ? De ijs qui init. myster. cap. 9
And this remains yet for me to prove. How many examples use we therefore
to persuade, that it is not that which nature has fourmed but that which
blessing has consecrated? and that the force of blessing is greater then that
of nature, because by blessing eue^ nature it self is changed. Moses held in
his hand the rod, he cast it from him and it becam a serpent, again he took
it by the tail and it returned to the nature of a rod. And after this
example with many other to this end by him out of the holy scriptures
alleged, he concludes in this sort. If man's blessing were of such force
that it was able to convert nature, what siae we to that divine consecration,
where the very words of our savior do work?

This thought S* Ambrose a proof strong enough to convince the truth of this
sacrament. And although the substance of the rod being turned in to the
substance of the serpent, lost also there with all his first outewarde nature,
the accide^tes I mean, which in this miraculouse change in the sacrament is
otherwise, where theie remain for our infirmities sake saufe and sound: yet
was this in his judgment no let why he might not well reason after this sort:
Moses gods servant was able to turn a rod in to a serpent. Therefore god his
master is able to turn bread in to his flesh. Neither thought he it any
iuggling because to sight bread and wine remained still, as that blasphemouse
tongue which of late has taken upon him to be your champion M. Iuell, against
a certain treatise by a notable learned man made in the defense of the
catholic faith, in certain points by you not so much by learning impugned,
as by malice maligned, has termed it: but the miraculouse worcking of god
above nature. And yet this good man forsoothe, may not abide in any wise to
be noted one, that should put any manner of mistrust in the omnipote^cie of
god, but that he grants as freely as we do with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
that god is able to perform what so ever he does promise, that no word is
impossible to him, that he has done what so eu^r his will was to do. And
therefore he says that theie that so r^porte of him and his compagnions,
th^ie must needs do^ it either of hateful blinden^s orignorant malice.

Truly good readers this man seems to me, to be like a makeshifte, that
falling into a company of others making merry, braggeth and boast^th of his
purse wherein is never a cross, that he has to spend as largely as the
best, and will bear his part as fran^k^lie as the proudest what so ever he
be, and yeat for all his high looks and great bragges made before, when it
comes to the gathering of the shot he slippeth fair and well away, and
leaves the honest company to pay for all. Even so I pray you mar^ke, when
it comes to the reconing of this heavenly bancket, where is prepared for us
the most pretiouse body and blood of our savior Christ, where is required
of us for the shot that faith as says holy S. Basile that Christ's words
(This is my body) teach us: In responad quaest. 172.
let us I say marcke how well for all his bragges he paieth his part. Forso
theyowe shall see. If Christ had made his body in the sacrament to appear
like a body, A Protestants faith.
and his blood to taste and show like blood, if he might have seen it with
his eyes, as the people of Israel saw the rod, as th^ie tasted of the water:
if Christ had ever done any such miracle before as this is, that is to say
if he had turned the substance of one thing in to an other, and left still
unchanged the qualities of the other thing that it was before, that it might not
have seemed a iuggling, if finally he had had any nece^sitie to constreine him
to work any such change, then he would have believed as we do
notwithstanding all the appearance of impossibility to the contrary.

These be the conditions requisite to the faith of this protestant. But here it
is a world to see, while he would seem humbly to grant the omnipotency of
god, and to deliver him self and his companions, from that note of infamy,
whereinto by long struggling against the same theie ar run with all men,
while he patcheth and cobbleth with his rotten lingells a nombre of clouted
ifs, and is like the false tincker that mendeth one hole and makes two new,
or crafty Couper that to fasten one whoope loses three: he tumbleth hedlo^g
in to a great heap of absurdities, whereof every one is as great as that
which he thought to have avoided, and wherein yeat he sticks not
withstanding. For if thou beleuedest man (as thowe vainelie braggest that thowe
do) that god were omnipotent, would thou so limite and restreine his
power, that he should not change the nature and substance of a thing, unless
he change the accidents thereof withal? Wilt thou first see blood and taste
it as did the children of Israel the water, and then after believe? O notable
faith to beco^pared with the gray ne of a mustered seed, whose guydes the
eyes and other fallible senses be. Quid memorabile facis si videas and credas?
what great act do thou to believe after thowe have seen I may say to you,
Lib. 1.
as Theophilus the B. of Alexandria said unto one Autolicus to whom he wrote.
(...). 15.
Thus said the Iues of Christ our savior hanging upon the Cross. Descendat
nunc de cruce vt videamus and credamus. Let him come down now from the cross
that we may see and the^ believe. And except you may see flesh and blood, is
it iuggling? what you mean herebie I know not, of this suer I am, that great
blasphemy it is so to term the miraculouse wor^king of almighty god, besides
the horrible presumption to apointe god in what sort he shall do his
miracles, and last of all extreme folly to say that he rather iuggleth, that
turning the substance of one thing in to another leaves yeat unchanged the
old for me (which no iuggler is able to do) then he that alters the form
although he can not the substance, which daily experience tells us that
every iuggler to our sight does. So that almighty gods worcking is most
unlike to iugglers iuggling, and rather might you have said, that Moses wand
was aiuggling stick for that that commonly iugglers seem to do as Moses did,
then that in this high mystery consisting all in faith, any such false
dealing should take place. You that call this iuggling, so far unlike theretoe,
if Christ I fear me had turned in this sacrament in deed the accidents and
outewarde form, which every Iuggler promises and seems to do in his
tricks: your false faith is such, that you would not have letten to have
called that plain iuggling, besides other pretty terms that you keep in
store.

But leaving you to your tricks of liegier de main, wherein considering your
excellency we will in no wise contend with you, but wisshing you yeat like a
frinde to make some more store thereof, and quietly hereafter to keep them in
your iugglers box till you meet with such company as whose eyes you may
be able easelier to dymme: tell me I pray you familiarly, whether for all
your great bragges, you mistrusted not the omnipotency of god, when you
made this weak reason that it was not his will to have his body present in
the sacrament, because in all the scripture beside you read of no such
miracle, that one thing was changed into an other reteining still the
qualities of the first. Is not trow you god in good credit with you, of whose
miracles you believe no one till he have doe^ two? what neded you to have asked
this question, where he did the like before had you not douted of his
ability? Is this Abraham's faith, is this Isaac his, is this David his that
yoweboast your self to have? what scripture have you where any of them did
this? Did our blessed lady when she had received that strange message that she
being a most pure and immaculate virgin, should conceive and bring forth a
child, desire first to see it done in an other? And yeat amongst all the
miracles that ever were done before or sense, was there ever any so strange? Ar
theie now blind or maliciouse that charge you with mistrust in gods power?
Have theie not right good cause to say that you see no farther then Ismael and
Agar, that confess yourselfe not to believe this miracle because Christ never
did the like before?

Your last reason is of all other most unreasonable, and makes me to think
that sense the time that I last spoke with you, there is some mischaunce
happended unto you, that has sore broosed your head and let our your wit.
For who I pray you has made you at any time a councelor to god, that so
presumptuouslie you dare affirm that there was no necessity, Esaiae. 40 Romans
11.
why Christ should work such a miracle, as to give us his body reallie and
carnally in a sacrament to be eaten? Is this all the than^kes that you give
him for so great a benefit and pretiouse a jewel, that he might have chosen
being at liberty not constreined by necessity, whether he would have done it
or no? Truly these reasons so (...) and weak have betrayed you, and given us
to vnd^rstand, that the chief stay why you believe not this truth, is even
that which you would so gladly keep from our knowledge, that is to wit, lack
and defect of power, which you persuade your self to be in god to the
perfourmance of so great a miracle. And even as the heretics Basilides,
Cerdo, and Marcion, because theie could not atteine to the understanding how a
virgin might bring forth, took the occasion of their heresies, to say that
Christ took no flesh of the virgin Marie, and therefore suffered not in a true
but in a fantastical body: so fares it with you and your company, who
because you can not see how Christ's body may be in the sacrament reallie
present, and in many places at onee, fall flat to the denial thereof, and
bring it to a simple figure, or fantastical understanding.

Now let us return again to S. Ambrose, from whom your peuish proctour (M.
Iuell) has made me somewhat to straie. The same holy bishop has touching
this matter in an other place these words. De Sacr^mentis. Lib. 6. Cap. 1.
Sicut verus est dei filius D. noster Jesus Christus, no^ quemadmodum homines
per gratiam, sed quasi filius ex substa^^ia patris: ita vera caro sicut ipse
dixit quam accipimus and verus est potus etc. Even as our lord Jesus Christ is
the true son of god and not as men ar by grace, Christ^s true flesh in the
Sacrament
but as his son of the substance of his father: so is it true flesh and true
drink which we receive as he him self has witnessed. But thou wilt
peradventure object (as even Christ's own disciples did, at that time when
theie hard their master say: Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man
etc) how is it true flesh? I which see the similitude of blood see not true
blood in deed. (...). 6.
First of all I told the of Christ's word, which is in operation so mighty
that it can change and alter, yea the common and accustomed ordonances of
nature. Afterward when the disciples could not abide this communication of
their masters theie departed. But only Peter said, Thou have the words of
life everlasting. Least therefore more might say thus, as though there should
be a certain horror and fearefulnes of blood, Why in the Sacrament the
accidents be not changed.
but yet the grace of redemption should remain, therefore truly thou
receiuest this sacrament in a similitude or likeness, but so that thowe
receiuest also the grace and force of his true nature.

Hitherto S. Ambrose: in whose words two things there are especially to be
noted, first that of the true presence of Christ's body in the sacrament he
took him self to be so suer, that even as certain a truth as it is that
Christ was the true son of god, not by grace only or adoption: so
certeinlie and truly he took his body to be present in the sacrament, not by
grace or spirituallie alone but truly and reallie. The second poincte that
is diligently to be observed is, why Christ contrary to his accustomed
manner of worcking in his miracles, changes not here in this sacrament the
outewarde shape and form, but only the inward nature and substance, which is
as this holy doctor says, for our infirmities sake, to avoid that horror
and fear which if we should receive the^ in their own likeness, and not under
the for me of things wherewith we are better acquainted: we were of all
likelihood suer to fall into. I ca^ not here pass over in silence that notable
and evident testimony of this worthy bishop and learned father, Lib. 4. de
Sacra^. Cap. 5.
vttred to this purpose by him in an other place in thiese words. Antequam
co^secretur panis est, vbi aute^ verba Christi accesserint, corpus est Christi.
Ante verba Christi calix est vini et aquae plaenus: vbi verba Christi operata
fuerint, ibi sanguis efficitur qui plaebe^ redemit. that is to say, before that
it be consecrate it is bread, but when the words of christ ar come unto it,
it is christ's body. Before the words of Christ there is a cup filled with
wine and water, as soon as Christ's words have wrought their effect, there is
made that blood which redeemed the people.

If these auctorities alleged out of S. Ambrose be not able to stop the
mouths of our adversaries, if they will yeat needs press us with their
faithelesse howes and whies, and will deal with almighty god so straightly
that they will grant him to be hable to do no more, the^ their simple wits
ca^ atteine to the manner of the doing whereof: I shall yeat most humbly
desire them to bear with me, if I allege once again the same excellent and
learned bishop (S. Ambrose I mean) most plainly refelling all such faitheles
Caparnaites, as leaning more to frail reason then firm faith, have their
doubtefull minds ever waltering and tottering in the truth of this sacrament.
His words ar these. De his qui initiantur myst^ r^js. Cap. vl^i.
Nunquid naturae vsus praecessit quum Jesus dominus ex Maria nasceretur? Si
ordinem quaerimus, viro mixta foemina generare consueuerat. Liquet igitur quod
praeter naturae ordine^ virgo gener auit, and hoc quod co^ficimus corpus ex
virgin est. Quid hic quaeris naturae ordinem in Christi corpore, cum praeter
naturam sit ipse D. Jesus partus ex virigine? That is, when our lord Jesus was
borne of the virgin Marie, was natur^s usage practiced? If we seek after her
order, women have first the company of men, and then so conceive and bring
forth after. It is manifest therefore that the virgin brought forth besides the
course of nature: The body consecrate by the priest the same that was borne
of the virgin
and this body which we do consecrate is the same that was borne of the
virgin. Why demaundest thou here (in the sacrament) the order of nature to be
kept in Christ's body, where as besides nature our lord Jesus him self was
borne of the virgin?

Hitherto have you hard of what mind holy S. Ambrose was, touching the
controversy moved in these our unfortunate days, Lib. 6. de Sacram Cap. 1.
Christ's true flesh in the Sacrament even as Christ was the true son of his
father.
about the most blessed sacrament of Christ's body and blood. In whom I have
tarried somewhat the longer, for that that both he proves most manifestly
the presence (when he affirms that Chrstes flesh in the sacrament is so
verily his true flesh, as Christ was the true son of his father, and
excludes all figures, all signs, all representation, when Christ was in none
of these senses his fathers son) and also the change and alteration of the
bread and wine in to the true substance of Christ's flesh and blood, It had
been in vain to have brought examples of thingest urned in substance, to prove
the same in the sacrament if there had been no such change there.
by alleging the examples (which had otherwise been in vain) of Moses rod
turned in to a serpent, the iron flotting above the water, the bitterness of the
waters of Marath turned into swetenes and such like, with answer to such
carnal objections as ar wont to be commonly made against this truth: and
last of all for that of all other he gives most plainly unto us the cause,
why in this great miracle our lord god changes not the accide^ts but
only the substance. By all which things he gives us most manifestly to
understand, that he meant no less the^ he spoke. For otherwise if Christ's
body had not been truly there but a sign thereof, not in verity but in
imagination, all his proufes to prove the same had been nedeles, whereas he
might and for his great wisdom and learning no doubt would, to all such as
either had doubted of the presence or tra^substantiatio^ with much more
facility have answered with our adversaries, that there was no change at all
in nature or substance, nor no presence there of Christ's true body: then to
have heaped together a nombre of examples whereof every one contained a true
change in nature, to have proved that which was not: or to have alleged the
miraculouse conception of Christ, or to give any cause why his body
appears not like a body, wherebie to bring the simple people in to a
perniciouse and damnable error. But forasmuch as his great travails taken in
the defense of Christ's church against the wicked Arrians, do well witness to
his posterity how far he was from all such impiety, we must needs conclude
that S. Ambrose did not only so write but also believe, that in the blessed
sacrament after the words of consecration, is the very true and natural
body of our lord Jesus Christ, the substance of bread and wine passing into
the substance of his flesh and his blood.

From S. Ambrose let us go one step farther to S. Austen. Augustinan. 400.
He in a certain place examining these words of the Prophet, A dor ate
scabellum pedum eius: worship ye his fotestole psalm. 98. has these words.
Suscepit enim de terra terram, in psalm. 98
quia caro de terra est and de carne Mariae carnem accepit. Et quia in ips^
carne hi^ ambulauit, and ipsam carnem ad manducandum ad salutem dedit, nemo
autem illam carne^ manducat nisi prius adorauerit, inuentu^ est que^admodu^ ado
retur tale scabellu^, and non solum non peccemus adora^do, sed peccemus no^
adora^do. That is to say: for he took earth of earth because flesh comes
of earth, and of Mary's flesh he took flesh. And forasmuch as he walcked
here in that flesh, and has given to us the same flesh to be eaten to our
salvation, and no man eats it but he first worshippeth it: the means is
found how such a fotestole of our lords may be worshipped, and we not only
not sin in worshipping it, but sin in not worshipping it. Hear you M.
Iuell S. Austen telling you that Christ's flesh is here given to us to be
eaten, A sin not to worship Christ's body in the Sacrament.
the same that he took of the virgin Marie, the same that he carried about with
him in this world? Hear you not your self vanquished which take from it all
manner of worship in the sacrament, Adoratio.
and violently wrest these words of S. Austen to Christ's body in heaven?
which interpretation how far it goes from the mind of the author to omit all
other proufes, your own self have well declared, when you grant that there
he must be worshipped where he is eaten, which seeing it is here in earth, what
moved you to conclude that therefore he must be worshipped in heaven, truly I
know not, but suer I am that the argument holds a loco topico: Baculus stat
in angulo Ergo Christus non est in coelo.

I am loathe here to press you with farther auctorities in this point, both
because I would not gladly stray from that which I have in hand, and also
least therebie you might falsely think that you had truly answered the place
allreadie alleged. And therefore I forbear to lay to your charge
Chrisostomus, who exhorts in a certcine place of his worckes all Christian
men, Homi^. 24 in 1. Cor. 10. Christ to be worshipped on the altar.
to imitate and follow those barbarouse men who worshipped Christ lienge in
the mangier, in worshipping the same on the altar: who tells you and us all
twice in one sentence, that Christ's blessed body being in heaven is showed
unto us here in earth, Ibidem.
and that it is Summo honor dignum, worthy the chiefest honor. But although
of gentleness I release you of the pains in answering to these places of S.
Chrysostom, yeat all the world looks for thus much at your hands, that
you should give some reason (for as much as you so understand the place of
S. Austen) why Christ's body may not as well be worshipped on the altar as it
should in heaven. If you say because there it has annexed to it the
divinity, do we separate them on the altar? How Chr^ste^ b^die is
worshipped in the Sacrament
Or do we direct our worship to it for any other cause then for that it has
the deity inseparably united thereunto? wherefore of fine force you must
confess, that seeing S. Austen has granted that Christ's body is received of
us here in earth, and you can give no reason why it should be rather honored
in one place then in an other, that he meant as he spoke, of honor to be to be
done thereto, then and there as it is received, which is not in heaven but in
earth. And truly if there were no authority therefore, very reason does
convince the same. For who is there so folishe or rather starcke mad, that if
his prince should do to him being a poor man that honor, that he would
vouchesaufe to visit him in his pore cotage, like a rude beast without cap or
knee would stand staring in his face, and say that when he meets him in his
court, or finds him in his throne (as though there unto were tied all his
princely power, and that he carried not the same with him whither so ever he
went) then he will not fail to do his duty to the uttermost. Who would not
detest such a lourdaine, that whereas for such exceading great kindenes of his
lord and king he ought the more to have honored him, he abuses now the same
as a cause to take all honor from him?

But let us return to S. Austen, and of many testimonies that he has
concerning the truth of this controversy, Psalm. 33.
allege only one other. which is there where he expounds these words of
the psalm. Et ferebatur in manibus suis: and he was carried in his own hands.
His words ar these. Ferebatur enim Christus in manibus suis quando commendans
ipsum corpus suum ait, Hoc est corpus meum. Ferebat enim illud corpus in
manibus suis. The words (says he) of the prophet ar found to be true, not
in David (for how he or any other could carry him self according to the
lettre in his own hands we find not) but in Christ: for he was carried in
his own hands when commending his body (to his disciples) he said. This is
my body. For he carried that body in his hands.

If the devils ministres will here go about to persuade you good readers, that
S. Austen meant not that Christ carried in his hands his true body, but a
figure thereof: tell the^ that S. Austen excludes all figurative speech in
that that he has, how Christ carried him self according to the lettre, and
that if he had meant as theie say he did, it had been no great hard thing for
either David or any other, to carry in his hands the figure of him self. If
they yet press you with that that S. Austen uses the word quodammodo after a
certain manner: tell them that he me^t not therebie to infirm the truth
which before he had so manifestly confirmed, but to teach the manner to be
miraculouse and above the reach of reason, and withal to withdraw us from
such fond fantasies, as discussing this mystery by the manner of reasoning in
other things, we might perhaps have fallen in to. I would here make an end
of alleging any more auctorities for the confirmation of this article, were it
not that happily some man might think that I contemned that notable pillar
of Christ's church in Greece Chrysostom, if out of him having for this
controversy so many testimonies, as in no one there can, either more in
nombre or stronger in proof be found: I should not also bring to light one
at the least or two. He therefore when he compared together the departure out
of this world of our savior and Helias, Chrisostomus.
and noted therein this difference, that the one, Helias, left behind him to
his disciple his cloak stripping him self thereof, Ad populu^ Antiochen.
homil. 2.
but Christ the other, left with us both his cloak (for so calls he there
his flesh) shifting him self thereof, Christ's cloak his flesh.
and yet ascendid into heaven and carried the same with him also: witnessed not
he manifestly his faith in this controversy? If Christ left not his flesh
here behind him, how could he the^ have said that in that point he was like
to Helias? if you say that he left a figure of his flesh, or a representation
thereof only, how is it the^ true that he left the same behind him that he
carried with him, seeing that the scriptures teach us that the flesh wherein he
ascendid, was no such as Marcion said suffered on the cross, and as you
affirm to be in the sacrament, but real, natural, and true flesh? when he
complained of the outrage doe^ at Constantinople by the means of Th^ophilus B.
of Alexandria, Epist. 1. ad Innoce^tium papam.
where he said the soldiers rifled the holy places of the church, Nicephor.
lib. 13. cap. 19.
and that the most holy blood of Christ was shed and spilt on their
garments, did not he plainly witness with us against you?

Hitherto you have hard master Iuell for one, seven ancient doctors of the
primitive church, all within four of the first six hundred years that you
demanded.

But all this not withstanding you will yet perhaps stand still upon your
negative and bear the world in hand, that although I have by diverse
auctorities alleged, Tertullian.
sufficiently proved that Christ's body is present in the sacrament, forasmuch
as the ancient fathers have, one that flesh fedeth in the sacrament on his
body and blood, an other that we eat the same flesh, and drinck the same
blood by the which we were redeemed, Oyprianus.
that the bread in the sacrament is turned not in form or shape but in
nature, Athanas.
that by a spiritual means the same flesh and blood is daily made by the
hands of the priest upon the altar, that before the consecration there is
bread and wine, Eusebius^ Ambrosi.
that after there is the body and blood of Christ, with such like: that yet I
say for all this I have proved no thing, because forsooth I have not vouched
your terms, Really, substantially, corporally, carnally, or naturally. If you
flee to this bare and miserable shift, then shall you do all men to understand
that you ar driven to an Exigent, when to defend your devilish doctrine you ar
feign to cavil apo^ words and terms, which also you shall but wrangle about
in vain, the thing it self being most evidently proved, which those terms and
words could do no more then signify. Besides that, you shall well show your
selves to be much either more foolish or maliciouse, then were those
faithelesse Capernaites. Of whom there was yet no one amongst them all, so
void of wit or freight with malice, who hearing our savior commend to them
the eating of his flesh and drincking of his blood, believed not straight ways
thoroughly, that he meant as he said, of his true and natural flesh and blood,
all were it so that he never mentioned your terms, Really, naturally,
substantially corporally, or carnally.

And truly to say the truth, I see no cause why you might not also if you
listed, renew Marcion his heresy again, and say with him that Christ suffered
not in a true but in a fantastical body, if such pleas on your part may be
allowed, that except certain terms such as you list to demand can be found,
otherwise let the truth be vttred in words never so apt or propre, you will
never grant theretoe. For the Evangelists (I pray you M. Iuell) which of them
ever told us in describing Christ's death and passion, that his body was nailed
on the cross, Really, substantially, with the rest of your terms? And will
you therefore with Marcion deny that he suffered in a true body, unless we can
find to you such terms as you demand? Or if you say that in this article
of our faith you make no such demand, but that you hold your selves fully
contented with such words as you find vttred in the scriptures for the
expressing thereof: Why then believe you not as well the verity of this
article, being by Christ's own mouth first, by the voice of his church sense
in all ages confirmed, as you do the Evangelists touching the suffering of his
blessed body? Or why might not Marcion denieng Christ's body on the cross
then, have bidden Tertullian and other that strove against him, prove it by
these terms Really, substantially, corporally, carnally, or naturally, as well
as you denieng it now on the altar, drive us to the proving the presence
thereof there by the same? Especially the words uttered by the Evangelists to
ascerteine us of the true suffering of Christ's body on the cross, being no
more manifest to that effect then ar the words of Christ to the other, that is
to give us to understand of the true being of the same upon the altar.

Well, yet shall I even in this point assay to satisfy (if it may be) your
deintie and delicat appetite. Although this must I needs by the way confess,
that the ancient writers used not thiese terms so commonly as the latter have
done. For in that pure and unspotted age of the primitive church, when no
heretic durst once open his mouth to impugn this verity, there was not to
say the truth like occasion, as sense Berengarius his time has bin ministered.
Or rather the innocence and parfect simplicity of those days, thought it not
necessary for them to use your terms, corporally, carnally with the rest,
which had said, the same body that suffered death on the cross, the same that
walcked here on the earth: whereas it might probably be thought, that they whom
such words should not persuade to yield in this point to the truth, would not
fail also in such wise to cavil and wra^gle about the other, that had they
been used never so often, they would yet by one shift or other seem to avoid
them, and so continue in their old heresy still. And this I fear me will
hereafter appear by your doings, how ever for the time you dally with your
dilatory exceptions, which being brought to wise me^nes scanning be not all
worth a blew point, or a rotten rushe. But now I come to your terms.

The first, which is, realiter, Really, Really.
is a barbarouse word, and therefore of likelihod not to be found in the
learned eloque^t worckes of the ancient fathers. Which thing makes me to
thinck that if in your challenge M. Iuell, you meant good faith, you will not
take it in evil part if for that which ca^ not be had, I give you an other as
good: I mean for this term really, the word truly or verily. For in right
judgment they signify I dout not all one thing. This being presupposed, your
challenge touching this term may be answered by the words of our Savior, where
he entreats of this most blessed sacrament, and in express words taught his
disciples, that his flesh which he would give them and they should eat, Joan.
6.
should be truly meat, and his blood truly drinck. Which if it be so, then is
it not by fiction or imagination (as you and your companions dream) but in
true, and to speak after your manner in real existence.

If you say that the words of Christ be here by me racked, and violently
wreste^ to a far other sense then him self had in them: then turn I you over
to try that matter, He lived Anno, dn^i 371.
to Hilarious that worthy Bishop of Poyctiers in France. Who reasoning against
the heresy of Arrius, as I do now against yours, applies them after this sort
to the same purpose. De naturali in nobis Christi veritate quae dicimus, nisi
ab eo discimus, stulte atque impie dicimus. Ipse enim ait, Caro mea vere
estesca, and sanguis meus vere est potus. De veritate carnis and sanguinis, non
est relictus ambigendi locus. Nunc enim and ipsius domini professione and fide
nostra, vere caro est and vere sanguis est. The which words in our English
tongue sound thus. Of the natural verity of Christ in us what so ever it be
that we teach, except we learn it of him we teach both foolishly and
wickedly. For he says him self, my flesh is truly meat, and my blood is truly
dri^ck. Of the truth of his flesh and blood, there is not any place left to
dout. For now both by the testimony of our lord hi^ self, and by our faith, it
is truly his flesh and truly his blood.

Hitherto Hilarious, by whom in this place may be gathered good readers, first
that in the primitive church, upon these words of Christ, my flesh is truly
meat, etc. the fathers, and bishops of that age grounded the doctrine of
Christ's true presence in the sacrament, and so consequently that I deserve no
blame, who use this authority no otherwise, then I find by good and laufull
records, that the learned fathers of Christ's church have done before me:
next, that upon this doctrine once settled, they builded an other, that Christ
dwelled naturally and truly in us, against the Arrians who denied it: And for
so undoubted a truth was this true and real presence of Christ taken to be
with Hilarious that blessed bishop, that a littell before the place even now
alleged, to prove that Christ dwelled naturally in us, Naturally.
he used this argument or reason: The word was truly made flesh in Christ's
incarnation: we receive the same word truly made flesh in our lords food.
Therefore he dwells naturally in us.

To this ancient father, Concilium Ephesinu^. ^ Anno domini. 433.
for the better justifying of this term truly or verily, I shall here add the
ancient council holden at Ephesus, one of the first 4. general, and
therefore allowed with us at home for good by act of parliament. The fathers in
this council assembled, to Nestorius, who (as by that council it may appear)
believed the bread in the sacrament to be so turned in to flesh, as that it
should have no manner of conjunction at all with the godhead, nor be any other
thing then the flesh of a pure and holy man, wrote after this sort: that we
should thinck that we receive flesh in the sacrament, non vt hominis, vnius ex
nobis, sed vt vere propriam eius factam, qui propter nos filius hominis est
factus and vocatus: that is to say, not as the flesh of a man, one such as we are, but such as was truly made his own propre flesh, who for our sakes was
made and called the son of man. Can there be any plainer proof, to show that
Christ's flesh is truly present in the sacrament, then this M. Iuell? You can
not here shift of this place with Oec^lampadius, and say as he most impudently
did, that this authority is no part of th'actes of the council. For if you so
say, the inscription of the epistle (out of the which these words ar taken*)
sent by the council to Nestorius will overthrow you, and prove you both
liers. The words ar these. Religioso, and amabili consacerdoti Nestorio,
Cyrillus and quicuque sunt apud Ephesi synodum. To the religiouse, and
well-beloved of god our fellow priest Nestorius, Cyrillus and as many as ar
gathered together at the synod of Ephesus. By the which it appears that
there was in the sending of this epistle common consent, and agreement of them
all, which is enough to sober wits, and hone^t judgments to prove, that this
epistle is and so ought of all men to be taken, laufull and authentike.

But what labor I to prove by the ancient fathers this term verily, or which
is all one therewith Really, which in John Calvin him self is to be found in
his co^mentaryes apo^ S. Paul's epistles, where he writes thus: Concludo nobis
realiter in coena dari Christi corpus, 1. Cor. 11.
vt sit animis nostris in cibum salutarem: I conclude (says he) that in the
supper is given to us really the body of Christ, to be to our minds a wholesome
meat.

Thus have you had proved to you M. Iuell, that Christ's body is in the
sacrament truly, and that we may not so much as doubt thereof, that it is
there naturally (for that was Hilarious meaning, when he proved that Christ
dwelled naturally in us) and last of all as Calvin has and you have hard,
really.

Here I fear not a little, least after the manner of children, that whine and
whimper till they have gotten at their mothers hands some trifling thing such
as their childishe appetite lists after, which so soon as they have once
fingred, they straight way cast in the dirt and tra^ple under their feet: You
will play the like part with her, that of right ought to be your mother the
Catholic church of Christ. And whereas to satisfy your wa^ton request, not for
any necessity that she knew you stood in thereof, she shows you by good and
laufull records, and some other, such as your self in times past have
accounted for sound and worthy credit, where the body of Christ has been said
to have been in the sacrament truly, naturally, and really, and myndeth to do
the like in your other terms demanded hereafter: I fear me I say, least when
you have all your asking, you handel them in such homely manner as was said
before, by casting them in to the mire of your distinctions, (as you use them
to subvert the truth, not durty but poisoned) Symbolice, Sacramentaliter,
Spiritualiter, and such other. Which if you do, thincking that to such places
as expressly mention that Christ's flesh and blood is truly present in the
sacrament, may be answered that it is there truly by a figure, by a sign,
Sacramentally or Spiritually: then how ever this seem to be a childishe guise,
yeat will it prove in the end an old knauish practice of Valentinus the
heretic and his mates, who lived almost fourtien hundred years ago. For he
and his (as you are not I am suer ignorant) denied that Christ had any true or
natural body, such as man's nature consists of, granting nevertheless that
he suffered in true flesh on the cross, as you will perhaps (clea^ing to
your distinctions) not deny that he has flesh and blood truly in the
sacrament. Lib. 5. Contrahaereses Vale^ tini and aliorum.
Now even as Irenaeus told them when they so said, Neque enimesset vere
sanguinem, and carnem ha^ens, per quam nos redemit, nisi antiquam plasmationem
Adae inse recapitulasset. Christ should not truly have had blood and flesh by
the which he redeemed us, unless he had renewed in him self the old shape of
Adam: so may we tell you M. Iuell saing that Christ's flesh and blood is truly
in the sacrament, but yet in a figure, in a sign only and spiritually, that
then he is not there at all having true flesh and blou^^, the same that the
scriptures, and fathers say he redeemed us with all, except he be in that old
shape of Adam. And thus much of the terms verily or Really, and naturally or
by nature.

The next of your terms is, substa^tially, Substantially.
after the which manner of being, I prove Christ's body to be present in the
sacrament by Irenaeus. Who after many vain opinions of Valentinus and his
compagnions by him rehearsed, as that Christ had a certain flesh brought with
him from heaven, not true or natural such as ours is, with other like:
infers thereapon these words. Vbi supra.
Sic autem secundum haec videlicet, nec dominus sanguine suo redemit nos, neque
panis quem frangimus, communicatio corporis eius est. Sanguis enim non est,
nisi a venis and carnibus and a reliqua que est secundum hominem substantia,
that is to say. By this means neither did our lord redeem us with his blood,
neither the cup of the sacrament is any part of his blood, nor the bread the
communication of his body. For blood there can not be without there be veins,
flesh, and other substance such as man is made of.

This place of Irenaeus good readers let it not I beseech you belightly run
over. For if any one of the rest prove all M. Iuelles terms and more then he
demands toe, by flesh and veins, this is it. For the better understanding
whereof, An absurdity in Irenaeus time to grant that in ^he Sacrament were
not such blood as yssueth from veins, orsuch flesh as is of the Substance of
man, such I mean in substance not in manner of being.
retain well the cause that moved this ancient father, and learned bishop to
write as he did. The cause was the absurd doctrine of them, that taught that
Christ had no natural flesh such as we have, against whom he reasoned thus:
If he had no true body, of such nature as ours is of, then was not his blood
shed on the cross, then do we not eat his flesh, nor drinck his blood in
the sacrament. For as there could be no blood shed on the Cross, so there can
be none dronck on the altar, except there be veins, flesh, and other
substance of man.

Here have you proved to you M. Iuell, that Christ's flesh and blood is
present in the sacrament, in humain substance, therefore substantially, that
there be veins and flesh such as blood uses to issue forth of,
Substantially, Corporally, Carnally.
therefore corporally, carnally, and real^y. Of the which words of Irenaeus
you may if it please you gather also, that so confessed a truth it was
amongst all men in that age, that Christ's blessed body was truly present in
the sacrament, yea even with the heretics the^ selves, that the true suffering
of the same upon the cross, was holden for no more certain, and undoubted a
truth. And truly if it had not so been, a pooer argument had Irenaeus made, to
induce any man to believe that Christ had a true natural body as we have,
because there is flesh, veins, blood, and the very substance of man in the
sacrament. Whereas he against whom he should so have reasoned, might have
bidden him go prove first the ground that he took for the fundation to build
his reason upon, that is that Christ were present in such sort in the sacrament,
and then to come to him again afterward. But well wist he that the heretics
the^ selves could not deny it, and therefore he so reasoned.

After this manner of reasoning disputed Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria
against Origin. who was in this error that he thought the bodies should be
after their resurrection mortal again, and that after many other years passed
over, they should vanishe away and become nothing. His words ar these: Lib. ^.
Paschal.
Nec vanitatem appellamus substantiam corporalem vt ille astimat, alijs verbis
in M^nichaei scita concidens, Manicheus taught that Christ had no true but a
fantastical body.
ne and Christi corpus su^iaceat vanitati, cuius aedulio saturati ruminamus
quotidieverba dice^tis: Nisi quis comederit car ne^ mea^ etc. that is: neither
do we call corporal substance vanity, as he thincketh, (Orige^ he means)
falling thereby although in other words in to Manichaeus doctrine, lest by
that means Christ's body might be subject to vanity with the food whereof
being filled, we chewe daily the words of Christ saing except you eat my
flesh etc. What had here Theophilus meant to object to Origin, that by this
opinion of his it would follow, that Christ's body which we receive and eat in
the sacrament, should vanish away and become vain, if it had been there not in
substance, but in a figure or baresigne? If he had not been there corporally;
and substa^tially, to what purpose (seeing he spoke of corporal substance)
mencyoned he his body in the sacrament, and not rather the same being in
heaven, which no heretic could have denied? Truly we can no less do but
thinck, that both for his great learning and wisdom he would so have done, had
he not been fully persuaded that the same body which is in heaven is in the
same substance, the same truth of nature, and in the same moment in the
blessed sacrament of the altar.

Eusebius Emissenus when he taught the people that the visible creatures of
bread, Homil. 5. de paschate
and wine ar turned in to the substance of Christ's body and blood said he not
that Christ's body is in the sacrament substantially? Or Chrysostom, when he
taught the people, Que^admodum si caeraigni adhibita illi assimilatur, Homil in
Encenijs.
nihil substa^tiae remanet, nihil superfluit: Sic and hic puta mysteria consumi
corporis substantia. Even as wax if it be cast in to the fire, The mysteries he
calls the bread and wine
becomes like to the fire, nothing of the substance remains nothing
abundeth: even so thinck that here (in the sacrament) the mysteries ar consumed
with the substance of Christ's body: was his meaning thinck we any other?

I pass over here the testimonies for this matter that ^ight be brought out of
the works of that noble bishop Cirillus Bishop of Alexandri^^: In Io^^. lib.
10. cap. 13. Lib. 11. cap. 27.
who in sundry places there of absteineth not from thiese terms, corporaliter,
substantialiter, carnaliter, corporally, substantially, carnally, and diverse
other, because I hope these which already have been alleged shall be
sufficient. Or if this suffice not, then beseech I you M. Iuell and your
companions to draw us out in writing a form of words to prove that Christ's
body and blood ar present int the sacrament: A reasonable request to M. Iuell
and his fellows.
such as your selves will promise if we be hable to prove by the scriptures,
fathers or councels, to stand to simply, without adding thereto gloses,
distinctions or interpretacions.

When I minded here to have knyt up this knot, behold it came to my
remembrance, that I had yet answered nothing to the foolish, and unsavory
reasons of your aduocat (who so ever he be) who more stoutely then wisely,
bears out even to the hard hedge, this devilish doctrine of yours. First
forsooth he bears us in hand, that Christ when he said. This is my body, the
same which shall be betrayed for you, meant not that we should receive his very
true natural and fleshly body, but using a figure called Metonymia, gave the
name of his body to the sign, that is to the bread. And this interpretation
he says may be proved by a nombre of examples out of the canonical
scriptures, as in one place where circuncision was called a covenant, being in
deed but a sign and testimony thereof, in an other the paschall lamb called
the passover, Christ him self a vine, a rock, with such like.

But here note I beseech you good readers, what a strange kind of reasoning
this is. In the scriptures is used a figurative kind of speech in one, two,
three, four, or mo places. Ergo Christ in that place where he instituted the
sacrament is to be understand by a figure. Or thus: the scriptures speak
figuratiuelie in some places. Ergo in all, and no where otherwise. This kind
of Sophistication in arguing, is the old shift of the wicked Arrians, who like
as this man takes away now from the blessed sacrament the very body and
blood of Christ, by expounding his plain words by a figure, under color of
some other places where such allegories must needs have place, and were no
otherwise to be taken: so did they take from Christ's blessed parson his
omnipotent godhead, and would not grant him to be equal with almighty god
his father, but the plain textes of scripture which proved his godhead they
expounded wrong and frowardlie, not only by some other textes that seemed to
say otherwise, but also as this man does now, by some allegories, affirming
that he was called god, Exodus 7.
and the son of god in the scripture, by such manner of speaking as the
scripture for some property calls certain other persons gods, and gods
sons in other places: as where god said to Moses I shall make the Pharao his
god, Exodus 22.
and in an other place. Thowe shall not backbite or sclaunder thy gods. And
where he has, I have said that you be gods, and the sons of the high
god all of you. Psalm. 81.
But surely if this manner of reasoning may be allowed for good, that because
of allegories used in some places, every man may at his pleasure draw every
place to a figure, we shall shortly bring the scripture from a fair flat
figure I fear me, to a sorry simple cipher. Yea says he, if we had not these
examples with a great nombre mo in the holy scripture to justify our manner
of interpretation, yeat the very words which the spirit of god by singulier
providence has used in the Evangelist and S. Paul, do lead us unto this
sense rather then unto that that you have devised. For in the second part of
the sacrament whereas Mathewe and Marc say. This is my blood of the new
testament: that Luke and Paul utter in this manner. This is the new testament
in my blood. Which can not be otherwise understand, but that the sacrament is a
testimony or pledge of his last will, and gift of our salvation confirmed by
his most pretiouse blood. Wherefore if you say never so often times with
Matthew and Marc This is my body: This is my blood. We will repete as often
with Luke and Paul who were led with the same spirit. This is the new
testament in my body, and blood.

Hitherto have reached the words of your friend M. Iuell. Who if he repete
never so often the words of Luke and Paul, shall spend but his wind in
wast, and gain when all is doe^ not so much as one ynche, toward the
furderance of his and your heresy in this point. The scripture belied by the
heretic.
For if he repete their sainges truly, theie vary in words from the other
two, but in the second part of the sacrament, and say but only: This is the
new testament in my blood* and then can he no^ wot ye well as here he falselie
does, repete (which theie never said) This is the new testament in my body
and blood, and so add to the holy scripture the word, ^odie. And then the
case standing thus, that all four agree in the first part of this sacrament
and call it Christ's body, and two in the later calling it his blood, and all,
so far as no one denies it to be his blood: a man may ask of your friend,
why he should rather suck out a figure in those words of the first part
which all four agree upon, only because in the second part two do speak
figuratiuelie, then so to interpret that figurative speech of those two used
in the cup, as to give place to the literal sense by two in the second part
and all in the first, so firmly and by so full consent agreed and arrested
upon.

But of this he (as it seems) him self being notignorant, if the matter
should be by him left thus raw, that there is no man so evil advised but he
had rather under stand two by four, then so many by two: he labors
marvelously to prove, that the old writers have so understand those words
of Christ as he does.

To be short we deny not nor ever did, that the old fathers have some times
upon considerations called this sacrament a figure, a sign, a similitude, an
example: but never in that sense we say, to take away the verity of his
blessed body therein. For as it were but a homely piece of logic to say that
Christ were no true man, because S. Paul says that he was made in
similitudinem hominu^, Philipp. Cap. 2.
after the likeness of men (as by occasion of that text and other, Marcion and
Appolinaris the heretics did as witness Tertullian and S. Ambrose): lib. 5.
contra Marcio^ cap. penult. Epist. 47.
or to reason that he were not of the same substance with god his father and
very god him self, with Arrius and his mates, because the same S. Paul
calls him the image of god and figure of his fathers subtance: Colloss. 1.
Hebre. 1.
so truly to reason in the sacrament, that because it is called a figure, a
similitude, a representation, that therefore it is not his true body is an
argument most false and faulty. And all were it so that we had not these places
of the scripture and the fathers manner of speaking and many other, How the
sacramen^ is called a figure of Christian bod^e.
which plainly teach us that the self same thing may be a figure of it
self (as the body of Christ in the sacrament invisibly offered on the altar,
is a figure of the same visiblie offered on the cross): yet of fine force
(except we would discredit a great part of the ancient writers as though
they had written contrary to them selves) should we have been driven to have
found out this answer. Seeing of them all that call it in one place a figure,
it will be hard to bring forth any that calls it not in diverse other the
verity and thing it self.

As for his similitude fetched from the court, well may it be fine and he
please him self therewith: but other men I suppose such as have more learned
then deintie ears, he should have pleased a great deal better, if although
in sluttishe eloquence, yet plainly and truly he had vttred better sense.
For I for my part, (and therein I thinck I may be bold to measure other by
my self) had rather drink a cup of holsom beer in a sluttishe cup, then a
draught of poisoned wine in a fine golden goblet. But I pray you (for you I am
suer know him) when you happen upon him next, ask of him how he is able to
prove the like change in the parchement of his lettres patentes, as has been
proved to be in the bread and wine in the sacrament. It has been showed out
of the holy martyr S. Ciprian, that this bread is changed not in the
outewarde shape but in the inward nature, that by that change it is made
flesh. It has been proved by Eusebius Emissenus and holy S. Ambrose, that
before the words of consecration, there is the substance of bread and wine,
but after those words the body and blood of Christ. The same has been
sufficiently proved by diverse other. Let him now if he can, find one other
so very a dizzard as him self, that will say the nature of the parchement of
his lettres patentes, to be changed in to earth, grass, wood, waters, worth
by the year a thousand pound.

If there had been no other change in this bread but that it is now as he
says made of common and profane, holy and consecrate, never would
Chrisostom have exhorted us to worship that body on the altar, Homil. 24 in.
1. Cor. 10.
which the wise men worshipped in the mangier: Christ's body worshipped in
earth not in heaven only M. Iuell.
never would S. Austen have said that theie sin which worship it not.

By this may it appear, that your friend is he M. Iuell that has plaide the
lourdeine with his master, and therefore well worthy the whip. For where he
had provided for his geastes a most preciouse and costly feast, this honest
companion steals all away, In psalm. ^8.
and leaves them instead thereof a bare piece of bred. And thus much to
satisfy your challenge in this point. Now to the next article which is of the
use of the Sacrament under one kind.

THAT WITHIN THE FIRST SIX HUNDRED YEARS AFTER CHRIST THE Communion was
ministered under one kind.
EVen as in the controversy of the popes supremacy you deny M. Iuell, that
there ought to be any other head over the church here militant in earth then
Christ him self, which is the chief, not as though you knew not right well
that government for the appeasing of schisms and repressing of heresies to be
the best: or as though if your god John Calvin had had that authority over all
the world were it twice as large again as it is, you would have found any
fault therewithal, and not have thought him able to rule the same well
enough, but only of a cancred hatred that you bear to the Catholic church
sometimes your mother, a vain pleasure that you take to thwart her in her
doings, and last of all because that government serves not your turn: as you
find fault with private masses, not as though you allowed any, but only to
banishe from the fathers sight if it might be the laufull enheritor, and to set
up the misbegotten bastard, to abolishe and utterly extinguishe the sacrifice
of the new testament, which that crafty wily serpent forsawe so long before,
if he were once able to quench that burning charity and earnest desire of
often receiving the blessed body and blood of Christ, which then was so
commonly amongst christian men in use, and he alas has now obtained, he
should in time to come by his wicked members be with the more ease able to
bring to pass: even so in this present controversy fares it with your
doings. When all the world may see, that you which charge us so hotely with
no less then that great and heinouse crime of sacrilege, as of robbing the
lay people of Christ's blood in the communion (which is notwithstanding an
impudent lie) rob not only them but the clergy also (except you had rather
call it by an honester name of exchange) both of Christ's body and blood toe.
The which thing leaving to the indifferent reader by him at his laisure more
earnestly to be weighed, I shall now prove unto you that within the first six
hundred years after Christ, the sacrament of the altar was ministered under
one kind.

But here I must warn you of this one thing before hand, that I mean in
this article and the next to give you but only a taste of our proufes, not a
full bytte as in the two first I have. Which I pray you not to impute to want
either of matter or good will, but only to this, that when I was thus far
entered in this simple treatise it was given me by a frinde to understand, that
as well in this point as in all the reast by you challenged, you have of late by
a notable learned man been so applied with stoare of wholesome viandes, that
the wiser ^orte take you to be rather in such terms, as you care more how to
digest that which you have already received, then that you once think of
craving any more. Bear with me therefore if I bear with your weak stomach.
Now to the matter.

You say that to ministre the communion to the laity under one kind is an
act unlawful, contrary to Christ's ordinance, and a thing in the primitive
church never used or hard of. But for proof of the contrary I reason thus.
Christ our savior ministered this sacrament under the only kind of bread:
his apostles practiced the use thereof after the same manner: The church
receuing it from them has continued the same usage. Therefore it is laufull
which we defend and blamed of our adversaries without cause.

That Christ first ministered this sacrament under one kind, Christ ministered
the sacrament under one kind.
it appears by the history of the ghospel, where is mentioned how that our
savior in the way between Jerusalem and Emaus, happening upon two of his
disciples entered with them in to a certain house, Luc. 24.
where he ministered to them the sacrament under that one kind of bread. That
this was the sacrament and not common bread, these words of the evangelist:
Benedixit ac fregit and porrigebat illis, he blessed it, he brake it, and he
delivered it to them, do well prove. Seeing that those words he blessed and
brake it, ar in no place of the scripture to be found, applied by Christ or
his apostles to profane or common bread: next for that the effect wrought by
that bread, that was the opening of their eyes, does give us also to
understand that it was his blessed body and no other thing.

To these reasons, I may here add the authority of S. Austen, Chrysostom,
Beda and Theophilactus, all four agreing that this was the blessed sacrament,
and not as the adversaries would have it common or profane bread. S. Austens
words ar these: Lib. 3. de consens. Evangelist. Cap. 25.
Non autem incongruen^er accipimus hoc impedimentu^ in oculis eoru^ a Satana
fuisse factum. etc. that is to say: We do not verily take it amiss to
think that this miste was cast before their eyes by Satan that they should
not know Jesus, but yeat even suffered by Christ so to do, until they had
received the sacrament of bread, that being thereby made partakers of the
unity of his body, the let or impediment of the enemy the devil being
removed and taken away, they might know Christ.

Hitherto S. Austen, with whom speaking incidently of this bread, the virtue
and holiness thereof, agrees that learned bishop Chrisostom, in an homely
that he writes upon the.7. chapitre of S. Mathewe in this wise. Homil. 17.
Si au^t tale esset quod de manu sacerdotis accipitur, quale est quod in mensa
manducatur. etc. If it were such which is received at the priests hands, as
the bread which is eaten at the table, every man would receive it from the
table, and no man at the priests hands. Therefore our lord by the way did
not only bless the bread, but he gave it also from his own hands to
Cleophas and his companion. And Paul as he sailed, did not only bless the
bread, but he delivered it also to Luke and the other disciples. And within a
few words after he adds. This bread is holiness it self and makes holy
the receiuor thereof.

By the testimony of thiese two notable pillars of the Grieke and Latin
church it appears, how this history of the gospel is to be understand,
not of common bread but of the blessed sacrament, and so withal that Christ
the author of this sacrament ministered the same under one kind, which our
adversaries so stoutely deny, and you especially amongst the rest with terms
most odiouse, against the whole council of Constance M. Iuell.

That the apostles did the like, and practiced the same in such wise as Christ
their master did before, thereof if there be any man that doubts, him send
I to S. Luke: in whom he shall find that as many as received the apostles
doctrine, Act. ^.
Eran^ perseuera^tes in doctrina apost^loru^ and co^municatione fractionis
panis and orationibus: were continuing in the doctrine of the apostles, the
communion of breaking of bread and prayers. In which words you can
understand M. Iuell no other bread then the sacramental bread, if you
pondre reverently the text. For truly the writer of that history, making there
mention of such spiritual exercises as the faithefull spen^ their time in, it
is not likely that between the doctrine of the apostles which he remembered in
the first place, and their paiers which he placed in the last, he would ever
have couched the breaking of profane bread in the midst. Act. 20.
Of this breaking of bread have we also mention in an other place where it is
said. Vna autem sabba^i cum conuenissemus ad frangendum panem. The morrow after
the Saboth day when we came together to break bread.

What remains now M. Iuell, seeing that the scriptures bear so manifestly
wit^esse of the communion ministered first by Christ, and after by his apostles
under the kind of bread, but that either you yealde and join with us, or
flee to your old and last refuge the help of some favorable figure, as before
you Melanchton being sore pressed with these auctorities was forced to do.
This figure for soothe is you say Syne^doche, by which S. Luke would by naming
the one part of this sacrament, signify the whole. But truly, whereas even in
them that take in hand to write profane histories, such figures ar nothing
commendable, where the truth ought wholly and truly without concealing or
dissembling any part thereof to be expressed, but that the same law ought of
all other especially in holy histories, and those that co^teine the acts and
doings of Christ him self, inuiolably to be observed, there is no man I
think that douteth. And yeat of all other if any of the Evangelists would so
have written, of them all S. Luke was most unlikely, as the man who by the
common veredict of the learned, was not of his words scarce or pinching, but
plentiful and liberal. Or if he would needs use figures where was no need,
yeat ought every good man to think that the holy ghost the director of his
pen (to whom being god and having all things present before his eyes, this
troubelouse hurliburly that should afterward happen in the church about the
receiving of this sacrament either in one kind alone or both together could
not be unknown): would so have provided, that so little a word whereby so
great troubles might be raised, should not by any figure in this place, in
this high mystery, in this pretiouse jewel, where all things ought most
perspicuously to be expressed, have been omitted. And thus much touching the
apostles ministering of this sacrament.

Now that the church long after the apostles continued the same manner, Laica
communio.
what better proof can you have, then may be deduced from that word so well
known to the fathers, so frequent and common in the old general councelles,
Lib. 4. epist. ^.
Laica communio, the lay man's communion? Of this communion of the lay men
makes mention the blessed martyr S. Cyprian in an epistle written by him to
Antonianus, where he tells of one Trophimus that having been a bishop and an
heretic, was then returned from his heresies and become a catholic, and
received thereapon by him in to the church and admitted also to the communion,
but so that he should communicate vt laicus non vt sacerdos, as the lay man
uses to do not as the priest. Ca^. 2.
Of this communion read we, Can. 50.
first in the council holden at Sardica under Julius then pope, above 12.
hundred years sense, next in the counsel kept at Agatha in France in the
year of our lord. 430. and in diverse other which might be here alleged.

What can we here think M. Iuell, but that there was a difference in the lay
man's communion and the priests? And what other difference can you give then
this, that the one received both the kinds the other but one? For of all
other it is most ridiculouse, that for answer hereunto you ar wont to
allege, that the priests used to receive the sacrament in a place of the
church appointed therefore by them selves alone, and the laytie in some other
place a part also, and that hereof rose the word Laica communio. For
admitting this to be true, how does yet the place make a difference in the
communion? Between his dinner that sits at the upper end of a table and his
that is placed at the neither, if there be the same meats, like courses of
service, semblable art of cookery, can you put any difference. Beside this,
the ancient council of Sardica makes in such wise mention of the lay man's
communion, that the words will in no wise admit your wrangling interpretation.
For there in the second canon is it decreed against such bishops as
changing their bishoprikes be translated to other, that they shall be excluded
from ever receiving the communion, ita vt nec Laicam in fine communionem talis
accipiat, so excluded, that such a one shall not be admitted so much as to the
lay man's communion, no not in the end of his life, not at the hour of his
death.

Thus have we here plain evidence, that the lay man's communion is not to be
understand of difference of places in the church: whereas the cano^ of this
council has, that at the hour of his death he shall not be admitted
thereunto. At which time every man will I suppose, think him to be at home in
his chamber, not out of his house at the church.

After this sort appears it by S. Austen that his mother Monica received
this sacrament. Lib. 9. Confess.
When as he says, being on witsonday refresshed with that bread that came
down from heaven, she continued by the space of a whole day and a night
without all corporal food.

Thus much seemed he also to signify to us in an other place, Epist. 180
where he has these words. Si aute^ ministri adsint, pro viribus quas eis
dominus subministrat omnibus subuenitur: alij baptiza^tur, alij reco^ciliantur,
nulli dominici corporis co^muni one fraudantur. that is to sai. If the
ministres be present, according to the strength that god has given the^ all
men ar helped: some ar baptized, other some ar reconciled, none ar deceived of
the communion of our lords body.

Much more might here be said touching this point were it not that I am loathe
to trouble you with the often repeating thereof, that I fear me you ar sorry to
have hard so much as once. And therefore if this sati^fie you not, for the rest
I remitte you to that learned work of late set forth at Lo^ain^, wherein
you have I doubt not already for this matter found, such stoare of
testimonies, such weight of auctorities, as in your own judgment you may
have cause to think, that you hold by the worst end of the staff. Your
objections also against the catholic faith in this article, because they arre
there with like dexterity answered and soluted, I here pass over in silence.
One I except amongst the rest, which because you mentioned it not in your
sermon (where unto the author without wandering any farther kept him self) he
also in his book speaks not of. Theophil. Alexandr. alleage^ by M. Iuell.
The place that you bring against us, is you say out of Theophilus
Alexandrinus, and is alleged by you without cotation after this sort. Si
Christus mortuus fuisset pro diabolo non negaretur illi poculum sanguinis. If
Christ had died for the devil the cup of the blood should not have been
denied him.

Here M. Iuell good faith and true dealing would, that you should have coted
to us this place. But I fear me it will so fall out in the end, that in all
Theophilus worckes there shall no such place be found. True it is that these
words we find in him. Si enim and pro demonibus crucifigitur vt nouorum
dogmatum assertor affirmat, quod erit priuilegium, aut que ratio vt soli
homines corporieius sanguinique co^municent, and non demones quoque pro quibus
in passione sanguinem suum (...)? That is to say: for if Christ were crucified
(as this (...) of new doctrine affirms) for the diuelles also, what
priuileage have men or what reason should there be, why they only should be
partakers of his body and blood, and not the diuelles also for whom in his
passion he should have shed his blood? If this be the place that you mean, why
allege you it so falsely, and corrupt both the authors words and mind? If
this be not it, then show us where we shall find it. which if you could do
then should you be answered in this wise: that in Theophilus time the use of
this sacrament was indifferent, to be received (as the devotion of the receiuor
thereof served him) either under both the kinds or one alone, as a thing by
Christ so left, and the liberty whereof the church directed by the holy ghost,
had not as then in any wise restreined. So that at those days the priest had
done him open wrong, to whom desiring both the kinds he would have given
but only one: yea if it had been the devil that he had denied it to, if
Christ had died for the devil.

But now I pray you apply this testimony to the present state of the church
which now is, and you shall see how handsomely it fitteth you? Theophilus
Alexandrinus when the church had as yet not restreined the use of this
sacrament touching the lay people to one kind, was of the mind that in this
case to deny to the devil (if Christ had died for him) the cup, had been a
disordre: Therefore now that the church has decreed that they shall
communicate under only one, he is also of the same mind. Thus must you reason
if you deal truly, which if you do, how little this place makes for your
purpose a mean wit will be easily able to judge.

Thus much touching this present controversy: now to the next which is (as by
our adversaries it is termed) of private Mass.

THAT THERE WAS MASS SAID WITHIN THE FIRST SIX HUNDRED YEARS, ALTHOUGH
THERE WERE none that did receive with the priest.
Our lord be thancked therefore, truth which well may be for the time
pressed, but never shall be vanquished, has at the length with much a do gotten
of her enemies maugre their heads, the confession of that which hitherto they
have all so stoutely denied. For now relinquishing and giving over their old
plea, that the Mass is a new invention, the name strange, and to the ancient
doctors unknown, they flee to an other shyft (as here by their common
proctour M. Iuell, you may good readers perceive) and say, that there was no
private Mass in all the whole world, In His sermon folio. 35.
for the space of six hundred years or more after the apostles time.

Here M. Iuell, forasmuch as this term, private, which by reason of the
equivocation that it has, might have brought us into some doubt how you had
understand it, is by you expounded in diverse places of your sermon, to be
taken for the priests sole, or alone receiving of the ^acrament without
company, and so as you take it, as this word private is contrary to public,
or common to many: And you herein stick not scrupulously in the other
significations thereof, as some of your fellows do, that is, that that Mass
is no less private which is said in private men's houses out of the church,
or which is done especially for some one man or woman, Cap. 32. Lib. 8.
but seem honestly to confess, that S. Austen mencioneth these two kind of
masses: the first in his books de ciuitate Dei, where he reports that a
pri^st of his diocese said Mass in a ferme or house of the country troubled
with evil sprites, Euel Sprites and heretics hate the Mass alike.
who immediately thereapon (none otherwise the^ do the heretics of our time)
avoided the place, and were no more hard of. Where we might also stand upon
this till the contrary were proved, that the priest received then alone. For by
the place it appears not of any that received with him. The second, in his
books of confessions. Where he tells us that he offered for his mother after
her deceasse, Lib. 9. Cap. 12.
sacrificiu^ praetijnostri, the sacrifice of our ransom. Forasmuch I say as
you seem not to pitche in these last points, I shall assaye to satisfy you in
the first, and then after to answer such objections as you make for the
fortifieng of your part.

You say that within the first six hundred years after the apostles and more,
there was no Mass said in the church, unless there were some that did
receive with the priest. Against this I reason thus. Chrysostom lived within
the space of four hundred years after the apostles time; but Chrysostom and
the priests in his time said Mass when none did communicate, ergo to you M.
Iuell, within the first six hundred years after the apostles time, there was
private mass in the church although there were none to receive with the priest.
That this learned doctor with other priests said Mass when none did
communicate, (for that I am suer you will deny) by this complaint of his
vttred in these words, it may most evidently appear. Ho^il. 3. in epist.
(...) Ephesians.
Frustra^^betur quotidiana obla^io, frustra (...) ad altar. Nemo est qui
communicate. the daily offering is had in vain: we stand at the altar in vain.
There is none that receives with us. If there were daily oblation, yea when
none received, why bear you us in hand M. Iuell that for that long space of
six hundred years, the priest might never offer the same without company to
communicate with him? If that were true, how did Chrysostom and the other
priests of Antioche offer yt, and that daily (that you may understand a
necessity that enforced them thereto) whether the people came or no? If they
received not them selves, how could he have said that there was none that did
receive with them?

But here you will ask me perhapps, The true meaning of Chrisostomes place.
how I dare allege this place, which says that the oblation was had in vain
because there was none to communicate. To this I answer (that being first
taken for granted which in no wise you can deny, that is, that daily this
oblatio^ was had whether any came or no) that this holy doctor in this place
is not to be understand, as though simply he meant the oblation to be in vain,
but in a respect, forasmuch as they came not who were looked for to have been
partakers thereof, concerning this expectation it was had in vain, and the
priests stood in their churches not at the table, but at the altar in vain.
And that this was the very* meaning of Chrisostomes words, and not as you
fal^lie surmise, there needs no other reason to persuade any reasonable man,
then the learning, the virtue, and great wisedom^ of the man him self. For if
the sacrifice had been offered by him in vain, so often as there was none to be
partaker thereof with him, what a heynouse act had this been of him, especially
standing at liberty without any more necessity to offer, the^ the lay man
has to receive, if it were true that you and your compani affirm? Shall we
not rather thinck if he had so meant, that he would utterly have absteined,
before he would by celebrating and receiving, practice the abuse of so
preciouse a jewel? Would he not rather when he came to the altar, have sent
the people away with a dry communion, when he saw none ready to receive?
Would he not at the least have been as circumspect in procuring warning to be
given to him by them that were disposed to receive, (if offering without
communicants he should have offered in vain) as you and yours, our new
Rabbis, ar about your apishe communion? No, no, Let no man thinck but that he
was well ware, that to offer the body and blood of Christ in vain, had bin a
fault nothing inferior to the receiving of it unworthily, whereu^to he was not
ignorant that S. Paul threateneth damnation. If he would give his own life as
he said him self, ^. Corin. 11.
before he would give our lords body to an unworthy man, Homil. 83. In Math.
and that he would have his blood shedd out of his body, rather then he would
give to the unworthy our lords blood, we may easily conjecture how hardly he
would have bin brought to have offered the same in vain.

To this testimony of Chrisostom shall I add one more, and so after come to
those objections which you bring for the maintenance of the contrary. Leontius
a bishop of the Grieke church, writing almost a thousand years sense the life
of that virtuous Patriarch of Alexandria, John the almoisner or almoise geuer
(for that name obtained he for his charity toward the pooer) reports
amongst other things of him, how that he being on a certain time at Mass,
perceiving after the reading of the gospel, that the people went out of the
church and fell to talking and babbling in the churcheyarde: went also out of
the church after them and spoke to them being all amassed in this wise. Filioli
vbi oues illic and pastor: aut intrate intro and ingrediemur: aut manete hic,
and ego quo que manebo. Ego propter vos descendo in sancta^ ecclesiam, nam
poteram facere mihi Missam in Episcopio. Children (that is to say) where the
sheep ar there is the shepherde: either therefore get you into the church and
we will go to gether: or bide you still here and I will tarry with you. It is
for your sakes that I come to the holy church, for to my self could I have
said Mass in my house at home.

Here I trust you will at the length yealde and grant M. Iuell, that private
Masses were laufull and in use in the primitive church. For first that the
Mass here spoken of was private, the word mihi missam facere, say or
ce^ebrate Mass to my self, does well declare. He said not I might say Mass
to my frindes, to my kinsfolckes, to my household servants but mihi, to mine
own self. And when you hear him s^ie that he might do it, I trust you
think it was not unlawful. But now I come to your objections against the
priests sole or alone receiving of the sacrament.

After you have taken your pleasure in triumphing over our poverty (as you
thinck) you bring forth your store. M. Iuelles proufes against Private Mass
examined.
And because you will make the matter sure and out of all doubt, you use our
own friend as a witness against us, the Mass book forsothe. where you say
the priest according to the direction of that book, turning him self to the
people, says: Dominus vobiscum, item, Oremus. Orate pro me fratres and
sorores, what then M. Iuell? Ergo what so ever prai^rs be used about the
ministracio^ of the sacrament ought to be the common requests of all the
people? What infer you hereapon? Ergo the priest may not say Mass without
he have some to communicate with him. That ergo is false M. Iuell, and not
truly deduced out of the premises. But I cry you mercy this is you say but
by the way, before you enter into the matter. Here you did but dribb and
flurt: your other arrows taken out of the same quiver. Accipite, edite.
Habete vinculum charitatis, vt apti sitis sacrosanctis misteri^s, that is,
take, eat: have ye the band of charity, that ye may be mete for the holy
mysteries. And last of all other, those words that are spoken by the priest
after the Agnus dei, Haec sacrosancta commixtio etc. This holy commixtion and
consecration of the body and blood of our lord Jesus Christ, be unto you and
to all that receive it health of body and soul: these ar they that pay home,
and cleave as a man would say the very face of the white.

I shall now rehearse first your words, as in your sermon printed they are to
be seen, that all men may understand how handsomely my L. of Salesburie can
play hi^k scornersparte: and then after shape thereto such an answer, as I
trust shall to all reasonable men be sufficient. Moreover the priest by the
mass book is taught to say, Iuell.
accipite, edite. Take ye, eat ye. and habete vinculum charitatis etc. that
is, Have ye the band of charity that ye may be mete for the ho^e mysteries.
And to whom shall we think the priest speaks these words? It were a
vain thing for him in the open congregation to speak to him self, and
specially in the plural number: yet were it a great deal more vain for him
to speak the same words to the bread and wine, and to say to them: Take
ye, eat ye, or have ye the band of charity, that ye may be me^e for the holy
mysteries. Therefore it is evident that these words should be spoken to the
people.

I have good hope M. Iuell, both by these testimonies alleged out of the
Mass book so far from the purpose, and also by your challenge wherein you
promise being overcome to yield, that you will at the length do as honest
soldiers pressed against their minds to serve in an evil cause ar wont to
do, that is, when it comes to the push, either cast away their weapons, and
suffer them selves to be taken, or keeping them in their hands fight very
weaklie. For suerlie M. Iuell if this be not your meaning (bear with me if I
tell you as the truth is and as I believe) it must needs be a great deal
worse, and such as declares inuinciblie to the world your cankred stomach,
and maliciouse mind toward your mother the catholic church. For standing
the case so, as you mean nothing less, then that good which I conceive of
you: what true dealing is this of youres (to prove that no Mass may be said
without there be company to receive with the priest) to allege these words,
Take, eat, as spoken by the priest) to the people? Whereas your own
conscience, if you have any, tells you I dare say, that they are a part of
other words going before, cut by you from the rest to serve your scoffing
spirit: and that they are not, nor ever were any more taken for the priests
own words, then ar those that immediately follow, This is my body. And as
you would I nothing doubt laughe at his simplicity, that hearing the priest
say. This is my body, would take the consecrated host to be the priests
body, because he repeteth the same words at the altar that Christ spoke at
his supper: So persuade your self that other men cease not to lament from the
bottom of their hearts, to se you not of simplicity, but of malice willfullie
to do the like. But I shall here wholly allege the words as they are in the
canon of the Mass, that you may if it be possible, be delivered of that
great scruple that so troubles your mind, whether those words, Take, eat,
should be spoken by the priest to him self in false latin, which you thinck
were to great an ouersighte, or to the bread and wine, which you think (and I
would you never might thinck worse) were a far greater. The words ar these.
Qui pridie quam pateretu^ etc. who the day before that he suffered, took bread
in to his holy and venerable hands, and lifting up his eyes into heaven to
the o god his father almighty, giving to the thanckes, blessed, brake, and
gave it to his disciples saying: Take, eat, this is my body. By these words
if you do not, every man I trust else does most manifestly perceive, that
these are not the priests words, and therefore neither spoken to him self,
neither yet to the bread or wine. But because I doubt not but you ar werie to
hear so much of your own folly, therefore I will dwell no longer in the
aggravating of that, which as in the eyes of all men is brimme enough, so would
I to god that you had never given occasion to me or to any other, once to have
mentioned it.

To your other objection that you make of these words habete vinculum
charitatis, have you the band of peace that you may be mete for the holy
mysteries: I answer, that if there be any such place in the mass book, as
having sought therefore I find none such, that such words first forbid not
the priest to say mass, if none be disposed to communicate with him, then
that they do not necessarily provoke the people to the sacramental receiving,
but may well be understand of the spiritual communicating with the priest in
those holy mysteries, by earnest meditacion of Christ's death and passion, the
which the more effectually to do they are exhorted to be one with an other in
love and charity. And thus understand we that other place where the priest
after the Agnus prays, that that holy commixtion of Christ's body and
blood may be both to him and to all that receive it, health of body and
soul. For we say, that as many as being present at the mass do heartily
join with the priest in the sweet remembrance of Christ's bitter death and
passion, do all receive with the priest Christ's body and blood, they
spirituallie, and he corporally. And this call we a true communion.

But what if now in every leaf of the mass book M. Iuell you had found
exhortacions to the people to communicate? Verily except you had found withal
that unless they would the priest should not, all would not help: yea it
would hinder you thus much, that where as you and your mates have borne the
world in hand, that the clergy has kept the laity from communicating, now
it would appear by this, that the priest looks for them, and their own
defaulte keeps them away.

Well, if the mass book have failed you M. Iuell, as it was never other like
but that it would, you have yet I dare say, other witnesses. Yea verily, you
vau^te to have the help of the canons of the apostles, of Clemens, of
Dionisius, of Calixtus, of Justinius, of Leo, of Chrysostom, of S. Gregory,
yea of S. Paul, and of Christ him self. Which be suerly good witnesses and
such as in law may be called omni exception^ maiores, and for the better
abeling of the^ of whose credit might most be doubted: your self have said
so much as no man I trow can say more. M. Iuell confesses the doctors to be
good grounds to build upon.
For you call the^ good growndes to build upon. So that now there remains no
more but to consider how they prove your intent. The which that I may the
better do, I shall allege your own words as they are in your sermon touching
this matter to be found, that so the reader may be the more able to judge, In
the second answer to d. Coals letters.
whether your evidence be to the issue or no.

In the.xxxv. leaf of your said sermon, you have these words. Iuell.
And I trust you shall clearlie see, that for so long time (six hundred years
after Christ) there was no private mass in the catholic church, in any
country or coast thoroughe ovvt the world.

A hard matter is it M. Iuell that you take upon you to prove, for it is a
negative so general, that to prove it is a thing impossible. To prove that
there is no Mass said (imagine with your self) in all London how hard a
matter it were. You are not able for your life to prove, that there is no mass
said in the diocese, whereof you call your self bishopp. For how should you
prove it being denied but by witnesses? how is it possible to have witnesses to
depose for every church, for every corner in every church, every town, every
house in every town, every chamber and secret place in every house, not for
once in the week, but for every day, not for every day but for every hour
of the day, all which he must do that will conclude a necessary proof. And
yet all this have you M. Iuell undertaken to prove, not in the city of London,
or diocese of Salesburie, but in all England, France, Spain, Scotland,
Portugal, Denmarck, Germany, Italy, amongst the Indians, the Mauritania^s,
the Egyptians, the Persians, the Arabians, the Armenians, the Grecians, or in
any other place or coast thoroughout the whole world: not that there was no
private mass in some one of these places, but in never a one of them, in never
a town of al those countries, in never a house of all those towns, in never a
place were it never so secret of all those houses, not for one, two, or three
years, but for the continual space of six hundred. A greater matter I
confess, then if you had stood to the law you could peradventure have been
constreined to have done: but seeing you trust so much to your self, let us
hear how you prove it. For (say you) All the vvriters that were within the
compass of that time, Iuell.
have left behind them witness sufficient of a communion, but not one of
them all could ever tell us of any private mass.

Here if a man should desire of you, good sir, a catalog of all such writers as
wrote within the first six hundred years, I thinck for all your great bragges
you would turn him over to your friend Gesnerus: where I am sure he were like
to find many a work named, that neither he nor you, nor any man else a live
ever saw yet, and I thinck and fear it to (the more is the pity) I may add
no man hereafter shall see. But let this pass, you keep not your quarters so
close, but that a man may r^ache you a rapp when he will. If one should ask
you whether you have but ^ene all those writers that being extant and to be
seen, wrote within the compass of the first six hundred years: I thinck such
a question would gravel you. But if he should go farther and conjure you
upon your false faith truly to answer him, of those few that you have
seen, how much you left behind in them that you never read: Esopes dawe
never was cause of so great laughter to her other fellows being spoiled of
her borrowed feathers, as you would bring shame to your companions, when your
counterfeite lions skin being plucked over your ears, and your lofty looks
and great bragges brought to naught, you should appear to the world in
your simple asses carcas. But let this be granted to your spirit of
arrogancy, that you may say frelie that you have seen all the writers, which
no man else alive has done: let it be a figure of rethorick that you have
ransacked every corner in their worckes, who have not read the twentieth part
thereof, and of that little which you have read, have not borne away perhapps
the hundredth. Yet all this I say being granted, what logike is this of youres
to reason after this sort? All these holy doctors have given us perfect
evidence of a communion, without mention making of any private mass, Ergo
there was in Christ's church within the first six hundred years no private
mass. If upon your witness you bring not in this conclusion you say nothing
against us. If this be your conclusion, in effect you say as little: forasmuch
as every child is in a manner able to teach you, that this consequent is
naught: he speaks not of such a thing, Ergo there is no such thing. Or as
you reason, they did not, Ergo they could not.

I would allege your auctorities of Clemens, Dionisius, Justinius martyr,
Ambrose, Hierom, Austen, Leo, saving that we find in them that which we deny
not, that is to say, that with the priest, the people did use to communicate:
but that if (as you say) the people would not, the priest should not, thereof
we find not one word, which till you prove to us, Chrysostom his yea will be
taken for better then your naie. In the mean season, you may if it please
you take this for an answer. That as the catholics forbid no man to receive
with the priest that will: but hartelie wisshe that all men would so dispose
themselves, that at every Mass with the priest there might be some to
communicate: so neither can they constreine them to receive whose devotion
thereto serves them not, nor may them selves abstain from the sacrifice
whereunto Christ's institution binds them. Which reason allthough it please
one of your coat (I mean him that took on him your defense of late, as
appears by a little treatise by him sent a broad) to call the root of all
the abuses of the L. supper, and farther to affirm that Christ's institution
makes no mention of any oblatio^ or sacrifice to be done by the priest, saving
only the sacrifice of thanks giving: Yeat ar we able well to prove, that
both the sacrifice which is offered is not of thanckes giving only, but of
the very body of Christ, both out of epist. ad Burdegal.
Martialis the B. of Burdeaulx one of the disciples of Christ, S. in Luca cap.
pr.
Ambrose, S. de ciuitate dei li. 10 cap. 20. et lib. 17. cap. 20.
Austen, S. in epist. ad hebreos in cap. ^0. Homil. 17.
Chrysostom, and others: and also that it ought daily to be Hieron. cap. 1.
in. Tit. Amb. epist. 33.
offered, and so was used in the primitive church, and last of all that
Christ him Chrisost. 1. Cor. 10. ^omil. 17.
self commanded him self to be offered.

If you thin^ke that this be but a shift, and that we mean nothing less then
that the people should communi^ate and receive together with the priest:
lookeapon that city, cast your eyes to that church, which of all other I dare
say in the world you hate most, Rome I mean: and there shall you by the
common and frequent communicating of the people with the priest well perceive,
how greatly you have iniuried us with that selaunderouse diffamatio^, that
our priests inhibite and forbid the lait^e to communicate with them at their
Masses. Look upon those religiouse men of the society of Jesus, whose
chieffest-profession is to enstruct youth in virtue and learning, to travail
about the world to bring in to Christ's fold infidelles and heretics. Which
they have so done within these few years, with such spiritual fruit and
increase, with such exceeding great gain of lost souls, (not sparing their
own blood and lives in Christ's cause) in Africa, in India, in Persia, and
else where, that god has well testified by sundry miracles wrought now by
them in those parties, no less then once in the primitive church by his
apostles, how highly he estemeth their labor: look I say upon them, whose
virtuous life and godly conversation shall once I trust, be the bane and utter
ruin of all heresies^, and you shall find it to be true, that both at
Colein, at Augusta, at Treuires, at Cambray, at Tournay, and in other places of
their abode, there passes no Sunday or holy day in the year, in which there
communicate not with the priest both of men and women great store. And yet
arre they it is well known; as far all this while from you in your
heresies, as you be from them in perfection of life. and true religion.

Well although the testimonies of Clemens, Dionisius, Justinius martyr, with the
rest sarue not your purpose: yeat you have other that touch us more near you
will say. The. 10. canon of the apostles brought against private Mass.
as fivst the. 10. canon of the apostles which you allege in this manner.
Fideles qui in ec^lesiam ingrediuntur, and scripturas audiunt and communionem
sanctam non recipient, tanquam ecclesiasticae pacis perturbatores a communione
arceantur. that is to say: Such christian men as come to the church, hear the
scriptures and receive not the holy communion: let them be excommunicated as
men that trouble the peace and quietness of the church.

To this I answer, The answer.
that this canon being truly alleged according to the Greek, the founteine
from whence it was taken first has no such thing in it, that all that be
present at the Mass or holy communion should communicate, but only continue
there to the end, that by their either often whipping in and out, either over
hasty departure from thence, they might not trouble the church, or be
scandulouse to any. Secondarily, that if it were to be understand as you say,
that yeat you must add some more force thereto before it well will serve your
turn, seeing there is never a word there that forbids (which is the thing
that you must prove) the priest to receive alone, if none will receive with
him.

And for the first, that you may perceive how this translation has deceived
you, and how evil it squareth with the grieke, know you, that the founteine
and original copy has thus: (...) which words Haloander a bird of the same
wing that you arre, translateth after this sort: neque apud praeces and
sanctam co^munionem permanent, that is, they that abide not out, or continue
not to the end of the prayers and holy communion.

This translation, beside that the words in the greek do bear it, (...) for
the other there is never a word to signify or ^^^resse the receiving of the
communion, it has also to ^^inteine it the authority of Theodorus Balsamon,
the grieke writer and Pat^^^ke of Antioche, who in his commentaries upon the
canon next before this, has these words. Dicere fideles laicos and
consecratos qui sacra non tractant, oportere qu^^^die sanctis comm^^^care,
alioqui segregari, nec est ex sente^tia canonis nec potest fieri. E^ ideo nonus
canon dixit puniri (...) qui non (...) that is: To say that the faithefull
lay men, and those that be not lay but yeat handle (...) the holy mysteries,
ought daily to communicate, (...) to be excommunicate, it is neither the
meaning of the canon, nor it can s^ be: and therefore the. 9. canon (the next,
which in some books is noted for the. 9. in some other for the. 10.) has,
that the faithefull not continuing to the end shall be punished.

Thus understands he the second canon of the council holden at Antioche,
The year of our lord 274.
in the days of Aureliaenus the emperor. Where examining those words of the
canon, by which all they arre excommunicated who coming to the church, refuse
the holy participation of the sacrament propter aliquam insolentiam, for some
insolency, he writes thus: Di^ quod i^ non existimabuntur sacram
participatione^ auersari, qui ^am odio habent and abominantur: velqui vt
nonnulli dicebant, propter pietate^ and humilitate^ ^am fugiunt. Illi enim non
solum segregabuntur, fed etiam vt haeretici extermin abuntur: hi vero propter
pietatem venia digni habebuntur. Sed illi, qui prae contemptu and arrogantia ex
ecclesia ante sanctam participationem inordinate exeunt, and nec intueri
sustinent. That is in effect to say thus much. Think not that the canon here
speaking of the^ which shoonne the participation of the blessed sacrament, is
to be understand of them that have it in hatred or abomination, or of them (as
some said) that of a certain piety and humility abstain from it. For of
these two kind of men, the first shall not only be segregate for a time, but
as heretics rooted out for ever: the other, for their devotion and worthy
reverence toward the sacraments, shall be thought worthy pardon. But those ar
they whom this canon notes, who of contempt and arrogancy, depart against
order out of the church before the holy participation, not so much as
vouchesausing to behold the same.

Thus you see M. Iuell, how this patriarch and learned Grecian expounds the
canon by you alleged, not as to signify a precise necessity in all that be
present at the Mass to receive with the priest, but to continue there only
to the end, that by that means, although they did not sacrame^tally, they
might year at the least in ioining their prayers with the priests, and by
holy meditating upon Christ's death and passion together with him, communicate
the one with the other spiritually. He adds in his said commentaries upon
the above named second canon of the council of Antioche, that he thinks the
distribution of the (...) (by which name I judge he calls our holy bread)
(...)
to have been taken out of this canon, that they which were not partakers of
the lively and holy mysteries, should be bound to tarito the end of the
divine ministry, and to receive the same at the priests hands ad
sanctificationem, to sanctify them.

Thus understands this greek canon Ioannes Monachus Zonoras, him self a
Grieke borne also, as in his commentaries extant thereapon, to him that lists
to search may be more at large seen.

But let the canon be expounded even as our adversaries would have it, let it
be so that the primitive church appointed great penalties for them, that
being present at the Mass would not receive with the priest: Yeat is there
all this while nothing brought against the priests receuing the sacrament
alone: M. Iuelles allegatio^s be not to the issue.
why he may not take it being so disposed if other will not. And yet is this
the point ye wot well that you must prove.

The next authority that you allege to this purpose; Anacletus.
is taken out of the first epistle of Anacletus, and never written as you
ignorantly said it was, by Calixtus. But whose so ever it be you handle it
like your own. For having cut of that, which otherwise might have bewrayed
your falsehoode, l. inci^ile. ff. de legib.
you bring us in a piece, that seems without the rest to make for your
purpose. Truly the civil laws call it inciuile even in worldly matters, to
judge upon the only bare view of some one part of the law, what the meaning
is of the whole. What they were like to call mangling and hackling, tearing and
dismembring, such as you use in gods matters, I refer it to your own
conscience to judge, by the argument of L. Cornelia. de Falls.

The words of Anacletus arre these. Episcopus Deo sacrificans testes vt
praefixum est secu^ habeat etc. The bishop when he does sacrifice to god, let
him as is before said have witnesses, and mo then an other priest. For as his
honor is greater, so has he need of mo witnesses. For upon high and solemn
feasts shall he have with him, either seven, or five, or three deacons, which are called his eyes, besides subdeacons and other ministres. Who having upon
them the holy vestimentes shall stand with humble spirit, contrite heart, and
demure countenance before him and behind him, the priests on the right hand
and on the left, garding him from evil disposed parsons, and giving their
consent to the sacrifice. It follows: Peracta consecratione omnes communicent
etc. The consecration being ended, let them all communicate: they that will not
shall be suspendid from entering in to the church. For so have the apostles
ordained, and the holy church of Rome o^serueth.

These arre the words of Anacletus, which if you had wholly according to true
meaning alleged, every man should have easily perceived how little this place
had made for your purpose: every man could have said, The true understanding
of the place of Anacletus
that the words (let all communicate) should be restreined to the priests,
Deacons, and other ministres, of whom assisting the bishop at Mass he had
before spoken, and not to be racked as by you they violently arre, to all the
whole people: that they should take place not in every priests mass, but in
every bishops, not at all times but at high and solemn feasts.

But what M. Iuell if as now it appears that this place makes nothing for
the prouse of your assertion (that there was not or could not within the
first six hundred years after Christ, or now may not, any mass be said
without there be ^ome present to communicate with the priest): so I make the
same place (to the intent you may not be said to have taken the pains to have
alleged it in vain) to serve for us against you. Truly I nothing doubt but
that in right and indifferent judgment I shall be hable to do it.

The assistentes to the bishop at his mass, should ye wot well as appears
by this place of Anacletus, The place of Anacletus brought by M. Iuell turned
against him self.
communicate peracta consecratione, after the consecration. But what if they
had refused at any time so to do? What should then have been done with that
which was consecrated? To have reserved it until an other time your doctrine
in that point would not have permitted: to have cast it away or abused it to
profanevses, your reverence to those high mysteries could not have allowed it.
I put here no case either impossible or unthought upon. For Anacletus him self
provided you see, a punishment for those that would not receive, which might
as well have been all as one.

Thus I hope for this matter we shall not need to try the law. You will
easily grant your self, that the bishop might have finished his mass and
have received a lone, and so either have song or said a private mass,
contrary to that which you have hitherto affirmed.

To the place of Chrysostom, and that other of S. Gregori, by the which it
appears that such as would not receive with the priest were commanded away:
although it were enough for us to answer, that all this proves nothing that
when they be gone, the priest which came thither for that purpose may not go
forward in his Mass and receive yea alone: so that resting on this point we
might look for your replye: yeat although these testimonies be not I say to
the purpose, forasmuch much nevertheless as they go nearer to us, then any of
the other auctorities before alleged, while they seem to bar the people to
be present at the mass without they will receive the sacrament with the
priest: I shall thereunto in few words answer after this sort.

First, How the ancient vvriters at to be understand forbidding all to be
present at the Mass save those that vvil receive with the priest
that these fathers of a vehement and earnest zeal that they had, to revoke
and call in to use again that frequent and common usage of receiving with the
priest, from whence they then saw the people thorough coldenesse of devotion
(which by the cruel and often persecutions of the heathen emperors was wont
to be kindled and enflamed in them) to be not a little swarued and fallen away:
used a phrase and manner of speech, although exactly considered in it self not
all together simply true, yet for that time and those manners very much both
expedient and necessary. For even as no man reprehendeth him that minding to
make a crooked wand straight, A fimilitude.
boweth it first to a great deal more crookedness on the other side then it
had before, not that he aloweth that any more then he did the other, but only
because he knows right well, that to make it at all straight this is the
only way: even so these fathers, if they commanded them away that being
present at the Mass would not communicate with the priest, if they
threatened them that if they were not worthy to receive the communion, they were
not worthy to have any part of the common prayers: yea if they added that
except they were worthy every day to receive, they should not be worthy once
in the year: we must needs think that here they bowed these crooked pieces as
far an other way, and that they meant no more to have them stand thus then as
they did before.

If you here demand of meapo^ what grounds I dare, leaving the manifest
words of these fathers, give this interpretation: know ye that two causes
there arre which have moved me so to do. The first is, for the avoiding of
absurdities and inconveniences (for which causes they that be learned in the
laws will tell you that it is not unlawful to swerve often times and go
from, even the plain words of he law or statute) which otherwise we should
of necessity fall in to, and from which of good reason we ought to think
those holy and learned fathers, in all their acts and doings to have been
most far. For if they had me^t verily as their bare words imporre, what
could have been spoken more absurdely then this, that he that is not worthy to
receive the, blessed body of Christ in the sacrament, is not worthy also to be
prayed for? Whereas all men know that the^ more unworthy he is of the one, the
more worthy he is of the other (if the sick be worthy to have a phisicio^ and
not the hole) that by the means thereof he may become worthy to receive that,
of which he was before unworthy. If we so stick in the barcke and rind and
come no nearer to the pith, what sense will you make S. Ambrose to have, in
saying that he that is not worthy to receive the sacrament daily, is not worthy
to rceiue the same once in the year? Might it not so happen, that many a good
man which now receives worthily once in the year, should by this means not
receive worthily once in his life?

But of this manner used in speaking or writing, have we not in some of these
fathers express testimonies, namely in Chrysostom? who travailing in a
certain place of his worckes to persuade the true and real presence of
Christ's body in the sacrament, uses these words. See thou not thy lord
offered up, the priest doing his priestly office, pouring out his prayers, the
people round about him, imbrued and made red with that pretiouse blood?
which words I know you will easily grant with us to be not in all points
simply true, but yet not discommendable or unseemly, being spoken as sensibly
as might be, the more firmly to persuade the truth of that, which although it
be there as truly as though it had been seen, was yet hid and to carnal
eyes invisible.

But what needs it here to allege the manner of speaking of the ancient and
old fathers, seeing that you M. Iuell and your companions our new masters
and young fathers, use the same or not much unlike in your cisguised communion:
And yeat for all your terrible thundre boultes shot against them that being
present receive not, you see never a one the more for fear thereof depart
out of the church: yea he that I think should, were well like perhaps to
hear thereof to his cost before his Ordinary. But there is not the simplest
in a parish but he knows, that your meaning is not to drive the^ out of
the church, as your words sound, but to stir the^ up thereby the oftener
to come to your schismatic communion, and therefore they tarry still. Or
else if this be not your mind, of so many that be present continually
thereat and be not partakers thereof, why have you punished all this while
no^^e.

An other cause that has moved me thus to understand these fathers is, for
that the practice of the church appears to have been in their time such, as
that the people was willed even then, to be present at the church and to hear
Mass (at the least on the Sundaies) when they stood nevertheless at
liberty, touching the receiving of the sacrament any oftener then thrice in
the year: as appears by the council holden at Agatha in France about
Chrisostomes days, and by S. Auste^ near also unto the same time. Canon. 47
and. 18.
S. Austens words arre these. In die vero nullus se a sacra Missarum
celebratione separet, ne^ue otiosus quis domi remaneat. Sermo. 251 De ^e^por.
On the Sunday let no man absente him self from the holy celebration of the
Mass, nor remain within the doors idle. And alittle after he adds: Adhuc
quo^ue quod detestabilius est, ad ecclesiam aliqui venientes non intrant, non
insistunt praecibus, non expectant cum silentio sanctarum Missaru^
celebrationem. that is to say: Besides all this, which is a thing more to be
detested, some coming to the church enter not in, they pray not, they tarry
not out with silence the celebrating of the holy Masses.

And thus it appears (the use of the church being at that time such as the
people was by order bound to hear Mass on the Su^day, whether they receuid
or no) that in no wise these fathers can be so understand, as though they meant
to drive them vttrely from the Mass, whither the church had bound them to
come, but only to put them in remembrance so to come, and so to be present
thereat, as in times past in that old feruency of devotion they had been wont.

Thus much for the first answer: Secondarily to the places before alleged I
say, that ^^^ing granted (which denied by us you shall never be able to
prove) that in the primitive church such as would not receive with the priest
were not suffered to be present at the mass: Year is it no good reason to say,
that therefore it must necessarily be so now. Seeing that in those things which
have by Christ been left indifferent (of which this is one) the spiritual
governors have power, to change and alter as occasion gives. Will you see it
proved by examples? There was a time when to abstain from blood and stra^gled
meats, Act^. 5.
was a thing so necessary to be observed, that it was by a solemn decree of
the apostles enacted: and as light a matter as some will perhaps make
thereof, yeat added the apostles thereto this weight and poise of words: Visum
est Spiritui sancto and nobis, it has seemed good to the holy ghost and to us.
Yea the text has that they accounted such abstinence inter necessaria, in the
nombre of those things that were necessary to be observed, even as to abstain
from fornication. Of the continuance of this decree in his force, the place
mencioneth nothing, so that thereof can be gathered no other, but that it was a
law made to endure for ever, although at this day it be not practiced well
you wot pardye.

Were it well done think you now to reason thus: In the apostles time the
church absteined from bloudinges and stiffled meats: Therefore we must in
these days do the like? Yeat were this truly a stronger reason drawn from an
ordonaunce and commandment of the apostles, then is youres leaning upon
examples (if you had any such) which as they never had their beginning of any
commandment or precept of the holy scriptures, but by them lef^e at liberty
were by the spiritual governors as the present time required drawn to a
necessity: so by the same upon contrary, occasion may at all times be
released. But you have at all no such commandment in the whole scripture that
sounds that ways, No Scripture forbids the priest to receive alone, or
the alie man to be present thereat when he communicates not.
that the priest may not say Mass and receive the sacrament alone without
company, or that no man may be present with the priest at his Mass there
with him to communicate spiritually, unless the same will also communicate
sacramentally.

For that you allege most fondly for the proof of the contrary, that Christ
gave this holy sacrament not to one alone, but to many being together, and that
he said farther by the way of charge, In his Sermon. fol. 34.
Do this, that is you say: Practice this that I have here done, and that in
such order and form as you have seen me do it, it ferueth nothing for your
purpose. For who sees not, that these words of Christ enforce no more a
necessity to have this sacrament ministered to company, Math. vl^.
then his other words to his apostles and disciples at other times spoken in
the plural number, Marci. 16.
of preaching to all the world, of baptizing, of loosing and binding of
sins, do implie a necessity to have a company of priests together at these
days, to execute either the one function or the other. If the priest alone
being thereto disposed may not receive the sacrament, because Christ delivered
it to many: why say you not also, that the same may not minister the
sacrament of baptism alone, because Christ gave that authority to many
together, or preache^, or absolve, all which powers he gave to no one alone?
Yea how dares one of you alone minister your communion, seeing the words by
the which your warrant (if you have at all any) takes his strength, ar
uttered in the plural nombre? Lucae. 22. 1. Cor. 10.
for Christ said not, hoc fac do thou this, but hoc facite do ye this. Must
there be now M. Iuell, if not twelve, yet at the least in every parisshe two
ministers, to stand at the communion table to minister the communion together?
Truly I account him not wise that sees not to what shifts you arre driven,
that graspe after such sclendre hold of these words of Christ, Take ye, eat
ye.

Of your second objection follow many absurdities. For if Christ had meant
as you say the words Do this, importe: that is that they should practice
that which they saw him do, in such form, in such order as they saw him
do it: then beside the nombre of communicantes that you demand, I can not
see how you can discharge your self, in ministering it to a less nombre or
greater either, then the same that Christ him self first observed. For if you
do, then where is hoc facite, do this, that you cry out apo^ so much? how
do you it then in the same manner and after the same sort that he did it?

If you say as in deed the truth is, that the presence of that company at
Christ's last supper, was no part of his action, but that the same consisted
in taking bread, in blessing, in breaking, in offering it to god the father as
the sacrifice of the church (as witnesses the blessed and holy martyr S.
Ciprian) and that the distribution thereof to other, Lib. 2. epist. 3.
was no more of the substance of that action, then as there was company r^ady
and disposed to be partakers thereof at that time: The which as when like
occasion is we may in no wise omit to do: Lib. 3. de ciuitat dei lib ^.
contraduersl ^eg. and proph. cap. 20 Sermon. 6. de Pasch^t.
so if no such offer it self, we may not suffer that the first use of this
sacrament which was as S. Austen and Leo say, to be a sacrifice to succeed in
the place of the sacrifices of the old law, should hang all together upon the
second use thereof, which is to be meat and dri^ke to the faithefull. If I
say you say thus, then say you truly and speak against us nothing. But if
you will needs stick to your tackelings, and still cry out that we must in
all points do even as Christ did, and although you can give no reason, why
you should in giving to fewer or to mo then he did, not be said to do
otherwise then he did: if the words Do ye this, you will still maintain to
be to be understand not in offering that sacrifice as Christ did, Vbi supra.
and S. Cyprian understands them, but in observing the time, the place, the
sex, the nombre, the qualities of the parsons with such like: how can you
then I say excuse your selves, that you have not swarued and yeat do from
Christ's example, and done otherwise then he did, that ministre that in the
morning which he gave in the evening, and to men fasting which he gave to them
i^mediately after supper? How have you observed the place in delivering it in
the church, which Christ did in a profane house? how the sex, that for
only men give it also to women? how the nombre (as I said before) that for
just twelve, stick not at one time (if so many there be that desire it) to
give it to twelve hundred, or to bare two if there be no mo that will, or to as
many above or as few under as you list? how the qualities of the parsones,
when you give that to all lay men, which Christ did to only priests? when
you put from this table notoriouse sinners, whereas Christ repelled not the
traitor Judas? Is this hoc facite? Is this to do all things in such form and
sort as Christ did, whereas in some things you do more, in some things
less, in other some clean contrary to that which he did?

Thus while (I doubt not) you see, that for the avoiding of a no^bre of
absuroities, which otherwise your selves shall in your procedinges necessarily
fall in to, you must of force confess, that time, place, nombre, sex, with
the rest, ar in the ministration of this blessed sacrament no part of the
substance but only mere accidents, and may be present or absent, used or
left of, as to the church shall seem best to take order, Epist. ad Ianuar. 118.
as witnesses S. Austen: you must also in like manner grant with us, that
Christ in the institution of this sacrament or else where, never made mention
of any nombre to communicate together, nor ever forbad his action to be
practiced without company, and last of all, that these words: Hoc facite, do
ye this, include not the using of every circumsta^ce which Christ used, but
only give authority (as I proved before by S. Cyprian) to offer this
sacrifice, which is Christ, as he him self first did.

So that now to return to your argument: In the primitive church it was so.
Erga it must now also be so: we may be bold to tell you once again, that
although the first part of your argument the antecedent, were most true, yet
the consequent deduced therefro is most faulse and untrue. Forasmuch as the
matter whereof we entreat being indifferent, may by the church at all times
be changed and altered, especially when new occasions shall vary the old
circumstances. Which as it has been proved to you to have been done by the
church in the apostles decrees and ordinances: so arre we able also to show,
that the apostles have changed Christ's own commandment, and that the
church has altered that and restored the first again. Did not Christ
command his apostles, that in baptesme they should use the name of the
father, Math. vl^.
the son and the holy ghost? Changed not the apostles this commandment
when they baptized in the name of Jesus? Ast 8. and. 10.


The primitive church forbad the sacrament of baptesme to be ministered at any
other time, then at Easter and witsontide, except in case of necessity where
the infant were like to perish witheout it: yeat now the church permits
to baptize at all times. And your congregation M. Iuell is content also, to go
from the old manner and to baptize on the Sundays and holy days, whether
there be any necessity or none.

If all this satisfy you not, but the church must needs appear coram vobis
in your L. consistory, to give a reason why she forbids not all men now
to be present at the mass saving those that will communicate, as once you say
she did: although he should offer you no wrong, that should first bid you
prove that she were subject to your jurisdiction, and then afterward to
propose your interrogatories, yet will she not deal with you after that
sort, but is contented (because she is illustris persona and can not be
compelled by the law personally to appear) to send you her advocate S.
Austen, Lib. contra Faustu^. 32. cap. 14. and Confess. lib. 3. cap. 7.
who answers for her in this sort. Sicut aeger non debet repreh^ndere
medicinalem doctrinam etc Even as the sick man ought not to reprehend the
phisicions prescriptes, commanding him one thing to day, an other to more we:
yea forbidding that which before he commanded (for so required the health of
his body to have it) Even so man kind, from Adam unto the end of the world,
so long as the corruptible carcas being sick and wounded annoieth the soul,
may not find fault with gods phisike, if in this it command one thing,
in that an other, one thing first, the contrary after.

Lo M. Iuell I trust you see, that laws may be in the church altered and
changed as the time and manners of me^ require, and that no man ought to grudge
or murmr at the change thereof. And by this also I trust it appear unto you,
that it was not so unhandsome a comparison as you said it was, that M.D. Cole
made when he resembled the state of the church in the apostles time, to the
age of infancy. The which because you saw your self you could not well
deny, and that by the granting thereof your part would be the worse: you
turn his words an other way (because you would seem to say somewhat) and
impudentlie father upon him, that he should call Christ and his apostles
enfantes. But I pray you good sir by the way, let me be so bold to ask you
being a merchant of logic, and sent from the wisdom of your father to scoff
at all other men's reasons that went before you, amongst whom you have not
spared S. Austen, In quaest. ex nou. testam. q. 75.
although either of malice, or of ignorance you attribute his reason of Peter's
primacy, and so by a consequent the B. of Rome his, to Roffensis: what price
bare logike which at other times was you say so good cheap, when you made
this argument? he says the church was in Christ's and in his apostles time
in her enfancie Ergo he calls Christ and the apostles enfantes. Truly I
think the marcket was risen and good stuff very dear, when my L. bishop
thought to utter such homely ware as this is.

If a man had said of the famous university of Paris in Charles the great
his time, when it was first erected, that it was then in her enfancie, had he
called Alcuinus that great clercke, and all the rest of the learned doctors
called thither to plant good learning, babes and infantes? If of your scattred
congregation one should say, that it were yet under that age of infancy, I
wene no man would think that John Calvin (if he now lived) were called a
babe. No he were like to keep his old name still for all that I warrant you,
and the rest of your pillars to? But here it is a world to see, how thorough
ignorance you be shamefullie deceauid in taking one for an other. If you had
readen S. Austen so diligently as reason would you should, both him and the
rest of the doctors toe, before you had made your challenge: You should have
found, that you reprehended not so much M. Cole, In psa^m. 36. co^. c. 3.
as you did unawares S. Austen. Whose words agreing with his I have thought
good here to allege, that all men may see how ignorance has deceived you.
The words arre these. Dominus enimipse in corpore suo quod est ecclesia,
junior fuit primis temporibus and ecceiam senuit. For our lord (that is to
say) him self was in his body that is the church young at the first, and now
lo behold he is becomen old. And a little after. The church has her times
of growing.
autem Christi quod est ecclesia, tanquam vnus quid am homo prim^o junior fuit,
and ecce iam in fine seculi est in senecta pingui. The body of Christ which is
his church, was as it were a man, at the beginning young, and now behold in the
end of the world it is in a ripe or f^ll age.

But leaving this as wide of my purpose I shall return thither from whence I
have digressed. Well let it be granted you will say, that the church has
power to alter and change things indifferent upon occasion, and as necessity
requires: what such occasion was there here to revoke that old commandment,
that all that were present at the mass should receive with the priest or
else depart.

Will you know? I shall show you an occasion. If the church then, when
although all would not, some yet there were that failed not daily to
communicate with the priest, forbad those that would not, so much as to be
present with other that did, thinking therebie to draw the worse to the
imitation of the better, found at the length by experience, that not only by
this restreinte theie were nothing amendid, but by absteining from that
communion in the which oftentimes before theie were wont spirituallie by the
sweet remembrance of Christ's death and passion in those holy mysteries, to
join with the priest, in their manners and lives not a littell empaired: If
the church I say upon these considerations bearing like a good mother with
the infirmities of her children, willing rather to hold her self contented
with a littell with their good wills, then to leese all devotion with their
evil, released the former commandment, was it not trow you cause
sufficient? But all this M. Iuell I must desire you to take as spoken under an
if, that if you can be hable to prove any such commandment of the church,
you may have a reason why the same has been abrogate and taken a way.

To make an end and to knit up the knot of this present article, I have here
thought good M. Iuell (that if you mind to write again you may find in few
words couched together the some of all that has been said touching this
matter before) briefly to show the catholic doctrine in this point, which
is this.

First the catholics forbid no man meet for the holy mysteries to receive
with the priest, The catholic doctrine touching private Mass.
when and as often as he lists, but wish and hartelye pray that all men
would so put themselves in order as at every mass there might be, that
would communicate with the priest some.

Secondarilie they teach, that this sacrament ministered in the mass, Two
special uses of the Sacrament.
was chiefelie instituted to be a sacrifice, to be offered up to god by the
priest for his own sins and the sins of the people, and next to be a
spiritual food for all Christian people, and next to be a spiritual food
for all Christian people to feed apo^, and that as the first use of any thing
may not depend upon the second, but contrary wise this apo^ that: so in this
sacrament, the oblation which is the chiefest use thereof, and whereunto the
priest is bound, may not so depend on the peoples communicating which is the
second, and whereunto (touching so often receiving) theie are not bound but
stand at liberty, that without their devotion serve them to receive it, he
may not do his duty, that is to offer it.

Thirdly, that although for lack of company the priest do receive alone,
the sacrifice is yeat never the more private or less common. For as no man is
so mad to say, that a great rich man keeping a common table for his pooer
neighbors has left his old accustomed wont and makes now his table
private, if the gates of his house standing wide open as theie were wont to be,
his tables furnished with plenty of meats, and all things in a readiness,
his geastes forbear to come: even so it fares in this case, where the table
is laid, the gates be open, the goodman of the house (the priest supplieng
the place of Christ) abides loking for his geastes, who only refrain to
come. Is this table private? is he a niggard? or shall he not eat that would,
because theie will not that should? Is a conduict builded in the midst of
the open market place of a town, the less public or common if the
inhabitants for whose ease it was made refuse to fetch water thereat.

Last of all we say, M. Iuell has not brought so much as one proof against
private Mass.
that hethertoe you have not discharged your promise, which was to prove, that
within the first six hundred years after Christ there was never Mass said,
nor might be, without a nombre to receive with the priest. So that now we may
say unto you, Vbi est illa seuitia? vbi est ille fremitus Leonis? Nonne
sagittae infantum factae sunt plagae eorum? Where arre now become your cruel
words against the Catholics? to what end is your Lions roaring, In the Sermon
fol. 43.
O Gregory, O Augustine, O Hierome, O Chrysostom, O Leo, O Dionise, O
Anacletus, O Xistus, O Paul, O Christ. If we be deceived you have deceived us:
Psalm. 63.
to what end I say is it brought? Nonne sagittae infantum fact^e sunt plagae
eorum? Are not the wounds that you have given us such, as childrens
cockeshootelles ar wont to make?

Well these be the points that the catholic doctrine stands upon in this
article. To the which if your stomach serve you to reply, and that you have
digested that which you have already received, I most heartily pray you to
keep you, without straieng from the matter or alleging proufes impertinent, as
close as you can. So shall you do both to your self in writing, and to me
in answering a very great pleasure. while I am suer your evidence is so much,
that six lines (I speak with the most) will receive with ease all that you
shall have to write.

THE CONCLUSION CONTAINING. 12. CAUSES, HABLE AS THE AVTHOR IVDGETH either to
stay the wauorer (in matters of religion) or to call back the wanderer in
thiese perilouse times
Hitherto have you hard M. Iuell for the confirmation of four articles, the
chiefest in a manner of all the rest that arre at this day in controversy
between you and us, the scriptures, the councels, the Doctors and examples of
the primitive church: not their bare names as apoticaries set forth their
empty painted boxes, but full even to the top of most wholesome triacle and
pretiouse preservatives, against the venime and contagion of your poisoned and
pestilent heretical doctrine. So that now there remains no more, but that
even as of late you have been warned already: so now by me you be put in
remembrance once again, according to your promise to return from your
heresies, to your mother the Catholic church. The which to persuade you the
rather and with the better will to do, I have thought good here, to
communicate with you such causes and reasons, as by part whereof I have by
experience found my self, against our common ennemie the crafty serpents
assaults, at such times as he has labored to draw me to your part, not a
little strengthened and confirmed in Christ's true religion and his catholic
faith.

FIRST I beseech you considre and weigh well with your self, The first cause.
whether Christ at his departure from us men, left behind him here in earth a
church or none: Whether he promised to aid the same and to be present with it
to the end of the world, to defend it in such sort, as if hell gates were set
wide open, and all the devils there sent abroad to vex it, they should not
yet all of the^ be able to prevail. When all this shall be well considered, and
found to be true: then march yet one step farther I pray you, and ask as it
were of your self how this church prospered afterward: whether (as if
according to his promise he have been continually present therewith all it
needs must) it multiplied and increased, or by his absence therefro decreased
and went backward. Here wot you well you must needs say either the one or
the other.

If you say that it has always hitherto either increased, or been at the
least so maintained, that no enemy, no heretic, no devil him self, no not
all the devils with all the power of the world ioining together could ever yet
prevail against it: then must you also grant, that at all times sense
Christ's departure from hence, there has bin a church visible, such as of all
men might both be seen and known (for such a one left Christ behind him to
us, his xij apostles besides the nombre of disciples) to be a pillar for them
to lean unto, 1. Timoth. 3.
that thorough infidelity should be in danger of falling, and a house to
harbor and succor them, that otherwise should be like in the tempests and
storms of heresies to lie without the doors.

If you say thus, and that he has never forsaken his church but allwaies
noorished it, at all times in such sort defended it, that never was there time
yet, in which for fear of all the tiraunts in the world, for dread of burning,
hanging, hedding or other torments what ^oeuer, it could be forced to hide it
self, to seek means to lurcke in clouds or wal^k invisible: but has
allwaies to the contrary well declared it self, Psal^. 18. Math. 5.
to be that tabernacle placed in the clear shining son, that city builded
on the top of the mountain, that ca^dell which gives light to all that arre in
the house: the^ demand (I heartily pray you) of your own conscience, where
fifty years a go that schismatic church which you call the true church
and boaste your self to be of, was in the compass of all the wide world to be
seen or hard of: where your bishops had their consistories, where your
pastors and doctors were resident, Contra Luciferianos.
where your religion was preached and Sacraments ministered, in such sort as
you preach and ministre the^. S. Hiero^ says where is no priest there is no
church. S. Paul teaches us, Ephesians. 4.
that in Christ's church be placed apostles, Fol. 26. of that book which
being last printed has no place named where.
prophets, Eua^gelistes pastors and doctors. Bring forth your priests,
show where were your doctors and preachers. If you can not, as in deed by
the confession of your apology, where you confess that forty years a go
the truth which you teach began first to spring, that the^ it was by Martin
Luther, and Hulderick Zuinglius first, The protestants confession concerning
the antiquity of their religion.
as never before hard of (for you call it inauditam veritate^) brought to the
knowledge of men, you are not able: confess then at the length that you had at
all no church: join your self to them, which can of all times and of all
ages bring forth good testimonies and evident proufes, where the religion which
they profess, the doctrine which they preach, has been preached and taught,
and the sacraments which they ministre ministered, in such sort and manner as
by them they presently arre.

Thus much if you grant to us that Christ's church according to his promise
has prospered, has prevailed against all enemies and back frindes, has
always sense his departure hence been visible and to be seen of all men. But
if now on the contrary part you say not thus, but for the city that should
stand on the top of the mountain to be seen of all me^, you will lead us to
a ragged cotage standing in some darcke hole and obscure cave, able to be seen
of no man or very few: if for the tabernacle placed in the bright son you
point us to a doghole in some cloudy cellar or rotten barn, and tell us that
there your church has lurcked, and all this long while lien hidden for fear
of persecution: then must we tell you in plain English, that although you
were able to find out some such luskes co^ner where your co^uenticles had
been assembled (as if a man should ask you but of the year before Luthers
time you can not): yet this would in no wise serve your turn, as being the
strange voice of those false prophets, of whom in the gospel our savior
gave us a watch word to beware and take heed. Math. 24.
For Christ, and so by a conseque^t the body which must follow the head,
Christ's church universal.
the chu^che I mean, is not in parts here or there, and therefore you deserve
no credit when you so say. He dwells not in the desert of singularity, but
in that well peopled city, cuius participatio eius in idipsum, Psalm. 122
which is at unity with it self: and whither the multitude ascendith, not by
one and one alone, but by whole tribues and companies together. And therefore
when you tell us that his abiding is in deserto, in the desert or wildrenes:
we may not go out of that populouse city, nor step out of the common beaten
way there to seek him, no more then we may believe you when you cry in
penetralibus, that he is in the secret and priuey places of the house.

Thus told S. Austen (then whom the church had never yeat a champion more
exercised or better practiced and acquainted with the manners and fasshions of
heretics) Petilian that heretic. Coutra literas Petil. lib. 2. cap. 16.
his words ar thiese. Sed haec interim sepono, tu ostende ecclesiam. I am vox
illa mihi sonabit, quam in pseudoprophetis Dominus vitandam praemonuit
ostendentibu^ parts, and ab vniuer so alienare conantibus: Ecce hic est
C^ristus, Ecceillic. Sed vsque adeo putas veras oues Christi cor non habere,
quibus dictum est nolite credere, vt lupum audiant dicentem: hic est Christus,
and pastorem non audiant dicentem per omnes gentes incipientibus ab Jerusalem?
Lucae. 24.
That is to say: But thiese things I lay all a side and slip over: show me
the church. Here will that voice sound in my ears which our lord warned us
to beware of in false prophets, showing us parts, and going about to draw us
from the whole, saing: Lo here is Christ and there is Christ. But thinckest
thou Petilia^ that the true sheep of Christ, to whom it is said believe them
not, ar so hartelesse, that they will harcke^ to the wolf howling that here is
Christ, and will give no ear to the shepherd saying, thorough out all nations
beginning at Jerusalem.

Thus taught he us in an other place to discern true preachers from false:
Libro de cantico no^o. cap. 5.
Si quis tibi Christum praedicat, attend and considera qualem praedicet, vbi
praedicet. Christus enim veritas est, per scriptur as sanctas praedicatur, non
in angulis, non occulte, sed palam, public. In sole posuit tabernaculum suum,
hoc est in manifesto collocauit ecclesiam suam. S. Austens rule to know the
true preacher from the false.
If any man (that is to say) preach unto the Christ, marcke and considre what
manner of Christ he preaches, and where he preaches him. For Christ is
truth, he is preached by the holy scriptures, not in corners, not in hocker
mocker, but openly and publicly. He has pitched his tabernacle in the son,
that is to say, he has placed his church in the open sight of all men.

The same S. Austen told Seuerinus a kinsman of his, Epist. 170.
that the church was ciuitas supra montem posita, a city buylt on the top of
a hill, and that therefore it was called (...) in Greek, because it was
diffunded thorough out the whole world, and finally that for that cause
according to the word of god, it could not be hidden.

To this that has been alleged may be added, that if ever Christ's church
should have been brought to such extremity, at any time after the fundation
thereof once laid, that a man might have sought for it and not have found it,
that no one du^s^ put forth his head to keep the possession and right thereof:
that then it had been utterly overthrown, that hell gates had prevailed against
it. And how had then David's prophecy been true spoken before hand of the
church: Psalm. 71.
Dominabitur a mari vs^ue ad ma re, and a flumine vs^ue ad terminos terrae? It
shall rule from sea to sea, and from the flood to the end of the world. How
had the church ruled and governed, that should have been so brought under and
vanquished? Or how could Daniel, have called it the great stone that grew and
becam a houge mountain and filled the whole world? Daniel. ^.
Yea how had Christ acquit^ed him self of his promise to be always present
with his church, if it had ever been brought to thiese terms? Great
persecutions the church (we confess) of Christ has suffered, but yeat never
was there any so vehement that could make all to hide their heads, that some
there were not, who even to the teethe of the proudest tyrants of them all,
standing at defense upon the walls, defended not stoutely Christ and his
church. For if it had been otherwise, then had the devil (as before has been
said) gotten the victory, and Christ taken the foil, then had the church
which at Christ's departure hence was both seen and known (whereas by this
means it should be neither) not only have been nothing at all auaunced, but
also in deed much abased.

By this that has been alleged I trust you see M. Iuell and will easily
confess, Lib. 4. Instit. cap. 1.
if not with me with Calvin yeat your late captain, that Christ's church^
must needs be visible, The church is visible.
that (as his reason is) we may know it to join our selves thereto. For a
pooer pillar should it else be to lean unto, and as homely a house for
succor to fly to, if when a man should stand in distress and need thereof,
he were suer never to see it or know it, by which means he should find it

Next after this you will grant I hope, It erreth not.
that this church of Christ has always kept with it, the truth of gods
word and right use of his sacraments, and in few words to comprehend all,
that it never yeat erred in any necessary point of doctrine. For if it have
(as in your apology you labor in vain to prove it may) then shall you hear
once again, and as often as you so say you must not thinck much to hear, that
Christ has not kept touch with his church: that he was from home when the
devil was there: that hell gates, by which one right well understands
heresies, have prevailed against it, the contrary whereof, after the scriptures
S. Austen amongst the ancient writers most plainly affirms. De ^iuitat.
Dei. lib. 20. cap. 8 It is universal.


Thirdly it has been proved, that this church of Christ is not in parts, but
dispersed over the whole, and therefore called catholic, as much to say, as
universal.

Last of all the truth will compel you to confess, that there is no certain
nombre of years limited or prefixed for the church to be visible, after which
time it should be darckened and not be seen: no more the^ Christ's promise
made to aid it for ever, can berestreined to any such certain or determinate
time. Which being true, then follows it that the church has been as well
visible, and preserved from errors thiese nine hundred years last past, as it
was in the six hundred before. And then if it be so, in what a plight you be,
which confess for us that for nine hundred years the practice of the church
has run on our side, we proving for our selves that for the six hundred
years before it has done the like: I pray you well to considre, to lay
your hand upon your heart and think upon it seriously.

This fundation laid, let now you and me imagine together (which I have
oftentimes done with my self alone) that we were fifty years ago both me^
living together in this world, of good years and discretion, that beginning
then to mislike and suspect the religion thorough all the world used, we
sought for the church of Christ (which we were persuaded not to be amongst
them who preached the word and ministered the sacraments as they did) such a
church for example as now is in England to be seen: where the head should be
a lay man, a woman or a child, in no wise a priest: where should be but two
sacraments: where there should be no sacrifice, yea the very name should be
odiouse: where in the sacrament of the altar should be said to be nothing but
bread and wine: in the which there should be no invocation of saints, no
prayeng for the dead, no abstinence from meats on prescript days: where only
faith should be taught to justify, good worckes to be nothing available or
meritoriouse to the doers: and finally in all points qualified according to
the direction of your communion book. Let us I say imagine (that all ways
presupposed that such a church as I have described is the true church of
Christ) where we should in those days have sought after it, where we should
after long seeking to join our selves thereto, to harbor our selves therein,
to rest our backs thereat, being all forweried with wa^dring from opinions to
errors, from errors to heresies, have at the length found it. Or let us
discourse with our selves, when after all this busy search and dilligent
enquiry therefore it appeared in no place, what we had been likely to have
said the one to the other. Truly what we would have said I know not, but what
we both should I know right well. We should first have entered in to a
merueilouse mislike with our own wits, who being in nombre but two, in
learning and wisdom not the most excellent in a country on the one side,
against the whole wisdom of the world on the other: had ever fallen in to any
such foolish fantasy or furiouse frenesy, as to condemn the doings of all the
rest to bring in place our doltish dreams, to think our selves only to see
and all other me^ to be blind, to believe that the most learned, Contr.
epistol. Parmeni^ni lib. 3. cap. 5.
the most virtuous should err, and we only priuileaged that we might not.
We should have remembered our selves, and with S. Austen have said: Qui no^
vult sedere in consilio vanitatis, no^ euanescat typo superbiae, quaerens
conuenticula iustorum totius orbis vnitate separata, quae non potest inuenire.
Iusti autem sunt per vniuersam ciuitate^, quae abscondi non potest quia supra
monte^ constituta est: monte^ illum dico Danielis, in quo lapis ille praecisus
sine manibus, creuit and impleuit vniuersam terra^. He that will not sit in
the counsel of vanity, let him not vanishe away with the shadow of pride,
seeking after conuenticles of just men the unity of all the world being
severed, which he shall never be able to find. For the just ar dispersed
thorough out that universal city, which can not be hidden, because it is
founded apo^ a hill, eue^ that hill that Daniel speaks of, in the which that
stone that was cut forth without hands grew, and filled the whole world.

Besides this, we should have judged our selves men altogether faithelesse,
that giving no more credit to Christ's promise, we would think his church
to have been by him at any time forsaken, and the whole world inuolued and
wrapped in an universal darckenesse. Whereas true faith and good reason ought
on the contrary part to have persuaded us, that we had our selves rather been
starcke blind not hable to see, then that conspicuouse city on the top of the
hill seen of all other men, should be removed or quite overthrown, and Christ
false in his promise.

If we should have thought and said thus then M. Iuell, as I see no cause why
we should have omitted so much as one word* let us now I beseech you, as you
tender the common quiet of the church, as you regard the health of your own
soul do the like. Your own selves confess within the term of years by me
mentioned, of the beginning and continuance of your religion: your Apology
alleging. 40. years for all the universal world: M. Haddo^ to Hieronimus
Osorius standing more stoutely then wisely upon the quiet possession of thirty
years, six excepted, in which the course thereof was interrupted within our
realm of England. So that you can not say that I have here imagined a case
impossible, but by your own selves confessed, and by many a man alive if you
would deny it, easy to be proved.

To conclude, if all that has been already said satisfy you not: let yet
Tertullian persuade you in this poinct, whose words touching this matter
written against the heretics of his time, ^ib. de praescript. aduersus hae^es.
follow in english after this sort. Well let it be granted that all have
erred. Has the holy ghost yet all this while regarded no church to lead it
into the truth, being sent for that purpose by Christ, being therefore
expressly demanded of his father to be the teacher of all truth? Let it be
so that gods bailif and Christ's vicair have suffered the churches to
understand otherwise then he taught by his apostles: Is it yeat likely that so
many and famous churches should err in one faith? And a littell after he
adds thiese words: The truth belike looked for some Marcionites and
Valentinia^s (the heretics against whom he wrote) to deliver it, in the mean
season till whose coming, the ghospel was not rightely preached, so many
thousand thousands baptized amiss, so many worckes of faith evil ministered,
so many virtuous cures and gifts wrongfully wrought, so many priesthodes and
ministrations naughtely executed, so many martyrdom; to make an end suffered
in vain.

Thus far Tertullian. To whom it seemed a thing absurd and unlikely, that the
holy ghost should fail the church, in the revealing and opening to the same
of any wholesome and necessary truth, that gods bailiff and Christ's vicair
should suffer so many churches to fall in to an erroniouse and wrong belief,
that so many agreing all in one faith should err, that no chance should at
one time or an other have varied the order (had it been naught) of that doctrine
which so many churches taught This wrote he when Christ's church was yet in
herba, when it had continued little above two hundred years. What would he
have said were he now alive in our time, to hear that all the churches in
the wide world, the same where the apostles them selves governed, from whence
as from a spring all scripture, all true religion next after god, flowed in to
the reast of Christendom, should be noted agreing all in one faith to have
perniciously erred, not one hundred years or two, but by the continual space
of fiftene hundred. Or if that confession fell from you in your Apology
unawares (as in a book set forth with such public consent first, commendid to
the world next, as the common and certain pledge of your religion, and last
of all vaunted to be placed openly in the eyes of all the world, and such as no
one of your adversaries were able to refell, it is not easi to be presumed:)
yeat for the term of nine hundred years at the least. For, for so long
continuance the most part of you grant, that we are able to bring proufes and
witnesses of our religion, and therefore you challenge all the writers that
have written within that compass. Would he not now have cried out, and have
asked where was become the holy ghost apppointed by Christ, demanded of the
father to lead the church in to all truth? Whether it were likely that so
many and notable churches agreing all in one faith should err? would he not
think we take up our new doctors, you and your companions, telling you
that the truth lay ever bound and could never be losed till friar Luther and
his brother Zuinglius came and set it at liberty: and that in the mean season
the ghospel was never preached aright, baptesme euel ministered, with such like
functions in the church?

But leaving Tertullian and coming nearer to our own time, will not thinck
you Hieronimus Osorius laughe in his sleeue, The year of our lord. 182*
when of thirteen hundred years (for so long is it and more sense we English
men first received the faith at the hands of pope Eleutherius) M. Haddon his
adversary, M. Haddons confession of the continuance of the Gospel in England.
after so much turning and tossing, troubling and vexing, of Cicero his master
and chiefest author of his divinity: could at the length with much ado, find
but.24. years that our country had continued in the doctrine of the gospel?
Is he not like think you to serve him again with this tennis ball: Hoc est
tuu^ Gualtere nescio stupidius an improbius ad Hieronimi epist. respo^sum? And
will not some other trow you, cut him short of this accounte eleven years,
and bid him for.30. lacking six, to write.30. lacking.17. Except he will fly
to this to justify his reaconing, that as soon as the pope was once banished,
although Mass, Mattins, and all other service continued till the death of
king Henry: that yeat was all as it should be and according to the doctrine of
their gospel. How ever it be, four and twenty or.13. years, has not the
Queen our gratiouse lady trow you, and the whole realm good cause to decree
and appoint a perpetual salary out of the common coffers to such a patron?
But because Osorius, is well known to be man good enough for M. Haddon, and
therefore both ca^ and will if he think it needful to reply upon so fond
an answer, defend him self: I will leaving to write any more thereof as
perteining not principally but incidently to my purpose, conclude here this
first cause, with my earnest request to you once again, that you considre it
diligently and seriously, not lightely or scornefully.

THE second cause that has weighed much with me, The.2.
and may also justly do the like with you, is the same that S. Austen
disputing with the Maniches, affirmed to have kept him in the lap of the
catholic church, that is the authority of the same church, by which we are
taught to give credit unto the gospel. Contra epist. quam vocant
fundamentum. cap. 4*
For as he reasoned thus against Manichaeus: Quibus ergo obtemperaui dicentibus
etc. Those therefore whom I beleuid bidding me believe the gospel, why
should I not give credit to the same men warning me not to believe Manichaeus:
so may you or I say to all such factiouse men as labor to bring us from the
obedience of the catholic church of Rome to their part: The church of Rome
the mother and chief of all other, taught us English men first to believe the
gospel, and other knowledge the reof then which we had from that church, we
have none. Why should we not therefore believe that church willing us to give
no credit to Luther, to Zuinglius, to Calvin and such like, seeing we obeyed it
commanding us to believe the gospel? If it deceive us now in counceling us
not to believe them: What more assurance have we that it might not do the like
in delivering to us the gospel?

THIRDLY your inconstancy in misliking one day that which you praised the
other, The.3.
in changing your opinions as makes best for your purpose, in using now in
many things the reasons of the Catholics which once ye condemned: When in
the old writers I find that this was the very manner of the old heretics,
and considre on the other side how the Catholics remain always settled and
stayed, without change or innovation, how so ever the course of time turning
about alter many things to their disaduauntage: this I say has moved me not a
little, to rest rather with them, then stray with you, neither you nor I wot
whither.

And because you shall perceive that I go not about by false and sclaunderouse
reports to bring you in hatred, but have noted truly the manner of your
proceeding that you may the rather detest the same: Call to your remembrance
the changing and turning in and out of your communion book: how the first was
praised for uniformity to be agreing with Christ's institution, and the usage
of the primitive church, and yet in how short a space that being taken away,
you brought in a new to the first in the principal points clean contrary,
to Christ's institution and the order nevertheless of the primitive church as
agreeable just as was the first. And yeat that, whether it be in all points as
ye mind to have it, squared and trimmed, your self and your companions
perhaps can tell: wise men that know the nature of heresy, and have
observed the practice and order of your procedinges think vereily no. And
whether you your self M. Iuell have at any time by private letters to Frauncis
Baldwin cast out any by words to that effect of changing some such things
which yet you take to be but grenelie handled upon better laisure, you know
best your self, at the least he has so reported of you.

But because what you will do hangs but upon uncertain euentes, I shall
leaving that as likely whereof you have given vehement presumptions, put you in
remembrance, that there was a time when your nombre was yet but small, that
the Catholics laid to your charge, that their doctrine was v^iuersallie
receauid of all me^ and in all places: which no doubt Christ assisting always
according to his promise his church, and not suffering hell gates (which one
right well interprets to be meant of heresies) to prevail against the same,
could never have been had their doctrine been false: and that youres was such
as coming sodenlie no man wist from whence, had only found entreteinemte^
at the hands of a few miserable men, who either for the lothesomnes of some
straight and peinefull profession that theie before had bound them selves
unto, gredelie desired now to walcke in the wide fields and broad way of that
large and lewd liberty which theie saw to be openly proclaimed by you:
other else thorough plain desperation of thriuing in their present state,
looked after some change, which as theie trusted might better the same: so were
theie suer could empaire it never. At which time ye could glory in your
fewenes, with boasting on the scriptures wronglie understood, that Christ's
flock was but little, that many were called but few chosen, with such like.
Now behold your inconstancy I pray you. After that your heresies have
gotten in a great part of Germany, in England, France, Scotland and else
where, some more liberty and freer passage, as though all the world were on
your side, you vaunte your selves of your nombre, and make in your Apology
a necessary argument, that your doctrine must needs be true and sound, which
notwithstanding so many enemies, such a nombre of back friends as from the
beginning it has had: has yeat at the length found such happy success* as
that now it ruffleth in the courts and palaces of noble men. O you that
triu^pheas ye do of this little (which yet o god is by all were thy will
otherwise to much, and yet in deed compared with the rest of the Catholics,
or with that nombre and power that in his time Arrius his heresy was of, very
little): what would ye the^ have said, how would you have taken up, the
Catholics reasons of generality and consent, (which now ye set so little by)
if you might once have gotten that advantage by the end, which now of your
small scattred company brag and boaste so much? Even thus did as S. Austen
rereporteth of them, those perniciouse heretics the Donatistes. Who when at
the first theie were but few bragged therein, afterward when theie were growe^
to be many, triumphed likewise in their nombre. The Arrians also when th^ie
were so now increased, that theie had gotten the emperor of the world,
besides a great nombre of bishops and priests, almost all, to take part
with them: had theie not trow you M. Iuell as good cause, (if happy success
against all enemies and gainesaiers be a cause) to triumph then as you have
now. Yea truly in all men's judgment theie had. De ^inod. adu^rsus Arriano^.
But even as of them Hilarious the bishop said: Antea in obscuro atque in
angulis D. Christus Deiesse secundum naturam filius negabatur etc. In times
pastor lord Christ was denied to be the natural son of god, and was
preached having no part of his fathers substance to have had his beginning
common with other creatures of nothing, and thus much only in hocker mocker.
But now heresy breaking in upon us by the help and favor of public
authority, triumphs of that like a co^querour which before she whispered in
corners like a micher: so may we at this time justly say of you. And
therefore we envy not your sorry joy wherewith you would seem to make your
selves merry, but contrary wise do pity much your case, who seeing how you
arre daily driven to such miserable shifts, that you ar feign after the
manner of such old heretics as have heretofore vexed the church to change
with the time your opinions: have not yeat the grace to perceive the same, and
to mislike that doctrine which can not come forward but by such means as
heresies have done.

When it served your tu^ne you defended stoutelie with toothe and nail, that
a woman might not govern a realm laufullie descended unto her, no not in
civil and politic matters. Within how few years, yea months after, taught
ye (the time so serving for your purpose) and yet do, that a woman may rule,
not a realm in temporal things, but the church in spiritual? I am not
ignorant of your excuse in this behalf, which is to cover your malice with
the cloak of a stranger and so to convey the fault from your selves to an
other. But the truth is well known to be far otherwise, both by him who for
that that he was a principal doer therein lurcketh presently in Scotland, and
also by that other who so ever he were that made the book entitled the
harborough for faithefull subjects. Who entending to lay all the burden upon
a straungiers back, having forgotten by misfortune the chief rule of his
art, that a lier should be mindful, even in the first leaf of his book
declares him to have been an Englishema^, when in begging as it were a pardon
for him, he uses thiese words: considering the grief which like a good
membre of that body which then suf^red, he felt. and afterward he declares
that that body was England and no other.

You may remember it is not so long sense, when to put men to death for
religion was a thing horrible you said, and expresselie against the word of
god, and charity of the gospel: Now the sword being as you think in your
hands, you teach in your lessons, you cry out in your sermons, and never
left crieng till you had brought it to pass that it was decreed by public
authority, that such as in religion believe not as you do, both may and ought
to suffer death therefore. And surely if the Queen our most graciouse lady
would alter the present state of religion, you would not fail shortly to sing
your old song again, that for religion no man ought to be punished by
death, and I fear me assaie either with some such feditiouse book as against
Queen Marie ye made, or by some other practice (of which your part lacks no
store) to remove her from all manner of government both spiritual and
temporal. For if your liberty in the lord be such, as against your prince
that pleases you not you can say nothing to much (as the author of the
harborough says, he could not that wrote the blast against the government of
women, had he kept him self in the particular parson of his sovereign lady
Queen Mary) who douteth but that you would use it? And for the better proof
hereof, I refer me to that book of late made by your companions of the
succession, whereby every man that wit has may easily perceive, upon such
premises what conclusion was to be looked for: none other forsoothe then the
speedy dispatch of her, whose clemency (being our gratiouse and sovereign
lady) because it could be brought by no means to serve your furiouse sprite,
you thought to work by other means and to provide for the maintenance of
your kingdom your selves. But this power ar ye grown unto (whereof I
marvel also that ye make not your vauntes) that ye can make kings and depose
them when ye ly^t.

This mutabilitie and inconstancy in your own doctrine in so short a space:
in your communion first, one while decreing that it be ministered in common and
leauened bread, by and by reuoking that and bringing it to unleavened: at one
time commanding that your service be in all places used in the English
tongue: not long after changing the same in some places in to the latin, and
yet that rejected once again and the English restored and all this within the
space of little more the^ a year. This day your communion table placed in
the midd^st of the quier, the next day removed in to the body of the
church, at the third time placed in the chauncel again after the manner of
an altar, but yet remoueable as there is any communion to be had: Then your
ministres face one while to be turned toward the Southe, an other while
toward the north, that the wethercocke on the top of the stieple has
been noted not to have turned so often in the space of one quarter of a year,
as your ministre has been caused benethe in the bottom of the church, in
less then one monethe: as though you could not sufficiently declare how
restles an evil heresy is, except you must make your communion table to
run about the church, the ministre first after it and then round about
it, to express the same. This inconstancy I say and tottring in and out,
first about the order of your communion, and then in other things before
noted, causes diverse men and amongst the nombre my self, to suspecte your
doctrine of newness, because naturally we see this hurly burly, and
shifting in and putting out, to chance in things at their first beginning,
and contrary wise never in those that have been of long and settled
continuance.

If such a communion as you now have devised, had ever been before, you should
have found preside^tes, and forms thereof that should have directed you so
certeinelie, that you never could have fallen in to this inconvenience of
making and marring, building and pulling down. But you had no such form, and
therefore I marvel not if it happened unto you as it has.

THE fowerth cause or consideration that has moved me has been this, The. 4.
that besides your own misliking with your own doings, I find (which is a
suer marcke wherebie to know the false and malignant church) that you arre at
dissensio^ amongst your selves one with an other: which has not neither
begone of late, but (even as the poet fained of Cadmus men) sprange up
together with that unhappy seed of your deuelishe doctrine.

What should I hear trouble your ears with the unpleasant remembrance of
that implacable dissension (for which even at this day their ofspringe ar one
with an other at deadly food) of your first parents Luther and Zuinglius,
or of your elder brothers Calvin and Oecolampadius? What should I remember
your own good agreement at home, which your last assembly in your
convocation has made to all the realm so manifest and well known? And yet is
this dissension of youres not in owtewarde ceremonies or triffling matters, as
yo we would have men to believe, or in the diversity of apparel as wherewith
for lack of other stuff, to the great defacing of your part, you arre
constreined to charge us: but in the highest mysteries and greatest points of
our religion. For how many opinions ar there amongst you concerning the
justification of a Christian man? how many of the value of good worckes? how
many about baptesme? how agree you with your late head that calls god the
author of their damnation that arre damned, Calvin. lib. 3. Instit. cap. 23.
except you call him so toe? how can you be said to agree, who call that
laufull, which the chief of your company calls blasphemy? how agree you
with your selves in that high mystery of the sacrament of Christ's body and
blood, Calvin. in 1. Osee. ^ 7. Amos.
of whom some of you, and the better some to if learning and honesty may
take any place, defend with Luther Christ's real presence in the sacrament,
other some with Zuinglius deny the same.

My leisor serves me not M. Iuell, or if it did my purpose is not here (which
a just volume would scarce receive) to heap together all the contrary
opinions, which sense the first hour that your father Luther opened the wide
doors of his wicked schools, either he in his life time, or his scholars sense
his death, have either taught contrary to them selves or one to an other. It
shall be enough for me friendly to warn you, to take good heed thereof in
time, and for the surplus to advertise you to resort to the worckes of Hosius,
of Lindanus in his tables, Fredericus Staphylus, Georgius VVicelius, both some
times enfected with your heresies, Martinus Cromerus, and diverse other: where
if you list you may more at large see, this dissension lively and at the eye
deciphred. Although I fear me you be not ignorant thereof your own self,
Apology.
which in your Apology of the church of England (for of the penning thereof
at the least you bear the name) to discredit and utterly deface that
infallible marcke of Christ's flock, The late Apology reasons against v^itie.
which your own conscience of all likelihode told you apperteigned not to
you, unity I mean, reported thereof that the devils lack not that. But long
shall it be M. Iuell before ye shall make any wise man to forsake the unity
of Christ's church, to come to the confusion of your seditiouse synagoge, I
trust, upon the warrant of such wise reasons as this is. Think you because
your pleasure is to call by the name of unity, the devils wicked agreing in
vexing and molesting of mankind, that therefore theie that considre how the
apostles began their doctrine therewitheall, how theie continued with the ^ame,
(for of them is it written that th^ie had cor vnum, and animam vnam, one heart
and one mind) how S. Paul commended it to the Ephesians, Cap. 4. 1. Cor. 14.
Joan. 13.
how god is called the god of peace, and not of dissension, how Christ finally
gave it as a badge to his disciples to be known by: and never yet in any age
would suffer, that the adulterer should be hable with all that he could do,
to pull from the fingre of his dear spouse that pretiouse ring of unity:
think you I say, that against thiese weighty considerations, by your
maliciouse cauilling theie will be any thing at all moved? Truly I nothing
doubt but by such dispitefull reasons, a^l good men will in their faith be the
more confirmed and staide. And thus much touching the fowerth cause.

THE. 5. The. 5.
cause that may persuade you to mislike your religion, may be the rechlesse
company of your adherentes and confederates. Which is such, that begin at
the one end of the realm, and pass thorough all the shieres, all the citees,
all the towns, and all the villages between that and the other, and generally
as every man is to all mischief most prone and inclined: so shall you
perceive it to be true, that he embraces your religion sonest. And
contrariewise as he is the most simple, the most quiet, the fardest from all
euel conditions, so is he in disposition from the same most abhor^ing. If he
never come to the church to pray, if he fast never, if he be a common Ruffian
that swears, that steals, that blasphemeth, that picketh quarrelles with
his neighbors, that breaks all good order: he is as I said before,
generally youres. For otherwise I know, that both some honest natures there are thorough simplicity (the more is the pity) by you abused, and other some
also ^^^ngest us, who (although thorough the goodness of god theie be staide
from erring in their faith) err yet notwithstanding in their manners most
perniciously. And therefore I say generally and for the most part. So that
I think^ I may be bold to say, for one found out on either part such as I
have described, if ye made the progress that I tell you of, you should find
forty on the other: and if it would please you by the way to visit the
gallows, the gibbettes and other places appointed for the execution of
justice, a far greater nombre toe.

O merciful lord is there any man so ignorant of thy righteouse judgments,
and infinite mercies, that he will rather think that thou have more regard in
the revealing of thy holy spirit of truth, to such hell hounds and wicked
men, Ast. 13. and. 14.
who never fast, who never pray for the obteining thereof (as did thy apostles
before theie received it) then to a nombre of quiet, modest, and harmless
men: who by prayer, by fasting by almoise deeds, by worckes of mercy, by all
virtuous means labor to obtain the same.

But here I wot well some one of you will say, that Christ of a persecutor of
his flock made Paul a dilligent sheppherd, that Marie Magdalen a great
sinner, became of virtue an earnest follower, and that such changes daily you
have in such as come to your religion. Truly if it were so then said you
some what, but experience has well taught us the contrary. For of many that
before theie came to you had some honesty left, or were but meanly evil: as
we have perceived diverse that straight ways became dishonest, and spreading
their sails abroad have launched into the deep goulf of all mischief: so
have we hard of very few that being before evil, your doctrine has at any
time persuaded to be good. For proof whereof, and that it may the better
appear that this is not only true in our country of England, but a mischief
that rages universally, where so ever your false gospel is preached, not
grown of late as though time which corrupts eue^ the best things had
wrought any change therein, but sprung up with the same at the very beginning:
I shall here lay before your eyes the testimony of him, who because he lived
amongst the first fautors of this your countrefeite religion could not be
ignorant of their manners, because he was vehemently suspected, and in some
things also uttered him self to favor your doctrine, can not be by you
challenged as not indifferent, The testimony of Erasmus concerni^^ the nevve
ghospellers. In Epist. in Pseudoeuangelic.
Erasmus Roterodamus. His words extant to be seen touching this matter arre
these. Circunspice mihi populum istum euangelicum, and obserua number minus illic
indulgeatur luxui, libidini, and pecuniae, quam faciunt hi quos detestamini?
Profer mihi quem istud euangelium ex commessatore sobrium, ex feroci mansuetum,
ex rapaci liber alem, ex maledico benedicum, ex impudico reddiderit verecundum.
Ego tibi multos ostendam qui facti sunt seipsis deteriores. That is to say:
Look upon this evangelical people, and mark whether there be amongst them
less riotte, less sensuality, less covetousness, then is amongst them whom
you detest so much. Show me whom this gospel has made of a rauenouse gloot
on a sobre absteiner, of cruel gentle, of couetouse liberal, of a sclaunderer
a good reporter, of an ^nchaste sinner a virtuous liver. I will show the many
that have been made worse then them selves. And a little after. Nunquam eorum
ecclesias ingressus sum, sed aliquando vidi redeuntes a conci^ne, veluti malo
spiritu afflatos, vultibus omnium iracundiam ac ferociam miram prae se
ferentibus. Sic opinor, discedunt milites a concione ducis ad praelium
exhortati. Quis vnquam vidit in eorum concionibus quenquam fundentem lachrimas,
tundentem pectus, aut ingemiscentem? I never was (that is to say) in any of
their churches but some times I have seen them coming from the sermons as
possessed of some evil spirit, the countenaunces of them all declaring a
certain anger and cruelty. So I wene use the soldiers to depart from the
oration of their captain, when they have been exhorted to the battle. when
ever saw in any of their sermons any of them weeping, knocking his breaste or
yet sighing? Thus much has Erasmus touching your new gospel.

I pass over here in silence the infamouse company of common minstrelles and
entrelude plaiers, Ministrelles and players chief ministres in publishi^g the
nevve gospel.
who be all brothers of your fraternity, members of your corporation, and in
so good credit amongst you, that they have their charge of dispensing the
word as well as you. So far forth, that in your filthy and dirty donghill
of stinking martyrs, you call players one of the engines set up by god against
the triple crown of the pope to bring him down. Fol. 750.


Let the civil laws note such marchantes with infamy: ^l. quod ait praetor
ait praetor ff. De his qui not infam. Council. Ca^thag. 7. Cap. 1.
Yeat amongst you they may go for honest men. Let the canons forbid them
to accuse even them that be faulty: Yeat your church admits them to
blaspheme Christ's sacraments, to sclaundre and speak evil of his ministres.
I mean not here bishops only and priests, but princes also and other
magistrates, to whom under god the charge of the common wealth has been
committed. Lib. 1. epist. 10. ad Eucratiu^.
Finally let S. Cyprian say as long as he list, that it is neither agreeable to
the majesty of god, nor discipline of his gospel, that such be admitted to
the holy communion, whereby the honor of the church should by their filthy
and infamouse co^tagion be defiled: yeat is not your communion so pure, but
that that honest kind of men may be^re you company and sit with you even at
one mess, nor your church so honorable, or doctrine ^o parfecte, that you
need to fear the blemishing thereof in to whose hands or mouths so ever it
shall happen to come. But all this I say I pass over, and shall go forward
in prosecuting of other causes that make me to abhor your doctrine.

THE next cause has been upon the consideration of the parson of him that
you boaste to have been the author and founder of your religion. The. 6.
Was not he a lewd lecherouse friar? The first author of the nevve gospel.
an apostata? Married he not (if by so honest a name I may call so filthy a
deed) a nonne, an act besides the commandments of the scriptures so
understood by the church, L. Si quis non dicam C. de episcop. and cleric.
by the civil laws also by Iouinian the emperor twelve hundred years ago
lacking three, under the pain of death most severely forbidden? Was he not
one that passed all other in pride? Deserved he not trow you for these
qualitees that favor and good grace at his fathers hands, Libr. de Missa
angulari.
of the obteining whereof in diverse passages of his worckes he reioiseth so
much: Luther persua^ed by the devil to have Mass.
as of the conference that he says he had with his said father the devil,
when by force of his reasons he was constreined to write against the Mass? of
the familiarity that he showed him when it pleased him to keep him so many
years company, as between them many busshels of salt were eaten? The which
time we may not think neither to hane been idellie spent betwe^ne them, but
as first in the Mass, that so afterward he enstructed him sufficiently in
the rest. Amongst which enstructions was it not trow you a lesson meet for
such a scholemaister: Si vxor nolit aut non possit, ancilla venito. If the wife
will not yealde to her husband the due debte of marriage or be not able, let
the maiden come? And again for the husband on the other side, In a sermon of
matrimony printed at vvitem berge first Anno. 1522. after ward An no. 1553.
Tom. 6. German fol. 177.
that if he be in that case that he can not re^dre to his wife the same: that
she shall first ask leave of him to repair to his brother or some other of
his blood for such carnal company, and that finally if she can not obtain
it, she shall get her a way and marie clam? Is not this trow you proof good
enough that your doctrine comes from the devil, while your selves grant
to have received it from Luther, and he both by words and deeds that he had
it from him?

Boaste now of him as long as you list, call him the man of god, claim him for
your patron and founder: term him prestantissimus vir, and ad illustr andum
orbem terrarum a deo datus. the most excellent man, and sent even from god to
lighten the darckenesse of the world, as in your Apology you do. For as we
envy not your fortune: so persuade we our selves, that had all the world
till his coming been as you would bear us in hand it was, overwhelmed with
errors, god would yeat have chosen an other manner of piece to bring it in
frame again, then he either in his life or doctrine showed himself to be: and
that he which should have done such an entreprise, ought to have conferred
with the holy spirit of god, not with the cursed and wicked spirit of Satan.

THE root of this your doctrine, The. 7.
was it not avarice mixed with enuiou^e hatred? whilst Luther the author
thereof, partly for that the office of publishing certain indulgences
granted by Leo then pope, was taken from the order of the Augustine friars of
the which he was one, and committed to the friars preachers of the order of S.
Dominicke (wherewitheall no small gain went also awai^ together from them)
partly of envy, that theie of that religion should be thought meter for the
execution thereof then he or his? And of such roots shall we look for good
fruit? Cast your eye upon other countries where your religion is now
embrased. Considre diligently by what means it found first there
entreteinement, in some upon desire of reuengement, in other by covetousness, by
lechery and such like vices, and in none by charity: and your self I trust
will say with me, that I had good reason to be moved by this consideration.

AN other cause why I have abhorred your doctrine and yeat do, The. 8.
is, for that I find by the ancient histories, and allowed records of the
fathers writings, that in many points of the same, and in your manners
beside, you agree with the old heretics that have heretofore troubled the
church of god, with the Iues, with the Ethnikes and paganes, with tyrauntes
and infidelles, with Antichrist, yea with Satan him self. If you demand of
every one of these several examples, behold here they follow.

Simon Magus.
To begin first with Simon (whom for his knowledge in Magike the histories
have called Magus) for as much as of all heretics he may be rightly called
the father, I^inaeus. lib. 1. cap. 20.
as he that living in S. Peter's time, That go^d vvorckes be not meritoriouse,
an here^y of Simon Magus.
first maintained that we read of, any heresy against the truth: have you
not borrowed this wholesome doctrine of youres, that such good worckes as god
gives us the grace to do, merit for us nothing toward our salvation?

Nouatus.
Nouatus whose heresies raged in the church in S. Cyprian his is time,
Cornelius being the^ pope about the year of our lord. 249. withdrewe him
Histor. trip. lib. 8. cap. 9.
self from the obedience of the Sea of Rome: Nicephor lib. 6. cap. 30. The
pope renou^ced.
he exacted a solemn oath of those that received the blessed sacrament of the
altar at his hands, that they should vttrely renounce the obedience of the
pope which was at that time Cornelius, as I said before. Do not you the like?

Manichaeus in the year of our lord. 271.
The Manichees denied that man has any freewill. Hieron. in proaem. dialog.
ad^ers. Pelag. August. de haeresib. cap. 45.
They refused to fast on such days as the church had appointed and
prescribed, and therefore they fasted not the wednesdaies and fridaies as all
Christian men beside did, Free will. Fasting. days.
but the sondaies, as witnesses S. Epist. 86. ad Casulanum praesbit.
Austen.

A^^rius. almost. 1300. years ago.
A^^rius did not only refuse to observe the prescript and appointed fasting
days, alleging for him ^elf that so he should be under the judicial yoke of
bondage (a reason also of youres M. Iuell and your companions when ye claim
the liberty of your new gospel) but he was an enemy also to sacrifice and
prayers for the dead, Epiph. lib. 3. ^aeres. 75. Sacrifice and prayers for the
dead.
and defended that they were unlawful.

Iouinianus in the year. 388.
If you agree not justly with the Manichees and the A^erians, it is because you
have ouerrunne them. For you deny not simply with A^e^rius the offering up to
god of sacrifice for the dead, but you (which they were not so impudent to
do) condemn all manner of sacrifice both for the quick and the dead. You
arre not contented barely to deny the solemn fasting on certain prescript
and appointed days, but going farther condemn with Iouinian the August. de
haeresib. cap. 82. Abstine^ce from meats.
hereti^e, all manner of fasting and abstinence from meats utterly. A^erius
and Manicheus although they would be bound to no certain time, fasted yeat at
some time: only you will fast at no time, so religiously do you keep, and so
fast do you hold the fast learned of Iouinian your auncestor.

He taught that all sins were equal: No difference of sins.
you put no difference between venial and mortal.

The virginity of noonnes, and continency of men choosing to live single,
Virginity and marriage.
he counted no better nor more meritoriouse, then the chaste marriages of other
men. For so reports S. Austen of him by thiese words. Virginitatem etiam
sanctimonialium, and continentiam sexus virilis in sanctis eligentibus coelibem
vitam, coniugiorum castorum atqueue fidelium meritis adaequabat. August. lib.
2. Retract. cap. 22. De peccat. merit. lib. 3: cap. 7.
The vows of chastity he animated and encouraged those that had made them to
break them. His wicked persuasions were, to the men, by asking them whether
they thought them selves to be better then Abraham and other the holy fathers
that were married: to the women, whether they durst compare them selves with
Sara, with Su^anna and such holy women, that were also married and had
husbands. Whether you agree in this point with Iouinian, let the hearers of
your sermones and readers of your books judge. Or if you will not put the
matter to judgment but your selves confess as the truth is, that you
received this doctrine from Iouinian: if you will needs stand in defense
thereof that it is both sound and good: then expostulate with S. Austen, why
he called Iouinian the first author thereof a monstre, why he termed the
doctrine it self heresy, when nombring it amongst other heresies he wrote
thereof in this manner: Cito tamen ista haeresis oppressa and ex^incta est,
Here Is. 82.
nec vs^que ad deceptionem aliquorum sacerdotum potuit peruenire. This heresy
notwithstanding was quickly repressed and sone extinguished, nor ever could
it come to be able to deceive any priests.

Hear you not here S. Austen, calling this doctrine of youres heresy? Hear
you him not as it were reioising of the sodeine decay thereof, and that
although the author deceived therewith some seely simple women, he was not yeat
able to entrappe any priest? Oh had he lived in our time when Martin Bucer
taught the same doctrine that Iouinian did: if he had seen Peter Martyr not a
priest only but a moncke also, so far deceived that he should be yoked in
countrefeite marriage to a nonne: What think you he would have said? What
metal would (may we judge) M Haddo^ his pair of golden old men have been
tried out to, be if they had been touched by S. Austens touchestone? Thus much
of Iouinian.

Vigilantius in the year. ^98.
Vigilantius the heretic against whom S. Hierome wrote, Hiero^. contra
Vigi^a^iu^ ad Exuperium.
murmured against the tapers and lights that burned in the church, he spoke
against the worshipping of saints, and despised the holy relics of martirs.
Lo M. Iuell an other of your fathers.

Eutiches in the year, 453,
Leo the pope the first of that name, Epist. 75.
complaining by his letters to Martianus the emperor, of such outrages as were
committed in Alexandria by the fury of Eu^iches and his companions, who denied
that our Savior had any more then the divine nature: emo^gest other words
has also these: Intercepta est sacrificij ob^a^i^, defecit Chrismatis
sanctificatio. the oblation of the sacrifice is by their means kept from the
people the halowing of the crisme fails. Who keeps from us in our country
the daily sacrifice? Who lets the sanctifieng of that crisme, the lack
whereof in the baptising of Nouatus that heretic, Corn^lius a bishop of Rome
and a holy martyr, writing to Fabianus the bishop of Antioche, judged to have
been the cause as Eus^bius reports, Lib. 6. Cap. 33.
why he never received the holy ghost? who but you treading the steps of
Euti^hes and his folowers going before you?

I might here allege diverse other heretics from whom you have borrowed a
great part of the rest of your wicked and perniciouse opinions, were it not
that I hope, that this which allreadie has been brought, shall be sufficient to
make you either to mislike the other, or to give you at the least just
occasion to seek therefore your self: and also for this, that in the
pro^ecuting of your agreement with them in their manne^s, many other of their
opinions arre like in that discourse to come to light also.

Of the Protestants agreement with the old heretics, with the infidelles,
with Antichrist, with Satan him self.

Paulus Samosatenus The year. 273.
Eusebius writes in his ecclesiastical history, Lib. 7. cap. ^6.
that Paulus Samosatenus (whose her^sie was that Christ the son of god never
came from heaven) trained up after that sort his hearers, that at his lessons
and sermones they should both men and women give great showtes, in token of
that liking and pleasure that they took in their masters doctrine. Si quis
vero auditorum honestius and verecundius agens a clamore nimio temperasset,
velut iniur^am faciens pati^batur iniuriam: If any of his hearers (says
Eusebius) behauing him self honestly and shamfastly had absteined from
outeragiouse crieng: he, as though he had done an injury, received one. Do
not you and your fellows follow in this point Paulus the heretic? Is he not
noted by you for a papist, and in danger of a shrewde turn that being present
at your sermones answers not Amen, to your blasphemies uttered against the
most holy sacraments? to your execrations against the catholics, to your
frantic bragges what you will do, how many men's lives it shall cost before
your religion be altered? Look you not so indecently for this (as E^sebius
said that Paulus did) that some of you have been noted upon your audience
defaulte in missing to answer at their cue, to have twice repeated the same
thing, to have paused and made a stay, whereby they have given to all men to
understand, how miserably they depend upon the blast of the peoples mouths?

Donatistae.
The Donatistes a perniciouse sect of heretics, Lib. 6. con^ra Donatist.
committed (as Optatus that learned bishop writes of them) sacrilege in
overthrowing the holy altars of god, Altars overthrown.
on which being (says he) the seat of Christ's body and blood his members
were wont to be sustained. Optatus. Lib. 2. cont^a Donatist.
They gave the blessed sacrament to dogs: the crismatory with the sacred
crisme they violently threw on the ground: being called to the council of
the catholics, August. lib. 3. ^cap. 4. 5. contra Crescon. Gramat.
there to answer to their doctrine, they refused to come and kept them selves
away. When they appeared one time at the council, August. Epist. 15^
to make their cause seem the better and to glory in the multitude of their
bishops, amongst diverse that were absent they c^aftilie packed in to the
nombre the name of one that was dead before, affirming not withstanding that
he lived and believed as they did. August^ Bonifacio comiti epist 50.
Of those that were priests, of some they plucked out the eyes: of one
bishop they cu^ of the tongue and hand, and many they murdered.

Behold I beseech you good Readers in this one sect of heretics the
Donatistes, how many points there arre wherein our Caluinistes and they
agree. In demonstrat. aduers. Gentil. quod Christ Sit deus.
The altars (the building up whereof in our country of England Chrysostom
used as a demonstration to prove that we had received the strength of gods
word) they overthrow as they did: and as Optatus said by the Donatistes
doing the like, they follow therein the Iues. For as they laid hands on
Christ being upon the cross: so do these upon him on the altar. If they have
not given the blessed sacrament to dogs, yeat have they trodden it under their
wicked and worse then dogs feet. The holy crisme, that sacred ointement
wherewith at their entering in to this world, and at their departure from
hence, all true Christian men from the apostles time hitherto, have used
continual^y to be signed and anointed: how vilanouslie they have handled, it is
to all men better known then that it needs to be by me here rehearsed. The
Councelles, the laufull remedy left by almighty god in his church to repress
heresies, it is a world to see how both the heretics of these days, and
those of times past, have all ways sought means and yeat do to avoid.
Macedoni^9.
Thus feined Macedonius the heretic him self to be sick, Histor. tripart.
lib. 5. cap. 34.
when he was cited to appear at a council appointed to be holden at a place
called Seleucia a town of Isauria. Thus lurcked Dioscorus from the council of
Calcedon and would by no means appear. Thus did the Donatistes being called
to Carthage: Thus do the protestants being somoned to Trent.

The Donatistes to increase their nombre, and to make it seem the greater,
feined that diverse bishops who were absent, and one emo^gest the rest that
was dead, did take part with them against the catholics. Impudent liers were
they good readers in so saying, Epist. 152
and for no less did S. Austen note them. But how much more impudent arre our
new gospellers, who feine not this of men absent, but of them that were
present, not of the dead, but of them that be living, not of them that being
present and asked their opinions and sentences answered either feintly or
nothing at all, whereby some manner of consent might seem to be gathered: but
of them who standing most stoutely in defense of the truth, chose rather to
leese gooddes, living, liberty, life and all, then by giving their consent to
the contrary, to betraie the pore flock committed to their charge? Was there
no other way M. Iuell to banishe the authority of the pope out of the realm,
but to abuse the Queen's highness with this feined supplication: Anno. 1.
Reginae E^ lizabethae.
Most humbly beseech your most excellent majesty your faithefull and
obedient subjects the lords spiritual and te^porall etc. Was this the only
mean to persuade the people that your doings were laufull, to bear the^ in
hand that the ^ishoppes who with all their power with stood it, were they that
chieffely labored to have the popes authority abolished? (...). 8.
Well Diabolus est mendax and pater ^ius. The devil is a lier and so was his
father before him, and therefore as I marvel not at your agreement in this
point with the Donatistes: so I will dwell no longer in the conferring of you
in this point together.

The cruelty used by the Donatistes toward the catholics in cutting of
hands, in plucking out of eyes and tongues, was great it can not be denied:
but compare it with that rage of the Caluinistes practiced of late years upon
the pooer catholics in France, and you will say that it was curt oise
dealing. For what? Contented they them selves trow you with the only cutting
of their hands, with the spoiling them of their eyes and tongues? The cruelty
of the Caluinistes in France.
This they did I wot well, but alas their fury rested not here. For they
besides this, tieng halters about the necks of such innocent priests as
gods providence suffered to fall in to their hands, first drew them
dispituously after their horses, the^ picked out their eyes, cut of their
ears, noses, or privy parts: ware their ears in their hattes (to glory the
rather in their malice) instead of brooches, and finally either hanged up the
miserable casses striving for life and death, or with the stroke of a pistolet
dispatched them out of the way at once. Of some they hackled and mangled the
faces: of other some to prove their force and strength they cleft the heads in
two at one stroke.

What should I here remember that horrible act committed by them upon an old
religiouse man at Man's, more barbarouse and inhumaine, then that the histories
and monumentes of the time past can show us of all the cruel tirauntes, of
all the barbarouse nations and savage natures that have gone before, any one,
no not of Julian the apostata, Theodorit. lib. 3. cap. 6.
who as it is written of him of such women as had vowed perpetual virginity
caused the bellies first to be opened, then after to be stuffed with barlie,
and last of all the innocent virgins to be thrown to the hogs of them to be
devoured: not of him I say or any other so much as one example of cruelty,
that may be able to match this. For who would ever think in men endowed
with reason, and those especially whose mouths and tongues sound so commonly
the Gospel the Gospel, Horrible cruelty.
such inhumanitie should have been found, as first to cut of the privy parts
of their Christian brother, then to fry them, after to cause him by violence
to swallowe them down, and last of all to rippe the stomach of him being yeat
a live, to see what was become thereof?

Marvel not now good readers if at S. Macarius they buried the catholics
quick, if they cut the very infantes in two, if they ripped the bellies of
priests and drew out by little and ^^ttle their entrailles, winding the same
either about some stick or tree. Marvel not if at a vilage called Patte six
or seu^n leagues distant from Orleance, they spared not so much as the innocent
age of infancy: but whereas two little children had by chance gotten out of
the belfrie whither the residue to the nombre of twenty or five and twenty were
for their sauegarde fled: these cruel murderers not gospellers but
manquellers, meting with them in their flight brought them back again, and
threw them in to the fire there to perish with the rest.

If I should here particulerly rehearse all the cruel and horrible acts done
by the Caluinistes in France, a whole book truly should I make thereof. This
which already has been brought may suffice for the comparing of them, I will
not say with the Donatistes only, but with the most cruel and barbarouse
tirauntes that ever lived. Of the rest who so is desierouse to have more
perfect knowledge, him remitte I to the book entitled Du Saccagement des
Eglises printed at Paris, and written by Claudius de Saints: out of the
which I have taken what so ever has here been alleged touching this cruel
dealing of theirs.

Arriani.
The next comparison is of our gospellers with the Arrians. Whose vilanie and
hatred toward the blessed sacrament of the altar was such, Victor De
perse^ut. Vanda^c. lib. ^ cap. 3.
that they trod it under their wicked feet. The churches in Africa they
ouerthrewe and made of them stables for their L.^. C. d^e off. prefect.
praetor.
horses. Of the vestimentes and altar clothes they made shurtes Victor lib. 3.
and breeches. They burned the books, they spoiled the churches of their
ornaments, as in an epistle written by the bishops of Egypt to Marcus the
pope it appears more at large. Finally as Gregorius Nazianzenus writes,
mysteria verterunt in comoedias. The mysteries of our religion they turned in
to plays and comedies.

What one thing is there of all these, Orat. ad Heron. Philosophum.
that you and your companions have omitted to do M. Iuell? wherein agree you
not with them? Can you say that you have not abused the sacrament by treading
it under your feet? That you have not overthrown churches and turned them to
worse uses, then to stables? that you have not made breeches, shurtes, yea
cotes for plaiers and dizzardes, of the holy vestimentes and altar clothes?
that you have not burned the church books and other ornaments, and most
shamefully spoiled the temple of god? have you not to conclude, which I tremble
as often as I remember, turned the mysteries of our faith, the sacraments of
the church, the pledges of our redemption, into comedies and plays? I would
to god you never had. But as it is more manifest that you have so done then
that it can be denied: so seem you to give little token of repentance thereof,
when you brag of your infamouse company of plaiers, that they arre one of the
three engines set up of god, to pluck down the popes triple crown: as much
to say although you plainly express it not, as to overthrow all true
religion.

Iulianus Apostata. the year. 365.
Iulianus the emperor, who of a good and virtuous catholic prince became
suddenly a cruel wicked and tirannouse persecutor of Christ in his members:
began the foundation of this goodly new religion of his, with the
Theodoritus. lib. 3 Cap. 6
robbing of churches and spoiling the clergy of their priuileages. He
banished aft^rwarde the priests and faithefull, he ouerthrewe the aultars and
caused the sacrifice to cease, as in a sermon that Chrysostom made of the two
martirs Iuuent. and Maximus, who being both soldiers and men of arms,
would he says sacrifice and offer up them selves to god, seeing the sacrifice
of the church ceased, it may most manifestly appear. He reproved the
Christians as witnesses Cirillus, lib. 6. ^^^tra lu^i^n. The cross.
and called them wretched men for doing reverence (as then was the guise of
Christian men) to the cross of Christ, for making the sign thereof in their
forheades, for painting of it on the doors of their houses: Lib. 10. co^tra
Iulia^.
he reproved them for worshipping the relics of martirs, for visiting their
tombs, for praieng to them at their graves and sepul^hres, calling them dead
men. He ouerthrewe Sozomen lib. ^. cap. 12.
the image and picture of Christ: The arcke or shrine wherein were religiously
kept the bones of S. John Baptist he brake open, burnt them The^do^^. lib. 3.
Cap. 6.
and dispersed abroad the ashes.

Now to make the comparison: Whether you contemn as Iulianus did the cross of
Christ, whether with him you call them wretched men that reverence it, that
make the sign thereof on their foreheades, that painte it on their doors,
keep it in their houses: let your burning and breaking of so many thousands,
your banishing them out of the churches, your troubling and vexing of such
honest men as being desirouse to have with them some lively remembrance of
Christ's death and passion to stur up their col^e devotion, to move their dull
and heavy affections, keep them for that purpose: your judgments agreing all
on him whom entering in to a church falling upon his knees, you behold
marcking his forheade with this sign (which was notwithstanding once as
witnesses Chrysostom the manner of kings at their entrance in to the
church) to be most assuredly an enemy to Christ's gospel: Homil. De
pe^t^coste.
Finally let that horrible act done in the late troubles in France by your
companions, Michael Fabritius contra B^^am.
who in the contumely of the same coming in to a church where was the image
of Christ crucified, strangled first two priests and then hanged them up
after on either side of it, be a most ample and sufficient testimony thereof.
As for the rest, deny that you agree with him if you can. So little shall that
displease me, that you shall I protest make me very glad to hear thereof, give
me good cause to hope and occasion to pray, that at the length you will and
also may, falling away from all other heretics and all their diuelishe
heresies, draw home to the lap of your mother that suer sanctuary, from
whence to your own harm and her great grief, you have so far strayed.

Ethnikes. Iues.
The Ethnikes and heathen men brake the image of Christ as Sozomenus lib. 5.
cap. 21.
writes. The Iues as Athanasius lib. de pass imag. Christi.
reports, crucified it on a certain time even as their fathers did Christ
him self. They asked of him in whose house the image was found, how being a
Jew he durst keep the image of Christ. They accused him to their high
priest therefore. I marvel not here that the Paganes and Jews did this, but
I marvel and never can be satisfied with marueiling, how they that profess
the name and faith of Christ dare do it. How the Jews argument made to their
fellow: Thou art a Jew by name and faith, therefore thou do evil to
retain with the the image of Christ, holds: how the conclusion is inferred,
I see well. But on the other side, how this argument framed in Luthers schole:
thou art a Christian, thou do therefore naught to keep with the the image
of Christ, how this reason I say concludes I confess in good faith I wot
not, nor in their new logic have learned as yeat so far. Petr. Crinit.
lib. 4. de honest. discipl.
The Ethnikes had a peuishe property although they could in no wise abide the
image or picture of Christ, to make yeat figures and pictures whereby to mock
and scorn the Christians. And is not this the exercise that you put such of
your brethern to in mocking and scorning the catholics, How the heretics
occupy their igno rant and unlearned brethern.
as being ignorant and altogether unlearned arre for preaching or writing
vttrely unmeet? Do you not suborne the^ to poison after this sort such by
the eyes, as they arre not able by the ears? with their wicked hands, which
they can not with their doltish heads and foolish tongues?

Antichrist.
Hippolitus an ancient bishop, He lived in the year of our orde. 220.
a learned father, and constant martyr, of whom S. Hierome makes mention in a
book entitled De scriptoribus ecclesiasticis: writing of the coming of
Antichrist and of the end of the world, has of him these words: (...). Sed
ecclesiarum ^des sacrae tugurij instar erunt: praetiosumqueue corpus and
sanguis Christi in diebus illis non extabit, ^iturgia extinguetur. But the
churches that is to say, shall be in Antichrists time like cotages, the
pretiouse body and blood of Christ shall not be to be had: the sacrifice
shall be quite extinguished. Who is he that hears this and sees what you have
done, that can yeat doubt whether your doings be laufull, and you the
foreronners of Antichrist?

The Devil.
With the Devil, to conclude, although by other diverse and sondrie ways you
have well testified your agreing: yeat in my opinion in no one thing more,
either often or evidently, then in that hatred that you bear, and fear that
you seem to stand in, of Christ's cross. Gregorius Nazianzenus and
Theodoritus report both, In Orat. quam hab. contra Iul. Lib. 3. cap. 3.
that after Iulianus the emperor had renied his faith, he kept company with
coniurours and sorcerours, With whom chauncing to be on a time as a devil was
raised ^p to do some feate, being a fearde of that terrible and unwonted
sight (more of a custom used in cases of fear when he was a Christian then
for any devotion) he made on his foreheade the sign of the corsse, whereapon
the foul find vanished away. How fly you I pray you and your companions
from him, how seek you by all means to avoid his company, how wary and
circumspect be you that you enter in to no frendeship or acquaintance with
him, whom you once see demean him self after this sort?

Hethertoe touching your agreement with the old heretics, with infidelles and
Paganes, with Jews, with Antichrist and Satan: not so much I confess as some
other of greater reading had been able to have alleged, neither yeat so little
for all that, but that you may if you be not a let to your self, take some
commodity thereby. For who is there of you so evil advised, or void of
grace, that loking on the one side to the old heretics, Simon Magus, Ae^rius,
Manichaeus, Iouinianus, Vigilantius, the Donatistes, the Arrians with the rest
of that company before reh^rsed: and finding that they have heretofore been
noted by the doctors and ancient writers for heretics, for molesters and
troublers of the church of Christ, for maintening the same opinions and doing
the same acts then, which you both maintain and do now: and casting his eye
on the other side to all such other heretics as these latter times and days
of ours have brought forth (the nombre whereof is infinite) and observing
diligently, that what other heresies so ever they have propre to themselves, be
they Anabaptists, be they Adamites, be they Libertines, be they Swenckfel
dians, be they if you list David georgians, that yeat they agree neu^rthelesse
with you in your doctrine: what such man is there I say, who weighing with
him self all this, can think other then that he has been and is deceauid. At
the least M. Iuell, if you can not win of your self so to think: if you
have been so long nooseled in this sweet company that you will needs continue
therein still: yeat blame not us if when you deny the merit of good worckes
with Simon magus: if when you take away free will with the Manichees, bar
the dead of the sacrifice of the church and suffrages of the living, as did
Ae^rius: if when you deny the worshipping of saints with Vigilantius: we
call you with Irinaeus, with Epiphanius, with S. Hierome and with S. Aust^^,
heretics. Be not offendid with us if you go about with Iouini^n to compare
matrimony with virginity, to condemn vows, to overthrow fasting, if we use
S. Austens words spoken by Iouinian that did the like, and call you mo^stres,
and your doctrine heresy. Take it not in evil part if we note you of
sacrilege for pulling down the altars, as Optatus did the Donatistes when ^hey
did the like: if we answer you when in your inuectiues against the blessed
saints you call them with Julian dead, that you offend therein as Cirillus
answered Julian, Lib. 10. co^^ra Julian.
when he so said. If you break the image of Christ and tomble it out of the
church with the Ethnikes: Sozomenus lib. 5. cap. 21.
bend not the brows at us, if with the Christians we gather to gether the
broken pieces, The image of Christ placed by the Christians in the church
1200. years ago.
and place it in the church again. If you scorn and laugh at us for doing
reverence to Christ's cross, cite us not to the long chapel in Poules, if we
weep for you according to the council of Chrysostom, willing us for men
laughing in such a case, to weep, as for them that be out of their wits.

To conclude, if you think to continue in this company, Sup. Math. ^omil. 54.
and yeat enjoy the name of catholics, bear with me if I use to you the
words of S. Austen, in a cause not much unlike by him spoken to the
Donatistes. The words arre these. Epist. 186.
Quae est ista dementia, vt quum male viuitis, latronum facta facitis, and quum
iure punimini, gloriam martyrum requiratis? What a madness is this quoth he,
that being of evil lives as you ar, doing the acts of thieves as you do, and
being therefore laufully ponished, you challenge yeat the glory of martyrs?
What a world is this M. Iuell, that scowring old heresies as you and your
companions do, doing the acts of heretics, thieves, paganes, Jews and
diuelles, you yeat challenge the gloriouse title of true Christians and good
catholics?

THE next cause has been, The. 9.
for that I find in your religion no certain rules or principles to build
upon, but such as having hitherto been challenged by all the ancient heretics
for theirs, may welbe called starting holes for your foxishe generation being
sore pressed to flee unto. For proof whereof, grant to an heretic those
principles, which you demand to be granted to you (of which these arre
part, that nothing is necessarily to be beleuid and followed as a truth, but
tha^ which may expressly be found in the lettre of the scrip ture, that of
the sense of go^des word and true meaning thereof there is no other judge then
the scripture it ^elf, as of the which one place fails not to expound an
other, that Christ's church is invisible, with such like) and there was never
yeat heresy so absurd, but that he will be able against you and all your
companions to defen^e it. Whereas the catholics on the other side have for
their part such contrary grounds, as wherewith the ancient writers have
always contended against the old and ancient heretics. Lib. de Sp^ritu
sancto. Cap 27.
For they say with S. Basile, that many things have been delivered to us
necessary to be bele^ed by Christ and his apostles, whereof the scripture
makes no mention at all. They teach with S. Austen as you hard before in the
first cause, that the church of Christ is visible. Co^tra Cres^ con Gram. lib.
1. cap. 33.
And with him also they arre bold to say, that in doutefull questions arising
upon the understanding of the lettre, we must appeal to the churches
determination. The. 10.


AN other reason (in the prosecuting whereof also I must crave pardon at your
hands if perhaps it chance me to touch your parson more nearer then you
would I should: remembering always that eae maxim sunt salutaria remedia,
quae acerbissime^ doloru^ faciunt) is, for that your^ doctrine being first
grounded and then continually after supported and maintained by lies, it can by
no means be that it ever should proceed from the spirit of god. Which being
the spirit of all truth, has no need of the help of lies to be underpropped
withal.

Be not your lies M. Iuell in slaundring of men, in false translations, in
wrong allegations, vttred the rather to deceive without cotatio^s, in mangling
and tearing of the Doctors and Counsels, as it pleases you and best may
make for your purpose: so manifest and to the world so well known, that theie
can be concealed no longer? What opinion might think you the Council of late
assembled (the most virtuous, learned, and wisest heads of the world) have
of you and your doings, when in your Apology amongst so many lies, ^heie
found that of all other most gross and impudent, in which you sclaundred so
wickedlie, the flower of this age Hosius the Cardinal? What may your own
country men think of your religion, when to place it the more easily there,
you feined (as I noted before in comparing you with the Donatistes) that the
catholic bisshoppes had consented to the banishing out of the realm the pope
and his authority? But hereof I forbear to write any more forasmuch as it
has by me already ben^ sufficiently urged. Only of this I can not but warn
you mine own dear country men, to take good head, to have always a diligent
eye to this lieng and suttell generation, and to think ever with your selves
that they who in things so evident and manifest, done at home even at your
own noses, have not refreined so impudently to abuse you, will make no
curtosie, or have any conscience in things more more secret or priuey to do
the same. And therefore marvel not by the way, that M. Haddon has borne
Hieronimus Osorius a straungier, a Portugal, M. Haddon.
a man ignorant of our affairs in hand, that religion was not altered in
this realm, nisi conspirantibus ecclesiae proceribus, but by the consent of
the bishops: or that he made him of our abbayes this accounte, that they
were dist^ibuted, pios ad vsus scholarum, A cademiarum, and Zenodochiorum: to
the godly uses (that is to say) of schools, of vniu^rsities, and hospitalles.

That the pope for a certain ordinary tribute to be to him yearly paid,
gives his priests free licenses and dispensations under his great seal
openly to keep concubines without controlleme^t, is it not an abominable lie?
Of that reverend old man, and great learned clerk M. Doctor Clement, whom
in your Apologye you have also to the world most shamefully sclaundred, what
shall I hear speak? seeing that he religiously denie^h that fact, which you
barely without proufes, without witnesses, lay^ to his charge. Which denial of
his I doubt not, shall amongst the better sort be taken, V^ler. Max. lib. ^
cap. 7.
to be of as great force against your false and untrue report, as was the
answer of Aemilius Scaurus that noble Roman, made in few words to the long
and odiouse oration of his infamouse accuser Varius Sucronensis, vttred before
the people of Rome in these words. Qui^^tes, Varius Sucronensis ait, Aemilius
Scaurus negat: vtri credi^^^? That is to say. Varius Sucronensis O ye Romans
affirms, Aemilius Scaurus denies: whether think you it best to believe? The
which words were no sooner spoken (so well were their honesties both known to
the people) but he was with great applause of the commons pronounced innocent,
and his adversary condemned in his own action.

If to establishe your doctrine you use thus to sclaunder and belie the
adversaries thereof, two things will follow thereapon. First that you shall
take from us all manner of merueile, why you so falselie report the old
fathers, who were to this world so many a hundred year sense dead, seeing
that even of them who be yeat a live, whose books and tongues, whose bodies
and whole lives manifestly bear witness of the contrary, you do the like.
And secondarily you shall give men occasion to think, that such doctrine is
very weak, the which to be underpropped must have such stays.

What should we judge of your translation of the holy scriptures, who turn
the word idolum, or simulachrum, in to the word imago an image, and this
forsothe to make us believe, that all the passages of scripture that speak
against the heathen and Gentiles Idols, speak also against the Christians
images: as though between an idol and an image there were no difference at
all. What meant you but to bring the order of priestehode in hatred, when in all
places of your English bibles, where priests have been praised, where any
thing sounds to their commendation, you call them ministres absteining
utterly from the name of priests, whereas contrary wise where their behaueor
has been evil, you spare not that name but use it frelie, Castalio, whose
translation of the bible is so well liked by your part, when he came to that
place in the gospel Dic eccl^siae, Math. 18.
tell the church: so odiouse a thing was in his ears the name of the
church, that for the word church, he gave the word Reipub. common welthe.
Much like honesty showed an other of your companions, Musculus.
in translating the Grieke writer of the ecclesiastical history Socrates. Who
making mention of certain lettres sent by Julius then pope, Socrates. lib. 2.
cap. 17.
to the bishops assembled at Antioche, wherein he reprehe^deth them, that
contrary to the canons and rules of the church, theie had holden a Council
not calling him thither: whereas by the order of the church, there may be no
Council kept without the authority of the B of Rome: He turned the words
(there may be no laws made or no council holden) into these, there may be
no churches consecrate without the B. of Romes authority. Which words if they
had been so, had given yet no small preeminence to the B. of Rome, for whose
license to consecrate a church, theie should be feign to run from the
fardest part of the East church to Rome in the west. But seeing this could
by no means be the mind of the author, who in that chapitre mencioneth not
one word of the dedicating of any church: and that the complaint of the
bishop had been most childishe and without all wit, to have said that theie
had done euel in not calling him to their council, because by the canons
without his authority there might be no churches consecrate, and that also
thereof he him self could not be ignorant: it must necessarily follow that
he did it of wicked malice.

In your doings and allegations M. Iuell, is your faith the (...) you and
dealing any better? No truly. For if it had, (...). Gardener B. of vvin to^
misreported by M. Iuell.
never would you so falsely and untruly have alleged the words of that
excellent and learned bishop of blessed memory, Steuin Gardener B. of
winchestre, upon whom in your reply to M. Doctor Cole you father these
words, as written by him in his book called Marcus Anton. Constantius: Quod
ait panem in sua substantia vel natura manner, ^ol. 71.
vel substantiam sentit Accidente vel nature proprietatem: and call it a
strange phrase of speech to say Substantiam accidente, as truly it had been if
he had either so said or written. But because he did neither, you have well
signified to the world, that it is no new or strange thing with you, to
carry about in your unquiet head a lieng sclaunderouse tongue. The words of
the bishop entreating of the place objected by the heretic out of Gelasius
arre these: Quod addit in sua substantia vel natura manner: (he means panem
and vinum which words go before) vel subsistentiam sentit accidentium, vel
naturae proprietatem. The which how far they differ from youres all men may
see, and your self can not be ignorant. This manner of dealing, to lay to
the catholics charges words that they never spoke, used long ago Celsus the
heretic, as Origene reports of him.

But to let this pass, The council of Carthage mangled by M. Iu^ll. cap. 47.
if you had meant (which of all other in gods matters especially you ought to
have done) to deal plainly, simply and vprightely, would you ever have
brought against the reading of saints lives in the church, the third
council of Carthage? Would you have alleged the first part of the canon:
Placuit vt praeter scriptur as canonic as nihil in ecclesia legatur, that is:
we have agreed that nothing be read in the church besides the canonical
scriptures, and have left out the last, Sub nomine diuinarum scripturarum,
under the name of holy scripture? Wherebie might have appeared, that the scope
of those fathers gathered together in that council, was not to banishe out of
the church the legendes of saints lives, but to agree upon such books of
holy scripture, as (the authority whereof being out of doubt) theie would
have to be readen in the church for scripture and no other. And therefore in
that canon, we find named for canonical scripture to be read in the church,
the books of the Machabees, the epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews, and also
that of S. James, all though theie be not enrolled in your regist^r of Gen^ua.
And that this council meant nothing less then to forbid the reading of
saints lives in the church, the other words that follow, if you had not
guilefullie suppressed them, would well have declared: where the same council
by express words permits, that yearly on the martirs days, their lives
may be read in the church.

Thus plaide you before with the decree of Anacletus, Anacletus gu^lefully
alleged.
except you will say that there you cut of the first part, and here you
left out the last. Thus alleged you corruptelie the words of Leo his
epistle, Epist. 81. ad D^oscor.
which being that the priest may celebrate Mass, offer the sacrifice,
because you would not have those words stick in your readers teethe, you
were so bold to change with him, and as the english proverb has, to steal a
goose and stick in her place a fether. Leo falsified by M. Iuell.
Whereas for those words you say, that Leo permits the priest to
ministre two or three communions in one day. Theophil. Alexandr.


Thus till you coat the place where you find those words will we say that
you have sarued Theophilus Alexandrinus, as before in the article of communion
under one kind I have noted. Thus alleged you once in a sermon that you made
in S. Peter's church in Oxford in the Lent, a saing of S. Austen for the
marriage of votaries: then which neither he, nor all the other fathers that ever
wrote, have or can speak more directly against them. And yet you (so cunning
a Master you ar in your art) made it just to serve your purpose. August. de
bono viduit. cap. 10.
For whereas S. Austens words ar these: Quapropter non possum dicere a
proposito meliori lapsas si nupserint foeminas, adulteria esse non coniugia.
Sed plane non dubitauerim dicere, lapsus and ruinas a castitate sanctiori quae
vouetur Deo adulterijs esse peiores. that is: wherefore I can not say that
such women if theie fall from their better purpose and marie, that this is
adultery and not marriage: but this I dare be bold to say, that the falling
and sliding away from holy chastity vowed to god, is worse then adultery:
you divide the sentence just in the midst, and where he says that he cannot
call such marriages adultery, that sweet soppe you keep for your own
toothe: but that which follows, that he dares be bold to call such manner of
dealing worse then adultery, that sower sauce you make no mention of at all,
but leave it to such scrupulouse consciences, as will not break their fast
with your deintie delicates.

Thus much touching your uneven dealing in Christ's cause. Whereof I can say
no more, but hartelie pray to god that both you and as many, take your
part may earnestly repent and be heartily sorry therefore.

YOVRE rebellion, The. 11.
and open war proclaimed agenst your prince, your sacking his towns, your
robbing his treasour, your murdering his people, your preachers riding with
their pistolettes at their saddle bow, encouraging their soldiers to this
holy battle against their own king: Theodorus Beza.
What is it else then a most strong reason of the naughtines of your
religion? seeing that in all the course of Christ's gospel hethertoe, we never
could find any one such example of Christ or his Apostles to be followed. So
that no less was it truly then merrily said of one, that how ever S. Paul
and Beza agreed in other things, yeat herein theie were far wide, that the one
converted the Gentiles by epistles, the other labourred to peruerte the French
men by pistolettes.

LAST of all, The. 12.
beside the causes and reasons before alleged, confer I beseech you with your
self the present state wherein we now live, with that of our for fathers,
not yeat fully forty years ago. So shall you I put no doubt, seeing the
effect that both the doctrines have wroughte, be able a great deal the
better to judge of the goodness of the same. Behold if you can for tears, the
miserable face of your native country, sometimes (so long as it had not yet
tasted of your wicked and poisoned doctrine) to the most flourishing common
weal in the whole world nothing inferior. The subject in those days loved
his prince with fear, and feared him with love. The vassal was to his lord
loyal, the servant to his master obedient and faithefull. Every man held him
content with his vocation, no man was curiouse to meddle in an others.
Charity, simplicity, sobriety, so reigned universally, that of us that time
might welbe called, the golden age of which the poets dreamed. But oh lord
god, after that old serpent who never since the beginning has ceased to
practice and exercise his hatred toward mankind, had now enfected us once
again with a new apple: after that first Luther, and then Calvin had set
their feet on English ground, it is a world to see how sodenlie all thiese
things were changed, and as theie never had been turned vpside down. The love
that was so loyal of the subject, turned into servile fear, and treason as
occasion serves: the faith of the vassal or tenant to his lord, in to
frauand disceite: the obedience of the servant in to cotempt: the quiet
contentation of every man with his own calling, in to that busy body
curiosity in other men's matters. Finally, envy and malice have taken up
charities place, fraud and sotteltie, simplicities, and vice dwells where
virtue was wont. Yea even yet, of this will all men bear me witness, if any
sparckle of this good order remain, with them it is to be found which hate
your doctrine most.

That such a change in our manners has chanced, your self well I wot the
thing is so plain can not deny. Hereapon will you demurre with us, that
your doctrine has not been the cause thereof, and that I use a paralogismus, a
non causa vt causa to deface you with all.

The contrary hereof shall appear by examining in few words some such
parts of the same, as I doubt not have wrought this change. You teach that
man is from the beginning predestinate by god, to be either saved for ever or
eternally damned, and that this order once taken, do what he will to the
contrary, live he never so vprightelie on the one side, or lose he the bridle
to all mischief never so much on the other, that yeat finally, his virtuous
life that is you faie so predestinate to be damned, shall not be able to defend
him therefro, no more the^ the others wicked behaueour shall have the power to
remove him from the glory of heaven prepared for him. On this fundation thus
once laid, yo we ground an other absurdity, and to maintain the first you
teach, that man has no free will to choose either good or bad, but that all
that he does he is forced to do maugre him self, be it right or wrong,
laufull or unlawful: if it be good, to satisfy the eternal decree, that he
may be saved which does it and is predestinate theretoe: If it be evil, that
it may likewise be a mean toward his damnation prepared for him. And as one
inconvenience is comonlie the mother of many, to maintain this you ardriuen
to mount one degree higher, In Common. in epist. ad To. prioris aedit.
and with Melanc thon to say, although he afterward recanted the same, that
god as in the good man he is the author of all good: so in the evil he is the
wor^er of all evil, not faith he permissiue by suffering them so to do, but
potestatiue, even by his own power and working: and so by just consequence to
affirm with your master ^aluin, Lib. 3. cap. 23.
that god is the author of their damnation who ar damned, Sect. 4.
as in his Institutions is to be seen.

You teach also that by only faith we besaued, that we must here in this
world take our selves always for certain of gods grace and favor,
without any manner of doubt or mistrust whether we be in the same or no, that
good worckes such as god gives us the grace to do; merit toward our
justification nothing at all, with such like. The catholics on the other side
teach the people, that theie (notwithstanding gods predestination of the
good, Genes. 4.
and his prescience of the damnation of the evil, and reprobate) take
nevertheless good heed to them selves, and walcke vprightelie in that
vocation whereunto god has called them, seeing that there is none so reprobate
in gods forsight, that may not so behave him self by gods assistance, that
he may be saved (as the mouth of almighty god when he said to cursed Cain:
If thou do well shall thowe not receive well most plainly does witness) nor
any so predestinate, but that he may so order him self that he may not be
predestinate, and so be damned. The catholics teach that man has given to
him by almighty god free will, either by the embracing of his grace freely
offered to all that demand the same, to be a worcker with him toward his
own salvation, either else by the refusal thereof, to chose eternal
damnation. This confirm theie by the example also of Cain, who notwithstanding
his being in gods sight from the beginning a reprobate and cast away, yeat
to declare that that forknowledge worcked no constreint, Genes. 4.
almighty god said in express words; that the appetite of sinning was in
his power, and that he should be hable to rule it. Theie teach that all
goodness what so ever it is comes from above, given to man for the calling and
praieng therefore, Jacob. 2.
that all evil is of our selves, by assenting to the devils maliciouse
suggestions. Theie teach with S. James the apostle, that faith without
worckes is vain and to no purpose, that faith must join with worckes by
means whereof it is made perfect, that man is not justified by faith alone.
Theie teach that so long as we be pilgrims and trauailers in this miserable
life, we may not sit us down and make our account, as though we were
certeinlie sure that we shall be saved, but that we must still labor and work
our own salvation cum timore and tremore, with fear and trembling: Philip. 2.
Theie teach men that for their sins theie must not only lament and be
hartelie forie, which you say suffiseth, but that if time also and leisor
theretoe serve, theie must take by penance, upon themselves vengeance as i^ were
therefore. De visit^^. infirm. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Theie teach also with S. Austen, that to confess our sins to god onelieis
not enough, but that we must lay them also in the lap of the priest, a
mortal man and a sinner, as great perhaps as we are. And this remission of
sins by confession and penance, In Leuitic. homil. 2.
do Origin and Cirill call a hard and a peinefull way. And truly so is it,
and so should it be, and all yeat little enough, and a great deal to little
toe, to bridle that wild and untamed nature of ours from sinning.

Now see you I doubt not M. Iuell, whose doctrine has wroughte this disordre
in the world, or if you do not, listen I beseech you a little to your
fellows disputing after this sort upon their masters good enstructions, and
I trust you shall. If we be so predestinate (say theie) to be saved or
damned, that by no means it can be otherwise: if good worckes be nothing
available to the doers: if only faith do justify, then let us cast them
at the papists heads that teach them. To what end serve theie that neither
can (in Christ's death) save us from hell, nor help us to heaven? Or why
labor we at all to do well, if we have not our will free to be the worcker
thereof? If sin be so easelie forgiven as our masters bear us in hand: if
one thought serve us to repent our life: if penance be nedelesse: if we need
not to confess our sins to the priest (which only thing made us for
worldly shame full often to forbear the doing of many a horrible crime) then
will we suerlie forbear no ynche of our pleasure whilst we are here: then will
we score on gods mercy, and recon with him for all at the last.

Thus much although theie say not in express words, yet speak theie in
their wicked deeds. And therefore seeing in the comparison of these few
points between you and us, I find so many occasions given by your doctrine
to this disordre: seeing there be no such to be found in ours, but that
contrariewise all that we ^aughte and you would overthrow, tended to the
contrary: I can say no more, but to me it ^emeth a cause sufficient to
abhor the same.

These be the causes that have kept me in the catholic faith, these be theie
that may justly call you thither again from whence you ar straied, and
will I nothing doubt if you fail not to your self. For truly if you will
but make an exchange of pride with humility, if you will lay down that
proud pecockes tail of youres, esteem your self somewhat less and other men
somewhat more: you shall easily gain again that quiet haven of Christ's
church, from whence the blustering tempests of pride drove you in to the
maine sea and daungerouse goulf of heresies. Be not ashamed you which have
hethertoe kept company with wicked heretics, to follow in your return the
example of some droncken soul, who having perhaps in his dronckennesse
leaped some dau^gerouse leap or passed some other notable peril, which no man
having his right wits would have done, in giving the adventure whereapon the
odds was great tha^ he should have miscarried: being brought by his frindes
on the morrow, sobre to the danger that he escaped the night before being
dron^ken, and told of his adventure: first lifts up his heart and hands to
almighty god, whom he than^k^th most humbly for the preferuing of him from
so imminent and present a danger, next he makes an earnest and solemn vow,
to use after that such temperancie and sobriety, as he will never by the
contrary minis^re any occasion to fall in to the like.

If you had not been as dron^ken M. Iuell with pride, as ever was any with
wine, would you one amongst so many of your side, have made this challenge,
which of the rest none would attempt to do? would you have ever called it
blasphemy to say that Christ is in the Mass offered up to god his father, De
ciuit. dei. lib. 10. cap. 20.
which S. Austen affirms, Homil. 24. 1. Cor. 10
and Chrisosto^ faith that Christ commanded to be done? would you have ever
alleged this weak and feeble reason to have proved your saing, because
contrariewise Christ presents up us, and makes us a sweet oblation in the
fight of god his father? Deci^itat. De lib. 10 cap. 20.
whereas you find in S. Auste^, Sacerdos est ipse offerens, ips^ and oblati^.
Christ is the priest him self which offreth this sacrifice, and the oblation
which is offered: and in Chrisostomes Mass, Tu es offerens and oblatus,
suscipiens and distributus. Thou art he which offr^st and art offered, which
receiuest, and art distributed. By which places it appears, that it is no
such absurdity as you would have it to ^eme, that Christ should in this
sacrament both offer and be offered,

This being therefore a clear case, that you have showed your self in this
challenge of youres, a man if not dronken, truly star^ke mad: look on the
dangers that in the mean season by the goodness of god you have been preserved
from, look I say upon and behold that deep pit in to the which with so
many heretics before you, had not the merciful hand of god staide you and
holden you up, you had long ere this fallen. Thancke him of his goodness
therefore, which has so mercifully borne with you, and not taken you as he
might if he would at the worst. Propose for the love of god with your self,
never hereafter to commit the like (I wot not whether to call it) either
dron^ken or frantic part.

If the causes above rehearsed do nothing move you thereto, if the fear of
god, if your own conscience prick you not: let yet this persuade you to
leave those vain bragges (at the which your friends blushe, wise me^ laughe,
and the adversaries of your doctrine them selves utterly contemn) at the
least, for that your impudency being discovered, your credit is lost and
your estimation gone, so that ye shall but waste words in vain, which evil
spent might better be spared. Cry out as Dioscorus that heretic did, being
condemned by the council of Calcedon as long as you list, eue^ till your
uoice if you will fail you: Ego testimonia habeo sanctoru^ patru^, A thanasi^,
Gregorij etc. Ego cu^ patribus cijcior, Ego defendo patrum dogmata, non
transgreaior in aliquo. I have for my part the testimony of the holy fathers
A thanasius, Gregorius: I am cast out with the fathers: I defend their
doctrine: I violate no part thereof. East ^ib. 1. Apologetic aduers. Eunom.
Brag with Eunomius the heretic that you square all your doings by the
ancient tradition and doctrine of the fathers: yet when you have all done,
you will be taken for an heretic as theie were, and in calling them your
fathers that never could abide the sight of that malignant church the
strompet your mother, and ^n refusing them which in deed begot you as before
in the eighte cause it appears, to have proved your self an impudent lier
on the one side, and an unnatural child on the other.

FINIS.
Quoniam Liber iste a Thoma Dormanno Anglo, sacre theologiae Baccalaureo
compositus, a viris doctis, probis, and Anglica linguae peritis, apud me fide
dignissimis, diligenter est examinatus, probatus and vtilis iudicatus qui
euulgetur, libenter e^rum sententiae subscribendum esse iudico.

Cunnerus Petri, pastor Sancti Petri Louanij.
9. Iulij anno 1564.
Faults committed in the Printing.
The leaf. The side. The line. 2 Country self. read country it self. 2 5 7
Worldly. VVorldly. 2 28 8 Interpretatyon. interpretation. 2 16 8 Hereaster.
hereafter. 2 22 15 Le^t. left 1 8 22 asnvver. answer 1 25 24 Ecclesiaflica.
ecclesiastica. 2 24 24 Them. those 2 30 29 Cuhrche. church. 2 24 31 inrerpret.
interpret. 2 31 32 Intetpretation. interpretation. 1 30 43 Infidleles
infidelles. 1 9 45 Might not be. might be. 1 3 54 strong. strong. 2 7 55
Immedatly. immediately. 1 4 65 thick. think. 2 26 66 And. An. 1 15 90 Paiers.
prayers 1 17 101 Tarito. tarry to 1 30 134 acerbissimem dolorum. acerbissimum
dolorem. 2 3 136 Subsistentiam. Substantiam. 2 8


