A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING THE ABSTRVSENESSE of Divine Mysteries, together with
our knowledge of them MAY 1. 1627.

ANOTHER TOUCHING CHVRCH-Schismes but the Unanimity of Orthodox Professors
FEB. 17. 1628.

By I. D. Mr of Arts and Fellow of Merton College in Oxford.

OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD Printer to the Famous University, and are to
be sold by EDWARD FOREST Anno Dom. 1628.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Dr BRENT, Dr OF THE CIVIL LAWS, THE WORTHY WARDEN
OF MERTON COLLEGE.
SIR,
I Have done that here, which intruth I never thought to have done; Namely put
my self upon the public censure for a Sermon: For I know, and well consider
the superabundancy of this kind of writing, wherewith the world may seem not
more instructed, then oppressed. But the maine reason that drove me on this
determination, was a fitness here of the argument with the times; in which
case alone (to speak my mind) I have ever thought such discourses, at
leastwise excusable, if divulged; Especially when as too the argument thus
taken in hand happens a little besides the usual road: not trauers'd and
debated in every treatise. Upon this ground, or howsoever I was persuaded,
having perchance resolved of a publication. I knew not to whom I could more
justly entitle this Schedule, then to your self. First for the particular
respect I owe you, and then by reason of my collegiate duty in which I stand
bound. Please you then Sir, but to accept of these my first fruits: It may be
hereafter I shall be able to undertake some one thing or other, which may
better deserve your name and patronage. Mean while I remain, as ever,

Yours in all due observance, JOHN DOVGHTY.

CONCERNING DIVINE MYSTERIES.
ROMANS 12. VER. 16. Be not wise in your own conceits.


NOT to trouble you with any tedious Preface: The Romans here in this Chapter
may seem upon their new enlightening by the Gospel, not rightly to have used
those spiritual endowments which they did therewith receive. For otherwise not
long since they were a people of all most reprobate; so far from the light of
Grace, that they became even void of common sense: What the Satyrist speaks
concerning Eunuchs in that they are dismembered, Quaerit se natura, nec invenit
-- Petronius.

might be affirmed of them in a more proper phrase, they had by custom of
sin lost the very principles of reason: doing those things (says the
Apostle) which are against nature. Romans 1. 26. But now at length through an
especial calling by God's grace, they were well rid of that wretched estate in
which they lay; being instead thereof endued with many rare gifts both of the
will and understanding; like men therefore newly recovered from out the dungeon
into a comfortable sunshine, they do not moderately enjoy this so unwonted a
light, but with too much exultancie: they wax proud and high minded: Before
they sinned in not knowing God or what was right, and now they take an occasion
of transgressing from the abundance of their knowledge; As the Apostle speaks
of leaven 1. Cor. 5. that a little of it leaueneth the whole lump: so here
chiefly by a little selfe-conceipt of knowledge, all their other graces are in
danger to be corrupted.

Saint Paul therefore to cool and allay this heat of ambition is very
diligent: first he advises them in the 6. v. above to measure themselves by
their proper endowments: whither (says he) you have received the gift of
Prophecy, use prophecy, or of ministering, wait upon your ministry: In the
beginning of this 16th v. he bids them not to mind high things: not things
which might serve rather to increase their tumor, then build them up in the
spirit. And lastly he presses them with the words of my Text. Be not wise, etc.

Where may you be pleased to observe two maine parts: Division.
first a wisdom forbidden: and then what wisdom it is: The wisdom here
inhibited may be understood, either in regard of the object, as Be not wise,
that is, Justin. in Comment.
be not overcurious to prye into secrets vnrevealed: In which sense I will
handle; first, the profoundnesse of Divine Mysteries: 2ly, the danger if any
shall press too far into them; or you may understand it in respect of the
subject, as Be not wise, that is be not conceiptedly lift up in mind.
Whereupon I shall consider the weakness of humane knowledge; and how at
leastwise it is not our own, but from God: Out of the second general, whereas
it is denied that we should be wise in our own conceits, a rule or square
may be thence supposed, according to which we may be wise, and that I define to
be either Scripture or Revelation. Of these in their order, and first of the
profoundnesse of Divine Mysteries.

So deep are most points of this art, P. 1.
that in truth they are above the lawfulness of man's search. The Apostle in
the precedent Chap: at the 33 v. terms them not incomprehensible, but rather
(...), things not to be inquired into: such as must be reverenced and admired
in silence; Quod non potest comprehendi (says Lactantius) nec quaeri debet: if
mysteries cannot be sounded by us, neither ought they at all to be discussed;
It is true that whatsoever may conduce to our happiness, the Lord has
revealed most graciously; he has given us his word to be our guide and
comfort; For as the Israelites were in the vast Wilderness, so are we beset
with sins and errors in this world: as they then iournied toward the
earthly Canaan through conduct of those two pillars Exodus 13. v. 21. so may we
walk safely on toward the heavenly by the guidance of his double Testament;
Nothing there is that may help to further us, but it is either in both, or in
one of them imparted: But as for high and sublime mysteries the Lord has
greatly concealed them; he has as it were close locked them up: For suppose he
did communicate and lay them open, they would not so much instruct our faithes,
as amaze our judgments. Flashes and strictures of lightning do indeed
enlighten the eye, but by reason of too subtle a nature they do also hurt it:
even so mysteries too abstract are apt to dazzle the weakness of reason, if
they were presented unto us.

There are I confess degrees of knowledge: the spiritual man understands a
great deal more then the carnal: his eyes be newly vnscaled by grace, as once
S. Paul's were: but it is touching matters of salvation or faith: as for these
hidden and abstruse points he is still dim-sighted. In the 5th of the Apoc. v.
2. it is said, who is able to open the book? who but the Lion of the tribe of
Judah? It is meant of the book in which such secrets lie coucht, and infolded;
where you may note, that we, nay the best of God's Saints, are so unfit to
expound the contents, that we may not so much as untie the claspes.

Now the reason of this may be, both man's dulnes, and the abstractnesse of
these points; as for man, he is of an understanding much darkened: what it was
before the fall, whither as of a Viator, or a Comprehensor, or mixed as Aquinas
Sum: P. 1a, Q. 104. resolves, it matters not: but certainly he did not then
apprehend supernatural things more fully, then since he does searcely and
with dimnesse; As the earth is, so are the earthly, of a dull and heavy
capacity, reason here hardly raising it self above the sense; David
acknowledges in this regard that he was ignorant, nay foolish, and as a beast,
Psalm. 73. Now on the otherside divine mysteries, whither they concern God in
his nature, or in his attributes, they are very sublime.

First God in his essence he is so pure, that he is purity and abstractnesse it
self: as the eye be it never so clear cannot see the thinness of the air:
so neither can the eye of the mind truly embrace the pureness of the Dietie,
because wanting as 'twere a solid substance whereupon to fix; And therefore you
may observe how always it falls down straight upon conceits more gross and
earthly; Anon. E:de Cardinal: Christ. open
Cum accesseris (says one) longius abit, God the nearer we labor to approach
him, the farther we shall find him removed beyond our search; The Poet some
where brings in Aeneas catching earnestly at Creusa's ghost, but that flying
and escaping between his embraces: we may puzle much about the divine
essence; but even then when we think to have laid hold on it, it proves
incomprehensible; say I am that I am is my name, was once the instruction of
God unto Moses, Exodus 3. v. 14. and let him be still what he is: it is
impossible that he should be measured by man's weak brain.

Much less may that sacred division of the Trinity be perceived; how three
persons are as it were grafted upon one and the same essence: what the
Schoolmen urge by way of similitude from the understanding, memory, and will,
does but badly illustrate the cause; for if the Father begot the Son as the
power of the understanding produces its act, them must the Son beget another
Son as being with the same power endued: likewise as the Spirit is produced
by love, so shall it produce again a Spirit by love; wherefore this instance
falls short of a due resemblance: Yet is it I confess the best help and
shadow for expression that either here we have or may expect: Whilst Moses
kept unvailed, Exodus 34.
the Israelites could not endure to look upon his face it was so bright;
neither may we behold this mystery unless it be through such shadows and
that but weakly; So then that which Tertullian has here defined, is most
remarkably true: Apolog.
Deum aestimari facit dum aestimari non capit: we do best apprehend God
either in his essence, or in the Trinity, if we confess that we cannot.

Come now to those attributes of his power, his will, and such like; what man
is able possibly to reach them? Who does not straight acknowledge his dullness?
So long as the understanding meets with objects equal and befitting it is
strength, it does well enough; but the hand you know cannot graspe a thing
bigger then it self: neither can a finite apprehension thoroughly conceive
those properties, as being infinite: it does well conceive that they are
infinite but not the infiniteness; he is as high as heaven what can thou
do? deeper then hell what can thou know? Job. 11. v. 8. By the power indeed
of the Almighty was this round world framed; his arm and strength laid the
foundation of it, no man doubts: but clearly to apprehend the manner of its
production, requires more then a finite capacity; our understanding is not able
to pass over so vast a distance, as lies between an utter nothing, and the
newness of a being. Saint Paul makes it an act of faith to perceive this,
Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed, Heb. 11. 3.

Yet especially are those mysteries of his will and decree most abstruse; for
they be not only abstract in their own nature, but also concealed by God of
purpose, No man knows the things of a man save the spirit of man which is in
him, 1. Cor. 2. And a prudent man (says Solomon) concealeth his knowledge,
Prove. 12. v. 23. Now God is all wisdom, and for this must be as secret in his
determinations, as he is just and upright; whither he reprobates men
absolutely, or upon a presupposed fall, seems a question of a perplexed
difficulty: Again, whither he allows sufficiency of grace to all or not, it is
easier to argue, then find out whereupon to pitch a settled assent. The
Egyptians to declare the abstrusenesse of their rites did place upon the
forefront of their Temples the picture of a Sphynx: how much more justly may
we do so? So many scruples do occur in the bulk of divinity, which if
they be searched unto the bottom, they far surmount humane reach.

I let pass here that great mystery (as Saint Paul calls it) of Christ's
being incarnate; that of the last restoring of our bodies, both which for their
seeming impossibility, were points in times past which ancienter professors of
the Christian faith did most hardly digest; humane reason proved so incapable
to entertain them, that they became unto it a rock of offense: Neither stand I
to enlarge those disputes of the worlds consummation, of Antichrist, with
others, not so rightly to be termed doubts as riddles; Not the Angels
themselves perchance do comprehend them, as being of that rank into which
they do but peep as before they did into that of the redemption of man kind.
Mirandula in his Apology much extolleth certain Cabalisticall volumes which
he had, as if in them all such mysterious doctrines had been darkly comprised;
for (says he) besides the holy writ, God did so provide that whatsoever is to
be known, might out of these be collected by the more wise and painful Jews:
which his opinion he groundeth upon Esdras. Esdr, 2. 14. This is but a mere
fancy, yet so far it agrees to right, that by it is intimated the
abstrusenesse of divine truths; Out of whose womb comes the ice (says the
Lord) Job. 38. or, have thou entered into the treasures of snow? If not into
those natural storehouses of ice and hayle, much less can we ascend into
those spiritual ones of which I speak: Doubtless they are more removed, and
being heavenly they as far exceed the compass of man's wit, as the heaven is
divided from the earth.

Neither be these alone of chiefest moment so involued, but lesser also and
those which we perhaps do judge our selves to understand completely; But that
of Gods providence and the administration of the world, may seem to have
staggered the kingly Prophet: how the wicked should still flourish, Psalm. 23.
and the righteous be daily afflicted: the manner of the souls beginning,
whither propagated or infused, did much trouble Austin and Hierom;
Caliginosissima quaestio (says Austin.
one of them) it is a question too intricate; not to heap up many: Lib. 2.
Arnobius in the controversy, why God permits sin, since he hates it,
yields himself in a manner blanckt.

If any shall ask why divine truths are so obscured, it may be they are
reserved to augment our future bliss, which shall consist as well in the
enlargement of our knowledge, as the refining of our wills: when the veil of
ignorance is to be taken away, and we shall know even as we are known, 1.
Cor. 13. or perhaps it is to increase the state and respect of them; for men
do usually esteem that with greater reverence, with which they be not so
thoroughly acquainted. Upon this ground the heathen also did, In somn. S^ L. 1.
(as Macrobius observes) couch their religion under dark types; thence so many
fables and seeming toys: with reverence to this policy, some heretics
likewise had their (...), according to that of the Apocal. 2. 24

Howsoever, Durando.
as long as we remain clothed with this corruptible flesh, we be in such
mysterious points but weakly grounded; we have only assensum fidei an easy
belief, not assensum scientiae, a peircing knowledge; Religion is not as other
sciences, it supposes and takes upon trust very much: which gave occasion long
since to the blasphemous Pagans to deride it as a groundless fabric of the
brain: it believes much and knows little, yea knowledge it self here is but
a kind of practicke belief: If any man will do (Gods) will, he shall know
of his doctrine, John 17. v. 17. Take but Saint Paul for an instance, a man of
rare excellency; one who had been wrapped up above the heavens and himself: yet
(as himself does imply) he heard those things in his rapture, which afterward
he did not well conceive; nay in the argument of the Jews reiection, and
calling of the Gentiles, when he has driven it to a head as near as he can,
he meets with a sea vnfordable; he is feign to sit down as it were upon the
bank, and cry out, O the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God.

I will conclude this point with the words of the historian; Tacitus.
that which he speaks of state mysteries, may of these be more fitly
pronounced, Non aliter ratio constat, quam si vni reddatur: it is the
privilege of divine mysteries, that they be understood of God alone. As for
others, a bold enquiry here, is not more irreverent, then full of danger and
hazard, Which is my second point.

When men walk upon prerupt and steep places, 2.
they are subject to fall; and so here by meddling with these high points, an
error or heresy is quickly incurred; yet such is the intemperate desire of
knowledge, that men cannot be bounded in the search thereof; Even our first
parents in Paradise were not free from this itch; De orthodox, religione. L. 4.
where when all the trees besides were granted them for use, they must needs
taste the excepted fruit, which (as Nicetas Chomates imagines) was nothing but
an allegory or figure of knowledge. Hence in their posterity such lusting after
novelties: such an unsatiate curiosity. In truth to assuage this humor in
part, the Lord has wholly exposed all the creatures to man's disquiry; as it is
said of the Leviathan, Psalm. 104. that God has made the wide Sea for him to
play in, that is to expatiate and take his swinge; so has he as it were made
this lower world for man's delight and contemplation; he may roue as he list,
and not only rest in the outside of things, but also lawfully diue into the
inmost essence.

But for Divine mysteries, if we press too far, we become obnoxious to
errors and slips; for from whence sprang heresies of old in the Christian
world, but from this fountain? Whilst men in the search of truth were directed
rather by too much ambition, then an advised modesty; whilst they would needs
be tampering beyond their skill in points of the chiefest moment. Hence is it
that we find more heresies to have arisen concerning those two greatest
mysteries of the Trinity and incarnation, then about all the rest: Arians,
Nestorians, yea most sects did stumble at these blocks: The stomach when it
meets with meats hard and not well to be digested, it sends up noxious
vapors into the brain: even so these men lighting upon points which were too
knotty for them, and not being guided by discretion, instead of doctrines
broached their wild conceits: For this cause we find the Fathers evermore
cautelous and very retired. Read but St Hilary in his 2. l. See before the
entrance of his dispute concerning the Trinity, how he puts on, and then falls
back, venters again and recoyleth as fast: mihi (says he) in sensu labes, in
intelligentia stupor est: both my sense and reason are astonished. The good
Father may seem rather to have feared a surreptitious curiosity, Gelasius
Cucycenu^
then if he should bluntly have betrayed the cause. At the Synod of Nice where
the same point was debated, the Bishops there expressly rejected the words,
(...): undertake they would to prove the mystery, but for the manner they
durst not.

Such was their religious diffidence in these matters: and such others also; to
whom I could wish that the Schoolmen were not unlike. But contrariwise what
arrogance does wholly possess them? How respectlessely do they thrust into the
most hidden secrets? It was a time when the Lord gave command, Exodus 19. v. 12.
that none, neither man nor beast should touch the mount where himself was. And
surely there is great reason why the same edict should be proclaimed again:
this boldness of some wits calling too nicely into dispute, those mysteries,
which are more justly to be adored; Ever and anon they discuss the
absoluteness of their makers power: what may be effected by it, and what not:
sometimes they argue his freedom and will, and happily limit it with some
vain distinction: Nay so audacious are many, that except they sport themselves
in these mysteries they be not contented; witness for instance sake those
queries, whither God be materia prima, and, whither Christ's divinity might not
suppositate a fly: which and such like do not inform the mind, but truly
wrong the majesty of God: so that here I could almost applaud that sharp
censure of judicious Calvin, though in another case: Instit. l. 3.
Scholae in deterius semper aberrant, the Schoolmen do always incline to the
worse hand.

Neither in this are the Arminians less to be condemned: Who has been his
counselor? says the Prophet concerning God, Isa. 40. 13. Whom among the
sons of men did he choose for his assistant? But they as confidently state
those his Acts of election and reprobation, as if they had themselves decreed
them: they soar up on high even into the bosom of the Almighty: men oftimes
of greater reach in controversies, then of wisdom or discreetnesse. Our
Savior once took up Peter, Ioh. 21. 21. but for that frivolous question: What
shall this man do? He is offended with the Disciples for inquiring too
narrowly after the restoration of the Jewish estate, Act. 1. 6. how much more
is it to be feared that he will sharply rebuke those forenamed intruders, if
they learn not betimes to curb their knowledge; Austin in one of his Epistles,
has a pretty allusion of a certain passenger fallen perchance into a pit:
Obsecro (says he there so fallen to one coming to his rescue) quomodo hinc me
liberes, non quomodo huc ceciderim quaeras: stand not to expostulate with me
how I slipped in, but rather kindly help me out: We are all fallen through Adam
into a wide gulf of unhappiness; let us endeavor to recover our selves: let
us examine rather by our course of life our hopes of bliss or not, then
curiously look it in the first decree. Our sins and miseries require the
goodness of a mediator: as for a Sophister to dispute the occasion we need
not; especially since, as Arminius himself concludes, these points be not
requisite neither to be known or believed: it is in his declaratione
sententiae, before the States.

Yet are they still so fraught with subtilties, that the very perusal may
seem of greater danger, then it can be of profit. How often see we many here
to suffer shipwreck, whilst they covet to go farther then their ability or
strength will permit them? The Prophet David Psalm. 36. compares the judgments
of God to a depth, or an abyss. Now in a depth as long as we can find
footing, we be well and safe: but if that fail, a fear straight seizes on us
of being plunged: thus in abstruser mysteries, as long as we can have the help
of reason too, we may wade the more securely on: but when that once is
swallowed up, Et de Orpheo etiam Hygin Poet. and Astro. nom. L. 2.
a mazelesse confusion must needs follow. You know what Poets feign of
Pentheus; he was torn but for viewing too nearly the rites of Bacchus: upon
which one of them (...); Euripid.
Such wisdom is madness outright; You may remember how the Lord long since
gave up the ancient Philosophers to vanish in their own devises, because they
used the talent of their wits to idle disquiries, and not to the donours
praise; Let us take heed least we deserve alike sentence, by trespassing too
far upon Grace, as they did upon the light of Nature.

Neither do I by this approve the lazy dullness of any: not of such who
think it acuteness sufficient to cry down more acute disputes. Men may
deseruingly canvase these poinrs, if they shall in their discourses, be guided
by reason, and not by fancy or boldness. It is here as it was in Ovid his
Medea; a matchless Poem (says the Rhetoritian) si ingenio suo temperare
maluisset, Quintil.
quam indulgere, if he had not been too lauishly witty. We be placed by nature
in a mid distance between beasts and Angels: thus also ought our knowledge to
be, less then that of Angels, as more then what beasts have: we must be
content to forgo many difficulties, if we can percance understand any. But so
it is, that those who meddle here, do for the most part exceed their limits; as
it happens in ambition of state, they never deem themselves high enough,
till they touch upon danger. God in many places of Scripture is said to be a
fire, as Deuteronomy. 4. v. 24. Ezekiel. 8. 2. If to a fire we approach not too nigh, it
comfort, but otherwise it burns and scorcheth: so here concerning divine
matters, a temperate knowledge instructs us; but a superfluous or
presumptuous search confounds the judgment.

I will close up this point with that of Salvian. L. 3.
Genus quasi sacrilegae temeritatis est, vt plus scire cupias, quam sinaris: it
is not so much curiosity, as a kind of sacrilege, to pry into the forbidden
secrets of Gods own closet: it argues a foul presumption in us of our
strength, when as (God knows) our knowledge is but small and weak, which is
my third point.

Knowledge indeed is the very light of the soul, 3.
a jewel inestimable: yet so apt are men to be misled by arrogance, that they
inuert that to their harm, which the Lord has bestowed on them for their
great use; I told you before of the danger of an encroaching wisdom: of
drawing too nigh unto the flaming bush, to which notwithstanding Moses might
not. Now of this there is no greater an incentiue cause, then this of pride;
when men do favor more their own wit, then the justness of the argument they
have in hand; for this reason you may note how errors in times past brake
forth most rife in the Eastern Churches; there that of the Novatians,
Eunomians, first took root, and indeed what not? Whereas there of the West, as
being placed under a duller clime, so were they for heresies less disposed.
The Valentinians (says Iraeneus) were men qui semetipsos perfectos, L. 2.
and vniversorum agnitionem habere dicebant: they deemed themselves as it were
composed of wit and knowledge; neither is it a rare sight to see men now adays
to slip from pride to error: whilst not being seasoned with charity, they
swell with self conceit. Hence the Apostle lays it for a principal and
main ground of perverse doctrines, 1. Tim. 6.

But alas, what is the highest pitch of man's science? or wherein does he so
excel, but in that he may be said best to know, if he confess his ignorance;
Can he sound the true depth of the least point in nature? is he able to
satisfy himself in any triuiall object? Look but upon the loadstone, and
thou shall find as many amazing wonders, as there be properties. Consider the
remora so called: show me how so small a creature does check the tallest ship
in its full course: view the curious frame of man's body: ponder the increase of
the buried seed, Exercit.
Vbique (says Scaliger) clamandum est nos nihilscire: one nevertheless, who
did (I believe) judge as charitably of himself, as another man. Reason and
sense be the only or chief promoters of our knowledge in this world; now these
for the most part, are as subject to error, as weak in their helps; whereby
it happens that those things which we do understand, we know but in the rine
and slightly: like Aesop's Fox, who did lick the outside of the glass, when
he could not come at the substance.

As for tumor then and height of conceit, it argues nothing here, but want of
an experienced insight: the very claim to much knowledge proves this, that the
title is neither good nor right; Saint Paul makes it a principle, that such
pretenders, at least wise concerning the Christian doctrine, were but (...)
mere nouices 1. Tim. 3. In the 6th Chapter he couples them together, proud and
knowing nothing v. Festus de v^ borum sign^catione; Lu^lius and Nae^ in fragmen^
4. upon the same ground perhaps also the word infrunitus of the ancient
latins, does as well imply an insolent man, as one that is void of sense; when
the limbs swell and wax ouerbig, it is no sign of health in the body, but
rather of a dropsy, or some disease: so truly this arrogance proceeds most
commonly from an unsoundness of the brain, as not comprehending yet but what
the vastness of knowledge is.

Hence, those bitings and censures against others: such malignant
vndervalewing, whereby we lessen our brothers name that we may increase our
own; livor (says Petrarch) Semper lippus est: this humor always is ill
sighted: it discerns not of worth abroad, but of that only which is nigh at
hand, nay in the possessour: Although so ill a custom does nothing augment
their repute who practice it. The moon may darken and eclips the sun, but
withal it loses its own light: and they by deprauing another worth, make
their own to be suspected.

But now on the other side, men of growth and good proceedings in knowledge be
nothing so; Moses it is recorded, was a man skilled in all the learning of the
Egyptians: yet afterward we find, that he was not more learned then meek
and modest, The meekest man upon earth Numb. 12. v. 3. In truth such do well
conceive the length and breadth of sciences, as not to be waded thorough; they
are so far from nourishing a great opinion within themselves, that they labor
also to beat it down elsewhere; Ep. ad marcellin.
non placet cum a charissimis, etc. It is not pleasing to me (says St Austin)
that my friends do so ouerprize my worth: It is understood by them, how the
knowledge of this point does but lead us into the ignorance of another; how the
infiniteness of learning grows upon us in the very getting of it. If men
walk abroad the heavens seem at every small distance to close with the earth:
but when they approach thither, as large a space opens forthwith as they have
left behind; thus in the course of learning; upon any purchase of some little
insight we hope anon to rest accomplished; but when we ariue there farther
difficulties arise before us; still there remains something behind vnscand;
For as yet we know but in part 1. Cor. 13. upon which some have made this
observation, that in this life we obtain a greater likeness with God through
the improuement of our wills, then by that of the reasonable faculty; Holy we
may be in a bigger measure, then we can be wise and learned.

But suppose thou have attained to the highest top of all science: that thou
understand as much as angels do, what have thou, that thou did not
receive, and if thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not
received it? Men do not usually boast of those things which do outwardly
accrue unto them; thence he in the tragedian scoffingly,

Qui genus iactat suum
Aliena laudat.
it must be something of their own industry and atchieuement that pufs them
up: now knowledge, it is chiefly a gift of Gods benevolence: he gives to one
the power of tongues: to another the understanding of arts; and to all as best
him pleases.

I speak not of an infused science; not of the ability which the Prophets and
Apostles had: but that likewise of the common strain may seem in a peculiar
manner to proceed from God; Neither yet know I, how far forth here he affords
his influence, by what concurse: only I am persuaded that he does concur unto
this by a more special aid, then to other virtues of the like rank; Vid. ad
initia. 7.
Even the Philosophers conceiving this, L. de artibus.
had there deities (as Capella also alludeth) to whom severally they did
attribute each art; who, if he does consider those prime fathers of the
Church: how powerfully they withstood troops of heresies out of the
copiousnesse of their knowledge: who can imagine but that they were thus helped?
Yet not by inspiration, but by a particular and unknown assistance; Every good
gift, and every perfect gift is from above. Ia. 1. 17. and for this the
Philosopher in his Ethics makes his felicity or chief good (...) a gift of
God; Now there is no endowment of the mind more excellent then this of
knowledge; it is the eye and guide of the rest, if we do not abuse it through
selfe-conceipt: if, as venomous beasts wont to do by nutriture, we turn not
that to poison and our hurt, which of it self is good.

I will end this point with the words of the Apostle: If any man think that
he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know: he knows
not according to sobriety: not according to the rule of holy writ and revealed
grace, which is my last point.

Since man's speculations and fancies of themselves are so extrauagant, God has
wisely provided laws to bind them withal. Now laws (says the Emperor) be
either (...) writs and promulged, or (...) namely forcible customs, Insti^.
but no where inrowled: and so is the rule wherewith God guides our knowledge
in divine mysteries, partly described in his word, and sometimes revealed
besides the holy writ.

As for the word it is a treasury full of most rare knowledge. There are who
hold no art or science to be extant, which is not at least wise implicitly
contained in it: for, say they, some clauses do here appear of each faculty:
some prints and footsteps. On this manner have Critics likewise thought all
Philosophy to ly hid in Homer, and judge him as various an artist, as an
excellent Poet. Either opinion I let pass, though not as improbable, yet as
remote from my purpose; Certain it is that whatsoever may ordinarily beget, or
increase a divine knowledge, the Lord has amply set down in his word; For he
has not given it alone to conform our wills, but also to enrich the tables of
our understanding; to make us wise 2 Timothy 3. It is confessed to be a kind of
science, as far surpassing the rest in worth, as divinity does exceed frail
nature. David though a prophet protests that he grew thereby more wise, then
were his teachers: How often does he pray and entreat to be fully instructed
in it.

So then, that conceit of the Cardinal L. 4. De verbo Dei, is but a mere
figment; as if things of common need, were comprised therein, and not matters
of peculiar and secret use. It is said to be as a light that shines in a dark
place 2. Pet. 1. a Candle put on a candlestick Mat. 5. 15. Now a light so
placed, does not lighten only the open rooome, but every nooke and corner
thereof. Nay I will add, it is an armory furnishing the zealous disputer with
proofs against so blasphemous tenants; a garden out of which the holy
dispenser may deck up his discourse into a Prophets phrase; what things are of
necessary and a saving use be there most plainly disclosed; others indeed but
dimly; whereas the word grows obscure, so should our search be more cautelous
and circumspect; we must not vent our conjectures for oracles at all, least
whilst we annex such glosses, we corrupt the text. The good Samaritan in the
10th of Luke delivered two pence to the host for the wounded traveler: L. 6.
Et Ambrosius in exhortatione advirgines. L.
two pence (says Optatus) that is Christ has bequeathed unto us for our
souls health both laws, the old and the new; He promises there that what
should be laid out more, if not lauishly perchance, or idely, he would see it
discharged: so may we for our sober disputes, either upon or besides the word
expect a recompense; but if they appear superfluous or repugnant, they be no
longer descants, but sinful devises.

Humane inventions then come short of a divine authority: they may serve us for
illustrations, but not for a ground and rule: upon the word as touching that
efficacy which they have, must they be builded also; either express, as there
apparent, or at least, elicitiue, as being thence fairly and handsomely
deduced. If we contain within this compass we shall be as wise as safe:
but if we fly out and follow our fancies, it remains that we straight vanish
in them. For even thus did that lewd rabble of the Gnostici: L. 2. c. 46. 47.
etc.
they set the scriptures aside (says Iraeneus) betaking themselves to their
proper conjectures: The Psalmist oft'time likneth the word of God unto a path
or way: nay it is via Regia, as one styleth it: the high way to bliss: now
most commonly upon each side of such ways there be ditches and miery bogs: so
here on either hand the word ly heresies and numberles errors, dangerous to
be slipped iuto; it is best then to keep the beaten and trodded way, the word,

But again; sometimes the Lord speaks as well by Vrim and Thummim, as he
does in the written word: for he has not tied himself so strictly unto the
word, but that he can, if he please, vary the manner of his communication with
his beloved Saints. Our Fathers in the first nonage of the Church, well
understood the benefit of this; a dream or vision to them did as easily clear
each doubt, as either their own weakness, or the occurrency of business
could suggest it. But to avouch the truth, now in these later days, such
extraordinary means of grace be well nigh out of late; Prophecy, and
revelation, and tongues, with other gifts, we find conioyn'd 1 Cor. 12. Since
as there appears no miracle of tongues or prophecy, neither is it to be
believed that revelations are very frequent; Having Moses and the Scriptures,
we may not expect new messages from the dead, nor yet from above; Calvin is
confident to vpbraid Such pretended Enthusiasts with downeright madness: minus
errore agitantur, quam rabie; they be not (says he) so much mistaken as quite
distracted, when as therefore I make revelation a rule of our wisdom, it is
indeed in it felfe, but not so usually if we respect the present age; it is if
it were, but this no way causes it to be: Our best Enthusiasmes now must be
our prayers and diligence in the sacred word.

Try then at least we must the spirits as St John warns us, 2. Sam. 10.
Vincentius contra Hereses c. 24. and Rhenanus in Annotationibus.
least a dream or idle conceit delude us with the esteem of a classicke
revelation; least as Nathan did once in counselling David, such Prophets speak
without the Ephod; for what drove Tertullian more effectually upon Montanisme?
And if you pervse the good father Saint Cyprian, as for Visions he may seem
to credit them overmuch; so apt are men to rely on the slights of fancy,
raising miracles out of the brain, when those of the hands be ceased; yea in
former times this liberty of imagination grew so far, as into a sect of
Heretics, termed the (...); who could as they thought by help of divine
illumination, expound the Scriptures upon first sight. As Samuel then being
called by God himself, once or twice mistook the sound for old Elies voice
Sam. 1. 3. so must we be careful that contrariwise we entertain not some
crotchet of man's brain for a divine Enthusiasme.

Notwithstanding all this, if having examined such inspirations by the touch of
sacred writ, we find them accordingly; a rule they may be; yet here again
you must note, what revelations I mean; not new and unheard of respectu
doctrinae reuelatae, as the Papists would, lessening thereby the sufficiency of
the word: but new respectu actus reuelandi: such only as inform us in matters
of fact, not increase the Canon of our faith: such alone may be the guide of
the wisdom here discussed.

The sum of all that has been spoken hitherto is this. It is to be wished
that we had no occasion to deal upon such deep mysteries at all; since our
life is frail, and our aim eternal bliss, it were expedient that we
endeavored more to become pious, then subtle and acute; Epictetus the Stoicke
could once complain of his time; whereas (says he) there be two parts of
Philosophy: the first and more especial (...) a practice of wholesome precepts
well digested: the second (...); a speculatiue and curious disquiry; (...), we
have quite inuerted the course. How many now a days frame their diuiner
studies after this method? How do they chiefly intend sublimer, though
fruitless controversies; yea and moreover, which is as bad, often times those
here undertake these points, whose shoulders for such a burden be most unfit.
Fight ye not with small or great save only with the king af Israel, was the
charge of the Syrian king to the Captains of his host, 2. Chron. 18. Even so
there be who as soon as they can but spell in divinity, fasten alone upon the
greatest difficulties; whereby it comes to pass, that they clear not the
doubts which they take in hand, but rather betray their own weakness.

Or secondly, since by reason of our insulting adversaries on either side, some
must needs look into these points, it is meet that we dispose our selves
with a grave consideration of this before hand; Daniel before he received those
strange visions, fasted three whole weeks, L. de. mysterijs Aegyptiorum.
Dan. 10. 3. And Iamblychus the Pythagorean relates how the Egyptian Priests
went to prepare themselves for their supposed Enthusiasmes with music and
abstinence; I urge not this for example sake, but only to show with what
reverence we should address our selves to so divine a task: not rudely
setting upon it, but with mature advice: Besides in the enterprise it self,
let us use great sobriety, avoiding that (...), 2. Tim. 2. or nice acuteness:
a fault unseemly each where, as well in religion, as in other arts: for which
Minerva is feigned to hate the Spider, because she spinneth too curious a web.
In a word let us evermore submit fancy to reason, and reason to faith, both to
Gods word, or his especial revelation. These two be that helping glass of our
knowledge here, or double spectacle, of which Saint Paul speaks. Now we see
through a glass darkely, but then face to face.

And thus I have, though weakly, made up a discourse concerning Divine
Mysteries, and our knowledge of them. A Text in my indgement, as befitting this
auditory, as my self, for this my first assay. We sit all here by the
wellspring of Wisdom and science, and most of us may hereafter serve at the
altar in Gods own house. It is not amiss that we know our limits, as also
consider our strengths. Under the old law the Levite might go farther into the
Temple, then the Lay, and a Priest then the Levite: so in these points
concerning the mystical temple, Apoc. 21. 22. One may wade farther then
another: but as there none could enter into the chiefest sanctuary, save only
the high Priest: so neither here has any full access, into the secrets of
these mysteries, but only our high Priest and Savior Christ: In whom are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Colos. 2. 3. As for us as long as
we abide in this life, we must be satisfied with a meaner knowledge of such
things: with certain glympses at most: like benighted travailers, who if the
moon hap to be ouerclouded, are content with starlight. Now to the only wise
God, who is able to do above that which we can either speak or imagine, be
ascribed all glory, power, praise, and dominion this day and forever. Amen.

FINIS.
TOUCHING CHVRCH-SCHISMES.
ROMANS 16. VER. 17. Brethren mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned and avoid them.


SCarcely had our Apostle here laid the grounds of Christian religion, but it
presently meets on each side with strong opposers. The Devil was straight
ways ready to excite erroneous and factious spirits against the truth. What
Poets faigne of hate and contentions beside their Jupiter's palace, Hesiode.
is really true of the house of God. (...).

Eager debates closely still as 'twere environ the Church. Always there be
who like the Dragon, Apoc. 12. 4. are ready to devour it even in its birth.
Neither yet does this so inbred enmity betwixt the patrons of truth and error,
happen without God's especial allowance.

For, first hereby he sifts and winnowes all alike. As many as settle firmly
together he takes for solid grain: but those who are carried away with each
blast of new doctrine, for fruitless chafe. They never were sincerely
orthodox, but either temporizing formalists, or at most coldly devoted.

Again by this he keeps his elect from rust and an over secure ease: out of
love he permits them not to slumber in such a tranquillity as might at length
produce some hurtful effect. Calamitas (says he in Minutius) virtutum
disciplina est: Crosses and all kinds of opposition, do not so much afflict
Gods Saints, as truly exercise them.

Thus does the Lord effect the good of his chosen by the hands of malignant
Schismatics. But notwithstanding though he deal so in providence, yet their
offense and guilt is nothing thereby abated. For in the third to the Philipp.
the Apostle plainly affirms such to be evil workers, very dogs. v. 3. In
the 18th v. he terms them enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction, v. 19. and here in my Text, he judges them unworthy even of the
solace and benefit of humane commerce. Brethren mark them which etc.

My Text, Division.
like to those shafts of the holy candlestick, upon every word bears knops of
flowers: please you then to take notice of: First, the thing here spoken
against, namely divisions and offenses in the Church. Secondly, their more
especial property which is to be contrary to some doctrine before learned.
thirdly the persons or those, who cause them. Fourthly, the manner how such
disturbers must be dealt with: First mark, then avoid them. Lastly, on the
other side, the entire and mutual agreement among true professors, or as it is
here their brotherhood. Of these orderly in that method I have proposed, and
first concerning divisions and offenses themselves.

There is nothing which does more preserve the world in being then unity and
agreement. P. 1.
It is the stay and bond of every thing; by how much the nearer they
participate of this, by so much the more they enjoy a certain existence.
Zoroaster as implying God that first and chiefest unity terms it, (...): the
matrix or fountain within which all things be originally concluded; Except in
nature the heavens did embrace this globe below: unless here the elements did
combine thus lovingly as they do, so stately a fabric could not long
subsist; it must needs loose its being, because it should loose its harmony. In
matter of policy consent of minds legally disposed makes a state: without this
it remains no longer a state, but a rude and vngoverned desert. To speak in
the phrase of modern Philosophy, mutual concord is, forma totalis; that which
wholly gives a body politic both life and beauty; But above all in the house
or Church of God seems this unity of greatest value. One Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, we find commended, Ephesians. 4. 5. As in the structure of the old
tabernacle, by loopes and taches were the curtains aptly conjoined: so in the
antitype, namely the Church, does this spirit of Unity diffusing it self
throughout the parts, knit them up into an entire frame.

This being so; sithence each where a concord is so requisite, but most in the
Church, how fowly do they trespass that break this bond? with what
sharpness deserve they to be handled who breed divisions? The Fathers amidst
their writings do press no one point more frequently or eagerly then this;
Every where they take occasion, after St Paul's manner, as well to condemn all
rents and Schisms, as extol a Christian like accord. Optatus in a word makes
such divisions Summum malorum, a crime so heinous, as that none can match it.
And indeed if you rightly weigh the examples of Gods wrath and punishments, you
will not much mislike his judgment. In the 4th of Genesis when Cain had slain his
brother, God only marks him and lets him go: nay he is jealous least any
might kill Cain, v. 15. To that great and sacrilegious city of Ninive what does
he? Only Jonas is sent to teach and warn them. Instead of ruin comes a gentle
embassage. But for Corath and his accomplices, those mutiners in the tribe of
Levi, behold a sudden destruction: the earth opens and entombes them alive;
whence it follows not without some show of probability, that Church-Schismes
more displease the Lord, then either murder or sacrilege. Austin yet goes
farther; for in his 50th Ep. discoursing about the obstinacy of the factious
Donatists, he charge them with no less a sin, then with that of the holy
ghost.

But the heinousness of divisions will better appear, if we examine them,
First in their object. It is no slight or vulgar argument; perchance in the
disquiry of such points, dissent may afford greater profit, namely by
exercising the wit, then a present accord. But it is religion, that prop of
man's conscience, and path to bliss. Upon this narrow way do men lie daily
striving and justly in opinions, not without much hindrance in their intended
journey. Religion indeed of it self is rather a ground of common agreement:
Religio think some a religando from binding the hearts of the professors, as
well in a mutual affection, as in obedience to God: yet if happily it be made
the subject of strifes and debates, they no where burn more fiercely, L. 2. 2.
nullae infestae hominibus bestiae, (could Ammian: Marcellinus an heathen say)
vt sunt sibi ferales plerique Christiani. No beasts are so violent, as
Christians be, when once they jar in points of doctrine. The reason may be;
men for the most part hug their peculiar tenants with a too ouerprizing love.
And as they do thus in all other arts, so especially in matters of
Christianity and faith. Having then fancied some opinion here as greatly
appertaining to the souls health, they must necessarily abhor those who so
ere oppose it.

Next in a second place consider the usual and hurtful diffusion of Schisms.
2. Tim. 2.
Saint Paul compares them to a Canker: now a canker rests not, but eats
forward till the member be consumed: on this manner do false and erroneous
doctrines: being once broached they creep from man to man, until they have
corrupted the Church throughout. Of this our forenamed Apostle had a feeling
experiment: for as one forsaken, 2. Tim. 1. he complains that all in Asia
were turned aside. So naturally apt are men to admit of a fancy nere so
improbable, if once on foot. Neither so only: falsehood too always is more
fertile then truth: it straightway multiplies into several and diverse
streams beyond the head. Those manifold blasphemies wherewith the primitive
Church was pestered, what were they save so many branches of Simon Magus his
doctrine that first heretic. L. 2.
Arrius indeed (says Ruffinus) vented one single heresy touching the nativity
of our Savior: but ere long this one becomes a triple monster. As then, Lev.
13. v. 8. if the plague in a man's flesh spread, not otherwise, the Priest
pronounced him leaprous and unclean: so here, there is no plea against
Schisms more aggravating their foulness, then because thus strangely they
both spread and multiply.

Lastly consider their irksome and long continuance: how they persist not for a
day or year, but commonly for length of ages. It were some happiness if as
easily as they burst forth and ouerflow, they could as quickly be stopped.
Those tares, Mat. 13. v. 24. sprang up on a sudden: but as for the extirpation
and rooting them up, we find it deferred till the great harvest. Errors in
truth are by nature (...), very obstinate; what once is vented falsely, is here
maintained, if but for credits sake. As much as wants in strength and
cleerenesse of argument, they supply with a color of perseverance; give them
leave to take but root, they will flourish of themselves, without either
watring or attendance: so that as Sulla spoke of wars, sumi facile, caeterum
acerrime de sinere; the same is true of refractory Schisms. Any man never so
mean, may sow a fond opinion: but to repress and curb it seems a task of
the highest skill.

You have heard briefly concerning divisions in gross; how execrable they be
whether you attend their object or boundless diffusion; but chiefly for their
long and obstinat continuance: cleaving almost as lastingly to the Church, as
the leprosy did to the house of Gehazai; This is there condition, this their
nature: It follows methodically in my 2d point, that I handle their especial
property, which is to be contrary to some doctrine before learned.

Every art and faculty has some maine ground to rely upon: 2
Some chief axioms by which it is guided in its inferior positions no
otherwise then by a card or polestar. These axioms ought always to be sure
and firmly established; for if they also be exposed to doubtful enquiries,
the whole science straight begins to shake. In this respect as the Grammarian
prettily descants, the alphabet in all languages stands indeclinable, because
it is the foundation of that first art. Christian religion although no perfect
science, yet likewise it supposes certain principles: a few grounds and rules
upon which the mind may rest. Now as we speak in Philosophy of a double
measure; there is mensura actiua, that which is so primarily and in it self;
again, there is mensura passiua; such a one as being measured before, measures
something else: so in case of religion, you may discern of a twofold rule; one
principal, namely the holy writ: another with reference unto this, to wit the
constitutions and Cannons of the Church. Against these two do the authors of
heresies and schisms, particularly aim their forces.

First the Heretic, as subornde with a bolder malice, is wont more directly
to oppose the very text. In former times we find them so impudent as that they
durst change and mangle it as seemde them best; witness the Cerinthians,
Marcionists, with the rest of that frantic crew; not enduring so pure a light
should shine upon their monstrous blasphemies, they either wrongfully concealed
it under a bushel, or quite renounced it; Indeed the Papists now a more
refined offspring, deal with greater caution; yet in effect they perform as
much, whilst they groundlesly enlarge the sacred Canon, or else countenance
against it their idle traditions; for by adding superfluously unto the old,
what do they less then create a new word;

Thus do Heretics some way still infringe the text: But now for Schismatics
they meddle in those points which fall more properly within the Churches verge;
And here they vary and swerve from the right on either hand; upon one stand
such as conspiring with us in doctrinall grounds, differ only touching the
outward surface: As children who otherwise mutually well disposed, yet wrangle
about their nuts and toys. Leo. Austin: e contra de Luxu Arrianorum sabbatario
Sidon Appolinaris L. 1.
Concerning these external rites what tumults have been raised? How frowardly
do men still stand forth against the Church in terms point blanke? Fasting
almost with the Manichees of old upon such days, as that keeps feast; Not a
bare division has served here, unless a local secession were made; Except at
lestwise by some peculiar notes of sanctity, they as yet remain distinguished:
like to those seeming Philosophers among the heathen, Julian Ep. Lucian (...), 8
who had their (...), some odd habit or other, to exempt them from the rout;
But I leave this soar as too too hardened for a plaster. A rent so great in
our Israel, that well nigh ten tribes, I fear me, be this way fallen off.

Those more nearly concern my drift, who impugn some real points of
doctrine. Now some do this expressly and without a gloss. Before Arminius let
loose his tenants, he first questions openly the Belgicke Catechism:
Consentaneum rationi, etc. it is meet (says he) and very expedient that such
Constitutions be newly reuewed. As long as they stood fast and plausible, well
he knew his acuter doctrine could hardly gain entrance; But as the Lord
commands touching land-markes Deuteronomy. 10. v. 24. not to remove them, because they
have there been anciently erected: so in Church affairs it is best that old
and authenticke decisions do still prevail; Are we wiser then our Fathers?
Or is our understanding beyond the ancients? If in a common weal as the
Philosopher notes, former laws should not hastily give place to new; (...):
least by often changing their respect be somewhat impaired; Pol. 2.
much less in positions of a Christian beliese. It causes the minds of men
to waver much: it begets scruples and offenses, which our Apolstle also here
condemns.

Others at least in show approve the received Cannons, but no otherwise then
for their own advantage; under pretext of those general rules they vent some
private and modern conceits. It was a divise (says Seneca) concerning his
times of many lewd and riotous livers, to cloak their luxury by pretending to
the Epicurean sect. Thus they shroud their wrong and false opinions in the
Churches bosom; not deriving a meaning from thence, but fastening there one
upon it; how much better were it, if they left the Cannons free and still
unbounded. For by thus drawing them down into a more particular sense, they
have troubled the Church with needless disquiries; Constantine the geeat
speaking unto the Nieene counsel, is bold to call those disputes between
Arius and Alexander, Gelasius.
(...): a vain and fruitless debate: Rather then the catholic peace should
suffer disturbance, he disliketh an exact discussion even in a point of faith.
I dare not prescribe universally an implicit belief, not such an one as seals
up the understanding, whilst it kindles a blind zeal: yet happily in doubts
which grow besides the foundation, it may well suffice. The woman diseased of a
bloody flux Mark. 5. v. 25. couets only to touch Christ's garment: she stands
not upon circumstances how or whence an healing virtue should flow: neither
need we perchance to dig so particularly into those positions, which our
forefathers have left undetermined. At once it costs more anxiety, then it can
afford either content or gain.

Well then: let both principles of Church tenants and Scripture stand in force;
as Aarons rod eat up those wherewith the Egyptians contended, they will
discountenance and consume any vpstart issue of falsehood; for by the way you
may note: errors and truth do not spring up alike; this leasurely and with a
lingering increase: that hastily like the sun in his western course, which
cuts most nimbly about the line: but as there the sun proceeds but slowly in
degrees farther distant: so here do errors after their first bruit and
flourish: if the ancient grounds be still vpheld: if we retain this defense to
withstand their onset.

I have showed you the maine property of Schisms; a dangerous quality, you
see, in a Christian estate; for as Sampson did to ouerwhelme the Philistines
Iud. 18. 29. it pulls away both Pillars whereupon the Church is founded. Now
afterward you have thus had their property, it remains that in my third point
I decypher their subject, to wit the persons or those which cause them.

It is true that as the Lord has planted a vineyard; 3
so has he hedged and fenct it rouud. But what can possibly keep out
malicious Schismatics? Ever and anon they break through this fence,
dispoyling miserably so precious a ground plot. And this they do, either from
an inward corruption of nature, or else induced by some external motives:
concerning their nature, you may note them to have been men commonly of a
fierce and abrupt temper; St Paul I am sure describes them so 2 Timothy 3. Of this
humor as Tertullian witnesses, was Hermogenes of old, natura turbulentus, a
fit material to frame an heretic; Not unlike unto him we find Novatus in
Cyprian; one who more esteemed his own will and fancy, then the quiet of the
Church: such men go on in a violent course: whereso ere they appear, raising
some storm or tempest: they carry indeed fire in their Censors, yet not to
sacrifice, but to kindle public debates. Far better does S. James instruct
such with patience and and meekness of wisdom. Iam. 3. 13.

Neither yet as I said want they outward fuel to increase, this inbred
aptness. First here occurs an hope of honor and advancement; Varro.
This as one speaks of beauty has (...): it distorts and draws the sight
besides the truth; when Alcimus 1 Mac. 7. affected the high priesthood, he
calls in the Syrians to back his suite, not without extreme hazard of the
Jewish estate: no otherwise do they: rather then miss of dignities, they will
endanger the Church with foreign tenants; any way shall help, before they will
sit vntitled. We read of Arrius as otherwise of a good and honest man; his
fault was somewhat too aspiring a mind. It is so with most: they square not
their drifts by religion, but religion by their drifts of eminency or profit.

Secondly by this, as they conceive, they much enhance their fame. To be the
author or revivour of some nicer Doctrine must needs seem a master piece of no
usual knowledge; Indeed the Apostle himself Romans 15. 29. forbares to build
the Gospel upon grounds forelaid. This he did to avoid emergent scandals,
but they for by respects: least they be thought a mere accession of another
wit or credit. Yet here observe their gross mistake; Truth says the
Philosopher as likewise virtue is (...): a thing of small and narrow extent;
But as for errors, they ly in multitudes and troops round about; If then in so
vast a number of fashoods, they pitch upon one what glory is it? If missing the
center they prick each part of the circle else? To bolt an error then is no
hard exploit; And as its beginnning is thus prompt and easy, so also is the
maintaining of it once begun; Insooth falshhood in point of religion commonly
someway touches upon the deepest mysteries; it will be sure of a cause
pregna^t enough wherein to deal: Pelagianisme how does it in close those large
queries concerning gods power and hidden decree? As therefore mariners wont
for to say, give them wind and Sea room they fear no shipwreck: so in such
open and boundless disputes, it may argue a shallow brain that is quickly
graueled; if nere so pressed he find not still scope as well to decline the
adversary, as to reinforce his tenants.

A last incentiue here may be an itching desire in men of seeming active;
rather then rest vnbusied, they will do some unnecessary mischief. It
pleases them greatly in their pride of wit to behold those combustions which
themselves have caused. The associates of Catiline in his conspiracy against
Rome were the more forward, Salust.
says the historian, vt quiet a mouerent: that at least they might unsettle a
state so well composed; many endeavor a disturbance of the christian peace for
no serious intendment: they raise debates that they may be said to have raised
them; like hot furious spirits abroad, who delight soly in fights and
vproares; (...), mere lovers of strife.

Upon these motives fore cited do Schismatics chiefly undermine the Churches
unity; men otherwise oftimes of no mean esteem and worth. But as it was said
of Curio the tribune, that he was facundus sed malo publico: even so they in
truth seem able and sufficiently learned, but it is to the Churches annoyance:
whilst they employ those gifts perversely, with which they might have advanced
the common good.

Yet also give me leave, if a little I misdoubt such: if I judge them not
thoroughly sound at heart; In 13. Nehem. v. 33. where the Israelitish parents
mix with the women of Ashdod, the children speak an uncertain idiome: half
the Ammonitish language; and half the Jewish; examine their tracts and
discourses aright, they may seem the issue of a mixed faith. Religion if once
ambiguous cannot choose but betray it self; some sparkles will here break
forth, though never so carefully suppressed; wherefore as Iosuah asked the angel
Ios. 5. v. 13. art thou for us or for our adversaries? Let me likewise demand;
whose part take they? for now by walking so doubtfully and in a mist, they
merit applause from neither side; more reason there is that they be refused of
both; Saint Hierome somewhere speaking touching such neutrals the Hebionites,
Dum volunt (says he) and Iudaei and Christiani esse, nec sunt Iudaei nec
Christiani: whilst they hang between two sects, they deserve to be ranked no
where: mere batts in religion are they; as nature has placed these as twere
in no certain degree either of beasts or fowls: thus they for there
ambiguous profession, may hardly be numbered among Christians in any rank.

You have seen the subject of divisions briefly displayed; persons very
contagious in the Church, and as Miriam, long since a Schismaticke too, leprous
throughout. It is not unseasonable, if therefore in my fourth point I prescribe
the Apostles caution, which is, first mark, then avoid them.

What our Savior forespake touching false teachers, 4
Math. 7. 15. seems not more true in regard of their demeanor, then of their
preaching and doctrine. They come indeed clothed with sheep clothing: covered
over with a pretended show both of truth and zeal. Hard it is in so near a
likelihood, to discern where they conform to the truth, and where they break
off. St Ignatius for this terms them sometimes (...), creatures having though
no more, yet a Christian outside; elsewhere (...), exact and able counterfeits.
Came they dressed in their proper shape, we might the more easily keep safe: it
were no difficult task to eschew their infectious tenants. A wound if open and
apparent, may be quickly cured; that especially is dangerous, where the soar
lies hid, or the passage proves inuolu'd. Well do Schismatics conceive the
weakness of their cause: should they attempt to obtrude their falsehoods upon
the Church, in their naked deformity, it were a vain design. Errors be
naturally displeasing to the understanding: whereas truth is no less outwardly
pleasing, then admirable in it self. Therefore they color and varnish over
their absurdities with ounning deceit.

First, Ep. ad Leone^ papam.
they refute one bad opinion that they may set up a worse; Eutiches, you know,
would needs maintain a confusion of natures in Christ; now this he undertook
(says Flavianus) under pretense of confuting Nestorius, who held oppositely as
much amiss; Are there none now which cry down Puritanisme whereby to
establish Papisme? Is there no such new stratagem? Yea farther, are there not
those who deal with religion in a sense inverted, as David did with king
Achish, 1. Sam. 27. under show of fighting against the Philistines our
adversaries, they fall upon their countries faith.

Another way they have of intermingling truth with error; Amidst their
discourses they craftily mix some drams of verity to commend the rest; nay so
they do more hurt and d^^plier infect. Poison if given in wine or honey
pierces the veins with greater violence; even thus falsehood sweetened with a
relish of truth, eats most dangerously into the bowels of the Church.

A third devise is by faigning of some good intent; whilst they labor a breach
in christianity, Orat. de componendo religionis dissidio inter Christianos.
to make show of a desired unity and peace. Arminius even then when he was
forging those opinions upon which such endless troubles have ensuech,
compos'de a treatise touching a general reconcilement; like Ioab to Amasa, 2.
Sam. 20. at once he offers embraces to the Church and stabs it.

More shifts besides they skill of to obscure their malicious drifts. There
want not infinite tractlesse mazes, wherein they can lurk undiscerned; so as
what a petty historian speaks of the Ligurians inhabiting bogs and bushy
places. Mayor aliquanto labor erat invenire quam vincere, may be here applied.
It is easier to convince their errors, then perfectly trace it out.

Not in vain then are we bid to mark: observe we ought their subtle passages,
mudding still the stream wheresoer'e they go; neither yet is this enough;
after we have thus descried their falsehoods, we must also avoid and shun them;
what communion has light with darkness (says the Apostle) 2. Cor. 6. In the
1. of Genesis v. 4. no sooner had God created light, but in the same v. he diuides
them straight: we are though not light, yet the children of light, and
therefore must be careful, least by mixing with the sons of error, our
light be dimmed and weakened. How seriously diligent were the primitive Fathers
in declining such? How watchful to repress them? Should I here recount their
various edicts and provisoes framed thereupon, I might happily make more use of
reading, then of moderation and judgment; Only for a taste; you may from the
course of Ecclesiastical stories gather a treble censure thus disposed. First
they inflicted upon them abstension, or (as I may say) incommunication with the
Church: Next a positive eiection, else deposition from their clericall degree;
at length if both these reclaimed them not, the utter Anathema; Add here to
those seuerer cautions of the Apostolic Synod; that men rightly orthodox
might not (...): not join in prayer with such, Can. 44. of the Laodicean, not
to deal with them or use commerce, Can. 57. So careful were those ancient
sages, least a contagious Schismaticke, if let alone, might perchance infect
the whole Christian flock.

It may be in former times there appeared greater danger. About the first
plantation of the Gospel, we find in truth heresies more rife and frequent;
Satan was then most busy, that he might choke up the word before it took sure
root. Thus Mat. 13. 25. the envious one presently sowes his cockle, as soon as
the owner had ended. Notwithstanding although such Church diseases be now less
pregnant, yet are they poisonous still alike. A mixing of things unwholesome
with pure, corrupts as much as ere it did.

Neither do I (mistake me not) prescribe so extreme a course as the ancients
used. It is a point both above my skill and place: only I wish that always
disturbers, of what kind soever, if not in person, yet in doctrine be shunned;
that we take heed least by a seeming furtherance of the faith, they hinder its
growth. At the fourth of Ezra when the people of the land desired to help the
Israelites in rebuilding the temple, they would not, Ye have nothing to do
with us to build an house, v. 3. Happily they guessed that for laying one
stone, they might maliciously pluck down two. You know the fable of the
homebred wolf: under color of keeping the sheep, he made more hauock in
the fold then the Wolfes abroad. A doubtful zeal is most dangerous when thus
it gets a handsome disguise. It is to be feared, that such may do more
mischeife, then the adversary from without.

I have laid before you at length a full view of Schisms: their nature and
property: their subject and how they must be avoided; now because one opposite
shines more clearly in another presence, it is not amiss that contrariwise
in my last point I handle the mutual agreement of true professors, or as it
is here their Brotherhood.

We read concerning the divisions of Reuben, 5
Judge. 5. 15. of much dissension betwixt the Saduces and the Pharisees, Act. 23.
7. Evil and erroneous men are both alike given to strife; whereas Christians
rightly seasoned, be no less unanimous then abundant in all truth and
goodness; In the 15th of Genesis Abraham is commanded to take an Heifer, a Ram,
and a Goat: besides a Pigeon with a Turtle: as for the former he divides them
v. De promissionibus and praedictionibus. P. Ima.
10th: the Turtle and the Pigeon he divides not. Those three (says Prosper)
fore-shew'd the condition of Schismatics, but these the Doue-like and
undivided agreement of professors truly orthodoxe. Now as the higher faculties
of man's soul are two, will and the understanding, this agreement here consists
in a meet consonancy of both.

First, for the understanding, having received one spirit, they must needs
conspire in one meaning and sense: they differ not, as being by the same
teacher instructed. Indeed no marvel if Schismatics do iarr, whom their own
affections or satan diversely instructs: but the Disciples of verity, though
many, yet be they as organs tuned by an individual spirit. Neither is there a
more constant evidence of the truth professed, then such consent; Judicious
interpreters of the sacred writ thence especially infer, that the Prophets
wrote inspir'de; Each where they do so miraculously concur, Vid. B. Vigilium
adversus Eutychem l. 2. Just. Martyr. (...) --
and fully accord: On the other side dissent of tenants, has ever been the
sign of falsehood. The Fathers to confute the Pagan Philosophers in many
principles of faith had no greater proof: like to a common weal ill composed,
they overthrew them through their own discord.

Secondly, neither yet are orthodox professors thus only (...) but likewise
(...): not alone sympathizing in judgment, but also in heart; Love and vnamity
were ever a most Christian-like note. Look but into the course of former ages,
and you will easily grant as much. Concerning the Apostles time, what ardency
of good will find we there? with what affection did they mutually embrace?
Lands and goods lay then in common: the whole Church may seem no other then
one great family. As in the building of Solomon's temple not any hammer or iron
tool was used that made a noise; 1. Reg. 6. Thus they labored jointly in
founding the Gospel, wihtout all malice or clamorous strife. Afterward we
find this holy zeal no whit abated; still in succeeding times, as
persecutions waxt hotter, the Christians love grew more enflamed. To manifest
which, least it might languish if concealed, how many signs of expression had
they? witness there (...) or feasts of love: there osculum pacis after their
sacred meetings: yea osculum baptismi at their admittance into the Church:
lastly their panem vnanimitatis, as Paulinus to Austin intimates; a token
commonly annexed and sent with their letters to express their joint
consolidation into the same body of Christ; As for hatred and malice, such
ungodly motions, they may seem as free, as we their offspring now stand guilty.

Yet what wonder is it if thus reciprocally they maintained charity? For first
(you know) among all virtues this takes place: without it martyrdom it self
avails not, 1. Cor. 13. Lumbard so far extols it, as to make it touching
the exercise an immediate act of the spirit: whereas other divine graces
acknowledge their proper habits. How truly he does this I mean not to
examine; only you see what a glorious conceit he had of this virtue above the
rest.

Again, such love greatly strengthens each where the Christian zeal: it
conserues as it were religion warm and frolic. Ignatius in his Epistle to the
Ephesians discoursing to this purpose, tells them that it would keep them more
secure even from Satan's assaults; (...), etc. all assronts (says he) of those
spiritual enimyes be this way lessened: join they but hearts, sin it self
would find an harder inlet.

Once more, no marvel if orthodox Christians affect this concord, since our
Savior himself so much commends it; whenas he who is the author of peace
appears so urgent a teacher thereof. In the 13. of Io. he makes it the very
mark and badge of his: By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples,
and. v. 35 In the 14. C. being now to suffer, he bequeaths it them for their
only legacy, My peace I leave you, v. 27. with great earnestness he enioines
that, which long since was commended to the Church under a type; Noah's dove
having circled the waters too and fro, returns not empty; yet brings she for
a token of the floods decrease, no other testimony into the arc, the figure of
the Church, then an Olive leaf; a leaf which is the usual sign of love and
concord; hence the Apostle more expressly, Romans 10. 15. deciphers the Church
under name of the Olive.

You perceive by this a little better the fowlnesse of Schisms: how ugly they
be apart, yet more if opposed to unity: give me now leave but to set down
some few rules, as well for the advancing of the one, as the repressing of the
other, and I will end.

First then, it were well if men did meddle less in needless points besides
the faith: were they not ouerbusie there, where they may show more wit, then
promote the Gospel. The orthodox religion stands now betwixt Papistry and
Semi-pelagianisme, as the Platonicke sect did once between the Epicureans and
the Stoics; Acodemicatu^ Quaestionum. L. 2.
cum his non de sinibus sed de tota fere possessione contentio est; with these,
says the Orator, the Platonicks hold an utter distance; but from them they
differ upon terms of lighter moment. Papistrie thwarts and cuts the very
life-strings of a saving belief. Semi-pelagianisme no so; whence then the
greatest danger appears, there to be most active were a prudent course.

Or 2ly, if some must needs be dealing elsewhere, would they could but keep
their opinions concealed; not press upon the Church for current whatsoever
themselves have fancied; Paracelsus having grounded himself strongly in
natural magic, afterward in all his conclusions ascribes over much to that;
with him Adam and Methuselah lived so long not without some help of Chymicall
extracts; Upon like grounds Agrippa among others his foppish notions, De
occulta Philos. L. 4
persuades us, that the cross if of force at all, it is by virtue of the mere
figure. Me^ for the most part relish long of those principles with which they
have been at first invred. The vnderstainding is so far from embracing the
opposite truth, that it rests and scarcely admits of a farther search.
Moreover, and what they have once conceipted privately, they straight way
labor to make good a broad; hold they cannot, but they will obtrude their
peculiar fancies, for a public truth; Our savior Math. 16. speaking of such
doctrine among the Pharisees, calls it leaven v. 6. Even as leaven it heaues
and works in the brain till it can get a vent; Much discreeter was the course
of Saint Cyprian; The devout father being unhappily tainted in that point
concerning Anabaptisme, yet would he by no means commemd it for a classicke
tenent; nemini prescribimus, etc. let others (says he) abound in a contrary
sense: for my part I advise none: which his modesty if diverse now adays did
follow, from how many unnecessary tumults might they secure the Church.

But suppose a Schism be once on foot, the speediest way for redress may
seem; First a serious yet civil debatement: when men shall enter the lists as
willing to yield, if pechance convinced, as to refuse the assaylant; hot and
furious disputes do seldom good; amidst the noise of such conuiciating
iarres, the the truth is scarcely heard. The discussion of doubtful points
resembles much the smiting of a flint; a gentle and well poys'de stroke
procures some sparks; whereas a boisterous collision, gets no fire, but
breaks the stone; Just so in point of controversy: a civil hadling brings it
to an issue straight; contrariwise an impetuous wrangling inflicts happily some
stain on either party, yet nothing cleeres the argument. Unwisely then deal
they who fly out into such a distempered vehemence; Instead of a sober and
useful debatement they raise a personal brawle; they ttauerse not at length
the truth, but their own cause. It was the noted fault of Marcellus a
Rhetoritian that lighting on a figure, Sucton.
he would pursue it so far, till he had forgot the matter in hand: likewise
do these if once they fall into a calumniating and iarring vain; nay farther,
often times, they strangely misinterpret the adversary; either to extend their
discourse, or else of malice they impose a meaning far wide from the authors
drift. Thus as Zebul told Gaal, Thou see the shadows of mountains as if
they were men, Judge. 9. 36. they bestow much fruitless pains in confuting
such notions as themselves have fram'de amiss. But a way with such misprision:
such rouing encounters; it is a more probable course, if, as I said, they
neither shall over roughly dispute the cause, nor yet suspitiously make it
worse.

A second help here may be the use of Synodicall conuents: conuents which are
no less apt to repress falsehood, then establish a received truth in the
minds of people. The Romans of old when any more fatal danger approached, did
wontedly maintain their standing Senate; how much rather in a Christian state
appears some like project needful: where sin and error make a daily inrode.
Our forefathers therefore of the primitive Church, may seem indeed in such
meetings very frequent; every year twice, about Lent and antumne they ordained
councels provincially to be held. Hereby they weeded as it were and cut up
error in its first appearance: no sooner could it sprout forth, before it
procured strength, some decree or other straight ways cropped it; Satan you know
that old Serpent is the father of schisms: nay he was by a voluntary
discession from God simply the prime Schismaticke; A snake or serpent if he can
get but his head into a crany, scrues and wreaths in his whole body after with
no hard pain: on this manner error; by reason of its Serpentine nature,
unless at first repelled, threatens a dangerous progress; Councels then in
this case be greatly available; of sovereign help, if thus seasonably applied;
such a meeting of reverent sages must needs if not refell, at least
discountenance a crept in falsehood.

The last remedy shall be a serious advise; That men would duly consider how
by Schisms they would afresh the body of Christ; how they make the wonted fold
a coat of raueuing wolves. Hermes somewhere terms malitiousnesse (...): the
food or worlds repast; let not, oh let not the same be said concerning the
Church it self; Weigh likewise hereto the unknown and doubtful event of such
debates, The Collator in Prosper begins fairly and as a moderate pelagian, but
ere three pages are past leaving Pelagianisme, he becomes flat Atheist.
Unnecessary disputes never remain in that state of moderation, in which they
were at first raised; like floods they gain increase from their continued and
lasting course; especially if there happen (though I hope not) such as dispense
them secretly and of purpose to some farther end: When Hannibal mainely
intended Rome he took in Saguntum (says the historian) only by the way;
Liuie.
for occasion-sake in truth of a desired war; God grant there be none who
begin at these lower points, that they may fight at length not against Rome,
but for it.

I have done with my text; a subject I confess somewhat to high for me, and
deserving a more grave and learned pen; such an one wherein they should chiefly
labor, who are as able for skill, as effectual in power and place. Truth is
then most persuasiue, when thus abetted: but as Elihu took courage to advise
Job, though after his elders: to show his opinion also; Job. 22. v. 10. even so
have I done. Wisdom is of God, and often times he works no less through
weak means, then by strong and potent. Howsoever I thought it not besides the
duty of the meanest Leuite, if now he stretched forth his hand to uphold the
arc: if for my part likewise I endeauourde the Churches unity, my only drift.
And now O Lord do thou build up those breaches in the walls of our Jerusalem,
which by Schisms have long since been made; give us external peace, that so
the better we may procure that inward of mind, and in fine enjoy eternal
with thee. To God the Father, etc.

FINIS.

