INNOVATIONS Unjustly charged upon the Present CHVRCH and STATE.

OR AN ANSWER TO THE MOST MATERIAL PASSAGES of a Libellous Pamphlet MADE BY
MR. HENRY BURTON, AND INTITVLED An Apology of an Appeal, etc.

BY CHRISTOPHER DOW B. D.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill.

M DC XXXVII.

To the Ingenuous Reader.
THis Treatise was finished and intended for the Press, at the beginning of
Easter Term last, at which time it was expected that M. B. and his
Confederates would have had their censure: Had it then comne forth, the speed
it made would, perhaps, have made some Apology for the defects of it. However,
in all this delay, I wanted both leisure and will to add or alter any thing,
and resolved to let it pass in its first dress. If it seem incompt and less
accurate then might happily be expected; the comfort is, that (with all faults)
it is a cover fit enough for such a cup. Only one thing may seem strange; That
(having promised it). I add nothing particularly of the Appeal and its
Apology. The truth is; the only point of moment which I reserved for that part
was, The Legality of the Bishops exercising their Jurisdictions in their own
names, and of their proceedings in the High Commission. The rest (excepting his
often repeated railings, and frivolous reasons, which I never thought worthy of
any serious answer) I have met with in the Sermons, and answered so far as I
thought fit. Now for that point, That which was spoken in that High and
Honorable Court of Star Chamber at the Censure, and the expectation of
somewhat shortly to be declared by Authority, for the full clearing of it; Made
me (even when this book was more than half printed) to alter my first
determination, and suppress those things which I once intended to publish upon
that part; judging it altogether needless, if not presumption, to bring my
poor verdict either to second, or prevent so judicial and authentic a
decision: and (that point excepted) I held the rest not worthy a peculiar
Chapter. I will add no more save the best wishes of

Thine in our common Savior C. D.

THE CONTENTS OF the CHAPTERS.
Chap. 1. Fol. 1. AN Introduction to the ensuing Discourse, containing the
reasons inducing the Author to undertake it, and his aim in it. Chap. 2. Fol.
7. A short Relation, or Description, of M. H. Burton his course and manner of
life. Of the occasion of his discontent, his dismission from the Court. The
ground of his dislike and hatred against the Bishops, and betaking himself to
the people. The course he has since taken, in his Books and Sermons, to make
himself plausible, and the Bishops envied. Of the Book called A divine
Tragedy, etc. Chap. 3. Fol. 14. Of this book of his; The parts of it. Of the
title of his Sermons. The dedication of it to his Majesty, and some passages in
it. Chap. 4. Fol. 21. Of the Sermons. The Authors intention in the examination
of them. A general view of their materials. Their dissonancy from the Text,
in every part of it. Their principal argument, Supposed Innovations. The
Authors pitching upon them as containing the sum of all. Chap. 5. Fol. 32. Of
the supposed Innovations in Doctrine. Of K. James his Order to the Universities
for reading the Fathers: done long since: unjustly charged upon the present
Bishops. By whomsoever procured, upon just grounds. Not Popish, but against
Popery. King James his other Order for preaching, of Election, etc. justified.
Chap. 6. Fol. 38. Of his Majesty's Declaration prefixed to the Articles of
Religion. M. Burtons cunning trick to color his railing against his Majesty's
actions, and the danger that may come of it. All truths not necessary to be
known or taught. The Doctrine of predestination in M. Burtons sense best
unknown. The Gospel not overthrown, but furthered by the want of it. An
uncomfortable Doctrine. Chap. 7. Fol. 43. Of the books that have been printed
of late. Of Franciscus a S. Clara. Desire of peace warranted by S. Paul. We and
they of Rome differ not in fundamentalls. What are fundamentalls in M. Burtons
sense. The distinction, in fundamentalibus and circa fundamentalia justified.
The Church of England not Schismatic. How far separated, and wherein yet
united with the Romish Church. Good works necessary to salvation.
Justification by works; By charity, in what sense no Popery. Whether the Pope
be That Antichrist, disputable. Of confession. Of prayer for the dead, how
maintained by our Church. Praying to Saints, justly condemned by Protestants.
Chap. 8. Fol. 58. Of the Doctrine of obedience to Superiors. How taught and
maintained by the Bishops. Wherein it must be blind; and how quick-sighted.
Chap. 9. Fol. 67. Of the Doctrine of the Sabbath and Lord's Day, falsely accused
of Novelty. The sum of what is held or denied in this point by those whom Mr
B. opposes. The Churches power, and the obligation of her precepts. The
maintainers of this doctrine have not strained their brains or conscience.
Chap. 10. Fol. 73. Of his Majesty's Declaration for sports, etc. M. Burtons
scandalizing the memory of K. James about it. His wicked censure of His Majesty
for reviving and republishing it. His abusive jeere upon my Lords Grace of
Cant. Five propositions opposed to his so many unjust criminations in this
argument. Chap. 11. Fol. 78. Of the 1. Proposition. The Declaration no inlet to
profaneness. His Majesty's respect to piety in it. Recreations only
permitted, not imposed. Of the 2. Proposition. The sports allowed are lawful,
on those days, and in themselves not against the Law of the Land. M. Burtons
seeming respect of the Fathers. Of Revelling. Of mixed dancing: how unlawful,
and how condemned by the Ancients, and by the Imperial Edicts. Of Calvin's
judgment in this point. Of the 3. Proposition. The Book no means of
violation of the 5. Commandment. Chap. 12. Fol. 97 Ministers commanded by His
Majesty to read the Book. They may and ought to obey. The matter of the Book
not unlawful. Things unlawfully commanded, may sometimes be lawfully obeyed.
What things are required to justify a subjects refusing a Superiors Command.
Refusers to read the Book justly punished. The punishment inflicted, not
exceeding the offense. Not without good warrant. Chap. 13. Fol. 108. Of the
Innovation (pretended to be) in Discipline. The Courts Ecclesiastical have
continued their wonted course of Justice. St. Austines Apology for the Church
against the Donatists, fitly serves ours. The cunning used by delinquents, to
make themselves pitied, and justice taxed. Their practices to palliate and
cover their faults. Mr. B's. endeavor to excuse Ap-Evans. Mr. Burtons
opposites not censorious. What they think of (those, whom he calls)
Professors, and the profession it self. True Piety approved, and honored in
all professions. The answer to this crimination summed up. The censured,
partial Judges of their own censures. How offenses are to be rated in their
censures. Chap. 14. Fol. 113. Of the supposed Innovations in the worship of
God. Ceremonies no substantial parts of Gods worship. The crimination, and a
general answer. Of standing at Gloria Patri. What will worship is. Standing at
the Gospel. Bowing at the name of Jesus. Of the name of Altar: and what
sacrifice is admitted. Of the standing of the Altar. Of Communicants going up
to the Altar to receive. Of the railes. Of bowing toward the Altar: and to the
East: and turning that way when we pray. Of reading the second Service at the
Altar. Chap. 15. Fol. 121. Innovation in the civil government slanderously
pretended without proof. His slander of my Lords Grace of Canterbury about
Prinnes Prohibition, confuted. Other calumnies against His Grace, etc.
answered. The Bishops falsely charged with dividing the King and His Subjects.
Chap. 16. Fol. 132. Of the altering of the Prayer-books. The putting In for At.
The leaving out of Father of thine elect, etc. no treason. Master B. rather
guilty. His pretty shift about it; and how he and some of his use the Prayers
of the Church. Of the Prayers for the fifth of November altered. Those Prayers
not confirmed by act of Parliament. The Religion of the Church of Rome not
Rebellion. Of the alterations in the last Fast-booke. The restraint of
preaching. Fastingdayes no Sabbaths. Chap. 17. Fol. 150. Of the sixth pretended
Innovation in the means of Knowledge. The Knowledge of God necessary. The
Scriptures the key of Knowledge. Impious to take them away, or hinder the
knowledge of them. The difference between the Scriptures, and Sermons. How
faith is begotten: of Romans 10. 17. The Word of God must be rightly divided, and
what it is so to do. Chap. 18. Fol. 162. Of the seventh pretended Innovation in
the Rule of Faith. What matters of Religion are submitted to the Bishops
decision. The Doctrine of our Articles. The properties of the Bishops
decisions. Master Burtons clamors against the Bishops in this particular,
odious and shameful. Of that speech which he ascribes to the Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury, concerning the Catholic Church. What is justly attributed to
the Church, and how we, ordinarily, come to know the Scriptures to be
Scriptures. Chap. 19. Fol. 170. Of the jurisdiction of Bishops: how far of
Divine right given by Christ to his Apostles, and from them derived by
succession. The power given to the Apostles divided into several orders. What
power Ecclesiastical belongs to the King; and the intent of the Statutes which
annexe all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to the Crown. Of Mr. Burtons Quotation
of the Jesuits direction to be observed by N. N. M. B. and the Jesuit,
confederates in detraction and ignorance. Chap. 20. Fol. 182. The last
Innovation, in the Rule of manners. The Scriptures acknowledged to be the sole
rule of manners, and how. Old Canons how in force. The Act before the
Communion-booke does not forbid the use of ancient and pious customs. Master
B. incurring the penalty of that Statute. Of Cathedral Churches. The argument
from them frees the rites and ceremonies there used from novelty and
superstition. Of the Royal Chapel. His dangerous insinuations referred to
the censure of Authority. The Close. Chap. 21. Fol. 193. A brief Discourse of
the beginning and progress of the Disciplinarian Faction. Their sundry
attempts for their Genevian Dearling. Their Doctrines new and different from
the true and ancient tenets of the Church of England: and they truly and
rightly termed Innovators.
REcensui librum hunc, cui titulus est [Innovations unjustly charged, etc.] in
quo nihil reperio quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur.

June 17. 1637. Sa. Baker R. P. Episc. Londin. Cap. domest.

INNOVATIONS UNJUSTLY CHARGED UPON THE PRESENT CHURCH and STATE.
CHAP. I.
An Introduction to the ensuing Discourse, containing the reasons inducing the
Author to undertake it, and his aim in it.

IT is better (in the judgment of St Melius errantis imperitiam silentio
spernere, qua^ loquendo dementu insaniam provocare Nec hoc sue ^^gist^^ii
divini^e^ nominis aucteritate faciebam, etc. Cypr. ad Demetrian.
Cyprian) by silence to condemn the ignorance of the erroneous, than by
speaking to provoke the fury of the enraged. And for this judgment of his, he
had the warrant (as he says) of divine authority. And certainly, it must
needs be a great point of folly, to grapple with those, who, (as that Father,
of Demetrianus) by the noise of clamorous words, seek rather to get vent and
passage for their own, than patiently to hear the opinions of others; it being
more easy to still the waves of the troubled sea, than by any discourse to
repress the madness of such men. To undertake such a task therefore, is but a
vain attempt, and of no more effect, than to hold a light to the blind, to
speak to the deaf, or to instruct a stone. Foul-mouthed railers and barking
dogs are soonest stilled by passing on our way in silence, or by severe and due
correction: Yet notwithstanding, this rule is not without some exception, and
therefore Solomon who gives this counsel, not to answer a fool according
Prove. 26. 4, 5.
to his folly, adds in the next words (as it were) a crosse-proverb to it,
bidding us, Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own
conceit. In that case, an answer to clamorous and slanderous railers (whom the
Wiseman comprises under the name of fools) is not unfit or unseasonable. And
there are (no doubt) other cases, in which without deserving the imputation of
folly, a man may, yea and it is expedient, that he should make answer to the
envenomed railings of imbittered spirits. And if at any time, surely then, when
such detractors are not only wise in their own conceits, but, which is more,
have enveigled many simple and (perhaps otherwise) well-meaning people, and
drawn them to an opinion of their wisdom, and belief and approbation of
their false and wicked calumnies. Much more, when they level their poisoned
arrows of detraction against the Sovereign Power, and against the Fathers of
the Church; which, if they should prevail, would wound and endanger the settled
government and peace of both Church and State. In such case, it cannot be
accounted rashness for any true-hearted subject and son of the Church, to
break an otherwise resolved silence, to prevent (what in him is) the growth of
so great a mischief.

I will add one other particular: When men shall be so impiously presumptuous,
as to break into the secrets of the Almighty, and peremptorily to pronounce of
his unscrutable judgments, (as if they had been his counselors) and to cast
the causes of the present plague, and all the evils that have lately threatened
or befallen us, upon those men, to whom, next under God, we owe, and in duty
ought to acknowledge, our preservation hitherto, and that the plague and other
evils have no more raged amongst us; yea and upon those means, which God has
sanctified for the removal of his judgments. It is high time then to speak,
lest silence should be interpreted a confession of guilt, and inability to wipe
off such desperate and malicious slanders. And herein, I have for my warrant,
the authority of the same Father, who having, upon the grounds before
mentioned, long held his peace, and with patience overcome the rage of his
adversaries, at length he thus breaks forth: Seeing thou [Demetrianus] Sed
enim cum dicas plurimos conqueri, quod bella crebrius surgant, quod lues, quod
fames saeviont, quodque imbres, and pluvias serena longa suspendant, nobis
imputari; tacere ultranon oportet; ne jam non verecundiae, sed diffidentiae
esse incipiat, quod tacemus; and dum criminationes falsas contemnimus refutare,
videamur crimen agnoscere. Respondeo igitur, etc. Cypr. loc. supra citat.
say, many complain, that it is to be imputed to us [Christians] that wars
so often rise, that plague and famine do rage, and that we have such long
droughts: We must no longer be silent, lest now it be not modesty, but
diffidence that we hold our peace; and while we scorn to refute your
criminations, we should seem to acknowledge the crime. Upon these
considerations, and in imitation of that holy Father and Martyr, I have set
upon this work, (in a calm and compendious way) to endeavor the stopping of
the mouth of detraction, and to show the groundlesnesse and vanity of those
suspicious jealousies, and clamors which of late have been raised in many
parts of this Kingdom; and which Mr. B. (having first vented in the Pulpit)
did after send abroad (gathered into one bundle) in his book entitled, An
Apology of an Appeal, etc. And though I know it to be most true, that among
the ruder sort and common people, the lowdest cry takes the most ears, and
that audacious errors and bold calumnies find more free entertainment and
welcome, with light and weak judgments, than peaceable and modest truth: And
that there seem so great an indisposition and disaffection in the minds and
hearts of some in these days, either to the present Authority, or to the
things by it either commended or enjoined, that important truths and wholesome
orders, becoming once countenanced or pressed by authority, in stead of credit
and obedience receive nothing but clamor and detraction: and that such, as,
according, but as duty binds them, do undertake to plead in their just
cause, or speak in their defense, shall, from many, in stead of thanks, gain
nothing but odious and opprobrious names and contumelies. Yet withal I know
and am persuaded, that the iniquity of the times is not such, but that truth
and a good cause may yet find equal judges, who following the precept of our
blessed Savior, Judge not according to appearance, John. 7. 14.
but judge righteous judgment; not taking their information of a cause, from
the cry of the crowde, or rumor of the people (which for the most part
conveighs not the truth of the cause, but the affections of the reporters) but
from right and solid grounds, weighing things in the balance, not of profit or
particular interest, but of sound reason; and abstracting the cause from the
parties, and from malevolent aspersions (wherewith truth many times is obscured
and defaced) do embrace truth in the love of it. And others there are (no
doubt) who, though led away, for the present, with the example of the
multiutde, and ensnared by the opinion they have unwarily drunk in, of the
worth of the broachers of error, yet will notwithstanding be patient of better
information, and upon due consideration be ready to express their love to
truth and peace. To these sorts of men principally I address my self in this
discourse, whom I shall desire not to expect that verbosity, much less that
virulency and opprobrious language which Mr. B. uses; I leave that contention
and victory to base minds, and shall study rather what is fit for me to
speak, than what he and such as he deserve to hear.

Neither do I reckon upon their censure who judge of books not by the weight,
but by the words. For (as S. Austine says well) what is more talkative than
vanity? which yet cannot therefore Quid loquacius vanitate? Quae non ideo
potest quod veritas, quia si voluerit etiam plus potest clamare quam veritas.
Sed considerent omnia diligenter, et si forte sine studio partium judicantes
talia esse perspexerint, quae potius exagitari, qu^m convelli possint
garrulitate impudent issima; et quasi satyrica velmimica levitate, cohibeant
suas nugas: et potius ^ prudentibus emendari, quam laudari ab imprudentibus
eligant. Aug. de civ. l. 5. c. 27.
do that which truth can, because it can cry louder. And I would to God that
Mr. B. and if there be any other of his mind and temper, would (as the same
Father adds in that place) consider all things diligently, and if happily,
judging without partiality, they shall perceive the things, (against which they
have rayled such bitter invectives) by their impudent pratings, and Satyre-like
or mimical lightness, to be such as may rather be exagitated, than confuted,
they would repress their scandalous trifles, and choose rather to be rectified
by the judicious, than to be applauded by the unskilful. As for those, who are
the abettors and applauders of those contumelies and criminations cast upon the
government and governors of the Church and State, and so fautors and
propagators of the suspicions and discontents received against them, whether
they be in the same gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, or only seduced
by their leaders: I shall only desire one boon from them; namely, that they
would cease to have men's persons in admiration, for profit sake, or any other
by-respect, and endure with patience the examination of their complaints by the
word of God, and sound reason, the only infallible rules of sound judgment.
That they would not (as they are wont) think those whom their popular breath
has swollen great, to be the only oracles of truth, and patrons of religion
and godliness; and in comparison of them, contemn and vilify all others
(even those of highest eminency and authority in the Church and State) and
reject whatsoever, though never so reasonable shall proceed from them, as if
their doctrine were deadly, and their persons Anathema Maranatha. This request
if they shall grant me, I doubt not but the unnatural heat of their distemper
will in some measure be abated, and they brought to entertain a more reverent
and dutiful esteem of their superiors, and begin to study to maintain the
peace of the Church, which the proposterous zeal of boisterous spirits has of
late so much disturbed.

CHAP. II.
A short Relation, or Description, of Mr. H. Burton his course and manner of
life. Of the occasion of his discontent, his dismission from the Court. The
ground of his dislike and hatred against the Bishops, and betaking himself to
the People. The course he has since taken, in his Books and Sermons, to make
himself plausible, and the Bishops envied. Of the Book called A divine
Tragedy, etc.

WHERE the weight and power of reason enforces a Discourse, it makes its own
way to credit, and challenges belief without respect to the Author: but when
matters of fact are barely related, or opinions or conjectures broached, they
must bring their credence from the Authors worth, whose wisdom and sincerity
must usher them to belief with wise men: For in this case it is with words, as
with weapons, which receive their force from the hand that uses them; and so
these pierce according to the weight of the speakers authority. Now, the
work, whose survey I have undertaken, being (for the most part) of this kind,
it will be very requisite that the Author of it be taken into our
consideration. To which end I shall make a brief relation of some part of his
story, with this only intention, that the impartial Reader may be able to
know at what rate to value his authority, and what credit his bare word may
justly merit.

The Author then Mr. H. Burton, had his breeding at first, for some short time,
in St. John's College in Cambridge, where he was never observed for any
excellency, but that he could play well on an Instrument: and after his
removal from thence (having for a while been a Schoolmaster in a Noble-mans
house) he found the favor to be admitted to a mean place in the Closet of
His Majesty that now is, then Prince of Wales: Which sometime he was wont to
execute in his hose and dublet, with a perfuming pot in one hand, and a
fire-shovell in another; and as I have heard, received for his pains 5li. per
annu^. and a livery. But the Prince being gone into Spain, and Mr. Burton
before this time being got into Holy orders: among others of his Highness
Household that were designed to go thither, this man was one: But whether his
indiscretion (which he has since abundantly manifested) did then minister
grounds of suspicion, or what ever the cause were, certain it is, that he was
put out of the List for that voyage, and that when his goods were a-shipboard,
which he was fain to take home again, and to stay behind. Now all this while,
and for some space after, he was not any whit popular, (I mean, gracious with
the People) no not in his own Parish, witness his seldom preaching, and
(when he did preach) his thin audience: yea so ill was he relisht in those
days, that it was usual with many in his parish (though I do not commend
them for it) to enquire who preached, and if it were he, they would forsake
their own Church, and wander elsewhere.

He did not then inveigh against those which did not preach twice every
Lord's Day, which himself did not practice; neither was he noted to express any
distaste of the form of Divine service used at Court in the Royal Chapel,
or to call it, long Baby lonish p. 160.
service bellowed and warbled out, nor the use of Organs p. 163.
Piping; the Copes, Altar, tapers, etc. which were daily in his eye, did not
then offend him, or if, happily, they did not altogether please him, yet he was
content to hold his peace, and to tolerate them. But to go on. After it pleased
the King of kings to put a period to the terrestrial Kingdom of King James of
famous memory, our gracious Sovereign succeeding, Mr. B. would needs serve His
Majesty in the same place as before when he was Prince of Wales. And he
thinking the time now come wherein he might come even with those whom he
conceived to be his adversaries and hinderers of that his intrusion into the
Closet, and of his hoped voyage into Spain (and so of his desired preferment)
he behaved himself in such sort, that His Majesty dismissed him the Court and
his service: whence being cashiered, and all his hopes of preferment dashed, he
betakes himself to the people, as more patient of his criminations, and more
apt to side with him, against the Reverend Bishops; and having, by the help of
popular applause, advanced, from the hatred of some Bishops persons, to a
total dislike of their order, and of all their proceedings; he made their
actions his continual theme, and his Sermons See his Plea to an Appeal.
and writings so many satyrs, and bitter invectives, accusing them of
Arminianisme, Popery, Seven vials etc.
and whatsoever might make them odious, and himself gracious with his
new-masters, the People, and proceeding in this course with strange violence,
(the State and Church Governors, as I conceive, bearing the more with him, in
regard of his discontent for the loss of his hopes at Court) he sent forth a
book called A Divine Tragedy lately acted, etc. wherein he has See p 61.
in a strangely presumptuous and daring manner perckt up into Gods throne, and
taken upon him to read the dark and dim characters of the causes of his
inscrutable judgments: and wrested many late accidents that have happened, to
make them speak Gods indignation against such as have used the liberty granted
by His Majesty's late Declaration for sports upon the Sundays and Holy Days:
of which accidents, there are some which fail in the truth of story; others,
that are so common and ordinary, that it is ridiculous to reckon the for
memorable examples of Gods judgments: others that though they may well be
accounted such, yet have other causes of them, that may with more probability
be assigned, than that for which he brings them: yea, there is not one of them
that so clearly speaks that which he pretends, that any man (without the
just imputation of impious rashness) can say that they were inflicted for that
cause only or principally: and (which is yet more) granting that they were all
true, and so remarkable as he makes them, and that they did (in as plain
language as is possible for them) speak Gods indignation against the
profanation of the Lordsday, yet will it not follow, that God did thereby
confirm the Sunday-Sabbatarian doctrine, and condemn the contrary, and
express, from Heaven, his disallowance of his Majesty's Declaration, or the
lawful making use of that liberty which is there permitted. For, without all
question, whether the observation of the Lord's Day stand by virtue of Gods
immediate precept, in the fourth Commandment, or otherwise; or only by
Apostolical or Ecclesiastical constitution, the profanation of that day must
needs be a grievous sin and powerful attractive of Divine vengeance: seeing
it is acknowledged by all, that, in the profanation of that day, both Gods
precept (so far as it is moral in the fourth Commandment) is violated, and
the authority which God has commanded all Christians to obey, is contemned:
yea and the public worship of God, without which there can be no true
religion, neglected, vilified and overthrown. But his chiefest aim in all
this was, by this means, to stir up, against the Prelacy, the envy and hatred
of the people, who are easily wrought upon by the noise of judgments, and more
taken with a bold assertion of what neither they, nor he that speaks it, are
able to discern the truth of, than by the power of solid reason, or the plain
evidence of naked truth. At last he preached these sermons which we have
before us, in which he showed that extremity of virulency, as the like I
think has not been heard to be delivered out of the Pulpit, against the
persons of some Prelates and their actions, against the High Commission Court,
the most reverend Father in God the L. Archbishop of Canterbury, yea, he has
not spared the Royal Person of his Sacred Majesty, whose piety and religious
government he has most unchristianly and undutifully (to say no worse)
endeavored to blast, by most odious insinuations and calumnies. And having
thus vented these things in the Pulpit, they were sent abroad (by way of an
abstract or Epitome) in a libell entitled News from Ipswich: for any man that
compares that libell with his Sermons, shall find, that in both the materials
are the same; and if both (in their forms) were not his, it must needs be
that he and the author of that libell had consulted together, and conferred
notes; or perhaps they were set out by some zelote which gathered notes from
his Sermons. And being questioned in the High Commission for the things by him
delivered in these Sermons, he Appealed from them to His Sacred Majesty, and
printed his Appeal and an Apology for it, and two Epistles inscribed, one to
the true-hearted Nobility, and another to the reverend Judges, together with
the Sermons, and dedicated both by two several Epistles to His Majesty.

For the man, Charity commands me to pity him, but I can see no foundation for
charity to excuse him; for when I do but read him in this, and see to what an
height of desperate boldness, discontent, fomented by popularity, has brought
him, I can devise no better Apology, nor other way to free him from the just
imputation of imbittered malice, and traiterous intention, than to say that
discontent at once has cracked his brain and his conscience. Nor can I give a
better character of him, than that which S. Hierom long Homo turbulentus -- qui
-- Loquacitatem facundiam existimat, et maledicere omnibus bonae conscientiae
signu^ arbitratur. Hieron. advers. Helvid.
since did of Helvidius, that he is a turbulent man, and one that esteems
loquacity eloquence, and to speak evil of others the sign of a good
conscience.

How truly I have censured the man, there is nothing able so fully to
demonstrate as his book, which, being true-bred, resembles him to the life; and
gives the world a more perfect picture of him, than that which is sold by the
Stationers: without more ado then to begin our view of that.

CHAP. III.
Of this book of his; The parts of it. Of the title of his Sermons. The
dedication of it to his Majesty, and some passages in it.

THe book divides it self into two maine parts; the first contains his
Appeal, and its Apology; the other he entitles For God and the King, or The
sum of two sermons, etc. I shall crave leave to pass by the first part, and
(using a (...)) to look upon the last first. To begin with the Sermons, and
then come to the Appeal and its Apology; and indeed, that in reason ought to
have this privilege, in as much as it was the elder birth, the other being
younger and made to serve it: had these Sermons not been, there had been no
cause of Appeal, or of Apology. Now this part carries with it an awefull
title, which may usher it into the world with authority, and command respect
from every loyal and religious subject. It is [for God and the King] who dares
oppose himself? Who (says holy Job) has resisted God, and prospered? Job 9.
4.
and they that resist the King, resist the ordinance Romans 13. 2.
of God, and receive to themselves damnation. If it be so, it behooves us to
consider well before we adventure to gainsay ought in it, lest we be justly
(as Naboth was once unjustly) 1 Kings 21.
judged to blaspheme God and the King. But I remember I have read of Julian the
Apostate, who writing a book against the Christians, to allure them to read
it, and that so it might prevail the better for their seduction, inscribed it
[Ad Christianos] To Christians. And surely, Mr. Burton had learned some such
policy of somebody, which makes him prefixe so glorious a title, which may at
once (like the Sun) dazzle and allure the beholders, when indeed there is
nothing in it that answers the title. But however, they are two Sermons, or (as
he terms them) the sum of two Sermons. If this be true, surely the Sermons
were of a large size, and transgrest the bounds of an houre*glasse. But he
after expounds Epist. to the King.
himself what he means: and with him the sum of two sermons is, two
sermons and more: he might have termed them two Sermons with additionals: but
that word did not please, because so much used in the High Commission. But
Apol. p. 13.
let that pass; and take his good meaning: They are two Sermons more or less,
such as they are; had he termed them prophesies, I should have taken them in
that sense, when Saul is said to prophecy: which the Chaldee terms
[Insaniebat 1 Samuel 18. 10.
Saul] Saul was mad; but that they should be sermons its more strange. Yet not
very strange neither, among those of his strain; of whom there was Peter's, one
who being in London, preached as if he were not very well in his wits, and
remooving into the Low Countries, he became stark mad, and after some while
(being somewhat amended) inquiry being made of one that knew him how he did:
answer was made, that, God be praised, he now began to preach again, but he
was mad still. So then, they may be sermons, and preached too, on the fifth of
November last, in Saint Matthewes Friday-Street: and they were preached (as the
title tells us) by H. B. Minister of Gods word there and then. Sure, that is not
so; he was no Minister of Gods Word there and then, further than to make Gods
word usher to his fancies and frenzies: he might better have said: Out of Gods
word Minister to Hen. B. there and then. The text indeed is the word of God,
but the scrmons not so, they were Mr. Burtons own, neither framed according to
the rule of Gods word, nor founded upon that part of it, which he singled out
for his text. Well; but he would have you believe it to be Gods word; and
that you may guess of what subject he treated, he has inscribed a place
parallel to his text upon his title page, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Fear God, Honor the
King: which, if it be not misplaced, we must look for nothing but religion
and loyalty. Then you have his commission out of 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. to show
that what he did was not without good warrant, and to brand the times of
perverseness, as not enduring sound doctrine: that is, such as his own, which
you must believe Saint Paul prophesied of. But he had dealt more fairly with
his readers, if in stead of that he had fronted his Sermons only with that of
St. Peter, and applied it to himself, 2. Pet. 2. 10. -- Presumptuous,
selfe-willed, not afraid to speak evil of dignities. And for St. Bernards
sayings, to have taken that of the Satyrist.

-- Nunquamne reponam, Iuvenal.
Vexatus toties?
Or, Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris and carcere dignam,
Si vis esse aliquis.
But it seems, Mr. Burton was far otherwise conceited of them; for he is not
afraid to present them to the Kings most excellent Matie, and to avow (in the
beginning of his Dedication) that they were; What the title in the front
professes, for God and the King, and preached to teach his people obedience to
both. That he was by divine providence directed to that text, Prove. 24. 21, 22.
That the doctrines of it were necessary for the times, seasonable for the day
on which they were preached, and so, like apples of gold in pictures of silver.
For my part, I shall easily grant him that the text is for God and the King,
and serves to teach men obedience to both; but how the Sermons were suited to
the text, let wise men judge. I shall also grant, that the text was necessary
for the times, and seasonable enough for the day too; but as by him perverted,
made an incentive to animate ill-affected hearts to Apostasy and defection from
the due obedience both of God and the King. So that he might rather have
likened them to the Apples of Sodom, which are beautiful in show, but
contain nothing but sulphurous dust and rottenness. And how he says he was
directed to it by divine providence, I know not; one thing I know, that the
providence of God is as well in permitting evil, as in effecting of good, and
so Gods providence might well be said to suffer him to fall upon, or to point
him out that text to abuse and wrest, that thereby he might fill up the measure
of his iniquity, and fall into the hands of justice. But I rather think, under
the name of Divine providence he aims at an extraordinary calling or motion
from the spirit of God, which such as he use to pretend, for countenance to
their exorbitancies; or as in his Epistle to the true-hearted Nobility, that
Christ has called him. If he mean thus for what he delivered Page 20.
upon the text, I pity his seduced fancy: for no honest or wise-hearted
Christian can believe, that those bitter raylings, slanders, lies, surmises,
and seditious instigations, etc. which (for the most part) are the matter of
his Sermons, can proceed from the motion of any other spirit, than that which
now works in the hearts of the Children Ephesians. 2. 2.
of disobedience. However, (if you will believe him) they had the general good
acceptance with the people, whose hearts were much affected by them: he should
have said, their itching ears were well taken with hearing of those that are
in authority boldly taxed, and their faults (as they conceive them) ripped up,
which all, that know their humor, know to be a most delightful subject to
treat upon. And no question, this was a strong motive to him for the publishing
of them in print; and more prevalent than that of his superiors requiring a
Copy of them. If superiors command Appeal ep. 15.
him to bring in a Copy, he conceives he is not bound to do it, nor they to
require it, by the law either of God or man: but the peoples acceptance and
liking, is a sufficient motive to print them. It seems his aim in his Sermons
was the same which the Poet had in making his comedyes, To please the people;
Populo ut placerent etc.
and that they were only calculated for the Meridian of their liking, whom if
they pleased, no matter what others, though never so high in place or
authority, thought of them.

I here pass by the story which he tells His most excellent Matie, which we
have more at large elsewhere, as likewise his reasons of his presenting his
Majesty with them, and his refreshing his memory with his solemn and sacred
protestations, reserving them to a fitter place. Neither is it my intent,
either here or in his Sermons, to follow him step by step, or to scan every
particular. Yet one passage I cannot let slip, as seeming to contain a
special strain of modesty, more than I find in the whole work beside. For,
desiring his Majesty to acquit his honor in executing justice upon the
delinquents; He adds this modest piece, I do not charge any one particular
person; That honor is reserved to your Majesty. In which speech, I must wonder
at his modesty or at his meaning. If he mean, he does not charge any
particular in his Epistle, then my wonder at his looking modesty is ended, and
I judge him wise in not forestalling his Majesty, and so preventing his looking
further. But if he mean, that he has not at al charged any one particular
person (as the words, if they carry any sense with them, seem to import) then
I know not what to wonder at most, his impudency, or folly, in abusing so
sacred a Malefici. gestiunt latere, devitant apparere etc. Christianis vero
quid simile? neminem pudet, neminem poenitet, nisi plane retro non fuisse. Si
denotatur, gloriatur. etc. Tertul. Apol. c. r. Quid autem infelicius atque
perversius, sicut Donatistae faciunt, quise persecutionem perpeti gloriantur,
quam de coer citione iniquitatis suae non solum nescire confundi, sed etiam
velle laudari, ignorantes coecitate mirabili, vel animositate damnabili se
scire dissi mulantes, quod martyrs veros non facit poena, sed causa. August.
Epist. 167.
Majesty with so palpable an untruth: For it is most apparent that in his
Sermons he has charged many particular persons, and that in a most odious
manner, without reserving that honor (as he pretends) to His Majesty. For the
rest of this Epistle, which is most spent in imploring His Majesty's
protection, I willingly pass it over, leaving him and his cause (as duty
requires) to his Majesty's princely wisdom and justice. Only for a close to
it, I note that he seems here more resolute, than in his Epistle before his
Appeal: for there he shows his fear of being apprehended and brought into
the High Commission, which he calls the lions den: which Tertullian makes an
argument of a malefactor, who are glad to keep close and avoid appearance. But
Christians (as the same Author notes) were never ashamed, never repented, but
that they were not brought to profession sooner. So that his resolution here
for prison or not prison, is the better temper, and more like the ancient
martyrs, were but his cause like theirs, which (as St. Austine long since
observed) and not the suffering, is that which makes true Martyrs: otherwise,
there is nothing more wicked or more perverse, than for men not to know how to
be ashamed of their punishment, but to seek praise in their just sufferings;
which (to use the words of the Father) argues a strange blindness, and a
damnable animosity. But this was but a flourish, to show his confidence in the
goodness of his cause; for, had he been thus christianly-resolute, he would
not have refused to have been examined in the Star Chamber, and so forced
that Honorable Court, after long patience, to take the things informed against
him pro confesso, and so proceed to sentence upon him.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Sermons. The Authors intention in the examination of them. A general
view of their materials. Their dissonancy from the Text, in every part of it.
Their principal argument, Supposed Innovations. The Authors pitching upon them
as containing the sum of all.

I Come now to the Sermons themselves. The text is, Pro. 24. 21, 22. My son
fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change. For their calamity shall rise suddenly; and who knows the ruin of
them both?

Here I intend not to play the Critic, to carpe or catch at every trifle, or
to censure every solecisme or word misplaced, but to pass by such slips as are
common incidences to humanity. And therefore I will not scan the difference
between an exhortation and an admonition; or whether Sermon. page 3.
Solomon speaks here in his own or the person of God: or (in which soever)
whether he intend to distinguish him, to whom he directs his speech, from
others, and to appropriate him as Gods own peculiar: Page 4.
and so, whether the Doctrine of final perseverance in grace, can here find a
good foundation. Page ^0.
Or how his fourth point (viz. That a man that truly fears God, is a man of a
thousand, an eminent person, a goodly object or spectacle to be looked upon.)
is drawn from this text, when I am sure the word [Thou] upon which he seems to
ground it, and therefore writes it in great letters) is not at all in the
Original, but only as it is wrapped up in the Verb. Neither will I reckon up
the many other impertinencies and inconsequencies, which every where throughout
his discourse are obvious to a judicious eye; These, and the like niceties (so
I account them in comparison) whether Logical, or Theological, shall make no
difference between us. Though perhaps in an accurate disquisition, or to a
curious examiner they may be judged not unworthy the discussing: and that he,
who takes upon him to be the great and disdainful censor of learning and
learned men, deserves the lash for smaller failings. Neglecting these then (as
beneath my intentions) when I at once in a general view behold the text and
the discourse upon it, and see what a strange body he has joined to such an
head; Horac. de Art Humano capiti cervicem pictor equinam, jungere si velit
etc.


I cannot but think of that strangely-deformed monster, which Horace says, if
a Painter should draw, would move laughter in the beholders. From which, were
not the matter more serious, and of an higher consequence, I could hardly
refrain; so monstrous a disproportion there is between the one and the other.
For what better text could there be picked out of the whole Bible, to persuade
Piety to God, Obedience to the King, and (which is a part of our obedience to
him) submission to such as are in authority under him? And what readier way can
be devised to extirpate the fear of God, and true religion, and piety out of
men's hearts, than is here taken in these Sermons? For example, to mock at the
devout gestures, and pious expressions of holy reverence in Gods service: To
call that due and lowly reverence, which is done at the mention of that sweet
and blessed Name by which alone*men can be saved, a Page 66.
complementall crouch to Jesus, and in a blasphemous jeere, Page 15. 25, etc.
Iesu-worship: And that honor which is tendered to God toward that place where,
of all others, he manifests himself most graciously, Ibid. etc.
Altar-worship, Page 33.
Adoration of the Altar-God, Page 98.
false-shewes, will worship, a kind of Courtship, a complement, etc: To style
the singing of praises to God Page 163.
chanting, and the music (which is used to allay distracting and disturbing
thoughts, to raise our dull affections, and to stir them up to a devout
cheerfulness in praising of God) Ibid.
piping: Yea, to deride the whole service of God (ever allowed and approved in
our Church) under the name of page 160.
long Babylonish service: And the solemn prayers of the Church appointed and
used at the Fast, page 148 etc.
Mocking of God to the face, and the fast it self a mock-fast. What a
dis-heartening must this needs be to men, and what an allay to that little
fervor which is in them to Gods worship, when their best performances, both
for matter and manner, shall be thus derided and scorned? Yea, what a door is
here opened to let out all Religion and fear of God, and to let in all
profaneness and atheism, when they shall be taught thus to conceive of
religious duties, and the public service of God? And what is, if this be
not, to make men to abhor the offering of God? Again, there is 1. Sam. 2. 17.
scant any one thing that argues a greater want of the fear of God and true
religion, than an unbridled tongue. If any man among you seem to James 1 26.
be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, that man's religion is in vain. And
yet, how has this man given his tongue the reins (and that in public, and
in the house of God, and standing in the place of God, and entitling him the
Author of such licencious wickedness) to utter the impure vomit of an
exulcerated heart, in most odious and shameful railings?

What opprobrious language, what bitter terms and titles of reproach has he
used against those whom he conceives opposite to him in opinion, aiming
principally at the R. Bishops and Fathers of the Church, whose dignity he
contemnes, calling them, Enemies and rebels to God; fogges and mists risen from
the bottomless pit; frogs page 11. and 12.
and unclean spirits crept out of the mouth of the Dragon; limbs of the Beast,
even of Antichrist. Paralleling them with the Jews, who killed the Lord Jesus,
and their own Prophets, etc. page 32.
Babel-builders, factors of page 15.
Antichrist, page 83.
Antichristian mushromes, page 121.
Lukewarm, page 28.
Miscreants, page 148.
Neuters, N. Ips.
causers of the plagues continuance, and other judgments, which (as it is in
his Epitome) we must never look to have removed, till some of them be hanged:
and indeed what not? that may either vent his own, or move others spleen
against them. Neither has he been contented to keep himself in generals,
but has shot out the poisoned shafts of his serpentine tongue against
particular persons, (a thing hateful and intolerable in a public sermon) as
(not to speak of those of lower rank, of whom the meanest is far above him
in every kind of worth: The L. Bishop of Norwich (a man eminent for his
learning, and approved to his Sacred Majesty, by his long and faithful
service) upon whom he bestows these titles: An page 71.
usurper, a bringer in of foreign power, an Innovator, Oppressor, Persecutor
and troubler of the peace of the Church and Kingdom. The L. Bishop of
Chichester, that mirror of learning, he calls a page 126.
Tried Champion for Rome, and (joining him with that thrice Venerable the L.
Bishop of Ely, whom in contempt he calls Dr. White) says, page 121.
They are men well affected to Rome; when it is well known, they have done
more real (not railing) service to this Church against Rome, then ever Mr.
Burton or any or all his faction ever did or could: but I am beneath their
worth thus to compare them.

But if ever he showed himself his craftsmaster in the art of reviling,
lying, and slandering, it is against the most reverend Father in God, the Lord
Archbishop of Cant. his Grace. Against whom he has, with an impudent forehead,
framed such odious lies, endeavoring to load him with so many false and foul
aspersions, and using so insolently base and reproachful terms against his
person, his chair and dignity; that he may seem (to use a phrase of his own)
to have strained the veins of his conscience, no less than of his brains, in
the venting and inventing p. 126.
of them; and, perhaps he thought he could not sufficiently rail upon an
Archbishop, unless he proved himself an arch-railor, and peereless in his
faculty. The particulars (at least, the chief of them) I shall hereafter meet
and answer, and therefore I forbear here to relate them. Yet further. It was
wisely, and truly observed, by that worthy Prelate, and late glory of our
Church, Bishop Andrews, upon this same Bishop Andrews sermon. p. 95.
text; That, they that in the end prove to be seditious, (mark them well) they
be first detractors: -- Ever, as at first it did, so does it still, begin in
the gainsaying, in the contradiction of Corah. So began he: This Moses and
this Aaron, they take too much upon them, do more than they may by Law: they
would have somewhat taken from them. So Absolon: Here is no body to do any
justice in the land. So Jeroboam; Lord, what a heavy yoke is this on the
peoples neck! Meddle not with these detractors. So he. And indeed what more
powerful detractive of obedience from the Sovereign power can there be
invented; than to fill the peoples heads with conceits of the Kings neglect of
religion, his p. 56. etc.
oaths and protestations, to persuade them that (as if unable to rule) he
suffers his royal throne Appeal p. 29.
to be overtopped by others, his Laws trampled on, and himself swayed to
acts against justice p. 54. p. ^6.
and religion? what greater incentive? what readier way to kindle the fire of
sedition, than to cast contempt and scorn upon those in authority under him,
to make them hated as contemners of law, oppressors, persecutors, enemies of
God and all goodness? What louder alarm to rebellion, than the noise of the
loss of the settled religion, and the imputation of the present calamities to
those, who (under his Majesty) have the government of the Church? Lastly,
whereas the text advises men not to join, side, or meddle with those that are
given to change, and that under a great penalty, Mr. Burton (though himself
expound it of changes in Church or State) that he might in all points run
counter to his text, under the color of crying out against changes, becomes a
projector himself, and a ringleader to others, and that with so great
confidence and zeal, that he would adventure with an haltar about his neck to
the great Senate p. 110.
of this land, with this proposition; That the Lordly Prelacy might be changed
into such a government, as might better suit with Gods word, and Christ's sweet
yoke. Thus, from a detractor he is become, not a medler with changers (that
were little for so great a Captain as he would seem to be) but a p. 31.
leader and foreman of their company: which is just as that reverend Prelate
said; When [men by their detraction] have made the present State naught, no
remedy but we must have a better for it; and so, a change needs. What change? A
good one you may be sure, from a Lordly Prelacy to Christ's sweet yoke. So Mr.
B. But I Will tell you his meaning, in his words that understood the text better
than Mr. Burton, and was well acquainted with such men's intentions. You shall
change for a fine new Church Government: A presbytery would do much better for
you than an Hierarchy: And (perhaps) not long after a government of States,
than a Monarchy. And then adds: Whom you find thus magnifying of changes, and
projecting new plots for the people, be sure they are in the way to sedition --
and if that be not looked to in time, the next news is the blowing of a
trumpet, and Shebaes proclamation, We have no part in David. It begins in
Shimei, and ends in Sheba. And, what ever fair colors he puts upon it, the
change, he aims at, is neither so agreeable to the word of God, nor Christ's
sweet yoke, as is the present Church Government, nor the Presbytery (save
entitle) less Lordly than the Prelacy. Nay there is no Prelate, nor all of them
together, that does or will challenge that power and dominion which is
exercised in that discipline, to which not the people only, but the King
himself must be subject, yea and deposed too, if he will not submit. As by
their practice at Geneva, where it had its first beginning, is most apparent.
Mr. Calvin himself relating both of his urging Epist. 71.
the oath which Mr. Burton, and others, so much startle at, and cry out
against, and his putting one of their four Syndicks (which is the chief
Magistracy among them) out of his place, till by his public repentance he had
given satisfaction to the Presbyterian Consistory. But this only by the way.
To our purpose. By this the Reader may judge how well Mr. Burton has suited
his text with a discourse which is fraught with matter of so far different
nature as I know not how better to resemble it, than to that deformed monster I
mentioned out of the Poet, where the body -- Turpiter atru^ Desinit in piscem
mulier formosa superne.
and lower parts of an ugly fish was joined to a fair and beautiful woman's
face. Or like some Apothecaries boxes which bearing the inscription of a
Cordial or precious antidote, contains nothing in it but some banefull drugge
or deadly poison. I confess I have known men of his strain, to start strange
doctrines from texts, where a man would never have dreamed of any such matter,
as if their texts were but a color, serving only to bring in their own
fancies. As one that preaching upon the parable of the Prodigal, Luke 15. 15.
from that where it is said, He joined himself to a Citizen of that country
(which he did constrained by necessity, and to avoid starving) observed this
doctrine, That it is the duty of Christians, in choosing their calling, to make
choice of men eminent for religion and piety. Another, that in that of S. John,
He is the propitiation for our John 15. 15.
sins, and not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world; found
this; That Christ did not dye for all men, but only for the elect. But yet Mr.
Burton passes them all, in that having such a Text, could in all the parts of
it so directly contradict it: as if he had learned of the Canonist to expound
constituimus by abrogamus. But I go on. The pretended ground of all these
clamours, calumniations and contumelies, against the Bishops and Hierarchy, we
find by him set down, p. 111. in these words: According to our text, we are
professedly against all those usurpations and innovations, which the Prelates
of latter days have haled in by the head and shoulders, being besides and
against the law of the Land, and much more against the Law of God. And indeed
the sum of all these declamatory sermons, and of his libels, and Epistles,
etc. is, briefly, this: There are diverse Innovations lately brought into the
Church and State, and that with a strong hand, and strange persecution of those
that yield not to them, by the Archbishop of Cant. and some other Bishops, of
dangerous consequence, as tending to the subversion of the religion and
government established, and the bringing of us back again to idolatry and
union with the Church of Rome; and therefore that the Bishops ought to be
severely punished, and their orders abolished. So that, if it appear that this
is false, in every part of it; As namely that the innovations, which he raves
upon, are injuriously so termed; That they are not popish, or tending to the
overthrow of the religion established, and reconciling us to Rome; That the
Bishops, urging these supposed innovations, have kept within the bounds of
their lawful power, and not exercised any tyranny, nor persecuted Gods people
or the Kings good subjects; If I say, these severals shall be made to appear
(and this by Gods assistance, I doubt not but I shall be able to do, to the
conviction of such as are not wilfully blinded) then the iniquity of his
clamors, the falsehood, odiousness, and impudency of his calumniations, will,
without more ado, be discovered: and it will be easy to judge who they are
that have troubled Israel. And therefore, that I may not lead my readers
through the maze of his manifold tautologies, nor tire my self and them, in
the wild and pathless thicket of his impertinencies, nor take the pains to
wipe off every spot of dirt which he has cast upon his opposites; My purpose
is to examine this Grand crimination, and to speak of the several supposed
innovations, and that according to that division, and in that order that we
find them ranked by him, in that forenamed place; Where he thus writes: And
these Innovations or changes we may reduce to eight general heads. 1.
Innovation in Doctrine. 2. Innovation in Discipline. 3. Innovation in the
worship of God. 4. Innovation in the civil government. 5. Innovation in the
Altering of books. 6. Innovation in the means of knowledge. 7. Innovation in
the rule of faith. 8. Innovation in the rule of Manners.

CHAP. V.
Of the supposed Innovations in Doctrine. Of King James his Order to the
Universities for reading the Fathers: done long since: unjustly charged upon
the present Bishops. By whomsoever procured, upon just grounds. Not Popish, but
against Popery. King James's other Order for preaching, of Election, etc.
justified.

FIrst, says he, they (the Prelates) have labored to bring in a change of
Doctrine, as appears by these instances. 1. By procuring an Order from King
James of famous memory to the Universities, that young students should not read
our Modern learned Writers, as Calvin, Beza, and others of the reformed
Churches but the Fathers and Schoolmen.

This first crimination is far fetched, being (if I mistake not) a thing acted
above twenty years ago; so that it seems he means to take him compass
enough, the times present not affording him sufficient store; and, if he had
gone back but twice as many more, he might have found the reading of Calvin
and Beza accounted as great an Innovation, as now he holds the debarring of men
from reading of them; and that by those that were as good Protestants as Mr.
Burton, and as far from Popery.

But secondly, being so long ago done, I cannot see how he can lay it upon
the present Prelates, especially upon those whom he most strives to make
odious, none of them being Bishops at that time. But, if they must inherit the
guilt and punishment of their Predecessors faults:

In the third place, how does it appear that it was the Bishops doing? Marry
because, King James approved and magnified those Orthodox Authors, and gave the
right hand of fellowship to those reformed Churches which those Authors had
planted or watered: calling that the Orthodox faith which those Churches did
profess: and in particular did commend Calvin as the most judicious and sound
expositor of Scripture: And therefore it were impious to imagine that King
James should do any act in prejudice of Calvin, etc.

Well; But might not that judicious King, or any man else approve the Authors
in the general, and yet dislike some things in them, for which he might think
them not so fit for young students in Divinity to lay them for the foundation
of their studies? It is no prejudice to the best of them, nor indeed to any
man, as being a common infirmity of humane nature, to say that in some things
they erred: Much less can it wrong them to have the ancient Fathers (from
whose torches, they lighted their candles) preferred as the more worthy: And it
is one thing to give the right hand of fellowship to a particular Church,
(which we willingly do to all the reformed Churches beyond the Seas) and
another to like and approve every Tenet that any man in that Church shall hold
or deliver. I suppose Mr. Burton is not so uncharitable as to deny the
Lutherane Churches the right hand of fellowship, and to exclude them from being
a true Church; and yet I believe he would be loath to agree with them in all
opinions which they maintain; especially if he knew (for I have heard that,
in place where, not many years ago, he bewrayed his ignorance, and was feign
to be informed by a brother Minister then in presence) that they held all those
Tenets about Predestination, Freewill, and falling from grace, which he so
much condemns in those, whom he terms Arminians. Neither can it be imagined
that King James, when he acknowledged Calvin (and therein did him but right)
to be a most judicious expositour of Scripture, ever intended to exempt him
from error, when it is most manifest that he did utterly condemn many
opinions of his; and that though he had been bred and brought up among those
who received their doctrine and discipline from Calvin, yet (as himself
professed in the Conference at Hampton Court) from the time that he was ten
years old, he ever disliked their Confer. p. 20.
opinions, and that, though he lived among them, he was not of them: And
therefore might, without crossing his own judgment, enjoyne young students
rather to look into the Fathers, and acquaint themselves with the judgment of
the Ancient Church, than to take up opinions upon trust of those modern
Authors, who though (as he after adds) they were not without their Naevi or
spots, yet no man (without betraying insufferable pride and ignorance) will
account their works a dunghill, or heap of mud, where happily with much raking
and prying a man may chance to light upon a Pearl, so as they that read them
must Margaritas e caeno legere, gather pearls out of the mud, as Mr. Burton is
pleased to speak. I am sure other men (as sound and judicious as himself
every whit) have held it a point of wisdom, to draw water as near as they
can from the wellhead, rather than from lakes and cisternes. And the truth is,
that King James of famous memory (whether by the procurement of the Bishops or
not, it matters not, for neither the Author, nor the procurers need blush for
it) having taken some just distaste at some novell points delivered by some
young Divines, which trenched upon his Regal power and dignity, and knowing
from what pits that water was drawn, and that those modern Authors mentioned,
were ill affected to Monarchical Government, and injurious to the just right
of Kings, going hand in hand with the Jesuits in the principles of popularity:
Did in his Princely wisdom, for the preventing of so great a danger as might
ensue, if such principles were drunk in at the first, by young and injudicious
Novices, give charge to the Heads of the University of Cambridge (I am sure,
and whether of Oxford too, I know not) that they should take order that young
students should be well seasoned at the beginning, and well grounded in the
principles of Our own Catechism, and the Articles and Doctrine of our Church,
and that they should not ground their studies upon those men, where they might
with their first milk in Divinity suck in such unsound opinions and dangerous
to the State: But rather, that they would search into Antiquity, and study the
writings of the Fathers, whose consentient Doctrine is (without doubt) the best
and soundest Divinity. And if Mr. Burton had taken this course in his studies,
he had learned better obedience to his Superiors, and been less troublesome
to himself and others. This then is but a fetch, and brought in only to
increase the heap of odium upon the Bishops, with those Page 114.
who judge of things not by weight or worth, but by noise and number: For there
is no color for that which he suggests, that it should be done, the more
easily to make way for the accomplishing of their [the Prelats] plot, so long a
hammering for the reinducing of Popery; seeing neither that which was done, nor
the end for which it was done, have the least affinity with Popery, but was
intended for the opposing and preventing of that point of Popery or Jesuitisme,
which animates and arms the people against their Princes.

But further: To this purpose (says he) they procure Page 114.
another order in King James his name, for the inhibiting of young Ministers to
preach of the Doctrines of Election and Predestination, and that none but
Bishops and Deanes shall handle those points. And is it not great reason that
those high points should be handled with great wisdom and sobriety? And who
are then fitter so to handle them, than the Bishops and Deanes? who (how
contemptible soever Mr. Burton esteems of them) are presumed, in reason, and
in the judgment of the King, from whom they receive their dignities, to be
the most discreet and judicious Divines.

Hitherto we have no Innovation in Doctrine, and much less, any Popery. For
the Doctrine may be, and is still the same that it ever was, from what Authors
soever it is fetched, and by what persons soever it be delivered. So that Mr.
Burton is beside the matter, and has not yet come home to the point by him
proposed; which was: Innovations in Doctrine.

CHAP. VI.
Of his Majesty's Declaration prefixed to the Articles of Religion. Mr. Burtons
cunning trick to color his railing against his Majesty's actions, and the
danger that may come of it. All truths not necessary to be known or taught.
The Doctrine of predestination in Mr. Burtons sense best unknown. The Gospel
not overthrown, but furthered by the want of it. An uncomfortable Doctrine.

BUt leaving King James, he comes to our gracious Sovereign that now is, and
says, After that there is set forth a Declaration before the Articles of
Religion in King Charles his name. And why in King Charles his name, and not by
him? The title calls it His Majesty's Declaration, and the whole tenor of it
runs in His Majesty's style. How then shall we know it was not his? This is but
a cunning quirk to teach the people to decline obedience to His Majesty's
commands. If they can be persuaded that His Majesty's Declarations and
Proclamations which are sent out, (if they concern things that cross their
fancies) be none of his acts; Then to what pass things in short time will
grow, it is easy for any man that is but half witted to conjecture. If men
may, at their liberty, Father the Kings acts upon the Prelates, or any other
whom they favor not, and then rail at them at their pleasure, and reject them
as none of his; His Majesty will ere long be feign to stand to his subjects
courtesy for obedience to his royal commands. Or if men may say of such
things as come out in the Kings name, that they tend to the public dishonor
of God and his word, to the violation and annihilation of his commandments,
the alteration of the Doctrine of the Church of England, the destruction of the
peoples souls, and that they are contrary to his solemn royal protestations,
as Mr. B. speaks about the declaration p. 56.
for sports, and often elsewhere; and therefore that they are not the Kings
acts: What does he else but persuade the people, who (for all his gloss)
believe them (as indeed who can believe otherwise) to be his, That His Majesty
is (I tremble to speak it out) such as he makes them, whom he intitles to those
acts? And then what may we Calv. Inst. l. 4. c 20. et 31. Bucan. loc. 40 77.
See Goodman p. 190.
expect to follow, but the practice of that doctrine which is taught in many of
his Orthodoxe Authors; The withstanding and opposing of their commands, and
deposing of their persons. But this passage is better answered by the justice
of authority, than a Scholars pen. Let us see then what it is he finds fault
with in this Declaration. First he intimates, that Gods truth, that is, the
saving doctrines of Election, Predestination, effectual vocation, Assurance
and perseverance, are thereby silenced and suppressed. Be it so; Is it not
better that some truth for a while be suppressed, than the peace of the Church
disturbed? St. Augustine says, It is prositable to keep in some truth, for
their Facile est, imo and utile ut ^aceatur aliquod verum propter incapaces.
Aug. de persev. Sanctoru^. c. 15.
sakes that are incapable: and surely, we might truly say of the time when this
Declaration was published by His Majesty, that men were incapable of these
doctrines. When men begin once to strive about names, to quarrel about
abstruse mysteries, to side one against the other, and to count each other
Anathema (as it was with our neighbors, and began to be with us) was it not
time to enjoyne silence to both parties? All truths, we know, are not of the
same rank, or of equal necessity; some things there are, which must be
preached in season, and out of season, but those points he mentions, come not
within that number. And though the godly consideration of Predestination and
our Election in Christ is full of sweet, pleasant and unspeakable comfort to
godly persons (as our Church Article speaks) that is, if wise men in this
argument, Artic. 17.
can be content to be wise unto sobriety; and thus far truth (even in these
points) is not by the Declaration suppressed, nor our Articles of Religion, to
which we all subscribe, hung up upon the wall and cashiered. And though this
may in some sense be called a saving doctrine, yet not so as the ignorance of
it should exclude from salvation. However taking it in the sense he intends,
for those absolute and peremptory decisions, desperate positions, and high
speculations, and such as are opposite to the receiving of Gods promises in
such wise, as they be generally set forth to us in the holy Scripture, and
harping upon that will of God, which is secret, and not declared unto us in the
word of God, (which is the doctrine Multa etenim been tecta latem ne^c^ta^;
prosunt etc. vid. Carm de Ingrat.
which he aims at) we may count this doctrine among those things of which
Prosper says, that they profit being unknown. And Mr. Burton is much
deceived, and deceives the people, when he says, Thus the Ministry of the
Gospel is at once overthrown, and nothing but orations of morality must be
taught the people. Indeed Mr. Burtons Gospel is thus overthrown, which
consists in such daring speculations. But blessed be God, the Gospel of Christ
by this means has had a freer passage than it was like to have had, if things
might have been suffered to have gone on as they begun: And then is the Gospel
in most vigor, when the people by it are instructed what it is that God has
commanded, and what they ought to do, which in contempt he calls orations of
morality. God does not bring men to heaven by difficult questions; the way to
eternity is plain, and easy to be known: To believe that Jesus Christ was
raised from the dead, to acknowledge him to be Lord and Christ, and to live
soberly, righteously and religiously in this present world; is the sum of
saving doctrine, and Christian religion: and this is left written for our
learning, in so plain characters, that he that runs may read it. And therefore
it is good counsel which the son of Syrach gives; Seek not out the things
that are above thy strength: But what is commanded Ecclus. 3. 21.
thee, think thereupon with reverence. And what the Jesuit thinks of this way
of silencing Contzen polit.
controversies, it is not much to be regarded; yet it seems Mr. B. and he
jumpe in opinion here, as well as in other things. But how this should be a
means to restore the Roman Catholic religion, for men to be enjoined to hold
themselves to the Articles of the Church of England, and (as it is in the
Declaration) that no man shall either print or preach to draw the Article aside
any way, but shall submit to it in the plain and full meaning thereof, etc.
This I confess is beyond my capacity. But by this means there is not one
Minister almost among a thousand, that dare clearly preach of these most
comfortable doctrines [Of Absolute Election and Reprobation] and so soundly and
roundly confute So I find it printed diverse times in the place.
the Arminian heresy; And blessed be God that there are so few that dare; and
I wish that Mr. B. and those others that have dared, would have showed more
obedience to his Majesty. As for the comfortableness of that doctrine, as they
teach it, let the poor tormented consciences speak, which have by it been
affrighted and driven to desperation. I heard one once (an acquaintance of Mr.
Burtons) making this objection, against his preaching about reprobation, that
said, It was very fit that therefore it should be taught, that men that found
in themselves the marks of reprobation, should be driven to horror and
despair, and have hell fire kindled in them here in this life. A most
comfortable doctrine no question.

CHAP. VII.
Of the books that have been printed of late. Of Franciscus a S. Clara.
Desire of peace warranted by S. Paul. We and they of Rome differ not in
fundamentals. What are fundamentals in Mr. Burtons sense. The distinction, in
fundamentalibus and circa fundamentalia justified. The Church of England not
Schismatic. How far separated and wherein, yet united with the Romish
Church. Good works necessary to salvation. Justification by works; By
charity, in what sense no Popery. Whether the Pope be That Antichrist,
disputable. Of confession. Of prayer for the dead, how maintained by our
Church. Praying to Saints, justly condemned by Protestants.

FOr the books that he says of late times have come abroad maintaining Popery
and Arminianisme; My answer is, that Mr. Burton knows well enough how to get
books printed in spite of authority, and therefore he cannot lay the blame
there, if any such have past out without license. And for those that have
Bishop. Mount. Appeal. Dr. Iacksons books.
been licensed, it passes Mr. Burtons learning (yea, though Mr. Prinne should
be of his counsel) to find any thing in them, which is not consonant to the
doctrine of the Church of England, Dr. Cosens private devot. Mr. Brownes
sermons I have not seen.
contained in the 39. articles, and the book of Common prayer; Nor which is
contrary to this Declaration of his Majesty. Only here, I except my Lo: of
Chichester his Appeal, which was published some years before the making of
the Declaration.

And what blemish can it be to Authority or to the Prelates, if the book of
Franciscus a S. Clara. Also that book of Fr. a S. Clara.
had been printed 23. times, and in London too; so long as it is not, cum
Privilegio? And what if he were so bold as to dedicate it to his Majesty? I
have known others (and Mr. Burton by name) p. 117.
more bold in that kind, than either was fitting, or, as I believe, well
pleasing to his Majesty.

But (they say) it was presented to the King by a Prelate. And how if his
highly-esteemed author (They say) do mis-informe him, and there were no such
matter? Yet granting it to be true, what hurt can be in it? Blessed be God, his
Majesty is of years and wisdom abundantly sufficient, to be able to discern
truth from falsehood, be it never so cunningly masked or disguised. Lastly,
what if a Romanist (acting his own part like himself) endeavor to pin such
a sense upon our Articles, as may make them almost Romish. Who can hinder such
men's tongues and pens? Much applauded by our Innovators.
But do any of our Innovators approve or applaud his wresting of our Articles
to serve his own turn? I think Mr. B. cannot name any of them that does. And
yet, I cannot see what harm can follow, if any shall so far approve him, as
to like his moderate strain, his lessening the number and quality of the
differences between us (which most of his own party, like M. Burton, study to
multiply and increase) and so his desire of peace and reconciliation; which if
(salva veritate) it might once be wrought, were a most blessed and happy
accomplishment. Neither is that (though M. Burton so term it) true Christian
p. 121.
zeal (but a distempered heat of a contentious spirit) that shall come
between, and make an interruption. And if (as he confesses) Puritans and
Calvinists be such men; no matter if they had no place either in Synod or
Church of England.

As for those, who (because they know better) are not willing (as Mr Burton and
others of his strain use) to call all opinions and practices Popish, which are
beyond their learning, and cross the principles of their Catechismes, and are
therefore by him, in scorn, termed peaceable and indifferent men, and well
affected to Rome, as Ely and Chichester, and the Arch-Prelates, they, by their
wisdom and moderation, do more good and acceptable service to God and his
Church, than ten thousand such fiery*spirited Zelotes, who, understanding
nothing, but that the Romish Church are not of their opinion, make it their
ambition, and highest point of Religion, to condemn whatsoever is held or
practiced in that Church, not because evil or erroneous, but because theirs:
What warrant they can have from the God of peace for their courses, I cannot
imagine: One thing I am sure of, that the Apostle S. Paul does sufficiently
warrant the contrary, when he commands us, If it be possible, and as much as in
us is, to live peaceably Romans 12. 18.
with all men: and, according to his wont, makes good his precept by his own
practice, and that having to do with men (Jews and Gentiles) opposite not to
the faith only, but even to the very name of Christianity, which yet they of
Rome (though bad enough) are not. For to the 1 Cor. 9. 20, 21.
Jews he became as a Jew, that he might gain the Jews. To them that were
under the law, as under the law, that he might gain them under the law, etc.
Yea (as he there says) he was made all things to all men, that he might by all
means save some. Not that thereby he did betray the truth, or join with either
Jew or Gentile in their errors, (from which he labored by all means to
withdraw them) but because, commiserating their condition, he did condescend
to their weakness, and yielded to them in what he might, that thereby he
might win them to yield to him in the maine; As S. Augustine expounds the
place. And thus to August. Ep. 19.
deal with them of the Church of Rome at this day, (not that I intend to
parallel them with either) how any man can (without wrapping up the blessed
Apostle within the same sentence) justly condemn, I must confess, I am
altogether ignorant. For, whereas such are bruited abroad to comply with
Papists in their errors, that is mere clamor, without ground, or show of
truth, saving that they join not with these hot-spurres in railing and raging,
and so exasperating them, but leave that part to them, as most delighting and
exercised in that way, and lacking compassionate affections to seek to gain and
reduce those that wander, into the way of truth.

Yet here we must take heed of going too far, and that we do not, while we
pity and seek to gain the adversary, become injurious to the truth, and lose
it: as it seems (if M. Burton may be believed) some Factionists and Factors
for Rome among us (so he is pleased to style the Reverend Prelates, and those
that oppose his crotchets) have done: for (he says) it is a common cry among
them, that we and they of Rome differ not in fundamentals. This is, I confess,
to go far; yea, and a great deal too far, if we measure Fundamentalls by
M. Burtons last, who under that name will comprise all matters of faith: as is
evident by his quotation of these words out of our 19. Art. in the margent; The
Church of Rome has erred in matters of faith. And this is usual with others
of his party (who more truly may be termed Factionists, than those who^ he so
calls) for I once lighted upon a small book, set forth by one of them, which
bare this title [Fundamentall truths, and nothing but Fundamentalls] in which
were contained all Catecheticall Doctrines, the high points of Predestination,
the ten Commandments of the Law, yea and (though some more sublimated among
them will admit none) ten Commandments of the Gospel: But M. Burton has
been told sufficiently, (if prejudice would let him see) that by Fundamentalls
See B. of Exon advertisement. Cholmely and Butterf. treatises.
are meant those points of faith, which are absolutely necessary to salvation,
which whosoever believes not, cannot be saved; and to admit that in the Church
of Rome these points are yet to be found and believed among them, is no more
than not absolutely to deny salvation to all that live in communion with that
Church; or to yield them the name of Christians, and of a Church, and so to
difference them from Turks and Pagans: to which, the profession of the same
Creed, and their Baptism is sufficient. And though the errors of Popery, as
now it stands, are gross and palpable; yet to make them such, as presently and
absolutely to cut off all that profess and believe them, from the Catholic
Church, and hope of salvation, is an uncharitable and groundless rigor and
strictness: neither can they who are not thus harshly uncharitable, be justly
taxed; nor is it an absurd distinction (as he unreverently and absurdly termed
it) that a Great Prelate, who ever he was (for he names him not) used in the
High Commission at the censure of Dr Bastwick, when he said, that We and the
Church of Rome differ not, in Fundame^talibus, but, circa Fundamentalia: for
there may be (and indeed are) many intercurrent questions concerning points
fundamental disputed among us, in which we and they differ, and yet the
fundamentalls themselves confessed by both sides. For example, both sides do
profess their agreement and common belief of that grand Fundamental of
Christianity, that Jesus Christ the Son of God, and Son of the B. Virgin, is
the Savior of the world. and that salvation is obtained only by virtue of his
merits: Yet we do not agree in every thing that concerns this principle, or
how, and in what manner this virtue is efficacious unto our salvation. Whether
it make the good works of those that believe in this common Savior properly
meritorious, and fully worthy of everlasting life, as they will have it; or
only, as we contend, in regard Rhemist, on 2 Timothy 4. See B* Andr. Ser. of
justificat. in Christ's name.
of Gods gracious acceptance, and by means of his promise and covenant whereby
he has bound himself to reward them. So that, the distinction is not absurd,
but may most truly and fitly be said, that we may and do differ about and
not in fundamentalls. That which M. Burton out of the Apostle alleges to
cross this, is most 1 Timothy 1. 19.
frivolous and vain, for he might have known that (...), in that place, is
better turned [of] or [concerning] than either [in] or [about:] and so
Naufragium fidei fecerunt.
Beza renders it: or (as Fide vacuati sunt.
Tremellius out of the Syriack) they lost their faith: so that faith is the
merchandise lost or cast away, and not any thing about it. But, granting that
to err in faith and about the faith (as they may in some sense) be all one:
yet will not that follow which he would have, but for all that, there will be
ground sufficient to justify that distinction, and to lay the absurdity upon
those that quarrel it. But this is an old theme upon which M. B. has long
wrangled, and he might now do well to give it over, or, if he will needs be
doing, let him go lend his help to the Jesuit, (with whom he sides in
opposing this distinction) to answer Dr Potters learned and Ans. to Char.
mistaken, Sec. 7
judicious discourse, wherein it is fully and unansweraby asserted.

But M. Burton has another quarrel yet, but it is so weak and silly, that I
would not grace it with an answer, but that happily some of his admirers may
think it of greater moment, because he affirms, that thereby is made a change
of our very Church, etc. This is a great matter; but how is this made good?
Thus. My L. of Ely affirms, In his Epist. to my Lo: Grace of Cant. before his
discourse of the Sabbath.
that the Romish adversary, fromt he rising up of some schismatic spirits
among us, uncharitably concludes, that the whole body of our Church is
schismatic.

But in good earnest, is M. Burton so deeply in love with his schismatic
humor, that he cannot be content himself alone to be a schismatic, but that
he will have the maine body of our Church schismatic? or must we needs join
with the Romish Church in their errors, unless we will confess our selves
guilty of the crime of schism? So they would have us indeed, and M. B. (it
seems) so he may show himself to be at enmity with them, cares not though he
draw that name upon himself and the whole Church of England: whereas it has
been the care of discreet and wise men, that have dealt in the controversies
between us and them, to wipe off that unjust and infamous aspersion. To whom I
refer him, and others of his See the Ans. to Char. mistaken, Sect. 3.
mind, to be better informed; and to learn, That the Church of England did
reform the errors and abuses of Rome without schism. And that though we have
separated from the^ in those things which they hold, not as the Church of
Christ, but as the Roman and Pontifician; yet we remain still united both in
the bond of charity, and in those Articles of faith which that Church yet has
from Apostolical tradition; yea, and in those acts of Gods worship which they
yet practice according to Divine prescript: that is, we and they profess one
belief of the same Apostolic Creed, as it is expounded by the four first
General Councels: We approve with them, the things which the Ancient Church
of Christ decreed against Pelagius: We and they worship and invocate the same
God, in the Name of the same Jesus Christ. And (what ever some
turbulently-uncharitable happily may do) we study to reduce them from their
errors, and pray for their salvation, accounting them not quite cut off, but to
continue still members (though corrupt ones) of the same Catholic Church.

But the man has not yet done, but to show that there will come in an
universal change in all our doctrine, reckons up diverse particulars: as
Justification by works, maintained openly, not long ago, at the Commencement
in Cambridge: Justification by charity, in Mr. Shelfords Book. The Pope not
Antichrist. Pulpits and preaching beaten down by the same man in his second
Treatise. The Virgin Mary Deified, in a book entitled, The female glory, etc.

For answer to these: I say for the first, That he has shamefully slandered
the University: terminis cross the Articles of our Church, to be openly
disputed and maintained. That which I suppose he aims at by his quoting of Fr.
a Sta. Clara was to this purpose: That good Bona opera sunt efficaciter
necessaria ad salutem. Resp. Dr. Duncan.
works are effectively necessary to salvation: which position was intended and
maintained, in opposition to the enemies of good works, of whom some deny their
necessity; others, allowing their presence as requisite, deny that they conduce
any thing to the furtherance of salvation. Now this is not to maintain
Justification by works, (for the works here meant were such as follow
justification) but to assert the Doctrine of St. Paul, commanding Phil. 2. 12.
us to Work out our salvation with fear and trembling; and of St. Peter, who
tells us, 2 Pet. 1. 11.
That thus an entrance shall be ministered into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

And, I believe (for I have not the Book at Shelfords justification by
charity, be well examined, it will prove to be no other than this; at least,
no other than in St. James Iam. 2. 24.
sense, when he says; Ye see how that by works a man is justified, and not by
faith only. And I would demand of any reasonable man, whether the express
words of that Apostle may not without aspersion of Popery, be even openly and
publicly maintained, if there be no sense obtruded upon them, which may cross
St. Paul's doctrine, which Mr. Burton can never prove that they did, whom he
charge with that assertion. But the the truth is, such is the humor that
possesses many men of Mr. Burtons strain, that they cannot endure any gloss
upon that place of St. James, but such as shall both make the Text (like
themselves) full of nonsense, and to turn the seeming and verbal into a
real and direct contradiction of St. Paul.

To the third; That the Pope is not Antichrist, I answer, Reformation when the
greatest heat was stricke^ between us and Rome) have affirmed the Pope to be
Antichrist, and his whole religion Antichristian: and that some, exceeding the
bounds of moderation in this point, have passed abroad, and that with the
license of authority (wherein yet they are to be excused, in that they have
been so intolerably provoked by the odious criminations of the adversary) yet
to them that calmely and seriously consider it, it may not without good reason
be disputed as doubtful: whether the Pope, or any of them, in his person, or
the Papal Hierarchy be that great Antichrist, which is so much spoken of. And
which way soever it be determined, it makes not the religion any whit the
better, nor frees the practices of the Popes and Court of Rome, from being
justly accounted and styled Antichristian.

For Mr. Shelfords second Book, I have not of public Prayer, the most sacred
and excellent part of Gods worship.

Neither have I seen that other Book, called Female glory, nor will I spend
words, by way either of censure or defense of it, upon sight only of those
fragments which here he presents us with, as well knowing his art, and at what
rate to value his credit in quotations. Yet in all those panegyric strains of
Rhetoric (for such for the most part they seem, rather than positive
assertions) he has not deviated so much to the one extreme, as Mr. Burtons
marginall has to the other, in scoffingly calling her, the New great Goddess
Diana. And if it be true that he has not digressed in any particular Lo here
the new great goddess Diana, whom the whole Pontifician world worshippeth. H.
B. p. 125.
from the Bishop of Chichester, as Mr. Burton makes him affirm, I dare boldly
say, Mr. Burton will never be able to find the least point of Popery in it.
For (it is well known) that Bishop (whom he (as if he had bid adieu to all
civility, yea and shame too) terms a tried Champion of Rome, and so a devout
votary to the Queen of heaven) has approved himself such a Champion against
Rome, that they that have tried his strength durst never yet come to a second
encounter.

Beside, we have, elsewhere, other points of Page 67.
Popish Doctrine, which, he says, are preached, and printed of late: As
Auricular Confession, Prayer for the dead, and praying to Saints: Which,
because I find only mentioned by him, without any proof to evidence the
truth of his assertion, I might with one word reject, till he produced the
Authors, which have so Preached and Printed, and what it was that they have
delivered touching those points. But because there are many that, by reason of
their ignorance of the truth in these points, are apt to believe what he
affirms, and to entertain a sinister opinion of the Churches Doctrine in
them; I will briefly add some of them in this place.

First, for Confession: It cannot be denied, Of Confession
but that the Church of England, did ever allow the private confession of
sins to the Priest, for Book of Common Prayer, Exhortation before the
Communion.
the quieting of men's consciences burdened with sin, and that they may
receive ghostly counsel, advice and comfort, and the benefit of absolution.
This is the public Order prescribed in our Church. And it were very strange,
if our Church ordaining Priests, and giving them power of absolution, and
prescribing the form to be used Form of absolution in the Visitation of the
sick.
for the exercise of that power upon confession, should not also allow of such
private confession. To advise then and urge the use and profit of private
confession to the Priest, is no Popish Innovation, but agreeable to the
constant and resolved Doctrine of this Church; and that which is requisite for
the due execution of that ancient power of the Keys, which Christ bestowed
upon his Church: And if any shall call it, auricular, because it is done in
private, and in the ear of the Priest, I know not why he should therefore be
condemned of Popery. But if Mr. Burton by Auricular Confession, mean that
Sacramental Confession, which the Council of Trent has defined to be of
absolute necessity by Divine ordinance, and that which exacts that (many times
impossible) particular enumeration of every sin, and the special
circumstances of every sin. This we justly reject, as neither required by
God, nor so practiced by the ancient See Bishop Ushers answer to Jesuits
^chall.
Church. And if Mr. Burton knows any, that has Preached or Printed ought in
defense of this new pick-lock, and tyrannical sacramental Confession, he
may, if he please, (with the Churches good leave) term them in that point,
Popish Innovators.

For the second point: Simply to condemn Of prayer for the dead.
all prayer for the Dead, is to run counter to the constant practice of the
ancient Church of Christ. Prayer for the dead, it cannot be denied, it is
ancient, says the late learned Bishop of Winchester. That the ancient Church
had Commemorations, Oblations, and prayers for the dead, the testimonies of the
Fathers, Ecclesiastical Histories, and ancient Liturgies, in which the forms
of Prayers, used for that purpose, are Cannon 55.
found, do put out of all question: and they that are acquainted with the
Canons and Liturgy of our own Church, cannot but say this Doctrine has been
ever taught and maintained among us: That is, We praise God for all those that
are departed this life in the faith of Christ; and pray, that they may have
their perfect consummation and bliss, both in body and soul, etc. And thus
far, Prayer for the dead is no Innovation, and much less Popish. For, we
maintain no Suffrages for the relief of souls in the fooles-fire of
Purgatory, which prayers and Artic. 22.
place we condemn as fond things vainly invented, and grounded upon no
warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God. So our
Church-article speaks: and in the same condemnation joines that other point of
Mr. Burtons charge: Invocation of Saints, which Doctrine Of praying to Saints.
taken at the best, and as the learned Papists defend it, deserves that
censure; and as it is commonly practiced by the vulgar sort among them, is not
foolish only, but flatly Idolatrous: And therefore justly exploded and
condemned by all Protestants, and I dare boldly say, Mr. Burton cannot produce
any one of those whom he endeavors to blemish, that holds or teaches that
doctrine.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Doctrine of obedience to Superiors. How taught and maintained by the
Bishops. Wherein it must be blind; and how quick-sighted.

WE have two changes in Doctrine yet remaining. First, in the doctrine of
obedience to Superiors. Secondly, in the doctrine of the Sabbath, or Lords
Day. page 126.


By the first (he says) Man is so set in Gods throne, as all obedience to man
must be absolute, without regard to God and conscience. I verily believe, there
is none of those he means, that have raised obedience so high, but that Mr. B.
would bring it down to as low a pegge: and, happily, considering how prone such
as he are to debase it, it might not be thought ill policy, to exact somewhat
more than of strict right it can callenge. But where? or by whom is this
doctrine taught? Of that he says nothing here, but tells us he has spoken of
it sufficiently before. And indeed, we find more than enough, by him spoken
about this point: for, speaking of the connection of the fear of the page 84.
Lord, and of the King, and from thence (rightly) observing that these two
ought not to be separated; But that God must be so honored, as we do also in
the second place honor our Superiors: And our Superiors so honored, as that
in the first place we honor God. He page 8^.
comes to reproove those that separate these two; the second sort of whom, he
makes Those that separate c page 87
the fear of the King, from the fear of the Lord, by attributing to Kings
such an unlimited power, as if he were God Almighty himself. So as, hereby
they would seem to ascribe that omnipotency to the King, which the Pope
assumes, and his Parasites ascribe to his Holiness. And this (he says) these
parasites and paramours of the Kings Courts do, etc. All this is easily
granted: The doctrine, there is no good Christian but will subscribe to, yea,
and the use too, and think those not only worthy of reproof, but unworthy
the name of Christians, and to be accounted none of Gods good subjects, that
shall go about by flattery, or otherwise, to advance the power of the King to
the prejudice of Gods supereminent soveraigntie: or which, when the commands of
the one and the other come in opposition, shall not (as the Apostles) choose
rather to obey God than Act. 4. 12.
man, and as those ancient Christian Soldiers, under Julian the Apostate, who
(as S. Augustine In Ps. 124. Distinguebant dominum aeternu^ a ^omino temporali,
and tum subditi erant propter dominum aeternum.
notes) were so subject to their temporal Lord, for their eternal Lords sake,
as they still distinguished their eternal, from their temporal Lord: And
though they would obey that wicked Emperor, when he sent them to fight against
his enemies, yet when he would have them to worship Idols, or to burn Incense
to them, they preferred God before him, and denied their obedience. And, if any
man shall presume to teach, that which shall be contrary to this so sure and
well grounded a truth, he shall thereby make himself the author of a doctrine
impious against God, and novell in the Church, as (by those places out of the
Fathers, which Mr. B. alleges, and infinite more to the same purpose,) may be
easily demonstrated. Yet it seems (by him) some have dared so much, and that
beside the Jesuits (whom he calls) the Masters of this mystery, in their blind
p. 77.
obedience; there are gotten too many Doctors to be their Disciples and
broachers of this new doctrine: and again, Many false prophets are now page 82.
abroad, being possessed with the spirit of the Beast, which so magnifieth the
power of man, and his authority in commanding, that ipso facto, all must yield
obedience thereunto, without further ado. And (in the place formerly
mentioned) he makes the Bishops to be those Parasites and Court*Paramors which
ascribe such an unlimited power to the King. But, in a matter of this high
nature, to accuse only, is not sufficient: If he can prove it as
substantially, as he has boldly affirmed it; let them go for Jesuitical
Novell Doctors; and Parasites, and spare not. Hic labor, hoc opus est. Here (as
it is wont) the water sticks with him: Proofs I can find none, but instead of
proofs, I find conjectures and surmises, of some ends, which the Bishops may
have to induce them to hold and teach this Doctrine: Their ends (he says) are
1. To keep the K. from Parliament, lest they might be brought Coram. 2. By
their flattery, to endeare the K. unto them as the only supporters of his
Prerogative Royal, thereby to protect themselves, having incurred the hatred
of the whole land. 3. That they may borrow this abused regal Power, to execute
a lawless tyranny over the Kings good subjects. 4. Lastly, that they may
trample the laws and liberties of the subjects, and in fine, bring the whole
State, King and all, under their girdle, as being true to their principle; That
a Bishop ought not to Episcopus non debet subesse Principibus, sed prae esse.
Decret. de maj. et obed. Tit. 33. Innocent 3.
be subject to Princes, but rule over them. These he brings, instead of
reasons, to make good this accusation: and these he knows to be sufficient, to
make thoses Judges (I mean, the people) before whom he has brought them to be
tried, to pass sentence against them, and pronounce them guilty. Yet, God be
thanked, the Bishops do not stand or fall by their sentence: And prudent
Judges, if they find no greater proofs, will rather judge the accuser guilty
of Scandalum magnatum, than upon such weak evidence to condemn the accused.
For (all this notwithstanding) it appears not (otherwise than by Mr. Bs.
words) either that the Bishops have these ends, or that, for these ends, they
do teach this doctrine: But it is enough. There is no Parliament (and Burtons
disciples, get voices in it, and can prevail, they may do somewhat for their
cause, and ruin the Hierarchy) and that there is none, it must needs be the
Bishops doings: who (as he persuades credulous auditors) will not be able to
purge themselves to a committee of the Lower House for Religion: and then, if
this be granted, it cannot be thought a thing unlikely for them to broach such
doctrine as this, which cannot but be very useful for their purpose. But M.
Burton will have much ado to prove (and words must not carry it) that the
Bishops are not Parliament-proofe: and as much, that they therefore are the
means to hinder the King from having a Parliament. I would to God, that men of
his strain and humor, and poisoned with such principles of Popularity, as he
labors to instill into the people, had been no greater means, to cause
heart-burning between the King and his subjects, and so to keep them from
meeting in Parliament, than the Bishops are. It is not the Bishops, but the
disobedient and seditious carriage of those ill-affected persons of the house
of Commons, in the last Parliament, who raised so much heat and distemper, upon
causeless jealousies: That His Procla. before the Declar. for the dissolut. of
the Parliament.
Majesty (to use his own words) His Regal authority and commandment were so
highly contemned, as his Kingly office could not bear, nor any former age
parallel. This is the means that severed King and people, being met; and this
humor still fomented by turbulent and malevolent spirits, (such as Mr. Burton)
is the true and sole cause that yet hinders their re-assembling in Parliament.
And, if thereupon any damage have or do ensue, the blame must light upon those
entrenchers, not upon those (whom he falsely makes) the over-enlargers of the
Royal prerogative.

Yet necessity may make them do much, and incurred the hatred of the whole
land, yet) perhaps he knows some intended mischief toward them, or hopes
well that his Sermons and the Ipswich Libell will work so with some bloody
Assassines, that they may be brought (as his brother Leighton speaks) Sions
plea, page 166.
to strike that Hazael (the Bishops) in the fifth rib, to strike that Basilike
vein, as the only cure for the plurisie of this State. However, it were but a
poor device for their security, to flatter the King into a conceit of his
boundless authority: which (beside that it would be a vain attempt upon so
wise and just a Prince, and such as cannot, without derogation from his
Majesty's wisdom, and gracious disposition, be once imagined as faisible)
would but increase the subjects hatred, and, in the end, cause his Majesty to
forsake them, and justly to expose them to the fury of their malice. Their best
security, and that which they only rely upon, is, their integrity and just
proceedings, wherein they assure themselves, the just God and King whom they
serve, will never forsake them, or deny them protection.

Neither do they need to borrow a lawless and abused Regal power, nor can it
be accounted tyranny, to punish those that deny obedience to his Majesty's
commands: which (whatsoever he untruely and seditiously suggests) shall be
proved, both to be his Majesty's, and beseeming his Royal justice and
goodness.

As for their aiming, by this means, to bring the State and King under their
girdle, and to make Princes subject to the Bishops: If malice had not made him
as blind as Impudent, he would have wanted a forehead to have vented: for if
they meant any such thing, their way had been to advance their own, and not
the Kings power and prerogative; which, if they make boundless, will be sure
to hold themselves, as well as others, under the yoke of subjection.

To conclude this point then: The Bishops teach no other doctrine of obedience
to Superiors, than has been ever taught in the Church of God: They give the
King that only prerogative which we see has been given always to all godly
Artic. of Relig. p. 37.
Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself, that is, that they should rule all
estates and degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the civil sword the stubborn
and evil doers. This is the doctrine of our Church. To this they have, ex
animo, subscribed; and to this they exact subscription of all that are under
their several Jurisdictions: And this is not to give him any unlimited power;
they give to God, and Caesar both, their dues; They make God the first, the
King the second, and only less than God, as Tertullian speaks. They make no
Idol of their King, nor Ad Scapulam. Hominem a Deo secundum -- solo Deo minorem.
place his throne above, but immediately under Gods: That Is all. Under God,
they grant; acknowledging his power to be from God, and that he ought to use
his power for God, and not against him; and our obedience to the King not
sufficient to warrant disobedience to God: yet immediately and above all others
in his Dominions: So as, They believe and teach that his actions are not liable
to the scanning, much less to the control, no not of his greatest subjects.
This The King (to speak with all humble reverence) cannot give, etc. p. 72.
They do not know, They dare not practice. Neither will or dare They (no not
with humble reverence premised) tell the people that the King has not, and
therefore cannot give power to others, to do those things which cross their
fancies; as namely, to punish those that refuse to conform to his commands,
and the orders of the Church (which he miscalls, the altering of the state of
Religion, and to suppress the faithful Ministers of the Gospel) this They
judge no humble reverence, but outrageous and desperate impudency and
boldness. Yea, and that it savours of unchristian disloyalty to insinuate to
the people that the King is careless of his reiterated solemn protestations
and oaths: That he is forgetful of the law of God, and regardles of the laws
of the Land: That he uses his power (or suffers it to be used) to alter the
state of Religion, to oppress and suppress the faithful Ministers of the
Gospel, against both law and conscience. All page 56. page 73.
which Mr. Burton has done [ad nauseam usque] even to his readers surfeit and
loathing. Neither will his usual scheme help him off, or excuse him, to say,
he does not, nor will not believe such actions (as he is pleased so deeply and
desperately to censure) to be the Kings: when all the world knows, both that
they are the Kings, and that he cannot be ignorant that they are so. But of
this before. They hold and teach, that it is more agreeable to Christian piety
to be blind, rather than thus quick-sighted in our obedience, and approve that
of S. Gregory, True obedience does not discuss Vera obedientia nec
Praepositorum intentionem discutit, nec praecepta dece nit -- nescit enim
judicare, quisquis perfect didicerit obedire. D. Greg. l. 2. c. 4. in 1 Reg.
the intention of superiors, nor make difference of precepts -- He that has
learned perfectly to obey, knows not how to judge. To be blind, so as not to
see the imperfections and failings of Superiors, nor to be less ready for
these to perform their commands, and to look only at Him whose place they
hold: To be blind, so as not to search the reason, or to look at the causes,
why; but to think it enough to know the things to be commanded, and by them
that are in place and power. Lastly, They would have obedience to be better
sighted, and not so blind as M. Burton has showed himself. They would have
obedience to have eyes to see what God commands, as well as what the King, and
to discern God to be the greater of the two, and to be obeyed in the first
place: but they would not have men mistake their own dreams and fancies for
Gods commands. And not this only, but to see what is commanded by their
superiors, and who it is that commands, and to know them to be Gods Deputies,
to whom obedience is due, as unto God himself. And they have learned of
Solomon, that where the word of a King is, there is power; and who may Eccles.
8. 2.
say unto him, what do thou? This is no novell Jesuitical doctrine, but
sound Divinity, and that which this Church ever taught, and the Law of the Land
ever approved; if it be good Law which was long ago delivered by Bracton, with
which Bract. de leg. and consuet. Ang. c. 8. Ipse (sc. Rex.) sub nullo, nisi
tantum sub Deo. -- Si ab eo peccatur, etc.
I will shut up this point. The King (says he) is under none, but only God.
-- And, a little after, If he do amiss (because no writ goes out against him)
there is place for supplication, that he would correct and amend his deed:
which if he do not, it is enough punishment for him, that the Lord will punish
it. For no man must presume to enquire or discuss his actions, much less to
go against them.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Doctrine of the Sabbath and Lord's Day, falsely accused of Novelty. The
sum of what is held or denied in this point by those whom Mr B. opposes. The
Churches power, and the obligation of her precepts. The maintainers of this
doctrine have not strained their brains or conscience.

THe last innovation in doctrine that he mentions, page 126
is concerning the doctrine of the Sabbath or Lord's Day: wherein, he says, our
novell Doctors have gone about to remove the institution of it from the
foundation of Divine authority, and so to settle it upon the Ecclesiastical or
humane power. Thus he. But in this (as in the rest) he betrays most gross and
palpable ignorance and malice. 1. In that he accuses that doctrine of novelty,
which was ever (as has been sufficiently demonstrated) the doctrine of the
Ancient Church, and of the Church of England, and of the reformed Churches
beyond the Seas, and the principal of the learned among them, as Calvin, Beza,
etc. 2. In accusing those that teach this doctrine, with removing the
institution of the Lords day from the foundation of divine Authority: See B. of
Ely p. 271. etc. edit. 1.
which taken together, and as he delivers it, is most false: For They
acknowledge the appointing of set times and days, to the public and solemn
worship and service of God, to be not only divine, but moral and perpetual:
and that the common and natural equity of the fourth Commandment B. of Ely,
p. 120
obliges all mankind to the end of the world.

Secondly, They affirm, that the institution of the Lords day, and other set
and definite days 2 De dispens. etc. c. 12. Quid enim interest utru^ per se,
an per suos ministros, sive homines, sive Angelos, hominibus innotescat suum
placitum Deus.
and times of Gods worship, is also of divine authority, though not
immediately, but by the Church, which received her power from the holy Ghost;
and that Christian people are to observe the days so ordained, in obedience to
the equity of the fourth Commandment, to which those days are subordinate,
and their observation to be reduced.

Thirdly, they grant, that the resting from labor on the Lords day, and
Christian holy 3 B. of Ely, p. 121
days, in respect of the general, is both grounded upon the law of nature,
and the perpetual equity of the fourth Commandment.

Fourthly, they grant a special sense of that 4
Commandment of perpetual obligation: So that, they have not absolutely
removed the institution of the Lords day from the foundation of divine
Authority: Nor is the fourth Commandment wholly abolished, as he falsely and
unjustly clamours. That which they deny in this doctrine, and concerning the
fourth Commandment, may be reduced under these heads:

They deny the fourth Commandment to be Burton.

Particularly, they deny the morality and perpetual seventh day from the
creation, which is our Saturday. And this is the Apostles Col. 2. 17.
doctrine, who calls it a shadow, which M. Burton also grants.

They deny, that the peculiar manner of the Jewish or seventh-day Sabbath in
the observation of a strict and total rest and surcease from ordinary labors,
can, by virtue of that commandment, be extended to the Lords day, or Christian
holy days, but that it (together with the day on which it was required) is
expired and antiquated. And this also M. Burton must needs grant: 1. Because
there is the same reason of the day and the rest required upon it; both being
appointed for a memorial of Gods rest from his work of creation, and other
typical respects: 2. Because otherwise he will contradict his fellows, and
those that side with him in this argument, who generally allow some Perkins
cases. Amesius Med. Theol. l. 2. c. 15. n. 23.
things to be lawfully done on the Lords day, which on the Jewish Sabbath were
not permitted.

They deny that the fourth Commandment seven, or to any other seventh, save
only that which is there mentioned; and that therefore the Lords day cannot
thence be said to have its institution, as being another day than that which
the Commandment speaks of; which, to conceive to be there meant, is to make
the Commandment to speak riddles and arrant nonsense.

They deny that there is any Commandment New Testament for the observation of
the Lords day: Though (they acknowledge) sufficient ground there to warrant the
Churches institution and observation of that day. And this they suppose they
may justly maintain, till Mr. B. or some other of his mind, in this point,
produce the place where it is written; which, if they would once do, they would
easily bring off the Bishops, and others who agree with them, to make a
recantation, and to subscribe to their better information.

That which they ascribe unto the Church in this argument is; 1. The
institution of the Lords day, and other holy days, that is, the determination
of the time of Gods public worship to those days.

2 The prescription of the manner of the observation of these days, both for
the duties to be performed, and the time, manner, and other circumstances of
their performance.

Concerning which, they affirm 2. things. Bishop of Ely p. 149.
First, That the Church has liberty, power and authority thus to do. Secondly,
that Christians are in conscience bound to observe these precepts of the
Church, and that they that transgress Bern. de praec. et dispens. c. 12.
Obedientia quae majoribus praebetur, Deo exhibetur, quamobre^ quicquid vice Dei
praecipit homo etc.
them, sin against God, whose law requires that we must obey every lawful
ordinance of the Church: And as S. Bernard speaks, The obedience that is given
to Superiors (he speaks of the Prelates and governors in the Church) is
exhibited to God, wherefore whatsoever man in Gods stead commands (if it be not
for certain such as displease God) is no otherwise at all to be received, than
if God had commanded it. For what matters it whether God, by Himself, or by
his Ministers, men or Angels, make known his pleasure to us? So he, and much
more to that purpose in that place. So that, they which maintain the
institution of the Lords day to be from the Church, do not thereby (as they
are wrongly charged) discharge men from all tie of obedience, and give them
liberty to observe it, or not, at their own pleasure: which no man will
affirm, but those only who have learned to under-value and despise the Church
of God, and her rightful Authority.

Now, these things have been so fully proved, so plainly demonstrated already,
that it is needless, yea impossible for me to add any thing, and as impossile
for Mr. B. or any other to gainsay, with any reason or evidence of truth.
Which because he cannot do, he betakes him to (the forlorn hope of
contentious spirits) railing against his opposers, and traducing the doctrine,
which he knows not how to confute. For his opposers; he says, that (in this
point) they have strained all the veins of their conscience and brains, and
that they are so mad upon it, that no shame will stay them, page 126.
till confusion stop their mouths. But, God be praised, they have not,
neither need they much to strain either: Their conscience need not be strained
at all, in delivering that doctrine, and acknowledging that truth which is
after godliness; And for their brains, it is not Mr. Burtons Tit. 1. 1.
Pamphlets, or lawless Dialogues, that can strain them; No, nor his larger
answer which he threatens, in answer to my L. of Elyes Treatise; which (were it
not that simple and well meaning people might happily be seduced, and made to
think them unanswerable) were quickly answered, with that which best befits
them, silence and scorn. As for that grave and learned Prelate, whom he uses
with such contempt and base language; The world has seen his humility (joined
with that mass of learning which is lodged in that venerable breast) that he
has not disdained to stoop to answer this railers railing dialogue of A. and
B. which he has done (like himself) with great strength and evidence of
reason, and solidity of judgment; and yet (blessed be God) has not sacrificed
the least dram of reason, which yet remains (in so great years) to
admiration quick and pregnant, and will be able, if need be, to discover Mr.
Burtons arrogance, and bold-fac't ignorance; So that he must be feign to
sacrifice the remainder of his modesty and honesty (if any be yet left him) to
find any thing to reply.

CHAP. X.
Of his Majesty's Declaration for sports, etc. Mr. Burtons scandalizing the
memory of K. James about it. His wicked censure of His Majesty for reviving and
republishing it. His abusive jeere upon my Lords Grace of Cant. Five
propositions opposed to his so many unjust criminations in this argument.

THis is all he says of his supposed innovations in doctrine: But before I
part with this last point, I must annexe somewhat of his Majesty's Declaration
concerning lawful sports to be used upon Sundays; as depending hereupon, and
being the great pretended grievance in this argument.

This Declaration, and the publishing of it, according to his Majesty's Royal
intent and command, has afforded Mr. Burton plentiful occasion of
calumniation, and caused him to utter many shameful and slanderous invectives,
not only against the Declaration it self, but against the Royal authority
commanding, and those, whom he conceives procurers of it, or that in obedience
to his Majesty have urged the publishing of it, and punished any that have
obstinately refused.

For first he has endeavored to blase the Honor of (that great Patron of
the Church) K. James of Blessed memory, by an odious and base insinuation of I
know not what extraordinary temper wherein the King should be, when this
Declaration was first published: a passage so unworthy and execrably
scandalous, that I will not so much as mention it.

Nor has he dealt better (but far worse) 2
with his sacred Majesty that now is, in making his reviving and republishing
of his Fathers Act, to tend to the public dishonor of God, the annihilation
of the holy Commandment touching the Sabbath, p. 56.
the alteration of the doctrine of the Church of England, the violation of his
solemn Royal protestations: all which and more, (supposing the republishing
of this Declaration to be his Majesty's Act, and by his Authority) he lays to
his Majesty's charge. Indeed he seems not willing that the world should take
notice of these blasphemies as directly sent out against his Majesty, and
therefore would make men believe, that this Act was none of his Majesty's. But
then I would Declaration concerning the dissol. of the last Parliament.
demand of him, how he knows any Declaration or Proclamation to be set forth
by his Majesty? and in particular, how he knows that Declaration to be his,
which he puts His Majesty so often in mind of. Sure I am, he can have no
greater evidence for any, than he has for this: His Majesty's name prefixed,
his Royal Test subscribed. And who is there (without danger of being found
guilty of high treason) can counterfeit these? and what danger it may be for
men to question or reject these, I leave to be judged by those that are best
able and armed with Authority.

But if it were his Majesty's, sure it was procured by some ungracious persons,
and ill-affected to Religion. And who can they be but the Prelates? and yet
he knows not upon which of them to lay it: but he would have the people to
know whom to guess at: For (he says) it was done presently after the L. of
Cant. took possession p. 59.
of his Grace-ship, and that his Grace was very zealous for the pressing of it
to be read in all Churches of his province.

All which might very well be, and yet his Grace have no hand in the procuring
of it. But, though I cannot affirm it, be it so; for I believe his Grace holds
it no dishonor to be the means of procuring, or urging obedience to any Act,
which so just and religious a King shall avow to be his. Yet must he needs for
that be degraded, and deprived of that honorable Title, which the King, the
State, and Church have given him, and his Predecessors ever enjoyed? Must he
needs slip from his Grace presently, and become the jeere of presumptuous
detraction. Malicious pride, whither will thou? Durst any but a wicked Edomite,
a Doeg thus draw out the sword of his tongue, against the Lords High Priest?
Shall not the Ephod and Tiara, inscribed Holiness to the Lord, be a sanctuary
from the violence of reproachful taunts? If pride and malice had not Dis^at
aliquando reticere, qui nunquam didicit loqui. Hieron. advers Helvid.
quite bereft this man of reason, or modesty, and made his tongue cast his
bridle: He, though he never knew how to speak, would have here learned to
hold his peace: And, of all others, have spared him, to whose obedience he is
bound, by his spiritual sonne-ship, (if I may reckon those for sons, who
thus spit at their Fathers) by the sacred tie of holy Orders, and by all those
names that may command reverence and esteem. I speak this of the dignity of
his place. To which, if we join the worth and eminency of his person, so in
all things suitable to so great a height of Authority and dignity; so in all
things becoming his Gracious Title: I cannot but wonder what spirit possessed
this man, thus to rob him of his deserved honor, yea to use him with such
contempt and scorn, as he has done throughout these Sermons (and the rest of
his books.) But what do I go about to vindicate His Honor, or to speak in
his praise, who is above the reach of my praises, as well as of his revilings?
It shall suffice me, that so judicious and religious a Majesty has past his
Royal sentence upon his merits, and judged him most worthy to sit in the
highest Chair of this Church. To proceed then; The Declaration it self he
has used in the same manner, that he has done the Authors of it; stiling it
by all the names he could devise to make it odious, and to harden others in
their obstinacy against it. For answer whereunto, I shall briefly oppose these
five following Propositions, to his so many unjust criminations.

First, The Declaration is no inlet to profaneness, or irreligion, or
hindrance of the due sanctification of the Lords day.

2. That the sports permitted by it to be used, are lawful, and such as are
not prohibited, either p. 57.
by Gods law, or the law of the Land.

3. That it is no means of breaking the fifth p. 61.
Commandment, nor does allow any contempt of Parents, or Masters authority
over their children, and servants.

4. That the reading of it by Ministers in their p. 55.
several Congregations, was enjoined and intended by his Majesty, and that it
is a thing that may lawfully be done by them.

5. That such as refuse to publish it accordingly, are justly punished, and
their punishment no cruelty, or unjust persecution.

CHAP. XI.
Of the 1. Proposition. The Declaration no inlet to profaneness. His Majesty's
respect to Piety in it. Recreations only permitted, not imposed. Of the 2.
Proposition. The sports allowed are lawful, on those days, and in themselves
not against the Law of the Land. Mr. Burtons seeming respect of the Fathers. Of
Revelling. Of mixed dancing: how unlawful, and how condemned by the Ancients,
and by the Imperial Edicts. Of Calvin's judgment in this point. Of the 3.
Proposition. The Book no means of violation of the 5. Commandment.

FOr the first, It is most evident to any impartial Reader, that shall peruse
the Declaration, that his Majesty intending only to take away that scandal,
which some rigid Sabbatarians had brought upon our Religion to the hindering of
the conversion of Popish Recusants, and to allow (especially to the meaner
sort) such honest recreations, as might serve for their refreshment, and better
enabling them to go through with their hard labors on other days. His
Majesty (I say) in this his charitable intention, did not forget his wonted
respect to Piety, and the service of God, or due sanctification of the Lords
day.

For first, He does straightly charge and command every person, first to resort
to his own Parish Church.

Secondly, He does expressly provide, that none shall have the benefit of the
liberty granted, that will not first come to the Church, and serve God; thereby
excluding all Recusants, and idly profane persons, who absent themselves from
Gods house and service.

Thirdly, He does enjoine, that they to whom it belongs in office, shall
present and sharply punish all such, as in abuse of this his liberty, will use
the exercises allowed before the ends of all Divine-services for that day.
Which things rightly considered, if they be as well put in execution, as they
were piously intended by his Majesty, are so far from hindering, that they
are a great furtherance of the due service of God upon that day; in as much as
thereby, many that otherwise would not, may be allured and compelled to
present themselves in the Church at the public worship of God.

Yea, by this means the public worship and service of God shall have its due
honor, and be preferred before, even our otherwise honest and lawful
recreations; so as till that be ended, these cannot be used; nor by any that
have not first in that tendered their duty to God; and if any shall presume to
do otherwise, those in Authority have power to punish them, and bar them
from the benefit of their liberty, which (for ought I know) no Law, or Canon
before, did ever enable them to do.

It is manifest, in that his Majesty does only permit, and not impose the use
of recreations upon Bishop of Ely, p. 255.
any, which notwithstanding, devout Christians who are piously affected and
able, may upon the Lords day sequester themselves from secular business, and
ordinary pleasures, to the end they may the more freely attend the service of
God, and apply their minds to spiritual and heavenly meditations: which must
needs be a thing very commendable and acceptable to God; and far from his
Majesty's intention to disallow, or to prohibit any, from encouraging men in
such courses: only he would not have this imposed as necessary for all, which
no Divine or Evangelicall precept has done, nor is possible by all to be
observed: all men not being morally able to apply themselves for the space of
the whole day, to spiritual and religious exercises, and to divine Meditations
only.

If then, by the Declaration, the public service of God be duly provided for,
no recreations permitted to the hinderance thereof, no nor the pious affections
of well disposed Christians, for the applying of themselves on that day to
private duties of devotion, and piety any way prohibited: Then it cannot justly
be accounted any inlet to profaneness, or irreligion, or hinderance of the
due sanctification of the Lords day, which was my first Proposition.

For the second Proposition. Things may be said to be unlawful, either in
themselves, or in regard of some circumstance of time, place, or manner, in
which they may be used. The great exception which is by most men taken against
the sports and recreations allowed in the Declaration, is not so much in regard
of the things themselves, as in regard of the day, on which they are permitted,
when (though in themselves lawful, as honest labors are) they judge them
unseasonable and sinful. But this has been already sufficiently cleared by
the learned Bishop of See B. of Ely p. 237, 238. etc.
Ely, and others, who have proved, that neither the Jews under the Law, were
prohibited all recreations on their Sabbath, nor (if that were not granted)
could such prohibition of them, conclude against Christians, using of them upon
the Lords day. Provided that the proper work of the day, the public service
of God be first ended, and not thereby any way let or impeached.

But secondly, there are some that will have the Recreations by the Declaration
permitted, to be in themselves unlawful; and if so, then must they be against
the law of God, or the law of the land. M. Burton will have them against both.
page 57.
1. Against the law of the land: for which he cites the Act of Parliament in
the 1. of King Charles. But in that Act none of the exercises or pastimes
allowed by the Declaration are mentioned, but only, in general terms, it
prohibits all such as are unlawful, which the Declaration also does; and that,
not only such as are simply unlawful, but all others forbidden by the law of
the Land, as Decla. p. 12.
unlawful, either on Sundays, as Interludes, and Bear and Bull-baitings: or
for some persons, as bowling; an exercise by law prohibited the meaner sort.
And it were very hard to imagine, that his Majesty should confirm any Act of
Parliament, which should cross the Declaration set forth by his Royal Father
not seven years before, at least without express mentioning of it, and
rendering some reason moving him so to do.

But secondly, they are nevertheless unlawful, and, as supposed to be such,
Mr Burton will have them comprised in that Act under those general words, All
other unlawful pastimes; which (says he) are those? By name, all dancing,
leaping, revelling, and such like; in terms condemned by Imperial edicts,
Decrees of Counsels, writings of ancient Fathers, of all learned Divines both
Protestants and Papists in all ages. And King James of famous memory in his
Basilicon Doron, whose words he there cites. He that should read this passage
in M. Burton alone, and not know the man, would think him a man that did much
esteem the writings of the Ancient Fathers, the Decrees of Councels, and
consentient testimony of Divines. But the truth is, it has been an usual
custom with men of his strain and humor, if they can but light upon any
thing in the Fathers, or ancient Councels, that sounds to their liking; they
catch hold of it presently, and make a great show and flourish with it, and
both sayings and Authors shall have their due commendations: See Survay of the
pretended holy Disc. c. 26. and 27.
But if any or all of them be brought to impugn their crotchets, they set
light by their authority, and care not a rush for them: Bring them then the
Scriptures, or nothing. I will not serve him in the same kind, but (giving
Antiquity its due honor) for answer to that which he alleges, I say first,
That sure the man is much mistaken, and in his heat forgot himself, in putting
leaping into the number of those pastimes, which he says, are so condemned:
For, I believe, he is the first man that ever so accounted it: and I am verily
persuaded, that in his sad and sober thoughts (if ever he come to himself so
far, as to have any) he will exclude from so hard a censure, both it, and
archery, and vaulting, and such like, though mentioned in the Declaration.

2 For Revelling, taking it in the usual sense for drunken and disorderly
meetings, etc. we must subscribe to the Fathers and Councels, and not to them
only, but to the sacred Scripture, where they are plainly condemned as works
of Gal. 5. 21.
the flesh. And say withal, that it was one end that his Majesty aimed at in
this Declaration, to hinder such Revellings, which he condemns under the name
of filthy tiplings and drunkenness. Decl. p. 6.
But if Mr. Burton intend by it, all those other sports mentioned in the
Declaration, as Wakes, and Whitson-ales, etc. I say then, that he is much wide
in his conceit of them, they are no such things: especially in his Majesty's
intention, who has therefore given express charge for Decl. p. 16.
the preventing and punishing of all disorders in them.

Thirdly, That then which remains under the sentence of condemnation, is only
Dancing, and, as I suppose, mixed dancing (as they use to call it) of men and
women together; for single dancing is not by the strictest disallowed. As for
mixed dancings, I know they may be abused, and become unlawful, by the
immoderate and unseasonable use of them, and may otherwise, yea and they do
many times become incentives unto lust, and that two ways especially:

First, when there are used in them such immodest motions and gestures, as have
in them manifest tokens of a lascivious mind.

Secondly, when they are done animo libidinoso, with an intention to stir up
the fire of lust: where either of these are, they must needs become unlawful.

Now these, as they may be as well in single dancing, so they are not in all
mixed dancings, so as to make them all to be condemned. For what hinders, but
that men and women may together express their joy in such modest motions, and
with as chaste intentions, as they may otherwise walk, talk, salute, and
converse together? If any shall say, there is danger, because of our frailty,
which is prone to abuse these to wantonness; I say, so there is in other
conversings of men and women together, but that danger not such as to make
either altogether unlawful.

Again, I would know feign why men and women (especially where the custom of
the country allows it) may not as unblameably dance together, as for either
sex to become spectators of others dancing? David, we know, danced in the
sight of women, 2 Samuel 6. and Miriam, Exodus 15. And (if we grant that the women
danced seorsim a viris, yet) it cannot be denied, but that they danced in the
sight of men: why then may they not do it together? But they expressed a holy
and religious joy, which our Country-dancers are far from: What if they did?
will that hinder the creeping of impure affections into the minds of the
beholders? or must there be no dancing, but in expression of spiritual joy? I
suppose, no wise man will be so strait-laced: and if not, then must they not
condemn mixed danceings (which have in them only grave and modest motions)
because men's corruptions may abuse them to lust and wantonness.

But do not the ancient Fathers in the writings and Councels condemn them? So
Mr. Burton indeed says. But I answer: It Is true, that the Fathers and Councels
speak against dancings: But how? Not so as to condemn them as simply
unlawful: but first, against dancings which are lascivae, impudicae,
meretriciae, for such additions we find in their invectives, and these we no
less condemn than they. Secondly, They speak against such as did then savor
of Gentilizing superstition; which, as the state of the Church then stood,
could not but be scandalous, and a hinderance to the conversion of the
Gentiles, when, though they might happily be done with other intents and ends,
yet, they saw the outside of their rites retained.

If any say that our Morris-dancing, and Maypoles do also savor of
heathenisme (as Mr. page 157.
Burton seems to do, when he calls them heathenish sports and pastimes.) I
answer, that things are not therefore rightly called heathenish, unless there
be something in them, for which Christians might not use them. Now as for
these, I know no impiety or other cause in them, why Christians may not use
them as well as heathens, if they did or do use any such; for Christianity
does not forbid men to do any thing which the heathens did, but such only as
were contrary unto the law of God, and the law of right reason; neither does it
exact in all men a Philosophical or Catolike severity, to which these delights
may seem no better than folly: for grant, that wise men esteem of them, as
Solomon of laughter and mirth, Eccle. 2. 2. yet will it not follow, that such
as by reason of their mean education and parts, hardly aspire to know the
pleasure of other delights, should not use such, as they are capable of.

Thirdly, they speak against dancing in some persons, as in Priests and
Churchmen; and surely dancing does best beseem these.

Fourthly, the Counsels do sometimes forbid dancing, as the Laodicean at
marriages; and other Councels forbid Clericos, etc. but this does not prove
them simply unlawful: but they might see some abuse in it, which might make
the^ think it inconvenient to tolerate it, and so may our Church and State,
upon such abuse, take away the use of it hereafter, as it has done in many
other things that are in themselves lawful.

Fifthly, some of the Fathers more looking at the abuse, than considering the
lawfulness of dancing, did sometimes (in their Sermons and popular discourses)
cry down all dancing, as we see it is usual with many in our times to do the
like in other things.

Sixthly, some of the Fathers and Councels might happily respect the custom of
the Country. Nam pro more patriae and provinciae quod alicubi lascive and
impudice fieri judicatur, alibi non fit lascive, sed libere and honest. Now,
we know, the heathen Romans had no good opinion of dancing, which among the
Grecians and Eastern Countries was highly esteemed of, and therefore they
might cry out upon it, not as simply evil, but because sic mos patriae
ferebat, to esteem such light and vain persons who used it; and fit it is
that Christians should avoid such an imputation by abstaining: but it being not
esteemed unlawful among us generally, (but only by some prejudiced against
it) there is not the same reason with us and them.

Lastly, I verily believe, yea I know (how peremptorily soever M. Burton seems
to affirm it) that neither the Fathers nor Councels do with one consent speak
against this recreation, as it is in use among us, if we mean such dancings
as are permitted and intended by the book: that is, of men and women publicly
using this exercise, where I cannot conceive how they should so forget
themselves, as to use any lascivious gestures; neither do I believe, that if
the Fathers lived among us, they would easily condemn a received custom.

However, their condemning of dancings differing from ours, in nature and in
places, where usages were different, or to some persons, or for some abuse they
found, etc. cannot prescribe against our dancings, unless they can prove them
both for nature and circumstances to agree with them. Neither can the Imperial
Edicts (if happily any speak for M. Burton) prescribe to us, or bound our
liberty, for that we are not under that law, no nor prove the thing prohibited
unlawful: all that can thence upon good grounds be deduced, is, that the
makers of such Edicts (all circumstances weighed) judged such things not fit to
be tolerated among them. Yet happily, our case and theirs being not the same,
they may be lawful for us. We know there are many things prohibited by our
Statutes, which are not unlawful, but only inconvenient in regard of the
time, place, or persons, in which, and to whom such things shall be so
prohibited.

For example, no man can truly say that Bowling, or shove-groat, or other
exercises by Statute Stat. Hen. 8. 33. c. 9.
forbidden to be used by Artificers, Husbandmen, Servants, etc. are unlawful,
either in themselves, or for those persons. Yet was that Statute founded upon
very good reason, namely, that such persons restrained from those and such like
exercises, nothing profitable for themselves, or the Kingdom, might betake
themselves to the too-much (by means of those) neglected exercise of shooting
in the long-bow, that so they might at all times be ready to serve their
country when occasion should require, and in the mean while uphold the
occupations of Bowyers and Fletchers, and keep them from settling in other
Countries, to their comfort, and the detrement of this Realm, as that Statute
speaks. So that in Statutes and Edicts of Princes and States, always the end
and other circumstances ought to be considered, as well as the bare letter of
the Law, if from thence we will judge of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of
things by them commanded or forbidden. And this shall serve for answer to the
great noise he makes of Councels, Fathers, and Imperial Edicts; which, if he
had cited in particular, happily, I should have shaped him a more full answer,
and have given my readers better satisfaction. But I list not to make men's
objections for them, neither need I give other than a general answer, where
the objection is made in such general rermes.

As for that he adds, that all learned Divines, Protestants and Papists, and
in all ages, do condemn them. It is so palpably false, that it needs no
confutation; otherwise it were easy to produce a large Catalogue of Authors of
both sorts, that are so far from condemning them, that they allow and approve
them in themselves, considered as not prohibited on the Lords day, if they be
not used with excess, nor have any other accidental evil that may make them
unlawful. But I suppose all his learned Divines are reduced to one, (who to
him is, instar omnium) Mr. Calvin and such as follow him; he (I confess) is
down right of his side, and though he allow as much recreation of other kinds
upon Sundays, as we, yet dancing he will have none, neither Epist. ad Facell. p.
64. in folio.
then nor at any other time, being made a heinous crime, and deeply censured,
insomuch as one of their Syndicks or chief Magistrates, for being present at a
dancing, was deprived of his place for a time, by their Inquisition or Motly
Consistory.

But for his judgment, I say, that it weighs not much in this case: for First,
he was not indifferent in judging of things indifferent. Secondly, why should
his opinion sway in this, more than in the point of the Sabbath? surely there
can no reason be given why we may not reject him in this, as well as Mr. Burton
and others use to do in that.

That which he alleges out of King James of famous memory, his Basilicon
Doron, says nothing for his purpose, and it is so far from crossing the
intent of the Declaration, that it speaks rather for it, for when he says, he
would have no unlawful pastimes used on that day; what is more said than in
this Declaration, which is for no other but lawful sports? And therefore
neither did K. James cross his own judgment, nor our Gracious Sovereign,
the Peereless Son of so Peereless a Father, herein disobey his Royal Fathers
instructions, as Mr. B. labors to make the world believe, nor yet (though he
falsely affirms it) does that judicious King expressly and by name, forbid
May-games as unlawful on that day.

Here is one marginall that I cannot pass, viz. Bellarmine in his Sermons in
many places copiously declameth against such profanations: as (says he) we
have else where expressed at large: where this elsewhere is, he tells us not,
but we find it in the book called A Divine Tragedy, which (though it went
abroad without his name) it seems he is willing the world should take notice
of, to be his, and (though the style and strain speak so much to the
judicious, yet) thinks fit to put it past peradventure. As for the places of
Bellarmine which he cites, I know not what he means by that which Mr. B.
translates, mummeries and dancings (for I have not those Sermons by me) but if
he mean (as he seems to expound himself) Bacchanals, drunkenness and
disorders, we join with him, and condemn them simply at all times, but
especially on sacred festivals. But I do not think him so far a Puritan (to
use Mr. B's. own phrase) to condemn all dancing, either simply, or on
Festivalls, if it be after divine Service ended: or that he has said any
thing to contradict that which I find delivered by a prime Casuist, and one of
his own society; with whose words I will conclude this Proposition: Rustici
non sunt prohibendi a choreis etc. vid. Filliuciu^ Tract. 30. p. 215.
Country people (says he) are not to be kept from dancings on Holy Days, so
that they be had after service; because otherwise they would be idle, which is
worse: and because they are done according to the custom of the country, and
publicly before others, and so for the most part the occasion of lust is taken
away, and lastly, because they are means to conciliate affection between
young men and maids, and so making marriages between them. Yet the abuses (if
there be any) must be taken away, and modesty maintained as much as may be;
This he: and though he be a Jesuit, I know not why we may not be of his mind.
And thus (as far as Mr. Burton draws me, and further I intend not to go) I
have cleared my second Proposition: That the sports by the Declaration
permitted are lawful, and (for ought that Mr. B. has alleged to the
contrary) not prohibited, either by the Law of God, or of the Realm. I will
dispatch the rest with more brevity.

For the third, It is a part of Mr. Burtons declamation against this
Declaration, That it is a 3 p. 62. And to the same purpose he has spoken very
largely. in Divin. Trag. p. 32. 33.
trenching, or rather a violent inrode upon the fifth Commandment, which
says, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc. That it breaks two great
Commandments in the Decalogue at once, the last of the first table, and the
first of the second, and so cuts asunder the very sinews not only of
Religion, but of all civil society at one blow: Thus he speaks, and I have
heard some simple people muttering some such thing; but no man to speak out in
so broad language as Mr. B. But no matter who speaks it; sure it is an evil
thing, and worthy to be abolished, that shall thus violate Gods Commandments
by couples: and were it not that this charge is (as his others use to be) a
little defective in one thing (which we call truth) I should (not so much as I
do) dislike those men that refuse to publish it. Let us then consider his
proofs. All that I find by him alleged (though there be more than enough of
it) may well be resolved into his private opinion boldly vented and faced with
certain interrogatives; which perhaps he mistook for good reasons in the
Pulpit, where no man would or durst contradict him. For I find him speaking
(in many more words) after this manner. Should Ministers in p. 61.
their Congregations declare how the Justices of Asize in their circuits are
commanded, that no man trouble or molest any in or for their lawful
recreations; Alas! then what shall Parents and Ministers do, when their sons
and servants will abroad, and take their liberty of sports, at leastwise after
evening prayer every Lords day, and will stay out as long as they please. A
heavy case, no doubt; and because the man (by the moan he makes) seems to be
in some distress; I Will resolve his doubt, and free him from his perplexity.
Alas! what shall they do? Marry, give them such correction as befits such
rebellious and disobedient sons and servants, that shall dare to take upon them
to be their own Carvers in their liberty, with contempt of those whom the Law
of God and Nature, commands them to honor and obey. But this plaster seems
too narrow for his sore; for he adds, gladly would they restrain them, but
they may not, they dare not, for fear of being brought to the Assizes, there
to be punished. No? may not? dare not? Surely a man by this, may swear Mr.
Burton never read the Declaration; or if he did, is very dull of
understanding, or very willing to mistake. For, I would demand, when ever Mr.
Burton, or any man else knew a father or master bound over, or brought to the
Assizes, for restraining his son or servant? or where this danger is
intimated? It says indeed, That the Justices of Assize, shall see that no man
do trouble, or molest any of his Majesty's loyal and dutiful people, in or
for their lawful recreation, having first done their duty to God, and
continuing in obedience to his Majesty and his Laws, etc.

But what is all this to parents and masters? shall they lose their authority,
and government over their children, and servants? God forbid. Were that true,
then indeed farewell all obedience to Superiors, whose first model and
foundation is laid in private families. But, God be thanked, there is no such
thing: Neither 1. in the Book, wherein the names of servants, or children are
not once mentioned, but the persons for whom the liberty is granted, supposed
to be sui juris. Nor 2. in the intention of it; for all that is spoken, is of
public hindrance and molestation, by the public Magistrate or Officer, whose
office ordinarily, and in such cases is not exercised inter privatos parietes,
within private walls, at least, not without express order to that purpose. So
that every man is still free, and has as full power to order his family, and
to prescribe bounds to his children and servants liberty as before. Yea, they
may, if they please (as too many use to do in this case) notwithstanding the
Declaration, prove Tyrants in the exercise of their authority.

But why do I bring reason to the confutation of so gross a slander, when it
is reason enough to convince it of false-hood, that in all this noise, he
cannot bring the least show of reason for it. That which he brings of a story
of three Apprentises, upon the occasion of reading the Book (so M. p. 62.
Burton will have it, and I list not to contradict him in such trifles) going
to a Tavern, spending six shillings there, and concluding to run from their
Masters, and after executing it. All this (if malice did not make men
ridiculously blind) might be, and yet the Book, or the reading of it, no cause
of it, otherwise than the Gospel, that perfect law of liberty, whereby men are
freed Iam. 1. 25.
from the bondage of the ceremonial Law, may Gal. 5. 13.
be used as an occasion to the flesh, and cloak of maliciousness, that is,
not by any defect or fault in 1 Pet 2. 16.
it, but by the corruption and perverseness of men. And there may, and be some
(no doubt) that in like manner, do abuse this Book, and turn the liberty
granted, into licentiousness; which was piously and charitably intended, for
the honest comfort and refreshment of laboring persons. For where does the
Book give liberty to any (much less to servants and such as are under others)
of tippling, or drunkenness, or of going to Taverns, or Alehouses on Sundays?
Declar. p. 8.
When the preventing of filthy tiplings, and drunkenness was one end of giving
liberty of the use of more honest and manly refreshments.

If any shall say, that the Wakes and setting up of May-poles are not without
drunkenness, and disorders: My answer is; that however, the Book is not in
fault, which expressly commands all Justices and other Officers to whom it
belongs, to prevent and punish those and all other disorders, among which we
may reckon that for one. For servants to turn rebels to their Masters, under
pretense of this liberty granted. And if they to whom this charge, by His
Majesty's Royal Command is given, fail in their duty, the blame must be laid
upon them; and let Mr. Burton in such case, turn his invectives (a Gods name)
against them, and not against the Book, to the blasting of His Majesty's pious
and Christian intentions, who is far from robbing either God of his worship,
or his subjects of the obedience which is due to them from their servants and
children; and so no violater either of the fourth, or fifth Commandment. And
so I pass to my fourth Proposition.

CHAP. XII.
Ministers commanded by His Majesty to read the Book. They may and ought to
obey. The matter of the Book not unlawful. Things unlawfully commanded, may
sometimes be lawfully obeyed. What things are required to justify a subjects
refusing a Superiors Command. Refusers to read the Book justly punished. The
punishment inflicted, not exceeding the offense. Not without good warrant.

THat the reading of the Book by Ministers in their several Congregations,
was enjoined, and intended by His Majesty; and that it is a thing that may
lawfuly be done by them: Both these are denied by Mr. Burton, and the p. 55.
latter brought as a reason to the former, thus. The thing is unlawful, As
tending to the public p. 56.
dishonor of God, etc. Therefore, the King did not, nor can any honest man
imagine that he should ever intend to command it.

This is a common fetch of his, and it is very pretty, to pass a false sentence
upon his Majesty's just and pious actions, and then to charge those actions
upon others, that so he may the more freely vent his invectives against them,
and yet seem, in the midst of this his great seeming-zeale, to retain his
dutiful and loyal respect of his Majesty's honor. If a man should deal with
Mr. Burton in the like kind, and say, he did not traduce his Majesty's
government, incense the people to sedition, and rail upon his Superiors, the
Governors of the Church, for that were against the duty of a Christian, of a
subject, of a Minister, and against his Oath of Allegiance, and his often
protestations of loyalty to his Royal Majesty, etc. Therefore (though such
things have gone abroad under his name) surely they were none of his; he never
intended, nor was Author of so foul and wicked practices: If, I say, a man
should speak thus (as any man might do, and yet not as he has his Sacred
Majesty's) falsely censure his actions in the least) there is Argumentum ad
hominem.
no man of reason and discretion, but would think this to be no excuse, but
rather an aggravation of his fault; so long as the evidences, of that wherewith
he is charged, are so plain and convincing, that they leave no place for
doubting: for what other construction can be made of such manner of speech, but
only this? That Mr. Burton has done contrary to the duty of a Christian, of a
subject, of a Minister, and violated his oath of Allegiance, and often
protestations of boyalty.

But I answer briefly: That his Majesty (as his Royal Father had also done)
commanding publication Declar. in fine.
of the Declaration, by order from the Bishops through all the Parish-Churches
of their several Dioceses respectively, did implicitly command that Ministers
should read it. For 1. how does publication use to be made of such things in
the Church, otherwise than by the Ministers reading of them? But 2. I know no
man of common sense, but will confess, that what order any man, to whom the
making of such order is committed, shall make, that order (what ever it be) is
his who gave the Commission.

His Majesty in his Declaration, authorized the Bishops to take order for the
publication of it, and seeing their order was, that it should be read, and that
by the Ministers; Then may it (without presumption) be said, That His Majesty
commanded Ministers to read it; unless it might some way appear, that His
Majesty did restrain them from making that kind of order, or limit them to do
it in some other way, which he did not in the Book, I am sure, and I am
confident Mr. Burton cannot prove he did otherwise, and therefore it is
ridiculously false that M. Burton says, His Majesty did command no such thing,
as that Ministers should read the Book.

I say further, that Ministers may lawfully (and therefore ought) to obey his
Majesty in reading the Book. For 1. The matter of the Book is not unlawful,
nor against any Commandment of God, as has been already proved. 2. Supposing
(not granting) that the things declared in that Book to be permitted, were not
lawful, and such as cannot be used without offense to the Divine Majesty, and
transgression of his Commandments, and that therefore his Majesty (which is
sin to imagine) had unjustly granted such liberty: yet will it not follow,
that it is unlawful to read the Declaration, and publish his Majesty's
pleasure. For Ministers by reading it do not justify, but declare what is
done, nor do they thereby ipso facto approve the liberty granted, or the
granting of it, but make known his Majesty's pleasure what ever it be, which
(for ought I could ever learn) is not by God forbidden any man to do.

It is lawful sometimes for Subjects to obey their Superiors in that which by
them is not lawfully commanded. David sinned in causing the people to be
numbered, but no man can (with reason) say, that Ioab sinned in numbering them,
but that on the contrary, he had sinned if he had not numbered them. For there,
the sin was not in the act, but in the motive; which in David was pride and
vainglory; in Ioab, obedience to his Sovereign. So also, and much rather in
this case, where the acts are not the same; and (what ever the other is) the
act required to be done by Ministers (without all question) is of the same
nature with those, in which (as S. Bernard says) Inter summa vero mela and
summa bona, quaedam meclia sunt ad alterutru^ se habentia, et boni malique
nome^ assumunt. Media sunt, ambulare, sedere, loqui, tacere, comedere,
jejunare, vigilare, dormire, et si qua sunt similia In ^is mediis (sc.
ambulare. sedere, loqui, tacere, etc) subditi esse et obedientes debemus ad
nutum praepositorum, nihil interregantes propter conscientiam: quia in his
nullum praesixit opus Deus, sed Praelatorum dereliquit iperio disponenda. S.
Bern. de virt. obed. p. 1713 Mal. 2. 7.
Subjects must be obedient to the beck of Superiors, asking no questions for
conscience sake: because in these, God has not prefixed any work, but left
them to be disposed by the commands of Superiors. Again, The error of
Superiors is not always a dispensation to the obedience of those that are
under them. Sed homines, inquis, sacile sall^ in Dei voluntate de rebus dubiis
praecipienda, et in praecipienda fallere so pussunt. Sed enim q^id hoc refert
tua qui conscius non es: praesertim cum teneas de Scripturis quia labia
sacerdotis custediunt scientiam, et legem ex ore ejus requirunt, quia Angelus
Domini exercituum est. S. Bern. de praecep. and dispens. c. 12.
Superiors may err in their judgment sometimes, of the will of God in things
doubtful, and may err in commanding. What is that to thee (says S. Bernard,
speaking of obedience to spiritual governors) who art not conscious of such
error? especially having been taught in the Scriptures, that the Priests lips
preserve knowledge, and they shall seek the law at his mouth: for he is the
messenger of the Lord of Hosts. And the like may be said for obedience to
Sovereign Princes, and the Magistrates that are subordinate to them. To whom
we may apply that, which the same Author after adds in that place: Ipsum
proinde quem pro Deo habemus, tanqua^ Deum in his quae a perte non sunt contra
Deum, audire debemus. S. Bern. ibid.
Him whom we have in Gods stead, we must hear as God, in those things which
are not manifestly against God.

That the error then of Superiors be such as shall justify the Subjects
refusal of obedience, it must, according to S. Bernard, (and according to the
truth too) 1. be known to be so; for he that shall

2. It must be against Gods will and Word; nothing

3. It must be [aperte] manifestly known to be against the will of God, and
past all doubt and peradventure. The Subject may not deny his Sovereign his
obedience, because he fears that which is commanded, is not agreeable to Gods
will; or because he cannot see the word of God for it; or because some doubt of
the lawfulness of it. He that will do nothing at the command of his
Superiors, which is doubted of by any, whether it be lawful or no, will pin
up his obedience within very narrow bounds, and prove but a bad subject. It is
our own conscience, not another, that must be our guide in matters of
obedience to the Powers ordained by God. In things left to our liberty, we may,
yea, we must have respect to the conscience of another: That is S. Paul's
doctrine: For why (says he) should my 1 Cor. 10. 29.
liberty be judged by another man's conscience? That is, why should I use my
liberty, so as to be condemned by the conscience of another? But S. Paul does
no where say, Why should my obedience be judged? That is no matter of liberty,
but duty. If another man's conscience (mine own being resolved) shall condemn
me for my obedience; they may, but to their own hurt, not mine; who do but my
duty without offending against charity, which must never be extended to cross
justice; to offend and wound mine own, for fear of offending another man's
conscience, is not a well-grounded charity, but (to speak but right) sinful
folly. Though a man must love and tender his neighbor as himself, yet he
needs not, he must not, in this case, love him more or before himself: but if
it come to that, that the one must be neglected, here every man must think
himself his nearest neighbor, and prefer himself before all others.

2. Neither is it sufficient to excuse our disobedience, to say, God has not
in his Word commanded any such thing as man requires. For this were to deny all
obedience to man, whose power is properly in those things which are left
undefined in the Word of God. It is sufficient warrant for us, to know the
things by humane authority commanded, not to be forbidden by God in his Word,
and that they are not contrary to that which God commands; which every thing
which he has not commanded, cannot, with reason, be said to be.

3. They must be plainly such. This contrariety must evidently appear, not
doubtfully seem: to commit a certain sin, to avoid an uncertain, is no point
of wisdom or religion. It is a good rule I confess, if rightly applied, In
doubtful things ever to take the safest course. But this cannot (though some
so use it) be any prescription for disobedience to humane authority: For the
question here is not between two things that are doubtful, but between an
evil certain, and that which is doubtful: as namely, whether a man shall
disobey his Superiors, (which without all question is a sin against God, and
the power by him ordained) or shall do that which he knows not whether it be
a sin or no? here it cannot but be a fond choice, to choose to rush upon that
sin, which is certain, for the avoiding of that which is uncertain. In
those things which the Scripture has manifestly delivered to be the will of
God, we are not (as S. Bernard speaks) to expect Nec praeceptor expectandus,
nec prohibitor auscultandus. Bern. de praec. and dispen. c. 12.
a teacher, or respect a Countermander: But in that which lies hid, and is so
obscure, that it is questionable what the will of God may be; we must have
recourse to the one, and obey the other. Neither (in that holy man's judgment)
do we in this, give man divine authority, or cross the Scriptures, commanding
us to obey God rather than Siquidem quod nos asserimus de dubiis, hoc ille
(Samuelvel potius Eli) negat de manifestis. Idem ibid.
men: For that speaks of things manifestly against the will of God, not of such
as are doubtful, whether they be such or no. And indeed, how otherwise can any
by disobeying man, be said to obey God, if he be not certain of Gods contrary
command, to which he pretends to yield obedience? This must needs be to obey
(not God, but) our own opinion, rather than men: and to prefer our private
fancies and self-will, before the obedience which God has exacted as due to
those, whom he has invested with part of his own power, and placed in
authority over others.

To our present purpose then; I would demand of those that refuse to obey
Authority by commanding them to read the book, whether it be manifest that
God has forbidden the reading of it? Or where it is written that they shall
not (at the command of Authority) read that which they conceive not to be
orthodoxe? or to refuse to publish their Sovereigns royal pleasure, unless
that which it contains, be (in their opinion) just and right? But this without
question they are not able to do, nor is it reasonable to think that ever God
should suspend the power of Superiors, upon the liking and approbation of
those from whom he requires obedience to them. And if they cannot, let them
fear, lest refusing to yield obedience, and so resisting the power and the
ordinance of God, they receive Romans 13. 2.
not to themselves damnation.

It will follow then that they are justly punished, and their punishment to
cruelty or unjust persecution, which is my fifth and last Proposition. For they
to whom God gives authority to command, they have also from the same hand of
God a sword, an emblem of their power, not defensive only, but coercive also,
to punish the disobedience of such as resist their commanding power; and this
vindicative power is as necessary as the other: yea, it is that which supports
and gives life to their commands, which otherwise were to none or very little
purpose; as not being able to keep things in due order, unless thus seconded,
that thereby they who by their disobedience Lessius De justit. et jure l. 2. c.
47. n. 21.
transgress the bounds of order, may be reduced into order again, by due
punishment: The execution of which, if it exceed not due bounds, cannot justly
be styled cruelty or persecution; unless the obedience required be
demonstrated to be contrary to Gods will and word: which (by that I have said
in my last proposition) they may be able rather to attempt, than to perform.
But happily, the punishment may exceed the nature of the offense, and so become
cruelty, and they justly termed cruel that executes it. For those Seneca calls
cruel, who have Illos crudeles voca^o, qui puniendi causam habent, modum non
habent. Senec. de clem. l. 2. c. 4. p. 56. Div. Traged. p. ult.
cause, but no measure of punishing. Indeed Mr. B. would make men, that know
nothing of the case, think there were strange severity, yea, injustice,
illegal, incanonicall proceedings, severe and wicked censures, persecution
exercised against Ministers in this cause. But it is no new thing, for men of
his spirit to call their deserved punishment unjust persecution, when (to
speak as S. Austine once did in the like case to his Donatists) If the thing
Siea quae per misericordissima^ disciplinam patiuntur, comparentur factis, quae
furiosa temeritate co^mittunt, quis non videat, qui magis persecutores
vocandisunt? Aug. Ep. 167.
they suffer be compared with the deeds which they commit, who sees not, which
are rather to be called persecutors? And whether these men suffering for their
faults, or the Church and State suffering under their irregularity and
turbulency, may most rightly be said to be in persecution, is no hard
question to determine. But to the point, they complain of two things. 1. The
Censure is too heavy. 2. Without warrant. For 1, will no less censure serve the
turn then suspension, excommunication, deprivation, and the like? I answer,
No: especially for those, that after admonition, instruction, and long
forbearance, remain not only refractary, but add thereto many intolerable
affronts to Authority, by public invectives, private whisperings, and false
suggestions, buzzing into the people I know not what dangerous issues (mere
fictions of a pettish fancy) to follow: for these men, these censures are mild
enough: And I dare appeal to that conscience which Mr. B. has yet left him,
whether if he did erect his new discipline, and godly government, page 110.
he would not exercise as harsh censures upon them that not only wilfully,
but thus turbulently, oppose the commands of those in authority: and we may
easily guess what he would do, if he had once the upper ground, when being
on the lower he can so severely censure those that are above him; with
deprivation not of living, but of life, and turn suspension, Ips. News. p. 6.
into (plain English) hanging. And that the Churches where that purer
discipline is in place, for matters of less moment, has inflicted as heavy
censures, is better known than to need rehearsing. But not the example of
others like dealings, but the proceedings themselves are the best
justification. For with how slow a pace did justice march to these punishments,
that have been three years space in the execution, and yet of delinquents in
that kind, how few are they that have suffered? And what admonitions were
spent upon them, what pains in information, what patience in expectation of
their conformity: is sufficiently known, and remains upon record, and will
justify themselves before any indifferent Judges. So that I may truly say of
these proceedings, as S. Austine of the Churches in his time against the
Donatists, that it was a most merciful discipline that was used upon
Misericordissima disciplina.
them. And what other censures has the Church to inflict, but these, except it
be an admonition, and if they would only have that used (and rather to be
misused upon them to no purpose) they might then have just ground for their
usual practice in contemning the whole power of the Church.

2 But what warrant have they? There is no Canon, Statute, Law or precept
extant that requires Div. Trag. p. ult.
it: I grant it, if he mean particularly requiring it; for since (at least the
last) setting forth of the book, there have been no Canons or Statutes made.
But it were very hard, if the Kings Majesty should not have power to command
men to declare his pleasure in any thing, and to punish such as refuse, without
the assistance of new Canons and Statutes, for every new occasion. God be
thanked, his own Royal right, and the Laws and Canons already made, do
abundantly enable him to do far more than this. Well, perhaps, he does not
deny the Kings right or power: but what power have the Bishops for their
proceedings? If (says he) they allege the Kings p. 57.
authority, as they do, where show they this authority? Where do they show it?
Marry, where they are by duty bound to do it; to those that have authority to
demand it, to whom they are ready to give a just account of their proceedings;
but not to Mr. Burton. For what authority has he to demand a sight of their
Authority? Or who made him Inquisitor general over the Bishops, to examine
their actions, and so imperiously to require their warrant, as here he does,
and in like manner in another place, has dealt with my Lord Bishop of Norwich,
for his proceeding in his own Diocese? And all this he presumes to do
merely of himself, without, and against all Law, and Canon, yea and reason
too; he not having the least occasion offered him, as not having been, so much
as questioned for the things, nor touched by the authority whereof he
complains: If he had been suspended, excommunicated, and deprived for not
reading the Book, or for not conforming to the new Ceremonies, (as he calls
them) he could have done no more; nor indeed, could he justly have done so
much. It belongs not to any man, that is questioned for any crime or cause,
before any subordinate Magistrate, Civil, or Ecclesiastic, in such manner to
question their Authority; if happily, they think them to have no warrant for what
they do; they who are questioned have the benefit of Appeal, Ad praesidium
innocentiae est Apellationis remedium institutum, Lancellot Perusin. instit.
jur. Can. l 3. tit. 17.
which was instituted for the relief of innocence, (as the Canonists speak)
and by this means, the Judge a Quo, shall be compelled to transmit both his
proceedings in the cause, and his authority, by which he so proceeded, to be
scanned by the Judge ad Quem: But for the parties questioned to do it, is an
unsufferable insolency, and affront to Justice. And if Mr. Burton 1 Pet. 4. 17.
(...). Alienas Curas agens. S. Cypr. ad Quirin. Curiosus nemo est, qui non sit
malevolus. Plau^
now suffer for this, he cannot be said to suffer as a Christian, but as a
busy body, or Bishop in another Diocese: And certainly, every man that is
such, is an evil member in the Commonwealth, and ill-affected to the
Government under which he lives; for (as the Comic once said well) No man is a
busie-body, which is not malevolent. But beside this; the Book expressly
commanding the Bishops to take order for the publication of the Book, does
(whatsoever Mr. Burton says to the The book orders no such severe and wicked
censures, to be inflicted upon any in that behalf. No, nor yet gives the
Bishops any express order, or power at all, to punish any Ministers in this
case. p. 56.
contrary) sufficiently warrant them to punish such as refuse, otherwise they
do but poorly discharge the trust committed to them: To send it to the
several Churches, and there to leave it, to be read or not, at the pleasure of
the Minister, is not to take order for the publication of it, but to permit the
publication of it, to the discretion of every Minister; which if his Majesty
had only intended, he would have employed some inferior persons; but
intending to have it done to purpose, His Majesty committed it to the Bishops,
whose power he knew to be sufficient to take order in that case, without any
new warrant, or express order in the book for the punishment of offenders
against his Royal pleasure. And thus much of that Book, and of the first kind
of supposed Innovations, viz. in Doctrine.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Innovation (pretended to be) in Discipline. The Courts Ecclesiastical
have continued their wanted course of Justice. St. Austines Apology for the
Church against the Donatists, fitly serves ours. The cunning used by
delinquents, to make themselves pitied, and justice taxed. Their practices to
palliate and cover their faults. Mr. Burtons endeavor to excuse Ap-Evans. Mr.
Burtons opposites not censorious. What they think of (those, whom he calls)
Professors, and the profession it self. True Piety approved, and honored in
all professions. The answer to this crimination summed up. The censured,
partial Judges of their own censures. How offenses are to be rated in their
censures.

THe next is Innovation in Discipline, which (says he) in a word is this; That
whereas of old, the censures of the Church were to be inflicted upon disordered
and vicious persons, notorious livers, as drunkards, adulterers, etc. Now the
sharp edge thereof is mainly turned against Gods people, and Ministers; even
for their virtue page 127.
and piety, etc.

A man that reads this charge, and were ignorant of the language that is spoken
among those of M. Burtons tribe, would verily believe, if it were but half
true, that the State of our Church were metamorphosed into a very Babel of
disorder and confusion, and sinck of profaneness and iniquity. But the comfort
still is, we may fitly answer him, as Nehemiah did Sanballat, There are Nehem.
6. 8.
no such things done as thou say, but thou fainest them out of thine own
heart. For first, let the records of Ecclesiastical Courts, and (as that he
most aims at) of the High Commission, be searched, and compared with the now
highlymagnified times, of the reign of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, and
it will appear that there is not now the least Innovation, either in the
manner of their proceedings, or in the crimes and persons censured, but that it
continues in the old and trodden steps of religious justice, and uses the same
severity against vicious persons, and inordinate livers, in all kinds, as ever
it was wont to do. And that if there be any change at all, it is that the
edge of their censures is not now so sharp, or so mainly turned against Gods
people, and Ministers for their virtue and piety, as it was in those happy
times. For had it been now, as it was then, perhaps Mr. Burton had been
prevented, for ever coming to this height, and his virtue and Piety, had been
nipt in the bud, which now has enlarged her branches, laden with goodly
fruits, suitable to the stock on which they grow. And many of his virtuous
friends, and Candidates of Martyrdom, in the Sabbatarian cause, would not have
thus long have waited for their sentence of condemnation, for their godly and
right Christian resistance of his Majesty's unquoth commands. But I must not
go farther with this vizor, and therefore before I proceed, I Will pull it off,
and expound the terms, and then read this part of his charge in plain
English.

Here then by Gods people and Ministers, understand, People and Ministers of
Mr. Burtons party. Their virtue and piety, their disobedience to their
Sovereign, their repining and murmuring at his government, their inconformity
to the Orders of the Church, their contempt of Ecclesiastical power and
authority, and other strange insolences, whereof M. Burton has given us a
full pattern in this book, and his long practices. The sum and plain truth
is, That some people and Ministers (that have a better conceit of themselves
than they have cause for) have been lately censured for their not conforming
to his Majesty's commands, and the Churches orders. This is all: and when was
it otherwise in this Church? nay, in any Church since the beginning of
Christianity? was it ever known, that any Church, or any civil government
did, or could subsist, without inflicting censures upon the wilful violators
of their orders and constitutions? Has not ever the edge of discipline been
justly sharpened against those that shall, to their disobedience, add contempt
of the authority, and that with contumelious reproaches and slanders against
the persons invested with it. If men for the maintenance of their selfe*will'd
humors, and for exalting of their private fancies against the public Orders
of the Church, and the authority Ecclesiastical, shall presume so far; Sipro
errore homines -- tanta prasumunt -- quanto magis aequ^ est, et oportet eos,
qui pacis et unitatis Christianae asserunt veritatem, omnibus etia^
dissimulantibus et cobibentibus manifestam, satagere instanter atque impigre,
non solum pro eorum munimine qui jam Catholici sunt, veru^ etiam pro little
correctione qui nondu^ sunt. Nam si pertina cia insuperabilis vires habere
conatur, quantas debet habere consta^tia, quae in eo bono quod perseveranter
atque infatigabiliter agit, et Deo placere se novit, et proculdubio non potest
hominibus prudentibus displicere. Aug. Ep. 167.
How much more is it fit, and behooves those who stand for the truth of peace
and Christian unity, which is manifest even to those that dissemble and oppose
it, to endeavor with all earnestness and diligence, not only for the securing
of those which are Catholics, but also for the correction of those that are
not. For if stubbornness seek to get such strength, what ought constancy to
have, which in that good which uncessantly and unweariedly it does, both knows
that it pleases God, and without doubt, cannot displease wise men.

So Saint Augustine once Apologized for the Church in his days, proceeding
against the Donatists; and a fitter I cannot use for our Church at this day,
nor need I add more in this case.

But this will not happily be contradicted by any, that thus viewes things in
their true notions; and if any should be so void of reason and grace, as to
declaime against it, every man would cry shame of him: But the cunning mask
that is put upon it, makes it pass current, and to be entertained as a just
and a great grievance, when it shall be presented under the names of persecution
and unjust censures, inflicted upon Gods people and Ministers, and that for
their virtue and piety: who then can but pity and commiserate the sufferers,
and condemn their persecutors of notorious injustice and horrible impiety? It
is an old and a cunning stratagem, used by some expert Captains, to march
disguised, and to bear the Colors of those against whom they fight, that they
may find the more easy passage. And this practice has been long in use with
the disturbers of the Churches peace, to usurp the name and privileges of the
true Church, and to appropriate that to themselves, which of right belongs to
those whom they oppugn. But never any Vos enim dicitis remansisse Ecclesiam
Christi in sola Africa partis Donati. Aug. Ep. 166.
were better Artists in this kind, than the Donatists in S. Augustines time,
who were wont to circumscribe the Church within the bounds of their party, and
to account all other Christians, as Pagan, and to call the repression of their
turbulencies, persecution, and boast of Martyrdom, as appears out of S.
Augustine, and Optatus Milevitanus. Optat. Milevit. l. 3. prope finem
And these Donatists were never better paralleled than in these times, and by
those whom M. Burton here styles Gods people and Ministers, who take upon them
that title, as their peculiar privilege, engrossing all piety and religion to
themselves, with contempt of others, accounting for Christians only those of
their own humor, or (as Optatus said) which do as they would have Ille vobis
videbitur Christian*, qui quod vultis secerit, non quem fides adduxerit. Opt.
loc. cit.
them, not which believe as they should. And by this means, they the more
boldly cry persecution, when they are censured for their disorders and
misdemeanors: and to uphold this opinion, they cannot with patience endure to
have any of their tribe taxed of any fault, but would have them esteemed (as
their doctrine terms them) at the most but infirmities, indiscretions, and
petty failings; or if any of them happily fall grossly and notoriously, they
then use all their art, and strain their inventions how to excuse it, that the
Gospel (which they will have professed only by themselves) may not be evil
spoken of by their occasion.

If any of them, who was forward and noted for profession, turned bankrupt, and
robbed the fatherless, and widows, and were the undoing of many others, they
were wont (till of late, that it is so common among them, that they are driven
beyond all excuse) to be much troubled, and to use strange shifts to palliate
the business, and to remove the scandal that thereby might befall the
Gospel, and their profession. But if any of them be detected of any villainy,
for which the sword of justice cuts them off; Lord! what hurly-burlies are
raised? how do they seek, to excuse, to extenuate the fact? and use all their
strength for the hindering of the execution of justice upon the malefactor? and
if they cannot prevail, they cry out of injustice and malice in Judge and
jury, against the sincere Professors of Religion: as it happened not many
years past, when one of them, dwelling (as I remember) in Blackfryers, was
condemned and executed for a rape, p. 18.
committed upon a young girl. And what a pudder does Mr. Burton make to excuse
that execrable murder committed by Ap-Evans, and, because he cannot do it
better, he will have him taken for a mad man, and for that purpose there was a
second relation (as he says) offered to the Press; and all, that the whole
profession of Religion might not suffer for one Professors failing: and lest
the wicked and Popes Factors should take advantage, and say of Puritans, that
they were all such, as that miserable Ap-Evans; for this he will have to vid.
p. 18. 19.
be their common practice. But, by what names soever M. Burton please to style
those whom he counts opposites to him and his party, whether they be the Popes
Factors, or the devils agents, I must needs tell him, that there is more true
charity in them, and less censorious bitterness, than he or his use to show;
and they have more wisdom and conscience, than to condemn either a person for
one failing, or a multitude for one person; so that it is a vain fear that
troubles him, lest all Professors or Puritans (as he calls them) should by
them be thought to be as bad as Ap-Evans.

That which they will happily say upon such occasions, is, that the height of
that profession does not exempt them from falling (I will not say from grace,
but) into the foulest sins; and such, as that if any other should do the
like, they should think they had reason to fear their title to heaven, and
mistrust their assurance: they are far from branding the whole profession,
with the asspersion of such bloody sins; yet they may safely say of the
profession it self, (not of Religion, but of their New-forme of godliness) 1.
That he that shall act to the extent of some of their principles, may commit
as gross sins as that, yea, any sin whatsoever, and yet be sincere and
right in that profession.

2. That there are sins that reign in the most eminent of that profession, of
as deep a dye, and as odious in the sight of God, as are to be found in the
worst of those, whom they call the wicked and unregenerate: such as are pride,
disobedience, malice, uncharitableness, envy, contempt of their brethren, and
of authority, censoriousnes, and the like, (whereof Mr. Burton has given us a
most pregnant example in himself.)

Yea 3. That these vices are so connaturall to the very profession it self,
that the very practice of these (with a few heartlesse graces) is enough to
initiate any man, and to make him a right and a sound Professor. Yet I will not
say that every one that is of that profession, is alike guilty: I know that
many among them follow their leaders (as those two hundred that went out of
Jerusalem with Absalon) in simplicity of their hearts, not knowing 2 Samuel 15.
11.
any thing. There are that do dislike and hate these sins (in their height)
and even in those whom otherwise they esteem Worthies in their profession. And
I verily believe, that there are some, who (further than these vices present
themselves to them under the name and color of religion) cannot justly be
taxed with them. I honor piety, and the purity of religion in all professions,
and while I condemn those that condemn others, I would be loath to make my
self liable to the same condemnation. I judge not of religion by faction, but
by facts; not by the leaves of profession, but by the fruits of righteousness,
that are sown in peace, of them which make peace. My desire Iam. 3. 18.
is, that mercy and truth may meet together, and Psalm. 85. 10.
righteousness and peace kiss each other: That the power of godliness
professed, may show it self, in 1 Pet. 2. 17. 3. 8.
a due performance of the service of God, with all holy reverence and devotion;
in humility and subjection to superiors, in charity and compassion one toward
another, and keeping our selves unspotted Iam 1. 27.
from the world. And whosoever they be (or of what profession soever) that
walk according to Gal. 6. 16.
this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

But I find my self to have digressed too far: To draw my answer to this
crimination into a brief and more distinct form and sum: To the first part,
or intimation, that vicious persons, adulterers, etc. are not now censured: my
answer is (as before) that it is notoriously false, and till he bring better
proofs for what he says, that answer is sufficient.

To the second, that Gods people and Ministers are censured: I say first, There
are none that are rightly so called (in distinction to others) that are
censured. 2. None are censured as, or for being such. 3. Granting, that some
that are Gods people and Ministers (for I will not exclude them out of the
number of Christians, which are all Gods people) or (which is their meaning)
some honest, and good men, and Ministers, are and have been censured by the
Churches discipline; so long as it is for offenses by them committed, (from
which they cannot exempt themselves, unless they can be exempted from the
common condition of all mankind) their punishment can neither be rightly
termed an innovation, nor a persecution: but an act of justice, and of that
impartial discipline which has ever been exercised in this Church, and in
every well ordered Church and State Politic. Justice looks not at the person
of any man, but at the cause; She waighs the offenses of delinquents in her
impartial balance, while her eyes are blinded from all respect of persons.
Good men falling may deserve more pity from others, but must receive the same
doom at the bar of Justice, which others, guilty in the like kind and
measure.

But happily the edge of censure is more sharp

To this I answer. 1. That the censured are but ill and very partial Judges of
their own Censures; there are but few that (though convict of a crime) would
pass sentence upon themselves by the rule of justice, without some favor;
though they and their favorers (who for the most part are partakers of the
same guilt, and in fear of the same punishment) cry out of cruelty and
persecution, it is not much to be valued in this case. 2. In the censure of
sins and offenses they are not altogether to be rated by the atrocity of the
fact, or by the law that is violated, but by other circumstances, whereby it
comes to pass that a slight offense, in it self considered, and against a
positive and humane law or constitution may sometimes (without violation of
justice) be as deeply censured, as sins of an higher nature, and against the
moral and eternal law of God: and this is approved for good justice by all
commonwealths in cases of treason and the like, where sometimes, a little
aberration or word mis-placed, is sentenced with death: Yea, God himself, who
is the Judge of all the world, and must needs do right, did set this pattern of
judicature in the first sentence that was pronounced in the world, sentencing
Adam and all his posterity with death, not for the violation of any law of
nature, but of the positive precept of eating the forbidden fruit: which (being
a thing not for it self acceptable to God) may seem but a small sin in
comparison of those that are against the law of nature, yet in as much as by
that sin man did as it were renounce his subjection, and disclayme his
obedience to his Maker, whereof that precept was given for a symbol or
testification; God, in this (as in all other his actions) must needs be
justified. In like manner, if the violation of the orders of the Church, being
in themselves matters of ceremony rather than of the substance of Religion,
receive as heavy censures, or, perhaps more grievous, then the breach of the
moral Laws of God himself. Yet is not authority presently unjust (besides
that they are of more dangerous consequence than others) or cruel; considering
that these offenses, when they come to be so censured, are heightened by
wilfulness, and seconded by selfjustification, and contempt and condemnation of
authority: which if it should not, with all severity, be repressed, would
induce in short time a mere anarchie and confusion in the Church. Then which,
there can be, no greater evil under the Sun.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the supposed Innovations in the worship of God. Ceremonies no substantial
parts of Gods worship. The crimination, and a general answer. Of standing at
Gloria Patri. What will worship is. Standing at the Gospel. Bowing at the name
of Jesus. Of the name of Altar: and what sacrifice is admitted. Of the standing
of the Altar. Of Communicants going up to the Altar to receive. Of the railes.
Of bowing toward the Altar: and to the East: and turning that way when we pray.
Of reading the second Service at the Altar.

I Come now to the third kind of innovations pretended to be made in the
worship of God; which Mr. Burton says, they (the Bishops) go about to turn
inside outward, placing the true worship which is in spirit and truth, in a
will worship of man's devising etc. This is the crimination: which is set forth
in most odious manner, but proved as weakly as the former: for whereas he
pretends an Innovation in the worship, he produces nothing, but certain
ceremonies or usages which cannot be accounted parts or any thing of the
substance of Gods worship, such as are; bowing at the name of Jesus, bowing
toward the Altar, turning toward the East, standing at the Gospel, and (which
he produces for another example in this kind pa. 98.
elsewhere) at Gloria Patri, reading the second Service at the Altar. These and
some other like, mentioned by him in other places, are by him charged: as, 1.
Innovations lately brought in. 2. That they are made part of Gods worship. 3.
That they are willworship, and (as often elsewhere he calls them) superstitious
and idolatrous. Lastly, he taxes the rigor which is used in urging of these
things, and punishing the refusers of them in the High Commission etc. my
answer shall be brief, yet such as may give some satisfaction to the ingenuous
in all these. First, I cannot but wonder with what face he can accuse any of
these things of novelty, when there is not one of the things he names which
has not been used in the primitive and purest ages of the Church; and though,
by the disaffection of some, and the carelessness and negligence of others, they
have been, in many places for some while, too much neglected, were never
wholly out of use in this Church of ours, but observed as religious customs
derived from the ancient Church of Christ, and that not only in Cathedrals and
the Royal Chapel, (though that might sufficiently clear them from these
foul imputations) but in many Parochial Churches in this Kingdom; and
generally, by all, that to their knowledge, have added zeal and conscience by
their practice to maintain the honor and reputation of the pious and laudable
rites and customs of the ancient Church: And how these things can be more
popish, superstitious, and idolatrous now, then heretofore, I cannot see. View
them every one single, and let any man say which of them can justly thus be
taxed.

For the standing at Gloria Patri (which Cassianus Cassian. l. 2. de instit.
Caemb. Of standing at Gloria Patri.
the Churches of France) why any man (that is not resolved to cavil and snarle
at every thing that is good and commendable) should judge it either
superstitious or unfit, is beyond my capacity. Surely no man can deny, but that
to rise up and stand is a more reverent gesture than to sit or lean: and if
that be but granted, this solemn doxology may worthily challenge that this is
the more reverent posture: and if we may stand at the rehersing of the Apostles
Creed, to show our constancy and readiness to maintain that faith which we
there profess, (which I persuade my self no man will call an Innovation) much
more at this hymn which is both a compendium or short profession of our faith,
and a song of praise to God. As for the least show of superstition or idolatry
in this custom, I suppose Mr. B. himself cannot charge it; being only the
presenting of praise to the only true God in three glorious persons in a
seemly manner and with respect to his greatness and Majesty. Neither do any
that I ever heard of, make this gesture any part of the worship of God, which
ought to be in spirit and truth, it is only an external ceremony (and
ceremonies are not of the substance of Gods worship, but necessary attendants
of it) yet such, as being well suited with the affection wherewith Gods inward
worship ought to be performed, may well be used; yea, and if commended to us
by our Superiors, ought not to be omitted.

Lastly, both this and the rest here questioned, are most injuriously, and
ignorantly termed, Will Worship of man's devising. Every thing of man's devising,
in the worship and service of God, is not to be accounted Will Worship: If that
rule should hold, many things which they hold in high esteem, would deserve
that name. That only is Will Worship, which is so of man's devising, that it is
cross to Gods will, or at least not subservient thereunto, and so to no
purpose: but I dare confidently affirm, that no man can with any reason, fasten
either of these properties upon this or any one of these things, which are
here, therefore undeservedly, termed Will Worship; and till that be done, I
shall spare further Apology for them in that kind.

For standing at the reading of the Gospel, it is Of standing at the Gospel.
for that purpose, by Pope Anastatius the first, about the year four hundred
after Christ, mentioned by Platina in his life; yea, and if we may believe
Plat. in vit. Anast.
Durantus, it was in use long before: But for certain it has neither been out
of use among us, nor Durant. de ritib. Eccl. Cathol. l. 2 c. 23. n. 17.
is the use of it justly to be by any condemned; Because (as that worthy of our
Church Mr. Hooker has observed) the Gospels which are weekly read, do all
Historically declare something which our Lord Jesus Hook. Eccles. pol. l. 5* 30.
Christ either spoke, did, or suffered in his own person; and therefore for
Christians then especially (and rather then at the reading of other parts of
Scripture) in token of greater reverence, for men to stand and utter certain
words of acclamation, is very commendable and agreeable to Christian piety, and
not savouring in the least, of superstition or idolatrous will worship.

For bowing at the mentioning of the Name of Jesus, innovation, or thing of
late Of bowing at the Name of Jesus. Can. 30. Injunct. 52.
brought into the Church, and obtruded upon Christians, let it be decided by
the Church Canons, or the Injunctions set forth by Queen Elizabeth, at the
beginning of her reign. And what is done in this, is (or at least intended)
out of that reverend regard that we have and ought to have of the Son of
God, and blessed Savior of mankind, and the reverence tendered, not (as is
falsely and slanderously charged) to the Name, letters, or syllables of Jesus,
but to his person: yet at the mention of that Name which imports his most
saving virtue, and the greatest blessing that ever God vouchsafed to the sons
of men. And this ceremony is (as Mr. Hooker also has observed) Ibid.
against infidells, Jews, and Arrians, who derogate from the honor of Jesus
Christ, most profitable. As for any erroneous estimation, of advancing the
Son above the Father and the Holy Ghost, (to speak in the words of that
learned man) seeing that the truth of his equality with them, is a mystery so
hard for the wits of mortal men to rise unto, of all heresies, that which may
give him superiority above them, is least to be feared. And as vain is the
fear of superstition, or will worship in this case, seeing the worship of
Christ is prescribed by God, who exalted him, after his sufferings, and gave
him a Name above every name, that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow,
etc. Which, Phil. 2. 9, 10.
though it be granted that it is only meant of the inward worship and
reverence of the heart, yet cannot the outward expression of that reverence by
the gesture of the body, nor the occasion which is taken for the doing of it
(at the mention of his blessed Name) be thought guilty (in the least) of
superstition, or will worship, but to be rather (as bodily gestures and actions
ought) to be subservient to the soul, in the due glorifying of him, who by the
inestimable price of his blood, has bought both our bodies 1 Cor. 6. 20.
and souls: And therefore, if any man shall be so impiously wicked, as to gibe
and jeere, at so religious a ceremony, commanded and practiced by the Church
upon so good and solid ground, and (as our Author has) in derision to term it
Iesu-worship, p. 15:
or to brand those that use it, as men destitute of the true fear of God, I
say (as that blessed Proto-Martyr) Act. 7. 60.
Lord lay not this sin to their charge.

I come now to speak of that, which (without any cause) has made much speech
in the world, Of Altars.
and which our Author seems much offended at. The name of Altars, their
standing, railing about of them, and the reverence which is done to God toward
them, and the service which is there used.

And here, 1. The very name by reason of disuse among us of late, and of some
prejudice conceived against it, is grown with many very offensive, and yet the
name is neither new, nor savouring of any superstition. 1. Not new, as having
been used from Irenaeus l 4. c. 20. and 34.
the beginning of Christianity, and mentioned by the most approved Authors
that have written in the Church; and the blessed Eucharist, or Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, called the Sacrament of the Altar; which is so evident, and by
others so cleared, that I Ambros. in Luc. c. 23.
judge it superfluous to enlarge my discourse, or pester my Margin with variety
of quotations; and much less to bring many arguments, to prove the fitness of
this name, to be used in the Christian Church, when that which is obvious in
this case to every man may abundantly suffice. And this is the relation that is
between a sacrifice and an Altar: grant the one, and I know not how the other
can be denied. And who is there that will say, that Christians have not their
sacrifices? Nay, who is there that knows the nature of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, or the Heb. 13. 15, 16.
Doctrine of Antiquity concerning it, but will confess it to be a true (and
rightly so called) sacrifice?

2 Neither can all this be accused of superstition; for confessing a Sacrifice
and an Altar, we intend not, either the reviving of the Leviticall bloody
sacrifices of the old Law, nor the unbloudy propitiatory sacrifice, offered in
the Popish Mass, for the quick and the dead; we hold (with the subscribed
Articles) Transubstantiation Artic. 28. and 31.
a bold and unwarranted determination of Christ's presence in the Sacrament; and
think such sacrifices no better then blasphemous fables, and dangerous
deceits. We believe that our blessed Savior upon the Cross, by his own
oblation of himself Communion book. Heb. 10.
once offered, made a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and
satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, and that he needs not to be
often offered, nor can without impiety, and imposture be said to be made of
bread, by the Priests, and daily offered in the Mass.

The sacrifice which we admit, is only, 1. Representative, to represent to us
visibly in those elements, the all-saving sacrifice of Christ's death, and to
behold him crucified before our eyes, and his body broken in the bread, and in
the wine his blood powered out. 2. It is spiritual, offered and participated by
faith. 3. It is Commemorative, done (according to our Saviors institution) in
remembrance of him, and of his death and passion: This is all the sacrifice we
acknowledge, and we desire no other Altar than what may suit with it, and serve
for the offering of such sacrifices. A spiritual Altar, for a spiritual
sacrifice. It may be still, and must be, a Communion Table, and yet
nevertheless an Altar; that properly, this mystically. A Table it is for the
Lords Supper, and an Altar for the memorial sacrifice of the Lords death. And
both a Table and an Altar it is, what ever the matter of it be, whether of
stone, as sometimes, and in some places they have been; or of wood, as among
us, in most places they usually now are

Yea, and wheresoever they be placed, whether in Of their standing.
the West end, as sometimes in the Church at Antioch in Syria (as Socrates
reports) or to the East, which Ecclesia Antiochiae Syriae contrarium ab aliis
Ecclesiis sitam habet, nam altar non ad orientem sed ad occasum spectat.
Socrat. hist. eccl. l. 5. c. 21.
was the custom in other places, as the same Author intimates; and with what
site soever, whether it stand Table-wise (as they call it) with the ends to the
East and West; or Altar-wise, with the ends from North and South; whether upon
a plain level, or mounted by steps. These are but accidents, which alter not
the nature and use of it, but that though these vary, yet still it remains
both a Table and an Altar, in the sense that I have mentioned. And that it may
be placed at the East end of the Church, according to the ancient and most
received fashion of the Christian world: Queen Elizabeth's Injunction for that
purpose Injunction for Tables in the Church.
is warrant sufficient, which appoints it to be set in the place where the
Altar stood, and not thence removed, except at the time of the Communion, for
more convenience of hearing and communicating. Which, if it may be as well
there (as in some places, without question it may) as in any other part of the
Church or Chancell, for ought that I can see, it may stand there still. And
however, the placing of it, as of appointing the place for the rest of the
Service of Morning and Evening prayer, and the decision of all doubts about
Ceremonies, is left to the discretion of the Ordinary, as is evident out of the
Rubric before the beginning of Morning prayer, and the Preface prefixed to the
Book of Common prayer. In case then that the Ordinary (which is every Bishop
in his Diocese) shall appoint it to be so placed; he does no more, but what he
has pattern for from the Ancient Church, and by warrant from the Injunctions
mentioned, and Book of Common prayer it self; that I say nothing of the
Episcopal power, which was never abridged of liberty to take order in things
of this, nor of far higher nature.

I will add one thing more. That that place is of all others the most fit for
the standing of the Lords Table, because (as S. Iustine Martyr says) Quia
little quae apud nos sunt meliora and praestantiora, ad Dei honorem secernimus,
hominum autem opinione and sententia, ea pars in qua sol oritur, caeteris
naturae partibus praestantior est, orientem cum precamur omnes intuemur. S.
Just. Mart. ad orthodox. quaest 118. Communicants going up to the Altar to
receive. Ips. new. p 7.
Those things which are the best and most excellent with us, we set apart for
the service of God; and for that in the opinion and judgment of men, that part
where the Sun rises is the chief of all the parts of created Nature, we
look to the East when we pray, for that cause: And as that part of the Church
has been ever accounted the chiefest, so it is great reason that our best
services should thence be tendered unto God, and that his Table should have the
highest place in his own house, and no man suffered to perk above it and him.

And if it may be there placed, and (in case the Ordinary shall think that
place convenient for ministration) there remain; Then can it not (as some
think, and as the Ipswich-libell glancingly intimates) be unlawful, for the
Communicants to go up thither when they receive. As for the custom (which in
too many places is of late crept in) of the Priests carrying of the holy Bread,
and Cup, to every person in their seats, it is both unseemly, and derogatory to
the Majesty of those sacred Mysteries: and I am sure, beside the intention of
our Church, expressly commanding all those that intend to communicate, to draw
near to the^. And this is also the intention of the often mentioned
Injunction, when it appoints the removing of the holy Table, from the place
where the Altar stood, that the Communicants more conveniently, and in more
number might communicate with the Minister. For what need any removing for
that, if the Minister must carry the Sacrament to every man? Who sees not but
that the whole Congregation, though never so great, may communicate with the
Minister, and the Table stand still at the East end, or any where, if
communicating with him were understood in that sense? But without all doubt,
the intent of the Injunction, was that Communicants should go out of their
places, and draw near to the Table when they did receive, and care was thereby
taken, that as many as might with convenience, should, together there,
Communicate.

But the railes also offend, as well as the site, and Of railes.
have afforded some matter of railing and calumniation; and Mr. Burton seems
angry at them because they insinuate into the peoples minds an opinion of some
p. 33.
extraordinary sanctity in the Table, more than in other places of the Church,
etc. But I wonder at him, and for my part, think it very fit, that that place
be railed off, and separated from common access and danger of profanation, as
finding it practiced in ancient times: and 2. that such an opinion of sanctity
should by all means be insinuated into the peoples minds. What? Sanctity and
holiness in the Table? I, in the Table; but how? this holiness is not any
internal, inherent quality infused, transforming the nature of it, but an
external, adherent quality which it has by being consecrated to that most
holy use and service, in relation Eusebius. l. 10. c. 4. council. Turon. 2. Can. 3.
to which it is truly holy. And this holiness, as it is only compatible to
things of this nature, which are inanimate and not capable of higher; so it
belongs to this Table in the highest measure, so that (though all the Church,
and the things belonging unto it, be holy in their degree) this may be said to
be most holy, as dedicated to the most August mystery of our religion, and
being as Optatus calls it, The seat, or place of Quid est ^altare nisi seeds
corporis et sanguinis Christi. Optat. Mil. l. 6.
the body and blood of Christ: and where God (of all other places on earth)
does vouchsafe the most lively exhibition of his gracious presence; and so must
needs make the greatest impression of holiness to that place; which no man can
deny, unless he withal will grant, either that God is less present to us
under the Gospel, in these mysteries, then he was in those under the Law; or
that being there, he is less to be regarded; and the places where he is,
less worthy, or less capeable of the impression of holiness: as I suppose no
understanding Christian will do. Of bowing toward the Altar, or the East.


Now in regard of this special presence of God in this place, it is, that
Christians have in former times, and some at this day, use to tender their
service to him, directing their faces that way. For though we do not (as Mr.
B. slanders) tie God to a fixed place, yet we do (not without good cause and
warrant from Scriptures) acknowledge different manners, and degrees of his
gracious presence. He is (we confess) truly present in all places, and (as
the Prophet speaks) fills heaven and earth; yet there is no man that
understands any thing in Divinity, but will say, Ier. 23. 24.
he is otherwise in heaven, otherwise in earth; there as in his throne, here as
on his foote-stoole: for which Esaias 66. 1.
cause we are to direct our prayers to him, not as by us, or in us, (though he
be both) but as above us, and to say, Our Father which art in Heaven. In earth
Mat. 6.
Gods presence is not every where alike: God is present in all things, being
not far from every one of Act. 17. 27, 28.
us, for in him we live and move and have our being. Yet he is not so in the
brute creatures as in the rational; nor so in the wicked as in his Saints; nor
so in other things as in his own ordinances of life and salvation; nor yet in
all of them by the same efficacy and exhibition of grace, as in some; and
namely, in that of the blessed Eucharist, where he displayes the riches of his
glorious Grace in the representation and exhibition of the virtue of that
all-saving Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood. To look that way then where
God is wont thus graciously to be found, can be no act of groundless
superstition, misguided zeal, or empty form of godliness, but true piety and
sound religious devotion. To acknowledge Gods presence in one place, is not to
deny it in another. Jacob said, Surely the Lord is in this place: will any one
say, that Genesis 28. 16.
Jacob did not believe him to be elsewhere? Surely he that shall argue so, will
make but a rediculous inference. And yet this must be M. B's. reasoning; We by
our adoration toward the Altar, profess that we believe God to be there,
therefore we tie him there. What an absurd consequence is this?

But for praying toward the East let us hear S. Augustine upon those words of
the Lords Prayer. When S. Aug. de Sermon. Dom. in Mont. lib. 2.
we pray (says he) we turn to the East, not as if God who is every where,
were there, and had forsaken the other parts of the world, but that the mind
may be admonished to turn it self toward the most excellent nature, that is,
Nec vero mos et consuetudo qua^ servantus, cum oriente^ solemn spectantes
precamur, cum verbis Prophetae aut Apostol. pugnat. In omni enim loco oriens
sol sese offert precantib^: quoniamque quam in partem c^rnendi sensum
co^vertimus, in ea adoramus, nec fieri potest, ut precum tempore quatuor
caelipartes intueamur, una^ orbis partem intuentes, veneramur et adoramus, non
quod solum Dei opus sit, nec quod ea pars Deo ad habitandum secreta et
constituta sit, sed quod locus sit venerationi et cultui, quia nobis Deo
adhibetur constitutus. A quibus autem Ecclesia precandi morem accepit, ab iis
etiam ubi precandum sit, accepit, idest, a Sanctis Apostolis. S. Just. Mart. ad
Orthodox Quaest. 118.
to the Lord, etc. But most fully, S. Justin Martyr in the place before cited;
This manner and custom (says he) which we observe, looking toward the East,
when we pray, is not repugnant to the words of the Prophet [ Psalm. 103. 22.
David, that bids us praise the Lord in all places of his Dominions] or of the
Apostle, [that 1 Timothy 2. 8.
bids us lift up holy hands to God in every place] for in all places the sun
offers it self to those that pray; and because in that part where we turn our
eyes we pray, and that it cannot be that we should at the time of our prayer
look at all parts of heaven at once, therefore we worship looking toward one
part, not that that is only of Gods making, or that he has chosen that only
for his dwelling, but because it is the place that is appointed for that
worship and service which we perform to God. And from whom the Church
received the custom of praying, from them also it received where to pray, that
is, from the Holy Apostles. Thus that ancient Father and holy Martyr, who wrote
about 150. years after Christ, and so lived not long after the Apostles times.

From which words we may observe four things, which being considered and laid
together, may give reasonable satisfaction to any man. 1. That hereby God is
not tied to any fixed place, or abridged in his omnipresence. 2. That God being
every where, may be found, and so be worshipped any-where. 3. If any where, then
in the East, whither we direct our faces when we worship him. If that in
worshipping we must look some one way or other; I would demand then why we may
not do it toward the East, according to the custom used in the Primitive and
Apostolical Church, and received from the Apostles themselves? Yea, why may we
not do it toward the Lords Table, where he, so more than ordinarily exhibits
his gracious presence? For my own part, I am yet to learn, why we should be
said to tie God to a fixed place, more, than those ancient Christians, when we
only do as they did. Or why that should be termed Idolatry, Altar-worship, or
worshipping of the Altar-God, (as Mr. B. in many places has done) more than his
kneeling in the Pulpit toward his Desk or Cushion, may be termed Desk or
Cushion-worship. And I verily believe that Mr. B. is more idolatrous in
worshipping his own imaginations, and his note-gatherers in the Gallery, toward
whom he uses to pray, then any man, that shall upon these grounds present his
humble reverence to God with his face toward the East, and Gods holy Table.

To these pretended Innovations he has added Of reading the second Service at
the Altar.
one other yet, and surely he did it only to increase the number of them,
thinking that any thing shufled in any how might pass in the crowd. It is the
reading of the second service of the Altar or Communion Table, which for
certain is an Innovation brought in by some Bishops in the beginning of
Christianity, and by the Bishops continued at the Reformation, yea and, which
is more strange, confirmed by the Parliament, when the book of Common Prayer
with the Rubric, which so appoints it, was established. A foul oversight,
no question, That they all should think fit, that that part of Divine service
which was at first devised Hooker. Eccl. Pol. l 5. 30.
for the Communion, serving for very good purpose even when there is no
Communion administered, should be read at the Table of the Lord: if Mr. B. or
some other of his spirit had been of their Council, I verily believe, it had
been otherwise ordered. Yet me thinks, he should have been better advised,
then professing to write against Innovations against Law and Canon, to put this
in the number. But let that pass; as likewise those others of this nature which
he mentions, or rather raves upon, in other places of his Sermons, and
particularly, placing of Images in Churches, and erecting of Crucifixes over
the Altars, pa. 158.
which are such winter tales as it were too great a mispence of time and words
to refute them. I have but one thing now remaining of this head, and that is
the urging of these things by the Bishops, and their punishing those that
refuse these in the High Commission, etc. for which (he says) they are in
little less then a Praemunire. And my answer shall be only this, that he nor
all his accomplices cannot be able to produce any one example of any man that
has been censured, for refusing any of these things, but those only of them
which are commanded by Law or Canon. And yet if they should proceed to punish
such as rail, deride, and scoff at the practice of those other pious and
ancient usages (though not expressly enjoined by Canon) as profane and
irreligious persons, they need not bring themselves into a Praemunire for the
matter. And Mr. B. may talk and prattle of a Praemunire, as he does to the
people, who understand it as little as himself: but with those that know what
it means, he will but make himself extremely ridiculous. And this answer is
enough, if not too much for so foolish a slander.

CHAP. XV.
Innovation in the civil government slanderously pretended without proof. His
slander of my Lords Grace of Canterbury about Prinnes Prohibition, confuted.
Other calumnies against His Grace, etc. answered. The Bishops falsely charged
with dividing the King and His Subjects.

HIs fourth kind of Innovation is in the Civil Government, which he says,
They (the Bishops) labor to reduce and transform to the Ecclesiastical, etc.
This he says, but beside some clamors of oppressions and tyranny exercised by
the Prelates over the bodies, goods, and consciences of the Kings Subjects,
etc. I can find no proof at all brought. To which I say (as reverend Hooker
did to some of his brethren in his time) that a bare denial is answer
sufficient to things which mere fancy objecteth, and silence the best
Apology to words of slander and petulancy. But I cannot so well pass over his
marginall note, which is the only particular instance that he alleges, or
rather directs us to find in another place, viz. The Bishop of London (now
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury) in the High Commission threatening those that
should bring Prohibitions in that Court. And this we find page 54. related in
this manner. A Rule for a Prohibition for Master Prinne, being tendered in
Court according to the course of the Kings Laws in that behalf, presently my
Lord of London, then President of the Court, stands up and flies in the face of
Master Prinne and his Prohibition with great heat of passion, even almost unto
fury, and after many threatenings to him, he uttered these words, that whosoever
should dare to bring the next Prohibition, he would set him fast by the
heels. This, says he, was spoken alowd in open Court. And then he runs his
usual descant upon it, and him that spoke it; adding in his margin this
wholesome note; A most audacious and presumptuous speech of a Prelate, setting
his proud foot upon the Kings Laws, as the Pope did once on the Emperors
neck, an Emblem of perpetual servitude, and concludes, That the best Apology
that he can make, is, that his tongue did run before his wit, and that in the
flames of his passion he sacrificed his best reason and loyalty. But soft a
while. The man surely is much mistaken, if he think as he speaks: Blessed
be God, that most reverend and sacred Prelate, is not so near driven, as to
make any such Apology, which is both notoriously false, and if true, were
foolish, and not able to purge, but increase the crime objected. He can make
one far better, and more true. And it is but short, only this; That there
were no words so spoken. That which was said, was such as may stand with the
wisdom and loyalty, which is conspicuous in that eminent Antistes, as the
true story will make manifest, which in brief was this: Prinne being to be
censured, the Advocates having ended their pleading, and the judgment of the
Court being (according to the usual course) by the President (then Bishop of
London) demanded, and the sign given for that purpose; Prinne (as if he had
watched his time, to baffle them, and put a dorre upon them, which might be
notorious and make them ridiculous and jeered by the faction) steps out, and in
an unmannerly fashion, and without any reverence, produces his Prohibition,
with which saucy behavior of his, my Lord of London, justly moved, said to
this effect; That if any man hereafter should in that manner (N. B.) bring a
Prohibition thither, he would set him by the heels, or lay him fast. This was
the effect of his speech (the words I remember not so well) and this was the
truth of the story: to which there are many, and those of untainted credit and
reputation, that (if need were) will be sworn; who were present, and as near
as Master B. when the words were spoken; among whom, occasionally, I made one.

Now I appeal to any (that is not in the same gall of bitterness) whether
this were any outdaring of the Kings just Government of his subjects, any
infringing of the subjects rights and just liberties, any crossing of his
Majesty's gracious signing of the Petition of Right, any trampling or setting a
proud foot upon the Kings Laws, or any audacious and presumptuous speech of
one that in the flames of his passion has sacrificed his best reason and
loyalty. All which Master B. is pleased to brand it with. Does the Kings just
government and good Laws permit the subjects to affront any of his own
Courts? Is it the just liberty of the subject, to use the benefit of Law, to
the casting of contempt and scorn upon his Superiors? May not a Prohibition
(as this did) receive its due respect and be obeyed, and yet the malepert
behavior of the bringer be justly reproved, and severely censured? I am verily
persuaded that the reverend Judges (who ever they were) that granted the
Prohibition, never intended to give a Protection for any irreverence and
petulancy; and had they known their authority to have been so abused, they
would have as sharply reprooved and censured it. What then has Master B. here
sacrificed in the flames of distemperedzeale, in thus endeavoring (for he can
do no more) to blast the honor and reputation of so great and reverend a
Father of the Church? let others judge, while I only wonder at the strange
progress that he has made, since he has leapt over the bounds of modesty:
and leave him to glory in his shame, and to work his own confusion by seeking
to obscure the glory of him who is out of danger of wounding by his detracting
tongue, and whose eminent integrity and irreprehensible deportment in that
height, has so really confuted such slanders, that it makes all verbal
apologies unseasonable and superfluous. Qui fidens conscientiae suae negligit
famam suam, crudelis est: maxim in loco isto positus de quo dicit Apostolus
scribens ad discipulum suum, Circaomnes teipsum bonorum operum prebe exemplum
Tit. 2. 7. Et paulo ante Propter nos, conscientia nostra sufficit nobis;
propter vos, fama nostra non poll^i, sed pollere debet in vobis. S. August. de
Diversis, Sermo. 49.


Yet because (as Saint Augustine says) It is a cruelty for a man so to rely
upon his own good conscience, as to neglect his credit and fame abroad,
especially for him that is set in that place of which the Apostle to his
Scholar says; In all things show thy self a pattern of good works. And
although his Grace may justly say (as that holy Father once did of himself)
That for himself his own conscience is sufficient: (yet I am persuaded) he
approves also that which follows: That for others, it is requisite his fame
be kept unstayned, and retain it is authority and virtue. And therefore I
presume upon his Graces pardon, that I have (notwithstanding the consciousnesse
of my own weakness and unworthiness) adventured to oppose somewhat to the
base calumnies of a malignant spirit, which has endeavored to obscure the
luster of his eminent virtues. And though it be not needful to wipe off every
smutch, or answer every railing word; yet, having begun, I will also here add
somewhat of two other remarkable criminations which he casts upon his Grace.

The one is as like that of Prinnes, as is the person page ^^.
whom it concerned, which was Master B. himself, who (as he says) was
convented before his Grace, (then Bishop of London) for Preaching upon Romans 8.
29, 30. etc. well, what then? It was (says he) objected to me that therein I
did contrary to the Kings Declaration. And what of that? marry the margin will
tell you, that it was A dangerous and false charge laid upon the King. A
dangerous I will easily believe it to be, if false: for I cannot think it
either good or safe for any man to wrest the edicts of his Sovereign beyond
their true intendment; much less for any that is entrusted with the execution
of them, to press them in a wrested sense, to the unjust censure and
oppression of His Majesty's Subjects. But if it appear to be true, then, no
question, but all the danger is over: and that may easily be proved, for (what
ever Upon the golden Chain of Salvation. Master B.
golden terms he is pleased to use) the plain English of the business is
(as, if need were, could be justified by many witnesses that were his hearers)
that he was convented for preaching upon the high points of Predestination,
(not in that sober way in which our Church Articles run, shutting up all in
Gods promises, as they be generally set forth to us in holy Scripture: to which
way, his Majesty by his declaration had wisely and justly restrained all
preaching, writings, and disputations: but) in a controverted way, with
disputes and clamorous invectives against those which dissented from him in
opinion. And if this be not to do contrary to the Kings Declaration, nothing
is. And therefore this was no dangerous or false charge; but by his answer, he
has laid such a one upon the King; That he is an instrument of suppressing
Gods truth, which certainly, he can be no more justly charged with, than S. Paul
for willing men to be wise unto sobriety, and not to be wise above that which
is written. This was all that was intended, by His Sacred Majesty; Romans 12. 3.
1. Cor. 4. 6.
and this is not to suppress Gods truth, but curiosity, and to command
sobriety, which as it is every Nihil omittens de ijs quae non oportet ignorari;
nihil contrectans de ijs quae non licet scire De vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 5. S.
Ambros. and Prospero adscript.
where commendable, so it is most in those things wherein men cannot be
curious or over-daring without impiety. And therefore I may say of our gracious
Sovereigns wise and pious intentio^s in this, as a holy Father once did of S.
Paul handling this argument; He would have nothing omitted whereof men ought
not to be ignorant, nothing handled of those things which we may not or cannot
know spoken. All therefore that I will here add, is, that by questioning and
suspending Master B. for this cause, nothing was done contrary to either of His
Majesty's Declarations, nor was it any pernicious practice, nor laying of any
burden upon the King, which is injurious or dishonorable to His Majesty, as I
doubt not but Master B. will be told by those (to whom he referres it) who are
best able to judge of matters of such moment.

To this he adds another instance in the same place, but it concerned not His
Grace, but Bishop Mountague; and besides, it is notable for nothing, but his
impudent bragging of his silencing the High Commission Court by his brave
retort and recharge of sedition upon them: which, if true, were enough (if
there had been nothing else) to justify that which follows, of his
committing to prison without Bail or maineprise. And it is so ridiculous for
any to think the Petition of Right, (which he and his brethren use so much to
talk of) is, by this or the like act, infringed, that I should justly incur
the imputation of folly to answer it. For who ever dreamt that His Majesty by
signing that Petition, intended to bar himself from giving power to his
Commissioners to commit an offender to prison without bail? And therefore it
could be no impious or disgraceful speech, nor such as could bring any people
(which were not willing to catch at any thing for that purpose) into a hard
conceit of his Majesty, which, he says, was uttered by my Lord of London that
then was; That the King had given express charge for him; which he might very
well do, being informed of his offense, and thoroughly acquainted with the
temper of the man. But this only by the way.

The other accusation intended against His Grace, is for his Entertainment of
our Royal Sovereign at Oxford, which both for the magnificence, and for the
orderlinesse, so every way commendable, so acceptable to his Royal and Most
Gracious Master, and so full an expression of a grateful affection toward so
Munificent a Patron; so lively a demonstration of his Graces admirable
dexterous wisdom, and ability to manage great affairs: that I had thought,
Envy her self would have been stricken speechless, with admiration; or if she
could have spoken, would have lost her wont, and have come in with her
panegyric. But Master B. can see nothing in it to please him; the persons
entertained, the Entertayner, the place, the time, all serve him only for
furniture of a satyricall declamation; and make the Entertaynment an iniquity
not to be purged till he dye. But stay; was this the first time that ever His
Majesty, or His Royal Predecessors being entertained in the Universities,
have been presented with a Comedy? And why then should it be a crime for His
Grace to entertain His Majesty in the same manner? Why may not a Comedy made
and acted by young Students pass for a Scholasticall exercise now, as well as
heretofore? Nay, why should not a Comedy be thought more requisite at that
time, than at others, in regard the entertainment was intended also for His
Majesty's Royal Consort and others, not so capable of other Academicall
exercises? and yet there wanted not (that which Master B. esteems the only
piece of Piety) a godly and learned Sermon: neither was there any Comedy which
was half so scurrillous as these Sermons, or the Ipswich libell; nor so much
in disgrace of true piety and virtue: unless we do (as he does) mistake and
call the turbulent and seditious humors, the uncharitable and supercilious
censurings, or the vain and senseless crotchets and traditions maintained and
used by those of his faction, by the names of virtue and piety: These perhaps
might there receive (what they deserve) disgrace and laughter. But that true
virtue and piety were disgraced, no man can say either truly, or without laying
that aspersion upon the religious Majesty of our Dread Sovereign, as the
hearts of loyal Subjects abhor once to conceive. That He (who, if ever any,
made good his Title of Defender of Faith) should with patience, nay with
contentation and delight behold true virtue and pietio disgraced in a
scurrilous interlude. Shall we dare once to imagine that His Majesty was
either of so weak a judgment, as not to discern, or so weak in power, as
not to punish such presumptuous boldness, as should offer so great an indignity
to Religion in his sacred presence? O, Blush at this Mr. B. and (though not in
your Shrift, which is too Popish for you) confess how unseemly this is for
you, that pretend you are for God, and the King! either for shame mend your
manners, or never more profess to His Majesty, that you are his most loyal
Subject and faithful Servant, which you so belie with your disloyal
practices. Surely for my O Blush at this ye Prelates, etc. Mr. B.
part, I am ashamed that ever it should be said, you have lived a Minister,
under such a Prince and such a Prelacie, and so far forgot your duty to
both. But perhaps it was the time which caused his dislike, this happening,
when the Plague was at London; otherwise he had past a milder censure upon it:
but it troubled his zeal to see or hear of any rejoicing, when the City
wherein he was, had cause of mourning. And truly it cannot be denied, but that
Gods Judgments sent abroad and (among others) this of the Plague, do call for
weeping and mourning and amendment of life, not for feasting, and much less
for wicked mirth. But, blessed be God, the plague that then was (and yet
remains) was not at that time in such heat and height to cause a general
mourning all the Kingdom over: No, nor to cause such a mourning in that City
where it was, as that all sober mirth and feasting, all marriages should be
there prohibited in that time, which though in some great calamities it be very
necessary; in so moderate and fatherly a chastisement as this, would have
argued impatience, and have been injurious to that mercy, which in the midst
and height of this judgment, our Gracious God was pleased to remember. Yea, I
appeal to Mr. B. own conscience, whether, both at that time and after, when
the plague was hotter than at that time it was, he himself was not present at
some feasts or good cheer? whether he did not at a full table cry out upon
the times, and upon the Government and Governors of the Church, and State, and
hear them traduced, and that with as much content and delectation, as His
Majesty and his train could take at a Comedy? And why then must it be
imputed as an inexpiable crime in a place so remote from danger, for any to
entertain His Majesty with a feast and Comedy? Let no man suck poison out
of the sweet flower of candid sincerity. Mr. B.
Thus I have smelt this (which he calls the) sweet flower of candid
sincerity, and find it to be no other than the unsavory and bitter weed of
detraction. As for that for which he brings this, and the other instances.
viz. To prove that the Bishops (whom he calls the Popes Factors) do by these
practices labor to divide the King from his good Subjects, and bring Him to
have a hard opinion of the good Ministers of the Land, and the Kings most
loyal, loving, dutiful, faithful, obedient, peaceable Subjects. I say,
first, that if he mean himself and his party (as it is out of all question
he does, for we shall never find him to grace any others with those titles)
His Majesty has such experience of their love and loyalty, (such as it is)
that he needs no informers, nor need Mr. B. fear (till they alter their
courses) that ever His Majesty will (or any of those he aims at, go about
to) alter his deserved opinion of them. Secondly, if the words be taken in
their latitude, and as they sound. I say only two things. First, That it is a
mere slander and groundless calumny. Secondly, That if they should act their
parts in that way with His Majesty, as devoutly, and with as great zeal, as
Mr. B. and others of his faction have done theirs with the people, (or to
speak more plainly) if they should as earnestly endeavor to bring His
Majesty to have as hard an opinion of His Subjects, as Mr. Burt. has done to
bring the Subjects to have of His Majesty; all things had long before this
been in a combustion, if not arrived at a total ruin and desolation. But
enough of this: Pass we now to the fifth kind of Innovations.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the altering of the Prayer-bookes. The putting In for At. The leaving out
of Father of thine elect, etc. no treason. Master B. rather guilty. His pretty
shift about it; and how he and some of his use the Prayers of the Church. Of
the Prayers for the fifth of November altered. Those Prayers not confirmed by
act of Parliament. The Religion of the Church of Rome not Rebellion. Of the
alterations in the last Fast-booke. The restraint of preaching. Fasting days
no Sabbaths.

THe fifth Innovation (he tells of) is in altering of Prayer-bookes set forth by
public Authority. And this (out of the zeal he bears to Authority) much
troubles him, so that he makes a great adoo about both in his sermons, and so
does the Author of the Ipswich libell. Let us briefly inquire what the matter
may be that thus moves his patience. First, he tells us of alterations made in
the Communion-booke, set forth by In the editions since 1619.
Parliament within this seventeene or eighteen years, as in the Epistle for
the Sunday before Easter. That In the name of Jesus, is turned into, At the
name of Jesus. Surely, a mighty alteration, and which touches the substance of
Religion, and worship of God; To read it in the Epistle as it is used to be
read in the Lesson, when that chapter is appointed: for so it is there turned
both by (his friends) the Genevians, and our last Translators. But he has a
matter of other-like moment than this. In the Collect for the Queen and Royal
Progeny, they have put out [Father of thine Elect and of their Seed:] This he
keeps a foul pudder about, and in the Epitome they cry out; O intolerable
News Ips. p. 3.
impiety, affront, and horrid treason! and puts it in the title page, to
startle and amaze the readers at first dash, and make them cry shame upon the
Bishops. But (if I could take the man in cool blood) I would demand of him;
who made that prayer? If he say (as he must) it was made at the beginning of
King James his reign; I would ask by whom? If he say, by the Bishops; I shall
then become his petitioner to be informed; why they may not as well alter it,
when the occasion ceased, as well as make it to serve the present occasion of
those times? If he say, as he here intimates, that it was set forth by the
Parliament, let him produce the Act that was made for that prayer, and then I
shall say more to him. But for all that, it is not to be so slighted, for it
sounds little better than high treason, to dash the Queen and Royal Progeny
out of the number of Gods Elect. We may very well let Master B. boast of his
loyalty, when he gives such experiment of it by his zeal in detecting
traitors and treasonous practices. But in good earnest, does he think it
treason? truly, I can hardly believe he does: but if he or any other (seduced
by his sermons and libels) should; I will, by asking a question or two, get
them assoyled from so heavy a charge. For how if this Alteration were (as
indeed it was, and for that cause altered) before the Kings Majesty had any
Royal Progeny? Sure then it could be no treason, he may perhaps (if there be
any such) call it treason in the root, which in time may grow up to be
treason; though at first, it was no such thing, but an act done upon good
ground and reason. But he is not very confident that they do exclude them out
of the number of Gods Elect; it is, but (as it were, or, as if) nor can he do
otherwise in reason, because it is no necessary consequence to say, they do
not, when they pray for them, address their prayers to God, by the name of
Father of his elect and of their seed, therefore they do not think them they
pray for, to be of Gods Elect. But what if Master B. himself do indeed
exclude them, and do not think them to be of the number of Gods Elect? Will
it be intolerable impiety and horrid treason still? No question it must be the
same crime in him and them: persons do not so difference acts, whose objects
are the same. And that this uncharitable and most unchristian-like Christian
man is of this opinion, were easy to demonstrate out of his senseless books
against my Lord of Exon and Master Cholmeley, were it fit for me to prosecute
this argument. But he has a pretty shift for that, and by the help of a
mental reservation, can use that clause well enough: For, though he do not
believe them to be Elect to an Eternal Crown (such is the wisdom and
charity of this black Saint) he believes that they are to a Temporal. And
this is intimated in his Epitome, where the leaving out of this clause is made
to imply, that they which did it, made them all reprobates, and none of the
number of Gods Elect, either to a Temporal or an Eternal Crown. By which,
men may judge, with what faith such as Master B. use to say the prayers of the
Church; and what strange senses they are feign to put upon them, to fit them to
their fancies. And this is no new thing with them, but practiced a long time,
especially in the prayers at Baptism, when, after the Sacraments administered,
We give God humble and hearty thanks, for that it has pleased him to
regenerate the Infant baptized. Where they use to understand some such clause
as this [If he be elected] or as I have heard some express it [as we hope:]
by which device, they can, without scruple of conscience, both subscribe, and
use the prayers of the Church, which, in the Churches sense, they do not
believe, or assent to. But this only by the way.

The next book that (he says) they have altered, is that which is set forth
for solemn thanksgiving for our deliverance from the Gunpowder Treason. In
the last Edition whereof, instead of this passage [Root out that Babylonish and
Antichristian sect, which say of Jerusalem, down with it etc.] They read [Root
out that Babylonish and Antichristian sect of them which say etc.] and little
after for [whose religion is rebellion, and faith faction] they read [who turn
religion into rebellion, and faith into faction.] For answer to this, I say
first; That those prayers were not (as he falsely affirms) set forth by
authority of Parliament. The Act of Parliament (which is obvious to every man
that reads that book, being prefixed to it, and appointed to be read on those
days) enjoynes the keeping of that day by resorting to the Church at morning
prayer; but mentions no special prayers either set forth, or to be set forth
afterward for that purpose. If he know any other act that authoriseth them; I
say to him, as be to my Lord Bishop of Norwich (and I hope I may do it with
less sawcines) Let him show it. Then secondly, page 72.
I say, that being done by the same Authority that first set them forth, it is
neither for him, nor me, nor any other of inferior rank to question them, but
with humble reverence to submit to their judgments, and to think them wiser
and far more fit to order those things that belong to their places, than we,
whom it neither concerns, nor indeed can know the reasons that move them,
either to do or alter any thing. But more particularly; that which he
obiecteth against the former, is: That they would not hereby have all Jesuits
and Papists termed a Babylonish and Antichristian sect, but restrain it to
some few of them, and mentally transferr it to those Puritans who cry, down
with Babylon, that is Popery. But what then? what if out of a charitable
respect to those which in that Religion are honest and peaceable men, (as, no
doubt, but some of them, whatsoever Master B. believes of them, are such) they
are not willing, nor think it fit, to pray for the rooting up and confusion of
all Papists, indiscriminatim, under those harsh terms? surely, charitably
minded Christians cannot but approve such an alteration, if there were no other
ground than that for it. As for any man's transferring it to Puritanes, that is
as mere a surmise, as it is a false slander, that any of those whom he
intimates, do call Rome, Jerusalem; or Popery, the true Catholic Religion:
Yet I know not why such furious cryers down of Popery, as Master B. has
showed himself, may not be accounted of a Babylonish and Antichristian sect,
as well as any Jesuit in the world, nor why we may not pray (and that with
better reason than Master B. would have men to do, and under those titles,
against the Hierarchy of our Church) that God would root them out of the land,
when they cry so loud (not of Rome, but) of our Jerusalem, (the truly and
rightly reformed English Church) Down with it, down with it even to the
ground. To the other, his exception is, that they which made that alteration,
would turn off Rebellion and Faction from the Romish Religion and faith to
some persons, as if the Religion it self were not Rebellion, and their faith
Faction. But he craves leave to prove it so to be, according to the judgment
of our Church, grounded upon manifest and undeniable proofs: and without
expecting the grant of what he craves from any (but his good Mrs. the People)
he sets upon it; but presently forgets his promised brevitie, for he spends
almost five leaves in that Argument. And lest I forget my promise in the same
kind, I Will sum him into a very narrow room. 1. Their Religion First Reason.
is rebellion, 1. Because the Oath of Supremacy, is p. 132.
refused by Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and Iesuited Papists; and if any Papist
take it, he is excommunicated for it. But this reason concludes nothing
Religion, but against the Practice of some of that Religion, and some positions
of a Faction, rather than the generally received Faith among them. It is well
known that the French and Venetian States profess the Romish Religion and
Faith, and live in communion with that Church. And yet they do not acknowledge
that Duaren. de Benefic. l. 5. c. 11.
extravagant Power over Princes, which some Popes have challenged, and their
flatterers do ascribe to them. As is evident 1. by the Pragmaticall Sanction
(as they call it) in France in the time of Charles the VII. approving and
ratifying the Decrees of the Councels of Constance, and Basil, against the
Popes usurped Power over general Councels and Princes: which, notwithstanding
the attempts of many Popes, and the Bulls, and Constitutions of Pope Julius the
II. and Leo the X. against it, is not yet antiquated, or abolished. Secondly,
by the public Decree made in France Christianography. p. 132.
Anno 1611. for expelling the Jesuits, except they approved these four
Articles.

1. That the Pope has no power to depose Kings. 2. That the Council is above
the Pope. 3. That the Clergy ought to be subject to the Civil Magistrate. 4.
That Confession ought to be revealed, if it touch the Kings Person.
3. By that memorable Controversy, that of late Controversia memorabilis inter
Paul. 5. and Venetos Acta and script. etc. edita 1607.
happened between Pope Paul the V. and the State of Venice; where the just
liberty of Princes and States in their Dominions, against that Popes
tyrannical Interdict, and Sentence of Excommunication, is defended by those
who notwithstanding profess their union in Religion, and due obedience to the
Sea of Rome. By all these (I say) it is evident, that (what ever the tenets of
fiery spirited Jesuits, and other furious Factionists of that Religion be) the
Religion may be held, and yet due obedience to Princes maintained, and
performed, which could not be, if the Religion were Rebellion, and Faith
Faction. Besides, our English Catholics (though for the most part more
Pontifician, and Spanish than French) do not all disallow the taking of the
Oath of Allegiance (nor their Priests themselves) but though some of them do,
yet others like and approve both the Oath, and those that take it; and others
neither approve nor deny it, but leave every man to his own Conscience. The
same Answer may serve to Mr. B. second reason, which is drawn from their
writings, positions, and doctrines, which Second and third reasons.
they (the Romanists) profess and teach concerning the Popes usurped power,
and Soveraigntie over all Kings and Kingdoms of the earth. And likewise to the
third, for both of them conclude no more than this; That some Popish Authors
exalt the Popes power over the Kings, in deposing and exposing their Persons to
the danger of Rebels, and Traitors; and that Popes of late have usurped that
power: which our Protestant Writers, and, by name, these which Mr. B. cites,
Dr. John White, and Dr. Crackenthorp, and our Church-Homilies do clearly
prove, and justly condemn as Antichristian: For all that can be rightly hence
inferred, will not reach the Religion or Faith it self, which (admit that
these were parts of it) is of far larger extent and different nature, than to
receive it is Denomination from these few principles, or some men's, or Pope's
practices. To make this clear by an instance wherein I am sure Mr. B. would be
loath to admit this reasoning for true Logic. Some Genevians (and some of ours
that learned it from See Chr. Goodman's treatise of obedience printed at
Geneva, p. 206. etc Dangerous positions and proceedings for disciplne.
them) allow the Deposition of Tyrannical and Idolatrous Princes and Rulers,
and the Peoples rising against them, commend Traitors for good men, and their
Treasons for godly enterprises; approve of private men's killing them, as set on
by God; and in a word, go as far in this kind, l. 1. c 5. Bucanan de jure
Regni p 57. Alsted. Syst Polit 2. cap. 3. Si tamen administratores of ficium
suum facere no int, si impia and iniqua mandent, si contra dilectionem Dei and
proximi agant; populus propriae salutis curam arripiet, imperium male utentibus
abrogabit, and in locum eorum alios substituet. page 141.
as the boldest and bloudiest among the Jesuits; and are in this worse than
they, in that the Jesuits allege their obedience therein, and zeal to an
higher authority, pretended to be in the Pope: But these hold the right of
Soveraigntie to be in the People, and allow them to be their own carvers of
their liberty. If any man should be reupon conclude, that the Genevian Religion
were Rebellion, and Faith faction, I suppose Master B. would, and for my part
(though I detest and abhor these principles, as most wicked and unchristian)
I should think they said more than they proved, and so I think Master B. has
here done against the Papists.

The last book he mentions is the last Fast-book, which with hideous outcries
he here (and often in other places) complains, that they have gelded (as he
terms it) and made a mock-fast of it, etc. and that contrary to the Kings
express proclamation, which orders the book for the former fast to be
reprinted and published. There be two things that he quarrels against them in
this: First, the alterations. Secondly, the restraint of preaching in places
infected.

For the first, he says, they have altered the book in such wise as he (being
a man very tender in that kind, and not willing to waive authority, or to do
things without warrant from it) does not see how any man may read it, as being
contrary to the proclamation. But I would demand, whether the proclamation were
expressly for the having the former book reprinted, without any alteration? if
not; as it is most evident that there was no such thing expressed; then can it
not be said to be contrary to it: for, contraries must both have a being: and
then only could it have been said to be contrary, if another, and not that,
had been printed; which this might still be said to be, though in some
things altered; which is a common speech in matter of books and other things,
where, the bulk remaining, there are made as great, and many times greater
alterations, than here were any. But what were these alterations? First, in the
first Collect this remarkable pious sentence was page 142.
left out [Thou have delivered us from superstition and Idolatry, wherein we
were utterly drowned, and have brought us into the most clear and comfortable
light of thy blessed Word, by the which we are taught how to serve and honor
thee, and how to live orderly with our neighbors, in truth and verity.] But
what of that? Lo here (says he) these men (the Bishops) would not have Popery
to be called Superstition and Idolatry, nor would they have the Word of God
commended, as that clear and comfortable light which teaches us all duties to
God and man. But the man is far and wide from truth in this fond conjecture;
I dare boldly say, there was no such thing thought on. It is out of question
(for ought I know) with Protestants, that in Popery there are many gross
superstitions, and Idolatries; and that the Word of God is that clear and
comfortable light, which teaches us all things necessary to salvation. But men
may be good Protestants and yet not damn all their forefathers, who lived
before the reformation; as he must do, that says of them, that they were
wholly drowned in Idolatry, and without the light of Gods Word to teach them to
serve God, and live orderly with their neighbors: which (though Master B.
perhaps will not) some men may think to be reason sufficient for the leaving
out of that sentence.

But secondly, they have left out a whole Collect: true, and perhaps it was
thought fit so to be; not for any thing contained in it, but only to abridge
the length of the service, which I know some of Master Burton's humor did as
much grumble at, when that first book was appointed, and took more liberty of
shortening it, than that comes to. His conceit, that they did it, because in it
preaching was commended, is groundless, and the dream only of a distempered
fancy, and shall receive from me the answer it deserves; silence. And that is
the best answer also that I can give to that which follows, about the clause
left out in the last page, in the order for the Fast, which he would have the
people believe, was done because they esteemed fasting a meritorious work: but
so without all show of ground or reason, that it were a vanity (second to none
but his) to spend time and words about it. And what has Master B. or any other
to do with the leaving out of the Lady Elizabeth and her children? which he
might well believe was done, either not without his Majesty's consent, or at
least, that would soon come to His knowledge, who Himself had the same
prayers read in his Royal Chapel. Nay, I Will tell thee more, it was exactly
done according to the last edition of the Common prayer-booke, and His
Majesty's special direction in this particular, as Master B. and I have been
often told by our betters. Surely, it was a great oversight, that when Master
B. was turned out of the Closet, he was not made Master of the Ceremonies, to
determine what was fit to be done for the entertainment of the Prince Elector,
and other States and Princes that resort to His Majesty's Court; seeing, for
want of some such able Director, they have committed this solecisme, and
therein given such an intolerable affront (as he and his Ipswich brother call
it) to that Lady and her children, even while they are now royally entertained
at the Court.

For the rest, the prayer for the Navy, every man knows the occasion was
ceased; and I wonder he did not mention the Prayer for the Parliament, which
was also left out, and would have helped to have increased the number of his
exceptions; and this did no more, nor those that follow, of leaving out sundry
Psalms and Collects, etc. which besides that they produced the service to that
length that it was thought very tedious, (especially by such as use not to be
over far in love with the Church Liturgy) were well left out, as being, some
of them, chosen to fit the various occasions of those times for which they were
apppointed, which were now ceased. And though the special prayer for
seasonable weather were left out, yet there were prayers remaining, wherein
petitions were made for that end, both in the Letany, and in the new-added
prayers (which perhaps some like better) and so there were petitions made for
all that travel by land or by water; so that it might rather be thought that
the storms, floods, and shipwracks that after happened, were because men did
use those prayers they had, without devotion and affection, and not that they
wanted more prayers to make for that purpose. God (we know) is not taken with
many words or loud cries: and therefore Solomon says, let thy words be few,
and Eccle. 5. 2.
those few words, breathed out of a devout and affectionate heart, shall
prevail more with the Almighty, than long-winded exercises, or wier-drawn
Orisons proportioned to the length of the howerglasse by the best-guifted
conceptionist.

But I pass to his other exception, the restraint of preaching upon the fast
days: which was thought fit for the avoiding of the danger of contagion that
might grow by the concourse of people; when being fasting, they were most apt
to take the infection, which by wiser than he was thought to have been a good
means (next to the devout prayers of the Church) for the decreasing of the
plague. And certain it is, that upon our weak humiliation (notwithstanding
the want of Sermons) the plague during all the time of the continuance of the
Fast, did weekly decrease, as was plainly demonstrated by M. Squire in his
religious Read that sermon which is since printed and entitled; A
Thanksgiving for the decreasing of the Plague. page 52. etc.
Sermon at S. Paul's* and that double increase, which M. B. mentions (to
disparage the Fasts) was in a great part to be attributed to the week before
the Fast began. And however that could not evidence Gods dislike of our Fast
for want of Sermons, no more than the Benjamites prevailing argued their
innocence, or the injustice of the Israelites cause. Gods judgments are
unsearchable, Judge. 20. Romans 11. 33.
and his ways past finding out; so that (though it be familiar with Master B.
to frame arguments for his purpose from them) it is impious presumption
peremptorily to assign any particular reason, either of their first
infliction, or their progress or continuance; and there is nothing in the
world, wherein men may, and do sooner befoole themselves, than in reading the
obscure Characters of Gods judgments, if once they pass the bounds of
sobriety, and presume to be wise above that which is written. But if he would
needs point out the cause of the plague and its continuance. Why did he not
rather impute it to the murmurings and seditious railings against governors and
government which he and too many more are guilty of, seeing the Scripture
testifies, that for the like cause, the like and greater plagues befell the
Israelites, whereas they never give any example, Number. 16. 3, 41, 46.
that God did plague any for want of a Sermon at a public Fast, as was
worthily observed by the author of the forecited sermon. As for Preaching (I
take it in Master B. sense, for expounding and applying of Scripture) I honor
it; and if it be as it ought, esteem it as a principal means for the
instruction of Christian people in the ways of godliness: but for any
absolute necessity of having a sermon or more at a Fast; I never yet saw either
reason or Scripture alleged to any purpose. And as for those places of
Scripture which are cited in the Ipswich libell, to prove that News Ips. p. 2.
Fasting, praying, and Preaching are the chief Antidotes and cure against the
Plague; There is not one of them, that has any word of Preaching, but only
mention of Fasting, and Praying, and amendment of life, as means for that
purpose. His places are, 2 Chronicles. 6. 28, 29, 30. cap. 7 13, 14. Number. 25. 6. to
10. Joel 1. and 2. Zeph. 2. 1, 2, 3. and therefore I say (with that worthy man)
peruse the places, and detest the false dealing. But this opinion of the
necessity of Sermons at a public Fast (as I take it) is built upon another,
(which with many passes for current, though in truth) as groundles as it self:
and that is, That a Fasting day ought to be kept as a Sabbath, and so to have
all the duties of the Sabbath performed in it. Men must no less in the days
of Fasting abstain from their ordinary, and bodily labors, and offer upon the
high place which they have exalted above Gods Altar twice, at least, upon every
of those days, the Sacrifice of the Priests lips in a Prayer and Sermon
produced to a more than ordinary length. Now the grounds which they pretend for
a Fast to be kept as a Sabbath, are 1. that in Levit. 23. 31. 32. where the
day of atonement, or Feast of Expiation, is commanded to be kept as a Sabbath,
and day of rest from labors, from even to even: and 2. that of Joel 1. 14.
Commanding the Jews to sanctify a Fast, and call a solemn assembly. But the
weakness of their Arguments, from these places to infer that Conclusion, is
manifest: 1. because, being only particular to those Fasts there spoken of,
they cannot in reason be extended to prescribe any general Rule for all
Fasts, as necessarily to be observed, according to their pattern. Particularly,
the former place was a Ceremonial precept, whose obligation lasted no longer
than till the coming of Christ. The other in Joel is altogether as weak, and
concludes no such thing. For to sanctify, is no more than to proclaim,
appoint, decree, or prepare, as the word is elsewhere commonly Joel 3 9. 1
Kings 21. 12.
translated, and that upon the like occasion: and though it be admitted in
that special sense, in which they take it, yet is the sanctification
expressly referred, not to the day, but to the Fast, which in regard of the
religious ends, and uses of it, may be truly called an holy, or sanctified
work; and so cannot infer any Sabbaticall sanctification of a day (much less
of every such day) for that work. 2. Neither does the solemn assembly
necessarily import it, the word being of more general signification, and some
times applied to such assemblies as are far from holiness; and however (as I
said before) being only a particular command, cannot be drawn into Ier 9. 2.
an Assembly of treacherous men.
a perpetual rule: As is judiciously observed by that Reverend Divine Master
Hen. Mason, in his pious Treatise of Fasting, or Christian humiliation, where
this point is more largely and learnedly discussed. I leave this then, as an
opinion built upon a sandy and tottering foundation, which (whatever show of
piety it seems to carry with it) has no ground in reason, or Scripture, to
support it. And I shall crave leave likewise, that I may not trace him any more
in his wild vagaries that he here makes bringing fire, saucie and
presumptuous Arguments to prove, that His Majesty never intended to restrain
Preaching on the Fast days, when the Proclamation, which is vox Regis, speaks
it. Some men (but none goes beyond Master B.) have a dainty faculty, this way;
if a thing like them, they will have Scripture for it, or it shall go hard:
and if they can find none, they will yet bring reasons to show that it must,
and ought to be there (as some Ames. med. Theol. l. 2. c. 5.
have done for the establishing of the Lords Day) If they like it not, then
plain words are not enough to prove it spoken, as here His Majesty's
Proclamation is not sufficient to declare his Royal meaning, but he must be
forced by multitude (I cannot say weight or force) of Arguments to mean
otherwise, yea clean contrary to his express words. But this is but his old
fetch, to put the Bishops between, when he levels his envenomed shafts of
detraction against His Sacred Majesty, thereby hoping to procure them envy,
and to get a starting hole to avoid the danger of broadmouthed Treason. The
Bishops prohibited Preaching, and not the King. But, whoever did it, naught it
was, and that which made the Fast to be neither grave nor religious: and if it
prove to be His Majesty's, I suppose it is not Mr. Burtons saying, he had
rather dye, than conceive such an opinion of his King, that will save him from
the just reward of his audaciousnes. But I pass by this, and those nine
reasons that follow, moving him (had the season served for his access) to have
becom'n an humble petitioner to His Majesty, for the taking off of that
restraint, that preaching at the Fasts in places infected, might be permitted:
partly because of their vanity and weakness, and partly because I would not
prevent my self, being to speak of preaching in General under the next head,
where I must touch upon some of these particulars, of which I now come to
speak.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the sixth pretended Innovation in the Means of Knowledge. The Knowledge of
God necessary. The Scriptures the key of Knowledge. Impious to take them away,
or hinder the Knowledge of them. The difference between the Scriptures, and
Sermons. How Faith is begotten: of Romans 10. 17. The Word of God must be rightly
divided, and what it is so to do.

THE sixth Innovation (he tells us) is about the means of the Knowledge of
God, and of the mystery of our salvation, where in he charges the Prelates,
as our Savior did the Scribes and Pharisees: That they shut up the Kingdom of
Heaven against men, and neither go in themselves, Matthew. 23. 13.
nor suffer them that were entering to go in. Which (says he) in Luke 11. 52.
is expressed thus: Ye take away the key of knowledge. And then he declares
his meaning, after a confused clamorous manner; The sum whereof is but this.
They hinder and disgrace preaching, and will not suffer men to preach or
Catechize as they desire. For answer to this, I say first; That it is a
certain truth (and granted by all that understand any thing in religion) That
the knowledge of God, and of the mysteries of salvation, is most necessary for
every Christian; so as without a competent measure thereof by some means
attained, it is impossible for any man (come to years of discretion) to be
saved. Secondly, It is also as certain, that it is not in the power of nature
to attain unto this competencie of knowledge, in those things especially that
concern the mysteries of our redemption, without the help of a key reached out
unto us from God himself, who alone can make known what is that his good,
acceptable, and perfect Will, by believing and doing whereof, he has
determined to bring men to happiness.

Thirdly, It is agreed upon by all Protestant Divines that this key of
knowledge is the Word of God, contained in the Canonical Scriptures of the old
and new Testament, which contain all things necessary to salvation.

Now, it cannot but be a most hateful and odious sin and impiety, to take
away from Christians this Key of knowledge, and to bar them any way from the
use of it; and this kind of persecution, which was used by Julian the
Apostate, is the most cruel of all others, as tending not to the destroying of
the bodies, but both of bodies and souls for ever in hell fire: and therefore
we justly condemn the Church of Rome, as envious of the salvation of men's
souls, in not permitting the Scripture to be had, or read in a vulgar and
known language. And if any of our Prelates should do the like, I think Mr. B.
might justly complain, and (in an orderly way) seek redress of so great a
mischief. But this he cannot say: for, he that has said so much, I doubt not
(if he could have had the least color for it) but he would have said that too.
All the business that he moves this stir about, is: The putting down of some
Lectures, and Sermons, and regulating of Catechizing. And this he would have
the people believe to be the taking away of the key of knowledge, and the means
of the knowledge of God, and of the mysteries of salvation. And this has been
an old deceit, with which many Ministers of his faction have cosened (if not
themselves) the people. For, whatsoever is spoken concerning the efficacy, or
necessity of Gods Hook. Eccl. Pol. l. 5.. 21.
Word, the same they tie and restrain only unto Sermons; howbeit, not to
Sermons read neither, (for such they also abhor in the Church) but Sermons
without book, Sermons which spend their life in their birth, and may have
public audience but once. And hence it is that these great cries are raised,
that a Minister shall not for any irregularity be suspended, or his extravagant
fancies restrained, or any order for the time, or manner of preaching
prescribed, but presently they cry out, that the Word of God, the Gospel, and
ordinary means of salvation are taken away, or hindered. The truth is we have
no Word of God but the Scripture: Apostolic Sermons were, unto such as heard
them, his Word, even as properly, as unto us their writings are. Howbeit not so
our own Sermons, the expositions which our discourse of wit does gather and
minister out of the Word of God. And much less every fond opinion, which
passion, or misguided zeal, shall utter out of the Pulpit. To dignifie these
with the name of Gods Word, is both a gross taking of Gods Name in vain, and
a dangerous delusion of Gods People. And yet so far are some transported and
carried away with this mis-perswasion, that they attribute more to men's
expositions, than to the pure and infallible Word of God it self. For they
deny that any power to save souls, though read, or otherwise published in a
known tongue, and so plainly expressed, that it cannot transcend the capacity
of a mean understanding, as indeed it is (and we confidently, and upon sure
and infallible grounds mantaine it to be so against our adversaries of Rome) in
those things that are absolutely necessary to salvation. Which opinion of
theirs (if ever any were) is most senseless, and contrary to all reason. For
we read, that the Scriptures are able to make men wise unto salvation, That
the Word of God received 2 Timothy 3. 15. Iam. 1. 21
with meeknes, and ingrafted, is able to save our souls: and that they thus
commended the Scriptures, as availeable to this end, for certain, had no
secret conceit which they never opened to any, a conceit that no man in the
world should be that way the better for any sentence in it, till such time as
the same might chance to be preached upon or alleged, at the least, in a
Sermon. There is no such coherence between Sermons and faith, that ordinarily a
Christian man's belief should naturally grow from thence, and not possibly from
any other kind of notification of the Word of God. The Apostle indeed faith,
that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Romans 10. 17.
But is not the Word as well heard when it is read, as when it is preached
upon, in Master Burtons precise acception of the word. The begetting of faith
in men's hearts, comes from the concurrence of two things. First, the Word of
God, which is the object of faith. Secondly, the notification of this object to
the understanding by such means as it may be able to apprehend it: and this
notification or conveighing of the word of God to the understanding, is that
which the Apostle calls hearing, and comprehends in it both reading of it by a
man's self, and hearing it read by, others, or any other way whereby it may
come to be understood and assented unto, as preaching (in that sense to which
it is, by these men, restrained by way of Sermons;) and yet we must give
preaching (even in that sense) it is due: and far be it from any, yea and I
dare confidently say, it is far from any of those whom Master B. taxes, to
deny it it is just honor: only let it not be lifted up to an unjust competition
with the Scriptures, and immediately inspired Word of God it self; and much
less preferred before it in power and efficacy; or to have the word of God to
borrow and fetch its power and saving virtue from it; neither let it not be
opposed to, or bring in contempt (that which it ought chiefly to labor to
promote) the public prayers of the Church, which is the true and proper
worship of God.

With these Cautions, whatsoever honor men shall give (not to every vain
babbling and venting of fables and news, and corantoes, out of the Pulpit, but)
to preaching rightly so called, that is, the sober and solid explication and
application of any portion of the word of God, will never offend the Prelates
of these times, nor any other piously affected Christian. Let them dignifie
this, if they please (in a secundary sense) with the title of Gods word: Let
them call the Ministers of it even in respect of this (as the Apostle has done
in regard of their whole office) co-workers or joynt-labourers with God; (than
which, what greater dignity can be imagined?) yet they shall not be gain said
by any Prelate, or fear the censure of the High Commission for it. Men do not
(we know) bring the saving knowledge of God into the world with them: it must
be instilled by some means, and among the rest, it is Gods ordinance, That the
Priests lips which should Mal. 2. 7. Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
preserve knowledge, should in this way let their doctrine drop as the rain,
and their speech distill as the dew: and that the people (who have not the like
opportunity or ability of knowledge) might seek the law at their mouths, who
(even in this) are the messengers of the Lord of Hosts. Yea, if this be not
enough, let them prefer this above all other means, and it will easily be
granted, in regard they are more apt to make impression upon the hearers, more
powerful incentives of good affections, than other ways of teaching are. But
all this notwithstanding, though there be so much of God in this work, yet
there is somewhat of man still in the best of them, and that, where ever it be,
is not privileged from error, imperfection and vanity: and hence it comes to
pass, that many Jer. 23. 31, 32.
times men (with those in the prophet) use their tongues, and say; The Lord
says, when God sent them not, nor commanded them, but they prophecy false
dreams, and cause the people to err by their lightness: Yea too often (as
these sermons here before us,) men make the Pulpit but a stage to act their
passionate distempers and spleen, to ransack the affairs of state, and to
pick out thence such things as may claw the peoples itch, who ever are content
to hear those above them taxed; or if men do not show themselves to be men
in so gross a manner; yet it cannot be expected, but that discretion will be
sometimes wanting, to know what meat is fittest for the strength of their
auditory, and when and how to administer that which is sufficient for their due
nourishment, without the over laying of their stomachs, to the ingendring of
spiritual crudities, and corrupt humors. It is a misconceit that some have,
who because the Apostle bids his scholar Timothy to preach in season and out of
season, there can be no 2. Tim. 4. 2.
time or measure unseasonable, and so no bounds (without injury) set to
preachers or preaching. When we know the nature of the duty it self, the end
of it, the necessity of other duties to succeed; and all show that there is an
out of season, (and an out of measure too) which the Apostle never intended to
urge his scholar to preach in. Yea and our Savior himself (whom Saint Paul
would not contradict) told his Disciples of such an out of season, that he
thought not fit to preach to his Disciples the things which they should
afterward be taught, when he says, I have yet many Ioh. 16. 12.
things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. It must needs therefore
behoove the governors of the Church, the Bishops, (who are the grand Pastors
and Ministers of their whole Dioces) if they will not be wanting to the Cure
of souls committed to their charge, to see that those whom they admit to
partake in their cure and charge, do rightly divide the word of truth; to see
2. Tim. 2. 15.
that it be, not only the word of truth, but rightly divided; rightly, 1. in
regard of the quality of it, that it may be suited to the condition and
capacity of those to whom it is divided, putting a difference 1. Cor. 3. 1.
between those that are carnal, and those that are spiritual, between babes
and strong men in Christ; between those who are unskilful in Heb. 5. 13.
the word of righteousness, and those who by reason of use have their senses
exercised to discern both good and evil. 2. It must be rightly also for the
time, manner, and measure of it. 1. There is a time for all things, a time to
preach, and a time to pray, Eccle. 3.
and a time for work, a time also for recreation: and it is a point of
wisdom to fit every work to its best time and season, and the fitness of
the season is a great furtherance to the work, which many times by
unseasonablenes becomes unprofitable, and gains contempt. It is, without
question, then best received, when men's minds are freest from distraction of
worldly cares or pleasures: and therefore the Sundays and Holidayes are the
fittest times for Preaching, and not upon Market-dayes, when men must be
dilemm'd between the word of God, and their worldly affairs; and when some
willingly, others sometimes are necessitated to prefer their body and the
world, before their souls and Heaven: and much less (as if a sermon were of
kin to a fiddle or a bagpipe) to have preaching upon every merry meeting, or
feasting, or at a Beare-baiting (at which I once heard of a sermon made) which
cannot be but a profanation of Gods Name, and derogation from the honor of
his ordinance.

Secondly, For the manner of it, it must be done gravely, with religious
reverence, for the edifying of men in their holy faith and godliness; not
vainly, or with intermixture of Fables, news, or passionate declamations; for
such profane and vain bablings will increase unto 2 Timothy 2. 16.
more ungodliness, and their words will eat, as does a Gangrene, edifying to
nothing, but sedition, and the subversion of the Church.

Thirdly, For the measure; That cannot be rightly done, that is over-done, and
there may be a too-much even in the best things; and spiritual food, as well
as corporal, must be taken with respect to the digestive faculty of the
eaters. The too-often, and overmuch taking of the best and daintiest fare,
begets loathing and contempt, whereas the moderate use, procures appetite,
helps digestion, and mantaines their due esteem: and certainly, there is
nothing more advantageous to piety, than to uphold the Majesty's of the
Priestly, or ministerial offices, and among the rest, of Preaching; which
cannot but be impaired, if it be, either too often, or out of due measure
obtruded upon men; for familiarity, we know, breeds contempt, but retiredness
is the preserver of Majesty's, and rarity commends pleasures, and makes them
more delightful, and (with moderation) must needs make preaching precious, and
become more acceptable, which, if it be not, it cannot profit: Besides, Sermons
must be ordered for their measure, and length, that they leave room sufficient
for solemn Prayers, and other Divine Offices; these must not be curtall'd to
lengthen them, nor vilified, by means of any new-devised forms of prayer,
either ushering, or following them. And therefore, when the Bishops (to whom
the care and charge of these things belong) shall in their wisdoms think fit
to use their just power, to order, and regulate Preachers and Sermons according
to these rules, they do no wrong, but right, to the Word of God, and what in
duty they are bound to do. If Lectures be unseasonable, or not in places
fitting; if they be upheld with faction, abused, and made nourishers of
sedition and male-contented thoughts; or cast contempt upon the Pastoral
charge, and settled ministry. To suppress such Lectures, and suspend such
Preachers, is but just and fit: and others than such as have been guilty in
these, or the like kinds, have not received any such censure. If Sermons upon
the Lords day be produced to that length, that they justle out the Prayers of
the Church, or be become of that esteem, as that men shrink up all religion
into hearing, or that they be of that strain, that the ignorant may be ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; it is but
reason that they both cut them shorter, and provide for the due esteem of other
religious duties, and for the instruction of the ignorant, by turning Sermons
into catechizing; and if that be abused too, and that men, in stead of laying
the foundation, and teaching the first principles of the Oracles of God, (which
is the true catechizing) shall soar aloft, and adventure upon the most high
and abstruse points in Divinity, and notwithstanding his Majesty's Declaration
to the contrary, shall deliver the doctrines of Election and Reprobation; and
that in such wise, as to make God the author of sin and obduration in sin,
which is blasphemy in the highest degree: if men use to catechize after this
manner (as some of late have done) is it not high time to reduce men to the
prescribed platform of the Church Catechism, which (even in the bare
questions and answers, as it is there set forth) cannot be denied (without
extreme ignorance, or impudent malice) to contain the principles of Christian
Religion, and whatsoever is necessary to be known of those for whom it was
intended; for the fitting of them for the receiving of the Lords Supper.
Lastly, if Sermon-prayers shall be used as libels, (as some have used them) or
be exalted above the prayers of the Church (as with too many they are) it
cannot but be much better to tie men to the form prescribed in the Canon
(which was the old use of these prayers in this Church) and to shut up all in
the Lords Prayer, which is without all contradiction, the most absolute
pattern of prayer, and the sum of all rightly-conceived petitions.

My conclusion then is, that the Reverend Bishops, doing these things upon
these grounds (and no otherwise, and upon other grounds they have done nothing
in this kind) are unjustly charged to take away the key of knowledge, whose
right use by these means is preserved and restored to the singular benefit of
Christian souls.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the seventh pretended Innovation in the Rule of Faith. What matters of
Religion are submitted to the Bishops decision. The Doctrine of our Articles.
The properties of the Bishops decisions. Master Burtons clamors against the
Bishops in this particular, odious and shameful. Of that speech which he
ascribes to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning the Catholic
Church. What is justly attributed to the Church, and how we, ordinarily, come
to know the Scriptures to be Scriptures.

THe seventh Innovation, he makes to be in page 151.
the rule of Faith, for, whereas the perfect and complete rule of faith, is the
holy Scripture, as 2 Timothy 3. Our new Doctors cry up the dictates of the Church,
to wit of the Prelates, to be our only guides in Divinity; as in Reeves
Communion book Catechism expounded. page 20. and 206. where (as he says that
author affirms) all Ministers must submit to the judgment of the Prelates in
all matters pertaining to Religion: and all Prelates must submit to the
judgment of the Arch-prelate. And then adds his own gloss, as having a
Papal infallibility of spirit, whereby, as by a Divine Oracle, all questions
in Religion are finally determined.

My Answer to this shall be very brief, for that the same crimination is by
Master B. objected in his Lawless Pamphlet entitled, An Answer to a late
Treatise of the Sabbath day; and since by the Reverend Author of that Treatise
(that venerable mass of solid learning) the L. Bishop of Ely, so profoundly
answered, that my poor endeavors In his Treatise entitled, An Examination,
vid p. 17 18, 19, 20, etc.
seem to me altogether needles; it being abundantly sufficient to refer my
Readers thither for satisfaction. Yet somewhat I will say, for their sakes that
have not that Book at hand. First, it is confessed, that the holy Scripture is
the sole and complete Rule of Faith. This is the constant, and subscribed
Doctrine of our Church: Artic. 6.
And therefore it were strange that they, who themselves have so often
subscribed, and who exact subscription from others, should go against so
confessed a truth: and certainly, if he had had but the least grain of
ingenuity, in interpreting the writings of other men, or rather, if malice had
not wholly filled him with ignorance and confidence, he would never have
dreamed of any contradiction to this Doctrine, in the words by him alleged, or
to have stretched matters of Religion subjected to the Bishops determination,
to the substantial points of Faith, which no Protestant ever affirmed. But
somewhat sure there is in it, that is in matters of Religion, submitted to the
Bishops judgment: True; and so it ever was in the Church of God. But this
extends not to matters of Faith, or manners to be believed, and done of
necessity to salvation, so as to coin new articles in either kind: The power
which by them is challenged, and by all understanding Christians in all ages of
the Church ascribed to them, is no other but that which is given them by the
tenth Article of our Religion, whose words are; That the Church has power to
decree rites, and ceremonies, and authority in Controversies See Preface to
the Book of Common Prayer, referring parties, doubting of any thing that is
contained in that Book to the Bishop, and the Bishop doubting, to the
Archbishop.
of Religion. Where by the Church (whoever Master B. understands) is meant the
heads, and Governors in the Church, to whom the right of direction and
government does peculiarly belong; and therefore they are called Bishops, or
Overseers, and Rulers, or Guides, and Leaders, as being, by their Office, to
judge of things needful, and to direct those that are under their charge.

Now this power of theirs has these properties. 1. It is not supreme, but
ministerial, not ruling, but ruled by the Scriptures, by which rule they are
to square their determinations in all matters of Religion; being altogether
unlawful for them, to define any thing contrary thereunto. 2. The things
wherein they have power to decree, ordain, alter and change any thing touching
Religion in the Church, is only in matter of Ceremony, which are in
comparison, of the points of Faith, only circumstantiall as concerning time,
place, gesture, order, and the like, to be observed in the service of God. 3.
In these things which they thus order, and ordain; they must keep them to
those general Rules. 1. That things be d^^e decently, and in order. 2. That
nothing be ordained contrary to the Scripture. 3. That things beside the
Scripture ordained, be not enforced to be believed of necessity to salvation,
as our Article speaks. 4. Their decisions in matters of Religion are not
infallible, neither did they ever challenge, nor any (that ever I heard of
among us) ascribe unto them, no not to the Arch-prelate any Papal
insallibilitie of Spirit: Neither did they arrogate any other ability of
right, and true judgment in things than is attained by ordinary means, nor
any immediately Divine Inspiration, or Assistance annexed to their Chair, all
which the Pope does. Lastly, the submission that is required by those that are
under them, Ministers and people, is not absolute, and such as no inferior
Priest, or Christian can without sin dissent from their judgments; but in
regard of external order, and for the avoiding of confusion, and sects in the
Church; as it is not left free for every man to appoint, or judge of matters of
Religion, or to have them after their own way, so it cannot but be a great
disorder, and consequently a sin, for any man out of his private humor
openly to reclaim, or to disobey those who are invested with the power of
Judicature. This being the power that is given, or challenged by the Bishops,
it cannot but be a wonder to think that any man, should be so past all shame,
as so odiously to clamor (upon this ground) against the Bishops, and Fathers
of the Church, and to deride, and scorn the most Reverend Archbishop of Cant.
calling him the Oracle, and one that has a Papal infallibility of Spirit,
and the like. But for a Priest to do it, puts it beyond all wonder, and
astonishment; especially if we consider these two things. First, (which is
also observed by the Reverend Bishop of Ely) that See the Book of Ordination
at his Ordination he promised, yea, swore that he would reverently obey the
Bishops, and with a glad mind, and will follow their godly admonitions, and
submit to their godly judgments. 2. That every Priest has a power of
directing those that are under his charge in matters of Religion, and that the
people ought to inquire the Law at their Mouths, and to submit to their
judgments; which to take away from them, were to rob them of a maine part of
the Priestly function: and yet I suppose neither challenges any Papal
infallibility of Spirit, nor requires any blind obedience, and therefore how
he can charge these things upon the Bishops, for clayming the same power over
the inferior Clergy, and people; which himself as a Priest has over the
people committed to him, is more than wonderful. Well, but for all that, here
is a strange piece of Popery, which he adds, uttered by the Chiefest Prelate
of England in the High Commission, p. 152.
viz. That in matters of Divinity we are not tied to the Scriptures, but to
the Universal Catholic Church in all ages; for how (said he, so Master
Burton affirms) shall we know the Scriptures but by the Church?

But that this man has set his faith to sale for popular breath, so that his
testimony is of no value; I should here run aground, and miscarry in my
undertakings: How? not tied in matters of Divinity to the Scriptures? surely
His Grace did much forget himself, and what himself has both subscribed and
publicly maintained against the Romanists. Or rather Master Burtons zeal,
has far overreached in imputing so gross an error so insulsly expressed,
to so learned and every way accomplished a Divine. Yet somewhat perhaps there
was said which might minister occasion to malevolence thus to traduce him.
Perhaps, if occasion were offered, He might make the consentient testimony of
the Catholic Church in all ages, the best interpreter, and the best rule to
follow for the settling of the understanding in the true meaning of holy
Scripture. Yea he might, perhaps, say, in all matters in Divinity (taking it to
include Doctor Field of the Church. l. 4. c. 20.
matters of ceremony and other things in which consist not the substance of
faith or manners necessarily required to salvation) we are not tied Perkins
refor. Cath.
to the Scriptures.

It is no innovation to admit traditions, which was ever granted in our Church,
and never denied by any learned Protestant. We baptize infants, Chemnit. exam.
Council. Trid, Sess. 1. 4.
receive the Apostles Creed, acknowledge the number, names, and authors of the
Books of Canonical Scripture. (that I mention not for fear of displeasing
Master B. the observation of the Lords day) all which besides a number of
rites, ceremonies and observations, whereof we have neither irrefragable
precept nor example in the Scriptures: only we do not admit any traditions
contrary to the Scriptures; nor do we (as the Council of Trent) receive them
with the same reverence and pious affection, or advance them to an equality of
authority with Scriptures, but as subservient unto them. Further, (though
Master B. startle at it,) it is no innovation neither to make the Churches
testimony to be the means of our knowledge, the Scripture to be the
Scripture: which is no more than our Articles allow, calling Artic. 20.
the Church a witness and a keeper of holy writ. I wish Master B. would have
given us his answer to the question, and have told us how he came to know the
Scriptures; seeing he will not seem to be beholding to the Church for that
piece of learning, surely he had it by revelation, or received that book (as
Saint John did) from the hand of some Angel; for I will not be persuaded he
brought that knowledge into the world with him. Revel. 10. 9.
But, whatsoever he shall persuade himself and others, it is an undoubted
truth, that we come to know the Scriptures by the Testimony of the Church, and
that secluding that, we cannot (ordinarily) be persuaded that they are the
word of God. But withal we must know, that it is one thing to suspend the
authority of the Scriptures upon the Church, and to make the Churches
testimony the foundation of our belief of those things which are contained in
the Scripture; and another, to make the Churches proposal and testimony a
necessary means and condition without which ordinarily men cannot know them,
to be those divine oracles whereon our faith is to be builded. And because
Master B. may think the better of this tenet if it be delivered by others, he
shall hear the same from the late learned Deane of Gloucester (whom I know he
will not count any D. Field. Appendix. l. 2. sect. 8*
Popish Innovator) who (answering a Popish Treatisor, that would needs fasten a
Popish absurd doctrine upon this assertion) writes thus:

If Protestants receive the number, names of the Authors, and integrity of the
parts, of books, divine and Canonical, as delivered by Tradition, as I say
they do: and if without tradition we cannot know such divine books, he (The
Popish Treatisor) thinks it consequent, that tradition is the ground of our
faith. But indeed there is no such consequence as he imagines. For it is one
thing to require the Tradition of the Church as a necessary means whereby the
Scriptures may be delivered unto us and made known; and another to make the
same Tradition the ground of our faith, etc. Thus that judicious Doctor with
much more to that purpose, evidently proves his assertion. Briefly, the
authority of the holy Scriptures depends only upon the author, God himself;
the Church receiving them as delivered by God, and so approving, publishing,
preaching, interpreting, and discerning them from other writings, does not add
any thing to the authority of them, which (by her means being made known) of
themselves they are able to persuade, and to yield sufficient satisfaction to
all men of their divine truth: And this authority thus made known, is that
into which, as into their highest, and utmost cause and end, our faith and
obedience is resolved. And this may serve for answer to this false and
groundless crimination.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the jurisdiction of Bishops: how far of Divine right given by Christ to
his Apostles, and from them derived by succession. The power given to the
Apostles divided into several orders. What power Ecclesiastical belongs to
the King; and the intent of the Statutes which annex all Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction to the Crown. Of Master Burtons Quotation of the Jesuits
Direction to be observed by N. N. Master B. and the Jesuit, confederates in
detraction and ignorance.

But there are two things here which I am unwilling to pass over. The first
is, that here he says, that the words which he ascribes to the Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury were by him spoken at the censure of Doctor Bastwick, for
oppugning the jurisdiction of Bishops, Iure Divino, as being no where found in
the Scripture, etc. This is one thing, which though here brought in upon the
by, I cannot pass; because I find him else where much harping upon the same
string. He will not have the Bishops derive their succession from the
Apostles: cries out upon Dr. Pocklington for delivering page 41. Ips News.
page 4. Appeal. p. 7. 1.
that doctrine, affirms their authority and jurisdiction to be only from the
King; that, not to derive it thence, is against the law of the Land, and I know
not what danger besides; and that Doctor Bastwick is imprisoned for defending
his Majesty's Ips N. p. vult. See page 67, 68, 69.
royal prerogative, and much more to the same purpose. Here (not to meddle
with Doctor Bastwicks case (against whom there are other crimes objected than
that which he here mentions) I will only lay down some brief conclusions,
and their consectaries, declaring the truth in these points, and refer those
that desire further satisfaction to such as have purposely treated of this
subject.

And my first conclusion shall be, That the Kings See the Queens Injunctions.
challenge in right of their Crowns, any authority, or power of the
ministration of Divine Offices in the Church. We give not to our Princes
(says the thirty seventh Article) the ministering of Gods Word, or of the
Sacraments; neither do they claim the power of the Keys, for remitting or
retaining of sins, either privately or publicly.

From this, I infer these consectaries. First, Word and Sacraments, of
ordination, excommunication, or any other act belonging to the personal
execution of the Episcopal, or Priestly function. And this is so evidently
deduced from the former, that, it being granted (as it must be by those that
will not deny the Articles of our Church) this cannot be denied

That no man can reasonably imagine, that the Statutes which annexed
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to the Crown, intended to give the King any power
of this nature, which Queen Elizabeth (in her injunctions) and all other godly
Kings and Princes ever disclaimed.

That it can be no denial of his Majesty's just right, nor violation of
Statute, nor danger of Praemunire for Bishops, to exercise their jurisdictions
thus far, in their own names, or to say, they have them not from the King.

My second conclusion is, This Ecclesiastical Matthew. 28. 29, 30. and for the
power and use of the Keys. John 20. 21. Matthew. 18. 18.

Thirdly, Our Savior giving this power, intended necessity, and use of it in
the Church, as well afterward, as in their times. Secondly, in regard of his
promise, of his assisting presence, or being with them always, even to the
Mat. 28. ult.
end of the world.

From which will follow; First, the necessity of the power of ordination, for
the transmitting this power by the Apostles, to some others, in whom, the same
power (though not in the Apostolical latitude) should remain, when they, (who
were not always to continue) should be translated out of this world. Secondly,
the necessity of an un-interrupted succession in the Church of those who shall
be lawfully invested with this power, which can at no time be wanting in the
Church, without the ruin of that building, for the edification of which,
Ephesians. 4. 12.
it was first given.

Our Savior, together with this power given grace, to enable them to exercise
that power, and discharge that function, which he had imposed upon them. This
is manifest; First, because God never uses to call Vactio antiquitus ol^o
ficbat, quod quia secundum naturalem efficientiam tum fragrantia reddebat
corpora, tum agilia, accummodum erat duabas rebus supernaturalibus
significandis: quarum una est, personae ad munus aliquod divinum obeundum
sanctificatio, and consecratio; altera, adoptatio, seu donorum ad illud
necessariorum collatio. Armin. Disp. pub.
any to a charge, without furnishing them with grace to discharge it; and
therefore, in the Old Testament, anointing with Oil was used, which (because
naturally it made men's bodies both fragrant and active) was to signify, both
the consecration and designation, Gods work, and the fitting of those, upon
whom it was imposed, with gifts necessary thereto required. Secondly, it is
manifest from the plain words of our Savior, in that giving them their
Commission, he breathed on them, and says unto them, Receive the Holy Ghost.

And from hence we may infer; That in the transmission of this power and
function, there is necessarily required, a continual supply of grace, though
not in the same measure as in the Apostles, nor for all those operations, which
were useful in the first foundation of the Christian Church, yet in the same
kind, and for the discharge of the function, so far as it should be
necessary ever to continue in the Church; and that therefore, in the
consecration, and ordination of those who are called to this function, and to
whom this power is committed, God does ordinarily confer this grace: as
appears by that of S. Paul, putting Timothy (whom he had consecrated Bishop at
Ephesus) in mind to stir up the grace that was given him by the laying on of
his hands; and that God does in the same way, still give the like grace, is out
of all question, unless men shall think, either that the grace is not now
necessary, or that God is wanting to his Church, or that the Apostles did fail
in prescribing the right way for the conferring of it. So, that of this Saint
Ambrose truly said. Man Homo imponit manus, Deus largitur gratiam; Sacerdos
imponit supplicem dextram, and Deus benedicit potenti dextra: Episcopus mitiat
ordinem, and Deus tribuit dignitatem Ambros. de dign. Sacerd. c. 5.
lays on his hands, God gives the grace; the Priest lays on his right hand in
supplication, and God blesses it by his powerful right hand. The Bishops
mitiates into the Order, and God bestows the dignity.

Lastly, the Apostles who from Christ received both the Priestly, and
Episcopal power in one, did divide the same, and made distinct orders and
degrees of them in the Church: in which they appointed Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, all which we find mentioned by Saint Paul, in his Epistles, and in
the Acts of the Apostles, and in the most ancient Writers, and records, that
are extant in the Church. And these orders thus by them distinguished, were
subordinate in such sort, as the whole remainder of the Apostolical Office,
that is, so much as the perpetual necessity of the Church required, was in the
Bishops, who, besides that which they had in common with Priests, as power to
preach, and administer the Sacraments, and of absolution, had also power of
jurisdiction, and ordination, and both Priests and Deacons were by them
ordained and subjected to their authority. All which may be proved out of Saint
Paul prescribing to Timothy and Titus (whom he had ordained See Mason, de
Minesterio Eccles. l. 1. c. 2. and l. 4. c. 1. etc. D. Field of the Church. l.
5. c. 25.
Bishops) how to exercise their jurisdiction, and to use the power of
ordination, or laying on of hands, which he no where does to the Priests or
Deacons, but more clearly by the ancient Canons and writings of the Fathers in
the primitive B. Andrews Resp. ad Epist. Mo^inaei. 1. 3. Tortur. Terti. p. 151.
Church.

That which results from all this, is, That to affirm, the Episcopal order or
authority, as it is merely spiritual, to be received, not from the King, but
from God and Christ, and derived by continual succession from the Apostles, is
no false or arrogant assertion, nor prejudicall to the Kings prerogative
royal, and so not dangerous to those that shall so affirm, or that challenge
and exercise their jurisdiction in that name.

For the further demonstration hereof. I will also briefly set down what power
in causes Ecclesiastical is due and challenged by the King and other
Sovereign Civil Magistrates, and what Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is annexed
to the Crown of this Realm, which the Bishops must acknowledge thence to be
received, and exercised in that right.

My first conclusion shall be in the words of Artic. 37.
Kings in causes Ecclesiastical, is described to be only, That they should
rule all estates and degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword, the
stubborn and evil doers: other authority than this (as Queen Elizabeth in
her Injunctions) His Majesty neither does, ne ever will Qu. Eliz. Injunct.
challenge; nor indeed is due to the Imperial Crown either of this or any
other Realm. Where I observe two things wherein the Sovereign authority of
Princes in causes Ecclesiastical does consist; First, in ruling
Ecclesiastical persons; under which are comprised, 1 their power to command
and provide that spiritual persons do rightly and duly execute the spiritual
duties belonging to their functions: 2 to make and ordain Laws to that end,
and for the advancement and establishing of piety and true Religion, and the
due and decent performance of Divine worship, and for the hinderance and
extirpation of all things contrary thereunto. Secondly, in punishing them as
well as others (when they offend) with the Civil Sword. Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical persons being offenders, are not exempt from the coercive power
of the King, but that he may punish them as well as others; but it is with the
Gladium spiritualem stringere est Episcoporum non Regum, quan quam and hic,
licet Episcoporum manu, piorum tamen Regum sancto monitu et evaginari and in
vaginam recondi solet. Mason de Minist. Ang. l. 4. c. 1.
Civil Sword, as that only which he bears, not with the Ecclesiastical, or
by the sentence of Excommunication. It belongs to Bishops, and not to Kings, to
draw the Spiritual Sword, yet that is also wont to be unsheathed and sheathed
at the godly command and motion of religious Kings. And they may (as pious
Princes use) second, yea and prevent the spiritual Sword, and with the Civil
(as namely with bodily and pecuniary punishment) compel his subjects as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal to the performance of the duties of both Tables.

My second conclusion or (as I may rather Bishops having any civil power
annexed to their places, and exercising the same either in judging any civil
causes, or inflicting temporal punishments, whether bodily or pecuniary; have
and use that power wholly from the King, and by his grace and favor in his
right.

That the Episcopal jurisdiction, even as it is truly Episcopal and merely
spiritual; though in it self, it be received only from God: yet in as much it
is exercised in his Majesty's Dominions, and upon his subjects, by his
Majesty's consent, command and royal Protection, according to the Canons and
Statutes confirmed by his Authority; nothing hinders but that thus-farre all
Ecclesiastical Authority and jurisdiction may be truly said to be annexed to
the Crown, and derived from thence.

And this only is the intent of those Statutes which annex the Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction to the Crown. Which notwithstanding, it may truly be affirmed,
that the Bishops have their function, and jurisdiction for the substance of it,
as it is merely spiritual, and so properly Ecclesiastical, by Divine right,
and only from Christ; and that it is derived by a continual, and uninterrupted
succession from the Apostles. But if Master Burton conceive that the Bishops
affirm, that they have power to exercise this their spiritual jurisdiction
within His Majesty's Dominions, and over His Subjects, of themselves, and
without license, and authority from His Majesty. Or that their temporalities,
their revenewes, their Dignities to be Barons of the Parliament etc. or the
authority that they have, and use either to judge in Causes temporal, or to
inflict temporal punishments, belong to them by Divine right, or otherwise
than by the favor of his Majesty and his predecessors, he makes them as
absurdly ignorant, and presumptuous as himself.

The other thing which I cannot let pass, is, that which he here cites out of
the Jesuits pamphlet entitled, A direction to be observed by N. N. etc.
wherein the Jesuit, it seems, applauds the present state of our Church, as
coming on toward Union with Rome, The temper and moderation of the Arch
Bishop, and some other learned prelates, and the allowance of some things in
these days, which in former times were counted superstitious, as the names of
Priests and altars, and the acknowledging the visible being of the Protestant
Church for many ages, to have been in the Church of Rome, etc. My purpose is
not here to enter the lists with the Jesuit, who (I doubt not) ere long will
be more sufficiently answered, than I have either leisure or ability to do.
All that I shall say for the present is, First, that Master B. is willing (it
seems) to take dirt from any Dunghill to cast in the face of his Mother the
Church of England, and that though he profess such mortal hate to Rome, that
the last affinity with her (though many times but imaginary) makes him break
forth into strange expressions of his abomination. Yet he can be content to
join hands with the worst of the Romanists (the Jesuits) and use their aid
to slander and make odious the Church in which he was bred. But it is no
Innovation, this; it has been a long practice of the Faction, (whereof he is
now ambitious to become a captain) both to join with them in their
principles, and to make use of their weapons to fight against the Church
wherein they live. Secondly, It is manifest from hence, that the Jesuit and
he, are confederates in detraction and ignorance of the Doctrine of our Church,
which both of them judge of, not by the authorized Doctrine publicly
subscribed, or the regular steps of those that have continued in the use of her
ancient and laudable customs, rites and ceremonies: but by their own humors
and uncertain reports of some factiously-minded persons. It being usual with
such men of both parties to mistake the religion professed on either side: and
as Master B. condemns all that of Popery and superstition, that is cross to
his fancied crotchets, though it be the doctrine that has been ever taught in
the Church of Christ, and sometimes such as himself has subscribed; So the
Jesuits on the other side use to charge our Church with all those tenets which
they find to be by any among us, without respect had either to the consent
they have with the publicly received doctrine, or to the judicial approbation
that such opinions (which we many times detest as much, if not more than they)
have from any authorized act of the Church; otherwise both the Jesuit and he
might have known that many (for some of them are but mere fictions and
slanders) of the things they accuse of novelty, have been ever agreeable to
the doctrine of this Church. For who knows not that the names of Priests and
Altars are no such strangers in our Church, that any man should be fearful
of using them? such as have staggered at them, have been justly counted more
nice than wise: Especially the name of Priest, which both our book of
Common Prayer and of Ordination have ever used, and kept on foot, though it
sounded but harshly to some ears. And for that which the Jesuit calls fiery
Calvinisme, if he mean the Geneva discipline founded by him or any singular
opinions which he holds, wherein there has appeared more heat than truth; I
confess it has been and is (the more is the pity) the Darling of many in
England, but without either Canon or countenance from Authority: The Church of
England in reforming of Romish errors took no pattern from Geneva, nor
followed any private man's oppinion: and her wisest and most judicious sons, as
they honor the learning and good parts of any, and of Master Calvin among (yea
and in some things happily above) others, so they have ever on the other side
thought it an injury to receive their denomination from any doctrine, but that
which is publicly taught and avowed by our own Church: and all the innovation
that may seem to be in them, is only, that (by the negligence of some that
have been in place, or rather, from their inability, than to foresee the
mischief that now since appears) contrary tenets and practices have grown so
into such fashion, that the Churches true tenets and rites being revived, seem
no less strange and new, than the old English habits would be judged among our
present Courtiers. Or perhaps, (which I know not why any man should be ashamed
of) that learning and industry being increased, and the heat of contention
allayed, men begin to judge of opinions, not by the authors, but by the truth,
and so some things, which by some have been blasted, for Popish and
superstitions, and by others, taken up upon their credit to be such, by
judicious trial, are found consonant to the truth of Christian religion, and
our Churches doctrine. Neither can any (without bewraying, either malice, or
gross ignorance) call this a warping toward Popery, or that Protestantisme
among us waxes weary of it self, when the doctrine and profession (in all
this seeming variation) remains still the same, and unaltered.

CHAP. XX.
The last Innovation, in the Rule of manners. The Scriptures acknowledged to be
the sole rule of manners, and how. Old Canons how in force. The Act before the
Communion-book does not forbid the use of ancient and pious customs. Master B.
incurring the penalty of that Statute. Of Cathedral Churches. The argument
from them frees the rites and ceremonies there used from novelty and
superstition. Of the Royal Chapel. His dangerous insinuations referred to
the censure of Authority. The Close.

I Am now, at last, gotten to the eighth and last Innovation, or change, which,
he says, is in the rule of manners; which rule is changed from the Word of
Christ, and the examples of the holy Apostles, page 156.
wherein they followed Christ, to the example of the Prelates lives, and the
dictates of their writings. An ill change certainly: But where is this rule by
them prescribed? That he neither does, or can tell us: but (according to his
old wont) falls a railing against his Majesty's Declaration for sports upon the
Sundaies, and against those whom he calls Anti-Sabbatarians, for allowing of
it, notwithstanding (as has been already sufficiently demonstrated) it is no
way contrary, but consonant to the Word of God, which they (whom he taxes)
allow and acknowledge as the sole rule of Christian life: though not so (as he
would have it) that a man may do nothing, either in his civil conversation,
or in things pertaining to the time, place, manner, and other circumstances in
the worship of God, which is not to be found in the Scriptures, though
commanded by superiors, invested with authority from God himself. And however
this is no proof of his assertion; for he cannot bring any instance, wherein
they propound their own lives for a pattern, or rule of Christians practice
in this, no, nor in any other case. Nay, I dare boldly say, that if Master B.
and such as join with him in opinion, would give the Prelates of our Church
that which our blessed Savior commanded to be given (while the Jewish Church
continued) to the Scribes and Pharisees who sat in Moses seat, To observe and
do that Mat. 23. 2. 3.
which they command them, and that only, wherein they command not contrary to
the duty of their places, or to the Word of God: They will easily dispense with
them, for observing any further rule, or for doing after their works, though
it cannot be said of them (as our Savior did of the Scribes and Pharisees)
that they say, and do not.

Having nothing more to say to this point, but senseless repetitions of his
old declamatory, or incendiary language; For a close, he brings certain
arguments framed in defense of the pretended Innovations, which he answers with
as much confidence, and little reason, as he has used hitherto in the
charging of them for such.

First, he says, our changers plead, That they page 158.
bring in no changes, but revive those things, which ancient Canons have
allowed and prescribed: To this he answers. That in this Land, we are not to
be ruled by the Popes Canons, or Canon Law, but by the Law of God, and of the
King. But, by his favor, I must tell him, that neither the Law of God, nor of
the King does disallow the use of the Old Canons and Constitutions, though made
in the time of Popery, and by the Pope, or Popish Prelates; which are not
contrary to the Law of God, or of the King, which yet he has not, and indeed
cannot justly charge any of those things to be, which he quarrels. If he
desire proof of this, let him consider whether the Stat. 25. Hen. 8. 19. do
not say as much as I affirm. Where, having regulated diverse things touching
the exercise of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, at last, the Statute concludes
with this proviso. Provided also, that such Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances,
and Synodalls provincial, Stat. 25. Hen. 8. 19.
being already made, which be not contrariant, nor repugnant to the Laws,
Statutes, and Customs of this Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the Kings
Prerogative Royal; shall now still be used and executed, as they were before
the making of this Act, till such time as they be viewed, searched, or
otherwise ordered, and determined by the said two and thirty persons, or the
more part of them, according to the tenor, form, and effect of this present
Act. It follows then, that till those thirty two persons determine otherwise,
old Canons may be still executed and retain their ancient vigor and
authority; and when that will be, I know not, but as yet, I am sure, it has
not been done. As for that which he says, he heard a Popish Canon alleged in
the High Commission, in opposition to a Parliament Statute: unless he had
brought us the Particular, I will crave leave to put that among the rest of his
incredible fictions, which he has foisted upon that Honorable Court, and
those that sit Judges in it. And whereas, heads, that the Act of Parliament
prefixed to the Communion-booke, restraines Rites and Ceremonies to be used in
our Church, to those only, which are expressed in the same book, under the
penalty of imprisonment, etc. I grant that the Statute does forbid the use of
any other rite, ceremony, order, form or manner of celebrating of the Lords
Supper, Mattens, or Evensong, etc. than is set forth in the said book.

But this does not hinder the retaining of any laudable, and pious customs
then, and of a long time before, in use in the Church, which are no way
contrary to the form, or rites prescribed in the book of Common prayer. For,
where is it said in that book, that men, during the time of Divine Service, or
of prayer and the Letany, shall sit with their hats off, and uncovered? and yet
that ceremony is piously observed, by all that have any religion in them. Sine
scripto jus venit, quod usus approbavit, nam diuturni mores consensu utentium
comproba^i, legem imitantur. Justin. Instit. l. 1. Tit. 2. Consuetudo est jus
quoddam, moribus institutum, quod pro lege suscipitur cum deficit lex. Gratian.
Distinct. 1. c. 5. In his rebus de quibus nihil certi statuit diving scriptura,
mospopu^i Dei, vel instituta ma^orum pro lege tenenda s^nt Aug. Ep. 86.
Custom not contrary to Law, or good reason has ever obtained the force of a
law: and in things of this nature, the pious customs of Gods people (as Saint
Aug speaks) are to be held for laws. And being so, must (or at least may
lawfully) be observed till some law expressly cry them down: which I am sure
the Common Prayer Book, nor any Statute yet has done. And if Master B. shall
not allow this for good reason; he will do himself more prejudice by it, than
those whom he opposes: for, besides that, he will be at a stand what gesture
to use in many things, which are yet left there undetermined. His present
practice in many things, must needs be condemned, as having no warrant, or
prescription in that book. For I would (for instance) feign know where, in
that book, his rite of carrying the blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Christ up and down the Church, to the receivers pewes, is to be found? Where
he has any allowance of singing a Psalm, while he is administering? where,
or by what Statute, those meetred Psalms were ever allowed to be sung at all
in the Church? And if he can plead custom, or (however) practice, these and
many others like them (which might be reckoned up) without the warrant of the
Common Prayer Book. Why may not the same plea hold as strongly for those which
he oppugnes, which (saving that he has called them all to naught) are neither
against the Word of God, nor book of Common Prayer, but most decent, and
religious, and venerable, for their antiquity in the Church of God. Nay, if the
not being in the book of Common Prayer shall be enough to exclude all rites
and ceremonies from being used in the Church, and that upon so great a danger
as imprisonment, etc. Ther^ surely such as are contrary to the express orders
there prescribed must much more be excluded, and their practice expose men
(more deservedly) to the same danger. And certainly Master B. by this means
would be but in an ill case, and many others, especially of his faction. For
how could they justify their not reading of Gloria Patri, at the end of every
Psalm? their addition of those words to the Lords Prayer, (for thine is the
Kingdom, the power, etc.) when they find it not there printed. Their
Christening of children after divine Service and the Sermon is ended: their
consummation of the whole form of Marriage in the body of the Church, without
going to the Communion Table, and their churching of women, other where than by
that table, and many other things, which are contrary to the express words of
the If any person, etc. shall, etc. speak any thing in derogation, depraving
of the same book, or of any thing therein contained, etc. every such person
being thereof lawfully convicted, shall forfeit for the first offense 100.
marks, for the second, 400. for the 3. all his goods and chattels, and suffer
imprisonment during his life. Stat. 1. Eliz 2.
Rubric: yea, which is more than all this, how can Master B. be excused from
the penalty imposed by that Statute, for depraving and speaking against the
reading of the second (or Communion) service at the Communion Table, being so
appointed in that book? These things considered, it may justly be wondered at,
why the Statute should be so straitlaced to some, as not to admit any ceremony
to be used, but those that are prescribed and mentioned in the Common Prayer
book, though commended by antiquity and the practice of the most judicious and
of greatest authority in the Church, and yet so indulgent to others as to
suffer them freely to use what they think good, and to wave the orders there
prescribed, and to deprave and speak against them at their pleasure. But let
us hear what more he has to say.

Besides all this (says he) these men have one special Sanctuary to fly unto,
and that is their Cathedral Churches. Well, what then? nay stay and give him
leave first to empty his stomach, for we may well think he cannot name
Cathedral Churches without moving his vomit, which he utters plentifully,
both against those places and those that belong to them, with all their
furniture, vestments; yea, and the divine Service that is used in page 160.
them. And having thus cleared himself of that choleric and bitter stuff,
which I loath to pudle in; he propounds the argument pretended to be drawn
from hence; Thus: Cathedralls are so and so: therefore all other Churches must
conform to them. And then manfully denies the argument and says, we must
live by laws, not by examples, Legibus vivendum est non exemplis.
and that the rites and ceremonies of all our Churches, are prescribed, and
precisely limited by Act of Parliament, and not left at large to the example of
Cathedralls, etc. We are not (I confess) left to be ruled in point of
ceremonies by the example of Cathedral Churches, and it is the best and
rightest course to live by laws, rather than examples: But that the Act of
Parliament has so prescribed and precisely limited the rites and ceremonies,
that no custom or usage (how ancient or pious so ever) may be practiced
without express allowance of the Act of Parliament or of book of Common
prayer, which by it is authorized* that I have already showed to be untrue.
But I wonder where the man found any using that argument in that manner; yet I
need not wonder, it being common with weak and passionate disputants, to cast
the arguments of their adversaries to such a mold as they can best fit them
with answers, and to make them say that, to which they can say somewhat, not
that which indeed they speak or intend. And thus he has dealt with this, for
who knows not, that Cathedrals have ever had certain rites and ceremonies,
vestments, and other ornaments, which have not been used in Parochials? And
that to reduce all Parochial Churches to their model, is neither necessary
nor convenient, nor almost possible to be done. Yet the argument drawn from
the examples of Cathedrals, is good enough against Master B. and holds strongly
to prove that for which it is brought: It is a good argument to say; Cathedrals
are so and so; or use such and such rites and ceremonies, and ever since the
beginning of the reformation have used them. Therefore those rites and
Ceremonies are no noveltyes or innovations in the Church of England. Yea, and
it may pass for a good Argument to clear those Ceremonies (which he has so
deeply charged) from superstition and idolatry, except with such as are so
past sense and shame as to lay the approbation, and allowance of those gross
sins to this Church, yea and condemn not the Prelates only, but these
Sovereign Princes who have not only not purged, but been spectators and actors
in the same. And therefore if he had not had so much wisdom as to think the
Church, and the Sovereign, and subordinate Governors thereof to be as wise,
and able to judge and as conscientious to avoid superstition and Idolatry as
he; yet he might have showed that modesty and reverence as not to have
trumpeted out their faults, but rather to have imitated Samuel in honoring
them and upholding their reputation 1. Sam. 15. 31.
before the people. But he proceeds (after his raving manner) to let fly at the
usages and ornaments in several Cathedralls; where it must be taken for an
innovation, if any ornaments that were decayed have happened to be renewed or
repaired, or things neglected have been restored; 162.
or any Chapel in either University be adorned: and they are taxed to become
nurceries of superstition and Idolaty to the whole Land, and tells of a late
Order read at Sidney College in Cambridge, that whosoever would not bow at the
naming of Jesus, and to the Altar, should be upon the second admonition
expelled the College. Wherein surely his intelligence deceived him, and made
him foyst an order upon that College which (I dare say) is not guilty in any
such kind: and then he quarrels the calling of Cathedrals Mother-churches,
because (forsooth) other Churches never came out of their bellies: and such
like stuff, which to me, seems not worthy any other answer than silence or
laughter.

At last he falls upon the Royal Chapel, which he says, is the Innovators
last refuge, and they (as page 165.
he falsely charge them) plead the whole equipage thereof, as a pattern for
all Churches to follow, etc. In his answer to which, he has truly said, that
it is not for subjects to compare with the King in the state of his royal
Family or Chapel: and so in his second answer, that many things in page 166.
the Kings Chapel, as Quire of Gentlemen, etc. cannot be had or maintained in
ordinary Churches. But though these answers had been sufficient to have
answered that argument, if it had been brought by any in that manner wherein he
propounds it, yet he rests not in them, but adds others, and not obscurely
intimates, that the practice even of the Royal Chapel, and the rites there
used, are contrary to the Law of the Land, and the Divine rule of Scripture,
and compares the use of them, to the bowing to King Nebuchadnezzars golden
Image, and the offering of incense in the presence of the Emperor Julian the
Apostatels Altar, at his command; which the godly servants of God in those
times by no means could be brought to do. And concludes with a supposall,
That if Mass were set up in the Kings Chapel, it were no good argument, why
it should be admitted in all the Churches throughout the Realm of England. And
I verily believe that the argument is insufficient to make the Mass, or any
other idolatrous worship to be lawful. But say with all, that his answers are
dangerous and most disloyal insinuations of the violation of Law, of Idolatry
and superstition practiced in the Royal Chapel, by the allowance, and in the
presence of His most Sacred Majesty; and fitter for the censure of Authority
than other answer. And I conclude (as he does) with that, which if he had
rightly considered, would have taught him more religion and loyalty, and have
saved me this trouble: My son fear thou the Lord, and the King: and meddle
not with them that are given to change: for their calamity shall rise suddenly,
and who knows the ruin of them both.

And thus I have gone over these eight heads of Innovations, wherein I was
willing to follow Master Burtons method, and take his own division, not that I
thought it perfect (for I might easily have reduced them to half that number)
but, because I thought that the best way for the satisfying of some kind of
readers, who would (perhaps) if I had abridged their number, have thought some
of them unanswered. And in my answer to these, I have brought in diverse things
(such as I thought most material) which I found scattered in other places, and
(excepting his senseless railings and declamations, wherein he has
Tautologised to the tiring of a resolved patience) I trust I have not omitted
any thing to which an answer may not well be framed out of that which I have
said.

I shall now desire to take a little breath, and by way of digression, though
not altogether impertinently; to give a brief of the story of the proceedings
of those men, in whose steps Master B. has gone, to the intent that it may
appear, that they of his faction may more truly be termed Innovators in this
Church, as being both in their doctrine and discipline, new, and contrary to
the forms in both kinds, which the first authors of those (by them admired)
principles found here established.

CHAP. XXI.
A brief discourse of the beginning and progress of the Disciplinarian
faction; their sundry attempts for their Genevian Dearling. Their Doctrines new
and different from the true and ancient Tenets of the Church of England, and
they truly and rightly termed Innovators.

IT was one of the greatest evils that ever happened to this Church, that in
the infancy of the reformation (which was happily begun in the reign of King
Edward of happy memory) many for conscience sake and to avoid the storm of
persecution which fell in the days of Queen Mary, betaking themselves to the
reformed Churches abroad, and especially to Geneva, were drawn into such a
liking of the form of discipline then newly erected by Master Calvin there,
that returning home, they became quite out of love with that which they found
here established by Authority: insomuch, that set on by the persuasions and
examples of John Knox and other fiery spirited Zealots in Scotland, they
attempted and by all means endeavored to advance their strongly-fancied
platform of Genevian discipline. For the bringing about whereof, the course
they then took for the drawing of the people to a liking of their intentions,
was, to pick quarrels against the names, and titles given to the Fathers and
Governors of our Church, apparel of Ministers, and some ceremonies in the
book of Common prayer retained and prescribed, which they taxed of
superstition, and remnants of Popery. And afterward when T. C. and others (who
had also been at Geneva) had drunk in the opinion of Master Beza, who by that
time, had promoted the discipline there invented by his Master, and made it one
of the especial notes of the true Church, as if it had till then been maimed
and imperfect: what books were then written, what seeming humble motions made,
what pamphlets, pasquils, libels, flew abroad; yea, what violent attempts,
plots, conspiracies, and traitorous practices were then set on foot, by the men
of that faction, are at large set forth in diverse books of that argument, and
are yet fresh in the memories of many alive at this day.

What the care and courageous zeal of the Govenors of this Church and State
then was, for the preventing and overthrowing of these men's desperate disignes,
the flourishing and peaceful estate which this Church has since by their
means enjoyed, does abundantly speak. For the authors of these innovations,
troubles and disorders, receiving just and public censure, according to their
several demerits; they which remained well-willers and abettors of that cause,
were glad to lie close, and carry themselves more warily than before, and to
wait some better opportunity for the effecting of their purpose. Which they
apprehending to be offered at the coming of King James to this crown, began
again to move, but so, as beginning as it were at their old A. B. C. their
complaint was principally against the use of ceremonies, subscription, and
sundry things formerly questioned by their predecessors in the book of Common
Prayer. And when that learned and judicious King had out of his wise and
gracious disposition, vouchsafed to take their complaint into his serious
consideration, and to grant them a solemn and deliberate hearing in the
conference held at Hampton Court; The success of that conference (to use the
words of his Royal Proclamation) was such as Proclamation before the Book of
common prayer.
happens to many other things, which moving great expectation before they be
entered into, in their issue produce final effects. For (to give the sum of
that which there follows) mighty and vehement informations were found to be
supported with so weak and slender proofs; that that wise King and his
Council, seeing no cause to change any thing, either in the book of Common
Prayer, Doctrine, or rites established; Having caused some few things to be
explained, He by his Royal Proclamation commanded a general conformity of all
sorts, requiring the Archbishops and Bishops to see that conformity put in
practice.

Being thus frustrate of their hopes of bringing in their darling plat-forme,
some of the principal among them, remaining stiff in their opinion, and
opposition to Authority, received a just censure, and suffered deprivation;
others (grown wiser by the example of their fellows suffering) that they might
save their reputation, and yet continue in their places, invented a new course,
and yielded a kind of conformity, not that they thought any whit better of the
things, but for that they held them (though in themselves unlawful) not to be
such, as for which a man ought to hazard (not his living, that might savor of
covetousness, but) his ministry, and the good which Gods People might, by
that means, receive. This project prevailed with many, to make them come off
to a subscription, and yet gave them liberty, in private, and where they might,
freely, and with safety, to express themselves, to show their dis-affection to
the things to which they had subscribed, resolving not to practice what they
had professed, nor to use the ceremonies enjoined, further than they should be
compelled. And, for this cause, they did wisely avoid all occasions that might
draw them to the public profession of conformity by using the ceremonies, and
betook themselves to the work of preaching, placing themselves (as much as
might be) in Lectures and (where any of them were beneficed) getting
conformable Curates under them to bear the burden of the ceremonies. Thus
saving themselves, and maintaining their reputation with the people, they
gained the opportunity to instill into them their principles, not only of
dislike of the Church Government and rites, but also of the doctrine
established: and though (through the vigilancie and care of those that have
sat at the stern in this Church) they have been hitherto hindered from
erecting their altars of Damascus publicly in our Temples, yet have they
(using this art now a long time) in an underhand way brought up the use of
their own crotchets, and erected a new Church both for doctrine and discipline
far differing from the true and ancient English Church: and made, though not a
local (as some more zealous among them have, by removing to Amsterdam and
New England) yet a real separation, accounting themselves the wheat among the
tares, and monopolizing the names of Christians, Gods children, Professors, and
the like: stiling their doctrine, The Gospel, The Word, and their Preachers,
The Ministers, The good Ministers, Powerful preachers, and by such other
distinctive names. As for all other men they account them no better than
Resembling herein the Donatists of old, with whom Optatus expostulates in this
manner: Eum qui -- in nomine Christi tinctus est, Paganum vocas? And again,
Paganum vocas eum qui Deum Patrem per filium ejus ante aram rogaverit? And a
little after, Si aliquid Christianus -- deliquerit, peccator dici potest:
Paganus iterum dici non potest. And it is as verified of these men which the
Father after adds. Ille vobis videbitur Christianus, qui quod vultis fecerit,
non quem fides adduxerit. Optat. Milevit. l. 3.
Pagans, or heathens, baptized with outward Baptism, which, as one of them
once expressed it in a Sermon, (though I tremble to relate it) did no more to
the making of them Christians, than the washing of a dogs leg. Their usual
names by which they use to note out those that are not of their Tribe, are, The
Wicked, Carnal, Men of no Religion, Unconverted, Wretched beasts. And, when
they are most charitable, Civill-honest-men, (which yet is no commendation,
because with them, civill-honestie is no better than a smooth devil) Men that
have good natural parts; some common gifts of grace, which a reprobate may
have; or (if their charity happily do enlarge it self more than ordinary) Men
that have some good things in them, or some small beginnings of grace.

But for Preachers that suit not their humor, that is, all that are thoroughly
conformable, (who subscribe and practice, not groan, murmur and complain) their
best terms of them are, Formalists, Time-servers, Men*pleasers, Enemies of
grace and sincerity, etc. As for the Bishops, let Master Burton tell you under
what names they use to cloak their conceit of their persons and places.

And here for the better demonstration of their real separation wherewith I
charge them, and that it may appear, that though they are with us, they are
not of us; give me leave briefly, to instance in some of the most remarkable
points in difference between us: wherein I shall desire my reader to expect no
accurate, or elaboratelymethodicall discourse; my intent being, only to make a
rough draught of them, in such order, as they shall offer themselves to my
present memory.

The ordination of Priests and Deacons in our Church (as ever in the Church of
Christ) belongs to the Bishops, which (because they cannot otherwise choose
they are contented to accept from their hands, that their seal may protect
them from danger of Law: but yet think themselves not rightly called to that
Function, unless they have withal gotten the approbation of the people of
God, and of the godly Ministers: and for this end they must give trial of
their gifts in some private conventicle, or adventure up at some Lecture
(without the Churches ordination) where some of the Fathers of their Order
shall be present, and after with the people at a Feast, pronounce sentence of
their gifts and abilities. Which if it happen for them, they doubt not but they
are rightly called. In like manner, for their calling to a Benefice or
Pastoral charge, taking the Patrons presentation and Bishops ordination only
for their safe standing and security of enjoying it, they must be called of the
people too, the cure of whose souls they undertake. For which end their course
is (because they cannot openly put it to election) to show themselves by
preaching to the Congregation, and then to withdraw themselves as unwilling, or
at least unresolved to accept of the place, expecting whether they shall be
desired of the people, either the major part or (for they vary as it shall make
most for their purpose) the better (as they account them) that is, the
Professors of the Parish or near adjoining; whereof if they have but three or
four for them, though all the Parish beside, be against them, they take their
calling to be from God. Or if happily this shall fail them, then they will have
their calling scand and approved by some of the best Ministers, or perhaps by
some one of them, which shall (for a need) serve the turn, to make good their
calling, rather than part with the Living, unless some better hopes show
themselves. So that upon the point, we may say of them as Saint Austine once of
his Donatists: They have ordained Bishop against Bishop, Episcopum contra
Episcopum ordinaverunt, altar contra altar erexerunt August. Epist. 171.
or rather (because they like that name better) a private Presbytery, against
the Bishops; yea, and they have (though that name offend them too) erected
Altar against Altar, setting up a new religion, a new faith, and form of Gods
worship.

1. I say their faith is new, being (as they imagine) a firm persuasion of
Gods special love to them in Christ, or an assurance of their election, and
consequently of salvation: which is nothing else, but to have a good conceit of
a man's self, in regard of Gods favor, to believe themselves to be his
dearlings.

2. It is new in the instrument all cause of it, being not wrought by the word
of God, as it is left written for our learning, by the holy men of God moved by
the Holy Ghost, (that has no power to work conversion, but) preached, that
is, (not always out of the pulpit, a tables end will serve) expounded and
applied (as they call it) by them: with this help the word of God (otherwise
insufficient) becomes able to work their conversion and salvation; and (which
is more strange) to do it in an instant, (for they admit no preparatory acts
to proceed) and that so powerfully, that it is impossible to resist or to
defer the work of it for a moment; and so sensibly, that every man may, yea
and (if he be rightly) must know the time of his conversion.

3. It is new in the effects of it; For first, it frees a man from the fear of
him that is able to cast body Luke 12. 5.
and soul into hell fire, so that they are exempted from that precept given by
our Savior commanding us to fear him. They look at Hell as a danger past,
and at Heaven, as if they were in possession of it already; holding the hope of
reward a poor incentive to perform duty or endure affliction, a reprobate may
go so far as to abstain from evil and do good, for fear of hell, and
with an eye to the recompense of reward; so that a man must go farther than
this, or otherwise he can have no assurance that he is the child of God.

Secondly, it gives them a right, not to heaven only, but even to the things
of this life, which, if others (that want this faith) chance to have, they are
in Gods sight usurpers, and shall as thieves and robbers be arraigned for them,
at the dreadful bar of Gods severe judgment seat, and be condemned (not
for the abuse, but) for the having of whatsoever creatures of God, they have
had any part in their whole lives, insomuch as every bit of bread they eat,
shall help to increase their score and aggravate their condemnation. Whereas
they (having by virtue of their faith) this right and faculty granted them, may
use them securely, and without all fear, I had almost said, and abuse them
too, but I spare them; yet surely I have known strange effects of this
doctrine: and what consequences naturally do flow from it, I leave to the
judicious and indifferent consideration of any understanding man.

Thirdly, it produces a strange kind of justification, whereby at once, all
their sins past, present, Ames. p. 121. Calvin. Inst. l. 3. c. 4.. 3.
and to come, are remitted, and they without more ado as sure of heaven, as if
they were in it already: and that without any repentance, which (with them) is
no cause of the remission of sins, neither indeed can be as coming too
late, and when that work is done already by faith, or rather before all faith,
which apprehends the free and full remission of their sins ready sealed,
before all repentance, which (as they teach) ever comes after faith, though, to
say the truth, it seldom either precedes or follows after, as it ought; and
indeed, I wonder how it should, when they hold, that neither it, nor good
works are of any efficacy in procuring man's salvation. Yea, so far have
some gone in opposition to repentance and good works, that they blush not to
teach, that impenitencie it self does not exclude from grace or salvation, for
they say, that impenitencie is but a sin, and the impenitent but a sinner,
and so the proper object of justification, and salvation, inasmuch as the
Apostle says, This is 1 Timothy 1. 15.
a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance that Jesus Christ came into
the world to save sinners: so ignorantly, and against the maine grounds of
Christian faith and piety, do they wrest that most sweet and comfortable place
to serve their own fancies. So for good works, though all agree to exclude
them from being any means of not only of justification, but of salvation: yet
some do admit them as it were spectators and witnesses of the work done, and
in that respect require their presence as necessary, though they contribute
nothing to the work. But others are of a more sublime strain, and they think
them no way necessary, but rather hinderers of salvation: and whereas vulgar
Christians and the under-forme or rank of Professors, do make use of them as
signs and evidences of their faith and justification, these teach (as the most
new and more refined way) that men should try their works by their faith, and
that this is the only way to have constant and untottering comfort, which the
commission of no sin can ecclypse or diminish: for they believing, that God
loves and has accepted their persons, and that once for all, must believe
also, that he will take them altogether, with all faults, that they are or
shall be gulty of: and being his favorits, they may be assured that he will
give them more liberty, and wink at more and grocer faults in them, than in
unbeleevers and reprobates, who may happily be condemned to hell fire, for but
looking upon a woman to lust after her, when these escape with actual adultery,
and many other gross and grievous sins lived and dyed in without repentance;
those being but infirmities in them, which in others are scandalous and crying
sins. In which regard, they enjoy two notable privileges. First, that
whereas to others, death, to them, life is the wages of sin; for they so
far extend that of the Apostle Saint Paul, Romans 8. 28. to include sin and
all, which, together with all things else, works together for their good and
salvation. Secondly, they are by this means exempted from all punishment, as
well in this world, as in the next, that all the afflictions which befall them,
and death it self, are not punishments for their sins, or signs of his
displeasure against them, (whom he once and ever loved so dearly) but only
fatherly corrections and exercises of their graces.

As their faith is new, so are many acts of Gods worship new too; I Will begin
with the principal of them all, their Prayers: which are far different from
the Prayers of the Church of England: for first, our Church appoints public
Prayers, after a set and solemn form; Prayers received from the ancient
Church of Christ, and venerable for their antiquity; Prayers, wherein the
meanest in the Congregation, by reason of the continual use, may join in, and
help to set upon God with an army of Prayers: Prayers composed with that
gravity, with such pious, and soule-ravishing strains, with those full, and
powerful expressions of heavenly affection, that I suppose the world, setting
them aside, has not the like volumne of holy Orisons. But these are by them
slighted and vilified, in whose mouths the short and pithy prayers of the
Church are but shreads and pieces, and not worthy the name of Prayers, and the
Letany accounted conjuring. And in stead of these regular devotions, they have
brought in a long prayer, freshly-conceived, and brought forth by the Minister,
and that, (God knows) many times in bald and homely language, such as wise men
would be ashamed to tell a tale in, even to their equals, with many gasping,
and unseemely pauses, and multitudes of irksome Tautologies, and (which is none
of the least defects of it) in which none of the Congregation is able to join
with him or to follow him, as not knowing, no, nor the speaker himself
sometimes, what he is about to say.

Again, the Church of England has consecrated certain places to be houses of
public prayer, which places so consecrated and appropriated to that holy
Service, they judge fit that public prayer be there made, as in the places
where God is in a more special manner present: but these places are by them
contemned, and every place, a parlour, barn, or playhouse, accounted as holy
and fit as they, for public prayer or any other act of Gods worship.

Thirdly, prayers in the Church of England, have ever been conceived, not only
as duties to be performed, but as means also, sanctified by God for the
obtaining of his blessings, whereby he is moved to grant our desires: but with
them they are accounted only duties which must be done, in doing whereof men
do not so much move God, or dispose him to grant their desires, as themselves
to receive them.

Fourthly, when we (according as our Savior has taught us in that holy
pattern of prayer which he left with his Disciples) do pray that God would
forgive us our trespasses, we mean simply and unfeignedly to obtayn
fogivenesse, and that by this means; but they, praying for forgiveness of
sins, intend only continuation of that grace of remission of sins, which
they have already received, which grace, being immutable, prayer for that
purpose is by them judged altogether superfluous: the main end therefore that
they aim at in their prayers, is, that they may grow more and more in sense
and assurance of the remission of their sins. If we pass from prayer to the
Sacraments, which, as our Church teaches, are moral instruments to conveigh
those graces unto the receivers, which the outward signs visibly represent;
and so, that in Baptism infants receive remission of their sins, and are
truly regenerate: These men will allow the Sacraments no such virtue,
accounting them as bare signs and seals of that grace which they have already
received, if they be elect; if otherwise, they hold them to be but as seals
set to a blank, being to no pupose, and of no value; acknowledging no such tie
between the act of God and the Priest, that what the Priest shall do visibly,
God should be thought, at the same time, and by that means, to effect
inwardly by his grace and holy spirit. And therefore when (according to our
form of Ministration of Baptism) they are to say, that the child baptized is
regenerate, some of them are feign to interlace [we hope] and think it true,
only in the judgment of charity, or in case they be elected; in which case
some think (though others strongly contradict) they may be said truly to be
regenerate in Baptism. Of the same strain is their doctrine of the blessed
Eucharist; wherein they acknowledge no power of consecration in the Priest; no
other presence of Christ than by way of representation; no other exhibition
than by way of signation or obsignation; nor other grace conveyed, but in
seeming or (at best) the only the assuring of what they had before; which (if
they have not) they must want, for all that the Sacrament can do. Thus have
they made these saving ordinances of God, of none effect through their
traditions.

One thing more I cannot omit (though I have already touched it in part) which
is, their manner of observing of Fasts, and the course they have devised how to
have them their own way. The piety of the Church of Christ, in whose steps the
Church of England treads, as they have their appointed solemn Festivals for
the commemoration of Gods special mercies by public thanksgivings and
rejoycings; so they have also appointed set times for fasting and humiliation,
as the time of Lent, the four Embers, etc. These (though the work of fasting
seem to please them) they reject and scorn; first, for that they are set-times,
and perhaps because appointed by Authority; for they would, by their good-wils,
have them only occasional, and in the time of extraordinary calamities, either
felt or feared, and to be appointed by the Minister when he shall judge the
necessities of Christians so to require. A second thing they dislike them for,
is; That they are not enjoined to be kept as Sabbaths extraordinary (which is
their doctrine) and so to have the duties of the Sabbaths, then observed after
an extraordinary manner; as namely abstinence from bodily labor, and the works
of men's particular Callings, and two or more Sermons of a more than ordinary
size, of which I have already spoken somewhat. Now because the diligence and
care of the Church and State, and the watchfulnes of Pursuivants, has frighted
them from their private assemblies, where they were wont, to enjoy themselves
and their own way in this kind. They have used in the City of London, a new,
and a quaint stratagem, whereby, without suspicion, they obtain their desires.
The course they take is this: Some good Christians (that is, Professors)
intimate their necessities to some Minister of note among them, and obtain of
them the promise of their pains to preach upon that occasion, pitching upon
such days and places, as where and when Sermons or Lectures are wont to be;
and having given underhand notice to such as they judge faithful, of the day
to be observed, and the places where they shall meet for that end, thither
they resort, and mixing themselves with the crowd, unsuspected have the word
they so much desire, with the occasion covertly glanced at, so as those that
are not of their counsel, are never the wiser. Thus I have diverse times known
them to begin the day upon a wednesday, where they had a Sermon beginning at
six in the morning, and holding them till after eight: that being done, they
post (sometimes in troops) to another Church, where the Sermon beginning at
nine, holds them till past eleven, and from thence again, they betake
themselves to a third Church, and there place themselves against the afternoon
Sermon begin, which holds them till night. And so (without danger of the
Pursuivants, they observe a Public Fast, as much as these hard times will give
them leave) after their own way and heart.

I should tire my reader if I should at large set down their several tenets
and positions: whereof some are besides others, against the holy Scriptures,
the Doctrine of the ancient and of our mother Church of England. Among which
are the Doctrine of the Sabbath, for which of late they have raised such loud
cries, as if, without it be established among us, the glory were departed from
Israel and the Ark of God taken. Of the same strain are their opinions
concerning contracts and their necessity: which they use to solemnize in
private houses, with a Sermon and feasting (two usual companions) I will not
say, to affront and baffle the orders, and received customs of our Church (I
think that beyond the intention of many among them) though the event proclaim
that to be the attendant of their opinion and practice. To these I might add
many more, as their assertion of the impossibility of the observation of the
Law of God, not to the mere natural man, but even to the regenerate, and
assisted by the grace of God: a point of dangerous consequence, both in regard
of that rub which it casts before Christians, in their way to heaven, and of
the advantage which thereby the Jesuits have taken, to cast a scandal upon
our Church: as if, what these have in considerately broached, were a part of
her doctrine. So likewise their traditions about callings, with their many
conceits about them, obtruded upon many credulous and tender consciences, by
which, they are many times needlessly affrighted, and tormented, while their
Rabbis, by tying and untying of these knots of their own knitting, do gain
the people, and suck from them no small advantage. But I pass over these and
many others, as their innumerable signs and marks of Grace, invented many of
them to second that good opinion of themselves, which by their faith at first
they entertained. I pass also their rites, ceremonies, and usages,
superstitiously observed among them: in all, or most of which, any indifferent
man may observe an affectation of singularity, and opposition to the Church,
whereof they would seem members: omitting then all these, I will only add
something of their courses of late undertaken for the propagation of their new
Church and Gospel; amongst which the most dangerous and cunning that ever they
hatched was that of the buying in of impropriations: a pious and a glorious
work, and such as rightly intended, is highly esteemed by all those that
sincerely affect the good of this Church and Religion. This project so specious
in show, had for a long while a fair passage, and the approbation of many more
than of their own strain, till at length their purposes were unvailed, and
their aim discovered; which was, the erecting of a seminary at Saint
Antholins, subordinated to a Classis or Clerolaicall Consistory, who had power
(at least in their intentions) to plant there such hopeful imps, as should be
fit, upon the falling of any of their purchased Impropriations, to be removed
and transplanted into great and populous places in this Kingdom, in which they
endeavored so to fasten and fence these transplanted choice ones, that no
Ecclesiastical censure should touch or deprive them of their maintenance: by
that means, hoping in such places, (to use the words of a prime agent in that
cause) to establish the Gospel by a perpetual decree to this end also, they
had sundry attempts, of which these two were famous. First, the striving by
money, to purchase the place of an Head of an house in Oxford, for one of their
own party, for the first trayning up of their novices in their mysteries. And
the other was in (the like way) their attempt for the getting of a Commissaries
place, there where they intended to make a special plantation, who being after
their own hearts, might wink at their irregularities, and secure them from the
danger of that Court. The scanning of which and other their attempts, I leave
to the indifferent and intelligent. In the mean time, I shall ever bless God
that put it into the heart of His sacred Majesty and the State, timely to
discover and prevent this their purpose before it had undermined the present
government of the Church, as no question it would have given a good say to it,
if it had without control proceeded as it began. And for this, that learned
and famous man in his profession Master William Noy, (at that time His
Majesty's Attorney general) deserves an honorable memory among those that are
true well-willers to the Church and State; whose industry and zealous pains,
in this cause, was a chief means of it is discovery and overthrow. And that
the rather, because for that one piece of service sake, he fell totally and
finally from the grace and favor of that faction; and Master B. or the Author,
who ever he was, of that libell annexed to his Divine Tragedy, (as if he were
some fury, whose hate death could not pacify) for that and his service against
Prynne, tramples upon his memory, and pisses (as it were) upon the ashes of
him, and his unfortunate eldest son, whom he reserves for the last scene of
that his late audaciously vented fable, as if he had been the most remarkable
prodigy of impiety, by him brought upon the State. But I leave him, and his
presumptuous censurers to the judgment of God, which, (whatsoever theirs be) I
am sure, is according unto truth: Neither will it boot Romans 2. 2.
them, that (which they now so much boast of) their persons are accepted, for
there is no respect of persons with God in the day wherein he shall judge the
secrets of men by Jesus Christ.

But I find my self digressed: to return therefore and to conclude that which
I intended by this brief relation of the Doctrine and practices of these men,
it may manifestly appear, who they are that may rightly be termed Innovators
and broachers of novell opinions, and practices in this Church; and how easy
it were, by way of recrimination to cry quittance with Master B. and for his
eight, to charge him and his party, with five times that number, not such as
his (fond surmises ignorantly, and falsely accused of novelty and superstition)
but really and truly such, having neither Canon, nor Article of the Church for
them, nor any solid foundation in the Word of God, and which are (some of them
at least) as dangerous to the souls of men, and as great enemies to the power
of godliness, as any of those which he takes for such as are by him
pretended to be. If any man complain of brevity, or of confusion, and want of
order in the relation; let him know, I intended it, rather for a taste, and to
show what might be done in that way, than for any full discourse, which would
have required more than my present leisure, and have swollen my book too much
beyond its intended proportion. If they judge it defective, as wanting proof,
and because I have not produced the Authors of those opinions which I mention;
I answer to the same purpose; that it did not stand with my present intentions,
which was only to point out the things in a cursory way, in which I conceive,
the producing of proofs and Authors might well be spared. But for further
answer I say, that I did it for two other reasons: First, because the things
are so well known, yea, and acknowledged by those from whom (if from any)
contradiction was to be expected, that I could not think it necessary.
Secondly, because I could not do it, without bringing some men's names and
writings upon the Stage, which if I had done, Master B. in his next treatise,
would have styled me as bad as he has done my betters; but that did not so
much diswade me, as the respect I bear to many of their persons, from whom,
though, for the truths sake, I must testify my dissent, yet I shall never by
Gods grace express any disaffection to their persons, or procure them any
blame or blemish; so long as they (as I verily believe many of them heartily
do) remain studious of true piety, and of the Churches peace. What I have
written in this kind, (God himself knows whom I have served in it) I have
written out of love to truth and peace, and of them who are mis*led by these
errors: and therefore I say to them (as Saint Augustine concluding an Epistle
of his to some of Donatus partly) Erit autem vobis bic sermo, quem de munere
Dei novit ipse, quanta and pacis, and vestra dilectione de prompsimus,
correctio si velitis, testis vero et si nolitis August. Epist. 162. in fine.
That this that I have done, shall be, if they please, a correction of their
errors, but if not, a witness against them.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 40. line 18. dele wise. p. 53. l. 3. dele to. p. 58. l. 16. for callenge,
r. challenge. p. 61. l 13 for thoses, r. those. p. 71. l. 15. for displease, r.
displeases. p. 86. l. 25. for, does best, r. does least p. 149. l. 4. for
fire, r. five. p. 153. l. 3. for, that they, r. they that. p. 159. l. 8. for,
Majesty's, r. Majesty. item, l. 14.


