A MVSICALL BANQVET.

Furnished with variety of delicious Airs, Collected out of the best Authors
in English, French, Spanish and Italian.

By Robert Douland.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Adams. 1610.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR ROBERT SYDNEY, KNIGHT: Lord Governor of Vlissigen,
and the Castle of Ramekins, Lord SYDNEY of Penshurst, Viscount Lisle, and Lord
Chamberlain to the Queens most excellent Majesty.
RIGHT Honorable Lord: Since my best ability is not able in the least manner
to counteruaile that duty J owe unto your Lordship, for two great respects;
the one in regard (your Lordship undertaking for me) J was made a member of
the Church of Christ, and withal received from you my name: the other the love
that you bear to all excellency and good learning, (which seems haereditarie
above others to the Noble Family of the Sydneys,) and especially to this
excellent Science of Music, a skill from all antiquity entertained with the
most Noble and generous dispositions. May it please your Honor therefore to
accept these few, and my first labors, as a poor pledge of that zeal and
duty which J shall ever owe unto your Honor, until time shall enable me to
effect something more worthy of your Lordships view, having no other thing save
these few sheets of Paper to present the same withal.

To your Honor in all duty most devoted, Robert Douland.
TO THE READER.
GENTLEMEN: Finding my self not deceived in the hope I had of your kind
entertayning my collected Lute-lessons which I lately set forth, I am further
encouraged to publish unto your censures these AIRS, being collected and
gathered out of the labors of the rarest and most judicious Masters of Music
that either now are or have lately lived in Christendom, whereof some I have
purposely sorted to the capacity of young practioners, the rest by degrees are
of greater depth and skill, so that like a careful Confectionary, as near as
might be I have fitted my Banquet for all tastes; if happily I shall be
distasted by any, let them know what is brought unto them is dressed after the
English, French, Spanish and Italian manner: the assay is taken before, they
shall not need to fear poisoning. You Gentlemen and friends that come in
good will, and not as Promooters into a country Market, to call our viands into
question, whatsoever here is, much good may it do you, I would it were better
for you: for the rest I wish their lips such Lettuce as Silenus Ass, or their
own hearts would desire.

Thine, Robert Douland.
Ad Robertum Doulandum Ioannis filium de Musico suo conuiuio.
ERgone diuini genitoris plectra resumis,
Reddat vt attonitos iterum tua Musa Britannos?
Vt nimia totum rapias dulcedine mundum,
DOVLANDI and resonet nomen nemus omne, superbam
Qua mundi dominam vaga TIBRIDIS alluit vnda;
Littora qua rutilis verrit Pactolus arenis,
Aut sese immiscet glaciali Vistula ponto,
Vincere quem nequeat LINVS, nec Thracius ORPHEUS,
Credo equidem, vt nostras demulceat Entheus aures.
Somnio Threicidum voces, and murmura coeli
Antiquosque modos, rediuiuaque Dorica castra,
Illius vt vario cantillet gutture Musa,
Macte animo ROBERTE tuo, charique parentis
Pergito candorem, moresque imitarier arts
Auspicijsque bonis celebret te fama per orbem
Funera post Patris Phoenixque renascitor alter.
Henricus Peachamus.
The Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Lisle, Lord Chamberlain to the Queens
most excellent Majesty, his Galliard.
^

I.
The Right Honorable George Earl of Cumberland.
CANTVS.
^ MY heavy sprite oppressed ^ with sorrows might, Of wearied limbs the burden
soar su-staines, ^ With silent groans, With silent groans and hearts tears ^
still complains, Yet I breath still and ^ live in life's des-pight. Have I lost
thee? All fortunes ^ I ac- curse, bids thee farewell, with thee all joys
farewell, And ^

^ for thy sake this world be-comes my hell. ^ And for thy sake this world be-
comes my hell. ^

I. BASSVS.
Anthony Holborne.
^ MY heavy sprite, etc. ^

II.
CANTVS.
The Right Honorable; Robert Earl of Essex: Earl Marshall of England.
^
CHange thy mind since she does change, Let not Fancy
Thy un- truth can- not seem strange, When her falsehood
^
still abuse thee: Love is dead and thou art free, She does live but dead to
thee.
does excuse thee.
^
2
Whilst she loved thee best a while,
See how she has still delaid thee:
Using shows for to beguile,
Those vain hopes that have deceived thee.
Now thou see although too late,
Love loves truth which women hate.
3
Love no more since she is gone,
She is gone and loves another:
Being once deceived by one,
Leave her love but love none other.
She was false bid her adieu,
She was best but yet untrue.
4
Love farewell more dear to me
Then my life which thou preseruest:
Life all joys are gone from thee,
Others have what thou deseruest.
Oh my death does spring from hence
I must dye for her offense.
5
Dye, but yet before thou dye
Make her know what she has gotten:
She in whom my hopes did lie,
Now is changed, I quite forgotten.
She is changed, but changed base,
Baser in so vilde a place.
II. BASSVS.
Richard Martin.
^ CHange thy mind since she does change, Let not Fancy still abuse thee: Thy
un- truth cannot sceme strange, When her falsehood does excuse thee. ^ Love is
dead and thou art free, She does live but dead to thee. ^

III.
CANTVS.
^ O Eyes leave off your weeping, Love has the thoughts in ^ keeping, That may
con- tent you: Let not this miscon- ceiuing, Where comforts are receiving, ^
Causles tor- meant you. Let, etc. ^

2
Clouds threaten but a shower,
Hope has his happy hour,
Though long in lasting.
Time needs must be attended,
Love must not be offended
With too much hasting.
3
But O the painful pleasure,
Where Love attends the leisure
Of lives wretchedness:
Where Hope is but illusion,
And Fear is but confusion
Of Loves happiness.
4
But happy Hope that sees
How Hope and Hap agrees.
Of life deprive me,
Or let me be assured,
When life has death endured,
Love will revive me.
III. BASSVS.
Robert Hales, Groom of her Majesty's Privy Chamber.
^ O Eyes leave off your weeping, Love has the thoughts in keeping, That ^ may
content you: Let not this misconceiuing, Where comforts are receiving,
Causeless ^ torment you. Let etc.

IIII.
CANTVS.
Sir Phillip Sidney.
^ GO my Flock, go get you hence, Seek some other ^ place of feeding, Where
you may have some defense, Fro the storms in my breast breeding, ^ And showers
from mine eyes proceeding. ^

2
Leave a wretch in whom all woe
Can abide to keep no measure.
Merry flock such one forgo,
Unto whom Mirth is displeasure,
Only rich in measures treasure.
3
Yet alas before you go
Hear your woeful Masters story,
Which to stones I else would show,
Sorrow only then has glory
When it is excellently sorry.
4
Stella, fairest Shepherdess,
Fairest but yet cruelst ever.
Stella, whom the heavens still bless,
Though against me she persevere,
Though I bliss inherit never.
5
Stella, has refused me:
Stella, who more Love has proved
In this Catiffe heart to be
Then can in good to us be moved
Toward Lambe-kins best beloved.
6
Stella has refused me
Astrophel, that so well served,
In this pleasant spring ( Muse) see
While in pride Flowers be preserved
Himself only Winter-starued.
7
Why alas then does she swear
That she loves me so dearly,
Seeing me so long to bear
Coals of Love that burn so clearly,
And yet leave me hopeless merely.
8
Is that Love? forsooth I trow
If I saw my good Dog grieved
And a help for him did know
My Love should not be believed
But he were by me relieved.
9
No she hates me ( well away)
Fayning Love, somewhat to please me,
Knowing, if she should display
All her hate, Death soon would seize me,
And of hideous torments ease me.
10
Then my flock now adieu,
But alas, if in your straying
Heavenly Stella meet with you,
Tell her in your pittious blaying,
Her poor slaves just decaying.
IIII. BASSVS.
Dincerto.
^ Go my Flock, go get you hence, Seek some other place of feeding, ^ Where
you may have some defense, Fro the storms in my breast breeding, And showers ^
from mine eyes proceeding.

V.
CANTVS.
Sir Phillip Sidney.
^ O Dear life when shall it be, That mine eyes thine eyes may see, ^ And in
them thy mind discover, Whether absence has had force, Thy remembrance ^ to
divorce, From the Image of thy Lover? ^

2
O if I my self find not,
By thine absence often forgot,
Nor debarde from Beauties treasure:
Let no Tongue aspire to tell
In what high I shall dwell,
Only Thought aims at the pleasure.
3
Thought therefore will I send thee,
To take up the place for me,
Long I will not after tarry:
There unseen thou may be bold
Those fair wonders to behold,
Which in them my hopes do carry.
4
Thought, see thou no place forbear,
Enter bravely every where,
Seize on all to her belonging:
But if thou would guarded be,
Fearing her beams, take with thee,
Strength of liking, rage of longing.
5
O my Thoughts, my thoughts, surcease,
Your delights my woes increase,
My life fleetes with too much thinking:
Think no more, but dye in me
Till thou shall received be
At her lips my Nectar drinking.
V. BASSVS.
Dincerto.
^ O Dear life when shall it be, That mine eyes thine eyes may see, And in
them ^ thy mind discover, Whether absence has had force, Thy remembrance to
divorce, ^ From the Image of thy Lover?

VI.
CANTVS.
The Right Honorable Robert, Earl of Essex: Earl Marshall of England.
^
TO plead my faith where faith has no re- ward,
To heap com-plaints where she does not re- guard,
^
To move re- morse where fa- uour is not borne: I lo- ued
Were fruit- less, boot- less, vain and yield but scorn. And my vain:
^
her whom all the world ad- mir'de. I was re- fus'de of her
hopes which far too high as- spir'de Is dead and bu- ri'd and
^
that can love none: For- get my name since you have scornde my
for e- uer gone. Since for your sake I do all mischief
^
Love, And woman- like do not too late la- meant:
prove. I none ac- cuse nor no- thing do re- pent.
^
^ I was as fond as e- uer she was fair, Yet loved I ^ not more then I now
dis- pair. ^

VI. BASSVS.
M. Daniell Batchelar, Groom of her Majesty's Privy Chamber.
^ To plead my faith where faith has no reward, To mouere-morse To heap
complaints where she does not regard, Were fruitless, boote-where ^ fa- uour
is not borne: I lo- ued her whom all the world admir'de, I was less, vain and
yield but scorn. And my vain hopes which far too high aspir'de, Is dead ^
refus'de of her that can love none: For-get my name since you have scornde my
Love, and bu- ri'd and for e- uer gone. Since for your sake I do all
mis-chiefe prove, ^ And womanlike do not too late lament: I was as fond as
ever she was fair, Yet loved I I none accuse nor nothing do repent. ^ not
more then I now despair.

VII.
CANTVS.
Sir Phillip Sidney.
^ IN a grove most rich of shade, Where Birds wanton music made, ^ May then
in his pide weeds showing, New persumes with flowers fresh growing. May then
in, etc. ^

2
Astrophell with Stella sweet
Did for mutual comfort meet,
Both within themselves oppressed,
But either in each other blessed.
3
Him great harms had taught much care
Her fair neck a foul yoke bare,
But her sight his care did banish,
In his sight her yoke did vanish.
4
Wept they had, alas the while,
But now tears themselves did smile,
While their eyes by Love directed,
Interchangeably, rejected.
5
Sighed they had: but now betwixt
Sighs of woe were glad sighs mixed,
With Arms crossed, yet testifying
Restless rest, and living dying.
6
Their ears hungry of each word
Which the dear tongue would afford:
But their tongues restrained from walking,
Till their hearts had ended talking.
7
But when their tongues could not speak,
Love it self did silence break:
Love did see his lips asunder,
Thus to speak in Love and wonder.
8
Stella, sovereign of my Joy,
Fair Triumphres in annoy:
Stella, star of heavenly fire,
Stella, load-starre of desire.
9
Stella, in whose shining eyes,
Are the lights of Cupids skies,
Whose beams when they are once darted,
Love therewith is straight imparted.
10
Stella, whose voice when it speaks,
Senses all asunder break:
Stella, whose voice when it sings,
Angels to acquaintance brings.
11
Stella, in whose body is,
Writ the Caracters of bliss:
Whose sweet face all beauty passes,
Save the mind which it surpasses,
12
Grant, O grant, but speech (alas)
Fails me, fearing on to pass:
Grant to me, what am I saying?
But no fault there is in praying.
13
Grant (O dear) on knees I pray,
(Knees on ground he then did stay)
That not I but since I prove you,
Time and place from me nere move you.
14
Never season was more fit,
Never room apt for it:
Smiling air allows my reason,
These Birds sing, now use the season.
15
This small wind which so sweet is,
See how it leaves leaves does kiss,
Each tree in his best attyring.
Sense of Love to Love inspyring.
16
Love makes earth the water drink,
Love to earth makes water sincke,
And if dumb things be so witty,
Shall a heavenly Grace want pity?
17
There his hands in their speech saine
Would have made tongues language plain
But her hands his hands compelling,
Gave repulse, all Grace expelling.
18
Therewithal, away she went
Leaving him with passion rent
With what she had done and spoken,
That therewith my song is broken.
VII. BASSVS.
Tesseir.
^ IN a grove most rich of shade, Where Birds wanton Music made, May then in
his ^ pide weeds showing, New persumes with flowers fresh growing. May then in
etc: ^

VIII.
CANTVS.
Sir Henry Lea.
For one Voice only to sing.
^ Far from triumphing Court and won- ted glory, ^ He dwelt in shadie
unfrequented places, Times prisoner now he made his pastime story, ^ Gladly
for- gets Courts erst afforded graces, That Goddess whom he serude ^ to
heaven is gone, And he one earth, ^ And he on earth, In darkness left to
moan. ^

2
But lo a glorious light from his dark rest
Shone from the place where erst this Goddess dwelt
A light whose beams the world with fruit has blessed
Blessed was the Knight while he that light beheld:
Since then a star fixed on his head has shinde,
And a Saints Image in his heart is shrinde.
3
Ravished with joy so graced by such a Saint,
He quite forgot his Cell and self denaid,
He thought it shame in thankfulness to faint,
Debts due to Princes must be duly paid:
Nothing so hateful to a noble mind,
As finding kindness for to prove unkind.
4
But ah poor Knight though thus in dream he ranged,
Hoping to serve this Saint in sort most meet,
Time with his golden locks to silver changed
Has with age-fetters bound him hands and feet,
Aye me, he cries, Goddess my limbs grow saint,
Though I times prisoner be, be you my Saint.
VIII. BASSVS.
M. John Douland Batchelar of Music.
^ EArre from triumphing Court, etc. ^

IX.
CANTVS.
^ LAdy if you so spite me, so spite me, Wherefore do you so often, so ^ often
kiss, kiss and delight me? Sure that my heart oppressed, oppressed, ^ Sure that
my heart op-prest, oppressed and ouer-cloyed, May break, may break thus
ouerioyde, ^ ouer-ioyed, If you seek to spill, to spill me, Come kiss me
sweet,:: Come ^ Kiss me sweet and kill me, So shall your heart, your heart,:: be
ea- sed, ^ And I shall rest content and dye, and dye well pleased. ^

IX. BASSVS.
M. John Douland Batchelar of Music.
^ Lady if you so spite me, so spite me, Wherefore do you, do you ^ so
often, do you so often, kiss, kiss and delight me? Sure, sure that my heart, my
heart oppressed, ^ my heart oppressed and o- uercloyed, my heart oppressed and
ouer-cloyed, May break thus ^ ouer-ioyd, ouer-ioyed, If you seek to spill
me, to spill me, to spill me, Come kiss me sweet, ^:: and kill,:::: kill
me, So shall your heart, your heart ^ be eased, And I shall rest content,
content, and dye, and dye, and dye well pleased. well pleased.

X.
CANTVS.
^ In darkness let me dwell, The ground,:: shall sorrow, ^ sorrow be, The
roof Despair to bar all, all cheerful light from me, ^ The walls of marble
black that moistened, that moistened still shall weep, still shall weep, ^ My
music, My music hellish, hellish larring ^ sounds, iarring, iarring sounds
to banish, banish friendly sleep. Thus wedded ^

^ to my woes, And bedded to my Tomb, O Let me ^ living die, O let me living,
let me living, living die, Till death, till death do come, ^:: till death,
till death do come, ^ In darkness let me dwell. ^

X. BASSVS.
M. John Douland Batchelar of Music.
^ In darkness let me dwell, etc. ^

XI.
CANTO.
Airs du Court.
^ SI le parler and le silence Nuit a nostre heur esgalement, Parlons ^ done ma
chere esperance Du coeur and des yeux seulement: Amor ce petit dieu volage ^
Nous apprend ce muet lan- gage. ^

Que le regard vole and reuole
Messager des nos passions,
Et serve au lieu de la parole
Pour dire nos intentions.
Amor.
Mais si quelque ame est offencee
De nous voir discourir des yeux,
Nous parlerons de la pensee
Comme les Anges dans les cieux,
Amor.
Ainsi par un doux artifice
Nous tromperons les courtisans,
Et nous rirons de la malice
De mile facheux mesdisans,
Qui n'en seauront pas d'auantage
Ignorant ce muet langage.
XI. BASSO.
Dincerto.
^ SI le parler and le silence Nuit a nostre heur esga- lement, Parlous dove ma
chere. ^ esperance Du coeur and des yeax seu- lement: Amor ce petit dieu vo-
lage Nous apprend ce ^ muet laugage.

XII.
CANTVS.
Airs du Court.
^ CE penser qui sans sin ti- ranni-se ma vie, Se montre ^ tellement contre moy
coniu- re, Que tant plus ie m' effor- ce a dompter son enui- e, ^ Et tant moins
a mon bien ie le voy pre- pa- re. ^

I'ay quit te la beauty don't il a pris naissance,
Esperant par l'oubly ses charms deceuoir
Mais ie trouue a la fin que la veue and l'absence
Sont tous deux differends, and d'vn mesme pouuoir.
I'ay maintefois iure du change fair espreuue
Pour fair qu'vn dessein fust par l'autre deffait,
Mais a toutes les fois, aussi tossed ie me treuue
Infidelle en parole, and fidelle en effect.
Pay des plus fires dedains la puissance empruntee
Pour repousser le trait don't i'ay le coeur attaint,
Mais plus ie recognois par leur force domptee
Ma douleux voritable and mon remede feint.
Ainsi donc combatant le mal qui me possede
Sans voir par ces moyens ses tempests calmer,
Ie me vay consommant dans mon propre remede
Comme un Vaisseau qui brusle au milieu de la Mer.
Voila comme en viuant en toute servitude
Ie nourris un penser don't l'impiteux effort,
Se monstre en mon endroit si plain d'ingratitude,
Qu'en luy donnant la vie il me done la mort.
XII. BASSO.
Dincerto.
^ CE penser qui sans sin tirannise ma vie, Se montre tellement contre moy ^
conjure, Que tant plus ie m'efforce a dompter son enui- e, Et tant moins a mon
bien ^ ie le voy prepa- re.

XIII.
CANTO.
Airs du Court.
^ VOus que le bon heur r'appelle A un serua- ge ancien, ^ Mou- rez aux peids
de la belle Qui vous dai- gne fair sien. ^

Glorieuse en vostre perte
Honorez vostre vainqueur,
Qui vous a la port ouuerte
De la prison de son coeur.
Heureux venez vous donc render
A celle quivous a pris,
C'est honneur de ce voir prendre
A qui tient tout a mespris.
Ainsi vostre ame reprise,
Finis toute liberte:
Glorieuse est l'enterprise
Qui guide a l'eternite.
XIII. BASSO.
Dincerto.
^ VOus que le bon heur r'appelle A un seruage ancien, Mourez aux peids de ^
labelle Qui vous daigne fair sien. ^

XIIII.
CANTO.
Espagnol.
^ PAssaua amor suar-co dessarmado, Los. oios baxos blando y muy modesto, ^
Dexana m'ya atras muy descuidado. Dexaua. ij. ^

Quam poco espacio pude gozar esto,
Fortuna deembidiosa dixo luego:
Teneos amor porque vays tam presto.
Boluio de presto ami el nigno ciego,
Muy enoiado enuerse reprehendido
Que no ay reprehension do sta sufuego.
Ay prados, bosques, seluas, que criastes,
Tan libre coracon como ero el mio
Porque tan grave mal no te estoruastes.
XIIII. BASSO.
Espagnol.
^ PAssana amor suar- co dessarmado, Los. oios baxos blando y may mode sto, ^
Dexaua m'ya atras muy descuidado. Dexaua. ij. ^

XV.
CANTO.
Espagnol.
^ STa note mien ^ yaua, Call inferno mescta na my non da na, Non per ly ^ me-
i pecate, Ma per ui der chi fanno. lys ^ ny, Ma per ui der chi fanno ^ ly. ny. ^

Standola mi pareua
Chi nel medso Plutone ses sedeua
Tra qui Spiriti infernali
Chi donno l'alma tanti stragi mali.
XV. BASSO.
Espagnol.
^ STa notte, etc. ^

XVI.
CANTO.
^ VEstros oios tienen d'Amor no se que, Que me yelan me roban me ^ hieren me
matan, Que me matan, me matan a fe, Que me matan, me matan a fe, a fe, a fe, ^
Que me matan, me matan a fe, Porque me mirays con ta a- sti-cion, y almi
coracon ^ meaprisio- nays, Que si vos me mirays yo os a- cusare. ^

XVI. BASSO.
Espagnol.
^ VEstros oios tienen d'Amor, etc. ^

XVII.
CANTO.
Italien.
Dominico Maria Megli.
^ SE di farmi mo- ri re, Con crudelta pensate, ^ Certo che u'inga- na- te. Che
da la crudel- ta nascono lire, ^ E da lire lo sdeg- no, Che scaccia Amor, Che
scaccia A- mor, ^ Dal suo superbo regno. ^

XVII. BASSO.
Italien.
Dominico Maria Megli.
^ SE di farmi morire, etc. ^

XVIII.
CANTO.
Giulio Caccini detto Romano.
^ DOuro dun-que mo- ri- re? Pria che di nuouo io miri, Voibramata ^ cagion de
miei marti- ri mio perdu- to tesoro non potro dirui pria ch'io mora io ^ moro?
io me- to? OF, OF, mi- seria in audi- ta, Non poter dir a ^ voi mor- to mia
vita O miseria in au- di- ta. ^ Non poter dir a voi moro mia vita. Non poter
dir a voi mo- to mia vi- ^

^ ta moro mia vi- ta. ^

XVIII. BASSO.
Italien.
Giulio Caccini detto Romano.
^ DOuro dunque morire? ^

XIX.
CANTO.
Giulio Caccini detto Romano.
^ AMaril- li mia bella, Non credi o del mio cor dolce desio, ^ D'esser tu
tamor mi- o, Credi- lo pur, e se ti- mor t'assa le, Prendi ^ questo mio strale
Aprim'il petto, e vedrai scritto il core Ama- ril- li, Amaril- ^ li, Ama- rilli
e'l mio amo- re, Credilo pur, e se timor t'assa- le, ^ prendi questo mio strale
Aprimi'il petto, e vedrai seritto il co- re, Amaril- li, ^

^ Ama- ril li, Amarilli e'l mio a- mo- re. Ama- ril- li e'l mio amo- ^ re. ^

XIX. BASSO.
Giulio Caccini detto Romano.
^ AMarilli mia bella, etc. ^

XX.
CANTO.
Italien.
^ O Bella pipiu, O bella piu che la stella Di- a- na, ^ Chi parinansi de la
mia patro- na, mi regina, dolce mia ^ mo- re, pieta, cor mia pieta, non piu
dolor been mio caro, ^ Core mio bella, bella, tu se la mala morte mio la frets
a chi mi pas il core, pieta, cor mia pie- ta, ^ non piu do- lore been mio caro
core mio bella, bella, ^

^ tu se la mala morte mio la frets a chi mi pas il co-re. ^

XX. BASSO.
Italien.
^ O Bella pipiu, ^

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
The Authors names.
SIR Robert Sidney his Galliard. John Douland. My heavy sprit oppressed with
sorrows might. Anthony Holborne. I. Change thy mind since she does change.
Richard Martin. II. O Eyes leave off your weeping. Robert Hales. III. Go my
flock, get you hence. D'incerto. IIII. O dear life when shall it be.
D'incerto. V. To plead my faith where faith has no reward. Daniell Batchelar.
VI. In a Grove most rich of shade. Tesseir. VII. Far from triumphing Court.
John Douland. VIII. Lady if you so spite me. John Douland. IX. In darkness
let me dwell. John Douland. X. French Aires.
Si le parler and le silence. D'incerto. XI. Ce penser qui sans fin tir a mise
ma vie. D'incerto. XII. Vous que le bon heur r'appelle. D'incerto. XIII.
Spanish.
Passaua amor suarco dessarmado. D'incerto. XIIII. Sta notte mien yaua.
D'incerto. XV. Vestros oios tienen d' Amor. D'incerto. XVI.
Italian.
Se di farmi morire. Dom. Maria Megli. XVII. Douro dunque morire? Gui. Caccini
det. To. XVIII Amarilli mia bella. Gui. Caccini detto To. XIX. O bella pipiu.
D'incerto. XX.

FINIS.

