A Pilgrims Solace. Wherein is contained Musical Harmony of 3. 4. and 5.
parts, to be sung and played with the Lute and Viols.

By John Douland, Bachelor of Music in both the Universities: and Lutenist
to the Right Honorable the Lord Walden.

1612

LONDON: Printed for M. L. J. B. and T. S. by the Assignment of William Barley.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable, THEOPHILUS, LORD WALDEN, SON AND HEIR TO THE MOST
NOBLE, THOMAS, BAR ON OF WALDEN, EARL OF SVFFOLKE, LORD CHAMBERLAIN OF HIS
MAJESTY'S HOVSEHOLD, KNIGHT OF THE MOST Noble Order of the Garter, and one of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
Most Honored Lord:

AS to exell in any quality is very rare, so is it a hard thing to find out
those that favor Virtue and Learning; but such being found, men of Judgment
are drawn (I know not by what Sympathy) to love and Honor them, as the Saints
and Sovereigns of their affections and devices: wherefore (most Worthy Lord)
your Honor being of all men noted (as natural borne heir of your most Renowned
father and mother) to be the only and alone Supporter of goodness and
excellency, known to none better (unless I should be the most ungrateful of
all others) then my self, who am held up only by your gracious hand; for
which I can show no other means of thankfulness then these simple fruits of my
poor endeavors which I most humbly present as a public pledge from a true and
devoted heart, hoping hereafter to perform something, wherein I shall show my
self more worthy of your Honorable service. In the mean time you shall have a
poor man's prayers for your Lordships continual health and daily increase of
Honor.

Your Honors humble servant JOHN DOVLAND.

TO THE READER.
WOrthy Gentlemen, and my loving Countrymen; moved by your many and
fore-tasted courresies, I am constrained to appear again unto you. True it
is, I have lien long obscured from your sight, because I received a Kingly
entertainment in a foreign climate, which could not attain to any (though
never so mean) place at home, yet have I held up my head within this Horizon,
and not altogether been unaffected else where. Since some part of my poor
labors have found favor in the greatest part of Europes, and been printed in
eight most famous Cities beyond the Seas. viz: Paris, Antwerpe, Collein,
Nurenburge, Franckfort, Liepsig, Amsterdam, and Hamburge: (yea and some of them
also authorized under the Emperors royal privilege,) yet I must tell you, as
I have been a stranger; so have I again found strange entertainment since my
return; especially by the opposition of two sorts of people that shroude
themselves under the title of Musicians. The first are some simple Cantors, or
vocal singers, who though they seem excellent in their blind
Diuision-making, are merely ignorant, even in the first elements of Music,
and also in the true order of the mutation of the Hexachord in the Systeme,
(which has been approved by all the learned and skillful men of Christendom,
this 800 years,) yet do these fellows give their verdict of me behind my
back, and say, what I do is after the old manner: but I will speak openly to
them, and would have them know that the proudest Cantor of them, dares not
oppose himself face to face against me. The second are young men, professors
of the Lute, who vaunt themselves, to the disparagement of such as have been
before their time, (wherein I my self am a party) that there never was the
like of them. To these men I say little, because of my love and hope to see
some deeds ensue their brave words, and also being that here under their
ownenoses has been published a Book in defense of the Viol de Gamba, wherein
not only all other the best and principal instruments have been abased, but
especially the Lute by name, the words, to satisfy thee Reader I have here
thought good to insert, and are as follows: From henceforth, the statefull
Instrument Gambo Violl, shall with ease yield full various, and deuicefull
Music as the Lute: for here I protest the Trin^ie of Music, Parts, Passion,
and Division, to be as gracefully united in the Gambo Viol, as in the most
received Instrument that is, etc. Which Imputation, me thinks, the learneder
sort of Musicians ought not to let pass unanswered. Moreover that here are and
daily does come into our most famous kingdom, diverse strangers from beyond the
seas, which auerre before our own faces, that we have no true method of
application or fingering of the Lute. Now if these gallant young Lutenists be
such as they would have the world believe, and of which I make no doubt, let
them remember that their skill lies not in their fingers ends: Cucullus non
facit Monachum. I wish for the Honor therefore and general benefit of our
Country, that they undertake the defense of their Lute profession, seeing that
some of them above other, have most large means, convenient time, and such
encouragement as I never knew any have, belceue me if any of these objections
had been made when those famous men lived which now are thought worthy of no
fame, not derogating from these skillfull men present; I dare affirm that
these objections had been answered to the full, and I make no doubt but that
those few of the former time which live yet, being that some of them are
Batchelors of Music, and others which assume unto themselves to be no less
worthy, will be as forward to preserve their reputation. Perhaps you will ask
me, why I that have travailed many countries, and ought to have some
experience, does not under go this business my self? I answer that I want
ability, being I am now entered into the fiftieth year of mine age: secondly
because I want both means, leisure, and encouragement. But (Gentle Reader to
conclude, although abruptly) this work of mine, which I here have published,
contains such things as I my self have thought well of, as being in mine
opinion furnished with variety of matter both of Judgment and delight, which
willingly I refer to the friendly censure, and approbation of the skillful:
hoping it will be no less delightful to all in general, then it was pleasing
to me in the composition, Farewell.

Your friend John Douland.

THE TABLE.
Disdain me still, that I may ever love. I Sweet stay a while, why will you?
II To ask for all thy love. III Love those beams that breed: IIII Shall I
strive with words to move. V Were every thought an eye. VI Stay time a while
thy flying. VII Tell me true Love. VIII Go nightly, cares the enemy to rest.
IX From silent night, true register of moanes. X Lasso vita mia, mi fa morire.
XI In this trembling shadow. XII If that a Sinners sighs be Angels food. XIII
Thou mighty God 1. part. XIIII When David's life by Saul. 2. part. XV When the
poor Criple. 3. part. XVI Where Sin sore wounding. XVII My heart and tongue
were twins. XVIII Up merry Mates, to Neptunes praise. XIX VVelcome black
night. XX Cease these false sports. XXI A Galliard to Lachrimae. XXII


FINIS.
CANTVS. I.
^DIsdaine me still, that I may e- uer love, For who his Love inioyes, can
love, ^ can love no more. The war once past with ease men co- wards prove:
And ships returnde, do rot up- ^ pon the shore. And though thou frown, I Will
say thou art most fair, most fair: ^ And still I Will love, and still I Will love,
I Will love, though still, though still I must de- spayre. ^

As he^e to life so is desire to love,
and these once quenched both life and love are gone.
Let not my sighs nor tears thy virtue move,
like baser metals do not melt too soon.
Laugh at my woes although I ever mourn,
Love surfets with reward, his nurse is scorn.
ALTVS. I.
^DIsdaine me still that I may ever love: For who his Love inioyes can love,
can love no more. ^ The war once past, with ease men cowards prove: And ships
returnde, do rot, do rot upon the shore. And though thou ^ frown, thou
frown, I Will say thou art most fair, most fair, And still I Will love, I Will love
though still I must despair.

BASSVS. I.
^DIsdaine me still that I may ever love: For who his ^ Love inioyes, can love,
can love no more. The war once ^ past, with ease men cowards prove: And ships
returnde do ^ rot upon the shore. And though thou frown I Will say thou ^ art
most fair, most fair, And still I Will love, though still I ^ must despair.

TENOR. I.
^DIsdaine me still that I may ever love: For who his Love enioyes can love,
can love no more. The ^ war once past, with ease men cowards prove: And ships
returnde do rot upon the shore. And though thou frown, I Will say, ^ I Will say,
thou art most fair, most fair, And still I Will love, and still I Will love, and
still I Will love, I Will love, though still, ^ still I must despair, de- spayre.

CANTVS. To my worthy friend Mr. William Jewel of Exceter College in Oxford.
II.
^SWeet stay a while, why will you rise? The light you see comes from your
eyes: ^ The day breaks not, it is my heart, To think that you and I must
part. ^ O stay, O stay, or else my joys, my joys, my joys must dye, And per
rish ^ in their in- fan- cie. ^

Dear let me dye in this fair breast,
Far sweeter then the Phoenix nest.
Love raise desire by his sweet charms
Within this circle of thine arms:
And let thy blissful kisses cherish
Mine infant joys, that else must perish.
ALTVS. II.
^SWeet stay a while, why will you rise? The light you see comes from your
eyes: The day breaks, ^ breaks not, it is my heart, To think that you and I
must part. O stay, O stay, or ^ else my joys must dye, my joys must dye, And
pe- rish in their infancy.

BASSVS. II.
^SWeete stay a while, why will you rise? ^ The light you see comes from your
eyes: The day ^ breaks not, it is my heart, To think that you, that ^ you and
I must part. O stay, O stay, or ^ else my joys, my joys must dye, and perish
^ in their infancy.

TENOR. II.
^SWeete stay a while, why will you rise? The light you see comes from your
eyes: The day breaks ^ not, it is my heart, To think that you, that you, that
you and I must part. O stay, stay, stay; O stay, stay, stay, or else my ^
joys, my joys must dye, must dye, dye, my joys must dye, And perish in their
infancy.

CANTVS. III.
^TO ask for all thy love, and thy whole heart it were madness, I do not sue,
nor ^ can ad- mit (fai- rest) from you to have all, yet who gives all has
nothing to im- ^ part, but sad nesse. ^

He that receives all, can have no more then seeing.
My Love by length of every hour,
Gathers new strength, new growth, new flower.
You must have daily new rewards in store, still being.
You cannot every day give me your heart for merit:
Yet if you will, when yours does go,
You shall have still one to bestow:
For you shall mine when yours does part inherit.
Yet if you please, I Will find a better way, then change them:
For so alone dearest we shall
Be one and one, another all*
Let us so join our hearts that nothing may estrange them.
ALTVS. III.
^TO ask for all thy love and thy whole heart, it were madness: I do not sue,
nor can admit ^ (Fairest, fairest) from you to have all, Yet who gives all,
gi- ueth all, has nothing to impart but sadness.

BASSVS. III.
^TO ask for all thy love, and thy whole ^ heart, it were mad- nesse: I do not
sue nor can ad- ^ mit (Fairest) from you to have all, Yet who ^ gives all,
has no- thing, nothing to im- part ^ but sadness.

TENOR. III.
^TO ask for all thy love, and thy whole heart, it were madness: I do not
sue, nor can admit ^ (Fay- rest, Fay- rest) from you to have all: Yet who
gives all, gives all, has nothing to im- part but sad- nesse.

CANTVS. IIII.
^LOue those beams that breed, all day long breed, and feed, ^ this bur-
ning: But alas tears cool this fire in vain, in vain, The more I quench,
the ^ more I quench, the more there does re- maine. ^ Love I quench with
floods, floods of tears, night- ly tears and mour- ning.

I Will go to the woods, and alone, make my moan, oh cruel:
For I am deceived and bereaved of my life, my jewel.
O but in the woods, though Love be blind,
He has his spies, my secret haunts to find.
Love then I must yield to thy might, might and spite oppressed,
Since I see my wrongs, woe is me, cannot be redrested.
Come at last, be friendly Love to me,
And let me not, endure this misery.
ALTVS. IIII.
^LOue those beams that breed, that breed all day long, breed and feed this,
this bur- ning: Love I quench with floods, with floods, floods of tears,
night- ly tears, tears and mor- ning. ^ But alas tears cool this fire in
vain, in vain, The more I quench, the more there does remain.

BASSVS. IIII.
^LOue those beams that breed, all day ^ long breed, and feed this bur- ^
ning: But, but alas tears cool this fire in vain, the ^ more I quench, the
more, the more there does ^ remain. Love I quench with floods, floods of
tears, night- ly tears and mor- ning.

TENOR. IIII.
^LOue those beams that breed, all day long breed, and feed, and feed this
burning: Love I quench with floods, floods of tears, night- ly, night-ly
tears and morning. ^ But alas tears cool, tears cool this fire, in vain,
in vain, The more I quench, the more I quench, the more, the ^ more there does
remain.

CANTVS. V.
^SHall I strive with words to move, when deeds re-ceiue not due re- guard? ^
Shall I speak, and ney- there please, nor be free- ly heard? All woes have end,
though ^ a while de- laid, our pa- tience pro- uing. O that times ^ strange of-
fects could but make, but make her lo- uing. I wooed her, I loved her, ^ and
none but her ad- mire. O come dear joy, and an- swear my de- sire. She a-lone
my wound shall know, though she will not heal. Storms calm at last, and why
may not she leave off her frow- ning? O sweet Love, help her hands my af- fe-
cti- on crow- ning.

ALTVS. V.
^SHall I strive with words to move, when deeds re-ceiue not due regard?
Shall I speak, and ney- there ^ please, nor be free- ly heard? All woes have
end though a while de-laid, our patience pro-uing, O that ^ times, strange
times, strange ef-fects, of- fects, could but make her lo- uing. I wooed her, I
loved her, and none ^ but her ad- mire. O come dear joy, and answer, answer
my de- sire. Grief a- las though all in vain, her rest- less an-guish must
reveal: She a- lone my wound shall know, though she will not heal. Storms
calm at last, and why may not she leave off her frowning? O sweet Love, help
Love, help her hands, her hands my af- fe- ction crow- ning.

BASSVS. V.
^SHall I strive with words to move, when deeds re- ^ ceiue not due regard?
Shall I speak, and ney- there ^ please, nor be free- ly heard? All woes have
end, ^ though a while de-laid, our pa-ti-ence pro-uing. O that ^ times, strange
ef-fects could but make her, make her lo- uing. I, I wooed her, I loved her,
and none but her admire, O ^ come dear joy, and answer my desire. Grief a-
las though all in vain, her rest-lesse an- guish must reveal: She a- lone my
wound shall know, though she will not heal. Storms calm at last, and why may
not she leave off her frowning? O sweet Love help her hands, my af- fe- ction
crowning, crowning.

TENOR. V.
^SHall I strive with words to move, when deeds re- ceiue not due regard?
Shall I speak, and ney- there please, ^ nor be free- ly heard? All woes have
end, though a while, a while de- laid, our patience, patience pro- uing: ^ O, O
that times, that times, strange, strange times, strange of- fects, could make
her, could make her lo- uing. I, I wooed ^ her, I loved her, and none but her
ad- mire, O come dear Joy and answer, and answer my de-sire. Grief a- las
though all in vain, her rest-lesse an-guish must reveal: She a-lone my wound
shall know, though she will not heal. Storms calm at last, and why may, why
may not she leave off, leave off her frow- ning? O, O sweet Love, sweet Love
help, help Love, help her hands my, my af- fe- cti- on crowning.

CANTVS. VI.
^WEre eue-ry thought an eye, and all those eyes could see, Her sub-till ^
wiles their sights would be-guile, and mock their ielou- sie. De- sire lives
in her heart, Di- ^ a-na in her eyes. It Were vain to wish women true, it is
well, if ^ they prove wise. Such a Love deserves more grace, Then a truer heart
that has no conceit, To make ^ use both of time and place, When a wit has
need of all his slight. Her fires do in- ward burn, they make no out-ward
show. And her de- lights a- mid the dark shades, which none dis- cover, grow.
The flowers growth is un- seen, yet every day it grows. So where her fan- cy
is set it thriues, but how none knows.

ALTVS. VI.
^WEre eve- ry thought an eye and all those eyes could see, Her sub-till wiles
their sights would ^ be- guile, and mock their ielou- sie. De- sire lives in
her heart, in her heart, Di- a- na in ^ her eyes, in her eyes. It Were vain to
wish women true, it is well, ij. if they prove wise. Such a Love de- ^ serves
more grace, Then a truer heart that has no conceit, To make use both of time
and place, and place, ^ When a wit has need of all his slight. Her fires do
in ward burn, they make no out-ward show. And her de-lights a- mid the dark
shades, which none dis- cover, grow. The flowers growth is vn-seene, is
vn-seene, yet eve- ry day it grows, it grows. So where her fan- cy is set it
thriues, ij. but how none knows.

BASSVS. VI.
^VVEre eve- ry thought an eye, and all ^ those eyes could see, Her sub- till
wiles their sight would ^ be- guile, and mock their ielou- sie. De- sire lives
^ in her heart, in her heart, Di- a- na in her eyes, in her eyes. ^ It Were
vain to wish women true, it is well if they prove ^ wise. Such a Love deserves
more grace, Then a truer heart that has no con- ceit, To make use both of time
and place, and place, When a wit has need of all his slight. Her fires do
in- ward burn, they make no out-ward show, And her de- lights a- mid the dark
shades, which none dis- cover, grow. The flowers growth is vn-seene, is un-
seen, yet every day it grows, it grows. So where her fan- cy is set it
thriues, but how none knows.

TENOR. VI.
^WEre eve- ry thought an eye, and all those eyes could see, Her subtle wiles
their sight would be-guile, and ^ mock their ielou- sie. De- sire lives in her
heart, her heart, Di-a- na in her eyes, in her eyes. It Were vain ^ to wish
women true, it is well if they prove wise. Such a Love de- serves more grace,
Then a truer heart, that has no ^ conceit, To make use both of time and place,
When a wit has need of all his slight. Her fires do in- ward burn, they
make no out-ward show, And her de- lights a- mid the dark shades, which none
dis-couer, grow. The flowers growth is un- seen, un- seen, yet eue-ry day it
grows, it grows. So where her fan-cy is set, it thriues, but how none knows.

CANTVS. VII.
^STay time a while thy fly- ing, Stay and pit- tie me die- ing. ^ Come, come
close mine eyes, bet- ter to dye blessed, Then to live, to live ^ thus di-
stres- sed. For fates and friends have left me, And of com- fort be- reft me.

To whom shall I complain me,
When thus friends do disdain me?
It Is time that must befriend me,
Drowned in sorrow to end me.
Come, come close mine eyes, better to dye blessed,
Then to live thus distressed.
Tears but augment this fuel,
I feed by night, (oh cruel)
Light griefs can speak their pleasure,
Mine are dumb passing measure.
Quick, quick, close mine eyes, better to dye blessed,
Then here to live distressed.
ALTVS. VII.
^STay time a while thy fly- ing: Stay, and pit- tie me die- ing. Come, come,
close, ^ close mine eyes, better to dye blessed, Then to live, to live thus
distressed. For Fates and friends have left me, And of com- fort be-reft me.

BASSVS. VII.
^STay time a while thy fly- ^ ing: Stay, and pit- tie me die- ing. Come, ^
come, close, close mine eyes, better to dye ^ blessed, Then to live, to live
thus distressed. For Fates and friends have left me, And of comfort be-reft me.

TENOR. VII.
^STay time a while thy fly-ing: Stay, stay, and pit- tie, pit- tie me die- ing.
Come, For Fates and friends have left me, And, and of com-fort, com- fort
be-reft me. ^ Come, close mine eyes, better to dye blessed, Then to live, to
live thus distressed.

CANTVS. VIII.
^TEll me true Love where shall I seek thy being, In thoughts or words, in
vows or ^ promise making, In rea- sons, looks, or pas- sions, ij. never
seeing, In men on earth, or woe- ^ men's minds partaking. Thou can not dye, and
therefore li- uing, therefore living tell me where is thy seat, is thy ^
seat, thy seat, Why why, does this age expel thee? ^

2 When thoughts are still unseen and words disguised; vows are not sacred
held, nor promise debt:
By passion reasons glory is surprised, in neither sex is true love firmly
set.
Thoughts fainde, words false, vows and promise broken
Made true Love fly from earth, this is the token.
3 Mount then my thoughts, here is for thee no dwelling, since truth and
falsehood live like twins together:
Believe not sense, eyes, ears, touch, taste, or smelling, both Art and
Nature's forced: put trustin neither.
One only she does true Love captive binds
In fairest breast, but in a fairer mind.
O fairest mind, enriched with Loves residing. retain the best; in hearts let
some seed fall,
In stead of weeds Loves fruits may have abiding* at Harvest you shall reap
increase of all.
O happy Love, more happy man that finds thee,
Most happy Saint, that keeps, restores, vnbindes thee.
ALTVS. Repetition. VIII.
^TEll me. Thou can. Thou, thou can not dye, and there- fore, therefore
living ^ tell me, tell me, where is thy seat, ij. why does this age expel
thee?

BASSVS. VIII.
^TEll me true Love. ^ Thou, thou can not dye, and therefore ^ living tell
me, tell me, where is thy seat, thy ^ seat, where is thy seat, why does this
^ age expel thee?

TENOR. Repetition. VIII.
^TEll me. Thou can. Thou, thou can not dye, and there- fore living, there-
^ fore li- uing tell me, tell me, where is thy seat, thy seat, why does this
age, ij. ex-pell, ex-pell thee?

ALTVS. IX.
^GOe nightly cares, Go nightly cares, the ^ enemy to rest, Forbear, forbear
a while to vex my grieved sprite, ^ So long, so long your weight, so long, ij.
your weight. has line upon my breast, ^ that lo I live, that lo I live, ij.
of life bereaved quite, ^ O give me time to draw my weary breath, Or ^ let me
dye, as I de- sire the death. ^

^Welcome sweet death, ij. ij. ^ sweet death wel-come, Oh life, no life, A
hell, Then thus, and thus I bid the world fare- well. ^

CANTVS. IX.
^GOe nightly cares ^

BASSVS. IX.
^GOe nightly cares. ^

False world farewell the enemy to rest, now do thy worst, I do not weigh thy
spite:
Free from thy cares I live for ever blessed,
Enjoying peace and heavenly true delight.
Delight, whom woes nor sorrows shall amate, nor fears or tears disturb her
happy state.
And thus I leave thy hopes, thy joys untrue, and thus, and thus vain world
again adue.
CANTVS. To my loving Countryman Mr. John Forster the younger, Merchant of
Dublin in Ireland. X
^FRom silent night, true re- gister of moanes, ^ From saddest Soul consumde
with deepest sins, ^ From heart quite rent with sighs, with sighs and heavy
groans, My way- ling ^ Muse her woe, her woe, her woeful work begins. ^ And
to the world brings tunes of sad despair, ^ And to the world brings tunes of
sad despair, Sounding naught else but ^

^sorrow, sorrow, naught else, ij. but sorrow, naught else but sor- row, ^
grief and care. and ^

CANTVS. X.
^FRom silent. ^

BASSVS. X.
^FRom silent. ^

2 Sorrow to see my sorrows cause augmented, and yet less sorrowful were my
sorrows more:
Grief that my grief with grief is not prevented, for grief it is must ease
my grieved sore.
Thus grief and sorrow cares but how to grieve,
For grief and sorrow must my cares relieve.
3 If any eye therefore can spare a tear to fill the wellspring that must wet
my cheeks,
O let that eye to this sad feast draw near, refuse me not my humble soul
beseekes:
For all the tears mine eyes have ever wept
Were now too little had they all been kept.
ALTVS. XI.
^LAsso vita mia, mi fa morire, Lasso vita mia ^ mi fa, mi fa morire, Crudel,
crudel amor mio cor con- ^ sum, Da mill, mill, mill ferite, ij. mill,
mill feri- te, ^ Che mi fa ij. ij. morir, morir, Ahi me, Ahi me, Deh, che non
mi ^ fa morire, morire, Deh, che non mi fa morire, mi fa morire, Crudel, ij. a-
^ mor, crudel, cru- del, ij. amor, mi fa sofrir mill mar- ^

^tire. mill, mill, mill mar-tire. mi fa sofrir mill martire. mill, mill,
mill, ij. mill, mill, martire. ^ mi fa so- frir mill, ij. mar- tire, marti-
re. ^

CANTVS. XI.
^LAsso. ^

BASSVS. XI.
^LAsso. ^

CANTVS. XII.
^IN this trembling, trembling ^ shadow, cast from those boughs which thy
wings shake, Far from humane trou- bles, ^ hu- mane troubles, trou- bles
placed: Songs to the Lord, to the Lord would I make, Dark- ^ nesse, ij. from my
mind then take, For thy rites, thy rites none ^ may begin, Till they feel thy
light, ij- with- in. ^

As I sing, sweet flowers I Will strew, from the fruitful valleys brought:
Praising him by whom they grow, him that heaven and earth has wrought, him
that all things framde of naught,
Him that all for man did make,
But made man for his own sake.
Music all thy sweetness lend, while of his high power I speak,
On whom all powers else depend, but my breast is now too weak, trumpets shrill
the air should break,
All in vain my sounds I raise,
Boundless power asks boundless praise,
ALTVS. XII.
^IN this trembling, trembling sha- dow, In this trembling, trembling shadow,
cast from those boughs which thy ^ winds, thy winds shake, Far from humane
troubles, far from hu- mane trou- bles placed, Songs to ^ the, to the Lord
would I make, Songs to the Lord would I make, Darkness from my mind, my mind
then take: For thy rites ^ none none may begin, thy rites, thy rites none may,
none may begin, Till they feel, they feel thy light within. Songs, etc.

BASSVS. XII.
^IN this trembling, trembling shadow, cast ^ from those boughs which thy
winds shake, thy winds ^ shake, Far from humane trou- bles, humane ^ troubles
placed, Songs to the Lord, to the Lord (songs) would ^ I make, Darkness from
my mind, my mind then ^ take: For thy rites none, none may begin, thy rites
none ^ may begin, Till they feel, they feel, thy light with- ^ in. Songs, etc.

TENOR. XII.
^IN this trembling, trembling sha- dow, In this trembling, trem-bling sha-
dow, cast from those boughs ^ which thy winds shake, cast, cast from those
boughs which thy winds shake, thy winds shake, Far ^ from hu- mane trou-
bles, humane troubles placed, Songs to the Lord, to the Lord would I make, to
the Lord ^ would I make, Dark- nesse from my mind, my mind then take: For
thy rites, thy rites, none may begin, thy ^ rites, thy rites none, none may
begin, Till they feel thy light, thy light with- in. Songs, etc.

CANTVS. XIII.
^IF that a ^ sinners sighs be Angels food, Or that re- pentant tears be
Angels wine, ^ Ac- cept O Lord in this most pensive mood, These hearty ^
sighs and doleful plaints of mine, That went with Peter forth ^ most sinful-
ly: But not as Peter did, weep, weep ^ weep, weep bit- ter- ly* ^

ALTVS. XIII.
^IF that a sin-ners sighs be Angels food, a sinners sighs be Angels food,
sighs be Angels food, Or that re- ^ pentant tears, repentant tears be An-
gels wine, be Angels wine, Accept O Lord, O Lord in this most pensive, pensive
mood, ^ These hear- ty sighs, and doleful plaints of mine, That went with
Peter forth, ij. most sinful- sinful- ly: But not ^ as Peter did, not as Pe-ter
did, Peter did, weep, did, weep, weep, weep, weep bit- ter- ly. That went,
etc.

BASSVS. XIII.
^IF that a sin- ners sighs be ^ Angel, food, sighs be Angels food, Or that
repentant tears be ^ Angels wine, Accept O Lord, O Lord, Accept O ^ Lord, in
this most pensive mood, These hearty sighs ^ and doleful plaints of mine,
That went with Peter, ^ with Peter forth most sinfully: But not as Peter, ^ Pe-
ter did, weep, did weep, did weep, weep, ^ bit- ter- ly. That went, etc.

TENOR. XIII.
^IF that a sinners sighs, a sinners sighs be Angels food, sighs be Angels
food, Or that repentant tears, re- ^ pentant tears be Angels, Angels wine,
Accept O Lord, accept O Lord in this most pensive mood, this most, ^ most
pensive mood, These hearty sighs, and doleful, doleful plaints of mine.
That went with Pe- ter forth, ^ with Pe- ter forth most sinfully, sinfully: But
not as Pe- ter, not as Peter did, Peter did, weep, ^ Peter did, weep, weep
bitterly, weep bitter- ly. That went, etc.

CANTVS. The first Part. XIIII.
^THou mighty God, that rightest every wrong, ^ Listen to patience, Listen to
patience, Listen to patience, ^ patience in a dying, a dying, ij. song. When
Job had lost his Children, Lands, and goods, ^ Patience, patience as- swa- ged
his excessive pain, ^ And when his sorrows, his sor- rows, sor- rows came
as fast as floods, as floods, ^ hope kept his heart, his heart, his heart, till
com- fort came again, till comfort came a- gain, came a- gain. ^

ALTVS. XIIII.
^THou mighty, mighty God, that rightest every wrong, Listen to patience,
listen to ^ patience, to patience in a dying, dying song. When Job had lost,
had lost his Children, Lands, and goods, Patience as- ^ swaged, assuaged,
patience asswa- ged his excessive pain, excessive pain: And when his
sorrowcs, his sor- rows ^ came, and when his sorrows, his sorrows came as
fast, as fast as floods, Hope kept his heart, till comfort came again, ^ till
comfort came again, comfort came again, again. And when, etc.

BASSVS. XIIII.
^THou mighty God that rightest ^ every wrong, every wrong, Listen to patience,
to ^ patience, li- sten to patience in a dying, ^ dying Song. When Job had lost
his Children, ^ Lands, and goods, Patience, pati- ence asswa- ^ ged, patience
assuaged his exces- sieve pain: ^ And when his sorrows came, sorrows came as
^ fast as floods, Hope kept his heart, ij. till ^ comfort came again, And
when, etc.

TENOR. XIIII.
^THou mighty God that rightest every wrong, eve- ry wrong, Li- sten to
patience, to patience, ^ Listen to patience, ij. Listen, listen to pa- tience,
patience, in a dying, dying Song. When Job had ^ lost his Children, his
Children, Lands, Lands and goods, Pa- tience assuaged, ij. assuaged his ^
excessive pain, pain, excessive pain, And when his sorrows came, and when his
sorrows, his sorrows came as fast, as fast as floods, ^ Hope kept his heart,
his heart, til comfort came again, till comfort, comfort came again. And when
his sorrows came as fast as floods,

CANTVS. The second Part. XV.
^WHen David's life by Saul was often sought, Da- uids life by Saul, by ^ Saul
was of- ten sought, And worlds of woes, worlds of ^ woes, of woes did compass,
compass him a- bout, about, On dire revenge he never, ^ never had a thought, a
thought, But in his griefs, but in his griefs, his ^ griefs, his griefs,
Hope still did help him out, Hope still did help him, help him out. ^

ALTVS. XV.
^WHen David's life, Da- uids life by Saul, by Saul was often sought, David's
life by Saul was often ^ sought, And worlds of woes did compass him, ij.
compass him about, On dire re- ^ uenge, he never, ne-uer had a thought, a
thought, But in his griefs, his griefs, his griefs, Hope still did help, did
^ help him out, but in his griefs, his griefs, Hope still did help him out.
On dire, etc.

BASSVS. XV.
^VVHen David's life, Da- uids life by ^ Saul was often sought, And worlds of
woes, worlds of woes ^ did compass him about, On dire revenge he never had a ^
thought, But in his griefs, ij. ij. ^ his griefs, Hope still did help, help
him out. On dire, etc.

TENOR. XV.
^WHen David's life by Saul, David's life by Saul was often sought, was often
sought, David's life by Saul was ^ often sought, often sought, And worlds of
woes, of woes, did compass him about, did compass him about, ^ On dire
revenge, ij. he never had a thought, had a thought, he never had a thought,
But in his griefs, ^ in his griefs, but in his griefs, his griefs, but in
his griefs, Hope still did help him out, Hope still did help, did ^ help, help
him out. On dire, etc.

CANTVS. The third Part. XVI.
^WHen the poor Criple by the Poole did lie, ^ Full many, many years in mi-
se- ry and pain, No sooner he on ^ Christ had set his eye, But he was well,
he was well, was well ^ and comfort, comfort came a- gain, a- gain. No
David, Job, nor Criple in ^ more grief, in more grief, Christ give me
patience, patience, and my ^ Hopes relief. ^

ALTVS. XVI.
^WHen the poor, poor Criple by the Poole did lie, Full many years, many,
many years in misery and pain, ^ No sooner he on Christ, on Christ had set
his eye, But he was well, he was well, but he was well and comfort came again,
he ^ was well, and comfort came again. No David, David, Job, nor Criple, ij.
in more grief, in more grief, Christ give ^ me patience, patience, and my
hopes relief, my hopes re- liefe.

BASSVS. XVI.
^VVHen the poor Cri-ple by the Fool did ^ lie, full many years in misery
and pain, and pain, ^ No sooner he on Christ, on Christ had set his eye, ^
But he was well, he was well, and comfort came again, ^ and comfort came
again. No Da- uid, Job nor Criple ^ in more grief, Christ give me, give me
pa- tience, ^ Christ give me patience, and my hopes relief,

TENOR. XVI.
^WHen the poor, poor Criple by the Poole did lie, full many, many years,
ij. in mise- ^ ry and pain, ij. No sooner he on Christ had set his eye, ij.
had set his eye, his eye, but ^ he was well, he was well, and comfort, comfort
came a- gain, comfort came a- gain. No Da- uid, no Job, nor Criple, nor ^
Criple, Criple in more grief, in more grief, Christ give me patience, give me
patience, pa- tience, and my hopes re- liefe.

CANTVS. XVII.
^WHere Sin sore woun- ^ ding, daily does oppress me, There Grace a-
bounding, Grace a- bounding ^ freely, freely does re- dress me: So that
resounding still I shall confess thee, ^ Father, Fa- there of mercy, Father of
mercy, mercy Father of mer- cy. ^

Though Sin offending daily does torment me,
Yet Grace amending, since I do repent me,
At my lives ending will I hope present me clear to thy mercy.
The wound Sin gave me was of Death assured,
Did not Grace save me, whereby it is cured:
So thou will have me to thy love invred, free without merit.
Sins stripe is healed, and his sting abated,
Deaths mouth is sealed, and the Grave amated,
Thy Love revealed, and thy Grace related gives me this spirit.
ALTVS. XVII.
^WHere sin sore woun- ding, sore wounding, sin sore woun- ding daily does
oppress me, There ^ Grace abounding, abounding, Grace aboun-ding, Grace
abounding, abounding, freely, freely does re- dress, redress ^ me: So that
resounding still I shall confess thee, Father of mercy, mercy, Father of mer-
cy, Father of mercy, ^ of mercy, mer- cy: So that, etc.

BASSVS. XVII.
^VVHere Sin sore wounding, wounding, ^ There Grace abounding, abounding,
free-ly, ^ freely does redress me, freely, free- ly does redress ^ me:
Still I shall confess thee, Father of mercy, ^ mercy, Father of mercy, mer-
cy. Still I, etc.

TENOR. XVII.
^VVHere Sin, where Sin sore woun- ding, sore woun- ding daily does
oppress me, there ^ Grace abounding, Grace a- bounding, freely, freely does
re- dress me, freely, freely does redress, does re- ^ dress me: So that
resounding still I shall confess thee, Fa- there of mercy, mer- cy, Father of
mer- ^ cy, Father of mercy, mercy. So that, etc.

CANTVS. XVIII.
^MY heart and tongue were twins, at once con- ceiued, Th'eldest was my ^
heart, borne dumb by desti- nie, The last my tongue, of all sweet thoughts be-
rea- ued: Yet ^ Conclusion. ^ strung and tunde to play hearts har- mo- nie.
Then this be sure, ^ Conclusion. ^ since it is true per- fection, That ney-
there men nor Gods, ^ nor Gods can force af- fection. ^

Both knit in one, and yet a sunder placed: what heart would speak the tongue
does still discover.
What tongue does speak is of the heart embraced, and both are one to make a
new found Lover.
New found, and only found in Gods and Kings, whose words are deeds, but
words, nor deeds regarded.
Chaste thoughts do mount and fly with swiftest wings, my love with pain, my
pain with loss rewarded.
ALTVS. XVIII.
^MY heart and tongue were twins, at once conceived, Th'eldest was my heart,
borne dumb by desti- ^ nie, The last my tongue, of all sweet thoughts
bereaude: Yet strung, strung and tunde to play, strung and tunde ^ Conclusion.
^ to play hearts harmony. Then this be sure, be sure, since it is true
perfection, That ^ neither men nor Gods, men nor Gods, that neither men nor
Gods, nor Gods can force affection.

BASSVS. XVIII.
^MY heart and tongue were twins at once ^ conceived, Th'eldest was my heart,
borne dumb by de- ^ stinie, The last my tongue of all sweet, sweet joys
bereaude, ^ Yet strung and tunde, and tunde to play, to play hearts ^
Conclusion. ^ har- money. Then this be ^ sure since it is, it is true
perfection, that ney- there ^ men, neither men nor Gods, nor men nor Gods, can ^
force, can force affection.

TENOR. XVIII.
^My heart and tongue were twins at once con- ceiued, Th'eldest was my heart,
my heart borne dumb ^ by destiny, The last my tongue, of all sweet thoughts,
sweet thoughts be-rea- ued, Yet strung and tunde to play, ^ Conclusion. ^ to
play hearts harmony. Then this be sure, this be sure, since it is true, it is
true perfection, ^ That neither men, ij. neither men nor Gods, nor Gods can
force affection.

TENOR. XIX.
^VP merry mates, to Neptunes praise, Your voices high advance: The watrie
Nymphs shall ^ dance, and E- olus shall whistle to your lays. Stereman, how
stands the wind? What course? ^ no worse, and blow so fair, Then sincke,
sincke, sincke, sincke despair, Come solace to the mind, ^ ere night we
shall, we shall the ha- uen find. O happy, hap- py days, who may con- ^
taine, but swell with proud dis- daine, when seas are smooth, sails, sails
full, and all things, all things please? ^ Conclusion. ^ The golden mean that
con- stant spi- rit bears, in such ex-treams that nor pre- sumes not fears.
Conclusion. ^

ALTVS. Dialogue. XIX.
^O Happy, happy days, who can, who can contain, but swell with proud
disdain, when ^ seas, when seas are smooth, sails full, and all things
please? Conclusion. The golden mean that ^ con- stant spi- rit bears, In such
extremes, that not presumes nor fears.

BASSVS. Dialogue. XIX.
^FVll North, North-east, Full South South-west. ^ O happy days, happy days,
who can contain, but swell with proud ^ disdain, when seas are smooth, seas
are smooth, sails full, and all things please? ^ Conclusion. ^ The golden
mean that constant spirit bears, In such ^ extremes that nor presumes, nor
fears.

CANTVS. XIX.
^O Happy days, who may, who may contain, but swell with proud disdain, when
seas are ^ Conclusion. ^ smooth, sails full, and all things please? The golden
mean that constant spirit bears, In such ^ extremes, that nor presumes nor
fears.

Stay merry mates, proud Neptune lowres,
Your voices all deplore you,
The Nymphs stand weeping over you:
And Eolus and Iris bandy showers.
Mr. Boats man hale in the Boat.
S. Hark, hark the ratlings,
M. It Is hail.
S. Make fast the tacklings.
M. Strike sail.
Make quick dispatches,
Shut close the hatches.
Hold stern, cast Ancour out,
This night we shall at random floate.
O dismal hours,
Who can forbear,
But sink with sad despair.
When seas are rough, sails rent, and each thing lowres.
CANTVS primus. XX.
Chorus. ^ HYmen, O Hymen, mine of treasures more di- uine, what di-e-tie is
like to thee, that freest from morta-li-tie.

CANTVS secundus. XX.
^WEl- come, well- come black night Hymen's fair day, help, help, help Hymen
Loves due debt to ^ pay, Loves due debt is chaste de- light. which if the
turtles, the turtles, the Turtles want to night, ^ Hy-men forfets his Di- e-
tie, and night in love, in love her dignity, Help, help black night Hymen's ^
fair day, Help Hymen, ij. Loves due debt to pay ^ Chorus. ^ Hymen, O Hymen
mine of treasures more divine, what di-e-tie is like to thee that freest from
mor- ta- li- tie. ^ Chorus. ^

QVINTVS. XX.
^Chorus. ^ HYmen, O Hymen, mine of trea- sores more divine, ^ what di-e-tie is
like to thee, to thee, that freest from mor- ta-li- tie?

BASSVS. XX.
^Chorus. ^ HYmen, O ^ Hymen, mine of treasures more di- uine, what ^ di- e-
tie is like, is like to thee, that freest from ^ mor-ta-li- tie?

Stay (happy pair) stay but a while,
Hymen comes not, love to beguile,
These sports are alluring baits,
And sauce are to Loves sweetest Cates:
Longing hope does no hurt but this,
It heightens Loves attained bliss.
Then stay (most happy) stay a while,
Hymen comes not, Love to beguile.
TENOR. XX.
^Chorus. ^ HYmen, O Hymen, mine of treasures more de- uine, what di-e-tie, ^
what di-e-tie is like to thee, that free- est from mor- ta-li- tie?

CNTVS primus. XXI.
Chorus. ^ CEase, etc. Hymen O Hymen, bless this night, that Loves dark work,
loves dark work may come to light

CANTVS secundus. XXI.
^CEase, cease, cease these false sports, Have, have, have away, Love's made a
trewant by your stay, Good, night, ^ good night yet virgin, virgin Bride; but
look ere day, ij. ere day be spide, You change that fruitless name, least ^
you your sex defame, Fear not Hymen's peaceful war, you will co^quer, ij. ij.
though you subdued are, good ^ night, And ere the day be old, rise to the sun,
ij. ij. to the Sun, ij. a Marigold. ^ Chorus. ^ Hymen, O Hymen, bless this
night, this night, bless this sight, that Loves dark works may come, may
come to light. Chorus. ^

QVINTVS. XXI.
^Chorus. ^ CEase these false. Hymen, O Hymen, bless this night, that Loves ^
dark works, ij. dark works, that Loves dark works may come to light.

BASSVS. XXI.
^CEase these false sports ^ Chorus. ^ Hymen, O Hymen, bless this night, that
^ Loves dark works, ij. Loves dark, works dark ^ works may come to light.

TENOR. XXI.
^Chorus. ^ CEase these false sports. Hymen, O Hymen, bless this night, this
night, that Loves ^ dark works, Loves dark works, that Loves dark works
may come to light.

XXII.
Galliard to Lachrima. ^

FINIS.

