THE ROCKS, OF CHRISTIAN SHIPWRECK, Discovered by the holy Church of CHRIST
to her beloved Children, that they may keep aloof from them. WRITTEN IN
ITALIAN BY THE MOST REVEREND FATHER, MARC ANT. DE DOMINIS, Archb. of Spalato,
And thereout translated into English.

depiction of a fleet of ships sinking on rocks, and a fleet of ships afloat
sailing toward a haloed female figure in the clouds CITO: LONG: NVNQVAM.


LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL. M.DC.XVIII.

THE CHVRCH OF CHRIST TO HER MOST dear children wishes saving health, and
peace.
MY beloved children, If the spiritual Wrack of Christian souls could in the
approach be sensibly discerned, it might of it self serve for a warning-marke,
and all both eminent Rocks and vnder-water shelfs would be discried, and so
shunned. But so much the more dangerous, and pernicious is that woeful
shipwreck, which swalloweth up an infinite number of you, my dear children, in
that those, that undergo it, neither know, nor once all their life long heed
this their own ruin. Can I then your dolorous Mother, can I brook this
miserable loss? can I suffer so many of my children to be cast away? Noe, I
cannot. Needs must I impart the truth unto you; I am resolved to hide nothing
from you.

When in my young and first teeming days I felt the wounds, and torments of
Heathenish persecutions, very bitter, alas, was the anguish of my soul, to
behold on all sides streaming rivers of the blood of my tender children so
impiously shed by most cruel Tyrants, and persecutors of the faith of JESUS
CHRIST my Spouse, and Lord. No sooner ceased these tyrannous persecutions, but
I was beset with other more dangerous afflictions of Heresies, whereby the
bitterness of my soul was more increased: In asmuchas that first kind of
persecution was only outward, slaying the bodies of my children, but not
hurting their souls, nay rather much benefiting them. But this latter pierced
inward, destroying the souls of many, and wounded my very heart, even the
faith of my Spouse. At length the storm of heresies was hushed; and so I sat
me down in peace, enjoying a fair and goodly calm, when, behold, Isa. 38.17.
my grief was most bitter in peace. Peace brought upon me a greater bitterness
then any of my former. The persecutions of the Heathen, and the mutinies of the
Heretics were indeed a bitter service to me; but yet they both had their
sweetning. For, by the former I was made a more fruitful mother, Tertul. Apol.
aduers. gent.
The blood of the Martyrs being the seed whereout more Christians grew; and by
occasion of the latter my Officers, and Ministers became the more watchful,
and furnished themselves with more store of knowledge of sound doctrine, and
pure faith, and also fed my children with so much the more exact spiritual
nourishment. But the bitterness, which mine own Officers and servants have, by
reason of peace, through their own idleness, brought upon me, is become diverse
ages since, but in these days more then ever, distasteful to me.

From these my Ministers comes this your shipwreck; they have set in your way
all these Rocks, and Shelfes, and Quicksands, whereby so many of you are cast
away. Peace, and idleness have been my bane. As standing-water in wells,
ditches, and puddles through want of motion quickly corrupts, and breeds
worms, toades, snakes, and other such vermin: so peace, and idleness has
bin to my chief Ministers, Bishops, and Prelates the cause of putrefaction.
And so they following the crooked bent of corrupt nature, and running a madding
after their own concupiscences, have first given over themselves in prey to
Avarice. Very large have bin of old the alms, and oblations of faithful, and
very devout people, for the maintayning of their spiritual fathers After these
followed the bounty of Emperors, and other Christian Princes, and benefactors;
they, in their unadvised devotion heaping upon me more and more riches, have, I
may say to you, brought my Ministers to a good pass. For my part, I was at my
highest, and in best esteem, whilst I went in a thin coat, such as I was
cladde withal when my Spouse Christ Jesus betroathed himself to me. My most
proper ornaments, my truest greatness consists, not in outward pomp, nor
superfluous worldly commodities, but in spiritual, and inward virtues. My
beloved David wrote concerning me, Psalm. 45.13.
that the king's daughter is all-glorious within. And my worthy son St.
Hierome has noted concerning me, that, Hiero. de vita Malchi.
after that I was entertained by Christian Princes, I grew greater in state,
and wealth, but abated much in virtue. In thus saying, (alas the while) he
came too near the truth. Yet this was none of my fault: It was mine own
Ministers, that have brought this scar upon me: especially in that they,
without my allowance, or weeting, have divided among themselves that stock of
temporal goods, which, by my appointment, for diverse ages remained in common,
and whereout, by the public dispensers, or stewards, daily, or monthly
portions were wont to be allotted to every of those my Ministers for their
necessary maintenance; but afterward by their Avarice properly was brought in.
And I would to God they had there stayed, and contented themselves with their
parts so assigned to them: then had that been tolerable, and now perhaps were
necessary. But (as the guise of the covetous man is never to say he has
enough) they have gone on, inuenting new devises of purchase, though with the
apparent danger of their own, and their peoples, my childrens, souls, and to
the no small hinderance of all kind of spiritual gain.

Having afforded some, but never full, content to Avarice, they, by the sway of
natural corruption, cast themselves farther in prey to Ambition. They saw
themselves esteemed, and exalted by me, like fathers respected, reverenced, and
honored by my children: whereupon, forgetting that they were no other then my
Ministers, and servants, and that their office, and charge was to serve my
children, rather then to command, (even as they were taught by the example, and
precept of my Spouse, their and my Lord and Master, who came not to be
ministered unto, Matthew. 20.28.
but to minister) they began to think so highly of themselves, and to swell so
big with the conceit of their office, that they pretended themselves to be
Lords over my house, and very Princes, and so carried very small respect to me,
whose ministers, and servants they are. After that this Infernal spirit of
Ambition had entered into them, they now, not deigning any longer to employ
their joint pains in digging my vineyard, (which is the very office allotted
the^ by my Christ Jesus) set themselves to contend with one another about
Primacy, and Ancestry, and one to domineere over the other, and to play the
commander, as is well observed, and declared by my Eusebius. Eusebius. histor.
lib. 8. cap. 1.


These be the two horrible wild beasts, these the two monsters, namely
Avarice and Ambition, which have cast my Officers headlong into very important
errors, so that, putting away a good conscience, they have also made some
shipwreck concerning the faith: And, that which is worse, to boulster out their
Covetousness, and Ambition, they of their own head, without my foreknowledge,
or consent, nay to my great grief, and notwithstanding my ceaselesse
reclaimes, and continual protests against the^, even to the stopping of my
mouth, by downright violence, they have thrust upon the world their own
inventions, and established their own ordinances, not drawn out of that
Testament, which my Spouse left to me, and them, namely the holy Scriptures;
but craftily hammered out of their own capricious proiects, and tending to the
prejudice, downfall, and ruin of your poor souls, my dear children. These
their fancyfull devices, and monstrous inventions, brought in after those many
ages of my purity and singleness, were past, these being founded upon Avarice,
and Ambition, and cunningly couched under the water, yet so that they stand
near the top of it, are the Rocks, and Shelfes, and Quicksands, upon which
full many a wrack is made in the chiefest parts of my Dominions.

Now therefore, my beloved children, especially you, that find your selves,
though to my dishonor and great prejudice, under the yoke of my daughter of
Rome, I will discover to you all these Rocks, as I have formerly discovered
them to diverse other my daughters, whereby they have been much secured from
danger. Afford me attention with diligence, for your part. I, for mine,
protest in the presence of my Spouse, your Lord, and mine, and forwarne you,
that from henceforth the shipwrackes, which you shall suffer, shall be your
own fault, and not mine, if upon vain scruples, or fears suggested by the
devil, and cherished by those, who in name and profession bear themselves as
my servants, but are indeed my most deadly enemies, and rebels against me,
you shall forbear to open your eyes, and to be advertised of those dreadful
Rocks, which for your everlasting good I here compendiously, as in a Seamappe,
decipher out before your eyes, to the end that you, escaping out of them, or
rather keeping far and wide from them, may every of you guide the vessel of
his soul with all safety to the haven of eternal salvation. Give ear
therefore to me. And although Couetise has risen before Ambition, and given
the first blow to my Ministers; yet, forasmuchas Ambition has been the first
of the two that has built to your cost, I will therefore begin with the
Rocks, which Ambition has laid, and afterward will pass to those which grew
out of Avarice.

THE FIRST PART has these Rocks.
1 THE Papacy. Fol. 1. 2 Temporal power. 30. 3 Infolded faith. 38. 4
Excommunication. 45. 5 The Commandments of the Church. 56. 6 False union. 69.
THE SECOND PART has these Rocks.
1 THE Mass. Fol. 73 2 Auricular, Confession. 97. 3 Purgatory, together with
Satisfactio^s and Indulgences. 117. 4 Invocation of Saints. 142. 5 Images and
Relics. 148. 6 Merits. 158.
PROVERB. 1.20. Wisdom cries without; she utters her voice in the streets.
She cries in the chief place of concourse, in the opening of the gates, in
the city she utters her words, saying, How long, ye simple ones, will ye
love simplicity, and the scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate
knowledge? Turn you at my reproof; behold, I will power out my Spirit unto
you, I will make known my words unto you.


THE FIRST PART. The rocks, which are founded on Ambition.
The first Rock: The Papacy.
CHRIST my Lord, and Spouse, the Savior of my body, Ephesians. 5. c 3.
mine only true, and living Head, as he has promised to be with me always,
Matthew. 28.20.
even unto the end of the world; so he never would like, that I should
acknowledge any other spouse, or Lord, or Head, then himself. Indeed once he
died, and that was to wash me with his own blood, to make for me a vital
bath, and lauer of salvation; but he quickly rose again, and dies no more,
Romans 6.9.
death has no more dominion over him: and howsoever in his most sacred manhood
he remains in heaven, far distant from me in regard of bodily presence;
yet notwithstanding by his Spirit he is here upon earth continually present
with me; and so by way of Headship, or Lordship he has no need of any
Successor, or Lieutenant, in that himself, being mine own, and only Head,
does infuse into me all vigor, all motion, and all direction, which I, being
his Body, receive from him, being such an Head, as is not dead, but living, not
severed from me, but still growing to me. What need then have I of a visible
Head? Whatsoever an head usually does, or can do to its own body materially,
all that is spiritually wrought in me by my Christ, and that with abundant
sufficiency. I am indeed a body, but rather an invisible and spiritual one,
then visible, and material: in regard whereof my employments are for the most
part spiritual, and invisible. And therefore I have need of such an Head, as,
by his spiritual and invisible influence, may keep me in life, and govern
me, and furnish me with strength for my performances. In this behalf a
visible head can stead me just nothing. And as for that small deal of
visibilitie, and outwardnesse, which concerns me in this world, I have no
need, in that behalf, of any head for influence, but of a Ministry only for
execution, which is very sufficient for me. So have I need of visible hands
and feet, but not of a visible head; inasmuch as that, which is to be wrought
visibly, and outwardly in me, is fully, and completely performed by the only
Ministry of my members, without any proper office of an Head.

Hence was it that my Christ, as soon as he espoused me, did appoint me diverse
Ministers, who in my visible employments should all of them serve my turn, but
as members only, and not as an Head. Of this the first were the twelve
Apostles, who were no other then mere Ministers both unto Christ, and to me
also, not masters, nor Heads properly so called. Neither was it his pleasure,
that any of them should be set over me, as a proper Head, or as a Lord, or
Master in any wise: but his appointment was, that, under himself my only
King, Lord, Master, and husband, I should be left, as Lady and Mistress over
all his, and my Ministers, or servants: which is acknowledged by S. Paul
stiling himself my Minister. Col. 1.25.
As indeed were likewise all the other Apostles, even S. Peter himself; who
avouches as much, Acts 1.17.
whilst he calls his Apostleship a Ministry. And surely he never had, nor
professed himself to have any such Headship, or Lordship over me, but was
enterteined in my service only, as were the rest also. Neither can it ever be
found, that Christ committed to S. Peter any greater, or other charge,
dignity, jurisdiction or authority, then to the other Apostles, who all, and
every of them were, by the institution of Christ himself, absolutely equal in
all charge and office, which they bare in respect of me. Nay, my Spouse was so
far from affoording to any of them a pretended title of greatness above the
rest of his fellows, that, when as they diverse times cast out words among
themselves, and disputed concerning Sovereignty, he always checked them, Luke
22.26.
and would have them to remain as brethren, and jointly to attend his service,
and mine, and to keep themselves from affecting dominion, either over me, or
among themselves. And when he took his leave of them at his departure up into
heaven, they still dreaming on this idle fantasy, and asking him whether he
would then restore the Kingdom to Israel, Acts 1.6.
(namely, that hereby they might know which of them should be exalted above
the rest) they had the repulse of him in this behalf, with intimation that
they should attend, and that jointly with equal charge and office, no other
thing, then to be throughout the world witnesses unto him of his resurrection.
Certes, if ever there were a time for him to speak plain, and to declare,
that he left in his room his Lieutenant Peter, or some other, to be their,
and mine Head, then most of all it behooued, when in regard of his bodily
presence he gave them his farewell: and yet he then recommended me, his Spouse,
to them all together jointly, and equally, that they might employ their
attendance on me: Hane sponsam suis amicis sponsus abiens commendauit. Aug.
cont. 2. Gaud. epist. lib. 2. cap. 12.
Which is well observed by my holy doctor S Augustine.

There was no reason for it, nor decency in it, that I, being his Spouse, and
an universal Mother, should be domineered over, and lorded by any one of mine
own members, mine own sons, nay mine own servants. As for my Peter,
certainly he neither exercised, nor ever challenged any such soueraignety over
me, or over his Colleagues, and fellows; neither did he pretend to be an
universal Pope, or only Vicar-generall of Christ. One of the first actions of
employment about me, after the ascent of my Spouse into heaven, was the
ordayning of Deacons, which should take care of the widows, and poor. And
this action was neither performed, nor governed by Saint Peter, but by all the
twelve Apostles jointly. This being my perpetual ordinance, Acts 6.2.
as I have received it from my Spouse, that my Ministers, and Officers all
together jointly should treat concerning the external good guidance of my
family: So likewise, when there were some to be sent into Samaria, Acts 8.14.
to finish the good work of their conversion, Saint Peter was so far from
taking upon him to send whom he pleased, that he himself was by the whole
body of the Apostles chosen and sent thither, as one of the many. When the
first controversy, brake out in Antioch concerning the observation of the
ancient Judicial Ceremonies, to whom did Paul and Barnabas think they ought
to have recourse, for certain resolution in that point? Surely if Christ had
left Saint Peter his Vicar, they ought to have addressed themselves to him
principally; yet did they say among themselves, and resolve, that it behooued
them to go up to Jerusalem, to consult about this question with the Apostles,
Acts 15.2.
and Elders of that City. Which accordingly was done: and there was gathered a
Council, and that summoned, and ordered, not by Peter alone, but the Apostles,
of themselves, jointly met together, with the Elders also. And howsoever Saint
Peter (as the most stepped in age, and the most ancient Apostle, and much
respected by the rest of the Apostles) was the first that delivered his
opinion; yet Saint James prosecuting the same, did further add of his own,
and did strike up the matter. And the public letters, dispatched in that
behalf, were not styled in the name of Saint Peter, but of all the Apostles,
and Elders in common. Neither was it a slight check, or reproof, wherewith
St. Paul openly took up Saint Peter, Galat. 2.11.
for halting in the instruction of the faithful: which he might do; being
the Apostles were, in their office, and care of my affairs, all of them
equal, and even brothers among themselves.

And howsoever ye read in the Gospel, that Christ said to Peter, Thou art
Peter, Matthew. 16.18.
and upon this rock will I build my Church, yet are ye not therefore to deem,
that Peter had hereby committed unto him any dominion, or command over me, or
that he was entrusted with a larger cure, then the rest of the Apostles. For,
these words (according to the interpretation of them communicated to me by the
spirit of my Spouse, and declared by my most sincere, pure, and holy Doctors)
import, that that confession, made by Saint Peter, saying, Thou art Christ the
Son of the living God, must be that Rock, whereon was to be grounded that
faith, which is indeed my foundation and supporter. By this Rock is also
understood he, whom Peter confessed, even Christ, who is my true foundation,
whereon, and not on Peter, I was built: for, if Peter had been my foundation,
certes more then once should I have fallen by his falls. Matthew. 26.70.
But if any man will press yet further, Galat. 2.12.
that Christ does in these words promise that I should be built upon Peter,
let him understand withal, that to build my house is nothing else, but to get
and provide petras, stones, and to rear them up in my walls; that is to say,
to preach the Gospel, to convert the unbelievers, and to bring them home to
me. And forasmuch as Peter was to be, of all the twelve (or rather by the
default of Judas, eleven) Apostles, the most fervent, and most diligent in
converting a many of souls, therefore to him, as to a principal Minister, and
Builder, there was a prediction made of the work, which he was to perform,
and that I was to be built upon him; namely that Christ had especial
confidence in his care, for the building of my house, as being more zealous
then the other ten Apostles. But it follows not thence, that he was the
only builder, or that he was chosen for the only Architect, or
Chiefe-builder: for, the other Apostles also were Masteres of this Art, and
laid to their hands for the rearing up of my Fabrique, and in special, Saint
Paul labored more abundantly, 1. Cor. 15.10.
then they all, and so surpassed, even Saint Peter himself, in edifying me,
and has acquit himself for a skifull Master Builder. 1. Cor. 3.10.


In like manner, when ye hear it said to Saint Peter, Matthew. 16.19.
I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven; ye are to remember, that the same
was also spoken to all the rest of the Apostles. So likewise, though the keys
were promised to Peter, Matthew. 18.18.
yet it was never said to him, I will give the keys to thee only. And when
this promise was performed, it was accomplished, not in Peter only, but in all
the Apostles jointly, when Christ said to them, Go, and teach all nations.
Matthew. 28.19. Ioh. 20.21.
As my father sent me, so send I you: namely with the same authority, and
power, but yet ministerial in you, which is principal in me. What power
therefore had Peter, other then that, which all the rest had, to whom Christ
imparted his own power? Moreover, Christ gave the keys to them all, as also
the power of binding, and loosing, when he said jointly to all, Whosoeuers
sins ye remit, Ioh. 21.23.
they are remitted unto them: and whosoever sins ye retain, they are
retained. Therefore Saint Peter had no other part in my service, nor other
power, then the rest of the Apostles had.

Lastly, Ioh. 21.15.
if it was said to Peter, Feed my sheep and my lambs: know ye likewise, that
feeding is principally preaching, instructing, and administering the
Sacraments. All which was committed to all the Apostles, Go and teach all
nations, baptizing them etc. As my Father sent me, so send I you. Nor did
Christ say to Peter; Be thou the only sheepeheard of my sheep: But he, by a
special application, thus bespake him, to feed his sheep, that he might
comfort, encourage, and revive him, whom he saw then cast down with grief,
for having so lately showed himself a Renegate, whereupon he might with good
reason misdoubt himself, to have lapsed from his Apostleship. But Christ
recomforteth him by this his speech, as saying to him, I restore thee to thy
Apostleship, and, in recompense of thy crime in base denial of me, I now
enjoin thee the more zeal, and charity in feeding, and attending my poor
flock; and therefore, in lieu of thy thrice denying me, I will, that thou
thrice confess thy love to me: and so I recommend this office to thee in a
more special manner, even by way of penance, which in general I have committed
also to the rest jointly: but to them I do not redouble my charge, because they
have not as thou, denied me. And even this he required of him, when he
foretold his fall, and said to him, I have prayed for thee, Luke 22 32.
that thy faith fail not: therefore, when thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren. That is to say, if thou shall see the faithful, which hereafter
shall believe in me, to fall sometimes by weakness and infirmity, it is your
part to animate, and strengthen them by your own example, whom being fallen I
have raised up again: and with this care of co^firming thy brethren, I burden
thee in special more then the rest; for that thou by thine ensample can do
this, whereas others are like to do that office by their exhortations only,
and not by so lively an example of their own.

And if any doubt arise in your minds upon Christ's speaking only to Peter in
the presence of the rest of the Apostles, and of such things, as were to be
imparted unto all, and if thereupon ye should surmise, that he did this to
intimate hereby to the rest Peter's Soueraignety over them, as if he were to
be the Chief, and ordinary Pastor, and all the rest as his adiutors, and
assistants, you must awake out of this error. Verily Christ never had any such
purpose, or intention, nor (as I have proved) can he now suffer any such
construction: neither did ever any such interpretation come into my head. But
well may ye know, that, in this action, not any such Primacy of Peter, but
other mysteries are included, which be these:

Christ giving charge concerning that, which was to be committed equally to
them all, Cypr. de unit. Eccles.
yet directs his speech only to one, that it might hence be gathered, that
I, his Spouse, was to be but one, and that they should not imagine that every
of them might make a several foundation of their own, by schisms, and
divisions, but that their joint labors should bring forth one, and the same
work, namely me, being one, and the same Church. And this is Saint Cyprian's
interpretation.

Christ in speaking only with Peter, does appoint him, as the Head in order,
and the President of the Apostolic College, which is a dignity, and
pre-eminence, not of authority, nor jurisdiction, but only of rank, and
title; that thereby the Apostolical Company might attain to a perfect
collectiue unity, such as is in a Collegiate-Chapter with their Deane, or in a
Senate with their President; and that hereby the Apostles might gather, how
well unity did please their Master, in that, he speaking to Peter only,
Hieron. l. 1. aduers. Iouin.
as to the Head in order, and Foreman of that Society, they should in no wise
fall asunder in divisions, but keep themselves in perfect union, and so,
holding all together, they might the better set themselves to tend me, who am
but one. And thus Saint Hierome expounds it.

Only Peter was spoken to, as being my type, and representing me. Christ did
then treat with him, as with my Proctor, or Aturney: and so when Christ
delivered him the keys, he took sey sin of them, not to his own private use,
but to mine, and in the name of the public. For, there were then included,
and represented in Peter, all my Prelates present, or succeeding: and so in the
name of them al, and to the use of them all he both received the keys, Aug. de
Agon. Christ. c. 30. and in psalm. 108. and in Io. tract. 124. etc. Ambr. de
dig. Sacerd. c. 2.
and the charge of feeding my flock, and building my house. Not that he had
liberty to bestow those keys at his pleasure, or to appropriate them to any
one, whom he would make his successor: but that I, in his person, did then take
them to the use of my Prelates. Like as an Attorney taking Livery and seisin
for an incorporation, does not receive it as an owner, or disposer, nor has
thereby authority to do his pleasure with it, but by this Attornement the
right, and property inureth to the Body or Society represented. And, as for the
person of Peter, he received indeed the keys for himself also, inasmuch as
himself was one of them, in whose name he took them: And this is Saint
Augustine's judgment.

Lastly, Christ makes this conference with Peter only, that all Prelates,
casting their eye on Saint Peter, might from him take a just model and
pattern of gentleness, Leo. Sermon. 3. de su. Assump.
and other Episcopal virtues: Which is the exposition of Saint Leo.

These, and other like mysteries have I always understood concerning this
action of Christ with Peter: but that therein should be comprised any
Soueraignety, or Papacy, or commission for the only ordinary Pastorship, there
has not bin in all my house, for the first five hundredth years, any one found
so idle, as to dream of such an invention.

And though I should be so prodigal, as to grant, that which I have showed to
be most false, namely that Saint Peter was ordained by Christ an universal
Pope over me, yet what has the Bishop of Rome to do with St. Peter? The holy
Scriptures giue-in no evidence at all, that ever Peter was at Rome. Only
humane histories report it. And as for divine Records, they plainly show, that
he departed not from the coasts of Judea till the fiftieth year of our Lord.
Thereafter we find in the Ecclesiastique histories, that before his going
into the West, Hieron. in Pet.
he preached the Gospel in the Eastern parts, in Pontus, Cappadocia, Asia,
Bythinia, etc. for the space of diverse years; and that he suffered martyrdom
in Rome, about the sixty eight year of our Lord. It is not possible therefore,
that he could have been Bishop of Rome so long as fifteen years, much less
twenty five: Which space of time is very unadvisedly assigned him by some
passable ancient writers.

But, to omit these arguments from computation, suerely neither Saint Peter,
nor any other Apostle was ever made Bishop of any particular City, whereto his
seat might be entayled by a perpetuity. This is repugnant to the very office of
Apostleship, which was by Christ their Chief Lord instituted an order of
professed errants throughout the whole world, when he gave them their
commission, Matthew 28.19. Mar. 16.15.
to Go and teach all Nations, and to preach the Gospel to every creature,
that is to say, to all men wheresoever throughout the world. They had no power
therefore to fix themselves on any particular place, nor to bind themselves to
it, but their duty was to attend the enlargement of my tents, Act. 1.8.
beginning from Jerusalem, to the utmost parts of the earth: and when they had
founded any particular Church, and united it to me the universal Mother, they
were then to pass on for new plantations. Who therefore is so hardy, as to
coope up Saint Peter at Rome, and to bind him to a particular Bishopric
there till the day of his death? And if he finished his course at Rome,
certainly he died not with the title of Bishop of Rome, but of an universal
Apostle. For, neither that, nor any other See could be chosen by him, as proper
to him, being by his function, and calling to pass to and fro through the
world. But if he ended his life in any heathenish place, where, as then, there
was no Church planted, who then was to be his successor in the Papacy? It is
therefore a groundless, and idle assertion, to name personal successors to
any of the Apostles; whenas none of them all was a local Bishop, (for, as for
James Bishop of Jerusalem, Constit. Apost. lib. 6. c 14. and Doroth. in synopsi
etc.
he was none of the twelve Apostles, but a Disciple beside that number) and
therefore all Bishops succeed all the Apostles in Solidum, that is to say, every
particular Bishop, whatsoever he be, holds the place, and office of the
Apostles, who by Christ's institution committed their charge, and office to the
Bishops, and those to other Bishops, and so to others by continual succession
till the end of the world; and that by virtue even of those words of Christ to
the Apostles. Io. 20.
As the Father has sent me, so I send you. That is to say, As the Father has
given me power to send you, so I give power to you to send others, and to
give them likewise the same missiue power, which I give you, and the Father
has given me. And hereupon it follows, that every Bishop, in respect of the
divine institution, has the very Apostolical power, that is, universal in
habit, or general qualification, which he is enabled to exercise actually in
any part of the world. But, in regard of my restreining precept, for the
avoiding of disorder, and confusion, there are long since limitations set
down, and particular distinctions of every ones Diocese. Now therefore, when
as there is no personal succession unto any of the Apostles, who can fetch his
claim from Peter? who from John? who from any other of the Apostles? Nay, if
such plea were good, there could not be above 12. or at the most 13. Bishops
in the world. And to afford personal succession to Peter only, with denial
of it to all the rest, is to beat the air with idle words, and to go against
the Scriptures.

Certeinely for a thousand years and more, I never heard in all my family from
the mouth, or pen of any pious and holy Author, that the Bishop of Rome was
acknowledged for an Universal Pope. Indeed the Bishops of Rome themselves have
endeavored to make me an underling, and to put me under their feet, and to
make themselves my Head, and Lord, and Master, with great wrong to my true, and
only Head, Lord, and Spouse CHRIST JESUS: but they have long attempted it in
vain. For they have met with stout oppositions. St. Polycrates a most holy
Bishop of Asia did strongly oppose S. Victor B. of Rome. S. Irenaeus B. of
Lions did the like; and this befell near the times of the Apostles. Cypr. l.
1. ep. 3. and l. 3. op. 13. Apud. Cypr. ep. 74. Pamel.
S. Cyprian bears himself as a companion, and Colleague with S. Steven, and
S. Cornelius both Bishops of Rome, even in the Universal government of the
Church; and spares not to hold his own against them. S. Firmilian B. of
Cesarea in Cappadocia handles the same Steven of Rome very homely, and sets
naught by his excommunications. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 4. Iulij Epist. ad Orientales
and Socrat. l. 7. c. 5. and Sozom. l. 3. c. 5 etc.
The Church histories are plentiful in showing, how lightly S. Julius, though
B. of Rome, was ouerpassed by the Bishops of the East, and by the Council of
Antioch, (which, for the more part of it, was Catholic, and Orthodoxe) for no
less matter, then that he would make himself an Universal Judge, even in the
causes of the Eastern Church, and yet in the end he was feign to sit down,
and be quiet. The Council of Nice acknowledges not the B. Con. Nic. can. 6
of Rome for any other, then one of the three then Patriarchs, who had their
limited jurisdictions: so also does the first Council of Constantinople, and
the Council of Chalcedon. None of the ancient fathers my dearest children, for
the space of 600. years together, has any the least impression of the Roman
Papacy; by whom the B. of Rome was never taken for other, then at the most for
Patriarch of the West. The Africane Church (in those days one of my most noble
daughters,) affronted the Roman Church, and would not in any wise, that she
should exercise any power over her in the ordering of the Ecclesiastical
policy; and went so far, as in open Councels to resist her, in which even
the renowned S. Augustine bare his part. The like has been many times
practiced by the Churches of Rauenna, of Aquilege, and of Milan. And S. Gregory
in opposing the title of Universal Bishop in the Patriarch of Constantinople,
must needs oppugn the same in the Roman also by force of very strong
arguments.

It is to no purpose therefore to seek here upon earth one Vicar-generall for
my Spouse Christ, who has no need of a successor or Vicar, inasmuch as he is
head of my body, and his Spirit is sufficient for me, only Ministers, and
laborers are needful for him, and for me: and those were, first the blessed
Apostles, and after them their successors. So that, in respect of laboring,
and working, and setting right also the external government of my family,
Cypr. l. 4. ep. 3. and l. 3. ep. 13. and de Simpl. Prae. lat. Ambr. in 1. C^.
11. Chrysostom. hom. 17. in Mat. etc.
those Apostles all jointly, and in solidum, (as S. Cyprian expressly affirms)
hold the place of Christ, and are equally his Vicars, but in laboring, and
working for my behoof: and all Bishops likewise are with very good reason by
my holy doctors, styled by this title of Christ's Vicars, and not S. Peter
only. And so in respect of my true Head, and Spouse, I am under a perfect
Monarchy: but as for the work of my Ministers, they perform their office in
a kind of Aristocratie, without any Monarchy at all amongst them. They are
like a company of workmen, which have undertaken a large Vineyard, every man
his parcel: or like a troop of many shepherds all servants of one great
Shepherd, who percel out among themselves the feeding of a very great flock,
whereof there is one entire Lord, and Master, that only grand Shepherd. And
surely when the owner of a vineyard hireth many laborers to dig it, he does
not give any dominion, or jurisdiction to any of them, over either the
vineyard, or their fellow-workemen; and, if it be his pleasure to appoint any
to assist the workmen, and to direct them in their labors, either he comes
among them himself in person, or sends one of his sons, or his factor, or
deputy, whose office then must be, not to delue, and toil with the rest of
the laborers, but only to ouersee, and to provide, that they do their task.
I pray you ask Saint Peter whether he were hired by Christ to be a labourer
in his vineyard, or to be a surueyor. Verily he will answer you, that he was
one of the laborers, and diggers in my vineyard, and not a factor, or
surueyor, or deputy. His office therefore was, not to command others, but to
work himself. 1. Cor. 9.9. 1. Tim. 5.18.
For, all the Apostles were Oxen for the plough and for treading out the corn:
nor would Saint Peter have suffered his neck to be withdrawn from this
yoke. Let not therefore the Bishop of Rome thus without all ground vaunt
himself for the only Vicar of Christ, nor under this title (equally common to
all other Bishops with him) keep me down, and oppress me, and together with
me all my children.

Nor may you suffer your selves to be deluded by a false, but very common,
imagination, that it behooves me to have one visible Head, and one universal
Governor. For, in such cases, as this, ye are not to set down for good, that,
which men's fancies do conceive; but ye are to have an eye to that, which
Christ himself has ordained. And forasmuch as he, as I have showed, will be
my only Head, and sole Commander; and, for external managements, has
appointed that his laborers should among themselves in common, and in solidum,
without Monarchy, in a kind of Aristocraticall form, join together, for the
directing of my affairs, by way of Synods and Councels, as necessity shall
require; therefore one supreme visible Head over me neither is necessary, nor
was ever ordained, nor is desired. And if so many temporal Estates in this
world are sufficiently governed, without a Monarch, in a Democraticall, or
Aristocratical form, why do ye suffer your brains to be pestered with a
false imaginary necessity of having a mere man to be the Monarchical
governor over my house? and consider not what a woe case I were in, if I
should hang on the sleeue of one man, who has no privilege against any error,
or misery.

Perhaps ye will ask me, how then crept the Papacy into Rome, where now it
carries so high a sail? whereto I am sure, that, whilst I was a young, and
small tenderling, both the Apostles, and likewise those Bishops, which
immediately succeeded them, did indifferently, without any jealousy of
concurring jurisdictions, or affectation of soueraignety, agree together in the
ordeining of other Bishops, and Ministers, and committing to them the
preaching of the Gospel and planting throughout the world new particular
Churches. Which young daughters of mine being thus multiplied, and enlarging
me far and near, the necessity of preventing confusion did bring into my
house, an wholesome, holy, and necessary ordinance, that there should be
division of Provinces, and in Provinces distinct Bishoprics, and Diocesses;
and so the Bishops of one Province should attend the directing, and guidance of
their own precincts only, and not intermeddle with the Provinces of others,
unless they were thereto requested, or public necessity so urged. My self,
seeing this custom brought in by necessity, approved the same, and did
moreover ordain, that in every Province the Bishop of the Mother City (that is
of the place, which was the seat of the chief Magistrate, or otherwise
conspicuous for some civil respect) should be the chief, and consecrate the
Bishops of that Province, and in the stead of the Synod of his whole
Province, should dispatch certain affairs pertaining to me, that so the
Bishops of that Province might not be encombred with meeting together upon
every small occasion. And because in the Roman Empire, which at the time of my
espousall to Christ, and for three or four ages after, was in its greatest
flourish, there were then three most renowned Cities, Hegesip. de excid.
Hieros. l. 3. c. 5.
most eminent above the rest in honor, and secular power; namely first Rome in
Italy, the chief and principal seat of the Empire; secondly, Alexandria in
Egypt, where the Emperors Deputy remained; thirdly, Antioch the mother-City of
all the East; in regard hereof the Bishops of these three grand Cities were the
three first Metropolitanes. Afterward also the number of Churches so
increasing, that these three sufficed not, and the Provinces which grew too
large, being thereupon, for my conueniency, divided into more, and lesser
Provinces, (with appointment, that always the Bishop of the principal City
of such a Province should be the Metropolitan thereof) the three aforesaid,
in regard that they had been my first Metropolitanes, were honored with the
titles of Patriarchs, and endued with certain privileges, which I was not
unwilling that they should enjoy. To whom also I did afterward, by way of
privilege, add two other Patriarchs, one of Constantinople, (as soon as that
City became a seat of the Empire being called another Rome) and the other of
Jerusalem.

Thus my unthankful daughter the Church of Rome, having been courteously
enterteined, ennobled, enriched, and exalted by diverse devout Emperors, using
the advantages, which by little and little she gained, partly by temporal
greatness, which then shined fair upon her, partly for that I had often good
use of her help in the midst of my troubles, and garboiles, which heresies
brought upon me, wherein she stood me in good stead, by procuring me favor,
and countenance of Catholic Emperors, as also by the credit and reputation
she had abroad from those great Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul, which were her
fosterers, and breeders up, yet she, I say, impudently abusing all this, did
about a thousand years ago enter into a bold rebellion against me, not
vouchsafing to remain still my daughter, nor acknowledging me for her mother
in any wise, but seeking to make herself my mistress, and to domineere over
me. But most of all about 550. years after, since the times of that firebrand
Hildebrand, and since the total ruin of the Roman Empire, this daughter of
mine, being high-growne in greatness, and pride, as she began to withdraw her
neck from the yoke of a temporal Lord, who with his rod might hold her in
obedience to me, so would she needs also abandon her due place, which she held
with me, of being a member of my body, from which she rent herself by an
horrible schism; and disdeyning to be a member of it, would have no nay but
perke above me, and make herself my Head by tyrannical usurpation. And
whereas, first, according to the appointment of my Spouse, she should receive
life, and vigor from me, as every member of the Body does, from its
conjunction with the whole, as being a part thereof, she, by tearing herself
off from being a member, to put forward for the Headship, has instantly lost
all that spirit, and vigor, which every particular Church partaketh with and
from me, Cypr. de unit. eccles.
even as branches derive their vigor from the root, streams from the
fountain, and beams from the Sun; which is S. Cyprians comparison. And
moreover she has been so bold with me, as to dispoile me of my robes, and
ornaments, and to rob me of my proper name; and now she, she only must be
styled the universal Church, the Catholic Church, the mother of the
faithful, the pillar of truth, the Spouse of Christ, etc.

Behold therefore here an infamous, and dreadful rock. For, whosoever
abandoneth me, to cleave to her, he is out of the Arc of Noah; he, not having
me to his mother, Cypr. ibidem.
has not God to his father. Whosoever is a follower of that tyrant, which
usurps my dignity and trampleth down my authority, he certainly follows
not Christ my true Spouse, but Antichrist. No Church can be under Christ,
unless it be first united to me: and all Churches, that enjoy the graces
flowing from Christ, do partake them by my means, and so far forth, as they
are my daughters, and limbs growing unto me, who am the Body of Christ.
Therefore the Roman Church, inasmuch as a daughter, or member she will not be,
and mother or Head, which feign she would, she cannot be, between both sure
she has no part in me. And whosoever danceth after such a schismatical and
rebellious ringleader, must needs himself be a schismatique, and rebel: and
who so follows the usurping Pope, must engage himself to believe every
falsehood, and fiction that is thrust upon him, and so shall be sure to tumble
down headlong after such a guide. Thus the Papacy shows it self to be the
grand and most dangerous rock of all the rest, against which so many poor
Christian souls daily dash themselves. And so much for this mother-Rocke. The
rest I shall pass over more briefly.

The second Rock. Temporal Power.
SO far have my Churchmen been puffed up with Ambition, that they have not
only claimed, but also professed, and exercised temporal power in many
merely civil, and temporal affairs, challenging to themselves, as in my
right, a power over Clerks to imprison, and banish them, and to inflict real
forfeits, and corporal pains upon them; yet can none of my Prelates pretend
for any power otherwise, then as the same belongs to me. And I, for my part,
from my conscience confess, that I have not received from my Spouse any the
least temporal power concerning any temporal affair whatsoever: but all the
power I have, is wholly and merely Spiritual. For, the end, whereto I am
ordained, being wholly, and only spiritual, (namely to guide the souls of my
children unto eternal blessedness, which is supernatural and spiritual) it
follows, that all the means which I am to work by, must be of their own
nature Spiritual, and supernatural: and therefore mine own, and proper power
can extend it self no further, then to things Spiritual only. My Lord Christ
himself, what other power did he exercise, then merely Spiritual? Did he
ever thrust himself into any temporal affair? S. Paul says, that Those that
are set over my children, Heb. 13.17.
are to watch over their souls, and to render account of them. My care
therefore properly, and wholly concerns men's souls. As for their bodies, and
bodily, or civil affairs, they have other governors, namely temporal
Princes. The same S. Paul says also, that No man, 2. Tim. 2.4.
that warreth unto God, entangleth himself with the affairs of this life.
Moreover, by the joint acknowledgement of my holy doctors, it is manifest, that
my employment is wholly and only in cure of soul, which also is not denied by
diverse the most renowned Bishops of Rome: as Hormisda Epist. 21. Gelasius de
Anath. vinc. and Epist. 10. Symmachus in Apologet. Nicolas the 1. Epist. 8. And
why, I pray you, is my power described ordinarily in holy writ by the name of a
Chair, ^^^th. 23.2.
but that it consists in teaching, and directing, this power of mine being
principally instructiue, and doctrinall? Christ said to his Apostles, Luke
22.25.
that The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, But ye shall not
be so: thereby inferring, that it belongs not to the officers of my family to
exercise dominion, or civil coactiue jurisdiction. S. Hierome says, that
Kings rule over men, Hieron. ep. 3.
will they, nill they; but the priest rules only those, that are willing to
be subject to him. The reason is, for that it is not in my reach to enforce any
man. S. Chrysostom very well says of me, (...). Chrysostom. hom. 3. in Act. Apo.
that I cannot impose any thing by authority; that is, in such manner as
pretending power to compel others to obey me.

True it is, that religious, and devout Princes, to do me honor, and for my
sake to vouchsafe some privilege to my officers, have afforded me the favor,
to have the exercise of a certain civil, and criminal Jurisdiction over my
own Ministers: but such grants as these are at the courtesy, and in the
liberty of the grantors. And yet hereupon my Prelates carry their heads too high,
and lay claim to exempt from the civil Magistrate, all Clearkes, and Monks,
with their very hangbyes, and lickspits. And this Rock is very dangerous, even
to my Clergy themselves, who not only are hereby emboldened openly to disobey
the Magistrate in his civil government, but also hide under this cloak of
exemption a foul heap of heinous sins, and enormities, living as they do,
debauchedly, and without fear, either of God, or of the civil sword: the
execution of justice in such cases by my Ministers being either too too gentle,
slack, and sleepy, as it is ordinarily, or, on the contrary, sometimes too
cruel, bloody, and barbarous.

This Rock is so much the more harmefull, and dangerous, in that the Bishops
of Rome, cloaking themselves with my mantle, thereby make pretension to mount
above Princes, Kings, and Emperors, and to be judges over them, arrogating to
themselves authority to ouerrule them at their pleasure, in their civil
government, and in their laws; nay, moreover to deprive them of their
kingdoms, and free their subjects from their bounden duty, and oath of fealty:
and this not only in case of heresy, but upon any other occasion which the
Popes in their humor shall conclude to be important, and sufficient. An
horrible and abominable pretension, and altogether contrary to the law of God.
This Rock surely is founded by the Devil himself, whereat so many of my
children split themselves, and for the maintenance of the Pope's ambitions,
forfeit their goods, honors, fame, liberty, life, and soul. By this hellish
pretension, rebellions are raised up in Kingdoms, infamous and execrable
murders of Kings are plotted, the peace of the whole world is troubled,
brutish enormities are committed: and all this springs only from Papal
ambition.

It is most certain, and notorious, that by the law of God, and of nature,
expressly confirmed in the holy Scriptures, every one ought in conscience, under
the guilt of most heinous mortal sin, to obey his lawful Prince, in matters
concerning the civil estate, whether the same Prince be good, or evil. Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers. Romans 13.1. 1. Pet. 2.18.
Be subject to your Masters, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward. And for certain, I never received any power to disanull the bond of
God's laws. Whence therefore has the Pope gotten such power, that he
presumes to disoblige subjects from that natural bond, which tyeth them to be
entirely subject to their lawful Prince in civil matters, and those things
which concern the temporal government? It is a mere gull, and foppery, that
he should pretend to depose Kings from their thrones, and deprive them of
their crowns, and in this wise to let loose their subjects from their
obedience, whenas, without all dobut such deprivations, and depositions, are
mere temporal businesses; and no power of mine extends it self beyond
spirituals. The Pope's arch-flatterers confess, that it follows hence, that
he cannot directly depose Kings; yet will they have him enhabled to do it
indirectly, namely as such matters are occasion of some spiritual good, or
evil. But this, say I, is impossible. For, a thing is said to be done
indirectly, when it necessarily follows upon another thing which is done
directly. As for example, when a thief robs a trayuailer of his clothes,
and he, thus left naked, dies with cold, this thief has robbed the man
directly, but killed him indirectly. In like manner it should be shown what
spiritual action the Pope does directly, by his spiritual power, whereupon
necessarily, but indirectly the deposition of a King, or depriving him of his
temporals does ensue. But it is impossible that any such action should be
showed. For there cannot be any greater spiritual action achieved by my
proper power, then Excommunication. And who would ever come to that height of
absurdity, as to say (and yet some have said it, and believed it) that a Prince
being excommunicated is held in the same instant to be also deprived of his
kingdom, and deposed? And yet my very nouices know, that excommunication
medleth not with any temporalls. A rich man being excommunicated does not
thereby lose his possessions; nor a noble man his nobility; why then should a
King by excommunication lose his crown?

Now therefore see what a terrible Rock this is. A toy takes the Pope in the
head to bear the people in hand, that their Prince is an heretic, and
excommunicate, and so deprived of his kingdom, and that they are to rise
against him, and to call in another to reign over them: These simple wretches,
being misled by the Popes false doctrine, will needs disobey God, to obey the
Pope. And thus first they herein sin mortally, and cast away their souls;
then are they also most justly punished for traitors, as they are, and so
farewell goods, life, and all. Neither will the matter be salued up by that,
which the Romanists reply, saying, Obey your Prince, and swear fealty to him
in civil obedience: but when the case so falls out, that the Pope commands
you otherwise, then renounce this obedience. Nay, but obedience due to Princes
is perpetual, absolute, and without any reservation, or condition: for, God so
commands. Act. 5.
And we must obey God, rather then men. It behooves therefore by God's law to
swear obedience, and fealty, in matters concerning the temporal government,
unto every natural liege Lord, without any reservation; and consequently every
subject ought to declare himself, when he is so required, that he swears,
and promises perpetual, and absolute obedience, any whatsoever, or
whosesoeuer, declaration, commandment, excommunication, or sentence to the
contrary notwithstanding. For, in this world there is no power, that can
disoblige a man from this perpetual, and absolute obedience commanded by the
law of God himself. And in like manner the deposing, or depriving Sovereign
Princes is to be attempted by none but God's immediate hand, to whom only it
belongs to translate kingdoms. Dan. 4.25.
And, as for any power of mine, especially that cannot in any manner, neither
direct nor indirect, lawfully attempt any such deprivations. Let every one
therefore remain subject, and obedient unto his own Prince, in things
concerning temporal government: nor let him think, that he ever can be
assoyled by any power on earth, though Ecclesiastical, from such his entire
obedience.

The third Rock. Implicit Faith.
Cruel, and pestilent ambition! The Pope, to the end that his usurped tyranny
may not be discovered, and that he may be taken for a god upon earth, by simple
seduced people, or rather that they may be made pliable, and capable to admit
for good any falsehood, and forgery, which the Pope, for the advancing his own
greatness, shall propound to them, causes them to be persuaded, and taught,
that in matter of faith, it is sufficient for every of them to believe,
whatsoever the holy, Catholic, Roman Mother Church does hold, and believe.
Verily I, that am the universal Church, I, Mat. 28.20. 1. Tim. 3.15.
to whom the continual assistance of the Spirit of my Spouse is promised, (and
not to the Roman) I, that am the pillar, and ground of truth, yet dare not be
so bold, as to assure my children, that this infolded faith suffices them,
namely, to believe under general terms, whatsoever I believe. How then she,
now swarming with errors, and falsehood, and being nothing, but ambition and
avarice, how dares she be thus bold? My beloved Saint Paul would not have his
Corinthians think, 2. Cor. 1.24.
that he would bear dominion over their faith, which he did sweetly instill
into them, and not thrust it upon them by command and domineering. But Rome
will have every man, will he, nill he, by all means to believe, and rest in,
whatsoever she determines, and commands, and to subscribe his belief to
all that she believes and maintains, or rather to whatsoever she inuenteth
and imagines, though indeed herself believe it not, nor hold it for any point
of faith, but for a matter of state; and upon this point of policy she takes
order, that those inventions, which she knows to be no matters of faith,
but only to serve her ambition, and covetousness, must be given out for
points of faith.

Rome cannot abide, that ye, my children, should be zealous in seeking to know
what it is that ye are to believe; for, by such enquiry you would discover her
tricks: and therefore she tells you, that you are safe, if ye have this
enuelopped faith, and believe all that she believes. And if so be any of you
make a stand upon any particular, being one of those articles, which she in
point of policy has invented, (and which shall hereafter be declared by me in
my descry of these Rocks) then she presently mufleth up your eyes, and
blinds you, and sends to you her own attendants, the Priests, and Friars,
preachers, and confessors, who wholly depending on her, are all at her
devotion, and they declare unto you, that Rome has decided the point to be an
article of faith. And thus, when ye are bound to believe all that the Church
of Rome believes, and maintains, that is, whatsoever she teaches, and
avouches, as fit to be held, and believed, ye must needs play at
hoodman-blind, and being laden with dangerous scruples, stumble upon the rock
of many an error, and fiction, and so incur miserable shipwreck.

There is indeed a kind of vnweeting obedience, which is holy, and good, nay
necessary, but unfolded, which concerns the fundamental articles of my
faith. Such as are, the unity of the Godhead, and Trinity of persons in one
essence, and nature: the incarnation of the Word, with the conioyning of two
distinct natures, the divine and humane, in the one only divine person of my
Spouse Christ: that he suffered, and shed his blood, and gave his life upon the
Cross for my redemption: that he rose again by his own power: and that he
ascended, and is glorified in heaven, where he remains my true Mediator, and
continual Advocate with the Father: and that he is to be judge of all men, to
give to every one according to his own works, either life, or death
everlasting. In the believing these, and other such Articles, every child of
mine must yield his eyes closed up by obedience, without curiosity, or
recalling them to the principles of humane reason. For these are the
fundamentals, wherein all Catholic Christendom is well resolved, and settled
with absolute agreement. But in many other points, either necessary, or not
necessary to salvation, there is danger, 2. Cor 21.
that ye may be deceived. (For, oftentimes Satan transformeth himself into an
Angel of light.) Therefore every of you, that has any heart, and spirit at
all, ought to open his eyes, and look well into that, which is propounded to
him, to be believed, either by implication, or expressly, and to examine it with
Christian, and sober diligence, whether that, which your Preachers, and
confessors, and writers teach you concerning spiritual things, (who too often,
under the name of my Ministers, are wolves in sheepes-cloathing, and nothing
else, but the ministers of humane ambition, and avarice) be conformable to the
holy Scriptures, and unto my refined and throughly-established judgment; mine,
I say, that is, of the Universal Church, such as I was for the first four, or
five uncorrupted ages, and still am also in regard of my self; but not such as
the Roman, by usurping my name, does disguise, and vaunt herself to be. For
if you shall walk on blindfold, under this enfuddling faith, after blind
guids, ye shall, they, and you too, hit upon the rocks, and tumble into the
infernal pit.

For these respects, which I have named, Rome would feign have you remain
still muffled up with this cloudy faith; and, to keep you in your spiritual
blindness, she has deprived you of the use of holy Scripture; she will not
suffer it to be imparted to all the people in the vulgar tongues; she
prohibites it, she hinders it. Verily a most horrible cruelty. God commanded,
not only Moses, not Aaron only, and the rest of the Priests, not only the
Scribes, and doctors of the Law, and Pharisees; but generally all his people,
that they should always have the Scripture before their eyes. In this is
stored up your daily bread: but in stead of making you abound with this bread,
those, whom you call your spiritual fathers, take it from you; and so may ye
starve, for them. Nay, in stead of this bread, they put into your hands either
the stones of strange doctrines, which are marvelous hard for you to chew, as
that you are to spend your lives for the maintenance of the Pope's humors, or
else the scorpions of errors, and falsehood, which bite, and sting your very
souls, or, at the most, the course browne-bread of their pamphlets concerning
Christian doctrine, and other manuels which they name spiritual. Wherein,
because they can do no less, (for, then should they appear to be open
professed wolves) there are set down some good foundations of many good
Catholic verities, but under the crust of this good wheaten-bread, the course
crumbe is delivered to you, or rather the poison of the manifold errors, and
superstitions of humane, if not devilish, doctrine; thereby to cherish in your
simple souls such reverence, and obedience to the Pope, Prelates, Priests, and
Friars, as their ambition, and avarice gapeth after. As for other books, which
discover these their iugglings, Rome does slanderously bruit them to be
heretical, and prohibiteth them by vain, and childish terrors of
excommunications: and all this, that ye may not open your eyes, but remain
blind for ever. Look well to this.

The fourth Rock. Excommunication.
IT is a wonderful, or rather miserable devise and crafty trick of the
Popes, for the mainteining their tyranny over your souls, and making
themselves to be reverenced, feared, and held for gods upon earth; that they
project to bear you in hand, that the keys, given me by Christ my Spouse, are
thunderbolts, and fiery darts in the hands of the Bishop of Rome, as being the
successor of Jupiter Capitolinus. Behold the deceipts, and cunning of this new
Jupiter. There was never any thunderbolt, that struck, or hurt any man, unless
it were actually darted out: but they put a vain ridiculous scarecrow upon
you, making you believe, that they have certain close thunderbolts in a
corner, which of themselves fly abroad, and smell out, even in the most secret
closets, those that do, or say any thing which may displease the Pope, though
neither the parties themselves be known to him, nor any hint given what they
do. Alas, what poor fools are they, that give credit to this?

These my keys, which you see in my hands, no doubt, are mannageable by my
Prelates and Ministers, and have power sometimes also to thunder out an
Excommunication. But you must know, that I am to carry an hand in the guiding of
such thunderbolts: and, if they be darted forth contrary to my order
prescribed me by my Spouse, they are of no force at all, and have no other
operation, then to make a vain rumbling to scare young children withal.

Excommunication, my beloved children, is of diverse sorts in my family. The
first is, when any of my children, having committed some grievous, public and
notorious crime, whereby he has scandalized all his brethren of that
particular Church, where he remains, for the recalling him unto true,
wholesome, inward repentance by outward medecinall shame, is not only reproved
by the Prelate in the public Congregation, when my children come together
unto spiritual exercises, but also is expressly forbidden to receive the sacred
communion of the holy Eucharist, and of the Lord's Supper: and so is kept off
for some time, until he make satisfaction unto God inwardly, and to the Church
outwardly, by penitential works imposed upon him by the said Prelate.

A second sort of Excommunication is something more rigorous; when as one of my
children, being a public, and notorious sinner, is, for one, or more,
grievous, and scandalous faults, not only put back from the holy Communion,
but also from all other meetings, that is, from all holy assemblies, and is
prohibited from entering into the Church with the rest of the faithful brethren
to whatsoever sacred exercise, whether hearing of the word of God, or receiving
the holy Sacraments, or being present at the public holy Service, and prayers:
and this restraint to endure for a time, by way of wholesome and medicinal
penance, that by this his confusion of face, both he may conceive grief for
his sin committed, and others may take example by him, and be stricken with an
holy terror, for the shunning of such sins. Both the one, and the other of
these two Excommunications is taken away by public Reconciliation, when he,
having with due humiliation performed what was imposed on him, and given the
Church outward evidence of his true inward repentance, is now readmitted both
to the Church, and to the holy Communion: and both these may truly be called
the lesser Excommunication.

The third, and most terrible Excommunication, which I have learned out of the
Gospel is, when one of my children, having been given over in prey unto
grievous, public, notorious, and scandalous sins, after he has been tried,
but all in vain, by the two precedent medicinal Excommunications, being now
incorrigible, is wholly cut off from the number of the faithful, and utterly
cast off from being my child, and severed from my body, that is, from the body
of Christ my Spouse, and cut off, as a dead, and rotten member, and
consequently delivered up unto Satan, and held as if he were a Gentile and
Publican, deprived of all the blessings, graces, and heavenly riches, which are
to be found within my house. This is the true, and dreadful thunderbolt, which
may most fitly be called the greater Excommunication.

Thus you see that the two first Excommunications are rather outward, then
inward, rather medicines, then punishments; having external effects, and not
inwardly working upon the soul, otherwise then indirectly, and by diverse
deductions: namely so far, as upon the two first Excommunications the
remission of the sin remains in a sort suspended, etiam in coelo, even in
heaven also, until it be remitted him by me on earth according to the promise
made unto me by Christ my Spouse. And only the third (if it be executed
without any error in the keys) has its operation directly upon the soul.
But all these three Excommunications then only are Excommunications, and then
only have their operation, when they are made in special, and actually sent
forth, and employed, not before the fact done, but when the crime is already in
being.

Therefore observe what a trifle that is, which the Popes, and their flatterers
have invented, in enacting one Excommunication a iure, and ipso facto, and
another ab homine, that is to say, that there is an actual Excommunication,
which works actually, and by the deed it self, and not by way of threatening
only; and that, by virtue of the law before made, and written, it always
works of it self, without coming to any special act of excommunicating the
particular offender, as often as he commits such, or such an offense before
forbidden by the Law: The other is that, which, without being made universal
by the laws, is, from time to time darted out by the Prelate against a
particular man by name, for some fault committed by him. This distinction is
both false, and manifestly deceitful; and it is that very devise, whereof I
spoke before, namely, to dream of a thunderbolt, which does not only affright
a man, but also beat him down to the ground, without being darted forth: and
so there can be no secret among Christians, which by this means the Pope
cannot pierce into. Surely as for the two first Excommunications, if they be
not sent forth from time to time against the parties by name, no man will ever
abstain from the Communion, or from spiritual conversation in spiritual
meetings, (for as for civil and humane commerce, no Excommunication can hinder
it.) In the third Excommunication likewise, it is certain, that no effect can
follow upon it, unless it be actually (but without error) thundered out.
Where was it ever seen, that a Delinquent was bound to execute a penalty upon
himself? True it is, that every man is bound to bear with patience his own
just punishment; but no man can be bound to execute it on himself, and to be
his own hangman. How then is it possible, that any of my children, by virtue
of a wandering, uncertain, universal Excommunication, which is indifferent by
the law, should, upon an ipso facto, be truly, and actually excommunicated:
that is, disseuered, and cut off from my body, unless he himself, being the
only man, that knows himself to have committed that fault, shall of
himself be executioner of the punishment upon himself? For my part, I have
no spiritual power to chastise secret sins, no nor open neither, until they
come unto my notice: and yet these men would most fondly inflict actual
punishments for faults unrevealed to them, and upon Delinquents utterly
unknown.

Let no man therefore be afraid of these Excommunications iniure, although
they be ipso facto, upon the very deed, or latae sententiae, upon the
general sentence, which is an error: nor is it possible that such
Excommunications should work ipso facto: neither does God hold any man for
excommunicate, until he be namely bound, and actually excommunicate. Let
every one be afraid of sin, though never so secret, and let him look for
punishment from God; but let him not fear any excommunication of mine, unless
it be actually brandished out against him by his lawful Prelate, and that upon
good cause: nor can this third Excommunication otherwise work any whit upon
the soul.

Moreover I advise you, that, if a Prelate excommunicate any of you, and that
upon just cause, for some offense deserving excommunication, if he do not
either by word, or deed, declare with which of these three Excommunications he
does strike you, this his excommunicating, though it be special, and actual
is either none at all, or at the most it is to be understood of the second,
and not of the third. Neither can that stand, which the new Canonists avouch,
that by the indefinite name of Excommunication the greater is to be understood.
For, they confound the second with the third, which notwithstanding are most
different one from another; and they would have the second to be the greater,
because it takes away Ecclesiastical conversation from the excommunicate
party. It must be understood therefore of the second, but as not amounting unto
the third, which third is the true Excommunicatio mayor, the grand
excommunication. For, it is true, that in the later, the former are included,
but not the later in the former.

Besides this, you are to understand, that, by my rules taught me by my Spouse,
none of these Excommunications, especially the third, can be of force, but when
the crime is grievous, public, notorious, and very scandalous, and such as
gives, first very great offense to God, and moreover much scandal to the
Church. And he, that is clear in his own conscience, and knows that he
does not offend in the sight of God, and that the act, for which he is
excommunicated (especially by the Excommunication in iure only) is not of it
self abominable, nor repugnant to Gods Law, let him never fear any
excommunication at all, as making him guilty before God. Whilst therefore a
Prelate commands, or forbids any act of its own nature indifferent, which
is neither commanded, nor forbidden by the word of God, and imposes this his
command under pain of Excommunication, you may laugh in your sleeves at it.
For the not obeying a Prelate in such things, as in their own nature are
indifferent, seldom amounts to a mortal sin; and, though it were mortal,
yet it is not such, as can deserve the third Excommunication. And so when you
hear Excommunications thundered out for reading of books, for not paying of
pensions, for punishing Priests, and wicked Friars, according to law, with
civil punishments, and such like causes, you may take such Excommunications to
be made in jest, and need not be afraid of them: for I hold them to be
nothing worth; neither was it ever my mind, that this sword of mine should ever
serve the turn, either for temporal affairs, or for the private ends of my
Prelates.

Take also this with you, which is one of my principal ordinances concerning
Excommunications, that none can excommunicate any other then those that be in
proper subjected to him, and of his Diocese. And so the Bishop of Rome
cannot excommunicate those, that are out of the Diocese of Rome. And whosoever
excommunicateth any, that are not subject unto him, his Excommunication holds
not: and in this case the Popes thunderbolt is of no more force, then that of
the Bishop of A pety Bishopric in Italy, in the dominions of Venice.
Caurole. Indeed any Bishop, upon great cause, may deny to another Bishop his
communion, that is his communication, and brotherly complying, and spiritual
correspondence. So also may any particular Church deny its communion to
another, (and this may be called a fourth kind of Excommunication) but it
has no operation upon the soul, nor is exercised with any power, or
jurisdiction of one Church over another: and the action it self is merely
negative, not positive, nor operative: namely, when, upon evidence, or deep
suspicion of another spiritual corruption, mutual correspondence is shunned.
And yet in this sort of Excommunication there is very great danger, inasmuch as
upon it foul, and turbulent schisms do ensue.

This Rock, as you see, becomes very dangerous unto you, whilst it makes
you stumble upon fears, and terrors, which withhold you from many actions,
that would be profitable, and commodious to you, and also it makes you run
headlong into the actions of blindefold obedience, whence indeed comes your
ruin; seeing they will not suffer you to walk in the highway of your
salvation, but amuse you in the by-ways of eternal perdition, and hold you in
subjection to an Idol, and to him that would have you deem him a god upon
earth.

The fifth Rock. The Commandments of the Church.
THis is a very great Rock, or rather a maine Sea of Rocks, and shelfes heaped
up together, and appointed for the spiritual ruin of you, my dear Children.
The ambition of Popes has hitherto usurped a Law-making power through my whole
family; and would have me bound, under pain of mortal sin, to observe their
laws. Verily it belongs to me in my Synods, and Councels, to set down
certain practical rules concerning rites, and outward worship: which rules
are nothing else, then certain good directions, and public instructions,
requisite, and necessary, for the establishing of good order, for the
preventing of confusion, and for the increase of piety. But I never pretended,
that they should have the very nature of laws, but only of good ordinances:
and therefore my will was to call them Canons, that is to say, Rules, but not
Laws, nor Commandments, unless I procure the secular power to give them the
force of laws. From which secular powers, Christ has not freed either me, or
any of you, as he has freed us from the legal Ceremonies, and from the yoke
and burden of that law, which, being no part of the Decalogue, perteyneth to
the government of the soul: there yet remaining most full power in Princes;
and Magistrates, as far as concerns temporal government, whereto all the
sort of you are subject, not only by constraint, and for fear, but also for
conscience sake, as Saint Paul instructs you. True it is, Romans 13.5.
that there is also an obedience due unto the spiritual Overseers; but this is
to be understood of following their good instructions in matter of faith, and
concerning Christian life. Neither was it the mind of Christ to load me with
a multitude of external obligations, over and above the moral natural law,
and a few other precepts, when as himself commanded me, that I should beware
of making his yoke heavy unto my Children, by multiplying upon them humane
Commandments, and precepts: and sharply rebuked the Scribes, and Pharisees of
his time, vpbraiding them with that speech of Esaias; Esaias 29.13. Matthew. 15.8.
This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with
their lips; but their heart is far from me: in vain do they worship me,
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. They ouerpast the
Commandments of the law, and taught the silly people, certain obseruances
invented by themselves, and established by humane traditions only. In a manner
even so it befalls you, my Children, now a days; ye are plied might and
maine, with certain precepts, which, usurping my name, they call the
Commandments of holy Church, in which notwithstanding I have no part at all,
and as for God's Commandments, they lie by the walls. You take far more
heed, that you omit not a Mass upon an holy day, and many of you also upon
the working-dayes, then that you leave not your neighbor without help, when
he is in great misery. Ye take more care of offending in eating flesh on
prohibited days, then of committing fornication, or adultery. And hence it is
that more scruples are started up in your consciences, and more ado against
you by your Confessors, Preachers, and Inquisitors, if you have but once supped
half a mess of flesh-pottage upon a Friday, then if you had committed
fornication an hundred times.

Know ye therefore, that, in undergoing such scruples upon these
Church-commandements, ye are plainly tyrannized over, and are brought unto a
butchery, shambles, and slaughterhouse of the conscience. 2. Cor. 3.17. Gal.
4.31.
Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, concerning all indifferent
things: which liberty Christ has bestowed on you. I have indeed authority
upon occasion of public spiritual affairs, to intimate fastings, prayers,
and alms; but with sweetness, and gentleness, without imposing any yoke, or
impeaching this liberty, to the end that every one of you likewise should of
your own voluntary sweetly, and charitably compose himself to such holy
exercises, and thereby conform himself to my intention, which is always
hortatory, rather then mandatory, with compulsion. I do not hold my self to
have authority to command upon the guilt of mortal sin, which I find no
otherwise defined, then to be that, which is spoken, done, or thought against
the eternal Law of God; August cont. Faust. li. 22. cap. 27.
it is not said against the commandment of the Church; whereas principally I
either command or forbid that, which in it self is indifferent, and neither
commanded, nor forbidden, by God's Law. So the holy Apostles, gathered together
in the Council of Jerusalem, did resolve, that the new Christians, especially
those that were converted from Gentilisme, in respect of outward obligation,
besides the moral natural Law of the Decalogue, should not be bound in
conscience to any other thing, Acts. 15.29.
except absteining from meats offered to Idols, and from blood, and from things
strangled: and moreover to beware of fornication, not that this is not
comprised in the Decalogue, but for that the Gentiles for the most part were in
this error, to think that simple fornication was not forbidden by the Law of
nature. In other things the Apostles left them entire liberty of their
conscience. Romans 14.3.
And S. Paul advises, Coloss. 2.16.
that he, which eats not, should not judge those that eat, and that none
ought to judge the faithful for eating, and drinking. Briefly, I conclude, you
are to conform your selves unto the well-grounded and well-instructed devotion
of abstinence, of fasting, of prayers, of divine Service, and other spiritual
exercises; especially upon the Sundays, and more solemn Feasts. But beware of
two extremes; On the one side, lest you fall into superstition, and bring your
selves to such anxietie, and scrupulositie, as will oppress the inward
liberty of the conscience; and therefore you are to put from you all fear of
mortal sin, if sometime by negligence, or for your own conueniencie (so it
be without contempt, or scandal) you omit such devotions appointed, and
ordained by me, who am your indulgent Mother: and pretend not to hold you to it
with such rigor. The other extreme which you are to beware of, is, that
hereupon you do not run into carnal liberty, by contemning, and utterly
neglecting my good, and holy ordinances, setting at naught the pious, and
devout exercises appointed by (...) whereby the holy worship of God is
maintained, and the inward spirit is furthered in Christian virtues, especially
in Religiousnesse.

These Commandments therefore, in such sort as they are imposed on you by the
Pope, are very Rocks, he making use of them principally to the end he may
exercise his dominion over me, with a Law-giuing power; but secondarily also
for other indirect ends, tending unto covetousness: they are (I say) Rocks,
because, when as by Preachers, Confessors, and petty doctrinall pamphlets, it
still ringeth in your ears, that those Church-precepts do bind you under the
pain of mortal sin, they being little observed: by this your erroneous
conscience you make the omission of them to become in you mortal sin indeed;
whereas otherwise it would be no sin at all. An erroneous conscience is that,
which believes a thing to be a sin, which in truth is none: and whosoever
commits, or omitteth that, which he deemeth a sin to be done, or not
done, though in truth this be not a sin, yet he by his erroneous conscience
sins mortally herein: and this is a dangerous pit, and deep breake-necke of
souls. Now therefore when as you learn by me, that my precepts (those that
are merely mine) do not include any obligation unto mortal sin, be not you
troubled with scruples, when, without contempt, or scandal, you find them not
observed by you: and so much the rather, because some of those observations
have a tang of superstition, whereupon it is not only no sin to omit them,
but also it would be oftentimes a sin to observe them: I will declare my
self more particularly.

There be five precepts, which ordinarily pass under the name of my
Commandments, as common to all the faithful: and yet in very deed there are
to be found in the body of Canons now a days in force, a thousand such
precepts, even more then ever the Jews were burdened withal; which is a
thing very intolerable. Those five are these; 1. To hear Mass on Sundays,
and established holy days: 2. To fast in Lent, in the four Ember-wekes, in
the Vigils, or Eues; and to abstain from flesh on Fridaies, and Saturdaies: 3.
To be shriuen by your own Priest at least once a year: 4. To be houseled at
Easter: 5. To pay tithes according to custom.

The keeping of the Lords day, which succeeded the ancient Sabbath, is derived
rather from the divine, or moral Law, then from mine: but let the obligation
of that observance be what it may, I mean not now to trouble you with it. I
must remember you, that the Sunday, and other ancient Feasts established by me
upon mature deliberation, are to be fully observed by you according to my
ancient use, and declaration, with absteyning from servile works, as much as
moral necessity, and other urgent occasions will suffer; that you may then
apply your selves to the worship of God, and to the spiritual profit of your
souls; namely, by gathering together, especially to hear the word of God; to
join in public prayer; and oftentimes to be refreshed with the most holy
Sacraments. What has Rome done by adding this particular command of hearing
Mass, (since the Mass is degenerated into an abuse, as I will shortly show
you, and has much superstition in it,) but that all you should hold your
selves to have sufficiently discharged your duty of keeping holy all Feasts,
by absteyning from servile works and hearing the Mass, and nothing else? For
your Confessors require nothing else of you upon the commandment of
sanctifying the Feasts. The word of God either is not preached at all, or, if
it be preached, it is not heard, or, if heard, that is only upon courtesy, and
curiosity, and not upon duty. The divine Service is said, or sung, but in a
language not understood by the vulgar: whereupon it falls out for the most
part, that those, that are there present, spend the time in prattling,
whispering, and, which is worse, in courting, and obsenities, and other such
intertainments, very abominable to be used in the house of prayer. As for the
Sacraments, I will speak of them afterward. And this is your first
Church-commandement, which does much more hurt then good. You, my children,
shall duly sanctify the Feasts, if upon such days, avoiding these vain, and
superstitious, (and I would to God I might not say Idolatrous) Masses, and, now
that your spiritual fathers, or rather step-fathers, afford you no good
spiritual exercises, forbearing also to hear the Sermons of your Friars,
which are full of leasings, and deceipts, you would spend some time in your
own houses in reading, in godly meditations, and prayers; and thus should you
very well keep holy day, till it should please God to give you true, pure, and
vncorrupt exercises in your own Churches.

In the second precept, which concerns fasting, and abstinence, I like very
well, that those, who can, do fast on the fasting-dayes, especially in the
Lent, which is a very ancient institution. And let this be a true fast, tending
to the mortification of the flesh, with absteining, not only from eating
flesh, eggs, and whitmeats, as the manner is, but also from all delicate, and
high feeding viands, especially, if they be incentiue, as are salt meats: Let
the fast be kept with herbs, with pulse, with cheap ordinary fish, and only
one meal a day. Your fasting is very ridiculous, and loathsome, both to me,
and my Spouse: to abstain from such course meat as beef, and to seek out the
most delicate fish of the highest price, and other choice dainties, to please
the palate, with variety also of spices, and sauces. O, how much more perfect a
fast would it be, and more acceptable to God, to take one light meal of
flesh, then a delicious banquet of fish. But, as I said, if any of you be not
disposed to fast, or to forbear flesh, even in Lent, let him not be
scrupulous thereupon: for, my precepts do not bind on pain of mortal sin:
yet notwithstanding he shall be very blameworthy, if, being able, yet he do
not accommodate himself to the rest of the faithful. Of Confession, and
receiving the Communion, I will speak afterward.

As for tithes, they are ill ranged under my precepts: for, I hold them to
appertain to God's law, either natural, or positive, at least, where my
Ministers receive from thence their necessary sustenance, and in such quantity,
and manner, as custom has long confirmed. And this charge of ouerruling
matter of tithes, where they need rectifying, is proper to the secular
Princes, every of them in their own dominions, inasmuchas tithes are external
goods: and they are to see to it, that, where necessary Ministers have not
decent maintenance, supply be made by the Parishioners; and where too much
abundance, and superfluity is, and the same luxuriously employed, that it be
moderated, by transferring from those Priests, which have too much, unto
others, which have too little. They are also to provide that the Bishops
entertain so many Clearkes, as are necessary for their Churches, and to
restrain them from making a number of idle, and superfluous Priests: and so
shall all of them be well provided for: but much the better, if, by the
authority of Princes, and temporal Lords, the world were disburthened of such
rabbles of Friars, and Monks, and Regulars, of the Religions now out of
square, and dissolute: reducing also the other Orders, which keep as yet some
form of regular life, unto the entire obedience of those Bishops, in whose
Cities, and Diocesses, those Co^uents are; and withal utterly dissoluing, and
annulling, all form of Commonwealth amongst them, wherein all the Regulars
are combined together; so that they may remain either mere Clearkes, and
simple Priests, or else become Monks of the old fashion, without holy Orders,
and without revenues. And so their exorbitant possessions will make a supply to
help Bishops of small means, and poor Parish Priests, and will serve the
turn to ease the people, in maintayning their Parish Priests, and in founding
of Colleges, and Seminaries for students in the Universities, and some-where
also for the support of the Military profession.

The sixth Rock. False Union.
Verily I am but one, being the only Spouse of Christ; and though my
daughters, the particular Churches, be many, yet I am nothing else, but they
all joined together. And forasmuch as I am only one, and they altogether are
one with me, even as all the members united make only one body, and the head
of this my body is no other but Christ alone; therefore this my union
consists in our being built all upon one, and the same foundation, which is
only one and the same Christ, only one and the same Gospel, only one and
the same faith, only one and the same Baptism; and in that we love, and
embrace one another in perfect charity. And those Churches, which do not in
this manner unite themselves unto me, have no part in this union, nor pertain
to this body. And in these particulars, my holy Fathers have always declared
this necessary union to consist, the foundation whereof is faith, and charity
the bond which combineth it. It must needs be therefore very lamentable to
behold some Churches my daughters, or my parts, or members, that is, limbs of
my body, to agree with me in the foundation, but will not be united by
charity, under vain pretenses of frivolous dissenssions in points, that are
not fundamental: and thus they foully break me this union.

But that, which most of all offends me, is, that the Pope, my Capital
enemy, does destroy, and break, and dissipate this my so important union,
drawing it mischieuously to himself, and urging, that union consists in
being subject unto him, as a visible head. Yet have I showed, that there is no
relation of an head in him, and that he is merely my minister, and servant.
Indeed he is, as every other Bishop, the visible head of his own Church
only, my daughter of Rome: and he it is, that gives union to that Church;
for, every particular Church is visibly one, whilst it depends of her own
only principal minister. A Church (that is, a particular Church) says Saint
Cyprian, Cypr. lib. 4. Ep. 9.
is a people united to their Pastor: But in me, that am the universal and
total Church, there is no union made by any other then by my true and only
head Christ, and all particular Churches bring forth that goodly, and necessary
union, by being united with me upon the same foundation, and under the same
head Christ, and that by way of charity, and concord. Idem. lib. 4. Ep. 2.
To this purpose well said the same Cyprian, that the Church of Christ is one,
being divided throughout the world into many members, and that there is only
one Bishopric, which is diffused by the agreeing multitude of many Bishops:
Ibidem. Ep. 3.
Moreover he says, though we be many Pastors, yet we feed one flock only.
And again, being that the Church, which is one and universal, is not broken,
nor divided, she is also united, and combined by the bond of Priests conjoined
among themselves. Therefore Cyprian never could find, that this union
consisted in one of the Bishops, by the reducing all others to him, as to an
head, but that all Bishops united together in faith and charity did cause this
union of mine.

It is a grievous injury, which my ungrateful daughter of Rome does offer me,
whilst she, forgetting that she is my daughter, makes her self my Mistres,
and usurps my Robes, and my Titles, as if she were the universal Church, when
she her self is a particular Church, one of the many. It is I, that am the
truly universal, who stretch forth my arms from East to West, and from North
to South: and how can she be universal, or total, being only a part, and
member? All the many are gathered together and united in me, and not in her:
for even she, if she will be Catholic, must of necessity be united to me, as
a part to the whole, as a member to the body, under mine, and her head, Christ
Jesus.

Behold therefore the Rock, whereupon ye run, whilst ye are willing to
reduce your selves unto an union invented by the Pope, that he might thereby
become my head, and tyrannize over me, and whilst ye yield obedience to him,
instead of remaining in union with me, ye separate your selves from me, and,
instead of making and procuring unity, you break it, and divide it. For, he is
not in the Catholic Church, that is not in the universal Church, which am I:
and whilst the Bishop of Rome packeth a faction, which receives union from
him only: surely that sect of his can be neither Catholic, nor universal,
nor Church: therefore his party is not the universal Church, but a devilish
schism, wherein there cannot be any sound and holy union, but a conspiracy
and combination of a Sect, not of a Church. Now let us pass on to the Rocks of
Avarice.

THE SECOND PART. The Rocks founded on Avarice.
The first Rock. The Mass.
THAT exercise, wherewith I have been furnished sincerely for above four
hundred years, which now adays you call the Mass, was, by the first
institution thereof, nothing else, but a consecrating of the Bread of the holy
Eucharist for the communion of the faithful, and that to represent the Passion
and death of Christ, and to make commemoration of that most blessed sacrifice,
wherein Christ himself, being both Priest, and Sacrifice, did offer up his
most sacred Body, and precious blood, upon the Altar of the Cross, only once
for my redemption, and for remission of sins: and this was then instituted by
Christ, when in his last Supper he made his Apostles Communicants of that
mysterious Bread, and Wine, which represented his Body and Blood, saying unto
them, Do this in remembrance of me. That therefore, which Christ gave unto
his Apostles, namely. Bread, and Wine, for them to eat, and drink, was the
Sacrament, a true, and real Sacrament, but not a true, and real Sacrifice,
other then commemoratiue. For, this Sacrament was given them, as in very deed
an actual Sacrament, and bearing with it Sacramental fruit and benefit, but
as a commemoration only, and representation of the future sacrifice. When
therefore he said unto them, Do you this, What else could he understand, but
this, ye also shall deliver unto others actually this true, and real
Sacrament, but so, that it be commemoratiue, and representative of my Sacrifice
then ouerpast. And in this sense did all my ancient Fathers always understand
this sacred exercise (now called the Mass) for the introductions used in the
making a real, and actual Sacrament, and for a Sacrifice, not actual, but
only commemoratiue, and representative. Chrysostom. in epist. ad Heb. hom. 17.
Listen to S. Chrysostom, We make an offering every day, but we do it in
remembrance of the death of Christ: there is only one Sacrifice, which was
only once offered in the Holy of holies: but this Sacrifice is a type or
model of that: And this which we now perform, we do only in commemoration;
As he said, Do this in remembrance of me. We perform not another Sacrifice,
as the Priest then did; but we offer always the same, or rather, we do
celebrate the memory of that Sacrifice. So plainly speaks S. Chrysostom,
that this action now called the Mass, is not it self a Sacrifice, but a
memory, and representation, and after-draught of a bypast Sacrifice.

What has the Avarice of Rome done in this? This sacred exercise, which, in
regard of the real action, produces the Sacrament, is by them entitled to a
true and real vn-bloody Sacrifice under the name of the Mass, and so they
will needs have their Priests truly, and really to sacrifice Christ: And to
this their Sacrifice, as real, and properly so called, they attribute the true
properties of an actual Sacrifice, making it propitiatory, impetratory, and
satisfactorie: their end herein is, that you, my poor, and simple children,
believing these their fictions, may ply them to say Masses for you, but
tendering beforehand your money to the priests, and oftentimes driving the
bargain for more or less to eeke it out for the quick, and the dead. And so
you, finding your selves deeply drenched in sin, that you may save the
labor of a true, and due sacrifice of an humble and contrite heart: Psalm.
51.17.
thus trusting more to this unbloody Sacrifice, which will stand you in but a
few pence, you think that you bring with you in your pocket an undoubted
remission of your sins. O fearful rock! O doleful wrack! O hateful
avarice!

The Pope will needs have a great Army of innumerable Priests, and Friars,
whom he pretends, and, in despite of Secular Princes, mainteyneth, to be
his only, his Subjects, soldiers, and servants: but, he is more thriftie then
to allow them wages of his own pay, or table of his provision; and therefore
he has invented, for their maintenance, such devices as this, to nimme the
coin out of your purses: Which ye give down very gently, that you may have
your part in these sweet Sacrifices, not by way of commemoration of the benefit
which you have received by Christ, but by way of bargain, and hier for the
remission of your sins, and the freedom of souls out of Purgatory for
petty peniworthes. And that you may ply their shop the oftener, and become
daily customers for Masse-bargaines, they tell you that one Mass will not do
the feat; that you are not always rightly disposed to be capable of the
benefit of this Sacrifice; that for every sin you must have at least one
Mass; with such like devises: and then let them alone to make their ware
saleable: they will find you miracles enough begotten by their Masses, and
stoare you with visions, revelations, and many other such tricks, and slights
coined in the forge of covetousness.

But what think you of the superstitious ceremonies of the Mass? they are a
many of devises broached to astonish the simple vulgar, and to ravish them with
admiration of hidden and unknown mysteries, without common sense, without
signification, without any contents in them, other then mere superstition. The
Mass Priest sometimes beats his breast; one while lifts up his eyes,
other-while casts them down; one while ioynes his hands together, other-while
spreads them at large; one while holds his fingers close, other-while displayes
them: sometimes he makes crosses in the air, in a certain prefixed number,
and with so nimble motion, as if he would beat away flies, sometime he bends
himself down, lowting low with Spanish crindges: sometime he stands upright,
sometime stoopes, sometime mumbles in secret, other-while he chaunts it alowd:
one while he turns to the people, otherwhile to the Altar: which are
gesticulations fitter for the stage, then for the Church, and to procure
laughter, then to stir up devotion. Set habits I mislike not; for, in my
first, and best times my Ministers were in their holy functions adorned with
proper habits for that purpose, which indeed were not so costly and stately, as
now adays I see them in some Churches, nor so slouenly and nastie, as I see
them in other, especially amongst those Friars, which love their broth well,
and take more care to have their diet large and fat, then to have their Vestrie
furnished and neatly dight.

As for the Sacrament, whilst the Communion of the faithful, either all, or
many, or some is in celebrating, then is the fit time for that, which is called
Mass, which should indeed be the Liturgy, and, not a private, but public
exercise, even for the said Communion, and no other use: for, this only was
the first, and pure institution thereof. But Romanists have brought-in an
innovation, that for the most part the Communion should be celebrated without
Mass, or Liturgy: for, they make boxes to be kept full of these Hosts: there
one comes, another goes, and the Priest, without Mass, without prayers,
affords to every stander-by the Communion, or rather the half Communion; it
being a maimed Sacrament, and full of indecent enormities. Hence I infer,
that the private Mass, as it is now adays celebrated, is in many respects
frivolous, and causes the ruin of many souls. One reformation of it would
be, by cutting off many parts of it, and generally all those strange gestures,
and by celebrating it for the Communion only. Whereupon it follows, that in
one and the same Church all the Altars, except one principal, should be
demolished, as superfluous. For, in one Congregation one Mass is enough for
the peoples Communion, where the multitude of Altars, and Masses is nothing but
a mere superstition, and erroneous opinion of a Sacrifice.

But the greatest enormitie, and most intolerable error of the Mass, now
adays is, that you, poor souls, are made believe, that in it the bread is
converted, or (as they speak) transubstantiated into the true, and real body
of Christ: so that the bread after the consecration must be no more bread, no
not in substance, but Christ's true and real body, with his true, and real
presence in body, and soul, and the Deity united thereto; with his head, eyes,
hands, and feet, the very same, that was borne of the Virgin Mary, which was
fastened on the Cross, which rose again, and ascended into heaven, and
sits at the right hand of God the Father; a thing beyond all understanding,
and utterly imperceptible, which I could never apprehend, nor approve. Surely
the Scripture always calls the Eucharist, even after consecration, bread;
Saint Luke calls it the Communion of breaking of bread: Act. 2.46.
Saint Paul also says, 1. Cor. 10.16.
That the bread, which we break, is the communion of the body of Christ; and
speaking of the due preparation before the Communion, after a man has proved
himself, and purged his conscience, 1. Cor. 11.28.
then, says he, let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. So likewise
all the ancient Fathers acknowledged true bread in the Eucharist; neither ever
heard they news of this transubstantiation, it being an utter stranger in my
house; and for above eight hundred years after Christ neither heard of, nor
thought on. And whenever the ancient Fathers do call the Eucharist by the
name of Christ's body, their meaning is, that the bread is Christ's body
Sacramentally, without ceasing to be bread still: even as the water of holy
Baptism is sacramentally the blood of Christ, which washes the soul, yet
notwithstanding remains it still water.

And, if ye ask me, what the Eucharisticall bread does get by consecration
more then it had before, and what manner of transmutation, or change that is,
which the holy Fathers acknowledge to be in the bread after consecration; I
answer, that the bread before consecration is nothing else, but ordinary
bread, and only material food for the body; but upon consecration it is
altered, and changed, and that spiritually, and not materially: for, it
becomes Sacramental bread, and by so being it attayneth a very great and
marvelous privilege, that whosoever does worthy lie eat it in the holy
Communion, does receive the true body of Christ in a certain unspeakable, but
spiritual, and Sacramental manner: Christ having ordained and promised, that
whenever this bread being made Sacramental by consecration, shall be eaten
worthy lie, he will give his body spiritually, and all other admirable
spiritual benefits for the nourishment of their souls, to those that shall
thus worthylie communicate. And, in regard of this spiritual effect of
receiving the body of Christ spiritually, as often as the consecrated bread is
worthylie received in the act of communicating, the Fathers are wont to call
that bread the body of Christ: And in this sense, Christ, when he gave the
Communion to his Apostles in his last supper, did call that bread, which he
delivered to them, his body. So also must we understand the consecrated wine,
which being druncke corporally in the Sacrament, the very blood of Christ is
drunk, but spiritually, and not corporally: and so in the blessed Sacrament of
bread and wine, there is spiritually the true body, and the true blood of
Christ, with their true, and real effects, wrought in the soul of the worthy
Communicant: but there is neither the body, nor the blood corporally, and that
which is there corporally, is very bread, and very wine, employed
Sacramentally, as I have declared.

The like is to be understood also of the water of holy Baptism: for, that
also, before the invocation of the most holy Trinity in the act of baptizing,
is no other, then mere ordinary water, but by that invocation it is
consecrated in the very act of Baptism, and so at one and the same time, both
the water is consecrated, and of ordinary becomes Sacramental, and withal
there is performed the Sacrament of Baptism, with the inward effect of purging
the soul: whereas in the Eucharist the consecration goes before, whereby the
bread, and wine are made Sacramental; and afterward follow the eating, and
drinking of them: in which actions consists the very Sacrament, and the body
and blood of Christ is given inwardly to him, that worthylie eats and
drinks this Sacramental bread, and wine; but whosoever does eat and drink
them unworthily, without examining himself, and first being cleansed from
sin, he does not eat, nor drink any other thing, then bread, and wine. For
to those, that are unworthy, Christ affords not spiritually his body, nor his
blood, howsoever they do eat, and drink the consecrated bread, and wine:
which consecration has this operation, that it makes the bread, and wine
Sacramental unto those that Sacramentally receive them, and are only fit for
them; whereas the unworthy receive them not as a Sacrament, Christ denying unto
them his body, and blood; and so to them this eating and drinking is no
Sacrament, and that by their own default: This consecration therefore does them
no good at all, but is the occasion that they eat and drink, not a Sacrament,
nor Christ's body, 1. Cor. 11.29.
and blood, but judgment, and condemnation, as St. Paul denounces, because
they do not discern the body of the Lord; that is, they put no difference
between ordinary bread, and this consecrated bread, which in the Sacramental
eating does spiritually exhibit the true body of Christ to the worthy
receivers; they making no other preparation for it, then if they were to
receive their common, ordinary, and mere corporal food. So also, if, by any
mischance in the time of communicating, any unreasonable creature should eat
that consecrated bread, it eats no other then mere bread; inasmuch as Christ
does not afford his body with the consecrated bread, but only unto those, who
are capeable of the Sacrament, and are made worthy of it, or, at least, do not
unworthily approach unto it.

And because Christ performs not this wonderful work of giving his body,
and blood, (in such sort as I have declared) but only by occasion of the
Sacrament; and forasmuch as, likewise the Sacrament it self consists wholly
in the actions of eating, and drinking, who sees not, that such consecrated
bread, whilst it is not employed in those actions, remains pure and ordinary
bread? for, the consecrating of it served only to make it Sacramental bread,
and surely it is not Sacramental otherwise then as it is to be eaten
Sacramentally in that spiritual banquet, which then is in celebrating,
although the same should continue many hours, or there were some sick persons
to communicate of it, who lie in their beds at home, even though they were some
ten miles distant thence, in as much as this may be held morally one banquet or
Communion.

Whereupon you may easily perceive the error of those, that term by the name
of the most holy Sacrament that consecrated bread, which after the Communion
finished, is kept in Pyxes and cabinets, where it is not to be eaten by any,
but after certain days, and weeks, and months, and perhaps not by men at
all, but by mice, or other vermin, and yet surely it is no Sacrament, but
only in the act of eating: therefore in these Pyxes, and closets there is
contained, not only no Sacrament, but not so much as Sacramental bread, the
force of consecration being already vanished; inasmuch as that bread was
consecrated only to the end it might be eaten in that meeting Sacramentally;
and therefore afterward it becomes ordinary bread: which notwithstanding, in
reverend regard that this very bread was consecrated to the Communion, is to
be eaten by those, that are in sacred function, and not to be brought unto
the common dining-table, nor to be used as ordinary food. And yet (alas) even
to this bread thus reserved, there are usually prayers made, and adoration
performed, as unto the only true God, which is most express, proper, and
formal Idolatry.

Consider also the gross absurdities, and manifest impossibilities, which they
are feign to maintain, who hold transubstantiation: that the accidents of
bread, namely color, quantity, smell, savor, and such like, remain without
any subject, wherein they should inheare, or substance, whereby they should be
supported. Surely nothing can subsist in its actual being whenever it
loses its very essence; and all Philosophy proclaims, that Accidentis esse
estinesse, the being of an accident, or quality consists in being supported
by a substance, or subject. So that by this reckoning these accidents are in
being, because they are seen, and felt, and yet are not in being, because
their own being is denied them: and that which essentially has no being of it
self, but wholly depends of another, it is impossible that it should exist
without that, by which it is that it is. So every accident in its own essence
is an appurtenance to another thing, namely, unto substance; and he, that
withdraws substance and subject from an accident, steals away the very
essence thereof: and so, as I said, these accidents are something, because they
are visible, and palpable, and yet are nifles, because there is no substance
left to support them; and so they are appendants, and no appendants. And, as
for divinity, that acknowledges, that even to God himself those things,
which imply contradiction, are not feisible.

But what would they say concerning the power of nourishing, which is always
to be found in the Eucharisticall bread? Certainly he, that should eat no
other meat, nor drink no other liquor, then these Sacramental elements,
should find himself nourished as much as with any ordinary bread and wine:
And being that a man's body is not an accident, but a substance, of necessity
it must be nourished with substances and not with accidents, the substance of
meats being always turned into the substance of the body nourished by them:
here therefore is no other starting-hole left, then to run to a miracle, that
forsooth God does create a new substance, whereby he, that thus eats, is
nourished, and so in truth they might as well say, that he lives and is
nourished without eating, and drinking: for, to eat and drink without
receiving the substance of meat and drink is indeed not to eat and drink at
all.

Here I may add the greatest impossibility of all, and even open
contradiction hence following, namely, that Christ's body shall be a body, and no
body: it cannot be denied that corporeal, and incorporeall substances are so
far in their nature, and essence distinguished, that neither of them can have
the properties of the other, nor be dispoiled of their own properties, without
the total destruction of one of them. To be in a confining circumscribed
place; to have quantity, and parts one distinguished from the other; to be
either heavy, or light; to be sensible; are properties, which arise from the
internal essence of things corporeal. To be indivisible; to be uncircumcised
by any place; to possess no situation; to be wholly in the whole, and all in
every parcel of the whole, are properties of substances abstract, immateriall,
and incorporeall. Well indeed may it be granted, that God's Almighty power can
displace some of these properties in bodies, by putting in another property
contrary thereto, but yet corporeal; as he can make a body, which is naturally
heavy, to become light, and that, which is hot, to become cold; but to make a
body still to remain an entire body, yet so, that it shall retain no
corporeal quality, but assume incorporeall properties, is utterly impossible,
even to God's omnipotency: for it should be at the same time both a body and a
spirit; and so a body, and no body. To this are the Papists driven, turning the
body of Christ into an abstract, immateriall, and incorporeall substance, and
giving it the true properties of a spirit, and depriving it of all bodily
qualities. And yet when the Disciples, after the resurrection, upon Christ's
appearance amongst them, Luke 24.37.
and saying unto them, Peace be unto you, were terrified and affrighted,
supposing they had seen a spirit; for the driving this error out of their
heads, Christ, showing them his hands, and feet, and body, said, Handle me and
see; for, a spirit has not flesh, and bones. It is therefore a sound position
by Christ's own argument, that that, which consists of flesh and bones,
cannot have the properties of a spirit, nor a spirit have the properties of a
body; otherwise Christ's argument would not pass for current, if it were
possible, that a man's body might be without palpable flesh, and bones, and
that a Spirit might consist of palpable flesh, and bones. But the Papists will
needs drive the body of Christ, which of necessity has visible, and palpable
flesh, and bones, to be a mere spirit: and so they make the same body,
remaining continually in heaven, and not departing thence, to come down to the
earth, into the hands of the Priest, and that without passing through the
heavens, or the air: and that the same entire body must be in the same moment
of time, both in heaven, and upon an infinite company of Altars in the earth:
and that not only in the whole contents of the consecrated Host, but in every
little particle thereof, though no bigger then the point of a needle, there
must be the large entire body of a man fully grown, together with all his
flesh, and bones, with his hands, and feet, and with all the rest of his
members. A very mere vanity, whereat the Infidels our adversaries may well
make themselves merry, and mock at our faith, for mainteyning things so
repugnant to all reason, which we cannot salve up, no not by running to God's
omnipotency.

There is no necessity at all, whereby we should be driven to these absurd
assertions. True it is, that Christ speaking of the holy Bread, said, This is
my body, but even so it is said of iron heated red-hot, this is fire, not
because it cease to be iron, but because that iron is accompanied with fire,
together with the properties thereof, as heating, enlightening, and such like.
So, this bread is his body, because, in the Communion, the body of Christ does
spiritually accompany this bread, and does bring spiritual effects with it.

So also Christ said of S. John Baptist, that he was Elias, Matthew. 17.12.
yet he was not in person that ancient Elias, but he, that was prefigured by
him. Jesus Christ therefore spoke mystically and Sacramentally; as likewise
when he said of himself, that he was the living bread John 6.55.
that his flesh was meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed. Some of the holy
Fathers understand this place in S. John, not of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, but of faith, and in a mysterious sense, that he, that believed in
him, did thereby eat the true bread, which was given from heaven. And those
among the Fathers, which, by this flesh and blood thus promised by Christ for
nourishment, understand the Sacrament, do mean also, that this flesh, and
this blood is to be eaten, and drunk by faith, whilst the Sacramental Bread,
and Wine is eaten, and drunk by the corporal mouth.

From this maine error concerning this impossible, and inconceivable
transubstantiation, whereby they will have a true, and real transmutation of
the Bread into the true, real, living, entire, and total body of Christ, does
arise a true, and real Idolatry in the Mass: wherein the consecrated Host is
lifted up, that it may be adored for very Christ, very God; and yet in realtie
and truth it is true and real bread.

Another branch springing from this error is, that upon this occasion they have
maimed the Sacrament in the peoples Communion, by saying, that in receiving of
the body of Christ in the Bread, there is received the flesh, and so the blood
also by concomitancie. And upon pretense of certain vain, and fruitless
reuerences, lest by any mischance the consecrated wine should be spilt upon the
ground, and so the very blood of Christ be trod under feet, they have to
prevent this mischief robbed the people of the use of the cup. Wherein they
err more ways then one; first, in running to this devise of concomitance,
whereas Christ in his Institution of this holy Sacrament did employ both Bread,
and Wine, commanding all both to eat and drink, and giving order to his
Apostles, that they, and their successors after them should in the very same
man^er minister the Communion unto the faithful people.

Moreover, by taking away from the Sacrament the signification thereof, they
do, in whole, or in part, destroy the Sacrament it self: namely, as far as
the thing signified is more, or less defalked. Christ has instituted the
Sacrament of the Eucharist in the form of a meal, a banquet, a refection, for
the increase of amity, and love among the faithful, (whose charity is much
employed in these mutual intertainements and feasts) as also to signify, that
he would hereby refresh, and nourish our souls. Now he, that debarres drink
from his board, and feeds his guests with meat only, surely makes but a dry
feast; and he, that feeds only on meat, without any drink at all, is but
ill refreshed, and very imperfectly nourished. When therefore the faithful
come together to the Lord's Supper, they ought, even in the outward action, not
only to eat, but also to drink together, to express in this complete man^er
their mutual love, and union: and if they only eat together without drinking,
they cannot taste the entire signification of this spiritual Feast, which
consists in an entire, and total charity. And he that outwardly receives
meat only, without the Cup, cannot thereby represent to his understanding the
inward receipt of a complete spiritual refection.

They have therefore done very ill to take away the use of the Cup, to the
grievous mayming of the Sacrament, and robbing of you, my dear children, of a
great part of the fruit of the Eucharist, whilst they give it you in this
man^er, lame and dismembered. And this reverence, which they pretend, is a vain
excuse: for, such care, and diligence, as by men can be performed in this
behalf, is sufficient to prevent indecent handling of those sacred mysteries;
and there being no danger at all, that the very body, or the very blood of
Christ should be materially trampled or trodden under foot; but surely, their
keeping their Sacrament thus in boxes and shrines (which is indeed no
Sacrament whilst it is not thereto employed) is hereby exposed to danger of
being gnawen, and consumed by mice and worms: and in this their case of
danger, they are driven to say, that a mouse, eating those species, does
receive into it self the very body of Christ, and the entire Sacrament, though
it receive not rem, and effectum Sacramenti, the Sacramental thing and effect
thereof: and whilst these species remain in the belly of this mouse, it must
needs follow, according to their doctrine, that in the mouse's belly there is
included the true and real body of Christ. And is not this, I pray you, a
greater absurdity, then if some drop of the sacred wine, though it were
indeed the very blood of Christ, should be spilt upon the earth, whence it may
either be gathered up, or wiped away without being trodden on at all?

In the mean while here also they use their ambitious tyranny, making
themselves absolute Lords over holy things, and mysteries ordained by Christ
himself, whereof they ought to be dispenfers only, and not commanders, nor
masters to give or deny what they please, even to those, who are worthy
receivers of them. And besides this fuel of their ambition, whereby they
mainetaine transubstantiation, to make their Priests and Friars to be more
highly esteemed, and reverenced of the people, (as those who manage, and handle
Christ, and cause him to come down from heaven) heereto is to be added also
the part, which coueteousnesse has in this lot, by squiesing your purses, and
drawing from you the larger offerings by this vain fancy put in your heads,
and selling their Masses at so much the higher rate, which they see cannot have
the name of a propitiatory Sacrifice, unless the very body of Christ be
offered in them. And thus you see these so high mysteries, for the private ends
of those that manage them, enwrapped with gross and palpable errors; from
which I advise you to keep aloof, as from most pernicious Rocks.

The second Rock. Auricular Confession.
ONe of the precious treasures, which my Jesus Christ has laid up in his
house, and mine, is the remission of sins, which cannot be had, or found
anywhere else, then in my precincts: This in most full man^er is granted first
in Baptism unto those, who, being of ripe understanding, do seriously come
to the holy lauer. And you my children, by reason of your corrupt nature,
cannot remain any long while in this mortal life without falling into sins,
whereupon the true and general remedy for remission of sins committed after
Baptism, is Repentance.

But I would have you be advised, that ye by no deed, that you can do,
though supported with God's grace, can ever purchase, or merit this Remission,
as if doing one or more good actions, and presenting them to God, ye might
pretend, that he is bound to pardon you, especially concerning the act of
Justification; wherein of an impious sinner remaining under God's wrath, a man
becomes the son of God, and is reconciled to him, and accepted of him. This
is a grievous error, and dangerous Rock, inasmuch as neither repentance, nor
Confession, nor any other act done by a sinner, can bind God to afford him
remission, to whom only it belongs to remit sins. And this remission has
my only Spouse your Lord, and mine, Jesus Christ purchased, and merited with
his bitter Passion, by shedding of his most precious blood, and dying upon the
balefull tree of the Cross: and the remission of your sins consists in
this only, that God through his mere grace and mercy accepts Christ's
satisfaction instead of that satisfaction, which a sinner ought to pay him for
his sins, by the everlasting punishment of eternal damnation. And so a
sinner becomes just, whilst God does derive upon a sinner the justice of his
son, and does apply it unto him with this only condition, that the sinner by
faith do unite himself unto Christ, and believing in him do lay his whole
confidence on him only, and not on any work or merit of his own. For, all
your works, if they be merely natural, are filthy, and of no worth to
obtain any supernatural good: and if they be done with faith, and by the
help of grace, besides that they are always full of imperfections, and
tainted with some spots, they are not indeed to be counted yours, but to be
attributed to God and his grace; and are also a debt due unto him in many
respects: for, whose the tree is, his also is the fruit that it bears; and to
him that is master of a slave, belong also the children, the work, and the
purchase whatsoever the slave gets. Ye can never therefore bring unto God
your works as your own free gift, whereupon you might expect recompense of
pardon: and so much the more, in that there is no proportion between your
works, which are finite, and of finite value, (if of any at all) and the
offense of infinite demerit. Suffer not therefore your selves to be deceived
by the covetousness of the Priests, and Friars, when they tell you, that you
may obtain justification, and remission of your sins how heinous soever, by
your good works, especially by giving alms. Neither put you any confidence
toward the remission of sins in any, saving Christ alone, and in his merits;
Romans 3.24.
for, he freely justifies you, without any merit of yours.

True it is (and therefore take heed of the other extreme) that no man can
present himself to God, nor rely upon Christ's merits, that goes on in a
wicked resolution to continue still in sin against his conscience. And
therefore I told you, that you must address your selves unto Christ to obtain
this remission, but with faith, that is, with a true and lively faith, Iam.
2.17.
not with that faith, which without works is dead, but with such a faith in
the mind, which is accompanied with holy affections, and that is to believe in
Christ, to be subject unto him, to obey him, with detestation of faults
committed, and intending of a new life, and yielding up a man's self to the
keeping of God's holy Commandments. And whosoever does not this, in vain
shall he rely upon Christ and his merits, neither shall he ever obtain
remission of his sins. This rising up from sin, and submitting to the
observance of God's Commandments, as far as humane frailty will afford, is
not in you any merit, whereto remission should be repayed as due, but it is a
necessary disposition, and takes away the impediments, that otherwise would
hinder remission of sins. And herein consists Penitence, being both the
inwards of true repentance, (which is the most principal disposition requisite
for remission) and the outside also of penitential works, as fasting, alms,
mortifying the flesh, and other works of piety, which are indeed no merits,
nor causes of forgiveness, but fruits of inward true repentance, and a fit
appurtenance unto the inward good disposition, and unto due humiliation.

These dispositions being forelaid, as necessary, and required by God, let a
man hold himself to his faith, and confidence in Christ, and by his mercy he
shall without fail obtain remission: and the whole conueyance between God
and a sinner, is carried in this man^er by the means of Christ, mine and your
only Mediator, without any necessity at all of any other Confession made unto
man; due Confession made unto God being of it self sufficient, whereby a
sinner, being humbled, does not any more defend his sins, but confesses to
God, Chrysostom. in ep. ad Heb. hom. 31.
that he has sinned. I do not advise thee (says Saint Chrysostom) to lay
thy self open, nor to accuse thy self to others, Psalm. 57.
but to obey the Prophet, who says, Reveal thy way unto the Lord. Confess
thy sins before God, declare thy offenses before the Judge, though not with
thy tongue, yet with thy memory, and then hope that thou shall obtain mercy:
So says that worthy holy Father.

I do not know, that I ever intertayned in my house any such Sacrament
appointed me by my Spouse, as a true and proper Sacrament, whereby he has
obliged himself to give remission of sins after Baptism: I believe indeed,
that whosoever groaning under the load of sin, shall with true inward
pentience, and real repentance approach unto the holy table, and receive the
Communion with due preparation, shall receive remission of his sins. For,
although this Sacrament was principally instituted by Christ, and committed to
me for the spiritual feeding of the soul, and for the preserving of charity
among my children; yet in that it is also a remembrance of the Passion of
Christ, it avails much for the remission of sins; for the obtaining whereof
Christ's body was sacrificed upon the Cross, and his most precious blood shed:
and therefore in his first giving the Communion to his Apostles, he said unto
them, Luc. 22.19. Math. 26.28.
that that was his body which was given for them, and his blood shed for the
remission of sins.

You must understand also, that Auricular Confession, and Priestly Absolution,
which are the ground of this Rock, now set before your view, is neither
practiced aright, nor well understood by those that follow the Roman doctrine,
who hereupon have built a shop of money-mart and gain. Recall, I pray you, to
your remembrance that, which I observed before in the fourth Rock of the first
part, concerning the two first medicinal Excommunications, and you shall find
that my ancient custom prescribed unto me by my Spouse, and practiced by my
holy, and learned Ministers, of at least four of the first Ages, was publicly
to correct grievous, and scandalous offenders, and, according to the authority
committed to me by Christ, to bind them in their sins, and afterward to loose
them again, and in this man^er to employ the keys about the remitting of
sins; namely, to debar such offenders for some while from the holy Table,
and sometime also from all other Congregations, and meetings of the faithful
for spiritual exercises, as heinous delinquents drowned in their sins, and
unworthy of such participation, unless they should first recall themselves
unto due inward penitence, and give also outward satisfaction unto me, by
penitential works enjoined them by me, and my Ministers, when they thus had
by scandalous sins disgraced me, and not yet made me any due satisfaction.
And yet in due time, according to the pious discretion of my Ministers, such as
these were loosed, and reconciled, and were anew admitted to the holy meetings
with others, and to the Communion of the Lord's Supper.

This was a course taken to very good purpose, and at length did work great
setlednesse, and comfort in the consciences of such offenders, though perhaps
it did go down with some bitterness, and shame. For, such a sinner being in
this man^er bound by me upon earth, was infallibly also bound in heaven, nor
could obtain remission at God's hands, though he were never so well disposed
by penitence and inward contrition between God and him: for, that promise,
made by Christ, is most certain, and cannot fail, Matthew. 18.18.
that he would bind in heaven all those, whom I had (without error) bound upon
earth, John 20.23.
and that he would withhold and suspend all remission from those sinners, whose
sins I had withheld, namely by the aforesaid retention, or excommunication,
or solemn penance: and as soon as such a sinner, thus first bound by me, was
afterward reconciled, and remaunded to the Church, and restored to religious
commerce, and to the participation of the holy Sacrament, he did without fail
obtain remission of Christ himself, by virtue of his aforesaid promise, that
he would release, and forgive the sin as soon as I had loosed the person, and
released the sin by this external remission: and so the internal remission
afforded by Christ in such a case, depends upon the external remission given
by me; which truly was a way of dealing on a very sure hand. And moreover,
many grievous, and also secret offenders, nay perhaps all the sort of them, in
regard of the surety of this course, came to their Bishop, or to some other
deputed by him, who was afterward called the Penitentiary, or Confessor; and,
some openly with a loud and audible voice, others more privily unto the ear,
but in a public place in the Church, confessed their sins, those sins, I
mean, that were very grievous, and enormous; and caused themselves in this
man^er, as I have said, to be bound or excommunicated, and to have penance
enjoined them, that they might afterward in fit time get reconciliation by the
power of the keys, and consequently forgiveness in heaven without fail.

And here you are to observe, that the Keys were employed only upon great and
enormous crimes (for as for more light, and ordinary sins, though mortal,
there were other external remedies, as I shall hereafter show,) and that by
way of accusation, either by others, or by the delinquent himself: but the
binding, and reconciling, and whole process was in the same man^er. Whereby
you may perceive, that this was not a Sacrament, as the Romanists would now
have it: for, upon the accusation of others, and judicial conviction, they
proceeded unto this binding, and iniunction of penance, after which, the party
accused, as well not confessing, as confessing publicly, or privately, was
absolved with the same for me of reconcilement: neither is there to be found in
those days any other Confession, or Absolution. Moreover, that this was not
then any Sacrament, it appears in that there was not any verbal Absolution,
nor any ordinary form of absoluing, but this alone was sufficient, that the
Bishop, or his Substitute did give leave to the penitent to come into the
Church, even into the place where the other people remained, which were not in
penance, and to partake the Communion with them. And this was always called
Reconciliation, not Absolution. And howsoever afterward there were brought-in
certain prayers, which were pronounced over the penitent in the act of his
reconcilement, yet all was by way of supplication, and not by authoritatiue
Absolution, as may be yet seen in the Roman Pontifical.

And as for other sins, which were not so grievous, and enormous, howsoever
mortal of themselves, God, in his mercy, does require less disposition, and
less ado concerning them: and so supposing always inward repentance, namely
detestation of those sins, and firm remouall of the will from them, and
lively faith, and due confidence, God has promised to acquit them much more
easily, upon some performances taught, and imposed in the holy Scripture: as
principally the Lord's prayer taught by my Savior Christ. For, assuredly upon
the presenting that petition, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us, there follows the remission of lighter and smaller
sins; which S. Augustine, and other holy Fathers do understand of sins,
which are in truth mortal, howsoever they style them by the name of venial,
not that a venial sin is not mortal, (for every sin, that is truly a
sin, is mortal, and, if not mortal, it is no sin) but because it is in
that sort mortal that God vouchsafes to deem it venial, that is, fit to be
pardoned with more facility, then other heinous offenses, which by the holy
Fathers are called crimes, and distinguished from ordinary faults; yet both the
one, and the other are mortal. In like sort these lesser, or venial sins
are cancelled upon giving of Alms, (for, as water puts out fire, Ecclus.
5.30.
so Alms extinguisheth sin) as also upon undergoing tribulations with faith,
and patience. Ecclus. 2.11.
God is full of compassion, and very pitiful, and forgiueth sins, and saves
in time of affliction: Luke 6.37.
Also upon pardoning of injuries, Forgive, and it shall be forgiven unto you:
Also at my requests, and intercessions such sins are remitted, Amb. depae.
nit. l. 1. c. 1. and l. 2. c. 7. Aug. l. 3. de bapt. c. 17. Chrysostom. in ep. ad
Romans home 24.
and gemitu columbae, by my groaning, as you may find in S. Ambrose, and S.
Augustine: with other convenient ways also taught, and allowed by holy
Scripture, and expounded by S. Chrysostom.

But beware, lest you believe, that any sins, howsoever venial, are
cancelled by the holy-water-sprinkle: this is a mere superstition. Where does
the holy Scripture ever teach, that sins are washed away by water of the
Priests hallowing? This were to bring in a second Baptism. They will have this
effect to arise, either ex opere operato, or else ex opere operantis. That is
to say; They will have this effect to be wrought either by the water it self,
through the virtue of the benediction of it, if there be no impediment in him,
that is sprinkled with it; or else they will have it to come of the devotion of
him that uses this water. If they say by the deed done, (as for the most part
they avouch) this is an intolerable impudency, namely to avouch, that the
hallowing of this water does give unto it a certain supernatural force to
cleanse sins, without any further divine institution or promise, and so this
becomes the dotage of the Turks, who by often washings hold themselves to be
purified from their sins without fail: and how then can there be a more
formal superstition, then to give to things merely natural and human a
certain supernatural force? If they will say, that it comes ex opere
operantis, to what purpose then serves that water, otherwise then to bring-in
the superstition? The other operation, which they attribute hereunto, is the
scaring away of Devils: which certainly this water cannot do, unless God do
impart such virtue unto it: And where, I pray you, has God bound himself to
give such virtue to a creature by the blessing of a Priest? I would have you
therefore to fly from holy Water, as from an idle superstition; so also take
heed you believe not, that blessings given by Pope, Bishop, or Priest, whilst
they make the sign of the Cross over you in the air, can cancel your sins
though but venial; which is likewise a superstition of the same kind; whereto
I may add the Agnus Dei, and other such idle trinkets.

Well may ye collect out of that, which I have said, and observe how manifold,
and great are the abuses of the Roman faction about Confession. First, they
make a Sacrament where none is, taking the word Sacrament in the proper, and
strict sense. Secondly, they allow an efficacy to authoritatiue absolution,
which is neither necessary, nor has any force at all; Reconciliation being
sufficient, which in ancient times might be performed even by my Deacons, but
so as in my name. Thirdly, they make Auricular Confession necessary (at least
in men's desire of it when it cannot be had) for the remission of every mortal
sin. Yet have I showed you, that it is left to your liberty thus to work, or
no, your own security, by first causing your selves to be bound by the keys,
that afterward you may be let loose by the same. And this retention, or
binding, or discommuning, ought not to be undertaken by me for petty sins,
but only for those, that are heinous and scandalous; there being in my family
so many other means for remission of venials, yet always supposing
Repentance. Fourthly, they do first absolve, and afterward impose the
penance; that is to say, they loose him, whom they never bound, and then they
bind him again, whom they never loose afterward. And yet, for my part, I
cannot loose, but that only, which my self have bound; and my order is first
to bind, and then to loose; which is the true use of the keys. True it is,
that every sin does presently before God bind every sinner, and of this
binding Christ did not speak, when he said, Whatsoever ye shall loose in
earth, shall be loosed in heaven: inasmuch as my loosing is a relative unto my
binding; and therefore Christ there understands not that bond, whereby a
sinner is bound before God, but that bond which is knitte by me; whatsoever,
says he, ye shall bind: and when a sinner does bind himself before God by
his sin, it is not I that bind him, but he binds himself by sinning.
Therefore I let loose nothing, but that, which my self have bound, and so the
binding goes before, with imposing of penance, and satisfaction, and then in
good order follows loosing. And he, that is bound only before God, and not
in respect of me, cannot be loosed by me; because I never bound him: but he
must seek his loosing of God, and carry this business between God and him
alone, and then he knocks at the right door for Absolution. Which if he
desire to have at my hands, let him first come to have me bind him, and
subject himself to my wholesome censures, and then in fit time I may let him
loose again, inasmuch as I have bound him. Thus, and not otherwise, stands
the case of Absolution by my keys, there being also a liberty left to every
grievous offender to use, or not to use the benefit thereof; being, that even
without these keys he may be assoyled from his sins: always excepting those
offenders, who being accused before me, though against their own wills, stand
bound by me. And for such as these, my Spouse committed the keys to me to
bind, and loose withal; but he dothnot oblige any man to come to me, that I
may bind him, and afterward loose him, there being other ordinary means of
remission provided for such, namely Repentance: only those, that either with,
or against their own wills have been bound by me, are obliged by me to wait
their deliverance at my hands, without which my release (except in case of
necessity) by virtue of Christ's own words, they shall never be loosed in
heaven. And in this man^er I exhort all of you, my beloved children, in
grievous sins always to seek to have remission by my keys, subiecting your
selves voluntarily to my binding, but secretly, that you may afterward obtain
at my hands Reconcilement, whereupon infallibly follows loosing in heaven.

Behold this Rock of Confession, and Absolution, which are so corruptly, and
preposterously handled by the Romanists. They load you with more bonds then you
are liable unto: they bear you in hand with a Sacrament, where indeed there
is none: they secure you with Absolution ex opere operato; whereupon you,
putting such trust in the power of this Absolution, especially in that it
bears the name to make you ex attritis contritos, it makes you cast away all
care, and luls you fast asleep, so that you look not after true inward
repentance, without which it is not possible to have true remission, and you
rely too-too much upon this Absolution, which is given you without first being
exercised in penance. And, alas, how many wretches be there among you, that
lead still a wicked life upon presumption of the great force of Absolution,
saying thus to themselves, When I shall be at the brinke of death I will
confess me, and receive Absolution, and so I shall stand on a sure ground.
But Saint Augustine says to such as these, Aug. lib. 50. hom. 41. and sermon.
47. de temp.
that indeed he will not deny them reconciliation presently upon their
confession, but he will not be their warant, that it will boot them at all;
because there does not come between their Confession, and reconcilement such
penitence as is necessary. And so in a most important business concerning your
souls, you my children, that are blind, are lead by blind guides, and both
of you fall into the gulf, and beat your ship against this infamous Rock of
Avarice: for your Confessors (excepting some few good ones) ordinarily, when as
they see your alms prepared, especially when it glisters rather yellow, then
white, they presently absolve you, when you are nothing fit for it; or, to
intertaine the more pay, they shuffle up the business, that they may run
over others, and so they dispatch you without examining, without sifting your
consciences, without due considering your estate as well, or ill disposed for
Absolution.

I pass over the abominable abuses of making advantage of Confession, either
to discover the secrets of Princes, and States, or to make way for inclinations
to foreign Princes, or to fish for inheritances, and legacies, or to satisfy
their own wanton lusts. I pass by the errors, and gross enormities, whereby,
upon pretense of the secrecy of the seal of Confession, rebellions,
conspiracies, king-killing, and such like abominations are couched, cherished,
and secured. Judge you therefore, if this be not an horrible and dreadful
Rock: Let us pass on to the rest.

The third Rock, with two blind Rocks abutting, namely Purgatory, together
with Satisfaction, and Indulgences.
THe distinction of fault, and punishment in men's sins, being an vpstart
invention, yet some Ages since devised by my stubborn unruly daughter the
Church of Rome, for the feeding thereby her insatiable avarice; this
distinction, I say, has laid the foundation of that harmefull Rock of
Purgatory, enlarging it self with those two vnderlurking companions,
Satisfaction after absolution, or Penance, as they call it, and Indulgences. I,
for my part, through many the purer ages, have always published absolute, and
entire pardon, and complete remission of sins; for such I have learned of my
Spouse, of whom it is long since testified in the Psalm, that with him there
is plenteous redemption; Psalm. 130.7.
neither did I ever find, that he, in pardoning of sins, and giving
Absolution from the fault, did at any time change the eternal punishment into
temporal, or ever enjoined any punishment, Luke 7.48.
or satisfaction. Behold the example of the sinful woman: Matthew. 9.2.
of the man sick of the palsy: consider the parable of the debtors, I forgave
thee all thy debt. Matthew. 18.32.
So also by Ezechiel, that, God, when he pardons a man his sins,
mentions them to him no more: Ezech. 18.22.
whereas, if he left their debt of punishment unsatisfied, certainly he
should remember it until the said punishment were wholly performed. And how
can it be said that a man does pardon his enemy, if, forbearing to take away
his life, he should make reservation unto himself of some other revenge upon
him, though not mortal: Alas, what a pinching pardon were this.

Are Christ's satisfactions sufficient for the whole fault, and are they not
for the whole punishment? Or rather, has not Christ taken upon himself
entirely all my both faults, and punishments? And as for humane satisfactions,
so vile as they are, what price can they carry, being also due debt unto God in
many other respects?

But if you look back unto my continual practice, which I laid open to you
in the discovery of the last-touched Rock, ye shall find that after
Reconciliation, (which they now adays call Absolution) I did never impose any
satisfaction or penance upon Penitents. I did indeed, before the loosing such
offenders, impose upon them some penal works, yet not as satisfactory, nor
that by them they might rid themselves from the bonds of punishment due to
their sins, whether temporal, or eternal; (What acceptable satisfaction can
he give, who as yet is in disgrace) but that thereby they might stir up
inward repentance, and show forth their humiliation, and edify their brethren
scandalized by their heinous sins. Even as the penitence used by King Ahab,
when he fasted, and put on sackcloth, was approved, and accepted of God, not
as satisfactory, but as an outward sign of inward humiliation: 1. King. 21.29.
See thou (says God to Elias) how Ahab is humbled before me? because he
humbles himself, therefore I will not bring that evil in his days. And this
is that, which was said by penitent David, A contrite and humbled heart, O God,
Psalm. 51.17.
thou will not despise. Contrite by true inward repentance, and humbled with
those outward signs, namely, lowly, and penal works, by which the penitent
shows, that he will not stand out with God: but that laying aside all
hautinesse, he subiecteth himself to God's hand, and mercy; So also did the
Ninevites, humbling themselves with fasting, sackcloth, and ashes, going so
low, that they made the very beasts to fast: Which fasting surely could be
neither meritorious, nor satisfactory: but to the end that the fairer evidence
might be given of their own true repentance, they desired that their
humiliation might appear even in the very beasts. To this end have I made the
pious institution of Lent, which in order of time is to go before Easter, to
the end that my children might be the better prepared by fastings, prayers,
and other actions of devotion, to receive afterward in the holy feast of Easter
reconcilement, and full remission of their sins; and by this institution,
Penance is to go before Remission, or Absolution, and not to follow after it.

It cannot be denied, that oftentimes by the scourge of outward afflictions and
tribulations, Hebr. 12.6.
God does bring those, whom he loves, to this aforesaid necessary
humiliation, and also hereby tries them, as gold is tried in the furnace, and
is content that such chastisements as these, inflicted by him, shall stand in
the stead of punishment due to their sins: 1. Cor. 11.32.
but withal he does moreover apply his own mercy, and pardon, which he
affords them both of fault, and punishment: and such favors vouchsafed by God
are not halfed, nor pinched, but full and complete. When therefore he
receives a man unto favor, he pardons him all: yet does God sometimes
before hand, in pardoning an heinous crime, join also some notorious temporal
chastisement; the execution whereof may endure even after the remission of the
sin; which penalty God himself does inflict, and expressly enjoin, and
referrs it not to the voluntary undertaking, or executing by the penitent: 2.
Sam. 12.22.
As upon Dauid's Adultery he inflicted for a temporal penalty the death of
the child; which David could not put by, by any humiliation that he could
undergo, or prayers that he could make: So likewise that punishment of
division of the Tribes, which was the just reward of Salomons misdeeds, 1 Reg.
11.31.
came to pass after his death, and perhaps after that his sins had been
remitted, as we may with good reason presume: So likewise Ahab's punishment was
accomplished in his sonne's days; 2. Reg. 9.29.
and in like man^er other penalties also inflicted by God without remission.
But all these are extraordinary cases, and open chastisements, but not
satisfactory: and all of them executed in this present world. As for us, we are
to hold to that, which is ordinary.

Being therefore that there neither ought, nor can remain any obligation unto
any punishment after the sin is remitted, (for, true remission is of the
punishment, as well as of the fault) therefore Penances, and Satisfactions,
after Absolution must needs be one of these two, either works of humiliation
done out of season preposterously, which for the most part are also neglected,
and omitted by the penitents, having got their Absolution before hand: or else
they are the gains, and purchases of the Confessors, who ordinarily, as often as
they can, fly upon money-mulcts under the name of Alms, or for saying of
Masses, which those Confessors offer themselves ready to perform, and tell a
tale, that they have in their hands some private good business, which would
fitly be set forward with such Alms, as themselves thus impose in penance and
satisfaction; and by this means they draw store of water to their mill. And,
that which is worse, the Confessors contriue certain necessities of
restitution, and perhaps sometimes bear them in hand, that they are bound to
restore, whereas indeed there is no such cause, and so compound with the
penitent, that he may give them a set price, and by that means obtain
complete Absolution. O what a deal of chaffering do they use under this vain
pretense, that after the remission of the fault there remains yet a temporal
punishment to be satisfied!

Behold here the foundation of Purgatory; a vain, and groundless foundation,
laid in the air, raised by imagination, being a mere trick to bring-in money
to the Priests, and Friars, and besides them to my Grandees also. Purgatory by
deceitful devises has founded the richest Abbeys, and Priories, and other
Religious houses: Purgatory makes fair possessions, and inheritances to start
over to my having Churchmen: Purgatory makes so many idlesbies to swim in
delicacie, and voluptuousnes: those I mean, that defile the living, and feed
upon the dead. For the Preachers, and Confessors still crying alowd, that it is
not enough to receive Absolution, and remission of sins, as far as
concerns the fault it self, but that after all this there remains a debt of
temporal pain, which whosoever does not undergo in this life, it lies upon
him to make the score even with smart enough in another life in Purgatory; and
for as much as most men are very backward in performing these Satisfactions, at
length when they come to the point of death, then are they much affrighted with
those grievous pains, which, as they are borne in hand, do awaite them in
Purgatory, and then the poor wretches, to escape this brunt, give what they can
to the Church, that is, to the bellies of the Priests, and Friars, by whom they
are persuaded, that this is the only way to ouerleape Purgatory. And if he,
that lies thus at mercy, drop away without paying such ransom, then they
beleaguer his children or other his heirs, or executors, urging them, for the
pulling their fathers, or brothers, or husbands, or sons soul out of the
horrible torments of Purgatory, to make allowance for the singing of so many
Masses: or to found, and endow an Altar, a Chapel, a Church, a daily Mass
for ever, and a day, or some such like erections. So that this same Purgatory
is the nourse, and chief susteiner of an infinite rabble of most irregular,
and lewd priests, who still ring in your ears, that Masses are true and
propitiatory Sacrifices for the living, and for the dead.

As for Purgatory, as it has no foundation, nor reason whereupon to build it,
so the holy Scripture has none, no not the least, mention of it: but on the
contrary it has many authorities, and grounds, a little before pointed at by
me, which prove that it may not in any wise be maintained. The Papists have
long gone afishing to find some place in Scripture, which may make a semblance
of Purgatory, but all in vain. Surely whatsoever God would have me to know as
an Article of faith, or as a necessary point, or very important for the
salvation of my children, he has set it down in the Scripture in such man^er,
that I may, and ought thence to draw, and avouch it; but he will not in any
wise, that any of my family out of his own capricious conceit, should devise
an opinion, and propound it to my children, and after he has thus of his own
head avouched it, then to go a begging for some fragment of a word in
Scripture, to maintain it, as they have done about Purgatory: alleging for
it some places, which are subject to many expositions, whereof none at all have
any acquaintance with Purgatory.

Verily I neither can, nor may deny, that from my very ancient times I have
always had a good liking, and so have provided, that in the death of my
children (such as died not in very ill, and desperate estate) there should
prayers be made, and other devotions to God, and that for diverse reasons. First
that funerals, and obsequies, being an universal, and moral custom,
entertained by all Nations, and used by all sorts of men, and in that behalf
not to be neglected, they might be continued in my Family, not barely as
humane, and natural ceremonies, but also as Christian and religious, and that
with giving thanks to God, that such, or such a son of mine had rendered his
soul to his Creator, and had passed with his holy faith from this my house
militant to that other Congregation of the first borne: whereby I did revive
unto those, that were present at the funeral, the memory of the souls
immortality, of the expected resurrection of that dead body, and of the strict
union that is between me and my dearest sister now triumphing, to whom in
these my prayers for the dead I did direct that soul, with very good hope that
it was to ariue there.

Moreover, besides this, those my prayers, and supplications, which ought to
have been made over the party ready to die, whilst he being now in his last
agony cannot perform any longer the actions of penitence and humiliation
before God, nor acknowledge his own guilt, nor crave pardon for his daily
sins, I, doing the office of a mother, present them for him in his funeral,
together with the company of his brethren, and utter those prayers over him now
dead, which should have been uttered over him dying. And if you would thoroughly
sift your Masses framed for the dead, and the ancient prayers, which are set
down in them, being current at this day throughout the Papacy, you should
find that they are prayers to be used rather over him, who is at the last
gasp, then who is already dead. For in them I pray for remission, not of any
temporal pains, but of the sins themselves, yea even mortal sins, and
for deliverance from hell; as also in Masses for the dead, ye shall never
find any prayers for freeing the soul out of Purgatory, Libera animas omnium
fidelium defunctoru^ de poenis Inferni, and deprofundo lacu; libera eas de ore
Leonis, ni absorbeat eas Tartarus, nec cadant in obscurum. In Missa pro
defunctis.
but expressly out of hell. Deliver the souls of all the faithful departed
from the pains of hell, and from the deep lake: free them from the mouth of
the Lion, that hell do not swallow them up, and that they fall not into the
dark: so that it is a mere foppery to go about to pick Purgatory out of
these prayers. Likewise those tridualls, or thirday-masses; those trentalls, or
monethsmindes; those anniuersaries, or yeeres-dirges, or such like trinkets are
the mere inventions of Avarice aforesaid, and therefore their thrusting of
Purgatory upon you is a very collusion.

They auouching, and teaching, that there remain certain temporal
punishments for your mortal sins (which sins yet are forgiven in this
life) do hereupon inioyne Satisfactions after remission. And here we find
them entangled in many difficulties: which of them knows the quantity of
those temporal pains, which God left to be undergone by the penitent, after
that he is accepted into grace? how can they enjoin a true proportion of
Satisfaction? If they shall impose more then his debt requires, they shall do
him wrong, and deal unjustly with him: if they give him short measure, they
deceive him, and defraud him of his entire deliverance, and so the Confessor by
his own fault tumbles this poor soul into Purgatory after death. For, if he
had imposed sufficient Satisfaction, he had clean wiped out the skore, and
had left the penitent never a farthing in debt to Purgatory. And as for this
Satisfaction, by what operation does it cancel the punishment? it were fit
that they should declare whether it work ex opere operato, or ex opere
operantis, by the deed done, or by the disposition of the doer. And here
again they dash upon hard difficulties. Besides this, where has God bound
himself to release the punishment of sins by any action of man? When does
he, pardoning the fault, leave a guilt of temporal punishment? Do you see
into what perplexities, into what dangers they thrust you? They make you
believe that Christ's satisfactions are insufficient, seeing that now
ordinarily they do not take away all the punishment with the fault. They make
you to trust upon your own Satisfactions, as more able to cancel the
punishments, then can be done by Christ's Satisfaction. They make you remain
in a perpetual perplexity and doubt whether you have fully satisfied, or no:
They make you lazy and negligent in going thorough-stitch with true
Repentance, such as God requires of you, and whereupon he would give you a
full pardon both of fault and punishment: for you deem their Absolutio^ to be
sufficient for you, and that it does without fail make riddance of your fault:
and, as for the backe-reckoning of punishment, ye cheer up your selves, that a
little taste of Purgatory shall make you freemen: and so it falls out that you
pass to another life perhaps (which God forefend) with your whole load both of
fault, and also of obligation unto eternal punishment. But when you know there
is no Purgatory at all, you will, for the scaping of hell, look better to your
tacklings: and you will not then say, as I hear many among you now speak, I
will not perform the penance, that is enjoined me: I am content rather to make
it up afterward in Purgatory: And your instructers teach you, that you may
lawfully say, and do thus.

The other hidden Rock, that grows to this Rock of Purgatory, are
Indulgences. It is a shameless boldness to say, that Christ indeed has
fully satisfied for all the punishments due to every sinner, which addresseth
himself unto him: but yet that the applying of Christ's merits goes in this
man^er: the Confessor, when he absolueth thee, applies the merits of Christ
unto thee, only in respect of the fault, and the eternal punishment, but as
for temporal punishment, that lies still at thy door: and that therefore, in
respect of this punishment, it is in the Popes power to apply the said merits
of Christ for the remitting the said punishment in part, or in whole, as he
shall think good. But I say, if the Confessor absolve by the power of the
keys, who has restrained him in this Absolutio^ to the fault, and not to the
entire punishment? who has halfed out unto him the power of the keys, that by
them he should apply the merits of Christ for the taking away only of the
fault, and of the eternal punishment, but not of the temporal? Surely the
keys contain entire remission; who then thus has minced it out? And if the
Confessor can impose such satisfaction, whereby all kind of punishment may
beecancelled, (and certainly, as the Papists teach, this satisfaction works
by the power of the keys, being Sacramental) then his power extends also to
the whole punishment: and by absoluing and by Absolution applying Christ's
Satisfactions unto the penitent, he does apply them with all the power, and
virtue, which is either in Christ's merits, or in the keys, or in the Minister
himself, that works by them: there is therefore no kind of punishment, which
he has not remitted: and what then remains behind for Indulgences to work
upon?

I say nothing of the merits of the Saints Supererogation, which they shuffle
into this Treasure among Christ's merits, with as great falsehood, as wrong,
and injury done to Christ himself: The falsehood lies in this, for that the
works of any Saints whatsoever, both as they are maritorious, (if they may be
called meritorious at all) and also as satisfactory, are wholly paid for the
Saints own debt; nor is there any overplus left for others in case they were
sufficient for the Saint himself, as I shall afterward declare. To Christ
himself great wrong is done, as if a man should pour a drop of water into the
Sea, and should say that this drop carries every ship to the haven: but
especially he is wronged, in that only he, and none else, being appointed of
God the Mediator both for faults, and punishments of the world, and all men in
it, it must needs be an odious blasphemy, to say that the merits of Saints
do serve for the taking away of the punishments of sins; for the cancelling
whereof God accepts nothing else, but the blood of his onely-begotten Son:
as also he has sent none other, nor chosen any other for that office, then
this his only Son; neither is any other money current in Gods Treasury for
our complete redemption, either from fault, or from punishment, then the
treasure of the blood, and merits of Christ, stamped with the image of Christ
himself: all other money used for this purchase is false coin, and is
rejected by the mint-master of heaven.

But, besides this, how is the Pope enabled to apply the treasure of Christ's
merits? who has made him Master of it? who has put into his hands only the
keys of it? I have heard, that the principal key, which leads to this
treasure, lies open in public, to be used by every one, that will take it,
and that the hand, by which every one may take it, is true, and lively faith,
nor is there any need to ask this key of the Pope, or of any other man, it
lying open to all; nor to beg of any man the favor to be made partaker of
this treasure, which Christ has made common, without giving the custody
thereof to any man in the world. I have indeed a particular key committed unto
me by him, but without any prejudice to the common key, which lies open to
all, and this is that key, by which I bind, and loose; and this is equally in
the hands of every of my Ministers, and specially of my Bishops: and this key
does after a sort apply unto the penitent that treasure, namely the merits of
Christ, according to the promise of Christ himself, who, whenever he remits
the fault, remitteth also all kind of punishment; neither is it in my power,
or in the power of any that uses this key of mine, to separate the punishment,
or any part thereof from the fault: for the money of this treasure pays all in
the total, and that is the current rate of it. It is therefore open tyranny
in the Pope, to incroach this key into his own hands only, and to impart it
to whomsoever he please, and in what degree he thinks good: whereas this key
was given to me, and I have committed it to the hands of all, and every my
Ministers equally, without distinction. And if there were any true Indulgences
to be had, it were a great folly in you to seek them of the Pope, when as
your own Bishops can as well grant them, as the Pope himself: and this is not
denied by the doctors of his own side, namely, those that yield, that Bishops
have all their authority, power, and Episcopal Jurisdiction from God, and not
from the Pope.

To comprise this briefly; There are only three Keys, which keep the
treasury of my house: The one is common to all my children, lying open to every
man, as I said, and not committed specially to the hands of any: the other two
are in the hands of my Officers, and of every of them; for, by them only are
they to be employed, but to the benefit of all the faithful. One is of the
holy Sacraments, namely of Baptism, and the Eucharist: the other is for
binding, and loosing, as I have declared. And whosoever brags, that he has
another key besides these (as the Pope vaunteth that he has the key of
Indulgences) he both is deceived himself, and deceives others. For we have
in the Scriptures express Patent for those three sorts of Keys: but of that
fourth no grant appears, but forgery, and usurpation; and if it be one of
these three, it cannot have any proper and distinct name, nor different effect,
neither can it be appropriated to any, more then they: neither can it be used
otherwise, then in remitting the whole punishment together with the fault, and
so it will not be diverse from them.

There has been indeed in my house, and still may be the use of certain
Indulgences, but without employing any Treasure in them (from whence those
false Indulgences have occasionally taken their beginning, and not from
Apostolic tradition, as is pretended.) and this was, when as some Penitent
being bound by me in man^er aforesaid, with iniunction of penance for some
prefixed, and determinate time, wherein the Penitent was to give evidence of
his repentance, and to be taken down to a fit degree of humiliation, (which
course of time for performance of penance, was now and then the space of seven
whole years together) yet upon the good behavior of the party, and out of my
own compassion, and mercy toward him, as also by the instance and prayers of
my children, I was wont to shorten this time, and to moderate these penalties,
and so to grant him reconciliation sooner, as S. Paul did to the incestious
Corinthian. 2. Cor. 2.10.
And this was my Indulgence which, as you see, has nothing to do with the
punishment of sins, nor with Purgatory. For these works of Penance enjoined
the Penitent before his Absolution, were not punishments otherwise due unto the
sin by God's justice, but mere signs of repentance, and of necessary
humiliation: the true punishments of sin being cancelled by his
Reconcilement, and consequently, by the applying of Christ's treasure in such
sort, as I have declared, and not by abreuiating the time of precedent trials,
and humiliations.

So here ye see the blind-Rocke of those Indulgences, that now-adayes are used,
A Rock whereat many do suffer shipwreck. The maine mischief of it is, that
it takes away clean out of the world, and disanulleth true Christian
repentance, and so robs many a soul of the true remission of their sins.
I will demonstrate this to you. A sinner heauieloaden with heinous crimes,
putting his confidence in the great virtue of Sacramental Absolution, which, ex
opere operato, by the deed done, must remit sins, and make ex attrito
contritum, of a bruised heart a broken heart, hereupon does not hate his sin,
nor abhor it, and so he does not rise up from sin; but he goes to find one
of these triuiall Confessors, with a brace of sixpences in his hand, and for
more, or less upon the bargain, without any troublesome examination, he gets
Absolution; and now he holds himself secured from his sins, in respect of
the guilt, and of eternal punishment; And as for the temporal punishment,
there are imposed upon him so many fasts, so many Masses, such a quantity of
Alms; which he accepts, but with intent to perform never a whit of them. He
is content to leave them on the score for Purgatory: and yet he has a trick
to escape that payment too: he will gape after a planary Iubily, or rather he
will take a gainer way: he has in his Beadrow, or Rosary certain beads,
crosses, and medals, which have been all to be-blest by the most holy Father,
and these contain in them Indulgentiam plenariam, a full Indulgence over, and
over: and so with chewing over threescore and three Auemaries, and seven
Paternosters, he has rid himself of all this troublesome matter: and thus
without Penance, without Satisfaction, and without Purgatory, he is more then
certain of Paradise. And when these devilish inventions were first in ure,
Indulgences a culpa, and paena, as well from all fault, as punishment, were
granted, even without Confession, and without Absolution to all, that would put
to their helping hand, so that it had money in it. But now-adaies (gran-mercy
Luther) the Pardon-mongers are somewhat more moderate, though not reformed. For
they do not now trucke for the fault, but for the punishment only. Where you
may note, at least, the goodly beginning of these Indulgences, with marting the
remission of sins, at What will you give.

And yet notwithstanding, for the gain, that comes of them, they are
defended, and extolled by the Papists, as likewise the Stations to such, and
such Churches, the visiting of such an Altar, or such Relics, with so much
ado in iangling the Bells for many days before, and setting up titles and
banners in the chief corners, and eminent places of the City, with vehement
urging these things in the pulpit. Such doings as these, whither else do they
tend, but to rob you, my simple children, of your money? But such Stations as
these, and Indulgences, lest they should pass without income to the Pope, they
are not granted, but in his Court of Chancery, in form of Bulls; and this is a
very good means for the engrossing up of money at Rome. To prevent murmures of
the people, there was a new devise brought into Rome for the speeding of
Indulgences, per Breue, and gratis, by Breues, without fees, but now-adayes
again he, that will have any of these gainefull Indulgences, must go the old
way by the Chancery, and by Bulls; as for Breues, they are rarely granted, and
they also now not altogether gratis.

But it is an excellent trick of thrift the Pope has gotten up, both in
leuying forces and Soldiers in foreign Estates for his own enterprises, as
also in giving of presents, which, as a temporal Prince, he is to bestow on
other Princes, and on their Ambassadors: he, to save his own purse, puts his
hand into the endless treasure of Indulgences, and loads them with whole bags
full of blessed beads, medailes and croslets of copper, and paltry pictures
printed on paper, with a catalogue of Indulge^ces belonging to them: whereof
more account is made by the Pope's gentle customers then of so many Spanish
Doublons. Such trinkets as these, together with the trick of a plenary
Indulgence, and of opening the gate of Paradise, fly abroad upon every design
of the Popes. And yet all this while this treasure shrinketh not, but it bulkes
up every day by the canonizing of new Saints, and with their merits and works
of supererogation. O woeful blindness of men, which take no knowledge of such
abuses and deceits!

The Pope not content with the Keys of heaven, and earth, will needs have his
keys reach under the earth also, and exercises his omnipotence upon the
souls, which are in the center of the earth, stretching forth his Indulgences
unto the imagined Purgatory, per modum suffragij, by way of suffrage; but so,
that they may have their certain effect without fail, as much as concerns
his authority, if the indisposition of the souls themselves do not hinder
it: and all this for the whetting on of simple men, especially silly women in
the behalf of such a soul to multiply Masses at privileged Altars, to lay on
load of Alms, to give large legacies to Chapters, Co^uents, Schools,
Chapels, and Altars: To this end also they bring fabulous Legends, they devise
miracles, and revelations from another world, with a thousand pretty leasings
to gull simple people. Behold here new Articles of Christian Religion made out
at the fingers ends, whereof netts are knit to fish for gold, and silver. These
be the Rocks, and vndershelfes, which split many a poor soul: I would have
you, my children, know how to escape them.

The fourth Rock. Invocation of Saints.
THis Rock also has need of wary observation. It is good in this present
life, for one to recommend himself to the prayers of another, and chiefly to
the prayers of a whole particular Church. In this man^er S. Paul oftentimes
recommends himself to the prayers of the faithful people, to whom he writes;
but in this case there is no Religious Invocation, neither are those, to whom a
man thus recommends himself, called upon as Mediators between God and him,
but as companions, and brethren, which both hear, and understand that, which
is recommended unto them. There is no doubt at all, but that the holy Angels,
and blessed souls in heaven, according to their inflamed charity, do
intercede with God for me, and all you, they being (as S. Cypr de mortalitate.
Cyprian says) in sure possession of their own glory, and careful for the
salvation of you, my children: and therefore no Catholic man will ever deny
such intercession of the Saints. But to make religious Invocation of them,
that is, to call upon them with a certain affection, and opinion of a kind of
Deity in them, whereby they may hear, and attend us, or, as mediators
appointed us by God, to treat of our salvation with him; this is a perilous
matter, and smells strong of Idolatry. And certainly this cannot be done
without great wrong unto Christ, who is appointed by the Father for our only
Mediator, and Advocate. Why therefore should we here ouerpasse Christ, whose
proper office it is to be our Advocate, and, in stead of him, hold our selves
to his servants. They neither do, nor can hear the prayers of men: and
whosoever calls them thus to be his help, and inuoketh them, supposes an
infinite, and plainly divine virtue in them, that they can hear all. If the
most blessed Virgin the mother of Christ could hear, and listen to all
particular men, who throughout the whole earth pray to her, and call upon her,
and very many of them at the same moment, she should be God, and not a
creature: or, if God were pleased to reveal such prayers unto his Saints, and
that such Inuocations were acceptable to his heavenly Majesty, certainly the
Scripture would either expressly deliver it unto me, or would imply it in some
degree, whereas it does plainly teach me the contrary, nor will suffer me to
invoke any other, but God, and his onely-begotten Son my Spouse.

Know you therefore, that the disorders of this invocation, has run on so
much the farther, in that the common people put far more confidence in the
Virgin Mary, or in some other he or she Saint (who perhaps is not in heaven)
then in Christ himself, and certainly they do make more prayers and Masses to
the blessed Virgin, or to some Saints, then unto Christ: and howsoever in the
Litanies and public prayers under the Papacy, they say, ora pro nobis, pray
for us, yet if you examine silly women, and men of the vulgar sort, you shall
find, that they call upon them properly as on so many gods, and that they use
ordinarily to say, Saint Mary help me, Saint Charles Borromeo save me. Go
to Millaine, and enquire among the people, and you shall find that this same
Charles has not only driven the renowned St. Ambrose out of their hearts
there, (who now in comparison of this Saint Charles, is much abated in his
reputation) but also that they put more trust in their new Saint Charles, then
in Christ. The reason is, because they see the solemnities of St. Charles set
out with far greater pomp then those of Christ: which does infallibly breed
this error in the minds of the vulgar.

The great ones of Rome do willingly cherish these Inuocations and Idolatries,
and make them Articles of Faith, that the Statues, and Images may be of more
force to move you to make large contributions for the building of Churches,
and Monasteries to their names, and to endow them with fair revenues. I know
well, that some witty and subtle brains can by certain metaphysicall
formallities frame and accommodate the conscience to digest this kind of
Invocation: but by their leave, it is far more safe to hold off from it: and
therefore ye shall do well to abstain, forasmuch as this your absteining
tends not to any contempt of the Saints themselves, but to the keeping your
selves from falling into these errors: neither will Christ take it ill, that
you keep your selves from such Inuocations, least you should dishonor him;
and the Saints themselves, if they were to counsel you, would speak thus:
Imitate our holy actions, conform your selves to our lively faith, and holy
life; honor us in your hearts, as the faithful servants of God, and in thus
doing ye shall yield us all the respect you owe us. The most holy Mother of
my Savior, for her part, would give you the very same counsel, and that with
more vehemency: for, she would tell you, that it is irksome, and loathsome
unto her, that you thus call upon her, and make recourse ever and anon to her:
she would tell you also, that those glorious titles of Queen, Hope,
Salvation, Advocate, sound abhominably in her ears, and make her sick again,
she acknowledging her self to be none other then the handmaid of the Lord;
Luke 1.38.
therefore take heed of this Rock also. And when you repeat the Aue-mary,
recite it historically in remembrance of the Incarnation of the Son of God in
the most chaste womb of the Virgin. Profane it not with that Invocation,
Sancta Maria, matter Dei, ora pro nobis, etc. Holy Mary, the mother of God, pray
for us, etc. For, certainly in ancient times those words were not wont to be
added in my house, as also you shall find the Aue-mary without them in the
later Catholic Counsels of Germany, before that of Trent.

And because it is a laudable devotion which has anciently been used, to make
commemorations of Christ's Incarnation three several times in the day at the
public tolling of a bell, which is called the Aue-mary, namely, at
Sunne-rise, at noone, and Sunne-set, it were good that you would first purge or
reform it, and then being reformed use it zealously and unto edification. You
shall reform it, if kneeling down upon your knees you shall say in this
manner. The Angel of the Lord brought a message to the virgin Mary saying to
her, Hayle Mary full of grace, the Lord is with thee, thou art blessed among
women; and she said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according
to thy word. Then the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us: O thou that
did believe this, thou art surely blessed, and blessed is the fruit of thy
womb, Jesus. O Lord God, pour down thy grace into our souls, that we,
which by the message of an Angel have known the Incarnation of thy Son Iefus
Christ, may by his Cross, and Passion, be lead to the glory of his holy
resurrection, Amen.

The fifth Rock. Images, and Relics.
PIctures, and Statues in ancient times were used, as in private houses, so
also in public Churches, only for remembrance of sacred histories, and for
the benefit of them, that could not, or would not read books. Wherein they
beholding the representation of Christ upon the Cross, of the martyrdomes, and
memorable actions of holy men, might for their own particular remember the
benefit of their redemption, and propound unto themselves examples for
imitation in the maintenance of our holy faith, and the exercise of christian
virtues. Othervse of Images then this, which is civil, I was not acquainted
with for many Ages; But after that the covetousness of men did run on,
inuenting and forging of miracles to draw on the peoples devotion toward some
Image, and so their contributions under pretense of lamps, ornaments, and
other material embellishments; thence began they to teach, that there was a
certain proper religious worship due to the Image it self, and then my idle
Ministers began to light lamps to them, to burn incense to them, to adore
them, to kneel down, and make their prayers before them. Hence arose that
abuse, that none under the Papacy knows how to pray, without he have before
him some petty statue, or picture, either painted, or printed, especially of
the Crucifix, and of our Lady. And the Churchmen do wilfully infuse true and
proper Idolatry into the minds of the ignorant common people, whilst they
erect stately Churches, curious Chappells, with so many enclosures, vesteries,
curtains, lamps, torches, indulgences: whilst they carry them in Procession
with such furniture, and outward pomp, being an external religious
worship, which pertains unto God: they command, and compel every man to
fall down on his knees, and adore them, whereupon the silly people conceiueth
a certain divinity to be in them, and without any reflection at all ad
prototypum to the principal copy, they offer their vows, and their prayers
to that stock, or stone; to this cloth, or tablet, and expect immediately from
that very Image the grace, which they request, even of eternal life. It is not
to be doubted, but that the more part of the vulgar commits most proper, and
formal Idolatry with some Images. And the doctrine, which some learned
Papists do teach, namely, that unto Images, as Images, a proper religious
worship is due, must of necessity make even the wise, and learned amongst them
to Idolatrize formally.

A wodden Crucifixe representing Christ on the Cross may awake the mind of a
Christian to adore with his soul him, that is represented, namely true Christ:
but to teach a proper worship, besides that, which is due unto the prototype,
and a proper adoration to be due to a Crucifixe made of wood, only because it
represents the true Christ, this is to bring-in flat Idolatry. If they shall
tell you, that a certain humane, and civil reverence is to be given to the
Images of Christ, and also of the Virgin Mary, and eminent Saints, such as are
canonized by holy Scripture, such respect, I say, as is due to the Images of
great Princes, and Emperors, and famous benefactors, or of the progenitors of
noble families, publicly advanced, or privately respected; in this there were
no error, nor any danger at all. But whilst they will needs have it to be
religious, and spiritual worship, let them cloth it as cunningly as they can,
with the names of dulia, or hyperdulia to balke the name of latria, yet in the
end it comes to be a very latria, divine worship: inasmuch as religious, and
spiritual worship is, nor can be any other then latria, which is the very
adoration performed inwardly in the mind and spirit, and outwardly by the body
unto the only true God.

And why did God so severely command in the first table of his lively, and
eternal law, that his faithful people should beware of making any Images of
what sort soever, to be used in any religious worship, if not, because he
knew, that all such worship of them must needs be Idolatry? Think you that
the Idolatrous Gentiles did indeed worship those Statues of marble, wood, and
metal, as thinking that they were the very gods, whom they adored? It is a
folly so to deem. But in that they gave honor, and reverence unto those
Statues, as representing those men, whom they held for gods, nay otherwhile
representing such beasts, as they thought had a kind of divinity in them; in
this respect our sacred Scripture does deride them, Psalm. 115.5.
saying, The Idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's
hands: they have mouths, but they speak not, eyes have they, but they see
not, they have ears, but they hear not, etc. Whereby their Idolatry is
reduced, not only to their adoring, for gods, very men, or very beasts, (which
is indeed the most proper Idolatry of all) but also much more, because they,
having made those their Statues, and Images, did render unto these very same
Statues, and Images a certain proper worship, as being the Statues, and Images
representing those, whom they held for true Gods. In like man^er also, whilst
Christians do yield unto an Image a certain proper religious worship, though
only as it represents the true Christ, the holy Scripture by the same reason
will say of them, The Christians Images are wood or cloth, the work of men's
hands: they have mouths, and speak not, eyes, and see not, etc.

Neither does it excuse the matter, to say, that in the Image, the prototype or
first pattern is adored. For, the action in it self is unlawful, and directly
imports Idolatry: and therefore it ought of it self and in its own nature
to be shunned, as Idolatrous, as long as religious worship is yielded. For,
otherwise it were not Idolatry to worship the very Idols of the Gentiles made
of any material stuff, being that in that very matter whatsoever, there is
the presence of the true God. Nor will that excuse serve in saying, I do not
adore the Statue, or Image; but God in them. The action in it self is directly
terminated upon the Statue, or Image: neither does it suffice for the
preventing of Idolatry, that the intention is directed unto God, because there
does remain at the least material, and external Idolatry even in the
judicious and learned, that know how to frame these abstract notions: but in
the vulgar idiots there will be no less then formal Idolatry. And therefore
on all hands, all religious worship of Statues and Images, even of the Cross,
and of Christ himself, would be altogether banished out of Christendom: much
more those of Our Lady, and of other Saints, being that no religious worship
at all is due unto those Images, or to those Saints, whom they represent.
Remember how Saint John the Evangelist, when he would have worshipped the
Angel, was by the Angel himself forbidden with this Caveat, See thou do it
not; for, I am thy fellow-seruant. Revel. 22.9.
And surely Saint John never meant to adore that Angel as God, with the
worship called latria, proper to God only: for, he well knew, that this was an
Angel: but because he bowed himself to him with a religious act, the Angel
hindered him, knowing that such an act was unlawful: how much more unlawful
were it to be done to an Image?

But if you would clear the matter, whether this worship be used to be given
to the Image it self, as an Image, or to the prototype in the Image: look
into your Churches, and houses, whether the same adoration be yielded to all
Crucifixes, and to all the Images of the Virgin Mary equally, of all which the
prototype or principal is the same: or whether there be not rather a
difference in the adoring the^. Surely you shall find very great difference
between one Image and another, both being of the same principal. Of Our
Lady's Images you shall have in the same City in diverse Churches, and houses
some, that are not so much as looked after, and yet one of them in some other
Church shall be frequented with infinite concourse of people. That of Loretto
shall have far better doings, then that of Mont-ferrate, and so likewise of
others. Therefore the usual worship is proper unto the Image, and not to the
prototype, or original which it represents.

Observe also the disorders which are to be found, not only in the common
people, and simple women, but also in those, that are reputed discreet, and
grave: when they come into a Church, if there be there any famous Statue, or
Image of Our Lady, laden with vows, glistering with tapers, richly clad in
gold and silver, shut up in shrines, and such like, this must be the first,
that is visited: after they have adored the Image of the Virgin Mary, then, for
fashion sake, they go to the Altar of the most blessed Sacrament, as they call
it, where they suppose, that Christ himself is really and corporally present:
or if there be no such Altar there, then they first worship Our Lady dight in
that man^er, and go afterward to the Crucifixe; or rather for the most part
do not at all visit it. How many huge tapers, and whole torches shall you see
burning before the Image of St. Francis, of St. George, of St. Charles, or some
other Saint, but before the Crucifixe either none at all, or a petty
farthing-candle. Is this to reflect from the Image to the prototype? Is not
this to commit Idolatry, and to prefer the servant before the Master, the
creature before the Creator? Is not this to put more affiance in a Saint, then
in Christ, and to expect more help from a Saint, then from Christ himself?
There is no one thing, whereby poor I am more defamed, and shamed among the
Jews, Turks, and Pagans, then by these Idolatries: Fly therefore from them.

The Relics of Saints, if they be true, and proved so to be, are to be
laid up in honorable burial, and kept in decent places, and are to serve
your turn, my Children, as a memorial of the holy actions of that Saint for
your imitation. Ye are therefore to respect them with civil honor, as the
members of God's principal servants: but as for religious and spiritual
worship, as it cannot without Idolatry be afforded to their souls now
glorified in heaven, so is it much less due unto their ashes, and dead bones,
and least of all to their Images: those Relics having in themselves no divine
power at all, nor any Spiritual quality, whereby they may do you any help.
And if God, in love unto his Saints, that remain with him in glory, vouchsafe
to do you any favor, it is he himself, that does it, and not the Saint, much
less any Relic, or image of a Saint. So also when God did patiently bear
with the sins of the children of Israel, even to the pardoning them their
Idolatries, for the love which he bare to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: and when
he deferred the dismembring of Salomon's Kingdom, and pardoned many faults to
his successors Kings of Judah for his beloved Dauid's sake, the thanks then
were not due nor rendered to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, nor to David, but to
God. So also may you entreat God to grant you some favors for the love,
which he bears unto his Saints: but ye are not to beg those favors of
the Saints themselves, nor of their Relics, nor of their Images: and having
obtained those favors, you are to repay your thanks, and show your gratitude
to God only, not unto the Saints, nor to any their Relics, or Images. But,
besides all this, you may be sure, that there are innumerable impostures put
upon you concerning Relics, and that, perhaps for the most part, the bones of
knaves are showed to you for the bones of Saints.

The sixth Rock. Merits.
THe Popish Masters extol Meritorious works, especially Alms; and will have
them deserve eternal life: but their intent is, that you, being drawn on with
the hope of so great gain, may put out your money to use into their hands, to
bring in a most plentiful interest of an hundred for one; but in the mean
time they themselves take the money, and make God your debtor both for the
principal, and for the use, in the life to come. And this their bearing you in
hand with hope of so certain, and infallible gain makes the Priests and
Friars to ruffle it out upon your purses: and you for your parts, if you be not
the wiser, and take not heed of this dangerous Rock, shall loose both your
stock and interest; and suffering shipwreck, are like to be drowned in the
gulf of eternal punishment.

Know ye therefore, that the principal works, which are necessary, next after
faith, to obtain remission of sins, and God's grace in this life, with
eternal glory in the next, do consist in the due observation of Gods
Commandments: that so by God's help he may keep sin aloof from him.
These works therefore, which consist in keeping the Commandments, are
necessary, in as much as God will not justify, nor save any man, that
obstinately remains in sin, and resolutely holds on his way in offending
his heavenly Majesty. Therefore a true and lively faith, whereby a Christian
lays hold on Christ, has this operation, that it mollifieth, and sweetneth
his affection, and love toward God, and so it holds him off from sin, and
makes him hate it. But these works being necessary dispositions, without
which God admits none into favor, do not merit any supernatural reward.
For, God does not therefore receive thee into favor, because thou have kept
his Commandments, as though he were bound to receive thee into his favor for
such thy observance: it is not so. In these performances thou have but done thy
duty, removing for thy own behoof the obstakle and impediment of sin, but
God by his mere grace does accept thee as his own: neither were it a
receiving thee into grace, if thy works did deserve grace: for, reward is
given unto desert, nor by way of grace, but by way of Justice. And yet
Justification it self, remission of sins, and adoption to become a son of
an enemy, these come from God, as a mere grace, mere bounty, and mere mercy.
Thou art not therefore to boast of any such works, nor to flatter thy self
for them, nor to acknowledge any merit at all in them: When ye have done all
those things which are commanded you, (says Christ) then say, Luke 17.10.
We are unprofitable servants, we have done that, which was our duty to do.
Moreover, such performances have in the^, for the most part, so much
imperfection, that perhaps they have in them more sin and demerit, then
Merit, in regard of either vain glory, or other humane ends, and such like
faulty circumstances.

Only Christ's Merits are they, which being duly applied unto a man, make God
to hold himself fully satisfied for the dishonor, and offense taken at man,
and by virtue of such, and no other satisfaction, God receives a man in
favor, because he sees him by a lively, and working faith invested in Christ
as with the wedding garment; and for this garments sake he accepts him at the
marriage of glory: but whosoever enters into that heavenly banquet arrayed only
with his own garments, his own works, and proper merits, if he come not in
covered with this nuptial garment of Christ's righteousness, and Merits, he
shall be sure to be cassiered; and cast out into utter darkness, where shall be
wailing and gnashing of teeth. And therefore, not only justification,
remission of sins, adoption into God's Sonneship are to be accounted the free
grace of God, which has no other foundation, then Christ's only Merits,
applied unto man by God's mere grace and bounty, but also essential glory it
self, and eternal life is to be attributed to the same. For, God, when he
adopteth for his son a man justified by him, and that through his mere
grace, for the Merits of Christ only, at the same time also, for full measure
of the same grace, and for the same Merits alone, God does destinate unto him
the everlasting inheritance of the essential glory of Paradise. And therefore
to affirm, that Christians by their good works do purchase eternal life, is
to avouch a gross and sinister falsehood: as also to affirm that good works,
done even in grace, are meritorious of eternal life. For, eternal life is a
mere favor done unto men, being purchased for them by the only Merits of
Christ.

Yet for all this, good works are not to small purpose, or unprofitable to men.
First, because the keeping of the Commandments is always necessary, in such
sort as I have declared; and without them shall no man ever be saved, though no
man be saved by them. Moreover other good works, which of themselves come not
under commandment, are many times very profitable, and sometimes necessary
also for the keeping of the Commandments: as mortification of the flesh, to
the end that concupiscence draw not to disloyalty; for which cause even S.
Paul kept his body under, 1. Cor. 9.27.
and brought it into subjection, lest by any means he, preaching to others,
might himself be a castaway. And for the same cause he exhorted the
Colossians also to mortify their members. Hither look all fastings, Col. 3.5.
watchings, continual prayers, and other such holy exercises; not to any
making God a debtor, nor to any obliging him to recompense them with eternal
life; nor to any hoarding up a treasure of men's own merits, but to resist
evil desires: and therefore a man is bound even under pain of sin to
undergo them for his own behoof, and for the great need, which he has to
stand aloof from sin. To this only purpose long since in my young years,
Monasteries, deserts, solitary places, caves, and dens were replenished, not
to procure merit by such exercises, nor that they might thus purchase
Paradise, but that the loosing of it might be thus prevented, and that the
walk of the Tempter might be stopped, and the near occasions of sin taken
away: Whereas now many Monasteries are the schools of vice, and of many
heinous impieties, and, in a man^er, the proper lodges of sin and Satan; or,
at the best, the Seminaries of ambition, the receptacles of avarice, and the
sties to fat up idle fellows: and generally all of them are the garrisons of
the Popes soldiers, and of his catchpoles for the maintenance of the Papacy,
with all the enormities thereof, by the help of these irregular Regulars, who
are bolstred up with many privileges granted by the Popes, being withdrawn
from the jurisdiction of Bishops, to the end that they may become spies,
champions, and very Pandars to the Papacy, not for venery, but to serve his
turn for worse usurpations, and oppressions.

Another benefit of good works is, that they serve to discharge the obligation,
and debt, wherein every Christian is bound to be answerable in his duty to
God, and to serve him faithfully, and to promote the glory of so great, and
bountiful a Master. A bond-slaue, if he be good, will of himself, without
looking for stripes, seek out occasions faithfully to serve his good Master,
and, doing his deuoire, does not thereupon reckon his diligent service upon the
title of his own loanes, and of his Master's debts. Mat 7.17.
A good tree of it self brings forth good fruit: yet does not the planter
and owner take up that fruit on credit, or account himself a debtor to the
tree; but enioyes the fruit, as his own, and due to him, gramerce his good
planting, and husbanding. To this purpose said Christ, Let your light so shine
before men, Mat. 5.16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your father, which is in
heaven. Likewise Saint Peter makes the same use of them, 1. Pet. 2.12.
That the Gentiles beholding your good works may glorify God. And to this
glorifying of God every of you is bound in duty, nor can challenge any reward
upon so doing.

Moreover good works done in grace, do help on the increase of your love
toward God, and toward your neighbor, and set forward a just man to become
still more just. In relation whereunto some kind of merit, but very improperly
so called, may be attributed unto good works; in that God in his bounty is
content to reward man's imperfect operations, with such increases of his
heavenly gifts, and graces. So Saint Paul exhorts the faithful to serve
righteousness, unto sanctification: Romans 6.16.
that is, that they might become still more holy.

Semblable thereto is that in the Revelation, He that is just, Revel. 22.11.
let him be made just still. Yet is not this any true merit: because the works
of themselves, though done in grace, yet have no proportion to such a reward;
and, if it were not for God's gracious promise, they should never receive such
a reward, as by justice is not due unto them. For, even these works are to be
attributed rather to the grace of God, by whose help they are performed, then
unto man. Therefore God, in bestowing these gifts, does rather reward his own
gifts, and graces, then any work of man. And yet for all this no man can be
said to merit eternal life by his works, as you see.

Lastly, good works performed in the state of grace by the faithful,
(especially those, which in the aforesaid respects do neither directly, nor
indirectly come under necessary obligation) have from God, out of his mere
bounty, and liberality, a promise of reward, which shall be afforded them in
the world to come: And this reward is not the essentials of eternal life it
self, but certain degrees, and ouer-measures of glory. The Psalmist says to
God; Psalm. 62.12.
Thou renderest to every man according to his work. And St. Paul, 2. Cor. 4.17.
Our light affliction works for us an eternal weight of glory. And Christ
himself promises, Marc. 9.41.
that whosoever shall give his Disciples a cup of cold water in his name, shall
not lose his reward. Of which kind of promises the Scripture has plenty: Yet
does it not thereupon follow, that such works are truly merits, or
meritorious. For, that only is true merit, to which the reward is due by
justice, without the intercourse of any favor at all. And, where grace is
afforded, Romans 11.6.
there all merit is excluded. But in these good works grace bears a great
part. First, in that a man does them by the power of grace: and therefore S.
Aug de gra. and lib. arb. c. 6.
Augustine said, that God crowns not man's merits, but his own gifts. Also
because it is out of mere grace that God promises a reward; such promises
being made, not out of justice, but from mere bounty. As when a Prince, not
being obliged to any, proclaims a prize for him, that shall run best in a
race, it is certain that this running is not properly a merit; being it has
no proportion with the prize, which is of great value: and if it were not for
the bounty of the promise, that running were not of any worth at all.

But yet, all these graces being supposed, when as the Scripture willingly
calls by the name of rewards all those gifts, and heavenly remunerations,
which are promised unto works, some kind of merit cannot be denied. For,
surely reward does imply a relation, and correspondence to some merit. But ye
must take with you, that this merit has no relation to the essentials of
eternal life; as also that it supposes all these graces. Whereupon you are
not to rely upon your merits, nor to build the frame of your salvation upon
them; being that Christ is your entire foundation. Therefore put all your
hopes, both in life, and death, in him only, and build no foundation at all,
for your hope of eternal life, and of your everlasting salvation, upon your
own works done, or to be done in pious Legacies, in Masses, in Alms, or for
Altars, or Churches. For, if you do not take another course to obtain
eternal life by a true and lively faith, which works by love, Gal. 5.6.
removing also betimes the obstacles of sin by true, and sincere repentance,
your own merits shall not (much less any others) any whit benefit you, but as
for increase of glory, and augmenting of your joy, good works will be very
helpful to you, so that they be thoroughly purified, and employed on lawful
things, and free from superstition, and evil circumstances.

THus have I discovered to you, my most dear children, twelve principal very
dangerous Rocks: which I have but briefly showed, and little more then pointed
at; inasmuch as I have sure confidence in my Spouse (by who^ I have bin put in
trust to give you the discovery of them) that he will himself at length open
all your eyes. I see, that he has very very long had patience with the many
errors of that, his, and mine, ungrateful daughter, your, not loving mother
(for that am I) but cruel stepdame; and that now, beholding her at her highest,
he will no longer bear with her. He by his gentle Spirit works in the hearts
of great Princes, ( yea and of great Prelates too) his, and my sons: he goes
on taking away the manifold false preiudices, and delusions: he by little and
little mollifieth those obdurations, and obstinacies, whereby enormities, so
prejudicial to me, and so pernicious to you are wilfully maintained. They
begin to acknowledge, that in Rome, not Christ, but the world swayeth the
scepter, and that all my affairs there are reduced to temporal ends only. He
puts these Princes in remembrance, that they are my nursing-fathers, my
protectors, my defendors; and moreover, that it lies on the^, to bring home
all my daughters to me their universal Mother; and not to suffer one of them
to tyra^nize over both her Mother, and other sisters. Whereupon my self, with
very good hope, do expect from Christian Princes, and Co^mon-wealths all good
issue of a perfect peace, union, and concord on my behalf. In the mean time I
advise you, to take good notice of these Rocks, and to take such heed of them,
that ye may eschew your own lamentable wrack. So the blessed gale of the holy
Spirit conduct you safe to the haven of eternal happiness. Amen.

THE AVTHOR TO the godly Readers.
LEt this Manuell, Christian Readers, serve you only for an essay, or
roughdraught of a larger work, wherein the same Heads, which are here but
briefly pointed at, as also other matters bordering thereon, are to be more
particularly prosecuted, and commodiously enlarged. And I hope, that I shall
let in so much light unto you, that you shall by God's grace be enabled to
enterteine many trueths belonging to your souls health, which for long time
have been, with no good meaning, kept out of your sight. If you please to
accept these my first lineaments, you may expect from me the more diligent
accomplishment of the entire work: wherein will appear other Rocks also
worthy the discovering, to the praise of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, to the
safety of our souls, and to the confusion of the Devil. God be with you
evermore.


