The signs that do declare a person to be infected with the PESTILENCE.
1 GReat pain and heaviness in the head.

2 Great heat within the body, and the outward parts cold, and ready to shake,
being thirsty and dry.

3 Some pain and difficulty in breathing.

4 Great desire to sleep, and yet cannot, and sometime is vexed for want of
sleep.

5 Swelling in the stomach with much pain.

6 Diverse and heavy looks of the eyes, seeing all things of one color, as
green or yellow, and the eyes changed in their colors.

7 Loss of appetite, unsavory taste, bitterness of the mouth, sour and
stinking.

8 Wambling of the stomach, and a desire to vomit, and sometime vomiting
humors, bitter, and of diverse colors.

9 Heaviness and dullness in all the body, and a faintness and weakness in
all the limbs.

10 Risings in the neck, under the arm, or in the flank, or in some other
part of the body.

Preservatives against this Disease.
Eat every morning as much as the kernel of a Nut* of this Electuarie which I
shall keep always ready for you; or of Treacle mixed with Conserues of Roses,
or Dioscordium, the quantity of two white Peason. Likewise eat something every
morning before you go abroad, as Butter, Walnuts, Rue, a Potcht-egge with
vinegar, or the like.

Let your chambers be ayred morning and evening with good fires, wherein put
luniper, Frankencense, Storax, Bay-leaues, Vinegar, Rose Water, Rosin,
Turpentine, Pitch, Tar, or Brimstone.

When you go abroad, chew in your mouth, the root of Angelica, Gentian,
^edoarie, Turmentill, or the like.

Also I have prepared Tablets to wear about your neck, of which I did see
great experience the last great Sickness: As also Pomanders to smell too.

Remedies after a person is infected.
1 FIrst, be careful with all speed to use remedies betimes, for delay in this
sickness is dangerous.

2 Secondly, if the sickness begin hot with pain in the head, and the party
be of a full body let him be let blood in the Liver vain in the right arm,
except he feel any soreness, then let him bleed in that arm on the side
grieved.

3 Thirdly, four hours after if he be not let blood, let him take ten
grains; if it be a Child under 7. years old, then take but 5. grains, of
this red powder in a little Methridatam, or in the pappe of an Apple, and one
hour after, drink some possit-Ale, made with Medesweet and Marigold flowers:
keep the bed, and sweat two or three hours, according to strength, but
refrain from sleep next day let him take white powder, one dram, in the
possit*drinke, and sweat as before* do this three, four, and five days: But
be sure he go to stool once a day.

In the steed of the powders, you may take Methridatum one dram and a half*
of the best London Treacle one dram; mix them with Carduus Benedictus, or
Angelica, or Scabious waters, or the possit-drinke before mentioned, and sweat
well, as before.

The Methridatam or London* Treacle, you may have the best that I know, at the
sign of the Angel, over against the great Conduit in Cheape-side, lames Rand.

4 Fourthly, once in four or five hours, take Broth or Mase-Ale in
possit-drinke, wherein boil as before.

If he be very dry, let him take of Syrup of Endive and Sorrel, of each three
ounces; water of Roses and Buglosse, of each one ounce, Syrup of Lymons, two
ounces; mix them, and let him take as often as he is dry one spoonefull.

5 Fifthly, if any sore or botch appear, use means with speed to draw it
forth: as this is very good. Take a great Onion, and cut off the head, and make
a hollow place in the middle* fill that full of good Treacle, put on the head
again, and roast it in the embers: when it is soft roasted peele it, and stamp
it in a mortar, and lay it hot unto the sore, and renew it fresh once in six
hours: Or take this Poultes, two Lilly-rootes, Mallows two handfuls, cut and
bruise them, Linseed, four spoonfuls beaten; boil these in water till they be
soft and thick, then put to them, 12. Figs, Raysins sliced and stoned one
handful, mix and work these with the other, in a mortar, and put to them oil
of Camomile three spoonefuls, warm it, and with a cloth bind it on the sore,
shift this twice a day

When the sore is broken use this, Turpentine one ounce, and the yolke of an
egg, oil of S. John. Wort, Methridatam, of each half a dram, mix al these
together, and lay it on the soar, this will heal it

6 Sixthly, when they are well, before they go abroad, take a purge.

FINIS.

