M. ANTONIUS DE DOMINIS ARCHBISHOP OF SPALATO, Declares the cause of his
Return, out of England.

Translated out of the Latin Copy, printed at Rome this present year.

Vnus Dominus, Vna Fides, Vnum Baptisma.

Ephesians. 4. One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism.

Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XXIII.

To the Reader.
THIS may seem a small work (good Reader) for so great a sca^dall as has
been given by the Author, but it is an abridgement only of another more
large, and ample, that is to ensue; and yet in this, thou may perceive how
men may so far be transported by unbridled passions, as to fall into open
schism, and heresy: on the other side thou may see also, the force and
efficacy of Gods grace in recalling of sinners by true repentance to his love,
and favor. Let the one of these balance the other, and let the latter cancel
the fault of his committed error. 1 Co^silium Profectionis. 2. Co^silium
Reditus.
That was wicked, pernicious, and detestable; this is virtuous, exemplar, and
laudable. The latter counsel is always wont to be more ponderous, grave, and
judicious then the former; especially when as the forformer is recalled by the
latter.

His revolt you will say was scandalous. True. But now --

Vna eade^que manus vulnus ope^que tulit. He has in part made ame^ds for his
former fault by his submissiue confession: and this learned Prelate (as an
unlearned Mynister styled him) Hall in his honor of the married clergy. page ^5.
that had honored the English Church with a Dalmatian Pall, that had passed
over the Alps to leave Rome, that was so potent a Protestant as none of al our
Bandogges durst fasten upon him, has now withdrawn both Pall and Honor from
that Church, has left England, is returned over the Alps to Rome again, and
like a bandog indeed has fastened himself on the English wolves, and bites so
hard as he makes them bleed; and further makes all Protestants to see their
weakness (if yet they have eyes to see) and Hall ibid. in the answer to the
aduertisment.
that the whole Region of Deuines and those so incomparable, that may set Rome
to school, could not defend themselves from open Schism and Heresy; nor
persuade one man, and he such a one as offered himself freely into their
hands, to remain and continue amongst them. Magna est veritas, and praeualet.

Thou may further see, with what care and sincerity our Adversaries write
against us, how they examine the matters they handle, how little truth and
learning, and how much, lies, detractio^s, forgeries, and passionate fancies
are regarded. By these base means, and shameful shifts must heresy be
mantained, Catholics impugned, and injured, all virtue depressed, and trodden
under foot. Let the example of one be a warning unto all, and let the Retreat
of this seduced Bishop make men look on what ground they stand, and not hazard
their salvation, bought with the ransom of our Saviors blood, upon the false,
Heretical, and Schismatic opinions of these times.

The Cause of M. Antonius de Dominis his Return out of England.
EXCELLENTLY (as all other things) does the holy Ghost by the mouth of Saint
Paul reckon amongst the works of the flesh, contentions, emulations, angers,
debates dissentions, and sects: these unfortunate fruits of this wicked tree I
having tasted, or rather out of the corrupt disease of my mind greedily
devoured, have now thought requisite, after the wholesome receite of Gods grace,
to cast up again, and make a perfect euacuation of this contracted filth. This
that I might the more safely and readily do, and my self openly reprehend,
and condemn the manifold errors that have ensued of the wicked resolution of
my former bad departure; I resolved with my self the best course to be,
leaving the school of errors, falsities, and heresies, to return of mine
own accord to the holy Roman Church, the one and only pillar, and singular
foundation of truth, and mother of all Catholics, from which so wickedly I had
departed; and therefore first of all I will explicate this reprehension,
condemning, and detestation of my errors past: after that I will recount other
causes for which I was to leave England, and other heretical countries, and
to return again to the holy Catholic Roman Church.

2. It is a most ancient disease of our corrupt nature, as it were by
inheritance conueighed from our first parent unto all his posterity, that when
we err and do against that which is commanded, we either coin frivolous
excuses: Genes. 3.
The woman whom thou have given me etc. or else defend our faults, and with
the counterfeit garment of justice, and virtue, labor all we can to mask and
cover them. This to have befallen unto me I do both confess, and lament. The
disease of my soul wherewith I was sick before my departure was, in that I
trusted to much to my own prudence against that wholesome counsel of the
Wiseman, Proverb. 3.
ne innitaris prudentiae tuae, and out of the confidence of my small wit, being
of so small reach I judged too rashly of matters of Faith: besides this a
certain frenzy of rage, not that which some ignorant companions only wise in
their own conceit, objected unto me when I was to return out of England, for
that, forsooth, certain Promotions, which in vain I thirsted after were
denied me, but altogether caused of my unreasonable impatience whiles I took
it most grievously to be under them, of whom in the Book of the causes of my
departure I have without all cause complained: these things carried me upon the
shelfs and sands, these did beat my bark against the rocks, these sharpened
my wit to pestiferous thoughts, these were the cause why I fondly feigned
errors of the Roman Church, whereby I might excuse my departure; these finally
cast me on those extreme coasts, where I went, and that I might seem to have
done well, and in some sort endeavor to avoid the imputation of imprudency and
rashness, and of heresy also, first for defense of my departure I set forth my
purpose and intention in the same, then other volumes, and books fraught with
such things as either the art of feigning, or forging suggested, or the wisdom
of the flesh did prompt unto me: and vvhiles the sickness boiled in my breast
within, and the stings of wrath did prick my exulcerated mind, the itch of my
tongue, and pen did break forth into an impostume. Many things which
heretics, enemies of the Sea Apostolic did believe, affirm, and profess,
seemed to me, now blinded by my self to be credible, some to be true; when as
yet I had never brought these controversies to the touchstone of true divinity,
nor had thoroughly discussed them, for I had not ended any part of the
Ecclesiastical Commonwealth in which I had determined to treat of points of
religion, and rules of faith; nor yet had I so much as begun it, howsoever in
the book of the cause of my departure I said, that I had already finished all
these books. Hence it came that I rashly relying on the slanders of heretics
and not on the Catholic faith, entitled one of my books, Of the cause of my
departure, and another in Italian, The rocks of Christian shipwreck, and
another A certain sermon, which I filled full of errors, and heresies for the
most part, in hatred of the holy Roman Church, and Sea Apostolic, and of those
Popes by whom I thought my self to have been injured; and affirmed those and
many other things which before I knew to be false, and heretical, and after
at least in part, my self misliked, and did whils I wrote in England from my
heart detest them, because they conteyne open heresies, against the Catholic
truth, and are contrary to sound doctrine; I mean to that which the Catholic
Roman Church has always held, and holds at this day: against which
whatsoever, or whersoeuer is written or said by me, that in all and every part I
do condemn and detest; and I will better, and more at large by Gods help,
condemn and detest the same, in the confutation of my books of the
Ecclesiastical Commonwealth, and other books that I have written against the
truth: for I submit my self, and all my books to the most holy judgment, and
censure of the holy Roman and Apostolical Sea, the mistress and guide of all
other Churches.

3. In the mean time here in this exchange for a new, and sounder resolution,
I most detest the former of my departure, the Infamous Rocks of the
shipwrackes, of my self especially, and heretics, but not of Catholics, and
moreover the Sermon mentioned; neither shall I shame by casting of the garments
which I had made for myself, to show my nakedness, because I was not ashamed
against all law and conscience to break forth into vain fictions, open
slanders, and filthy heresies. Dioscorides l. 6. c. 44.
The sting, and poison of the scorpion by bruzing of the same scorpion that
stong, has a present remedy. If the voluntary breaking, and bruzing of my
self bring remedy to this poisoned wound (in case any so wounded have repented
him himself) I shall esteem this my bruzing, deiection, and mortification for
happy: let the glory of the Catholic Church and Sea Apostolic stand
immovable, yea even with the greatest loss of temporal goods that can befall
me; and since that so wickedly I have gone about to weaken, and infring it,
this course cannot (at least before God) but be glorious unto me.

4. First therefore I confess, and in conscience truly, and sincerly testify
that I wrote that book of the Cause of my departure, and the other two, to wit
the Rocks, and Sermon, not out of sincerity of heart, not good conscience, not
out of vnfeygned faith, but that I might cast some colorable excuse on my
shameful departur, and that I might be the more gratfull, and welcome unto the
heretics, to whom like a wretch I went, or with whom I did converse. The ten
years labor which I bragged of in the book of my departure, was not employed
in maturity of deliberation, gravity of judgment, discussion of truth, but all
that while I studied how to finish that vain, fruitles, and pernicious work
of the Ecclesiastical commonwealth, and coin bold, and heretical fictions,
and withal satisfy the impotent force of mine own rage; in so much as that
vocation was not divine, but diabolical, not inspired by the holy Ghost, but
suggested by a bad spirit, vexing me worse then it did Saul with the spirit of
giddines: 2. Reg. 18 v. 10.
but for my return I doubt not but that it is to be ascribed unto Gods true
vocation, his divine spirit calling me back to my Mother, the holy Catholic
Church.

5. I said, that the behavior of the court of Rome was the cause why I should
for ever abhor it: I am not ignorant, that herein I spoke ill, for there were
not wanting then, nor yet are at Rome very many co^spicuous examples of piety,
and all Christian virtues which are able to delight, and allure religious, or
well disposed mynds. I said that out of the forbidding of heretical books to
be read, do spring evil suspitio^s which get credit to the books of heretics,
and induce men to believe somewhat to be in them which Catholics could not
confute, and this I acknowledge to have been spoken by me, not without great
injury to the Catholic says, who have found in their books, I mean of
heretics, false, heretical, scandalous, and pestiferous doctrine, from
reading of which, least the Faithful be infected they are worthily to be
restrained: for not unto private men who read those books, but unto the
Pastors, the judgment of faith has ever and does still appertain, that they
may know which are poisoned pasturs, and remove their flocks far from them.
Moreover the arguments of heretics are deceytfull, sophistical, and have most
easy solutions. I affirmed the doctrine of those who oppose themselves to the
Church of Rome, nothing at all, or very little to degenerate from the pure
doctrine of the primitive Church, and this also is false: for the opinions in
which they differ from Catholics, are all of them most contrary to those which
that Church held, and nothing can convince them more certainly of error the^
the authority of the ancient Church from which they by these noueltyes have
very far departed: in so much as for this cause they are condemned as heretics
by the Church of Rome: it is therefore to be detested, and I do detest that
which I said, Therefore the religion of Protestants to be condemned of the
Church, because it is contrary to the sense, and corrupted manners of the Court
of Rome. I said, that in Rome by extreme violence were coined new articles of
belief, and this truly I did say both against my knowledge and conscience, for
I never saw any such matter, nor any man else, as most certainly I know, for
none can say that there are new articles coined, when there are only added the
true declaratio^s and explicatio^s of the true articles, and those gathered out
of the holy scripturs, traditions of the Fathers, and very rules of religion.
Again I endeavored to deprive the Roman Church of the titles of Catholic, and
Universal, wherein I exceedingly erred: for by the Roman Church is not
understood that special, and particular Church alone, which is at Rome, but
the collection of all other Churches adhering to the Roman in unity of the same
faith, and subjection to the same chief Bishop, wheresoever they be, albeit in
the uttermost coasts and corners of the earth. And doubtless this is most true,
and of me, both by word of mouth, as England it self can testify, and in my
written treatises of the Eccleclesiasticall commonwealth, and in that part
which last of all (I hear) is printed in Germany, I have euinced, that there
is no other Catholic Church but the Roman, understanding thereby that
particular with the other adhering thereunto; whereas all other companies of
Christians are defiled with heresies, and being by schism divided and
separated from the truth, are out of the Catholic, universal, and true Church
of Christ; and these blind souls with their blind guides, rush and fall
headlong into the pit of hell, which I in my error most wickedly and without
grievous injury affirmed of the Roman Catholics: for from the Roman Church at
all times to all other Churchs the most shining light of the pure and
incorrupted faith has flowed, and at this present flows. I remember also,
that in the preface of my books of the Ecclesiastical commonwealth, I used
certain words, by which I insinuated all such to be in the Catholic Church,
who had received baptism in the name of the Trinity; but albeit the words have
an ill sound, and make all heretical Churches true and sound members of the
true Catholic Church, which is most false, and heretical, yet my meaning was,
that the Arian, Nestorian, Eutichian, all heretical and condemned Churches in
times past, should be excluded, and only the true belieuers to be retained:
which true belieuers I thought then to be many more then indeed they are, and
many Churches tainted with these latter Heresies, and by Schism divided, I
erroneously judged to pertain to the Catholic; but though the Catholic
Church be so denominated for her Universality, yet this Universality includes
no other then the true orthodoxe, or right believing Churches, spread over the
whole world, which remain in unity with the Roman. And truly the universality
of the Roman Church does consist not only in the continual durance never yet
interrupted, or ever after to be, and constance of sound belief, but also is
universal, because the self same faith of Rome, and supreme government are
extended after the coming of Christ to all places, and all Nations: for which
respect even in these latter ages, it is no less to be termed Catholic, then
it was in the time of the ancient Fathers, because the faith of the Roman
Church even at this time, is propagated in the most remote, and vast regions of
the East and West Indyes, even unto the furthest corners of the earth; in so
much as the children of this Church even in these days passing by continual
travel from the rising of the Sun unto the setting, and carrying with them
the Faith of Christ, and offering clean sacrifices, that now may be said
especially to be fulfilled, which God pronounced by the mouth of Malachy:
Malach. 1. v. 11.
Ab ortu solis vsque ad occasum magnum est nomen meum in gentibus, and in omni
loco sacrificatur, and offertur nominimeo oblatio munda. From the rising of the
sun unto the setting my name is great amongst the Gentills, and in every
place there is sacrificed and offered unto my name a pure oblation. Neither was
it a less injury, and slander, when I said that I had noted very many
noueltyes, and errors of the Court of Rome; which novelties, which errors, I
neither now, or ever yet noted, and I acknowledge it to be most false, and
confess it for such, that ever there were, or are in Rome such errors, out of
which the ruin, and slaughter of souls does proceed, the peace of the Church
is troubled, or public scandalls have, or do arise; truly next after God all
peace of the Catholic Church, her total tranquillity, and the everlasting
salvation of souls is to be ascribed to the care, and solicitude of the Roman
Church. I said, that the more potent Bishops under the Bishop of Rome were but
equivocal, or counterfeit Bishops: and this saying co^teins no less falsehood
then injury in it, and therefore as raylatiue I condemn it; for they are true,
and lawful Bishops, made by lawful ordination. I affirmed others who were not
Potentates, and Princes to have lost the proper dignity and power of Bishops:
and truly this is also a slander, for hierarchical subordinatio^ in the Church
has been always necessary: much more do I condemn as an heresy that which I
said, the Church no longer to remayn under the Bishop of Rome; for as before I
specifyed, and earnestly avouched only the Church of Rome with the rest
adhering thereunto, is the true Church of Christ, and that others are no Churchs
at all. And to conclude much in few, I perceive that in the first book of my
departure, I specially endeavored to infringe the primacy of the B. of Rome,
in which point I deny not, but that I spoke against the faith of the whole
Catholic Church, and therefore greatly to have erred, for both by the
Evangelical ordinance, traditions of the Apostles, definitions of the holy
Synods, and General Counsels, by very many decrees of Popes, and common
testimony of Fathers, and ecclesiastical histories, it is manifest, and clear
the B. of Rome always to have been taken for head of the whole Church, to have
been so appointed by Christ our Lord, and always to have been taken for a
singular oracle, to whom no less the East then the West, in all doubts of
faith should sue for instruction of belief, definition, and secure doctrine,
as a master appointed us by God, who should by his office teach and direct his
Church, any scholar may observe very many examples in which the Bishops of
Rome direct the Patriarchs, and Bishops of the East, they warn them, rebuke
them, teach them, condemn them, absolve them, depose them, restore them,
control them, and that even out of their office, and power over them; and the
others checked by the Popes, humbly gave them ear, obeyed, resisted not, or
reclaymed; and briefly, it is clear by the confession of all the Catholic
Church, the whole spirit of Christ, for determining of these things which
belong unto faith, to reside in the sole, and one visible supreme head of the
same Church, which is only the Pope, the chief Bishop, and S. Peter's
succcessor.

5. I freely confess that the book which I called the Rocks of Christian
shipwreck did exceedingly displease me presently after that it was set forth,
for without all choice had of the matter, without all discussion or search of
truth I hudled it up, that I might some way or other please the Englismen,
after my arrival amongst them; in writing of which I considered, and laid open
not what was true, but what pleased best the enemies of the Church, especially
the vulgar, and unlearned multitude: and this book whiles I was in England,
and preparing for my departure being objected unto me by the King, and other
men, I did in plain words detest it, and my self withstood the greater part
of heresies which it conteynes, and as far as I was able impugned them: al
which here again I reject, abhor, and detest. The heresies were these. The
B. of Rome not to be Christ's vicar on earth, and visible head of his Church;
that he had no power over temporal things; implicit faith to avail nothing
but much to hurt the faithful; the excommunications of the law to be vain
buggs; the commandments of the Church not to bind under mortal sin; the
unity of the Church not to be taken from one visible head; the Pope to be the
capital eenemy of the whole Church; the Mass to be no true sacrifice; the
ceremonies of the Mass to be light Comical gestures, no transsubstantiation to
be made; auricular confession with absolution to be no true Sacrament; that
there is no purgatory; satisfaction for release of the punishment after that
the fault is forgiven not to be necessary; no Indulgences to be, but of such
penaltyes only as are imposed; the Saints not to be inuocated; the worship of
Relikes, and Images not to be lawful; that there is no merit of good works to
everlasting life. These, and the the like errors, and manifest heresies not so
much mine, and new, as of the ancient, and modern heretics, and their
bablings, and doting dreams, condemned always by the Catholic Church in
many holy general Counsels, are miserable rocks unto which such as approach
make lamentable shipwreck of their faith and everlasting salvation; and
therefore I fly from them as far as I am able: and least that I should have
been cast away upon them in England, I was of necessity to depart from
thence, and rerurne to the true Church, the port and harbor of Catholics,
and forsake, detest, anathematize or accurse all the foresaid errors, and
whatsoever others if there be any other in those books, which agree not with
the faith expressed in the sacred Counsels, especially in the late Council of
Trent: on the other side I embrace, and aver the contrary truths, to wit, the
chief Bishop of Rome by Christ's iustitution to be his Vicar on earth; to be
the visible head of the militant Church which always has been visible, with
full power received from God to govern and order the same; the same Bishopp of
Rome to have power over temporal things in ordine ad spiritualia; the
implicit faith to be profitable, and sometimes necescessary, as when one
without his fault has no express faith, or belief of some articles; the
excommunications of the law, or delivered ipso facto, to be of force, and to be
feared, as induced by exceeding great reason, and lawful power; the Popes to
be able to excommunicate all faithful people of what place, or country
soever, in case they deserve to be so censured, the commandments of the
Church bynd all under mortal sin to observe them; the unity of the Church
chiefly to depend upon the one, visible head thereof; the B. of Rome to be the
true, lawful, and toward the sheep of Christ as it behooves, the profitable
Pastor of the whole Church, the only eternal salvation of which I desire he
may always thirst, and seek with all care; in in the Mass to be offered up
unto God a true, proper, and propitiatory sacrifice, the ceremonies of the
Mass ordained by the Fathers, and Pastors of the Church by the inspiration of
the holy Ghost, to be holy, mystical, profitable, and by all means to be
retained; transubstantiation to be made in the Sacrament of the Altar, that is
the conversion of turning of the whole substance of bread into the body, and of
the whole substance of wine into the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; by
Sacramental absolution whereby the priest absolues the penitent, to be
exercised a true and proper power of binding, and losing sins, which our Lord
gave to the ministers of his Sacraments in the Church, to be purgatory in that
manner, as the holy Roman, and Apostolic Church teaches it to be granted;
satisfaction to be much avayleable for the releasement of the punishment after
that the sin is forgiven; the use of pardons in the Catholic Church to whom
Christ has given power to bestow them, to be most ancient, most soueraygne,
and approved by the authority of holy Councels; the Saints not only without all
error of the faithful to be inuocated, but further that it is good, and
profitable to have recourse to their prayers, and help; the worship of
Relics, and images to be good, lawful, and profitable; which cannot be
abrogated without the spot of heresy; the merit of eternal life to depend of
our good works. The later General Councels which are of supreme authority in
the Church, my stomak being over charged with ill humors, I did often despise,
especially the Counsels of Florence, and Trent, many times also that of
Constance, and through my procuring a certain history came forth in print of
the Council of Trent, of the truth of which history I had no certainty, yea it
is worthily suspected of imposture: in these things also I confess that I
erred very much, for I affirm all the most wholesome decrees of these Counsels
with full faith to be embraced by all the Catholics.

6. In a certain sermon of mine had in Italian at London the first sunday in
Aduent, and printed, I set down these errors, which being after repeated
again in the book of the Rocks, now I have worthily detested. In that sermon
I framed a certain night of papal errors in the Roman Church, whereas indeed
in the Roman Church alone and others conjoined therewith there is true light,
the true, and only most shining day, out of which (in England especially) is
continual, and most dark night. In the Church of Rome, the light of truth,
the true, and sincere understanding of the holy scriptures drives far away from
it all the darkness of errors, with which darkness miserable England being
ouercast, groapeth like a blind man at noone day. I said in the same sermon,
and reiterated again in the book of the Rocks, that S. Peter was never at
Rome, but this as a soul, and ignorant lie I freely confess is to be
condemned. I made all the Apostles in planting, and governing the Church to be
equal, whereas notwithstanding the supremacy of S. Peter over them is clear
by the very gospells and Apostolical traditions. I affirmed the Bishops to
succeed the Apostles with equal power, and to be Bishops in solidum of the
Universal Church, whereas yet Bishops are but Pastors of particular Churchs,
and have but a particular charge, the general primacy being reserved to him
who in the same succeeds S. Peter who is the B. of Rome, and chief Pastor. I
said that holy water, graynes, crosses, hallowed images, Papal, and Episcopal
blessings, the stations, diversity of habits, cords, leather girdles, visiting
Churches, and Altars, beads, processions, and the like to be toys; when as it
sufficiently appears, almost all of these things to be ancient and allowed
in the Catholic Church, which use is to be continued, yea even in those
things which are more fresh inducements to piety and devotion. I affirmed that
there were only two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Supper; whereas yet the
Catholic Church lightened by the holy ghost, does plainly teach and define that
there be seven true Sacraments: all which, and what other heresies soever
condemned by the Catholic Roman Church, I do also condemn, and with firm
faith believe, hold, and profess the contrary to these heresies defined by the
same: for it is most certain, that in the decrees of the holy Roman Church,
reason is not severed from authority, and the school doctrine especially in
articles religion, to be altogether conformable to the sense, or doctrine of
the holy Fathers. This further I confess, that I have without cause complained
in my books of the Court of Rome, as if it had usurped authority belonging to
others; for unless that Church out of her lawful authority over Archbishops and
Bishops keep them both in order, the violating of all laws will easily follow
by their dissension. It is truly the greatest happiness of the Church, when her
inferior Pastors under one most vigila^t Pastor receive and execute from him
who has supreme authority over all, reformation of life, and the charge of
sound, and sincere doctrine. And truly should not the mild, and Fatherly care
of the holy Inquisition watch attentively over our Lords flock, the scabbed
sheep would find no cure, and that most wicked infectio^ would soon far and
near spread it self. The ordinary armor of that tribunal are sound doctrine
and instruction full of charity, and not these others which I out of my
exulcerated mind have with so many falsityes, and slanders exaggerated: but in
case the festered soars do not yield to lenitiue medicines, then is it both
fit, and necessary that the Physician apply more sharp, and corrosiue plasters.

7. But now even the inward fire of the diseases of my mind did rage almost by
miracle, after the entrance of Gregory the fifteenth to the government of the
Church (whose emine^t piety, singular wisdom, and continual sanctity of a
most innocent life, I indeed believed to have advanced him to that high
honor) I began to think of some more healthful course, the holy ghost
enlightening me with the beams of his grace, in so much that now the dangers of
my soul in the state I lived in, began to show themselves every day more
clearly unto me, and I now wo^dered that I had gone so far in folly, and
error, that I would conioyne my self with them who were heretics, and
plain, and absolute scismaticks. Such in times past was the guilefull deceit
of a few Arrians in the Council of Arimini, that by secret collusion they had
as it were drawn almost all the Catholics into Arianisme, tunc (says S.
Hierome) Hieron. co^tra Luciferianos.
totus mundus ingemuit, and miratus est se esse Arrianum, then all the world
groaned, and merueyled to see it self become Arrian: so (alas) and much worse
it befell me, that I saw, wondered, and lamented my self an heretic amongst
heretics, and scismatick among scismaticks. And that the Englishmen compain
not of me that I do them wrong, but that they may know my departure from the^
and return to my mother the holy Catholic Church to have been lawful, and for
just cause, I am constrained to lay open their heresy, and schism with which
it was no way convenient, that I should be further entangled or taynted.

8. In England (if we speak of Religion) are many sects: there are Purita^s,
or rigid Caluinists: there are more moderate who call themselves only
Protestants, and Reformed: there are Anabaptists, and those divided into diverse
sects: neither want there Arrians, Photinians and such like raffe of lewd me^,
who albeit they be not allowed openly to profess their errors, yet are they
not banished the land, nor punished at home, but are tolerated, whiles in the
mean time they spread their poison, and infect others: that the Anabaptists
hold many heresies none that is not an Anabaptist will deny but they in England
freely have their conuenticles, and his Majesty himself one day told me, that
lately in London, at the asse^bly of the Anabaptists, a woman had made a
sermon, and ministered their Sacraments. The heresies of the Puritans are
notorious, to wit, that there is no free will, God to be Author of sin, God
merly, because so it pleases him to damn many; Christ not to have dyed for all,
to have undergone the punishment of hell, that infants baptized be damned etc.
the more moderate Protestants, although they go about, touching points of
doctrine, to free themselves in some sort from heresy, because they do not
admit entirely the heresies either of Calvin or Luther, if they follow the pure
doctrine of the English Church, which they call Reformed; yet can they not so
escape or rid their hands from Puritans and Anabaptists with whom they fully
communicate: and if any Anabaptist or Puritan come to their Ecclesiastical
Conuenticles, they neither avoid him, nor exclude him; yea almost all the
Puritan Ministers handle, and minister the very Sacraments of the false English
Church unto all comers, at least unto all Caluinists. And if Acacius of
Constantinople, for that he had communicated with Peter Mogge an heretic of
Alexandria, and if all the East Church for persisting in communion with Arrius,
was separated by a long anathema or curse from the Roman, and West Church; how
much more are the Protestants of England to be esteemed for heretics, because
they continually communicate which heretics; neither do they condemn them; or
deny them their company, but rather admit them all that will communicate in
their ceremonies, rites, and Sacraments with the English Church? Does not the
deformed Church of England publicly and plainly profess communion, and
Ecclesiastical league or fryendship with Geneua the mother of Puritans, and all
other forrayn Caluinists? Are there not even in London the Kings City, and
that by public grant of the King, Churches of the French, Flemish and
Italian Caluinists, which hate and abhor the doctrine, profession, and rites
of England, and yet are most dearly beloved sisters of the English Synagogue?
And by them Puritanisme is especially maintained, and set forward in England.
Moreover with the Luthera^s, polluted with very many heresies, the English
Sinagogue is most ready to communicate, and labors all that it can, to the end
that these mo^sters of many heads may like Hercules hydra agree in one body,
and a union (as they term it) be made of all the reformed Churches: but of
purging the faith and doctrine of these different sects, and rooting out their
heresies no care is had; and yet the Lutherans hate the Sacramentaries cane
peius, and angue. Other heresies of Englishmen concerning faith, and good
works, and justification, as also the B. Sacrament, private Masses, Merits of
good works, praying unto Saints, worshipping of holy Images, holy rites and
ceremonies, the souls of the departed, and the like, which they out of an
heretical spirit do condemn, and abolish, and which I with the same spirit
in part have once condemned, and abolished, I mean not now further to
discuss; somewhat (I mean as much as this place requires) I shall after
touch, and more else where in a larger work. I come to their schism.

9. Sure I am that the English Sect which the deformed English men call the
Reformed Church, to be more divided, and separated from the Church truly
Catholic then they are themselves divided from the whole world, diuisos toto
orb Britannos. That they are perfectly divided from the Roman Church, and
other Churches subject thereunto, and commumunicating with the same in Religion
and faith, they will themselves willingly confess, and the thing is most
evident, most notorious. Now whereas the Roman Church with the others aforsaid
is truly and properly according to the Cath. Faith, the Cath. Church of Christ,
does it not necessarily follow the English Church as they call it, to be clean
cut of from the Catholic Church, and consequently that it is not the body of
Christ, nor his house, nor, absolutely speaking, to be called a Church? Which
when at length I plainly perceived, I was no longer to ^emain therein. They will
object, and say, ^s this now plain unto thee, who yet in ^hy book of
Ecclesiastical common wealth did style Rome, Babylon, who did deny the
Church of Rome, who did teach us that it was properly schismatical; but that
which thou affirmest of our Church does not so plainly appear unto us. So
they. Wherefore I shall go about to make this point evident unto the English, who
know full well that I am not Pithagoras whose only authority among his scholars
for any thing that he said, was held for best proof: let the^ not therefore be
moved with those things I have said, without other argument, yea further let my
words want their weight, and credit eue^ where I bring my reasons and proofs,
if they be found to be weak and feeble. Truly my reason on which I relied, when
I made Christian Rome to be Babylon, was because the prophesy o^ S. John could
no be explicated of Rom^ as it was heathen, before it embraced the faith of
Christ. Apocalip. 8.
But this reason is of no force; for albeyt that this were granted, yet it
follows not that the Christian Rome is Babylon, for it is the opinion o^ many
Catholic interpreters, that in the persecution of Antichrist, the heathen
Idolaters, and enemies of Christ are perhaps to subdue Rome; and that of them
this prophesy not yet accomplished may conveniently be understood: yet so, as
the faith of the Catholic Church stil^ continue safe, and sound; by this
interpretation my affection of Rome as Christian, is ouerthrown, and conteyns
in i^ a mere slander; for I know the Christian Rome not to be Babylon, nor
that it can without exceeding injury be so called* But God forbid that in this
prophesy o^ the Apocalypse, we should conceive the Roman Church it self the
mother of all Churches, and head of Religion, hertofore ^o have been, or
herafter that it shall be Ba^ylon, for those things which are spoken of the
City, are not to be transferred or explicated of the Church. I denied the
Church to be at Rome, but proved it not, and therefore that deny all is to be
^laced amongst my curses and raylings, ^ea also amongst my heresies, especial^y
my self refuting the same, by reason in my other works, in which strongly I
^aue affirmed the Roman Church with ^he others adherent to be the true and on^y
Catholic Church of Christ, and now ^oe as much as I can profess, and aver the
^ame. I said that it had made a schism; ^ut then I said it, when as yet I had
no ^xact knowledge of schism or nature ^herof, and I erred grossly herin,
because it ^s a manifest falsity: the argument brought ^or the contrary is of
no moment, and co^^ludeth nothing; for he who being law ^ully made head of any
body, and does so ^ile and proclayme himself, does not ^eperate himself from
the body, neither ^oth he cast away the body from him, ^ut joins himself
unto it, which is a far different thing from schism; but this I will further
prosecute in the reuiew, and correction of that work: now only I declare how
it is evident to me that the Englishmen, and much more a^ Sectaryes of our age
are truly, and properly Schismatics, for that without all lawful cause they
have cut themselves from the true Church of Christ, which is the Catholic
Roman Church, and all those that communicate therewith.

10. Two causes only there may be of lawful separation, that one or more
Churches of Christ, may wholly repel one or more Churches from their
communicating with them, without the incurring of schism: the one is heresy,
the other schism it self. The heretical^ Churches that are incorrigible are
to b^ eschewed of Catholics, who are to hau^ no Ecclesiastical communion with
the^* This is a point well known among^ Christians. I often demanded of the
Englishmen why they separated themselves from the Roman Church, takin^ the same
as it comprizeth all other besides that adhere thereunto; was it for an^ heresy?
But truly none of them al could either in writing, or by word of mouth show
either the Roman Catholics of of our times, or our Predecessors, in their
public profession to be, or have been tainted with any true heresy. The most
sovereign King of great Britain plainly, and publickely granted this unto
me: this the wiser of their chief, and inferior Ministers granted, and many
other learned men affirmed the Church of Rome not to err in the fundamental
faith: wherefore by the grant of English Protestants this Church is not
heretical. They will object perhaps, the Church of Rome not to err in the
fundamental faith (which I in the book of the causes of my departure, and in
the sermon made at London seemed to defend) but to err, and to have fallen
into heresy in other not fundamental articles; but first of all I know not
what article there is of true faith which is not fundamental: neither could I
ever conceive, or were they able to explicate, how that distinction should be
admitted amongst the articles of faith, that some were fundamental, and some
not; for truly I always judged all and every of those articles which are truly
to be fu^dame^tal, but I erred in this that from the number of fundamental,
and consequently from the true articles, I excluded many which are indeed
articles of faith, and consequently were all fundamental, and cannot without
heresy be denied, howsoever they be not of these principal, of the Trinity,
Incarnation, Necessity of grace, Baptizing in the name of the Trinity etc. as
are the Sacraments, Justification, the necessity of works, merits,
indulgences, and the like which before I set down, as now defined by the
Church, because these no less rely on Gods revelation then the former, and
therefore as much belong unto faith as they, for he who makes God deceitful in
any one article whatsoever, he must necessarily acknowledge him to be
deceiptfull in all the rest: again I demanded of such as mea^t sincerely that
they would produce but one article, in which the Roman Church does hold, and
teach amiss: they are wont to urge that of Transubstantiation of bread and
wine into the body, and blood of Christ, out of which they gather certain
heresies, to wit, Christ not to have a true body, but a fa^tasticall one,
because we put the whole body in so little a compass, or quantity of bread, in
so much say they, as the body is no more a body: again, that Christ is not in
heaven if he be on the altar on earth, against the article of his Ascensio^:
finally Christ not to have been borne of the Virgin Mary, because that we do
make him of bread. In these men truly that is veryfyed which S. Hierom writes,
In Epist. ad Titum c. 3.
nullum esse Schisma quod non sibi aliquam haeresim confingat, vt merito ab
Ecclesia recessisse videatur. There is no schism which frames not to it self
some heresy, that it may seem with some reason to have departed from the
Church. And as for Tra^substantiation which the Catholics teach, that is most
far from these heresies, for in this all the properties of a body are out of
danger from being destroyed, although we grant the same body to be contained
under never so little forms and accidents of bread: albeit these propertyes in
ordine ad locum, as they are referred to place, which is a thing extrinsecall
to the body, may by Gods power be separated, which thing is fully explicated by
the school Doctors; but what heresy can they imagine in us, if we do al
constantly affirm that we believe as an article of faith, Christ to have had
and still to have a true body with all natural propertyes, in it self, which
propertyes we believe and confess by the same omnipote^t power may be
preserved although the body be reduced to never so little an external place;
neither can any by Thelogical proof infring the same: humane Philosophy
neither can, nor must measure Gods power, let that judge what can be done by
nature, but those things that are above nature, let it reverence, but not
judge: neither does it follow hence, Christ's body not to be in heaven but on
the altar: we all by divine faith believe Christ have ascended into heaven, and
there for ever to sit at the right hand of his father; notwithstanding we
affirm that by divine power one and the self same body may be in many places
at once, at least sacramentally, and this cannot be impugned, but only out of
humane Philosophy, and seeming arguments: and lastly we say not the body to be
made of bread, as if it had not been before, but we hold the bread to be
transubstantiated into the body of Christ, which body did preexist, or was
before the consecration, and before transubstantiation, the body of Christ
borne of the Virgin Mary is extant and existent, into which the bread is
transubstantiated; truly these men do ignorantly forge these heresies, for he
is an heretic who directly vtters heresy: but if they ask of us what we
believe of the truth of Christ's body, of the Ascension, of the Incarnation,
they shall hear us deliver the true, and Catholic belief, notwithstanding
that we affirm other things out of which they imagine to follow these
erroneous opinions, which we utterly, and truly deny to follow of them, and
they cannot Theologically convince us to the contrary. In so much then as
pertains unto heresy, they can pretend no cause wherefore they have justly,
and for good cause separated themselves from our Church, therefore they made an
unlawful schism.

11. The more moderate English Protestants that are not Purita^s, urge not much
the heresy of the Roman Church, nor from that ground free themselves from the
foul spot of schism, but they urge fiercely idolatry, and obtruding of new
articles of faith, by which means they will have the Roman, that is the
Catholic Church, to have fallen from the true faith, and hereby chiefly they
defend the equity of their separation; this idolatry they will have to consist
in the worship, and invocation of Saints, and reverence of Relikes, and Images,
and most of all in the Adoration of the B. Sacrament: and a more secret
Idolatry they will have to lie lurking in the confidence we repose on salt,
water, oil, and other things exorcised and blessed: they also co^plain of new
articles thrust upon them by Catholics, in the definitions of the Council of
Trent, about Justification, Works, Merits, Purgatory, Indulgences, and the
like; but all in vayn. Certainly if we Catholics were indeed Idolaters, we
should not only be heretics, but much worse then most heretics, and
therefore ought to be avoided, and altogether separated far from all the
faithful. And I wonder how any man that is in his right wits, can charge them
with idolatry, who daily profess themselves to believe in one God, and for
this ground, or foundation of faith are ready to shed their blood; who daily
preach and teach that no divine worship can be given to any pure Creature. This
then is a base slander. Are we for our inuocating of Saints, worshipping of
images, adoration of the B. Sacrament held guilty or suspected with these men
of idolatry? Let them seek, let them understand, let them penetrate what we
hold of the unity of the true God, what of divine honor not to be imparted
unto creatures, and then they shall presently perceive all such to be very
Sots, who judge and affirm us to be idolaters, that is worshippers of
creatures with divine honor; neither let them break out into open schism,
until they have found in our doctrine and practice, true Idolatry.

12. No Catholic ever avouched dead men, or Angels to be worshipped with
divine honor; we are not such fools. Vigilantius in times past objected this
unto the Catholics, but falsely as S. Hier. writing against him does show: and
in this as in other things of this nature, we have the ancient Fathers, our
good masters, from them we do not dissent, we do not depart, we do not
disagree: we willingly embrace and most exactly practice their most wholesome
doctrine, and every way Catholic, touching the worshipping of Saints Originis
lib. 8. contra Celsum. Epiphanij haeres. 79. August. Epist. 44. and libro de
quantitate animae cap. 34. and lib. de vera relig. cap. 55. and contra Faustum
lib. 23. cap. 21. Cyrilli Alexand. lib. 6. contra Iulianum. Theodoreti in
historia Sa^ctorum Patrum cap. 21. I cite not the words of these, and other
Fathers because the shortness of this small treatise does not comport it. From
whence then have these late blind masters borrowed their new eyes, when as the
Catholic Church long ere they were born was most excelle^tly furnished with
most resplendent, most secure, and shining la^ps of learning and sanctity?

13. Festiual days belong unto the honor of Saints, which we celebrate in
their remembrance, praising God and thanking him, that he has advanced mortal
men, and sinners to so high a degree of holiness: neither is this a late nouelty
in the Church by annual devotion to keep festival days in the honor of
Saints; it is an ancient use, (and so ancient that it may well be referred to
the tradition of the Apostles) that besides the So^day, the birth-daies of
Saints should be kept holy; which thing I see approved by the ancient custom
of the Church. I find S. Cyprian very careful to have the days noted, Lib. 3.
Ep. 6.
in which the Christians were martired, vt talibus (says he) celebre^tur hic a
nobis oblationes, and sacrificia ob co^memorationes ipsoru^, that on those
days they suffered we in remembrance of them may celebrate here the oblatio^s,
and sacrifices. S. John Chrysostom, and S. Augustine exhort the faithful to
the due observance of the feasts of Saints. Chrysostom. sermon. in martyrem
Pelagiam. Augu. in Psalm. 88. part. 2. in fine.
Wherefore I cannot but exceedingly merueil at the new scruples of Protestants,
not soberly So the Protestants translate non plus sapere qua^ oportet sapere,
sed sapere ad sobrietatem. Romans 12.3
but more highly thinkinge of themselves then they ought, whiles they have
fully judged, and taught all feasts of the Saints, yea of the B. Virgin mother
of God, of the Apostles, and most famous martirs to be abrogated and taken
away, albeyt the English Protestants, be not so rigorous; for in this matter
they have left somewhat to remayn as before, though it be very little.

14. To invoke Saints departed, say these me^, is nothing else the^ to make
many Gods, and this our calling upon them, and worshipping of their images not
to differ from the customs of Pagans, under which pretext they abhor and
avoid us all they can: but for us it were easy (if this place would bear so
long dispute) to beat back, and refell all these slanders of heretics: for
they are forced, if they believe the Scriptures, to admit this; (as certain
that the souls of the Saints with God pray for us mortal men, and that not in
general only, but also in particular, and it is most evident in this life the
faithful to be helped by the prayers of the virtuous;) for Moses often by his
prayers turned away the wrath of God from the people of Israel, Job 42.18.
and God exhorted the friends of Job to entreat his prayers, thereby to
obtain pardon for their folly. Ephesians. 6. Coloss. 4. 1. These. 5. 2. These. 3.
Hebr. 13. etc.
S. Paul ofter commended himself to the prayers of the faithful: and these men
may learn if they list, the Saints, whose souls live in the the sight of God,
and reign with Christ, to pray for such as are yet living in the militant
Church, out of Hieremy Ezechiell, and the Apocalips. Hierem. 15 Ezech. 14.
Apocalip. 5.8. and 8.
That for their sakes God grants many favors unto them, they have in the
same holy Scriptures, and that in many places, as Genes. 26.4.5.24. Exodus
32.13. 3. Regum 18.36. 1. Paralip. 29.18. 3. Reg. 11.12.32.34. and 15.4. 4.
Reg. 8.19. and 19.34. and 20.6. and Isa. 37.35. See the commentaries which are
said to be S. Chrysostomes, in the second Homily upon the 50. Psalm. Christ
warns us to make fryends of the mammon of iniquity, Luke 16.
Vt cum defeceritis recipiant vos in aeterna tabernacula, that when you fail,
they receive you into their everlasting tabernacles: August. de ciuitate Dei
lib. 21. c. 7. Genesis 28.12. Heb. 1.14.
out of this place S. Augustine attributes much to the intercession of Saints.

15. This intercession of Saints the holy Fathers acknowledge, admit, and
confirm* And truly of Angels the Ladder of Jacob, and their other employments
for us are notorious. See Origin contra Celsum lib. 8. Of the Angels attending
upon us, see S. Augustine; Aug. Epi. 122.
and of our guardian Angel the Scriptures do often, and plainly make mention,
Genesis 48. Exodus 23. Psalm. 33. Math. 18. Actor. 1^.
and the Fathers also most clearly. Nyssenus in vita Moysis. Basil. in Psalm.
33. Hieron in 18. Mat.
If therefore every man have to assist, and guard him an Angel of our Lord,
what shall hinder but that he may crave his help? I heard once in England, with
great gust one of my fellow Chanons of Windesor preaching before the King, and
affirming roundly in his sermon that he saw no reason to the contrary, why
every faithful man might not turn, and convert himself toward his good
Angel, and say, Sancte Angele custos ora pro me, holy guardian Angel pray for
me. Of the intercession of Angels, and their labors for our help, and
benefit, any one besides the former may also read these Fathers, S. Anton.
Monachorum Parentem Epist. 2. ad Arseonitas, Anastasium Synaitam in Hexam. lib.
5. Antiochum Abbat. Hom. 61. Chrysostom. de incomprehensib. Dei natura. Hom. 3.
and Hom in Martyrs Aegyptios. Hieron. in Epist. 1. Cyrill. Alexandrinum apud
Anastasium Nycaenum quaest. 61. Theodoretu^ ibidem. Damascen. Lib. 1. Parales.
cap. 7. etc.

16. For Intercession of Saints, we have the common consent of the ancient
Fathers. See S. Cyprian Lib. de mortalitate. Hieron. aduersus Vigilantium.
August. de Baptismo. Lib. 5. cap. 7. and Lib. 7. cap. 1. and de verbis Apost.
Sermo. 47. and Sermon. 46. de Sanctis. and Lib. 9. Confess. cap. 3. and Lib. de
cura pro mortuis agenda cap. 16. and contra Faustum Lib. 20. cap. 21. and in
Meditatio. c. 20. Leo Magnus Sermon. de Sancto Laurentio. Gaudentius Brixian.
Sermon. 17. Gregorius Magnus lib. 7. Indictione 2. Epist. 25. Bernard. in Cantic.
Sermon. 77. I pretermit innumerable others of later times: the Scriptures
therefore, and Fathers, and consent of the universal Church do securely
warrant us, that the Angels and souls of Saints departed this life, do pray
for the living, and that also in particular. Why then should not every
faithful man take courage to invoke, or call upon them whom most certainly
he knows to pray for him in heaven?

17. That the Invocation of Angels and Saints, to the end that they pray for
us, and join their prayers with ours, as S. Chrysostom speaks, Sermon. in
Sanctum Meletium.
cannot be doubted of, is most evident; and of the B. Virgin Mother of God a
part, that she is to be inuocated by us, that she pray for us to her son, we
have most evident testimonies Iraeneus lib. 5. cap. 19. Athanas in Euang. de
Deipara: Nazianzen orat. in Cyprianum. Basilius Seleuciae orat 1. de verbo
incarnato. August. sermo 1. de Annunciatione. Cosmas Hierosolym. and Sophronius
item Hierosolymitanus orat. 6. de Angelorum excellentia* Hildefonsus Toletanus
etc.

18. Now for the Invocation of other Saints, besides, the sacred Virgin, that
the most ancient practice of the Church does so much as I said before, it
appertains to the tradition of the Apostles, for this invocation has always
been in use, and never reproved by any who was not held for an heretic. It
were to long a labor to recount the Fathers who invoke Saints, or teach them
to be inuocated; that, elsewhere I have abundantly performed. And this
perpetual custom of the Church of Inuocating Saints, that they pray for us,
and help us with their prayers, was never so much as found fault withal, but
rather the contrary error was condemned by S. Hierome in Vigilantius, which
conde^natio^ the whole Church allowed, and therefore our new Vigilantians are
to be condemned by the judgment of the whole Church, whose temerity in making
our Invocation to be idolatry is very singular; neither have these Vigilantians
any thing of moment that they can oppose: their objections I have elsewhere
fully refuted, and I think that in another work I have fully defended the
reverent regard of holy Relics, which God himself, as most pleasing unto
him, has confirmed by most manifest miracles.

19. But our Adversaries bouldly affirm, that in worshipping of holy images,
we commit idolatry: and from hence they will have their departure from us to be
lawful: but this also is a most vayn pretext of theirs: neither can they
thereby free themselves from the infamous note of most filthy schism; for in
case we honor images with a proper, and peculiar honor, and worship, which is
exhibited to the thing it self represented by the image, that is not supreme
honor and worship, nor that true adoration which alone is due unto God;
whereas therefore we do most plainly profess divine honor and supreme
worship, not to be due, either unto Saints, or to their Relics, and much
less to their Images, why do they object Idolatry unto us? The use of Images
belongs to Ecclesiastical rites, and in these the sure, certain, and
infallible rule to know, whether they be lawful, and to be approved, is the
practice, and use especially of the primitive Church: In so much as they are to
be esteemed good, and lawful rytes, which either the Apostles, or some
Apostolical men have ordained, or have either silently, or expressly approved;
and it is most certain, yea most uncontrollable, the Christian Church even
most ancient, whole, and universal, with joint, and singular consent, without
all opposition, or contradiction, to have reverenced, or worshipped holy
Images, either painted or kerued. S. John Damascen has collected in his three
Orations which he wrote for Images most abundant testimonies. The Fathers of
the seventh General Council have done the like: and after these many others
of our Church: What ignorant companion then dare condemn that which the most
holy, and most learned Fathers have commanded, have taught, have practiced?
that which the Catholic Church, taught by the Apostles, has always observed?
that which God himself by mamiracles has confirmed? Are they not then,
according to the verdict of S. Augustine, August. Epist. 118.
most insolent mad men, who retain not the use of Images, nor devoutly keep
them with that peculiar honor, due unto them (so as the supreme be not given
them) but rather abuse, profane, and sacrilegiously cast them away?

20. Two things especially, do our Adversaries urge against this our
worshippinge of holy Images, by which they contend, that we cannot avoid this
charge of Idolatry, and by ^he same they ground themselves in their schism, as
if it were lawful. One is Gods commandment, which forbids ^ll Images to be
made; the other that they cannot be excused from true external idolatry who
adore the true God in any exterior sign that is a mere creature. These men
with Calvin will have the golden calfe to have been used by the children of
Israel to represent the true God: and in this above all others does Reynolds
the English Puritan settle and ground his Treatise of the Idolatry of the Roman
Church: but with me there is no doubt, neither can there be with our
adversaries, but the most ancient Fathers, and Catholic Church to have known
the ten Commandments, and the history of the Calf, and yet without all
difficulty, and scruple they used holy Images with honor and reverence: but
neither does this disputation beseem this short discourse, the time will come
when I shall have opportunity to to refute this book of Reynolds Of the
Idolatry of the Church of Rome, on which England does most of all maintayn her
schism. Now to deal briefly* I call to their remembrance the doings of
Solomon, who endewed with divine wisdom, not only adorned his temple with
those Images and works of art which God had caused to be made, as were the
Cherubims etc. but added of him self, so many shapes and kerued pictures of
trees and beasts, as we read in Scripture, 3. Reg. 10. 19. 20.
for there were brazen Oxen, Palms, Pomegranats etc. and his Throne he set out
with great, and little golden Lions. Doubtless Solomon understood this
commandment of not making Images, and has by his own fact explicated the
same unto us sufficiently, to wit, that it was not commanded for all times, nor
that it was of the divine natural law (but so far forth as it denied supreme
worship to be given unto them) but only of the divine positive law Temporal,
and Conditional, then and so long to be observed, when and how long there
should be danger least the picture should be cause and occasion of Idolatry:
wherefore seeing in us now so well instructed, there is no danger of committing
idolatry by Images, that prohibition of the law which forbids pictures to be
made, has no place with us; and therefore the Image-breakers abolishing the
use of Images, breaking them in pieces, and unworthily handling the^, have
always been esteemed of the Church, and held for most wicked heretics, and
nu^bred among the enemies of Christian Religion.

21. The children of Israel in adoring the Calfe to have committed Idolatry, is
a thing most evident; neither will I ever grant, that this Calfe represented
to the^ the true God; and it is most false and against the true sense of the
Scripture to say, the Israelites in that Calf to have adored the true God; they
adored the same golden Calfe, which they erring most beastly, thought to have
had in it the divinity of the true God: this as I hope in due place, and time I
shall convince out of most clear passages of the holy Scripture, and shall
refute the light arguments of Calvin and Reynolds, Latria.
and show the^ that God himself may be adored with highest honor in corporal
signs, without al danger of committing Idolatry: and that the English rely on
a most filthy error, whiles they dream out of Reynolds follyes, to triu^ph
over the Roman Church, as if it were truly Idolatricall, and therefore by them
lawfully rejected, and forsaken. In our use of holy Images, whereas every ill
circumstance, and all scandal are ordinarily wanting, because we live not
amongst Idolaters, and are, or may be well instructed touching the lawful
worship of Images, most far off from the supreme worship given unto God,
therefore we may lawfully kneel before an Image, and so adore the person
represented thereby with supreme honor, in case he be capable thereof. So did
the children of Israel adore God in the cloud at the gate of the tabernacle,
Exodus 33.
but they adored not the cloud; likewise in the fire: 2. Paralip. 7.3.
neither did they commit idolatry, whiles they adored God in these corporal
signs: such therefore as condemn this adoration, as of it self purly and
properly idolatrical, have not in them so much as one dra^me of a pure, and
sound Divine. In vain therefore do the Protestants complain of this Idolatry,
that they may defend their schism, and in this very thing first of al they
defile themselves with heresy, and further they remain true Schismatikes,
because there was no lawful cause of their separation.

22. They object unto us a most clear Idolatry, or bread-worship in the
adoration of the B. Sacrament of the Altar, and by this also they seek to
excuse themselves from sin; but they are fowly mistaken: for to us the real
and corporal presence of the body, and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ in the
sacred mysteries of the Eucharist, is most certain, and undoubted; we adore the
same body of Christ, capable of it self by reason of the hypostaticall union
with the Word of supreme honor, lying hidden under these forms of bread, and
wine; but hereof I cannot much dispute in this place. This real and corporal
presence we suppose, and this supposall by our faith is certain, because we
take it from the gospel, Christ saying when he had bread in his hands, Hoc est
corpus meum, this is my body, according to the promise he had made saying,
Joan. 6.
Panis quem ego dabo caro mea est: the bread which I will give is my body and
therefore our adversaries cannot suspect that in this adoration we are liable
unto the error of idolatry, and so neither from this can they pretend any
excuse for their schism, but they are truly, and properly not only
schismatiks, but also heretics, and therefore I was to depart from amongst
them, and no longer to adhere unto their errors.

23. Besides the former, they object unto us a certain hidden or secret
idolatry, when after the Exorcismes, and blessings, we place a spiritual
confidence in salt, in water, in oil, and the like: all which they heap
together out of a desire to slander us, and that they may seem by any means
to excuse their schism: but they know full well, that we place no certain
confidence in these things, as if we taught these creatures to receive any
certain, and infallible force from our exorcismes and prayers: these things we
say are Sacramentalls, but not Sacraments, and hallowed to the end we may
stir up our devotion by them: all our confidence is placed in God alone, who
moved by the prayers of the Church, even by these creatures, by virtue of the
same prayers and blessings, bestows his gifts upon us: the greatest part of
those and the like rites the Church has received from Apostolical tradition,
and from hand to hand of the most ancient Church, which who so follows cannot
err, and he who contemnes, and casts away, is himself to be cast forth as a
rash man, and enemy of the Church. Tertullian sets down the use of holy Oil:
Tertul. li. de Baptismo.
and amongst the matters of the Sacraments S. Augustine reckons Oil. Aug. Ep.
119.
The hallowing of the water of Baptism has been observed from time out of
mind; for S. Cyprian makes mention of the hallowing of water, and oil, and of
Unction also. Cyprian. li. 1. Epist. vltima.
The holy Churches, I mean the material, in case by any chance they should
be defiled, were wont to be cleansed by exorcisme, and washing of the walls:
this we have delivered by Optatus Mileuitanus. Optatus Mileu. lib. 2. con.
Parmenian.
S. Basil also from tradition deduceth the common ryte of annoyntinge with
oil the party that was baptized: Basil. lib. de Spiritu sa^cto cap. 27
all antiquity does further teach us the sign of the Cross to have been used
in every blessing and consecration: Justinius quaestione 118. Nazianzen Orat. 1.
in Julian. and Orat. in funere Patris. Chrysostom. Hom. 55. in Matthaeum.
Augustine. tract. 118. in Joan. and sermo. de tempore, 181. cap. 3. Areopagita
and alij. There are perhapps some rytes now used in the Church not so ancient,
in which we use things blessed, and consecrated; but as the primitive Church,
taught by the Apostles, never feared any danger of secret Idolatry if it used
consecrated oil and the like, why should we now fear who attribute no more to
these new consecrated things, the^ antiquity attributed unto the other? For
these things to fly to Schism, is supreme impiety: these rytes are good, most
of them were instituted by the Apostles, others have had their beginning from
the devotion of Catholic Churches, no way contrary to Faith, yea most conform
and agreeing thereunto: the variety of rites and ceremonies was in ancient time
in Churches, and yet none under that pretense did depart from mutual communion
amongst themselves: The Ancients (says Sozomen) Sozomen lib. 7. c. 19^
did worthily judge yt a frivolous, or foolish matter, that they for custom
sake should be separated from one another, who in the chief points of Religion
did agree; therefore this separation of the Englishmen is frivolous, yea rash,
and wicked, by which they have divided themselves from the true Catholic
Church, and have broken forth without cause into open schism, with whom to
communicate in divine things, is to consent to their most unjust, and
pernicious schism.

24. Touching the new articles of which they make their complaynt and excuse
their schism, I will not now dispute. I should be too prolixe if I should now
turn aside to these points in due place to be handled: only here I dema^d of
the^, whether they think these new articles (as they call them) to be contrary
unto faith or not. If they were contrary to faith, they should be heresies; and
they would make the maintayners heretics, and worthily to be detested, and
separated from the communion of all Catholic Churches. But I have now proved
that there is no heresy in the Church of Rome; the most soueraygne King of
great Britanny, and very many learned men in that kingdom confessing, that the
Church of Rome stands entier in the fundamental faith; but I have showed
before that there is no true Article that it not fundamental, and with assured
faith to be believed; therefore it has no articles, which are contrary to the
Catholic faith, and in case they be not contrary to the true faith but contayn
the same, they can yield no occasion of schism. But (say they) because we
reject, and refuse these articles, the Church of Rome has separated, and cut
us of from that body. Truly I lament and bewail these men to have made a
beastly, and perfect schism, before any thing was done, or defined concerning
those which they call new Articles, in much as they cannot without exceeding
vanity cover their schism by these new articles, for the effect cannot go
before the cause. I endeavor to show that they made a schism without cause,
and hence I knew them to be true schismatiks, and for that I departed from
them. And further, these very Articles which they call new, can evidently be
demonstrated out of the Scriptures, tradition, and Fathers: and the contrary
decreed by themselves to be convinced of open heresy, if we will follow the
judgment of Antiquity; howsoever some latter Protestants taking a more mild,
and moderate course are wont to bring for some point such favorable
explications (of which my self have heard many) as they seemed not to differ
much from the Catholic opinion, and these seem to admit some pious
agreement; who then without pernicious error, yea true heresy, will place his
salvation on only Faith, and exclude the necessity of Good works? Who will
absolutely deny our Merits, and that just men cannot loose their grace, and
that they are impeccable, and cannot sin? And such as stiffly hold these,
and the like to be Articles of faith, and the contrary to be heresies, they
undoubtedly do err in matters of faith, and show themselves to be heretics,
and consequently to be well and worthily by the Catholic definitions placed
amongst such: no heresy therefore of the Church of Rome, no Idolatry open, or
hidden, could give occasion to the schism of Protestants. Neither can they
object Schism to the same Catholic Church, for it has made no schism, but
suffered it. From her has Luther, from her Calvin, from her have their first
followers separated themselves, whiles stubbornly they refused to stand to her
judgment; these have made a schism, these have divided the garment of Christ,
these have erected altar against Altar, and finally these have left, and
forsaken the Catholic Church.

25. Besides the former alleged, and discussed causes, they pretend another
of Reformation, forsooth, needful to be made: but I amongst them scant ever
saw any reformation, or to speak more truly, saw none at all: but as for
Deformations, I saw many amongst the^. For the most part, all care of
conscience is cast away, they are not there (excepting a very few of them)
troubled with any scruples for adulteries, robberyes, or deceauing their
neighbors; and in like manner for coosenage, deceypts, and vsuries, for they
have wickedly abolished auricular Confession, fasting, penance, and the like
holy means for our amendment; and if these men had found amongst us somewhat
amiss, in conversation, in actions, in government, in direction, and the
like, that had not argued any defect of the Church, but the errors of
particular men, which of Catholics are not allowed but mysliked: neither for
these lesser a matters, as manners of life, and that not in all but some, were
they to to make this most ugly schism. There remains in the Roman Church a
sound, an immovable, and constant foundation: and suppose it were true, 1.
Cor. 3.
that we buylt thereon wood, stubble, hay; yet were we not thereby debarred from
salvation: but the Protestants have departed from the foundation it self, they
have forsaken it, and except they build upon the foundation which is Christ,
gold silver, and precious stones, which foolishly they boast to be theirs, all
are proiecta viliora alga, wast weeds, all fruiteles labors, and nothing auay
leable to salvation. There is one foundation, not two, one Church not two, one
Christ not two: if Christ be our foundation (which they cannot deny) he is not
certainly theirs, they have made themselves a new Church, divided and separated
from ours, and that also cannot be a Church, because the Church is one not two,
he who will be of their Church, he must needs be out of the true Church of
Christ.

26. I confess that I was deceived by the English Protestants, before I had
considered diligently the nature of schism; for when I objected this fault
unto them, some of them replied, that it was not their fault that they
communicated not with the Church of Rome, who were ready to make union, and
accord; but that the Pope would not receive them into communion, whom he had
cut of from him and his, by excommunication. This excuse for a while seemed
unto me lawful, and reasonable; yet when afterward upon this ground I
began in private disputes, and public sermons to urge an union, which I
took not to be far off from making, and whiles I striued to put my finger
deeper into this festered ulcer, I perceived in England, not the English
Confession which they commended unto me as modest, but the Confession of
Calvin, and many doting dreams of Luther, to be the common rule of their
faith: this I perceived more clearly by the counterfeyt Synod of Protestants
at Dort, in the which the opinions of the rigid Caluinists, by consent, and
concurrence of the English sect, by their ministers sent thither, were
confirmed: which opinions of the rigid Puritans, if the confession of the
English Church, divided into certain Articles, do not as they pretend,
include; then why under the name of the English Profession, did the aforesaid
Ministers yield their consent, and set their hands to these Caluinian excesses?
How can it be that those who profess themselves most eager enemies of the
Church of Rome, should be thought to desire vnio^ with the same Church, and the
defect thereof not to proceed from their fault? How can they cast the fault of
their schism upon the Tridentine excommunications, who before these
Anathema's, had divided themselves by schism from the Catholic Church; and
truly by a schime in some sort far more worse, and foul, then was the
schism made by Luther, and after confirmed by the instigation of Calvin?
Because England in the beginning refrayned from the opinions of Luther, and
Calvin, and charged not the Roman Church with heresy or Idolatry, as Lutherans,
and Caluinists did to cover their schism withal, and yet notwithstanding long
after, not with so much as any apparent cause, it yielded to the common schism
of heretics. The Englishmen now, for the most part, do praise and defend the
division and separation that is made: for that they strive, for that they fly
union, for that they cast away Charity; they labor all they can, that
agreement do not succeed, and fraternall unity be fast knit in the bands of
peace; and many of them say, that they would more willingly, and more easily
have union and society with the Turks then with Papists? Is this to be ready
to make concord? Is this the truth of their words, when they said, that it was
not their fault they communicated not with the Church of Rome? Truly it cannot
possibly be, that any union (which I thought might easily have been achieved)
be made, unless they detest all heresies, and heretics, and believe aright
with the Catholic Roman faith, and be united unto the same by perfect Charity.

27. Henry the 8. had in manner only contention with the Pope, and out of an
heretical spirit denied his Supremacy, and tossed with many discomposed
passions, took the same unto himself: in other things concerning faith,
form of Religion, and Ecclesiastical rites, he carried himself more
moderatly. Under his Son Edward a child, and much more under Elizabeth, not
only a separation was made from the chief Bishop Christ his vicar, and supreme
Pastor of the Christian flock, but also the use of Religion by main force,
and injury was taken from Catholics, and by public laws (but made by Lay
men) utterly suppressed. Was there any lawful Council before for this matter?
Were the objections made against Catholics discussed? Were the reasons for
their defense heard? Were they convinced of any error or impiety in Religion?
Was this judgment made by any compete^t Judge? Nothing less. Does not the same
violence, the same injury, the same impiety still remain? How much do they
strive in England, they especially who seem to have care of their Religion,
such as it is, least the divine, ancient, pious, and prescript worship of God
be restored to Catholics? Is this their meaning, when they say it is not?
Their fault, that the schism is not taken away? They urge reformation, but
reformation be it never so just, and necessary, yet if it be made with schism,
is a most foul deformatio^. That in deed is reformed that remains the same in
substance. Therefore Catholic Religion ought to have remained in England, and
the substantial practice of the same; if any thing had been to be reformed,
that seruatis seruandis might have been exposed to reformation, but no other
different Religion (the former being suppressed or violently kept under) was to
be made, in so much as now there should be two religions disagreeing among
themselves and one contrary to the other: for if the latter be another Religion
from the former, the former is not reformed, but, as much as lay in their
power, is overthrown, and a new set up; but there cannot be two Religions of
Christ, for there is but one only, and that with us, I as have showed, as there
is but one Church, one foundation, one Christ.

28. When as therefore amongst other miseryes I saw my self inuolued in
inueterate schism, and all hope of union to be taken away, seeing Altar
erected against Altar, and divided from the Charity of the Church, I neither
could nor ought, with safe conscience to be present: wherefore remorse of
conscience compelled me to return, and it was necessary that my Agar returned
to the most holy Roman Church her mistress, hearing the voice of the Angel
checking her, and saying: Genesis 16.9.
Reuertere ad Dominam tuam, and humiliare sub manu illius, return to thy
mistress, and humble thy self under her hand or authority: that flight cold
bring me nothing but shame and ruin: God commands me to be humbled under the
hand of my mistress, and in this I ought specially to follow God. I would to
God, that they to whom folishly I fled, would acknowledge their most miserable
spiritual estat, not only for heresies, but also for their schism to be most
desperate: from which schism now I have showed that they cannot be excused,
because they have unlawfully separated themselves from the true Church of
Christ, which is our Catholic Roman Church. And this point affrighted me,
because schismatiks are excluded from being the Children of God: for Deum non
habent patrem (says S. Cyprian) Lib. de simplicitate Praelatoru^
qui Ecclesiam (veram) non habent matrem: they have not God for their Father,
who have not the (true) Church for their mother. Christ therefore died, Joan.
11.51.
vt filios Dei qui dispersi erant, congregaret in vnu^; that he might gather in
one, the children of God who were dispersed: the death therefore of Christ did
work, and still works, not only the redemption of men, but also the union of
his Church. Before the death of Christ, the children of God were dispersed, and
divided, some under the Law of Moses, others under the only Law of nature,
being far asunder one from the other, making together no one certain, and
universal Congregation: but now the divine wisdom would so have it, that al
his faithful followers, and true children by faith should make over the whole
world one society, or fellowship, that they should all make one warfare under
their Captayn, and Emperor Christ, and under his banner, to wit, the holy and
life-giuing Cross, using all the same military signs, and tokens of the
Sacraments: and this society, and congregation is a singular effect of the
death of Christ, which procured, that disagreeing Sects and innumerable courses
of life amongst themselves so different, and contrary, should meet, and be
combined in one Christian unity, Ephesians. 2.19
which truly is his work qui fecit vtraque vnum, who made both one, and that
by the Cross. Hereunto does Anastasius Synaita apply the words of God in the
creation Congregentur aquae in locum vnum; Anastas. 3. Hexam.
let the waters be gathered together in one place: This says he belongs to
the Church, gathered together under the unity of one faith out of different
people, countries, and sects. And for this cause, Christ said of his own
Cross; Joan. 12.
si exaltatus fuero a terra, omnia traham ad meipsum. If I shall be exalted from
the earth, I will draw all unto my self. S. Athanasius says, Athanas. de
Incarnat. verbi Dei.
Exaltatus enim in cruce Dominus, vtroque extenso brachio vtru^que populum ad
se inuitauit, vt vtrumque amplexando in sinum suum colligeret. Our Lord being
exalted or lifted upon the Cross, with both his arms stretched abroad invited
to himself both people (Jew and Gentile) that by embracing them both he might
gather them together into his bosom. There is therefore one bosom, between
the arms of our Savior.

29. And in the same place S. Athanasius thinks it not to want mystery, that
Christ chose the death of the Cross and not Beheading, by which S. John his
precursor died, nor cutting or dividing of his body as Isaias: Vt in morte
(says he) sine mutilatione integrum corpus seruaret. and causa subduceretur
ijs qui Ecclesiam in parts cupiunt discindere, that in the death of Christ his
entire body without maiming might be preserved, and all pretext taken away from
them who desire to cut the Church asunder into parts. And so heartily Christ
esteemed this unity, as in that most fervent prayer which he made in the last
night of his life, Joan. 17.11 20.21.
he craved of his Father, that he would not suffer his disciples, and other
belieuers in him to depart from this unity, vt credat mundus quia tu me
misisti, that the world may believe that thou have sent me. But our Adversaries
little consideringe these things will as much as is in them, have the death,
and Cross of Christ to be destitute of this most noble effect of unity, and by
their divisions and schisms give occasion to Jews and Infidells of railing
and blaspheming of Christ, and saying that he was not the son of God, or sent
by him, seeing the society or Church founded by him, does not subsist, but is
ever now and then to be dissolved, or divided into parts; the Church of Christ
is one house, and one family; he who draws himself from this family, that
goes forth out of this house, he belongs not to the family of Christ, he is
deprived of salvation, as who were not in the Arc, Genesis 3.
were lost, and perished in the flood. The Protestants have cut themselves from
the body of Christ, which is the only Catholic Roman Church, and those who are
inseparably united with the same: therefore they are not members of Christ and
therefore Christ is not their head, neither does he infuse his holy Spirit, and
gifts into them: they are therefore rotten members, and already cut of, because
they have cut themselves off wickedly of their own accord from the body: Sunt
palmites (says S. Augustine) August. Epist. 50.
a vite praecisi, nulli vsui nisi igni apti: neque potest esse particeps
diuinae Caritatis, qui est hostis vnitatis: they are branches cut off from the
vine, fit for no other use then the fire: Ezech. 15.3
neither can he be partaker of Gods charity, who is an enemy of unity. So he.

30. Of all spiritual help (if they think themselves to have any) they have
made shipwreck by their schism. Si linguis hominum loquar and Angelorum,
(says S. Paul) 1. Cor. 13.1.
Caritatem autem non habeam, nihil sum, nihil mihi prodest. If I shall speak
with the tongues of men, and Angels, and have not Charity, I am nothing, it
auayles me nothing. Out of which words of the Apostle S. Augustine prudently
admonishes, August. de Baptismo Lib. 1. c. 9.
no good work any way to avail a Schismatike. The same, and more then once,
has S. Cypryan delivered. Cypria^. lib. 4. Epist. 2.
Etsi occisus propter nomen Christi postmodum fuerit extra Ecclesiam
constitutus, and ab vnitate atque caritate diuisus, coronari in morte non
poterit: although one after that he is out of the Church, and is divided from
the unity, and charity of the same, be killed for the name of Christ, he cannot
be crowned in his death. The same he urges in other places, as Lib. 1. Epist.
1. and ad Iulianum, and tract. de simp. Praelatorum, seu de vnitate Ecclesiae:
and de Oratione Dominica, whom S. Chrysostom follows in Epist. ad Ephesios.
Hom. 11.

31. Let the Protestants, I beseech them, consider what an enormous sin they
have committed by this cursed separation, because that schism destroys the
Church, for it is the saying of Christ, Luc. 11.17.
Omne Regnum in se diuisum desolabitur, every kingdom divided in it self
shall be brought to desolation: and of S. Paul, Galat. 5.15.
Videte ne dum inuicem mordetis, inuicem consummamini. Take head least whiles
you bite one another, ye be not consumed one of another: and this crime of
destroying the Church may be said to be that sin against the holy Ghost, that
Christ avouched not to be forgiven in this world, nor in the next, Math. 12.31.
as S. Ambrose shows. Ambros. 2. de Paenit. cap. 4.
So that most wicked harlot in the book of Kings, had rather that there should
be no child, the^ that it should be brought up in the bosom of the true
mother, and exclaymed against her, saying, 3. Reg. 3.26.
nec mihi nec tibi, sed diuidatur; let the child neither be given to me nor
thee, but let it be divided: the Schismatics labor al they can that the true
and entier Faith be not kept in the bosom of the true mother the Church: they
go about to dead it, that it may neither be kept alive with them nor us: but
they prevail nothing; and let those know that to be spoken of them, Ecclesiast
10.8.
qui dissipat sepem, mordebit eum coluber, the serpent shall byte him that
breateth down the hedge.

32. And it is no marvel that the Englishmen have fallen into many Heresies,
and that Puritanisme does sway so much, albeyt when first they made their
schism they were neither infected with the Lutherane or Calumia^ heresies. For
as Irenaeus does notably teach us, Iren. lib. 3. cap. 40. and lib. 4. cap. 43.
those who are cut of from the Church, do not drink out of the fountain of
the spirit of God, but do digg for themselves bylakes, and do fall into most
gross errors against the truth of Faith. In like manner S. Cyprian makes the
Catholic Church the root, the fountain, the sun; Cypria^. lib. de simplic.
Praelat.
that as a branch has his life from the root, the river his water from the
fountain, the sunne-beame his light and spendour from the sun: so the
sincerity of true belief to be had by our union with the Catholic Church:
they therefore who have cut themselves from it, cannot have the truth of faith,
but must necessarily fall into errors; for they are trees without a root,
ryuers without a fountain, and sunne-beames without a sun; hereof it comes
that the Fathers out of these, and the like reasons do convince, that schism
in the end breaks forth into heresy: for he who refuses to have unity with the
Catholic Church, will also refuse to learn of her the truth of Faith, of
which she alone is the treasurer, and preserver. S. Augustine very well defines
this matter, when he says: Augu. lib. 2. contra Crescon c. 7.
Inueteratum Schisma esse ipsammet haeresim, inueterate schism to be heresy it
self. And S. Cyprian worthily finds in every schism that heresy at least,
whereby is taken away one or two articles of our Creed; Credo Sanctam Ecclesiam
Catholicam, and Remissionem peccatorum: I believe the holy Catholic Church,
and the Remission or forgiveness of sins: for they who believe the holy
Catholic Church to be the true Church of Christ, they cannot if they thus
believe depart from her; and in case they depart, then truly they do not
believe the Catholic Church to be the true Church of Christ. So Saint
Augustine says of the Donatists, Aug. haeres. 69. ad Quod vult Deum.
that they had turned their schism into heresy. And S. Ambrose in the funeral
Oration had of his brother approving his fact for that he had fled from the
Luciferian Church, as I now from the Churches of England, says: Non putauit
Fidem esse in schismate: nam etsi Fidem in Deum tenerent, tamen erga Dei
Ecclesiam non tenerent, cuius patiebantur velut quosdam artus diuidi and me^bra
lacerari, Etenim cum propter Ecclesiam Christus pass^ sit, and Christi corpus
Ecclesia sit, non videtur ab ijs exhiberi Christo fides, a quibus euacuatur
eius passio, corpusque distrahitur. He thought not that there was any faith in
schism: for although they kept their fayht toward God, yet they kept it not
toward the Church of God, of which they permitted certain joints to be
divided, and members to be torn: truly whereas Christ suffered his passion for
the Church, and the Church is the body of Christ, they seem not to believe in
Christ, by whom his Passion is made void, and his body dismembered.

33. Was I then with so great damage of my soul to remain amongst Heretics,
and Schimatickes? God forbid. I am troubled with bitter grief of mind, that I
remained so long amongst them, that I took wicked arms, and fought against my
Mother, against the Catholic truth, and that I wrote books of the
Ecclesiastical Common Wealth stuffed with heresies, which I utterly abhor,
and detest, and that I have warred in the infamous tents of heretics, not
without the perpetual blot, or infamy of my Name. I now loath, and am ashamed
of my so great offense, and crave humbly, and with all submission, pardon for
this wickedness of God, most good, most great, of my Savior Christ, and of his
supreme Vicar, or Substitute on Earth the Bishop of Rome: and submit all my
faults to the singular Clemency of the same chief Pastor, because that he
being to be judged of none, sits as supreme Judge of al, most fully susteining
the person of Christ in the militant Church: and I confidently hope that as our
Lord does willingly open to his Penitent the bosom of his mercy; so I shall be
embraced in the arms of Clemency by his Holiness. The example of S. Cyprian
against Pope Stephen the first, very much reprehended, and condemned also by
the Catholic Church, confirmed me a while in my naughtynes of resisting the
Pope; but now my filthy fall has with mine own danger taught me how easily
Bishops fall from the right path of Faith, who leaving the Cynosura, or
Pole-starre, that is, the most certain, and secure direction of the Bishop of
Rome, follow, to their destruction, their own foolish fancyes. I would to God,
that as S. Cyprian with the shedding of his own blood, did blot out all the
spot of his former animosity: so also, that there may be granted unto me, who
for the multitude, and greatness of my faults, have incomparably exceeded his
fall, opportunity, and grace to blot out also with my blood, those soul spots,
and by that means to testify the Catholic truth; which, when my ink should
fail me, I am most ready by the help of God, to his praise and honor, for the
advancement of the holy Catholic Church, and glory of the Sea Apostolic, to
seal with my blood. Adsit Deus. God second and assist me. Rome, the 24. of
November 1622. stylo nouo.

FINIS.

