The Pattern of painful Adventures: Containing the most excellent, pleasant
and variable History of the strange accidents that befell unto Prince
Apollonius, the Lady Lucina his wife, and Tharsia his daughter.

Wherein the uncertainty of this world, and the fickle state of man's life are
lively described.

Gathered into English by LAVRENCE TVVINE Gentleman.

Imprinted at London by Valentine Simmes for the Widow Newman.

To the worshipful Master John Donning, Customer and Iurate of the town of
Rye in Sussex.
BEing diversely moved in mind, to signify my good will and hearty love
toward you, gentle M. Donning, I could not devise any means more effectual,
then by presenting the same to you, which had cost me some small labor and
travel. Not seeming thereby to acquit your manifold courtesies, toward me
diversely extended, but rather to discharge me of the note of Ingratitude, which
otherwise I might seem to incur. Wherefore in steed of a greater present to
counteruaile your friendlines, I am bold in the setting forth of this simple
Pamflet under your name, to make a proffer of my thankeful heart to you again.
Wherein though want of farther ability appear, yet is there is no let, but
that a wel-willing heart may be expressed, yea in the smallest gift. Now if happily
the argument hereof appear unto you other than you could much wish, or I well
afford, yet have I no fear of any great misliking, considering your natural
disposition, which is to be delighted with honest pleasure, and commendable
recreation, and not to lie evermore weltering, as it were, in doleful
dumpishnesse. Which thing did put me in the greater hope, that this work would
be the welcommer unto you, especially considering the delectable variety, and
the often changes and chances contained in this present history, which cannot
but much stir up the mind and senses unto sundry affections. What ever it be
take it I beseech you, in good part, in stead of some better thing which I
might well afford, promising the same when occasion shall serve, not being at
this present so well furnished as I could wish of God: to whose good grace I
recommend you and yours, both now and evermore.

Your worships to use. Laurence Twine.

The Table.
HOw Antiochus committed incest with his own daughter, and beheaded such as
sued unto her for Marriage, if they could not resolve his questions. Chap. 1
How Apollonius arriving at Antiochia, resolved the Kings question, and how
Taliarchus was sent to slay him. Chap. 2 How Taliarchus not finding Apollonius
at Tyrus, departs joyfully, and Apollonius arriving at Tharsus, relieueth the
city with victual. Chap. 3 How Apollonius departing from Tharsus by the
persuasion of Stranguilio and Dionisiades his wife, committed shipwreck, and
was relieved by Altistrates king of Pentapolis. Chap. 4 How Lucina king
Altistrates daughter desirous to hear Apollonius adventures, fell in love with
him. Chap. 5 How Apollonius is made Schoolmaster to Lucina, and how she
prefers the love of him above all the Nobility of Pentapolis. Chap. 6 How
Apollonius was married to the Lady Lucina, and hearing of king Antiochus death,
departs with his wife toward his own country of Tyrus. Chap. 7 How fair
Lucina died in travel of child upon the sea, and being thrown into the water
was cast on land at Ephesus, and taken home by Cerimon a Physicion. Chap. 8 How
Lucina was restored to life by one of Cerimon the Physicions scholars, and how
Cerimon adopted her to his daughter, and placed her in the Temple of Diana.
Chap. 9 How Apollonius arriving at Tharsus, delivers his young daughter
Tharsia unto Stranguilio and Dionisiades to be brought up, and how the Nurce
lying in her death bed declares unto Tharsia who were her parents. Chap. 10
How after the death of Ligozides the Nurce, Dionisiades envying at the beauty
of Tharsia, conspired her death, which should have been accomplished by a
villain of the country. Chap. 11 How certain Pirates rescued Tharsia when she
should have been slain, and carried her unto the city Machilenta to be sold
among other bondslaues. Chap. 12 How the Pirates which stole away Tharsia,
brought her to the city Machilenta, and sold her to a common bawd, and how she
preserved her virginity. Cha. 13 How Tharsia withstood a second assault of her
virginity, and by what means she was preserved. Chap. 14 How Apollonius
coming to Tharsus, and not finding his daughter, lamented her supposed death,
and taking ship again, was driven by a tempest to Michalenta where Tharsia
was. Chap. 15 How Athanagoras prince of Machilenta seeing the beauty of
Apollonius ship, went aboard of it, and did the best he could to comfort him.
Chap. 16 How Anathagoras sent for Tharsia, to make her father Apollonius
merry, and how after long circumstance they came into knowledge one of
another. Chap. 17 How Apollonius leaving off mourning, came into the city
Machilenta, where he commanded the bawd to be burned, and how Tharsia was
married unto Prince Athanagoras. Chap. 18 How Apollonius meaning to sail into
his own Country by Tharsus, was commanded by an Angel in the night to go
to Ephesus, and there to declare all his adventures in the Church, with a loud
voice. Chap. 19 How Apollonius came to the knowledge of his wife the Lady
Lucina, and how they rejoiced at the meeting of each other. Chap. 20 How
Apollonius departed from Ephesus and sailed himself, his wife, his son and
daughter unto Antiochia, and then to Tyrus, and from thence to Tharsus, where
he revenged himself upon Stranguilio, and Dionisiades. Chap. 21 How Apollonius
sailed from Tharsus to visit his father in law Altistrates king of Pentapolis,
who died not long after Apollonius coming thither. Chap. 22 How Apollonius
rewarded the fisherman that relieved him after he had suffered shipwreck: how
he dealt also with old Calamitus, and likewise with the Pirates that stole away
Tharsia. Chap. 23 How Apollonius had a young son and heir by his wife Lucina,
likewise of Apollonius age, and how he died: with some other accidents
thereunto incident. Chap. 24
FINIS.
The first Chapter. How Antiochus committed incest with his own daughter, and
beheaded such as sued unto her for marriage, if they could not resolve his
questions.
THE most famous and mighty king Antiochus, which builded the goodly city of
Antiochia in Syria, and called it after his own name, as the chiefest seat of
all his dominions, and most principal place of his abode, begat upon his wife
one daughter, a most excellent and beautiful young Lady. Who in process of
years growing up as well in ripeness of age, as perfection of beauty: many
Princes and noble men resorted unto her for entreaty of marriage, offering
inestimable riches in iointure. Howbeit the king her father, evermore requiring
deliberation, upon whom rather than other to bestow his daughter, perceived
eftsoons an unlawful concupiscence to boil within his breast, which he
augmented with an outrageous flame of cruelty sparkling in his heart, so that
he began to burn with the love of his own child, more then it was beseeming
for a father. Thus being wrapped in the toil of blind desire, he sustained
within himself a fierce conflict, wherein Madness put Modesty to flight, and
he wholly yielded himself unto love. Wherefore, not long after, on a certain
day he came into his daughters chamber, and bidding all that were there for to
depart, as though he had had some secret matter to confer with her: the
furious rage of lust pricking him forward thereunto, he violently forced her,
though seely maiden she withstood him long to her power, and threw away all
regard of his own honesty, and unloosed the knot of her virginity. Now when
he was departed, and she being alone devised within her self what it were best
for her to do, suddenly her nurse entered in, and perceiving her face al be
blubbred with tears, What is the matter, dear child and Madam, (quoth she)
that you sit thus sorrowfully? O my beloved nurse, answered the Lady, even
now two noble names were lost within this chamber. How so, said the nurse?
Because (quoth she) before marriage, through wicked villainy I am most
shamefully defiled. And when the nurse had heard these words, and looking
about more diligently, perceived indeed what was done, being enraged with
sorrow and anger, and almost distract of her wits. Alas, what wretch or
rather infernal feend (quoth she) durst thus presumptuously defile the bed of a
Princess? Ungodliness has done this deed (quoth the Lady.) Why then do
you not tell it the King your father, said the nurse? Ah nurse, answered the
Lady, Where is my father? For if you well understood the matter, the name of
Father is lost in me, so that I can have no remedy now but death only. But
the nurf e now by a few words perceiving the whole tale, and weying that the
young Lady gave inkling of remedy by death, which she much feared, began to
assuage her grief with comfortable words, and to withdraw her mind from
that mischievous purpose. Wherein she prevailed so effectually in short time,
that she appeased the fresh bleeding of the green wound, howbeit the scarre
continued long time, as deeply stricken within her tender heart, before it
could be thoroughly cured.

In the mean season, while this wicked father shows the countenance of a
loving sire abroad in the eyes of al his people: notwithstanding within doors,
and in his mind, he rejoices that he has played the part of an husband with
his daughter: which false resemblance of hateful marriage, to the intent he
might always enjoy, he invented a strange devise of wickedness to drive away
all suitors that should resort unto her, by propounding certain questions, the
effect and law whereof was thus published in writing: Who so finds out the
solution of my question, shall have my daughter to wife, but who so fails,
shall lose his head.

Now when Fame had blown abroad the possibility to obtain this Lady, such
was the singular report or her surpassing beauty, that many kings and men of
great nobility repaired thither. And if happily any through skill, or learning
had found out the solution of the kings question, notwithstanding he was
beheaded as though he had answered nothing to the purpose: and his head was
set up at the gate to terrify others that should come, who beholding there the
present image of death, might advise them from assaying any such danger. These
outrages practiced Antiochus, to the end he might continue in filthy incest
with his daughter.

The second Chapter. How Apollonius arriving at Antiochia, resolved the kings
question, and how Taliarchus was sent to slay him.
Whilst Antiochus thus continued in exercising tyranny at Antiochia, a
certain young Gentleman of Tyrus, Prince of the country, abounding in wealth,
and very well learned, called Apollonius, arrived in the coast, and coming
unto the city of Antiochia, was brought into the kings presence. And when he
had saluted him, the king demanded of him the cause of his coming thither.
Then said the young prince, Sir, I require to have your daughter in marriage.
The king hearing that which he was unwilling to hear, looking fiercely upon
him, said unto him: Do thou know the conditions of the marriage? Yea sir
king, said Apollonius, and I see it standing upon the gate. Then the king being
sharply moved, and disdaining at him, said, Hear then the question which thou
must resolve, or else die: I am carried with mischief, I eat my mothers
flesh: I seek my brother my mothers husband and I can not find him.
Apollonius having received the question, withdrew himself a while out of the
Kings presence, and being desirous to understand what it meant, he found out
the solution thereof in short space through the help of God, and returned
again to the king, saying: Your grace proposed a question unto me, I pray you
hear the solution thereof. And whereas you said in your problem, I am carried
with mischief: you have not lied, for look unto your own self. But whereas
you say further, I eat my mothers flesh, look upon your daughter.

Now the king as soon as he perceived that Apollonius had resolved his
problems, fearing lest his wickedness should be discovered, he looked upon him
with a wrathful countenance, saying: Thou art far wide from the solution of
my demand, and have hit no part of the meaning thereof: wherefore thou have
deserved to be beheaded. Howbeit I will show thee this courtesy, as to give
thee thirty days respite to bethink thy self of this matter. Wherefore
return home into thine own country, and if thou can find out the solution
of my problem, thou shall have my daughter to wife: If not, thou shall be
beheaded. Then Apollonius being much troubled and molested in mind,
accompanying himself with a sufficient train, took shipping, and returned into
his own country. But so soon as he was departed, Antiochus called unto him
his steward named Thaliarchus, to whom he spoke in manner following.

Thaliarchus, the only faithful and trusty minister of my secrets: understand
that Apollonius prince of Tirus, has found out the solution of my question.
Wherefore, take shipping and follow him immediately, and if thou can not
overtake him upon the sea, seek him out when thou come to Tirus, and slay
him either with sword or poison, and when thou returnest I will bountifully
reward thee. Taliarchus promised to accomplish his commandment with all
diligence, and taking to him his shield with money sufficient for the journey,
departed on his way, and shortly after arrived at the coast of Tirus. But
Apollonius was come home unto his own Palace long time before, and
withdrawing himself into his study, perused all his books concerning the
kings probleame, finding none other solution, than that which he had already
told the king. And thus he said within himself: Surely, unless I be much
deceived, Antiochus burns with disordinate love of his daughter: and
discoursing farther with himself upon that point: What say thou now, or
what intendest thou to do Apollonius, said he to himself? Thou have resolved
his problem, and yet not received his daughter, and God has therefore brought
thee away that thou should not die. Then brake he off in the midst of these
cogitations, and immediately commanded his ships to be prepared, and to be laden
with an hundred thousand bushels of wheat, and with great plenty of gold,
silver and rich apparel: and taking unto him a few of his most trustiest
servants, about midnight embarked himself, and hoysing up his sails, committed
himself to the wide sea. The day following his subjects the citizens came unto
the palace to have seen their Prince, but when they found him not there, the
whole city was forthwith surprised with wonderful sorrow, every man
lamenting that so worthy a Prince so suddenly gone out of sight and knowledge,
no man knew whether. Great was the grief, and woeful was the wayling which
they made, every man lamenting his own private estate and the commonwealths
in general, as it always happens at the death or loss of a good Prince,
which the inhabitants of Tirus took then so heavily in respect of their great
affection, that a long time after no barbers shops were opened, the common
shows and plays surceased, baines and hot houses were shut up, tauerns were
not frequented, and no man repaired unto the Churches, al thing was full of
sorrw and heaviness, what shall I say? there was nothing but heaviness.

CHAP. III. How Taliarchus not finding Apollonius at Tirus departs joyfully,
and Apollonius arriving at Tharsus, relieueth the city with vittell.
IN the mids of this sorrowful season, Taliarchus comes to Tirus to
execute the cruel commandment of Antiochus, where finding al-thing shut up,
and a general show of mourning, meeting with a boy in the street tell me,
said he, or I will slay thee, for what cause is all this city thus drowned in
heaviness? To whom the child answered: My friend, do thou not know the cause,
that thou ask it of me? This city mourns because the Prince thereof
Apollonius, returning back from king Antiochus, can no where be found, or heard
of. Now so soon as Taliarchus heard these tidings, he returned joyfully unto
his ships, and took his iourny back to Antiochia, and being landed, he
hastened unto the king, and fell down on his knees before him, saying: All
hail most mighty Prince, rejoice and be glad, for Apollonius being in fear
of your grace is departed no man knows whether. Then answered the king: He
may well fly away from me, but he shall never escape my hands. And
immediately he made proclamation, that whosoever could take that contemner of
the king Apollonius prince of Tirus, and bring him alive into the kings
presence, should have an hundred talents of gold for his labor: and
whosoever could bring his head, should have fifty talentes. Which
proclamation being published, not only Apollonius ennemies but also his
friends made all haste possible to seek him out, allured thereto with
covetousness of the money. Thus was that poor Prince (...) for about by sea
and by land, through woods (...) wild deserts, but could not be found. Then
the king commanded a great Navy of ships to be prepared to scour the seas
abroad, if happily they might meet with him, but for that every thing requires a
time ere it can be done, in the mean season Apollonius arriueth at Tharsus,
where walking along by the sea side, he was espied by one of his own
servants, named Elinatus, who landed there not long before, and ouertooke him
as he was going, and coming near unto him with dutiful obeisance, said unto
him: God save you prince Apollonius. But he being saluted, did even so as noble
men and princes use to do, set light by him. But Elinatus taking that
behavior unkindly, saluted him again saying: God save you prince Apollonius
salute me again, and despise not poverty beautified with honesty. And if you
knew that which I know, you would take good heed to your self. Then answered
Apollonius: If you think good, I I pray you tell me. Elinatus answered, you
are by proclamation commanded to be slain. And who, said Apollonius, dares
command by proclamation, the prince of a country to be slain? Antiochus said
Elinatus. Antiochus? For what cause, demanded Apollonius. For that, said
Elinatus, thou would be unto his daughter which he himself is. Then demanded
Apollonius, for what sum of money is my life sold by that proclamation?
Elinatus answered, whosoever can bring you alive unto the king shall have an
hundred talents of gold in recompense: but who so brings your head shall have
fifty talents of gold for his labor, and therefore I advise you my lord, to
fly unto some place for your defense: and when he had so said he took his
leave and departed. But Apollonius called him again, and said that he would
give him an hundred talents of gold: for said he, receive thus much now of my
poverty, where nothing is now left unto me but flight, and pining misery. Thou
have deserved the reward, wherefore draw out thy sword, and cut off my head,
and present it to the king, as the most joyful sight in the world. Thus may
thou win an hundred talents of gold, and remain without all blame or note of
ingratitude, since I my self have hired thee in the kings behalf to gratefie
him with so acceptable a present. Then answered Elinatus: God forbid my lord
that by any such sinister means I should deserve a reward. In all my life I
never consented to any such matter in my heart. And, my lord, if the deed were
good, the love of virtue were sufficient force to allure any man thereunto. But
since it respects your life, to whom in consideration of the cause no man
may do violence without villainy: I commit both you and your matter unto God,
who no doubt will be your defender: And when he had thus said, he departed. But
Apollonius walked forth along upon the shore, where he had not gone far, but
he descried a man a far off coming toward him with heavy cheer and a
sorrowful countenance, and his name was Stranguilio: a Tharsian borne, and of
good reputation in the city: To whom said Apollonius, God save you
Stranguilio: and he likewise resaluted him saying, and you likewise my good
lord Apollonius: I pray you tell me, what is the cause that you walk in this
place thus troubled within your mind? Apollonius answered: because, being
promised to have king Antiochus daughter to my wife, if I told him the true
meaning of his question, now that I have so done, I am notwithstanding
restrained from her. Wherefore I request you it may so be, that I may live
secretly in your city: for why, I stand moreover in some doubt of the kings
farther displeasure. Stranguilio answered: My lord Apollonius, our city at
this present is very poor, and not able to sustain the greatness of your
dignity: and even now we suffer great penury and want of vittell, insomuch
that there remains small hope of comfort unto our citizens, but that we shall
all perish by extreme famine: and now certes there rests nothing but the
fearful image of ghastly death before our eyes. When Apollonius heard these
words, he said unto him: Then give thanks unto God, who in my flight has
brought me a land into your costs. For I have brought great store of provision
with me, and I will presently give unto your city an hundredth thousand bushels
of wheat, if you will only conceal my coming hither. At these words
Stranguilio being strooken as it were into a sudden amazedness, as it
happens when a man is ouerioyed with some glad tidinges, fell down prostrate
before prince Apollonius feet, and said: My lord Apollonius, if you could,
and also if it might please of your great goodness, in such sort as you say,
to succor this afflicted and famished city we will not only receive you
gladly and conceal your abode: but also if need so require, willingly spend
our lives in your quarrel. Which promise of mine, to the intent you may hear
to be confirmed by the full consent of all the citizens, might it please your
Grace to enter into the city, and I most willingly will attend upon you.
Apollonius agreed thereto, and when they came into the city, he mounted up
into the place of judgment, to the intent he might the better be heard, and
gathering all the people together: thus he spoke unto the whole multitude. Ye
citizens of Tharsus, whom penury of vittell pincheth at this present:
understand ye, that I Apollonius prince of Tirus, am determined presently to
relieve you: In respect of which benefit I trust ye will be so thankful, as
to conceal mine arriving hither. And know ye moreover, that not as being
driven away through the malice of king Antiochus, but sailing along by the Seas
I am happily fallen into your haven. Wherefore, I mean to utter unto you an
hundred thousand busshels of wheat, paying no more than I bought it for in
mine own country, that is to say, eight pieces of brass for every bushel.
When the citizens heard this, they gave a shout for joy, crying, God save my
Lord Apollonius, promising to live and die in his quarrel, and they gave him
wonderful thanks, and the whole city was replenished with joy, and they went
forthwith unto the ships, and bought the corn. But Apollonius doubting lest by
this deed, he should seem to put off the dignity of a prince, and put on the
countenance of a merchant rather than a giver, when he had received the price
of the wheat, he restored it back again to the use and commodity of the
same city. And when the citizens perceived the great benefits which he had
bestowed upon their city, they erected in the marked place a monument in the
memorial of him, his stature made of brass standing in a charret, holding
corn in his right hand, and spurning it with his left foot: and on the baser
foot of of the pillar whereon it stood, was engraven in great letters this
superscription: Apollonius prince of Tirus gave a gift unto the city of
Tharsus whereby he delivered it from a cruel death.

CHAP. IIII. How Apollonius departing from Tharsus by the persuasion of
Stranguilio and Dionisiades his wife, committed shipwreck, and was relieved by
Altistrates king of Pentapolis.
THus had not Apollonius aboden many days in the city of Tharsus but
Stranguilio and Dionisiades his wife, earnestly exhorted him, as seeming very
careful and tender of his welfare, rather to address himself unto Pentapolis
or among the Tirenians, as a place most fit for his security, where he might
lie and hide himself in greatest assurance and tranquillity. Wherefore
hereunto, he resolved himself, and with convenient expedition prepared al
things necessary for the journey. And when the day of his departure was come,
he was brought with great honor by the citizens unto his ships, where with a
courteous farewell on each side given, the mariners weighed anchor, hoysed
sails, and away they go, committing themselves to the wind and water. Thus
sailed they forth along in their course, three days and three nights with
prosperous wind and weather, until suddenly the whole face of heaven and sea
began to change: for the sky looked black and the Northern wind arose, and
the tempest increased more and more, insomuch that prince Apollonius and the
Tyrians that were with him were much apalled, and began to doubt of their
lives. But lo, immediately, the wind blew fiercely from the South-west, and
the North came singing on the otherside, the rain powered down over their heads,
and the sea yielded forth waves as it had been mountanes of water, that the
ships could no longer wrestle with the tempest, and especially the admiral,
wherein the good prince himself fared, but needs must they yield unto the
present calamity. There might you have heard the winds whistling, the rain
dashing, the sea roaring, the cables cracking, ye tacklings breaking, the
ship tearing, the men miserable shouting out for their lives. There might you
have seen the sea searching the ship, the bordes fleeting, the goods
swimming, the treasure sincking, the men shifting to save themselves, where
partly through violence of the tempest, and partly through darcknes of the
night which then was come upon them, they were all drowned, only Apollonius
excepted, who by the grace of God, and the help of a simple board, was driven
upon the shore of the Pentapolitanes. And when he had recovered to land,
weary as he was, he stood upon the shore, and looked upon the calm sea,
saying: O most false and untrusty sea. I will choose rather to fall into the
hands of the most cruel King Antiochus, than venture to return again by
thee into mine own Country: thou have showed thy spite upon me, and devoured
my trusty friends and companions, by means whereof I am now left alone, and
it is the providence of almighty God, that I have escaped thy greedy jaws.
Where shall I now find comfort? or who will succor him in a strange place
that is not known? And whilst he spoke these words, he saw a man coming
toward him, and he was a rough fisherman, with an hoode upon his head, and a
filthy leatherne pelt upon his back, unseemly clad, and homely to behold.
When he drew near Apollonius, the present necessity constraining him
thereto, fell down prostrate at his feet, and pouring forth a flood of tears,
he said unto him: whosoever thou art, take pity upon a poor sea-wracked man,
cast up now naked, and in simple state, yet borne of no base degree, but
sprung forth of noble parentage. And that thou may in helping me know
whom thou succourest: I am that Apollonius prince of Tyrus, whom most part of
the world knows, and I beseech thee to preserve my life by showing me thy
friendly relief. When the fisherman beheld the comeliness and beauty of the
young Gentleman, he was mooned with compassion toward him, and lifted him up
from the ground, and lead him into his house and feasted him with such fare as
he presently had, and the more amply to express his great affection toward
him, he disrobed himself of his poor and simple cloak, and dividing it into
two parts, gave the one half thereof unto Apollonius, saying: Take here at my
hands, such poor entertainment and furniture as I have, and go into the
city, where perhaps thou shall find some of better ability, that will rue
thine estate: and if thou do not, return then again hither unto me, and
thou shall not want what may be performed by the poverty of a poor
fisherman. And in the mean time of this one thing only I put thee in mind,
that when thou shall be restored to thy former dignity, thou do not despise
to think on the baseness of the poor piece of garment. To which Apollonius
answered: If I remember not thee and it, I wish nothing else but that I may
sustain the like shipwreck. And when he had said so, he departed on the way
which was taught him, and came unto the city gates, whereinto he entered. And
while he was thinking with himself which way to seek succor to sustain his
life, he saw a boy running naked through the street, girded only with a tuell
about his middle, and his head anointed with oil, crying aloude, and saying:
Hearken all, as well citizens as strangers and servants, hearken: Whosoever
will be washed, let him come to the place of exercise. When Apollonius heard
this, he followed the boy, and coming unto the place cast off his cloak, and
stripped himself, and entered into the Baine, and bathed himself with the
liquour. And looking about for some companion with whom he might exercise
himself according unto the manner of the place and country, and finding none:
suddenly unlooked for entered in Altistrates King of the whole land,
accompanied with a great troop of seruitours. Anon he began to exercise
himself at tennis with his men, which when Apollonius espied, he intruded
himself amongst them into the kings presence, and stroke back the ball to the
king, and served him in play with great swiftnes. But when the king perceived
the great nimblenesse and cunning which was in him, surpassing the residue:
stand aside, (quoth he) unto his men, for me thinks this young man is more
cunning than I. When Apollonius heard himself commended, he stepped forth
boldly into the mids of the tennis court, and taking up a racket in his hand,
he tossed the ball skilfully, and with wonderful agilitie. After play, he also
washed the king very reverently in the Baine: and when all was done, he took
his leave duetifully, and so departed. When Apollonius was gone, the king said
unto them that were about him: I swear unto you of truth as I am a Prince, I
was never exercised nor washed better then this day, and that by the diligence
of a yongman I know not what he is. And turning back, go, said he unto one of
his servants, and know what that young man is that has with such duty and
diligence taken pains with me. The servant going after Apollonius, and seeing
him clad in a filthy fishers cloak, returned again to the king, saying: If it
like your grace, the yongman is a sea-wracked man. How know thou that said
the king? the servant answered: Though he told me not so himself, yet his
apparel bewraieth his state. Then said the king to his servant: Go apace after
him, and say unto him, that the king desires him to sup with him this night.
Then the servant made haste after Apollonius, and did the kings message to him,
which so soon as he heard, he granted thereto, much thanking the kings
majesty, and came back with the servant. When they were come to the gate, the
servant went in first unto the king, saying: The sea-wracked man, for whom your
grace sent me, is come, but is ashamed to come into your presence, by reason of
his base array: whom the King commanded immediately to be clothed in seemly
apparel, and to be brought in to supper, and placed him at the table with him,
right over against himself. Immediately the boorde was furnished with all
kind of princely fare, the guests fed apace, every man on that which he
liked, only Apollonius sat still and eat nothing, but earnestly beholding
the gold, silver, and other kingly furniture, whereof there was great plenty,
he could not refrain from sheading tears. Then said one of the guests that
sat at the table, unto the king: This young man, I suppose, enuieth at your
graces prosperity. No not so, answered the King, you suppose amiss: but he is
sorry to remember that he has lost more wealth then this is: and looking upon
Apollonius with a smiling countenance, be merry young man, quoth he, and eat thy
meat with us, and trust in GOD, who doubtless will send thee better fortune.

CHAP. V. How Lucina King Altistrates daughter desirous to hear Apollonius
adventures, fell in love with him.
NOW while they sat at meat, discoursing of this, and such like matters at
the board, suddenly came in the kings daughter and only child named Lucina, a
singular beautiful lady, and a maiden now of ripe years for marriage: and she
approached nigh and kissed the king her father, and all the guests that sat with
him at the table. And when she had so done, she returned unto her father, and
said: Good father, I pray you what yongman is this which sits in so
honorable a place over against you, so sorrowful and heavy? O sweet
daughter, answered the king, this young man is a sea-wracked man, and has done
me great honor to day at the baines and place of exercise, for which cause I
sent for him to sup with me, but I know not neither what, neither whence he
is. If you be desirous to know these things, demand of him, for you may
understand all things, and peradventure when you shall know, you will be
moved with compassion toward him. Now when the lady perceived her fathers
mind, she turned about unto Apollonius, and said, Gentleman, whose grace and
comeliness sufficiently bewraieth the nobility of your birth, if it be not
grievous unto you, show me your name I beseech you, and your adventures. Then
answered Apollonius: Madam, if you ask my name, I have lost it in the sea: if
you enquire of my nobility, I have left that at Tyrus. Sir, I beseech you then
said the Lady Lucina, tell me this more plainly, that I may understand. Then
Apollonius craving license to speak, declared his name, his birth and
nobility, and unripped the whole tragedy of his adventures in order as is
before rehearsed, and when he had made an end of speaking, he burst forth into
most ple^tifull tears. Which when the king beheld, he said unto Lucina: dear
daughter, you have done evil in requiring to know the young man's name, and his
adventures, wherein you have renewed his forepassed griefs. But since now you
have understood all the truth of him, it is meet as it becomes the
daughter of a king, you likewise extend your liberality toward him, and
whatsoever you give him I will see it be performed: Then Lucina having already
in her heart professed to do him good, and now perceiving very luckily her
fathers mind to be inclined to the desired purpose, she cast a friendly look
upon him, saying: Apollonius, now lay sorrow aside, for my father is
determined to enrich you: and Apollonius according to the courtesy that was in
him, with sighs and sobbes at remembrance of that whereof he had so lately
spoken, yielded great thanks unto the fair lady Lucina.

Then said the king unto his daughter: Madame I pray you take your harp into
your hands, and play us some music to refresh our guests withal, for we have
all too long hearkened unto sorrowful matters: and when she had called for her
harp, she began to play so sweetly, that all that were in company highly
commended her, saying that in all their lives they never heard pleasanter
harmony. Thus whilst the guests, every man for his part much commended the
ladies cunning, only Apollonius spoke nothing. Then said the king unto him:
you are too blame Apollonius, since all praise my daughter for her excellency
in music, and you commend not her, or rather dispraise her by holding your
peace. Apollonius answered: My sovereign and good lord, might it please you to
pardon me, and I will say what I think: The lady Lucina your daughter is
pretily entered, but she is not yet come to perfection in music. For proof
whereof, if it please your Grace to command the harp to be delivered unto me,
she shall well perceive, that she shall hear that which she does not yet know.
The king answered: I see well Apollonius you have skill in all things, and is
nothing to be wished in a gentleman, but you have perfectly learned it,
wherefore, hold, I pray you take the harp, and let us hear some part of your
cunning. When Apollonius had received the harp, he went forth, and put a
garland of flowers upon his head, and fastened his raiment in comely manner about
him, and entered into the parlour again, playing before the kng and the residue
with such cunning and sweetness, that he seemed rather to be Apollo then
Apollonius, and the kings guests confessed, that in all their lives they never
heard the like before. But when Lucina had heard and seen what was done, she
felt her self suddenly moved within, and was sharply surprised with the
love of Apollonius, and turning to her father: Now suffer me good father,
said she, to give unto this young gentleman some reward, according as I shall
think convenient. I give you leave to do so fair daughter, said the king.
Then she looking toward Apollonius, My lord Apollonius, said she, receive
here of my fathers liberality two hundred talents of gold, four hundred
pounds of silver, store of raiment, twenty men servants, and ten
handmaidens. Now therefore, said she unto the officers that stood by, bring
hither all these things which I have here promised, and lay them down in the
parlour, in the presence of our friends. And immediately they were all brought
into their sight as she had commanded. When this was done, the guests arose
from the table, and giving thanks unto the king and lady Lucina, took their
leave and departed. And Apollonius, thinking it likewise time for him to be
gone: Most gracious king Altistrates (quoth he) thou which art a comforter of
such as are in misery: and thou also renowned princess, a favorer of
philosophy, and lover of all good studies, I bid you now most heartily
farewell, as for your great deserts toward me, I leave them to GOD to requite
you with deserved recompense: and looking unto his servants which the lady
Lucina had given him, Sirs, take up this geere, quoth he, which is given me,
and bring it away, and let us go seek some lodging.

When Lucina heard those words she was suddenly stricken into a dump, fearing
that she should have lost her new lover, before she had ever reaped any
fruit of his company, and therefore turning to her father, said: I beseech you
good father and gracious king, forasmuch as it has pleased you this day to
enrich Apolonius with many great gifts, you would not suffer him now to depart
so late, lest he be by some naughty persons spoiled of the things which you
have given him. The king willingly granted the ladies request, and commanded
forthwith that there should be a fair lodging prepared for him and his, where
he might lie honorably, and when he saw convenient time he went to bed, and
took his rest.

CHAP. VI. How Apollonius is made Schoolmaster to Lucina, and how she
prefers the love of him, above all the nobility of Pentapolis.
WHen night was come, and every one was at rest, Lucina lay unquietly tumbling
in her bed always thinking upon Apollonius, and could not sleep. Wherefore, in
the morning she rose very early, and came in to the king her fathers chamber.
Whom when her father saw, what is ye matter daughter Lucina, (quoth he) that
contrary to custom you be stirring so earelie this morning? dear father,
quoth Lucina, I could take no rest all this night, for the desire I have to
learn music of Apollonius, and therefore I heartily pray you good father, to
put me unto him to be instructed in the Art of Music, and other good
qualities, wherein he is skillful. When Altistrates heard his daughters talk,
he smiled within himself, when he perceived the warmed affection kindled
within her breast, which with so seemly a pretense she had covered, as the
desire to learn, and determined in part presently to satisfy her request: and
when time served, he sent a messenger for Apollonius. And when he was come, he
said unto him: Apollonius my daughter much desires to be your scholar, and
therefore I pray you take her to your government, and instruct her the best
you can, and I will reward you to your contentation: Apollonius answered,
gracious prince I am most willing to obey your commandment. So he took the
lady, and instructed her in the best manner he could, even as himself had
learned: wherein she profited so well, that in short time she matched, or
rather surpassed her master. Thus increased she not only in learning, but
grew also daily in more fervent love of Apollonius, as, whether standing in
doubt of her fathers resolute good will if he were moved concerning marriage, or
fearing the time would be deferred in respect whereof she was presently ready,
in so much that she fell sick and became weaker every day than other. When
the king perceived his daughters infirmity to increase, he sent immediately
throughout all the dominions for the learned physicians to search out her
grief and to cure it, who examining her urine, and feeling her pulse, could
find out no manifest cause or substance of her disease. After a few days that
this happened, three noble young men of the same country which had been suitors
a long time unto Lucina for marriage, came unto the Court, and being brought
into the kings presence, saluted him dutifully. To whom the king said,
Gentlemen, what is the cause of your coming? They answered, your Grace has
oftentimes promised to bestow your daughter in marriage upon one of us, and
this is the cause of our coming at this time. We are your subjects,
wealthy, and descended of noble families, might it therefore please your Grace
to choose one among us three, to be your son in law. Then answered the king
you are come unto me at an unseasonable time, for my daughter now applies her
study, and lies sick for the desire of learning, and the time is much unmeet
for marriage. But to the intent you shall not altogether loose your labor, nor
that I will not seem to defer you too long: write your names every one
severally in a piece of paper, and what ioynter you will make, and I will send
the writings to my daughter, that she may choose him whom she best likes of.
They did forthwith as the king had counseled them, and delivered the writings
unto the king, which he read, and signed them, and delivered them unto
Apollonius, saying: Take here these bills, and deliver them to your scholar,
which Apollonius received, and took them immediately unto the lady Lucina. Now
when she saw her schoolemaister whom she loved so entirely: she said unto
him: Master, what is the cause that you come alone into my chamber? Apollonius
answered: Madame, I have brought writings from the king your father, which he
wills you to read. Lucina then received the writings, and brake them up,
and when she had read the names of the three noblemen her suitors, she threw
away the bills, and looking upon Apollonius, said unto him: My well-beloved
Schoolemaister Apollonius, does it not grieve you that I shall be married unto
another? Apollonius answered, No madame it greeueth not me, for whatsoever
shall be for your honor, shall be unto me profitable. Then said Lucina,
Master, if you loved me you would be sorry, and therewithal she called for
ink and paper, and wrote an answer unto her father in form following:
Gracious king and dear father, forasmuch as of your goodness you have given
me free choice, and liberty to write my mind: these are to let you
understand, that I would marry with the Sea-wrecked man, and with none other:
your humble daughter, Lucina, and when she had sealed it, she delivered it unto
Apollonius to be carried unto the king. When the king had received the letters,
he perused them, wherein he perceived his daughters mind, not knowing whom she
meant by the sea-wrecked man: and therefore turning himself toward the three
Noblemen, he demanded of them which of them had suffered shipwreck? Then one
of them named Ardonius, answered. If it like your Grace, I have suffered
shipwreck? The other twain named Munditius, and Carnillus, when they heard him
say so, waxed wroth, and fell into terms of outrage against him, saying:
sickness, and the fiends of hell consume thee, for thy foul and impudent lie:
do not we, who are thy equals both of birth and age, know right well that thou
never wentest almost out of this city gates? And how could thou then suffer
shipwreck? Now when the king Altistrates could not find out which of them
had suffered shipwreck, he looked toward Apollonius, saying: Take these
letters and read them, for it may be that I do not know him whom thou
know, who was present. Apollonius receiving the letters, perused them
quickly, and perceiving himself to be loved, blushed wonderfully. Then said
the king to Apollonius, have thou found the sea-wrecked man? But Apollonius
answered little or nothing, wherein his wisdom the rather appeared according
to the saying of the wise man? In many words there wants discretion: where as
contrariwise, many an indiscreet person might be accounted wise if he had but
this one point of wisdom, to hold his tongue, wherein indeed consists the
whole trial or rather insight of a man, as signified the most wise Philosopher
Socrates.

CHAP. VII. How Apollonius was married to the lady Lucina, and hearing of king
Antiochus death, departs with his wife toward his own country of Tyrus.
BUt to return again to my story from which I have digressed: when king
Altistrates perceived that Apollonius was the man whom his daughter Lucina
disposed in her heart to prefer in love before any of the other three noble
men, he found means to put them off for that present, saying that he would
talk with them farther concerning that matter another time: who taking their
leave, immediately departed, but the king withdrew himself into the chamber
where his daughter lay sick, and said unto her? whom have you chosen to be
your husband? To whom Lucina humbling her self, and with trickling tears,
answered, Gracious Prince and dear father, I have chosen in my heart the
Sea-wrecked man, my schoolemaister Apollonius, for whom I most duetifully
desire your fatherly goodwil: when the king saw her tears, his heart bled
inwardly with compassion toward his child whom he loved tenderly, and he
kissed her, and said unto her: My sweet Lucina be of good cheer, and take
not thought for any thing, and assure thy self thou have chosen the man that
I liked of as soon as I first saw him: whom I love no less than thee: that is
to say, than if he were my natural child. And therefore since the matter is
now thus fallen out, I mean forthwith to appoint a day for your marriage,
after that I have broken the matter unto Apollonius. And when he had said that,
Lucina with blushing cheeks thanked her Father much, and he departed. Now
would I demand of lovers, whether Lucina rejoiced or not? or whether there were
any better tidings in the world could chance to a man or woman? I am sure
they would answer no. For such is the nature of this affection, that it
prefers the beloved person above all earthly things, yea and heavenly too,
unless it be brideled with reason: as the same likewise though moderately, and
within the bounds of modest womanhoode, working the woonted effect in the
lady Lucina, revived her so presently, that she forsook her bed, and cast
away her mourning apparel, and appeared as it had been a new woman restored
from death to life, and that almost in a moment. The king being alone in the
parlour called for Apollonius, and when he was come, he said thus unto him:
Apollonius, the virtue which I have seen in thee, I have testified by my
liberality toward thee, and thy trustiness is proved by committing mine
only child and daughter to thine instruction. As these have caused me to
prefer thee, so have they made my daughter to love thee, so that I am as well
contented with the one as I am well pleased with the other. And for thy part,
likewise I hope Apollonius, that as thou have been glad to be my client, thou will rejoice as much to be my son in law. Tell me thy mind out of hand, for
I attend thine answer. Then Apollonius much abashed at the kings talk,
falling down upon his knees, answered: Most gracious sovereign, your words
sound so strangely in mine ears, that I scarsly know how to give answer, and
your goodness has been so great toward me, that I can wish for no more. But
since it is your Graces pleasure, that I should not be indebted to many, but
owe all thing unto you, as life, and wife, honor, and goods, and all: you
shall not find me unthankful, howsoever God or fickle fortune deal with me, to
remain both loyal and constant to you, and your daughter, whom above all
creatures, both for birth and beauty and good qualities, I love and honor most
entirely. Altistrates reioiced much to hear so wise, and conformable an
answer, and embracing Apollonius, called him by the name of dear beloved
son. The next day morning the king addressed his messengers and purseuants,
to assemble the nobliest of his subjects and friends out of the confederat
cities, and countries, and to show them that he had certain affairs to
communicate unto them: and when they were come altogether unto Pentapolis, after
due greeting, and accustomable intertainment showed as in the manner of great
estates, he said thus unto them. My loving friends, and faithful subjects, my
meaning was to let you understand, that my daughter is desirous to marry with
her schoolmaster Apollonius, and I am well pleased therewith. Wherefore, I
beseech you all to rejoice thereat, and be glad for my daughter shall be matched
to a wise man. And know you moreover, that I appoint this day sir weeks for
the solemnization day of the marriage, at what time I desire you all to be here
present, that like friends we may rejoice, and make merry together: and when he
had all said, he dismissed the assembly. Now as the time wore away, so the
wedding day drue near, and there was great preparation made as well for the
feast, as for jewels, and rich clothes to furnish the bridegroom, and bride
withal, as althing else that appertain to the beautifiyng of so great a
wedding. And when the day was come, the king apparrelled in his princely robes
with a diadem of great price upon his head, accompanied his daughter Lucina and
Apollonius unto the Church, whom thousands of lords and ladies followed after,
all clothed in rich attire, and marshalled in comely order. The bride woare on
a gown of cloth of gold cut, and drawn out with cloth of silver, and a kirtle
of crimsin velvet imbrodered with pure gold, and thickly beset with oriental
pearls. Her hair hung down in tresses fairly broided with a lace of gold,
and a Coronet upon her head, set with precious stones of inestimable value. Her
neck was bare, whereby her naked skin appeared whiter than the driven snow,
curiously bedecked with chains of gold, and every other lincke enameled with
black amell. Great baudrickes of perfect goldsmithes work upon each arm to
fasten the sleeves of her garment from sliding up at the wreast. Lastly, a
massy collar of fine gold, made esse wise upon her shoulders, hanging down
behind and before, with a Diamond reaching down unto her middle, esteemed in
value at threescore thousand pound, which the king her father had sent unto her
for a present, that morning while she was apparrelling. The bridegroom wore on
a dublet and hosen of costly cloth of silver guarded with Goldsmithes work of
the same color, and a gown of purple Satin embroidred with gold and beset
with rich stones. His cap was of fine black Ueluet, all over bespangled with
Rubies, set in gold and fastened on by loopes: the band of massy gold, beset
with courses of stones in order, first a Rubie, then a Turkeis, then a Diamond,
and so beginning again with a Rubie. This was their raiment, and thus went
they forth together hand in hand, after whom, as is already declared, the
lords and ladies followed by three and three in a rank. When the solemnities
were done at the Church, and the words spoken, and the Princes joined in
marriage, they returned home and went to dinner. What shall I now speak of
the noble cheer and Princely provision for this feast? And after dinner of the
exquisite Music, fine dancing, heavenly singing, sweet devising, and
pleasant communication among the estates? I may not discourse at large of the
liberal challenges made and proclaimed at the tilt, barriers, running at the
ring, ioco di can, managing fierce horses, running a foot and daunsing in
armor? And at night of the gorgeous plays, shows, disguised speeches, masks
and mummeries, with continual harmony of all kinds of music, and
banqueting in all delicacie? All these things I leave to the consideration of
them which have seen the like in the Courts, and at the weddinges of Princes,
where they have seen more than my simple pen is able to describe, or may be
comprehended within the recital of so short an history. When night was come,
and revels were ended, the bride was brought to bed, and Apollonius tarried not
long from her, where he accomplished the duties of marriage, and fair Lucina
conceived child the same night. The next day, every man arose to feasting and
iollitie, for the wedding triumphs continued an whole month. This while
Lucinas belly began to grow, and as it fortuned that the lord Apollonius and
his lady on a day walked along the sea side for their disporte, he saw a
fair ship fleeting under sail, which he knew well to be of his country,
and he hallowed unto the master whose name was Calamitus and asked of him of
whence his ship was? The master answered of Tyrus. Thou have named my country
said Apollonius: Art thou then of Tyrus, said the master? yea, answered
Apollonius. Then said the master, know thou one Apollonius prince of that
country? If thou do, or shall hear of him hereafter, bid him now be glad
and rejoice, for king Antiochus and his daughter are strooken dead with
lightning from heaven. And the City of Antiochia with all the riches, and the
whole kingdom are reserved for Apollonius.

With these words the ship being under sail, departed, and Apollonius being
filled with gladness, immediately began to break with his lady to give him
leave to go and receive his kingdom. But when fair Lucina heard him begin to
move words of departing, she burst out into tears, saying: My Lord, if you
were now in some far country, and heard say that I were near my time to be
delivered, you ought to make haste home unto me: But since you be now with me,
and know in what case I am me thinks you should not now desire to depart from
me. Howbeit, if your pleasure be so, and tarriance breed danger, and kingdoms
want not heirs long, as I would not persuade you to tarry, so do I request you
to take me with you. This discreet answer pleased Apollonius well, wherefore
he kissed his lady, and they agreed it should be so. And when they were
returned from walking Lucina rejoicing, came unto the king her father, saying:
dear father, rejoice I beseech you, and be glad with my lord Apollonius and
me, for the most cruel tyrant Antiochus and his daughter are by the just
judgment of God destroyed with lightning from heaven: and the kingdom and
riches are reserved for us to inherit: Moreover, I pray you good father, let
me have your goodwil to travel thither with my husband. The king rejoiced much
at this tidings, and granted her reasonable request, and also commanded all
things to be provided immediately that were necessary for the journey. The
ships were strongly appointed and brought unto the shore, and fraught with all things convenient, as gold, silver, apparel, bedding, vittels and armor.
Moreover, whatsoever fortune might befall, the king prepared to sail with them
Ligozides the nurse, and a midwife, and all things meet for the child
whenever Lucina should need them: and with great honor himself
accompanies them unto the sea side, when the time appointed for their
departure was come, where with many tears, and great fatherly affection he
kissed his daughter, and embraced his son in law, and recommended them unto
GOD in whom he did wish unto them a most prosperous journey, and so returned
unto his palace.

CHAP. VIII. How fair Lucina died in travel of child upon the sea, and being
thrown into the water was cast on land at Ephesus, and taken home by Cerimon a
Physician.
THe mariners immediately merrily hoissed sail and departed, and when they had
sailed two days, the master of the ship warned Apollonius of a tempest
approaching, which now came on and increased so fast, that all the company was
amazed, and Lucina, what with sea-sicknes and fear of danger, fell in labor of
child, wherewith she was weakened, that there was no hope of recovery, but she
must now die: yet being first delivered of a fair daughter, insomuch that now
all tokens of life were gone, and she appeared none other but to be dead. When
Apollonius beheld this heavy spectacle, no heart was able to conceive his
bitter grief, for like a mad man distracted he tare his cloths, and rent his
hair, and laying himself upon the carkas, he uttered these words with great
affection: O my dear lady and wife, the daughter of king Altistrates, what
shall I now answer to thy father for thee? would God thou had remained with
him at home, and if it had pleased God to have wrought this his pleasure in
thee, it had rather chanced with thy loving father in his quiet land, than with
me thy woeful husband upon the wild seas. The whole company also made great
lamentation for her, bewailing the death of so noble and beautiful a lady,
and so courteous a gentlewoman. Howbeit in the hotest of the sorrow the
governor of the ship came unto Apollonius, saying: My lord, pluck up your
heart, and be of good cheer, and consider I pray you that the ship may not
abide to carry the dead carkas, and therefore command it to be cast into the
sea, that we may the better escape. Then answered Apollonius: What say thou
varlet? would thou have me cast this body into the sea, which received me
into house and favor, when I was in misery and drenched in the water, wherein
I lost ship, goods and all? But taking further consultation, and aduising
himself what were best to do, he called certain of his men unto him, and thus
he devised with them. My trusty servants, whom this common mischance grieueth
as well as me, since sorowing will not help that which is chanced, assist me,
good sirs, to provide for the present necessity. Let us make forthwith a large
chest, and bore the lid full of small holes, and we will sear it all over
within with pitch and rosen molten together, whereinto we will put cunningly a
sheet of lead, and in the same we will enclose the tender corpse of the wife of
me, of all other a most vnfortutunate husband. This was no sooner said, but it
was almost likewise done with semblable celertie. Then took they the body of
the fair lady Lucina, and arraied her in princely apparel, and laid her into
the chest, and Apollonius placed a great sum of gold at her head, and a
great treasure of silver at her feet, and he kissed her, letting fall a flood
of salt tears on her face, and he wrote a bill, and put it in also, the tenor
whereof was in form as follows: Whosoever shall find this chest* I pray him to
take ten pieces of gold for his pains, and to bestow ten pieces more upon
the burial of the corpse: for it has lest many tears to the parents and
friends, with doleful heaps of sorrow and heaviness. But whosoever shall do
otherwise than the present grief requires, let him die a shameful death, and
let there be none to bury his body. And then closing all up very safe,
commanded the chest to be lifted ouerboorde into the sea: and willed the
child to be nursed with all diligence, that if ever fortune should so fall, he
might present unto good king Altistrates a niece in steed of a daughter.

Now fleeted away the ship fast with the wind, and the coffin tumbled backward
with the tide, and Apollonius could not keep his eye from the body whereon his
heart rested, until kenning failed, and the sea rose up with a bank between.
There were two days passed, and the night was now at hand, when the next day
morning the waves rolled forth this chest to the land, and cast it ashore on
the coast of Ephesus. Not far from that place there dwelt a physician whose
name was Cerimon, who by chance walking abroad upon the shore that day with
his scholars, found the chest which the sea had cast up, and willed his
servants to take it up, and diligently to carry it to the next town, where he
dwelt, and they did so. When Cerimon came home he opened the chest, marueling
what should be therein, and found a lady arrayed in princely apparel and
ornaments, very fair and beautiful to behold. Whose excellency in that
respect as many as beheld, were strangely affectioned thereat, perceiving such
an incomparable gleame of beauty to be resident in her face, wherein nature
had not committed the least error that might be devised, saving that she made
her not immortal. The hair of her head was naturally as white as snow, under
which appeared her goodly forehead, fair and large, wherein was neither
blemish nor wrinkle. Her eyes were like two stars turning about in their
natural course, not wantonly rouing here and there, but modestly moving as
governed by reason, representing the stabilitie of a settled mind. Her eye brows
decently commending the residue of her countenance. Her nose straight, as it
were drawn with a line, comely dividing her cherry cheeks asunder, not
reaching forth too long, nor cut off too short, but of a commendable
proportion. Her neck was like the white alablaster shining like the bright
sun beams, woonderfully delighting the minds of the beholders. Her body of
comely stature, neither too high nor too low, not scregged with leanenesse,
nor indecently corpulent, but in such equality consisting, that no man would
wish it otherwise. From her shoulders sprang forth her arms, representing two
branches growing out of a tree, beautified with a white hand, and fingers long
and slender, surpassing to behold. To be short, such was the excellency of her
beutie in each respect, that it could suffer no deformity to accompany it,
whereby also may be discerned a singular perfection of her mind, created by
God and infused into her body, whereby it was moved, and those good qualities
of hers expressed in operation: so that all outward beauty of the body
proceeds from the inward beuty of the mind, from whence sprang up the old
and true saying of the wisest Philosophers, that the sundry nature of the form
or soul, diversely disposes the matter according unto it own quality: as it
expressly appeared in the beutiful countenance and stature of this Ladies
body, whereof Cerimon stood amazedly taking the view.

CHAP. IX. How Lucina was restored to life by one of Cerimon the Physicians
scholars, and how Cerimon adopted her to his daughter, and placed her in the
temple of Diana.
THe surpassing beauty of fair Lucina, being such as is before recited, no
wonder it was though Cerimon were maruellously ravished at ye sight, whereby
his affection enforced him to break out into these words: Alas good beautiful
gentlewoman, what unhappy and cruel chance has thus made thee a way and
caused thee to be so woefully forsaken? And as he spoke those words, he
perceived the gold that lay at her head, and the silver that lay at her feet,
with a scroll of paper written, the which he took up and read, the tenor
whereof was this: Whosoever shall find this chest, I pray him for to take ten
pieces of gold for his pains, and to bestow ten pieces more on the burial
of the corpse: for it has left many tears to the parents and friends, with
doleful heaps of sorrow and heaviness. But whosoever shall do otherwise
than the present grief requires, let him die a shameful death, and let there
be none to bury his body. And as soon as he had read over the writing, he
said unto his servants: now let us perform unto the body, that which the
sorrow requires. And I swear to you by the hope which I have to live, that I
will bestow more money upon the accomplishing of the same than the sorrowful
scedul requires. Wherefore according to the manner of the burial, which was at
that time to burn the bodies of the dead, and to bury the ashes gathered up
and put into pottes, he commanded a pile of wood to be erected, and upon the
top thereof he caused the body to be laid.

Now Cerimon had a scholar in Physic, whose name was Machaon very towardly
in his profession, of years but young, but ancient in wit and experience, who
coming in while these things were doing, and beholding so beautiful a corpse
laid upon the pile, he stood still and wondered at it. Which thing Cerimon
perceiving: thou art come in good time said he to Machaon, and I looked for
thee about this time. Take this flagon of precious ointment, and power it upon
the corpse, being the last ceremony of the sepulture. Then came Machaon unto
the corpse, and pulled the clothes from the ladies bosom, and powered forth the
ointment, and bestowing it abroad with his hand, perceived some warmth in her
breast, and that there was life in the body. Machaon stood astonished, and he
felt her pulses, and laid his cheek to her mouth, and examined all other
tokens that he could devise, and he perceived how death striued with life
within her, and that the conflict was dangerous and doubtful, who should
prevail. Then said he unto the servants: set fire unto the wood at the four
corners of the pile, and cause it to burn moderatly, and bring me hither a bed
that I may take the body out of the chest, and lay it thereon.

This being done, he chafed the body against the fire, until the blood which
was congealed with cold, was wholly resolved. Then went Machaon unto his
master Cerimon and said: The woman whom thou think to be dead, is alive,
and that you may the better believe my saying, I will plainly prove it to be
so. And when he had so said, he took the body reverently in his arms, and
bare it into his own chamber, and laid it upon his bed groueling upon the
breast. Then took he certain hot and comfortable oils, and warming them
upon the coals, he dipped fair wool therein, and fomented all the body
over therewith, until such time as the congealed blood and humors were
thoroughly resolved, and the spirits eftsoons recovered their wonted course,
the veins waxed warm, the arteries began to beat, and the lungs drew in
the fresh air again, and she opened her eyes, and looked about, and being
perfectly come to herself, what art thou, said she unto Machaon? see thou
touch me not otherwise than thou ought to do, for I am a Kings daughter, and
the wife of a King. When Machaon heard her speak these words, he was exceeding
glad, and he ran unto his master and said: Sir, the woman lives, and speaks
perfectly. Then answered Cerimon: My well-beloved scholar Machaon, I am glad of
this fortunate chance, and I much commend thy wisdom, and praise thy
learning, and cannot but extol thy diligence. Wherefore be not unthankful to
thy knowledge, but receive here the reward which is due unto thee, namely,
that which by the writing was appointed to be bestowed upon her burial: for
thou have restored her unto life, and she has brought with her great sums
of money. When he had so said, they came unto her and saluted her, and caused
her to be apparelled with wholesome and comfortable clothes, and to be refreshed
with good meats. A few days after, when she had fully recovered strength, and
Cerimon by communication knew that she came of the stock of a king, he sent
for many of his friends to come unto him, and he adopted her for his own
daughter: and she with many tears requiring that she might not be touched by
any man, for that intent he placed her in the temple of Diana which was there
at Ephesus, to be preserved there inuiolably among the religious women.

CHAP. X. How Apollonius arriving at Tharsus, delivers his young daughter
Tharsia unto Stranguilio and Dionisiades to be brought up, and how the nurce
lying in her deathbed declares unto Tharsia who were her parents.
LEt us leave now a while the lady Lucina among the holy Nuns in the temple
of Diana at Ephesus, and let us look back unto sorrowful Apollonius, whose
ship with fortunate wind, and the good providence of God directing the same,
arrived at the shore of Tharsus, where he immediately came forth of the ship,
and entered into the house of Stranguilio and Dionisiades, whom he saluted, and
told the^ the heavy chances that had befallen him, both of the great storms
and tempests on the sea, which he had endured, as also of the death of the
good lady Lucina his wife: howbeit said he, God be thanked, my daughter
remains alive, for the which I am very glad: wherefore, dear friends
Stranguilio and Dionisiades, according to the trust which I have in you, I mean
in some things to use your friendship, while I go about to recover the kingdom
which is reserved for me. For I will not return back again unto king
Altistrates my father in law, whose daughter alas, I have lost in the sea, but
meaning rather to exercise the trade of merchandise, I commit my daughter unto
you to be nourished, and brought up with your young daughter Philomacia, and I
will that my daughter be called Tharsia. Moreover I will leave my dear wife
Lucinas nurce here also, called Ligozides, to tend the child, that she may be
less troublesome unto you. And when he had made an end of talking, he
delivered the infant and the nurce unto Stranguilio, and therewithal great
store of gold, silver, and raiment: and he swear a solemn oath, that he would
not poule his head, clip his beard, nor pare his nails until he had married
his daughter at ripe years. They wondered much at so strange an oath, promising
faithfully to bring up his daughter with all diligence. When these things were
ended according to his mind, Apollonius took his leave, departed unto his
ship, and sailed into far countries, and unto the uppermost parts of Egypt.
Therewhile the young maiden Tharsia sprang up in years, and when she was about
five years old, being free borne she was set to school with other free
children, always jointly accompanied with Philomacia, being of ye same age
that she was of. The time passed forth a pace, and Tharsia grew up so well in
learning as in years until coming to the age of fourteen years, one day
when she returned from school, she found Ligozides her nurce suddenly fallen
sick, and sitting beside her upon the bed, demanded of her the cause, and
manner of her sickness. Then said the nurce unto her, hearken unto my words
dear daughter Tharsia, and lay them up in thine heart. Whom think thou to
be thy father, and thy mother, and in what country supposest thou wast thou
borne? Tharsia answered, why nurce, why ask you me this question? Stranguilio
is my father, Dionisiades my mother, and I was borne in Tharsus. Then sighed
the nurce, and said: No sweet Tharsia, no, thou art deceived. But hearken
unto me, and I will declare unto thee the beginning of thy birth, to the intent
thou may know how to guide thy self after my death. Apollonius ye prince of
Tyrus is thy father, and Lucina king Altistrates daughter was thy mother, who
being in travel with thee, died after thou wast borne, and thy father
Apollonius, enclosed her body in a chest with princely ornaments, laying
twenty talents of gold at her head, and as much at her feet in silver, with a
scedule written, and threw the chest ouerboord into the sea, that whether
soever it were driven, it might suffice to bury her, according to her estate.
Thus wast thou born upon the Sea, and thy fathers ship with much wrestling of
contrary winds, and with his unspeakable grief of mind arrived at this
shore, and brought thee in thy swading clothes unto this city, where he with
great care delivered thee unto this thine host Stranguilio and Dionisiades his
wife to be fostered up diligently, and left me here also to attend upon thee.
Moreover he swear an oath, that he would not poule his head, clip his beard,
nor pare his nails, until he had married thee unto some man at ripe years.
Wherefore now I admonish thee, that if after my death thine host or thine
hostess, whom thou call thy parents, shall happily offer thee any injury,
then run thou into the market place, where thou shall find the stature of
thy father standing, and take hold of it, and cry aloud saying: O Citizens of
Tharsus, I am his daughter, whose image this is: and the citizens being
mindful of thy fathers benefits, will doubtless revenge thine injury. Then
answered Tharsia: Dear nurce Ligozides, I take God to witness, if you had not
told me thus much, I should utterly have been ignorant from whence I had come.
And therefore now, good nurce, I thank thee with all my heart, and if ever
need so require, thy counsel shall be followed: and while they were debating
these matters between them, Ligozides being very sick and weak, gave up the
ghost, and by the death of this present body, passed into the state of life
everlasting.

CHAP. XI. How after the death of Ligozides the nurce Dionisiades envying at
the beauty of Tharsia, conspired her death, which should have been
accomplished by a villain of the country.
THarsia much lamented the death of Ligozides her nurce, and caused her body
to be solemnly buried not far of, in a field without the walls of the city,
and mourned for her an whole year following. But when the year was expired,
she put off her mourning atire, and put on her other apparel, and frequented
the schools, and the study of liberal Sciences as before. And whenever she
returned from school, she would receive no meat before she had visited her
nurces sepulcher, which she did daily, entering thereinto, and carrying a flagon
of wine with her, where she used to abide a space, and to call upon her father
and mother. Now on a day it fortuned, that as she passed through the street
with Dionisiades, and her companion Philomacia, the people beholding the
beauty and comeliness of Tharsia, said: Happy is that father that has Tharsia
to his daughter, but her companion that goes with her, is foul and evil
favored. When Dionisiades heard Tharsia commended, and her own daughter
Philomacia so dispraised, she returned home wonderful wroth, and withdrawing
her self into a solitary place, began thus secretly to discourse of ye matter.
It is now fourteen years since Apollonius this foolish girls father departed
from hence* and he never sends letters for her, nor any remembrance unto her,
whereby I conjecture that he is dead. Ligozides her nurce is departed, and
there is no body now of whom I should stand in fear, and therefore I will now
slay her, and dress up mine own daughter in her apparel and jewels. When
she had thus resolved her self upon this wicked purpose, in the mean while
there came home one of their country villains called Theophilus, whom she
called, and said thus unto him. Theophilus, my trusty friend, if ever thou
look for liberty, or that I should do thee pleasure, do so much for me as
to slay Tharsia. Then said Theophilus: Alas mistress, wherein has that
innocent maiden offended, that she should be slain? Dionisiades answered,
she innocent? nay she is a wicked wretch, and therefore thou shall not deny
to fulfill my request, but do as I command thee, or else I swear by God, thou
shall dearly repent it. But how shall I best do it, Mistres said the
villain? She answered, she has a custom as soon as she returns home
from School, not to eat meat before that she have gone into her Nurces
sepulcher, where I would have thee stand ready, with a dagger drawn in thine
hand, and when she is come in, gripe her by the hair of the head, and so slay
her: then take her body and cast it into the Sea, and when thou have so done,
I will make thee free, and besides reward thee liberally. Then took the
villain a dagger, and girded himself therewith, and with an heavy heart and
weeping eyes went forth toward the grave, saying within himself, Alas poor
wretch that I am, alas poor Theophilus that can not deserve thy liberty but
by shedding of innocent blood: and with that he went into the grave, and drue
his dagger, and made him ready for the deed. Tharsia was now come from
school, and made haste unto the grave with a flagon of wine as she was wont
to do, and entered within the vaut. Then the villain rushed violently upon
her, and caught her by the hair of the head, and threw her to the ground. And
while he was now ready to stab her with the dagger, poor silly Tharsia all
amazed casting up her eyes upon him, knew the villain, and holding up her
hands, said thus unto him: O Theophilus, against whom have I so grievously
offended, that I must die therefore? The villain answered, Thou have not
offended, but thy father has, which left thee behind him in Stranguilios house
with so great a treasure in money, and princely ornaments. O, said the maiden,
would to God he had not done so: but I pray thee Theophilus, since there is no
hope for me to escape with life, give me license to say my prayers before I
die. I give thee license said the villain, and I take God to record, that I
am constrained to murder thee against my will.

CHAP. XII. How certain Pirates rescued Tharsia, when she should have been
slain, and carried her unto the city Machilenta to be sold among other
bondslaues.
AS fortune, or rather the providence of God served, while Tharsia was devoutly
making her prayers, certain pirates which were come aland, and stood under the
side of an hill watching for some prey, beholding an armed man offering
violence unto a maiden, cried unto him and said: Thou cruel tyrant, that maiden
is our prey and not thy victory, and therefore hold thine hands from her, as
thou love thy life. When the villain heard that, he ran away as fast as he
could, and hid himself behind the sepulcher. Then came the Pirates and rescued
Tharsia, and carried her away to their ships, and hoysed sail, and departed.
And the villain returned home to his mistres, and said unto her: that which
you commanded me to do is dispatched, and therefore now I think it good,
that you put on a mourning garment, and I also, and let us counterfeit great
sorrow and heaviness in the sight of all the people, and say that she died
of some grievous disease. But Stranguilio himself consented not to this
treason, but so soon as he heard of the foul mischaunce, being as it were a
mopte, and mated with heaviness and grief, he clad himself in mourning array,
and lamented that woeful case, saying: Alas in what a mischief am I wrapped?
what might I do, or say herein? The father of this maiden delivered this city
from the peril of death, for this cities sake he suffered shipwreck, lost his
goods and endured penury, and now he is requited with evil for goood. His
daughter which he committed unto me to be brought up, is now devoured by a most
cruel Lioness: thus I am deprived as it were of mine own eyes, and forced to
bewail the death of an innocent, and am utterly spoiled through the fierce
biting of a most venomous serpent. Then casting his eyes up toward heaven: O
God said he, thou know that I am innocent from the blood of silly Tharsia,
which thou have to require at Dionisiades hands, and therewithal he looked
toward his wife, saying: Thou wicked woman, tell me, how have thou made away
prince Apollonius daughter? thou that live both to the slander of God, and
man? Dionisiades answered in many words evermore excusing herself, and
moderating the wrath of Stranguilio, she counterfeited a fained sorrow by
attiring her self and her daughter in mourning apparel, and in dissembling
tears before the people of the city, to whom she said: Dearly beloved
friends and Citizens of Tharsus, for this cause we do weep and mourn in
your sight, because the joy of our eyes, and staff of our old age, the Maiden
Tharsia is dead, leaving unto us bitter tears, and sorrowful hearts. Yet
have we already taken order for her funerals, and buried her according to her
degree. These words were right grievous unto the people, and there was almost
none that let not fall some tears for sorrow. And they went with one accord
unto the market place, whereas her fathers image stood, made of brass, and
erected also another unto her there with this inscription: Unto the virgin
Tharsia in liew of her fathers benefits, the Citizens of Tharsus have erected
this monument.

CHAP. XIII. How the Pirates which stole away Tharsia, brought her to the city
Machilenta, and sold her to a common bawd, and how she preserved her
virginity.
THe mean time while these troubles were at Tharsus, the Pirates being in their
course upon the Sea, by benefit of happy wind arrived at Machilenta, and
came into the city. Now had they taken many mo men and women besides
Tharsia, whom all they brought a shore, and set them to sell as slaves for
money. Then came there sundry to buy such as they lacked for their purposes,
amongst whom a most vile man-bawd, beholding the beauty and tender years of
Tharsia, offered money largely for her. Howbeit Athanagoras, who was Prince of
the same City, beholding likewise the noble countenance, and regarding the
great discretion of the maiden in communication, out-bid the bawd, and offered
for her ten sestercies of gold. But ye bawd being loath to loose so commodious a
prey, offered twenty. And I will give thirty said Athanagoras. Nay I will give
forty said the bawd: and I fifty quoth Athanagoras, and so they continued in
outbidding one an other until the bawd offered an hundred sestercies of gold
to be paid ready down, and whosoever will give more, said he, I will yet give
ten sestercies more than he. Then prince Athanagoras thus bethought him
secretly in his mind: if I should contend with the bawd to buy her at so hie a
price, I must needs sell other slaves to pay for her, which were both loss
and shame unto me. Wherefore I will suffer him to buy her, and when he sets
her to hire, I will be the first man that shall come unto her, and I will
gather the flower of her virginity, which shall stand me in as great stead
as if I had bought her. Then the bawd paid the money, and took the maiden and
departed home, and when he came into his house, he brought her into a
certain chapel where stood the idol of Priapus made of gold, and garnished
with pearls and precious stones. This idol was made after the shape of a man,
with a mighty member unproportionable to the body, always erected, whom bawds
and leachers do adore, making him their god, and worshipping him. Before this
filthy idol he commanded Tharsia with reverence to fall down. But she
answered, God forbid master, that I should worship such an idol. But (sir)
said she, are you a Lapsatenian? Why askeest thou, said the bawd? I ask, quoth
she, because the Lapsatenians do worship Priapus: this spoke she of
simplicity, not knowing what he was. Ah wretch, answered he, know thou not
that thou art come into the house of a covetous bawd? When Tharsia heard that,
she fell down at his feet and wept, saying: O master, take compassion upon my
virginity, and do not hire out my body for so vile a gain. The bawd answered,
know thou not, that neither bawd nor hangman do regard tears or prayers?
Then called he unto him a certain villain which was governor over his maids,
and said unto him: Let this maiden be decked in virgins apparel, precious and
costly, and write this title upon her: whosoever defloureth Tharsia shall pay
ten pieces of gold, and afterward she shall be common unto the people for one
piece at a time. The villain fulfilled his masters commandment, and the
third day after that she was bought, she was with great solemnity conducted
through the street with music, the bawd himself with a great multitude
going before, and so conveyed unto the brothell house. When she was come
thither, Athanagoras the Prince disguising his head and face, because he
would not be known, came first in unto her, whom when Tharsia saw, she
threw her self down at his feet, and said unto him: for the love of God,
Gentleman, take pity on me, and by the name of God I adjure and charge you,
that you do no violence unto me, but bridle your lust, and hearken unto my
unhappy estate, and consider diligently from whence I am sprung. My father was
poor Apollonius prince of Tyrus, whom force constrained to forsake his own
country. My mother was daughter to Altistrates king of Pentapolis, who died in
the birth of me, poor wretch, upon the sea. My father also is dead as was
supposed, which caused Dionisiades wife to Stranguilio of Tharsus, to whom my
father committed me of special trust to be brought up being but an infant,
envying mine estate, and thirsting after my wealth, to seek my death by the
hands of a villain, which had been accomplished, and I would to God it had
before I had seen this day, but that I was suddenly taken away by the pirates
which sold me unto this filthy bawd. With these or such like words declared
she her heavy fortune, eftsoons sobbing and bursting out into streams of
tears, that for extreme grief she could scarsly speak. When she had in this
manner uttered her sorrow, the good prince being astonished and moved with
compassion, said unto her. Be of good cheer Tharsia, for surely I rue thy
case, and I my self have also a daughter at home, to whom I doubt that the
like chances may befall.

And when he had so said, he gave her twenty pieces of gold, saying: Hold
here a greater price or reward for thy virginity, than thy master appointed:
and say as much unto others that come unto thee as thou have done to me, and
thou shall withstand them. Then Tharsia fell on her knees, and weeping said
unto him: Sir, I give you most hearty thanks for your great compassion and
courtesy, and most heartily I beseech you upon my knees, not to descry unto any
that which I have said unto you. No surely, answered Athanagoras, unless I
tell it unto my daughter, that she may take heed when she comes unto the
like years, that she fall not into the like mishappe: and when he had so
said, he let fall a few tears, and departed. Now as he was going, he met
with an other pilgrim that with like devotion came for to seek the same
saint, who demanded of him how he liked of the maidens company. Truly,
answered Athanagoras never of any better. Then the young man whose name was
Aportatus entered into the chamber, and the maiden, after the manner, shut the
door to, and Athanagoras listened at the window. Then said Aportatus unto
Tharsia, how much did the prince give unto thee? She answered forty pieces of
gold. Then said he, receive here of me an whole pound weight of gold. The
Prince which heard this talk thought then in his mind, the more that you do
give her, the more she will weep, as thinking that you would look for
recompense, the which she means not to perform.

The maiden received the money, and fell down on her knees at his feet, and
declared unto him all her estate with tears, as is before showed. When
Aportatus heard that, he was moved with compassion, and he took her up from
the ground, saying: Arise Lady Tharsia, we are al men, and subject to the like
chances, and therewithal he departed. And when he came forth he found prince
Athanagoras before the door laughing at him, to whom he said: Is it well done,
my liege, thus to delude a poor gentleman? was there none to whom you might
begin in tears but unto me only? Then communed they further of the matter,
and swear an oath between themselves, that they would not bewray those words
unto any, and they withdrew themselves aside into a secret place, to see the
going in and coming forth of other, and they saw many which went in and gave
their money, and came forth again weeping. Thus Tharsia through the grace of
God, and fair persuasion, preserved her body undefiled.

CHAP. XIIII. How Tharsia withstoode a second assault of her virginity, and by
what means she was preserved.
WHen night was come, the master bawd used always to receive the money, which
his women had gotten by the use of their bodies the day before. And when it was
demanded of Tharsia, she brought him the money, as the price and hire of her
virginity. Then said the bawd unto her: it is well done Tharsia, use diligence
henceforth, and see that you bring me thus much money every day. When the next
day was past also, and the bawd understood that she remained a virgin still, he
was offended, and called unto him the villain that had charge over the maids,
and said unto him: Sir, how chances it that Tharsia remains a virgin
still? take her unto thee, and spoil her of her maidenhead, or be sure thou
shall be whipped. Then said the villain unto Tharsia, tell me, art thou yet a
virgin? She answered, I am, and shall be as long as God will suffer me. How then,
said he, have thou gotten all this money? She answered, with tears falling
down upon her knees, I have declared mine estate, humbly requesting all men to
take compassion on my virginity. And now likewise, falling then down at his
feet also, take pity on me, good friend, which am a poor captive, and the
daughter of a king, and do not defile me. The villain answered: Our master
the bawd is very covetous and greedy of money, and therefore I see no means
for thee to continue a virgin. Whereunto Tharsia replied: I am skilful in the
liberal sciences, and well exercised in all studies, and no man sings or
plays on instruments better than I, wherefore bring me into the market place
of the city, that men may hear my cunning. Or let the people propound any
manner of questions, and I will resolve them: and I doubt not but by this
practice I shall get store of money daily. When the villain heard this devise,
and bewailed the maidens mishappe, he willingly gave consent thereto, and brake
with the bawd his master touching that matter, who hearing of her skill, and
hoping for the gain, was easily persuaded.

Now when she was brought into the market place, all the people came thronging
to see and hear so learned a virgin, before whom she uttered her cunning in
music, and her eloquence in speaking, and answered manifestly unto all such
questions as were propounded unto her with such perspicuitie, that all
confessed themselves fully satisfied, and she won great fame thereby, and
gained great sums of money. But as for Prince Athanagoras, he had evermore a
special regard in the preservation of her virginity, none otherwise than if
she had been his own daughter, and rewarded the villain very liberally for
his diligent care over her.

CHAP. XV. How Apollonius coming to Tharsus, and not finding his daughter,
lamented her supposed death, and taking ship again, was driven by a tempest
to Machilenta where Tharsia was.
Return we now again unto Prince Apollonius, who whiles these things were
doing at Machilenta when the foureteenth year was expired, arrived at Tharsus,
and came into the city unto the house of Stranguilio and Dionisiades, with
whom he had left his young daughter Tharsia. Whom when Stranguilio beheld and
knew, he ran hastily unto his wife Dionisiades and said: Thou reportedst
that Prince Apollonius was dead, and lo now where he is come to require his
daughter. What shall we now do, or say unto him? Then cried she out, alas
wretched husband and wife that we are, let us quickly put on our mourning
attire, and shead forth tears, and he will believe us that his daughter died
a natural death. And when they had apparelled themselves, they came forth
unto Apollonius, who seeing them in mourning attire, said unto them: My trusty
friends, Stranguilio and Dionisiades, why weep ye thus at my coming? and tell
me, I pray you (which I rather believe) whether these tears be not rather mine
than yours. Not so (my lord Apollollnius) answered the wicked woman. And I
would to God some other body, and not mine husband or I, were enforced to tell
you these heavy tidings, that your dear daughter Tharsia is dead. When
Apollonius heard that word, he was suddenly cut to the heart, and his flesh
trembled that he could scarce stand on his legs, and long time he stood
amazed with his eyes intentiuely fixed on the ground, but at length recovering
himself, and taking fresh breath, he cast up his eyes upon her and said: O
woman, if my daughter be dead, as thou say she is, is the money also and
apparel perished with her? She answered, some is, and some yet remains. And
as for your daughter, my Lord, we were always in good hope, that when you
came, you should have found her alive and merry. But to the intent that you may
the better believe us concerning her death, we have a sufficient witness. For
our citizens being mindful of your benefits bestowed upon them, have erected
unto her a monument of brass by yours, which you may go see if you please. And
when she had so said, she brought forth such money, jewels and apparel which
it pleased her to say were remaining of Tharsias store. And Apollonius
believing indeed that she was dead, said unto his servants: take up this
stuff and bear it away unto the ships, and I will go walk unto my daughters
monument: and when he came there, he read the superscription in manner as is
above written, and he fell suddenly as it were into an outrageous affection and
cursed his own eyes, saying: O most cruel eyes, why can you not yield forth
sufficient tears, and woorthily bewail the death of my dear daughter? and
with that word, with grief and extreme sorrow he fell into a sown, from
which so soon as ever he was once revived, immediately he went unto the
ships unto his servants, unto whom he said, cast me, I beseech you,
into the very bottom of the sea, for I have no joy of my life, and my desire
is to yield up my Ghost in the water. But his servants used great persuasions
with him to assuage his sorrow, wherein presently they some deal prevailed,
as they might in so woeful a case, and partly the time, which is a curer of all
cares, continually mittigated some part of the grief, and he espying the
wind to serve well for their departure, hoised up sail, and bid the land
adue. They had not thus sailed long in their course, but the wind came about
to a contrary quarter, and blew so stiffly that it troubled both sea and
ships. The rain fell fiercely over head, the sea wrought wonderously under
the ships: and to be short, the tempest was terrible for the time. It was then
thought best in that extremity to strike sail, and let the helm go, and to
suffer the ship to drive with the tide, whither it should please God to
direct it. But as joy evermore follows heaviness, so was this sharp storm
occasion of a sweet meeting of the father with the daughter, as in process
hereafter it shall appear. For while Apollonius ship runs thus at
randon, it strikes upon the shore of the City Machilenta, where at that
present his daughter Tharsia remained.

Now it fortuned that this very day of their arrival was the birth day of
Prince Apollonius, and when as the Mariners saw themselves so happily come to
the land, both for the gladness of the one, and joy of the other, the master
of the ship, and all the whole company gave a great shout.

When Apollonius, who lay solitarily under the hatches, heard such a sudden
voice of mirth, he called unto the master, and demanded what it meant. The
master answered, we rejoice, and be you glad also with us my lord, for this
day we do solemnize the feast of your birth. Then Apollonius sighed, and said
himself: all keep hollyday save I only, and let it suffice unto my servants
that I only remain in sorrow and heaviness: Howbeit I give unto them ten
pieces of gold, to buy what they will to keep holyday withal. But whosoever
shall call me unto the feast, or go about to provoke me unto mirth, I command
that his thighs shall be broken. So the cater took the money, and went aland,
and provided necessaries, and returned again unto the ship.

CHAP. XVI. How Athanagoras prince of Machilenta seeing the beauty of
Apollonius ship, went aboard of it, and did the best he could to comfort him.
AS fortune thereto served, and delight to take the fresh air moved
Athanagoras prince of ye City, to walk toward the sea side, he saw Apollonius
ships riding at anchor: at the view whereof he took great pleasure, especially
at ye Admiral which was a great ship and a beautiful, wherein Apollonius
himself was carried, the like whereof happily he had not seen often before. This
was that Athanagoras that loved Tharsia so tenderly, and he haled unto the
Mariners, and asked of whence that fair ship was? The mariners answered,
that she came now from Tharsus. Truly, said Athanagoras, it is a fair ship,
and well appointed, and of all that I have seen, I like best of her. Now when
the Mariners heard their ship so highly commended, they desired him to come
aboard, whereunto he willingly granted. And when he was come abord, he sat
down with them at meat, and he drue his purse and laid down ten pieces of
gold upon the table, saying you shall not say that you have bidden an
unthankful person, take this small sum of money at my hands for a reward,
and they thanked him. But when he was set down, and beheld all that sat at the
board, he demanded who was owner of the ship, and where he was? The master
answered, our owner is sick, and weak with sorrow and taking thought, and
needs will die. He lost his wife upon the Sea, and his daughter in a strange
land. Athanagoras said unto one of the servants called Ardalius: I will give
thee two pieces of gold, to go down and tell thy master that the prince of this
City desires him to come up out of darkness into light. The servant
answered, I cannot buy new thighs for thy gold, and therefore get some man
else to go on the errand, for he has said that whosoever troubles him, his
thighs shall be broken. That law has he made over you, said Athanagoras, and
not over me, and therefore I will go down unto him: but first tell me, I pray
you, what you call his name? They answered, Apollonius: And when he heard that
name, he remembered in his mind that he heard Tharsia call her father so, and
he went down unto him where he lay, whom when he beheld, having a long beard,
and rough fligged hair, and long nails on his fingers: he was somewhat
astonished, and called unto him with a soft voice, saying: Apollonius? When
Apollonius heard himself named, thinking it had been some of his men that had
called him, arose up suddenly with a fierce countenance, and seeing a stranger
looking very comely and honorably attired, he held his peace. Then spoke
Athanagoras: Sir, I think you do marvel, that I being a stranger, am so bold
as to come to trouble you. You shall understand, that I am prince of this
city, and my name is Athanagoras, I walked by chance unto the Sea side, where
beholding thy ships, especially commending this wherein thou art, for beauty
and strength: I was by thy men desired to come aboard which I did, and have
eaten with them. Then inquired I for the owner, and they told me thy name, and
that thou remainest in great sorrow, and for that cause I am come down unto
thee to bring thee, if I may, out of darkness into light, hoping that after
this heaviness God shall restore thee unto gladness. Apollonius lifted up his
eyes, saying: I thank thee my Lord, whosoever thou art, and I beseech thee not
to trouble me longer, for I am not worthy to eat meat or make good cheer, and
I will live no longer. Athanagoras much mused at this answer, and wondered at
the wilfulness of the man, and came up upon the beck, and said unto the
servants: I cannot persuade your lord to come up out of that dark place into
the light: what way therefore were I best to devise to bring him from his
purpose, and to preserve him from an obstinate death? For it were great pity
that a notable gentleman should so consume away in hucker mucker, and die by a
dishonorable death.

CHAP. XVII. How Athanagoras sent for Tharsia to make her father Apollonius
merry, and how after long circumstance they came into knowledge one of another.
ANd as he was devising with himself, it came into his mind to send for the
maide^ Tharsia, for which purpose he called unto him one of his men and said
unto him. Go unto the baud, desire him to send Tharsia hither unto me, for she
has wisdom, and can move pleasant talk, and perhaps she may persuade him not
to die thus wilfully. The messenger went speedily, and returned immediately,
bringing the maiden Tharsia with him unto the ship. Whom when Athanagoras
beheld, come hither unto me Tharsia, quoth he, and show now the uttermost of
thy cunning and knowledge, in comforting the owner of the ship, which lies in
darkness and will receive no comfort, nor come abroad into the light, for the
great sorrow that he takes for his wife and his daughter. Go unto him, good
Tharsia, and prove if thou can persuade him to come into the light: for it
may be that God has appointed by thy means, to bring him from sorrow into
gladness. Which thing if thou can bring to pass, as I am a gentleman, I
will give thee thirty sestercies of gold, and as many of silver, and I will
redeem thee from the bawd for thirty days. When Tharsia heard this, she went
boldly down into the caben unto him, and with a mild voice saluted him,
saying: God save you sir whosoever you be, and be of good comfort, for an
innocent virgin, whose life has been distressed by shipwreck, and her
chastity by dishonestie, and yet has both preserved, saluteth thee. Then
began she to record in verses, and therewithal to sing so sweetly, that
Apollonius, notwithstanding his great sorrow, wondered at her. And these were
the verses which she soong so pleasantly unto the instrument: Amongst the
harlots foul I walk,
yet harlot none am I:
The Rose amongst the Thorns grows,
and is not hurt thereby.
The thief that stole me, sure I think,
is slain before this time,
A bawd me bought, yet am I not
defilde by fleshly crime,
Were nothing pleasanter to me,
than parents mine to know.
I am the issue of a king,
my blood from kings does flow.
I hope that God will mend my state,
and send a better day,
Leave off your tears, pluck up your heart,
and banish care away.
Show gladness in your countenance,
cast up your cheerful eyes.
That God remains that once of naught,
created earth and skies.
He will not let in care and thought
you still to live and all for naught.


When Apollonius heard her sing these verses, lifting up his eyes, and fighing
he said: Alas poor wretch as I am, how long shall I strive with life, and
abide this grievous conflict? Good maiden, I give hearty thanks both to your
wisdom and nobility: requiting you with this one thing, that whenever, if
ever such occasion do chance, I shall have desire to be merry, I will then
think on you, or if ever I be restored unto my kingdom. And perhaps, as you
say, you are descended of the race of kings, and indeed you do well represent
the nobility of your parentage. But now I pray you receive this reward at my
hands, an hundred pieces of gold, and depart from me and trouble me no
longer, for my present grief is renewed by your lamentable recital, and I
consume with continual sorrow. When the maid had received the reward, she
was about to depart. Then spoke Athanagoras, whither go thou Tharsia, quoth
he? have thou taken pain without profit, and can thou not work a deed of
charity, and relieve the man that will consume his life with mourning? Tharsia
answered: I have done all that I may, and he has given me an hundred pieces of
gold, and desired me to depart. I will give thee two hundred, said Athanagoras,
and go down unto him again, and give him his money, and say unto him, I
seek thy health and not thy money. Then went Tharsia down again, and set her
self down by him, and said unto him: Sir, if you be determined to continue
always in this heaviness, give me leave, I pray you, to reason a little with
you. And I mean to propose certain parables unto you, which if you can
resolve, I will then depart, and restore your money. But Apollonius not willing
to receive the money again, but thankefully to accept whatsoever she should
utter, without discouraging of her: albeit in my troubles quoth he, I have none
other felicity but to weep and lament, yet because I will not want the
ornaments of your wisdom, demand of me whatsoever shall be your pleasure,
and while I am aunswering you, pardon me I pray you, if sometime I give
liberty unto my tears, and shall not be able to speak for sobbing. Sir, I
will bear with you somewhat in that respect said Tharsia, and now if it please
you I will begin: A certain house on earth there is,
that roomths has large and wide:
The house makes noise, the guests makes none.
that therein does abide:
But house and guest continually,
together forth do slide.


Now if indeed you be a Prince, as your men say you are, it behooves you to be
wiser than a simple maiden, and to resolve my problem. Apollonius answered:
Maiden, to the intent you may not think that you were told a lie, hearken now
to the resolution.

The house on the earth is the Sea or every great water, the fish is the dumb
guest, which follows the water whither soever it run. Sir, you have
answered truly said Tharsia, and now I assail you the second time: In length
forth long I run,
fair daughter of the wood,
Accompanied with many a one,
of foot and force as good,
Through many ways I walk,
but steps appear none where I stood.


Apollonius answered: If I might be so bold, and opportunity served thereto, I
could declare unto you many things that you do not know, fair maiden, but
not interrupting your questions whereunto I have to answer, wherein I much
wonder at your young years, so plentifully fraught with excellent knowledge.
But to come to the purpose: The daughter of the wood, is the tree whereof is
made the long ship, which is accompanied with many companions, and walks
upon the seas many ways leaving no print, or footsteppes behind. You have
gessed right said Tharsia, and therefore now I propose my third parable: There
is an house through which the fire
does pass, and does no harm:
Therein is heat, which none may move,
from thence it is so warm.
A naked house, and in that house
guests naked do desire
To dwell, from whence if boords you draw,
then fall you in the fire.


Apollonius answered: Maiden, this that you mean, were a meet place for men
that live in delight and pleasure. And the time has been, when I have also
delighted in the bath and hoat-house, where the heat enters through the
creuises of the boordes and chinkes of the stones, and where by reason of
sweating, it behooves a man to be naked. When he had done speaking, Tharsia
wondering at his wisdom, and the rather lamenting his discomfortablenesse,
threw her self upon him, and with clasped arms embraced him, saying: O good
gentleman, hearken unto the voice of her that beseeches thee, and have respect
to the suite of a virgin, that thinking it a far unworthy thing that so wise a
man should languish in grief, and die with sorrow. But if God of his goodness
would restore unto thee thy wife safe, whom thou so much lamentest: Or if thou
should find thy daughter in good case, whom thou supposest to be dead: then
would thou desire to live for joy. Then Apollonius fell in a rage, and
forgetting all courtesy, his unbridled affection stirring him thereunto, rose
up suddenly, and stroke the maiden on the face with his foot, so that she
fell to the ground, and the blood gushed plentifully out of her cheeks. And
like it is that she was in a swoone, for so soon as she came to her self,
she began to weep, saying: O immortal God which made heaven and earth,
look upon my afflictions, and take compassion upon me. I was borne among
the waves and troublesome tempests of the sea. My mother died in pangues and
pains of childbed, and burial was denied her upon the earth, whom my father
adorned with jewels, and laid twenty sestercies of gold at her head, and as
much in silver at her feet, and enclosed her in a chest, and committed her to
the Sea. As for me unfortunate wretch, I was at Tharsus committed to
Stranguilio and wicked Dionisiades his wife, whom my father put in trust with
me, with money and princely furniture, and their servants were commanded to slay
me. And when I desired time to pray, which was granted me, there came pirates
in the mean while, and carried me away, and brought me unto this woeful city,
where I was sold to a most cruel bawd, and with much ado have preserved my
virginity, and I see nothing ensuing but continual sorrow, whereof I feel
both now and every day some part, and shall do ever more and more, until it
please God to restore me unto my father Apollonius. Apollonius gave good ear
unto her words, and was strangely moved within himself, knowing that all these
signs and tokens were most certain that she was his daughter, and he cried
out with a mighty voice and said: O merciful God, which beholdest, heaven,
earth and hell, and discouerest all the secrets therein, blessed be thy most
holy name for ever: and when he had said those words, he fell upon his daughter
Tharsias neck, and kissed her, and for extreme joy wept bitterly, saying: O
my most sweet and only daughter, the half part of my life, for the love of
thee I lust not now to die, for I have found thee for whom I had desire to
die only. And therewithal he cried out aloude, saying: Come hither my
servants and friends, come ye al hither, and see now the end of all my sorrow,
for I have found my dear daughter and only child which I had lost. When the
servants heard the noise, they came hastily together, and with them prince
Athanagoras, and when they came down under the hatches, they found Apollonius
weeping for joy, and leaning upon his daughters shoulders, and he said unto
them: behold here my daughter, for whom I have mourned, behold the one half
of my life for whose sake I now desire to live: and they al rejoiced and wept
with him for company, and thanked God for that happy day.

CHAP. XVIII. How Apollonius leaving off mourning came into the city
Machilenta, where he commanded the bawd to be burned, and how Tharsia was
married unto prince Athanagoras.
THarsia hearing her fathers words, fell down at his feet and kissed him,
saying: O father, blessed be God that has given me the grace to see you, and
that I may die with you. But Apollonius lifted up his heart, and cast away his
mourning apparel, and put on other sweet and clean raiment. And when
Athanagoras and the servants looked earnestly upon him, and upon his daughter,
they wondered, saying: O my lord Apollonius, how like in countenance is your
daughter Tharsia unto you? that if you had no other argument, this were
sufficient proof to show that she is your child. Apollonius thanked them,
saying, that now he stood not in any doubt thereof. Then Tharsia began to
discourse unto her father how she was sold unto the bawd, and how he thrust
her into the common brothell, and by what means she always preserved her
chastity, and how much she was bounden unto good prince Athanagoras there
present. Now Athanagoras was a widower, and a lusty young gentleman and prince
of the city, as it is declared, who fearing lest Tharsia should be bestowed in
marriage upon some other man, and using the benefit of the time, cast him
self down at Apollonius feet, and besought him for her, saying: Most noble
Prince, I beseech you for the living Gods sake which has thus myraculously
restored the father unto his daughter, bestow not your daughter upon any other
in marriage then me only. I am prince of this city, and through my means she
has continued a virgin, and by my procurement she is now come unto the
knowledge of thee her father. Apollonius courteously embracing him answered: I
thank you most heartily, good Prince Athanagoras, for your friendly offer,
which I may in no wise gainsay both in respect of your own worthiness, and
for the pleasure which you have showed my daughter, and therefore you have my
goodwill to be her husband. Then turning his face toward Tharsia, how say you
my dear daughter, said he, are you contented to be wife unto Athanagoras?
Tharsia with blushing cheeks answered: Yea forsooth father, for since I came
from Stranguilioes house, I never found rest nor pleasure saving through his
alonely courtesy. Now whether Athanagoras rejoiced at this answer or not, I
refer me to the judgment of those, who being passionate with the same
affection, would be well pleased with a jointly grant of the like goodwil.
When these matters were thus concluded, Apollonius moved Athanagoras
concerning revenge to be executed upon the bawd. Then Athanagoras took his
leave for a while of Apollonius and departs unto the city, and calling all the citizens together to the market place, he spoke thus unto them: My friends
and well-beloved citizens, understand ye that Apollonius prince of Tyrus and
father unto Tharsia, is arrived in our coast with a great fleet of ships,
wherein he has brought a mighty army of men to destroy our city for ye bawds
sake, who placed his daughter in a common brothell, to hire out the use of her
body for money. Wherefore look unto your selves, and advise your selves what
you were best to do, for it were pity that the whole city should perish for
one wicked man's sake.

When as he had made an end of this speech, the whole multitude trembled and
was sore afraid, and forthwith determined that they would all, as well men,
women and children go forth to see Prince Apollonius, and to crave pardon of
him. Not so, said Athanagoras, but we will desire him to come peaceably into
our city, and what he list to command, shall be fulfilled. The people liked
well of that counsel, and committed the matter unto his discretion wholly to
provide for their safety. Then went he forth unto Apollonius, and desired him
in the peoples name to come into the city, where he should be most heartily
welcome. Apollonius refused not that friendly offer, but immediately prepared
himself to go with him, and caused his head to be polled, and his beard to be
trimmed, and his nails to be pared, and put on a princely robe upon his back,
and a crown of gold upon his head, and so passed forth together upon the
way. And when they were come into the city, the citizens saluted Apollonius,
and he was placed in the highest seat whence the prince was wont to give
judgment, and his daughter Tharsia by his side, and he spoke unto the people
in this manner following: Good people of the city of Machilenta, you see the
virgin Tharsia, whom I her father have found out this present day, her has
the most filthy bawd, as much as in him lay, constrained to dishonest her
body, to her utter destruction. From which his deuillish purpose no entreaty
could persuade him, no price could allure him. Wherefore my request unto you
(good people) is, that I may have due revenge on him for the injury done unto
my daughter. When the people heard his reasonable demand, they cried out with
one accord, saying: My lord Apollonius, we judge that he be burned alive, and
his goods be given unto the maiden Tharsia. The revenge pleased Apollonius
well, and forthwith they apprehended the bawd, and bound him hand and foot,
and they made a great fire, and at Apollonius commandment cast him alive into
it, and burnt him to ashes. Then called Tharsia for the villain, and said
unto him: Because by thy means, and all the citizens, I have hitherto remained
a virgin even until my fathers coming, my will is that thou be free, and
moreover, here I give unto thee two hundred pieces of gold for a reward.
Secondly, she called for all the women that were in the bawdes brothell, and
said unto them: good women, whose chances perhaps has been as grievous unto
you as mine was unto me, I set you al at liberty, and whereas heretofore you
have gained money by hiring forth the use of your bodies, receive of me here
this reward, that you may live hereafter more in the fear of God, and
practice some more commendable way to sustain necessity, and therewithal she
gave to every one of them a reward, and so dismissed them. And when all these
things were ended, Apollonius minding to depart, spoke unto the people saying:
Noble Prince Athanagoras, and beloved citizens of Machilenta, I acknowledge my
self much bounden to you, and I yield you hearty thanks for all your benefits
bestowed upon me and my daughter. And now in recompense thereof, I give unto
you fifty pounds weight of gold to be divided amongst you, that when I am
gone from you, you may be mindful of me. The citizens thanked him, and bowed
their heads in token of reverence, and they agreed together, and they erected
two statues of brass one unto him, another to his daughter in the market place
of the city, with these superscriptions written in their bases: Unto
Apollonius prince of Tyrus, the preserver of our houses, and unto his virtuous
daughter Tharsia, a virgin, the mindful citizens of Machilenta have erected
those monuments. But Apollonius remembering the great courtesy of Athanagoras,
and his promise made unto him concerning Tharsia, appointed a short time for
their marriage, against which there was great provision as might be at so small
warning, the solemnities, riches, bravery, cost, feasts, reuelles,
intertainement, and all things else appertaining thereunto, and requisite for
so great personages, I shall not here need particularly to set down, since
every man may judge what belongs to such a matter, and none can precisely
describe this unless he had been there present. Of this thing sure I am, that
this marriage brought great pleasure to the father, contentment to the parties,
and joy to all the people.

CHAP. XIX. How Apollonius meaning to sail into his own country by Tharsus,
was commanded by an Angel in the night to go to Ephesus, and there to declare
all his adventures in the Church, with a loud voice.
THe solemnities of the wedding being finished, Apollonius made haste to
depart, and all things being in a readiness, he took shipping with his son
in law and his daughter, and weighed anchor, and committed the sails unto the
wind, and went their way, directing their course evermore toward Tharsus, by
which Apollonius purposed to pass unto his own country Tyrus. And when they
had sailed one whole day, and night was come that Apollonius laid him down to
rest, there appeared an Angel in his sleep, commanding him to leave his
course toward Tharsus, and to sail unto Ephesus, and to go into the Temple of
Diana, accompanied with his son in law and his daughter, and there with a
loud voice to declare all his adventures, whatsoever had befallen him from his
youth unto that present day.

When Apollonius awoke in the morning, he woondered at the vision, and called
for Athanagoras his son in law and his daughter Tharsia, and declared it to
them in order as is before recited. Then said he unto them, what counsel do
you give me in this matter? They answered, whatsoever it pleases you to do
that we shall well like of. Then Apollonius called unto him the Master of the
ship, and commanded him to wind sail and to coast toward Ephesus, which
he did, and immediately the wind served them so prosperously, that in few
days they safely arrived there, Apollonius and his company forthwith
forsook their ships, and came aland, and according to the commandment of
the Angel, took his journey to the Temple of Diana, whereas it is before
mentioned, his long lamented wife lady Lucina remained in virtuous life and
holy contemplation among the religious Nuns. And when he was come thither, he
besought one of the Nuns that had the keeping of the Temple, that he might
have license to go in, and she willingly granted his request, and opened the
door unto him. By this time report was blown abroad, that a certain strange
Prince was lately landed with his son in law and his daughter in very costly
and rich ornaments and gone into the Temple: and the lady Lucina as desirous
as the rest to see the strangers, decked her head with rich attire, and put on
a purple robe, and with convenient retinue attending upon her, came into the
Temple.

Now Lucina was passing beautiful and for the great love which she bare unto
chastity all men reverenced her, and there was no virgin in all the number in
like estimation unto her. Whom when Apollonius beheld, although he knew not
what she was, yet such was the exceeding brightness and majesty of her
countenance, that he fell down at her feet, with his son in law likewise and
his daughter, for he thought she glittered like a diadem, and exceeded the
brightest stars in beauty. But Lucina courteously lifted them up from the
ground, and bid them welcome, and afterward went to bestow the plate and
ornaments of the temple in decent order, which thing was part of the Nuns
duty. Then Apollonius settled himself to do as the Angel had commanded him
in the vision, and thus he began to say: I being borne Prince of Tyrus, was
called Apollonius, and when in youth I had attained unto all kind of
knowledge, I resolved the cruel king Antiochus parable, to the intent to have
married with his daughter, whom he most shamefully defiled, and kept her from
all men to serve his own filthy lust, and sought means to stay me. Then I
fled away, and lost all my goods in the sea, hardly escaping my self with
life, and in my greatest extremity I was courteously entertained by
Altistrates king of Pentapolis, and so highly received into favor* that he left
no kinds of favor on me untried, insomuch that he bestowed upon me his
fair daughter and only child Lucina to be my wife. But when Antiochus and
his daughter by the just judgment of God, were stricken dead with lightning
from heaven, I carried my wife with me to receive my kingdom, and she was
delivered of this my daughter and hers upon the sea, and died in the travel,
whom I enclosed in a chest, and threw into the sea, laying twenty sestercies
of gold at her head, and as much in silver at her feet, to the intent that
they that should find her might have wherewithal to bury her honorably,
leaving also a superscription that they might perceive with what grief of her
friends she died, and of what princely parentage she descended. Afterward I
arrived at the city of Tharsus, where I put in trust my young daughter to be
brought up unto certain wicked persons, and from thence I departed unto the
higher parts of Egypt. But when from that time fourteen years were expired,
and I returned thither to fetch my daughter, they told me that she was dead,
which I believing to be true, put on mourning attire, and desired nothing so
much as to die, and while I was in that extremity of sorrow, and determined
to have sailed unto Tyrus, while I was on my way upon the sea: the wind
turned, and there arose a tempest, and drove me unto the city Machilenta,
where my daughter was restored unto me. Then went I with my son in law, and
my daugter once again, to have sailed unto Tyrus by Tharsus, and as I was now
in the journey, I was admonished in my sleep by an Angel to turn my course
unto Ephesus, and there in the temple to declare aloud al my adventures that
had befallen me since my youth unto this present day, which has hitherto
guided me in all my troubles, will now send an happy end unto all mine
afflictions.

CHAP. XX. How Apollonius came to the knowledge of his wife the lady Lucina,
and how they rejoiced at the meeting of each other.
THe lady Lucina was not so busy in executing her office in the Church, but
that she gave also attentive ear unto her lord Apollonius talk, whom at the
first she knew not. But when she heard the long discourse, whereby she knew
by all signs that he was her husband and she was his wife, her heart burned
within her, and she could scarce temper her affections until he had done
talking. Yet measuring her love with modesty, as now of long time having
learned the true trade of patience, she gave him liberty to make an end:
which done, she ran hastily unto him, and embraced him hard in her arms, and
would have kissed him. Which thing, when Apollonius saw, he was moved with
disdain, and thrust her from him, as misliking such lightness in her whose
modesty and good grace he had so lately before commended in his heart, and
nothing at all suspecting that she had been his wife. Then she pouring forth
tears abundantly. O my lord Apollonius, said she, the one half of my life,
why deal you thus ungently with me? I am your wife, daughter unto Altistrates
king of Pentapolis, and my name is Lucina. And you are Apollonius, prince of
Tyrus, my lord and dear husband, and you are my schoolemaister which taught
me music: and moreover you are the Sea-wrecked man whom I especially loved
above many, not for concupiscence sake, but for desire of wisdom. When
Apollonius heard those words, he was suddenly astonished, and as the strangenes
of the chance appalled him much: so the great joy revived his spirits again,
and he cast his eyes earnestly upon her, and immediately called her to
remembrance, and knew perfitly that it was she indeed, and he went unto
her, and fell upon her neck, and for exceeding joy brast out into tears, and
then lifting up his hands and eyes to heaven, he said: Blessed be the most
mighty God of heaven, which sits above and beholds the state of men on
earth, and deals with them according to his great mercy: who now also of
his unspeakable goodness, has restored unto me my wife and my daughter.
Then did he most lovingly embrace and kiss his lady, whom he supposed long
before to be dead: and she likewise requited him with the like fruits of good
will and courtesy, whom she surely thought she should never have seen again.
And when they had continued a good space in intertaining the one another: O my
most dear lord Apollonius, said the lady Lucina, where is my child, whereof
I was delivered? Apollonius answered: my best beloved lady, it was a
daughter, and she was named Tharsia, and this is she, and therewithal he showed
her Tharsia. Then kissed and embraced she her daughter, and likewise her son
in law Athanagoras, and they greatly rejoiced one in another.

And when report hereof was spread abroad, there was great joy throughout all
the City of Ephesus, and the report was blown about in every place how
prince Apollonius had found out his lady and wife among the Nuns in the
Temple. Then Lucina discoursed unto her lord and husband Apollonius, of all the
strange accidents that happened unto her after his casting her forth into the
Sea: Namely, how her chest was cast on land at the coast of Ephesus, and taken
up by a Physician, and how she was revived and by him adopted, and for
preservation of her honesty, placed among the Nuns in the Temple of Diana,
where he then found her, accordingly as it appears before in the history,
wherefore they blessed the name of God, and yielded most hearty thanks unto
him, that he had preserved them thitherto, and granted them so joyful a
meeting.

CHAP. XXI. How Apollonius departed from Ephesus, and sailed himself, his
wife, his son and daughter unto Antiochia, and then to Tyrus, and from thence
to Tharsus, where he revenged himself upon Stranguilio, and Dionisiades.
APollonius and Lucina his wife, and the residue of their train, having rested
themselves and made merry sufficient time at Ephesus, when the wind served,
took leave of their friends and went aboard of their ships, and lanched from
the shore and departed unto Antiochia, where according as Calamitus the master
of the ship of Tyrus had told him before, the kingdom was reserved for him
since the death of Antiochus. But when the citizens heard that he was arrived,
they were all exceeding glad, and put on their brauest apparel, and garlandes
of bays upon their heads, and went forth in procession to meet him, and
brought him in triumph into the City, and crowned him king with all joy and
gladness. And when all the solemnities of the coronation, the feasts,
triumphs, largesses, and pardons were finished, he abode with them certain
days to dispose some matters in order that required redress, and to establish
certain laws for the due administration of justice. Which being all
accomplished according to his desire, he took his leave of the Citizens, and
with his wife, son, and daughter, departed to the sea, and sailed unto Tyrus
his own native country, where he was joyfully received of his subjects, and
found his kingdom governed in good order. There placed he for his lieuetenant
his son in law Athanagoras, which had married his daughter Tharsia, to rule
the country in his absence, and when he had aboden a convenient time amongst
them to make merry, and to provide necessaries for his farther affairs, he
levied in shorter space a mighty army of the best approved soldiers, with
sufficient store of money and munition, and taking with him moreover his lady,
and his daughter Tharsia, took shipping in the haven* and had so prosperous
wind, that in few days they landed in the coast of Tharsus. And when they
were come all ashoare, they marched forward in battle array, and came into the
City to the great terror of all the inhabitants. When he was come into the
market place, he commanded that Stranguilio and Dionisiades should be brought
before him, which being done, he thus spoke unto the people. Ye Citizens of
Tharsus, I am come hither in arms as you see, not moved by my will, but
constrained by injury. Wherefore tell me, was I ever unthankful unto your
City in general, or unto any of you al in particular? They all answered with
one voice no my lord, and therefore we are ready all to spend our lives in thy
quarrel: and as thou know well we have erected here in perpetual memory
of thee, a statue of brass, because thou preseruedst us from death, and our
city from utter destruction. Then said Apollonius, understand then this much
my friends, that when I departed last from this city, I committed my daughter
in trust unto Stranguilio and his wife Dionisiades, and when I came to require
her they would not deliver her unto me, nor tell me the truth what is become
of her. Immediately they were both called forth to answer unto these matters
before Apollonius, where falling down on their knees before him, Dionisides
answered in this manner: My lord, I beseech you stand favorable unto my poor
husband and me, and not to believe any other thing concerning your daughter,
then that she is departed this life. And as for her grave, you have seen it,
and also the monument of brass erected by the whole city in the memorial of
her, and moreover you have read the superscription. Then Apollonius commanded
his daughter to stand forth in the presence of them all, and she said unto
Dionisiades: behold thou wicked woman, dead Tharsia is come to greet thee,
who as thou did well hope, should never have been forth coming to have
bewrayed thy wickedness. But when the miserable woman beheld Tharsia, her
heart quaked for fear, and she fell to the ground in a swoond: and when she
recovered again, she cried out upon the just judgment of God, and cursed
the time that she was borne. And all the people ran thronging about Tharsia,
and wondered at her, thinking how greatly they had been of long time abused by
Stranguilio, and Dionisiades, and they rejoiced much in her safety, and all
knew by her countenance that it was she, and none other. O now, who were able
to declare the bitter grief and intolerable care which eftsoons assaied the
wearisome consciences of these twain, the husband and the wife when they saw
her living and in good liking before their faces, whose death they had so
traitorously conspired? Even hell it self is not comparable unto so heavy a
burden, the unspeakable weight whereof all men ought to fear, and none can
sufficiently describe unless he have been semblably plunged in the like gulf
of horrible desperation. Then Tharsia called for Theophilus Stranguilios
villain, and when he was come into her presence, she said unto him:
Theophilus, answer me aloud that all the people may hear, who sent thee
forth to slay me? He answered, Dionisiades my Mistress. What moved her
thereunto said Tharsia? None other thing, I suppose, said the villain, but
to enjoy the money and ornaments, and also because thy beauty and comeliness
were commended above Philomacias her daughters. Now when the people heard
this, they ran upon Stranguilio, and Dionisiades, and took them violently,
and bound them, and drew them out of the city and stoned them to death, and
would likewise have slain Theophilus the villain, for that, that at his
mistress commandment he would have murdered the innocent maiden. But Tharsia
entreated for him, saying: Not so my dear friends, I pray you let me obtain
pardon for him at your hands: for unless he had given me respite to say my
prayers, I had not been here now to have spoken for him: and when she had said
so, the furious multitude was appeased. And Apollonius gave many exceeding rich
gifts unto the city, and repared it strongly in many places where it was
decayed, and abode there with them the space of three months in feasting and
making merry before he departed.

CHAP. XXII. How Apollonius sailed from Tharsus to visit his father in law
Altistrates king of Pentapolis, who died not long after Apollonius coming
thither.
THe term of three months, that Apollonius purposed for his delight to
remain at Tharsus, was almost expired, and he commanded all things to be
prepared for the journey, and when the day was come, he made general
proclamation upon pain of death every man to ship. And when the whole army
was embarked, he took ship himself with his wife and his daughter, being
honorably accompanied by the citizens unto the water side, and after due
courtesy on both sides done and received, he hoysed sail and departed
toward Pentopolis king Altistrates City. And when they had sailed with
prosperous wind ten days upon the Sea, they discovered a far off the
Steeples and Towers of Pentapolis, and the Soldiers rejoiced and gave a shout
for gladness that they were so near to their wished land. Then they cast
about and cut toward the haven, and cast anchor, and landed all safe, and
Apollonius with his wife and daughter after he had taken order for the
company, rode unto the court unto king Altistrates, whom they found in good
health and merry. And when Altistrates saw his son in law, his daughter and
his niece Tharsia, he bid them welcome, and rejoiced exceedingly, and sent for
the Nobles of his land to keep them company, and gave them the best
entertainment that he could devise, and they soiourned with him an whole
year in pleasure and pastime, whereof the king took as great comfort, as was
possible for a man to do in any worldly felicity. But as there was never yet
any thing certain or permanent in this mortal life, but always we be
requited with sour sauce to our sweet meat, and when we think our selves
surest in the top of joy, then tilt we down soonest into the bottom of
sorrow, so fared it now unto these personages in the midst of their iollitie.
For the good old king Altistrates fell suddenly sick which much appalled them
all, and grew every day weaker than other. Then were the Physicians sent for
in haste, who left nothing untried that appertained unto Art and experience to
do, and above all Apollonius and Lucina his wife played the parts of duetifull
children, in tendering their aged and weak father with all care and diligence
possible. But alas, old age which of it self is an incurable sickness, and
had been growing now well nigh an hundred years lacking seven upon him
accompanied with the intolerable pain of the gowt, and the stone of the
bladder, had consumed natural moisture, so that his force gave over to the
disease, and shortly after changed this transitory life for a better. When
report was spread abroad of the kings death, there was great sorrow and
lamentation made in all places, neither was there any that took not grievously
the loss of so good a Prince. But to describe the inward affliction of
Apollonius, and the tears of the Lady Lucina and Tharsia her daughter, would
make any heart of flint to bleed, considering the tender affections of women
above men, and how prone they be that way, yea, sometime (God knows) in
smaller causes than at the death of husband, father, or mother. But as al
things have their time, so have sorrow and tears also, which are best dried
up with the towell of continuance, which gave now just occasion unto
Apollonius to cast off drowsy sorrow, and to provide for the funeralles of
his father in law, which he accomplished with so seasonable expedition, and in
so honorable a sort, as was feemely for so mighty a king, and so virtuous a
prince, whom he buried among the ancient race of Kings his ancestors in
the Temple within the city of Pentapolis. Which being all finished, as it is
also a work of charity to fulfill the will of the dead, he applied himself
to execute his fathers testament, wherein he had given half his kingdom unto
Apollonius, and the other half to Tharsia his niece, to have and to hold to
them and to their heirs for ever.

CHAP. XXIII. How Apollonius rewarded the fisherman that relieved him after he
had suffered shipwreck: how he dealt also with old Calamitus, and likewise
with the Pirates that stole away Tharsia.
BY this time, when all cares were banished, and Apollonius inioyed his
kingdom in quiet possession, he gave himself sometimes to delight as other
Princes are wont to do. And it fortuned that on a day when he had dined, he
walked forth for recreation unto the sea side, with his wife and a few
servants. And when he came there, he saw a small fisher boat fleeting under
sail, which he thought by all signs he should know well, for he supposed
it to be the fishermans boat which succored him, when he had suffered
shipwreck in sailing from Tharsus toward Pentapolis. Wherefore he
commanded some of his servants, to take an other ship which rode at anchor
there on the shore, to go after and take him, and to bring the fisherman unto
him unto the Court. When the poor man saw himself boorded of so many and so
gay a multitude, he feared they had been pirates, and that they would have
slain him, and he fell down on his knees, and besought them to have
compassion upon him, he was but a poor fisherman, and had not that which they
sought for: it were others that were more fit for their purpose to meet
withal, such as ventured further in greater vessels, carrying forth great
sums of money, and bringing home plenty of costly merchandise: As for him,
they should not only find miserable poverty in ransacking his boat, but if
they were also determined to take away his life from him, they should likewise
with the same stroke bereave the lives of his poor wife, and many small
Children, which were maintained by his hand only. These or the like words
uttered then the poor fisherman. But they smiling in their conceits, and
mindful of their Princes commandment, bade him not fear that they would
rob him, but said that he must go with them, and brought him away unto the
court. And when he was come into the kings presence, Apollonius knew him well,
and said unto the Queen and the Nobles that were about him: Behold, this is
the man that received me into his house, and succored me when I suffered
shipwreck, and showed me the way into the City, by which means I came
acquainted with good king Altistrates. And he rose out of his seat, and
embraced him and said: I am Apollonius Prince of Tyrus whom thou did
succor, and therefore be of good cheer* for thou shall be rewarded. And the
poor fisherman wept exceedingly for joy. And Apollonius commanded two hundred
sestereies of gold to be given unto him, and thirty servants, and twenty
handmaides, and forty horses, and fifty suits of apparel, and a fair
palace to dwell in, and made him an earl, and used no man so familiarly as he
did him all the days of his life. Now it was not long after that these things
were done, but one called Calamitus the master of the ship of Tyrus, an old
man, who, as we have before declared, showed unto Apollonius as he was walking
by the sea side with Lucina that Antiochus and his daughter were dead, and the
kingdom was reserved for him, came before Apollonius, and falling down on his
knees: Remember me, my most gracious Lord Apollonius said he, since the time
I told your grace the good tidings of king Antiochus death.

Then king Apollonius took him up by the hand, and caused him to sit down by
him and talked familiarly with him, and gave him great thanks, and made him a
great lord in his country. Thus Apollonius busied himself, not only in
bestowing himself courteously at home, but he also provided as well for the
quiet government of the state abroad, as it appeared by the diligence of his
officers, who having lately taken certain pirates upon the sea, brought them
to Pentapolis, where Apollonius then remained, to have justice executed upon
them. When they were arrived, they were found guilty of the fact of which they
were accused, and the next day being appointed for them to suffer, when they
came unto the gallows, they confessed many robberies: and among store, how
once at Tharsus they rescued a maid named Tharsia, from a villain that would
have slain her, and brought her to Machilenta, where they sold her to him
that offered most money, and he which bought her (as they thought) was a bawd.
When the citizens, who were none of them ignorant of the Lady Tharsias
adventures heard this, they stayed execution, and sent word unto king
Apollonius saying: May it please your grace to understand, that we have
certain pirates at the gallows ready to be exeted, and it appears that they
be those that stole away the Lady Tharsia your daughter from Tharsus, and sold
her to the bawd at Machilenta. Which when we perceived, we thought it good to
know your Graces pleasure what shall be done with them. Apollonius thanked
them, and willed the pirates to be brought before him, and examined them
diligently, and found that they were the same men indeed that had preserved
Tharsias life. And he gave great thanks unto God and them, and embraced them,
and willingly pardoned them their lives.

And for that he knew that the sinister means which they hitherto had insued,
was caused most by constraint, for want of other trade or ability to live by,
he therefore made them all knights, and gave them plenty of gold and silver,
and endowed them also with great possessions.

CHAP. XXIIII. How Apollonius had a young son and heir by his wife Lucina,
likewise of Apollonius age, and how he died: with some other accidents
thereunto incident.
WHile king Apollonius thus passed forth his time, in rewarding his friends
which had done him pleasure in his adversity, the part of a thankeful and
good natured man, and also unto his enemies in ministering justice with mercy,
which is the duty of a virtuous prince, the queen Lucina in the mean season
conceived child, and grew every day bigger bellied then other. And when the
time came that she attended for a good hour, she was delivered of a fair
son, whom some of the Ladies that were present said he was like Apollonius
the father, othersome, like king Altistrates the grandfather, and others judged
otherwise, according as is the custom of women to do, when as (God knows)
there is no more likeness between them saving that the child has the
general shape and proportion of a man, than is between Jack fletcher and his
bolt. Howbeit the boy was called Altistrates after the grandfathers name, for
whom there was much joy and triumphing, that it had pleased God to send an
heir male to govern the land, for whose life and preservation the people
daily prayed, that as he was like to succeed his grandfather in place and
name, so he might also be successor to his father and grandfather in honor
and virtue: which as they are the true goods, so are they the chiefest
inheritance of a king, and to be preferred before the greedy seeking for large
dominion and riches, which are the foolish scales whereby Fortune intrappeth us,

But to return again to our story, great was the care and provision for the
diligent bringing up of this young gentleman: who as he grew up more and more
every day to the strength of lusty youth, so his father Apollonius decayed
continually through the infirmity of weak old age: Who having passed his life
with one Lady the fair Lucina, by whom he had two beautiful children, the
lady Tharsia and young Altistrates, he lived to the age of fourscore and
four years, and obtained the empire of three kingdoms, to wit, Tyrus,
Antiochia and Pentapolis whom with the help of his son in law Athanagoras
he governed peaceably and prosperously. Moreover, when he had disposed the
affairs of his realms unto such of his nobility as were in credit about
him, although at all times he had recourse unto his accustomed studies of
humanity, yet then especially he applied his vacant time to his book, and
he wrote the whole story and discourse of his own life and adventures at
large, the which he caused to be written forth in two large volumes, whereof
he sent one to the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, and placed the other in his own
library. Of which history this is but a small abstract, promising if ever the
whole chance to come into my hands, to set it forth with all fidelity,
diligence, and expedition. But when the fatal time was come that Apollonius
old age could no longer be sustained by the benefit of nature, he fell into
certain cold and dry diseases, in which case the knowledge of his physicians
could stand him in little steed, either by their cunning or experience. For
there is no remedy against old age, which if the noble skill of physic
could ever have found out, doubtless it would have obtained the means to have
made the state of man immortal. Howbeit, God has determined otherwise, and as
he appointed all worldly things to have an end: so Apollonius had his dying
day, wherein in perfect sense, and ready memory he departed this transitory
life in the sweet arms of his loving lady Lucina, and in the midst of his
friends, Nobles, Allies, kinsfolk and children, in great honor, and love of
all men. His kingdom of Tyrus, he gave by will unto Athanagoras and his
daughter Tharsia, and to their heirs after them for ever: who lived long time
together, and had much issue, both boys and girls. Unto the queen Lady
Lucina, he gave the two kingdoms of Antiochia and Pentapolis, for term of
her life, to deal or dispose at her pleasure, and after her decease unto his
son lusty young Altistrates, and to his heirs for ever: But Lucina, as she
could not then be young, since Apollonius died so old, enjoyed not long her
widows estate, but pining away with sorrow, and wearing with age, forsook
this present world also, and followed her dear lord into the everlasting
kingdom that never shall have end, which so far exceeds the kingdom,
which forthwith she left unto her young son Altistrates to inherit, as
heavenly joys surmount the earthly, and the bright sun surpasses the
smallest star.

FINIS.

