IVVENILIA OR CERTAIN PARADOXES AND PROBLEMES, WRITTEN BY I. DONE.

The second Edition, corrected.

NOLI ALTVM SAP^^^


LONDON, Printed by E.P. for Henry Seyle, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Tigers head, in St. Paul's Churchyard, Anno Dom. 1633.

PARADOXES.
I. A Defense of Women's Inconstancy. II. That Women ought to paint. III. That
by Discord things increase. IV. That Good is more common than Evil. V. That
all things kill themselves. VI. That it is possible to find some virtue in some
Women. VII. That Old men are more fantastike than Young. VIII. That Nature is
our worst guide. IX. That only Cowards dare dye. X. That a Wise man is known
by much laughing. XI. That the gifts of the Body are better than those of the
Mind.
PARADOXES.
I. A Defense of Women's Inconstancy.
THat Women are Inconstant, I with any man confess, but that Inconstancy is a
bad quality, I against any man will maintain: For every thing as it is one
better than another, so is it fuller of change; The Heavens themselves
continually turn, the Stars move, the Moon changes; Fire whirleth, Air
flies, Water ebbs and flows, the face of the Earth alters her looks, time
stays not; the Color that is most light, will take most dies: so in Men, they
that have the most reason are the most inalterable in their designs, and the
darkest or most ignorant, do seldomest change; therefore Women changing more
than Men, have also more Reason. They cannot be immutable like stocks, like
stones, like the Earths dull Center, Gold that lies still, rusteth; Water,
corrupts; Air that moves not, poysoneth; then why should that which is the
perfection of other things, be imputed to Women as greatest imperfection?
Because thereby they deceive men. Are not your wits pleased with those jests,
which coozen your expectation? You can call it Pleasure to be beguiled in
troubles, and in the most excellent toy in the world, you call it Treachery: I
would you had your Mistresses so constant, that they would never change, no not
so much as their smocks, then should you see what sluttish virtue, Constancy
were. Inconstancy is a most commendable and cleanely quality, and Women in this
quality are far more absolute than the Heavens, than the Stars, Moon, or
any thing beneath it; for long observation has picked certainety out of their
mutability. The Learned are so well acquainted with the Stars, Signs and
Pla^ets, that they make them but Characters, to read the meaning of the Heaven
in his own forehead. Every simple Fellow can bespeake the change of the Moon
a great while beforehand: but I would feign have the learned man so skillful,
as to tell when the simplest Woman means to vary. Learning affords no rules
to know, much less knowledge to rule the mind of a Woman: For as Philosophy
teaches us, that Light things do always tend upwards, and heavy things
decline downward; Experience teaches us otherwise, that the disposition of a
Light Woman, is to fall down, the nature of Women being contrary to all Art
and Nature. Women are like Flies, which feed among us at our Table, or Fleas
sucking our very blood, who leave not our most retired places free from their
familiarity, yet for all their fellowship will they never be tamed nor
commanded by us. Women are like the Sun, which is violently carried one way,
yet has a proper course contrary: so though they, by ^he mastery of some
overruling chu^lish Husbands, are forced to his Byas, yet have they a motion
of their own, which their Husbands never know of. It is the nature of nice and
fastidious minds to know things only to be weary of them: Women by their
fly changeableness, and pleasing doubleness, prevent even the mislike of
those, for they can never be so well known, but that there is still more
unknown. Every Woman is a Science; for he that plods upon a Woman all his
life long, shall at length find himself short of the knowledge of her: they
are borne to take down the pride of wit, and ambition of wisdom, making
fools wise in the adventuring to win them, wisemen fools in conceit of
losing their labors; witty men stark mad, being confounded with their
uncertaineties. Philosophers write against them for spite, not desert, that
having attained to some knowledge in all other things, in them only they know
nothing, but are merely ignorant: Active and Experienced men rail against
them, because they love in their livelesse and decrepit age, when all goodness
leaves them. These envious Libellers ballad against them, because having
nothing in themselves able to deserve their love, they maliciously discommend
all they cannnot obtain, thinking to make men believe they know much, because
they are able to dispraise much, and rage against Inconstancy, when they were
never admitted into so much favor as to be forsaken. In mine Opinion such men
are happy that Women are Inconstant, for so may they chance to be beloved of
some excellent Women (when it comes to their turn) out of their Inconstancy
and mutability, though not out of their own desert. And what reason is there
to clog any Woman with one Man, be he never so singular? Women had rather,
and it is far better and more Judicial to enjoy all the virtues in several
Men, than but some of them in one, for otherwise they lose their taste, like
diverse sorts of meat minced together in one dish: and to have all excellencies
in one Man (if it were possible) is Confusion and Diversity. Now who can deny,
but such as are obstinately bent to undervalue their worth, are those that have
not soul enough to comprehend their excellency, Women being the most
excellentest Creatures, in that Man is able to subject all things else, and to
grow wise in every thing, but still persists a fool in Woman? The greatest
Scholar, if he once take a Wife, is found so unlearned, that he must begin
his Horne-booke, and all is by Inconstancy. To conclude therefore; this name of
Inconstancy, which has so much been poisoned with slanders, ought to be
changed into variety, for the which the world is so delightful, and a Woman
for that the most delightful thing in this World.

II. That Women ought to paint.
Foulness is Loathsome: can that be so which helps it? who forbids his
Beloved to gird in her waste? to mend by shooing her uneven lamenesse? to
burnish her teeh? or to perfume her breath? yet that the Face be more
precisely regarded, it concerns more: For as open confessing sinners are
always punished, but the wary and concealing offenders without witness do it
also without punishment; so the secret parts needs the less respect; but of
the Face, discovered to all Examinations and survayes, there is not too nice a
Jealousy. Nor does it only draw the busy eyes, but it is subject to the
divinest touch of all, to kissing, the strange and mystical union of souls.
If she should prostitute her self to a more unworthy Man than thy self, how
earnestly and justly would thou exclaim? that for want of this easier and
ready way of repairing, to betray her body to ruin and deformity (the
tyrannous Ravishers, and sudden D^flourers of all Women) what a heinous
Adultery is it? What thou love in her face is color, and painting gives
that, but thou hate it, not because it is, but because thou know it.
Fool, whom ignorance makes happy, the Stars, the Sun, the Sky whom thou
admirest, alas, have no color, but are fair, because they seem to be
colored: If this seeming will not satisfy thee in her, thou have good
assurance of her color, when thou see her lay it on. If her face be painted
on a Board or Wall, thou will love it, and the Board, and the Wall: Can thou
loath it then when it speaks, smiles, and kisses, because it is painted? Are
we not more delighted with seeing Birds, Fruits, and Beasts painted then we
are with Naturalls? And do we not with pleasure behold the painted shape of
Monsters and Devils, whom true, we durst not regard? We repair the ruins of
our houses, but first cold tempests warnes us of it, and bytes us through it;
we mend the wrack and stains of our Apparel, but first our eyes, and other
bodies are offended; but by this providence of Women, this is prevented. If in
kissing or breathing upon her, the painting fall off, thou art angry, will thou
be so, if it stick on? Thou did love her, if thou beginnest to hate her,
then it is because she is not painted. If thou will say now, thou did hate
her before, thou did hate her and love her together, be constant in
something, and love her who shows her great love to thee, in taking this
pains to seem lovely to thee.

III. That by Discord things increase.
Nullos esse Deos, inane Coelum
Affirmat Coelius, probatque quod se
Factum vidit, dum negat haec, beatum.

SO I assevere this the more boldly, because while I maintain it, and feel
the Contrary repugnancies and adverse fightings of the Elements in my Body, my
Body increases; and whilst I differ from common opinions by this Discord, the
number of my Paradoxes increases. All the rich benefits we can frame to our
selves in Concord, is but an Even conservation of things; in which Evennesse
we can expect no change, no motion; therefore no increase or augmentation,
which is a member of motion. And if this unity and peace can give increase to
things, how mightily is discord and war to that purpose, which are indeed the
only ordinary Parents of peace. Discord is never so barren that it affords no
fruit; for the fall of one estate is at the worst the increaser of another,
because it is as impossible to find a discommodity without advantage, as to
find Corruption without Generation: But it is the Nature and Office of Concord
to preserve only, which property when it leaves, it differs from it self,
which is the greatest discord of all. All Victories and Emperies gained by
war, and all Judicial decidings of doubts in peace, I do claim children of
Discord. And who can deny but Controversies in Religion are grown greater by
discord, and not the Controversy, but Religion it self: For in a troubled
misery Men are always more Religious then in a secure peace. The number of
good men, the only charitable nourishers of Concord, we see is thin, and
daily melts and waines; but of bad discording it is infinite, and grows
hourly. We are ascertained of all Disputable doubts, only by arguing and
differing in Opinion, and if formal disputation (which is but a painted,
counterfeit, and dissembled discord) can work us this benefit, what shall not
a full and maine discord accomplish? Truly me thinks I owe a devotion, yea a
sacrifice to discord, for casting that Ball upon Ida, and for all that
business of Troy, whom ruined I admire more then Babylon, Rome, or Quinzay,
removed Corners, not only fulfilled with her fame, but with Cities and Thrones
planted by her Fugitives. Lastly, between Cowardice and despair, Valor is
gendred; and so the Discord of Extremes begets all virtues, but of the like
things there is no issue without a miracle: Vxor pessima, pessimus maritus
Miror tam mal^ convenire.
He wonders that between two so like, there could be any discord, yet
perchance for all this discord there was nere the less increase.

IV. That good is more common then evil.
I Have not been so pitifully tired with any vanity, as with silly Old Men's
exclaiming against these times, and extolling their own: Alas! they betray
themselves, for if the times be changed, their manners have changed them. But
their senses are to pleasures, as sick Men's tastes are to Liquors; for indeed
no new thing is done in the world, all things are what, and as they were, and
Good is as ever it was, more plenteous, and must of necessity be more common
then evil, because it has this for nature and perfection to be common. It
makes Love to all Natures, all, all affect it. So that in the Worlds early
Infancy, there was a time when nothing was evil, but if this World shall
suffer dotage in the extremest crookedness thereof, there shall be no time
when nothing shall be good. It dares appear and spread, and glister in the
World, but evil buries it self in night and darkness, and is chastised and
suppressed when good is cherished and rewarded. And as Imbroderers, Lapidaries,
and other Artisans, can by all things adorn their works; for by adding better
things, the better they show in Lush and in Eminency; so good does not only
prostrate her amiablenesse to all, but refuses no end, no not of her utter
contrary evil, that she may be the more common to us. For evil manners are
parents of good Laws; and in every evil there is an excellency, which (in
common speech) we call good. For the fashions of habits, for our moving in
gestures, for phrases in our speech, we say they were good as long as they were
used, that is, as long as they were common; and we eat, we walk, only when
it is, or seems good to do so. All fair, all profitable, all virtuous, is
good, and these three things I think embrace all things, but their utter
contraries; of which also fair may be rich and virtuous; poor may be
virtuous and fair; vicious may be fair and rich; so that good has this good
means to be common, that some subjects she can possess entirely; and in
subjects poisoned with evil, she can humbly stoop to accompany the evil. And
of indifferent things many things are become perfectly good by being common, as
customs by use are made binding Laws. But I remember nothing that is
therefore ill, because it is common, but Women, of whom also; They that are
most common, are the best of that Occupation they profess.

V. That all things kill themselves.
TO affect, yea to effect their own death all living things are importuned,
not by Nature only which perfects them, but by Art and Education, which
perfects her. Plants quickened and inhabited by the most unworthy soul, which
therefore neither will nor work, affect an end, a perfection, a death; this
they spend their spirits to attain, this attained, they languish and wither.
And by how much more they are by man's Industry warmed, cherished, and pampered;
so much the more early they climb to this perfection, this death. And if
amongst Men not to defend be to kill, what a heinous selfe-murther is it, not
to defend it self. This defense because Beasts neglect, they kill themselves,
because they exceed us in number, strength, and a lawless liberty: yea, of
Horses and other beasts, they that inherit most courage by being bred of
gallantest parents, and by Artificial nursing are bettered, will run to their
own deaths, neither solicited by spurs which they need not, nor by honor
which they apprehend not. If then the valiant kill himself, who can excuse the
coward? Or how shall Man be free from this, since the first Man taught us
this, except we cannot kill our selves, because he killed us all. Yet lest
something should repair this Common ruin, we daily kill our bodies with
surfeits, and our minds with anguishes. Of our powers, remembering kills our
memory; Of Affections, Lusting our lust; Of virtues, Giving kills liberality.
And if these kill themselves, they do it in their best and supreme perfection:
for after perfection immediately follows excess, which changes the natures
and the names, and makes them not the same things. If then the best things kill
themselves soonest, (for no affection endures, and all things labor to this
perfection) all travel to their own death, yea the frame of the whole World,
if it were possible for God to be idle, yet because it began, must dye. Then in
this idleness imagined in God, what could kill the world but it self, since
out of it, nothing is?

VI. That it is possible to find some virtue in some Women.
I Am not of that seard Impudence that I dare defend Women, or pronounce them
good; yet we see Physicians allow some virtue in every poison. Alas! why should
we except Women? since certainly, they are good for Physic at least, so as
some mine is good for a fever. And though they be the Occasioners of many
sins, they are also the Punishers and Revengers of the same sins: For I
have seldom seen one which consumes his substance and body upon them, escape
diseases, or beggary; and this is their Justice. And if suum cuique dare, be
the fulfilling of all Civil Justice, they are most just; for they deny that
which is theirs to no man. Tanquam non liceat nulla puella negat.
And who may doubt of great wisdom in them, that does but observe with how
much labor and cunning our Iusticers and other dispensers of the Laws study
to embrace them: and how zealously our Preachers dehort men from them, only by
urging their subtilties, and policies, and wisdom, which are in them? Or who
can deny them a good measure of Fortitude, if he consider how valiant men they
have overthrown, and being themselves overthrown, how much and how patiently
they bear? And though they be most intemperate, I care not, for I undertook
to furnish them with some virtue, not with all. Necessity, which makes even bad
things good, prevails also for them, for we must say of them, as of some
sharp pinching Laws; If men were free from infirmities, they were needless.
These or none must serve for reasons, and it is my great happiness that
Examples prove not Rules, for to confirm this Opinion, the World yields not
one Example.

VII. That Old men are more fantastike then Young.
WHO reads this Paradox but thinks me more fantastike now, than I was
yesterday, when I did not think thus: And if one day make this sensible change
in men, what will the burden of many years? To be fantastike in young men is
conceiptfull distemperature, and a witty madness; but in old men, whose senses
are withered, it becomes natural, therefore more full and perfect. For as when
we sleep our fancy is most strong; so it is in age, which is a slumber of the
deep sleep of death. They tax us of Inconstancy, which in themselves young
they allowed; so that reprooving that which they did approove, their
Inconstancy exceeds ours, because they have changed once more then we. Yea,
they are more idly busied in conceited apparel then we; for we, when we are
melancholy, wear black; when lusty, green; when forsaken, tawney; pleasing
our own inward affections, leaving them to others indifferent; but they
prescribe laws, and constrain the Noble, the Scholar, the Merchant, and all
Estates to a certain habit. The old men of our time have changed with patience
their own bodies, much of their laws, much of their languages; yea their
Religion, yet they accuse us. To be Amorous is proper and natural in a young
man, but in an old man most fantastike. And that ridling humor of Jealousy,
which seeks and would not find, which requires and repents his knowledge, is
in them most common, yet most fantastike. Yea, that which falls never in young
men, is in them most fantastike and natural, that is, Covetousness^; even at
their journeyes end to make great provision. Is any habit of young men so
fantastike, as in the hottest seasons to be double-gowned or hooded like our
Elders? Or seems it so ridiculous to wear long hair, as to wear none.
Truly, as among the Philosophers, the Skeptike, which doubts all, was more
contentious, then either the Dogmatike which affirms, or Academike which
denies all; so are these uncertain Elders, which both calls them fantastike
which follow others inventions, and them also which are led by their own
humorous suggestion, more fantastike then other.

VIII. That Nature is our worst Guide.
Shall she be guide to all Creatures, which is her self one? Or if she also
have a guide, shall any Creature have a better guide then we? The affections
of lust and anger, yea even to err is natural; shall we follow these? Can
she be a good guide to us, which has corrupted not us only but her self?
Was not the first man, by the desire of knowledge, corrupted even in the
whitest integrity of Nature? And did not Nature (if Nature did any thing)
infuse into him this desire of knowledge, and so this corruption in him, into
us? If by Nature we shall understand our essence, our definition, or reason,
nobleness, then this being alike common to all (the Idiot and the Wizard being
equally reasonable) why should not all men having equally all one nature,
follow one course? Or if we shall understand our inclinations; alas! how unable
a guide is that which follows the temperature of our slimie bodies? for we
cannot say that we derive our incli^ations, our minds, or souls from our
Parents by any way: to say that it is all from all, is error in reason, for
then with the first nothing remains; or is a part from all, is error in
experience, for then this part equally imparted to many children, would like
Gavel-kind lands, in few generations become nothing; or to say it by
communication, is error in Divinity, for to communicate the ability of
communicating whole essence with any but God, is utter blasphemy. And if thou
hit thy Fathers nature and inclination, he also had his Fathers, and so
climbing up, all comes of one man, and have one nature, all shall embrace one
course; but that cannot be, therefore our complexions and whole bodies, we
inherit from Parents; our inclinations and minds follow that: For our mind is
heavy in our bodies afflictions, and rejoices in our bodies pleasure: how then
shall this nature govern us, that is governed by the worst part of us? Nature
though often chased away, it will retu^ne; it is true, but those good motions and
inspirations which be our guides must be ^ooed, courted, and welcomed, or else
they abandon us. And that old Axiom, nihil invita, etc. must not be said thou
shall, but thou will do nothing against Nature; so unwilling he notes us to
curb our natural appetites. We call our bastards always our natural issue,
and we define a Fool by nothing so ordinary, as by the name of natural. And
that poor knowledge whereby we conceive what rain is, what wind, what
thunder, we call Metaphysicke, supernatural; such small things, such no
things do we allow to our pliant Natures apprehension. Lastly, by following
her, we lose the pleasant, and lawful commodities of this life, for we shall
drink water and eat roots, and those not sweet and delicate, as now by Man's
art and industry they are made: we shall lose all the necessities of societies,
laws, arts, and sciences, which are all the workmanship of Man: yea we shall
lack the last best refuge of misery, death^ because no death is natural: for
if ye will not dare to call all death violent (though I see not why sicknesses
be not violences) yet causes of all deaths proceed of the defect of that which
nature made perfect, and would preserve, and therefore all against nature.

IX. That only Cowards dare dye.
Extremes are equally removed from the mean; so that headlong desperateness
as much offends true valor, as backward Cowardice: of which sort I reckon
justly all un-inforced deaths. When will your valiant man dye of necessity? so
Cowards suffer what cannot be avoided: and to run into death unimportun'd, is
to run into the first condemned desperateness. Will he dye when he is rich
and happy? then by living he may do more good: and in afflictions and
miseries, death is the chosen refuge of Cowards. Fortiter ille facit, qui miser
esse potest.
But it is taught and practiced among our Gallants, that rather than our
reputations suffer any m^ime, or we any misery, we shall offer our breasts to
the Cannons mouth, yea to our swords points: And this seems a very brave and a
very climbing (which is a Cowardly, earthly, and indeed a very grovelling)
spirit. Why do they chain these slaves to the Gallyes, but that they thrust
their deaths, and would at every loose leap into the sea? Why do they take
weapons from condemned men, but to bar them of that ease which Cowards
affect, a speedy death. Truly this life is a tempest, and a warfare, and he
which dares dye, to escape the anguish of it, seems to me, but so valiant, as
he which dares hang himself, lest he be pressed to the wars. I have seen
one in that extremity of melancholy, which was then become madness, to make
his own breath an Instrument to stay his breath, and labor to choke
himselfe^ but alas! he was mad. And we knew another that languished under the
oppression of a poor disgrace so much, that he took more pains to dye, then
would have served to have nourished life and spirit enough to have outlived
his disgrace. What Fool will call this Cowardlinesse, Valor? or this
Baseness, Humility? And lastly, of these men which dye the Allegorical death
of entering into Religion, how few are found fit for any show of valiancy? but
only a soft and supple metal, made only for Cowardly solitariness.

X. That a Wise Man is known by much laughing.
RIde, si sapis, o puella ride; If thou be wise, laugh: for since the powers
of discourse, reason, and laughter, be equally proper unto Man only, why
shall not he be only most wise, which has most use of laughing, as well as he
which has most of reasoning and discoursing? I always did, and shall
understand that Adage; Per risum multum possis cognoscere stultum,
That by much laughing thou may know there is a fool, not, that the laughers
are fools, but that among them there is some fool, at whom wisem^n laugh:
which moved Erasmus to put this as his first Argument in the mouth of his
Folly, that she made Beholders laugh: for fools are the most laughed at, and
laugh the least themselves of any. And Nature saw this faculty to be so
necessary in man, that she has been content that by more causes we should be
importuned to laugh, then to the exercise of any other power; for things in
themselves utterly contra^y, beget this effect; for we laugh both at witty and
absurd things: At both which sorts I have seen Men laugh so long, and so
earnestly, that at last they have wept that they could laugh no more. And
therefore the Poet having described the quietness of a wise retired man, says
in one, what w^ ^ave said before in many lines; Quid facit Canius tuus? ridet.
We have received that even the extremity of laughing, yea of weeping also, has
been accounted wisdom: And that Democritus and Heraclitus, the lovers of
these Extremes, have been called lovers of wisdom. Now among our wisemen I
doubt not, but many would be found who would laugh at Heraclitus weeping, none
which weep at Democritus laughing. At the hearing of Comedies or other witty
reports, I have noted some, which not understanding ^ests etc. have yet chosen
this as the best means to seem wise and understandiug, to laugh when their
Companions laugh; and I have presumed them ignorant, whom I have seen unmoved.
A fool if he come into a Princes Court, and see a gay man leaning at the wall,
so glistering, and so painted in many colors that he is hardly discerned from
one of the pictures in the Arras, hanging his body like an Iron-bound-chest,
girt in and thick ribb'd with broad gold laces, may (and commonly does) envy
him. But alas! shall a wiseman, which may not only not envy, but not pity
this monster, do nothing? Yes, let him laugh. And if one of these hot cholerike
firebrands, which nourish themselves by quarrelling, and kindling others, spit
upon a fool one spark of disgrace, he, like a that ^h^ house quickly burning,
may be angry; but the wiseman, as cold as the Salamander, may not only not be
angry with him, but not be sorry for him; therefore let him laugh: so he shall
be known a Man, because he can laugh, a wise Man that he knows at what to
laugh^ and a valiant Man that he dares laugh: for he that laughs is justly
reputed more wise, then at whom it is laughed. And hence I think proceeds that
which in these later formal times I have much noted; that now when our
superstitious civility of manners is become a mutual tickling flattery of one
another, almost every man affects an humor of jesting, and is content to be
de^ect, and to deforme himself, yea become fool to no other end that I can
spy, but to give his wise Companion occasion to laugh; and to show themselves
in promptness of laughing is so great in wisemen, that I think all wisemen,
if any wiseman do read this Paradox, will laugh both at it and me.

XI. That the gifts of the Body are better then those of the Mind.
I Say again, that the body makes the mind, not that it created it a mind,
but forms it a good or a bad mind; and this mind may be confounded with soul
without any violence or injustice to Reason or Philosophy: then the soul it
seems is enabled by our body, not this by it. My Body licenseth my soul to
see the Worlds beauties through mine eyes; to hear pleasant things through
mine ears; and affords it apt Organs for the conveiance of all perceivable
del^ght. But alas! my soul cannot make any part, that is not of it self
disposed, to see or hear, though without doubt she be as able and as willing
to see behind as before. Now if my soul would say, that she enables any part
to taste these pleasures, but is her self only delighted with those rich
sweetnesses which her in^ard eyes and senses apprehend, she should dissemble;
for I see her often solaced with beauties, which she sees through mine eyes,
and with music which through mine ears she hears. This perfection then my
body has, that it can impart to my mind all his pleasures; and my mind has
still many, that she can neither ^each my indisposed part her faculties, nor to
the best espoused parts show ^t beauty of Angels, of Music, of Spheres,
whereof she boasts the contemplation. Are chastity, temperance, and fortitude
gifts of the mind? I appeal to Physicians whether the cause of these be not in
the body; health is the gift of the body, and patience in sickness the gift
of the mind: then who will say that patience is as good a happiness, as
health, when we must be extremely miserable to purchase this happiness. And
for nourishing of civil societies and mutual love amongst men, which is our
chief end while we are men; I say, this beauty, presence, and proportion of
the body, has a more masculine force in begetting this love, then the virtues
of the mind: for it strikes us suddenly, and possesses us immoderately; when
to know those virtues requires some Judgment in him which shall discern, a
long time and conversation between them. And even at last how much of our
faith and belief shall we be driven to bestow, to assure our selves that these
virtues are not counterfeited: for it is the same to be, and seem virtuous,
because that he that has no virtue, can dissemble none, but he which has a
little, may gild and enamell, yea and transform much vice into virtue: For
allow a man to be discreet and flexible to complaints, which are great virtuous
gifts of the mind, this discretion will be to him the soul and Elixir of all
virtues, so that touched with this, even pride shall be made humility; and
Cowardice, honorable and wise valor. But in things seen there is not this
danger, for the body which thou love and esteemest fair, is fair;
certainly if it be not fair in perfection, yet it is fair in the same
degree that thy Judgment is good. And in a fair body, I do seldom suspect a
disproportioned mind, and as seldom hope for a good in a deformed. When I see
a goodly house, I assure my self of a worthy possessour, from a ruinous
weather-beaten building I turn away, because it seems either stuffed with
varlets as a Prison, or handled by an unworthy and negligent tenant, that so
suffers the waste thereof. And truly the gifts of Fortune, which are riches,
are only handmaids, yea Pandars of the bodies pleasure; with their service we
nourish health, and preserve dainty, and we buy delights; so that virtue which
must be loved for it self, and respects no further end, is indeed nothing: And
riches, whose end is the good of the body, cannot be so perfectly good, as the
end whereto it levels.

CERTAIN PROBLEMES WRITTEN BY I. DONE.

THE PROBLEMES.
I. Why have Bastards b^st Fortune? II Why Puritans make long S^rmons? III. Why
did the Devil reserve Jesuits till these la^ter days. IV. Why is there more
variety of Green, then of any other color? V. Why do Young Laymen so much
study Divinity? VI Why has the common Opinion afforded Women Souls? VII Why
are the Fairest, falsest VIII^ Why Venus star only does cast a shadow? IX. Why
is Venus Star Multinominous, called both Hesperus and Vesper. X. Why are new
Officers least oppressing?
PROBLEMES,
I. Why have Bastards best Fortune?
BEcause Fortune herself is a Whore, but such are not most indulgent to their
issue; the old natural reason (but those meetings in stolen love are most
vehement, and so contribute more spirit then the easy and lawful) might
govern me, but that now I see Mistresses are become dome^tike and in ordinary,
and they and wives wait but by turns, and agree as well as they had lived in
the Arc. The old Moral reason (that Bastards inherit wickedness from their
Parents, and so are i^ a better way to preferment by having a stock
beforehand, then those that build all their fortune upon the poor and weak
stock of Original sin) might prevail with me, but that since we are
fallen into such times, as now the world might spare the Devil, because she
could be bad enough without him. I see men scorn to be wicked by example, or
to be beholding to others for their damnation. It seems reasonable, that since
Laws rob them of succession in civil benefits, they should have something
else equivalent. As Nature (which is Laws pattern) having denied Women
Constancy to one, has provided them with cunning to allure many; and so
Basta^ds de jure should have better wits and experience. But besides that by
experience we see many fools amongst them, we should take from them one of
their chiefest helps to preferment, and we should deny them to be fools; and
(that which is only left) that W^men choose worthier men then their husbands,
is false de facto^ either then it must be that the Church having removed them
from all place in the public Service of God, they have better means then
others to be wicked, and so fortunate: Or else because the two greatest powers
in this world, the Devil and Princes concur to their greatnesse^ the one
giving bastardy, the other legitimation: As nature frames and conserves great
bodies of contraries. Or the cause is, because they abound most at Court, which
is the forge where fortunes are made, or at least the shop where they be sold.

II. Why Puritanes make long Sermons?
IT needs not for perspicuousnesse, for God knows they are plain enough: nor
do all of them use Sem-briefe-Accents for some of them have crotchets enough.
It may be they intend not to rise like glorious Tapers and Torches, but like
Thinne-wretched-sicke-watching-Candles, which languish and are in a Divine
Consumption from the first minute, yea in their snuff, and stink when others
are in their more profitable glory. I have thought sometimes, that out of
conscience, they allow long measure to course ware. And sometimes, that
usurping in that place a liberty to speak freely of Kings, they would reign as
long as they could. But now I think they do it out of a zealous imagination,
that, It is their duty to preach ^n till their Auditory wake.

III. Why did the Devil reserve Jesuits till these latter days.
DID he know that our Age would deny the Devils possessing, and therefore
provided by these to possess men and kingdoms? Or to end the disputation of
Schoolmen, why the Devil could not make lice in Egypt; and whether those
things he presented there, might be true, has he sent us a true and real
plague, worse than those ten? Or in ostentation of the greatness of his
Kingdom, which even division cannot shake, does he send us these which
disagree with all the rest? Or knowing that our times should discover the
Indies, and abolish their Idolatry, does he send these to give them another for
it? Or peradventure they have been in the Roman Church these thousand years,
though we have called them by other names.

IV. Why is there more variety of Green then of other Colors?
IT is because it is the figure of Youth wher^n nature wuld provide as many
green, as youth has affections; and so present a Seagreen for profuse masters
in voyages; a Grasse-green for sudden new men enobled from Gra^^ers; and a
Goose-greene for such Politicians as pretend to preserve the Capitol. Or ^lse
Prophetically foreseeing an age, wherein they shall all hunt. And for such as
misdemeane themselves a Willow-greene; For Magistrates must as well have Fasces
born before them to chastize the small offenses, as Secures to cut off the
great.

V. Why do young Laymen so much study Divinity.
IS it because others tending busily Churches preferment neglect study? Or had
the Church of Rome s^ut up all our ways, till the Lutherans broke down their
uttermost stubborn doors, and the Calvinists picked their inwardest and
subtlest locks? Surely the Devil cannot be such a Fool to hope that he shall
make this study contemptible, by making it common. Nor that as the Dwellers by
the River Origus are said (by drawing infinite ditches to sprinkle their barren
Country) to have exhausted and intercepted their maine channel, and so lost
their more profitable course to the sea; so we, by providing every ones self,
divinity enough for his own use, should neglect our Teachers and Fathers. He
cannot hope for better heresies then he has had, nor was his Kingdom ever so
much advanced by debating Religion (though with some aspersions of Error) as by
a dull and stupid security, in which many gross things are swallowed. Possible
out of such an ambition as we have now, to speak plainly and fellow-like with
Lords and Kings, we think also to acquaint our selves with Gods secrets: Or
perchance when we study it by mingling humane respects, It is not Divinity.

VI. Why has the common Opinion afforded Women Souls?
IT is agreed that we have not so much from them as any part of either our
mortal souls of sense, or growth; and we deny souls to others equal to them
in all but in speech for which they are beholding to their bodily instruments:
For perchance an Oxes heart, or a Goats, or a Foxes, or a Serpents would
speak just so, if it were in the breast, and could move that tongue and jaws.
Have they so many advantages and means to hurt us (for, ever their loving
destroyed us) that we dare not displease them, but give them what they will?
And so when some call them Angels, some Goddesses, and the P^lpulian Heretics
made them Bishops, we descend so much with the stream, to allow them souls?
Or do we somewhat (in this dignifying of them) flatter Princes and great
Personages that are so much governed by them? Or do we in that easiness and
prodigality, wherein we daily lose our own souls to we care not whom, so
labor to persuade our selves, that since a woman has a soul, a soul is no
great matter? Or do we lend them souls but for use, since they for our
sakes, give their souls again, and their bodies to boot? Or perchance
because the Devil (who is all soul) does most mischief, and for convenience
and proportion, because they would come nearer him, we allow them some souls;
and so as the Romans naturalized some Provinces in revenge, and made them
Romans, only for the burden of the Commonwealth; so we have given women
souls only to make them capable of damnation?

VII. Why are the Fairest, Falsest?
I Mean not of false Alchimy Beauty, for then the question should be inverted,
Why are the Falsest, Fairest? It is not only because they are much solicited
and sought for, so is gold, yet it is not so common; and this suite to them,
should teach them their value, and make them more reserved. Nor is it because
the delicatest blood has the best spirits, for what is that to the flesh?
perchance such constitutions have the best wits, and there is no proportionable
subject, for Women's wit, but deceit? does the mind so follow the temperature
of the body, that because those complexions are aptest to change, the mind is
therefore so? Or as Bells of the purest metal retain their tinkling and sound
largest; so the memory of the last pleas^re lasts longer in these, and
disposes them to the next. But sure it is not in the complexion, for those
that do but think themselves fair, are presently inclined to this
multiplicity of loves, which being but fair in conceit are false in deed: and
so perchance when they are borne to this beauty, or have made it, or have
dreamed it, they easily believe all addresses and applications of every man,
out of a sense of their own worthiness to be directed to them, which others
less worthy in their own thoughts apprehend not, or discredit. But I think
the true reason is, that being like gold in many properties (as that all snatch
at them, but the worst possess them, that they care not how deep we dig for
them, and that by the Law o^ (...), Occupandi conceditur) they would be like
also in this, that as Gold to make it self of use admits allay, so they, that
they may be tractable, mutable, and current, have to their allay Falsehood.

VIII. Why Venus-starre only does cast a shadow?
IS it because it is nearer the earth? But they whose profession it is to see
that nothing be done in heaven without their consent (as Re -- says in
himself of Astrologers) have bid Mercury to be nearer. Is it because the
works of Venus want shadowing, covering, and disguising? But those of Mercury
need it more; for Eloquence, his Occupation, is all shadow and colors; let our
life be a sea, and then our reason and even passions are wind enough to carry
us whether we should go, but Eloquence is a storm and tempest that
miscarries: and who doubts that Eloquence which must persuade people to take a
yoke of sovereignty (and then beg and make laws to tie them faster, and then
give money to the invention, repair and strengthen it) needs more shadows and
coloring, then to persuade any Man or Woman to that which is natural. And
Venus markets are so natural, that when we solicit the best way (which is by
marriage) our persuasions work not so much to draw a woman to us, as against
her nature to draw her from all other besides. And so when we go against
nature, and from Venus-work (for marriage is chastity) we need shadows and
colors, but not else. In Seneca's time it was a course, an un-Romane and a
contemptible thing even in a Matrone, not to have had a Love beside her
husband, which though the Law required not at their hands, yet they did it
zealously out of the counsel of custom and fashion, which was venery of
supererogation: Et te spectator plusquam delectat Adulter,
says Martial: And Horace, because many lights would not show him enough,
created many Images of the same Object by ^ainscoting his chamber with
looking-glasses: so that Veuus flies no^ light, so much as Mercury, who
creeping into our understanding, our darkness would be defeated, if he were
perceived. Then either this shadow confesses that same dark Melancholy
Repentance which accompanies; or that so violent fires, needs some shadowy
refreshing, and intermission: Or else light signifying both day and youth, and
shadow both night and age, she pronounces by this that she professes both all
persons and times.

IX. Why is Venus-star multinominous, called both Hesperus and Vesper?
THe Moon has as many names, but not as she is a star, but as she has
diverse governments; but Venus is multinominous to give example to her
prostitute disciples, who so often, either to renew or refresh themselves
toward lovers, or to disguise themselves from Magistrates, are to take new
names. It may be she takes new names after her many functions, for as she is
supreme Monarch of all Suns at large (which is lust) so is she joined in
commission with all Mythologicks, with Juno, Diana, and all others for
marriage. It may be because of the diverse names to her self, for her
affections have more names than any vice: scilicet; Pollution, Fornication,
Adultery, Lay-Incest, Church-Incest, Rape, Sodomy, Mastupration, Masturbation,
and a thousand others. Perchance her diverse names showed her appliablenesse to
diverse men, for Neptune distilled and wet her in love, the Sun warmes and
melts her^ Mercury persuaded and swore her, Jupiters authority secured, and
Vulcan hammered her. As Hesperus she presents you with her bonum utile, because
it is wholesomest in the morning: As Vesper with her bonum delectabile, because
it is pleasantest in the evening. And because industrious men rise and endure
with the Sun in their civil businesses, this Star calls them up a little
before, and remembers them again a little after for her business; for
certainly, Venit Hesperus, ite capellae:
was spoken to Lovers in the persons of Goats.

X. Why are New Officers least oppressing?
MVst the old Proverb, that Old dogs bite sorest, be true in all kind of
dogs? Me thinks the fresh memory they have of the money they parted with for
the place, should hasten them for the re-imbursing: And perchance they do but
seem easier to their suitors; who (as all other Patients) do account all
change of pain, easy. But if it be so, it is either because the sudden sense
and contentment of the honor of the place, retards and remits the rage of their
profits, and so having stayed their stomachs, they can forbear the second
course a while: Or having overcome the steepest part of the hill, and clambered
above Competitions and Oppositions they dare loyter, and take breath: Perchance
being come from places, where they tasted no gain, a little seems much to
them at first, for it is long before a Christian conscience overtakes, or
straies into an Officers heart. It may be that out of the general disease of
all men not to love the memory of a predecessor, they seek to disgrace them by
such ea^inesse, and make good first impressions, that so having drawn much
wa^er ^o their Mill, they may a^terwa^^s grind at ease: For if from the rules
of good Ho^se-manship, they thought it wholesome to jet out in a moderate pace,
they should also take up toward their journeys end, not mend their pace
con^inually, and g^llop ^o their Innes-doore, the grave; except perchance their
conscience at that time so touch them, that they think it an injury and damage
both to him that must sell, and to him that must buy the Office after their
death, and a kind of dilapidation if they by continuing honest should discredit
the place, and bring it to a l^^er-rent, or vnder-vaine.

FINIS.



