A DEFENSE OF Church Government.

Dedicated to the high Court of Parliament.

WHEREIN, THE CHVRCH Government established in England, is directly proved to
be consonant to the word of God, and that subjects ought of duty to conform
themselves to the state Ecclesiastical.

Together with, A DEFENSE OF THE CROSS IN Baptism; as it is used in our
Church, being not repugnant to the word: and by a consequent, the brethren
which are silenced, ought to subscribe unto it, rather then to bury their
Talents in the ground.

By JOHN DOVE, Doctor of Divinity.

AT LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Henry Rockit, and are to be sold by John
Hodgets in Paul's Church yeard. 1606.

THE CONTENTS OF THE first Book.
Of conformity to the state Ecclesiastical. Of Eldership. Of Diocesan
Bishops. Of Cathedral Churches. Of Lord Bishops, and ecclesiastical persons
exercising civil authority.
TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the Lords spiritual and temporal of the upper
house, with the Knights and Burgesses of the lower house, assembled in the high
Court of Parliament.

Of conformity to the state Ecclesiastical.
MAy it please the wisdom of this honorable assembly, to weigh our reasons,
not only in the balance of man's wit, but also in the skales of the
sancturarie, why this conformiture is required. The Apostle 1. Cor. 1. 10.
beseeching us as brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we all
speak one thing, that there be no dissentions among us, that we be knit
together in one mind and judgment: commends it unto us as a necessary rule
of Ecclesiastical polity, for the better establishing of this consent in
doctrine, the speedy cutting off of all iarres and discensions, the fast
knitting and uniting of minds and judgments: upon this ground and warrant
other states have urged their Preachers to conform themselves to the State
under which they lived. And seeing by this rule apostolical it cannot stand
with the peace and good estate of any Church whatsoever, to permit such among
them as are not of them, and to tolerate such in their Ministry as are
adversaries: to their laws and constitutions: much more then is conformity so
grounded upon Scripture, and strengthened by example of other Churches, deemed
by the godliest, and approved by the wisest, to be no less needful in this
present scisme and rent of the Church of England, then was pitch for the Arc
of Noah floating upon the water, and mortar for the ruins of the Temple
exposed to the injury of wind and weather, without which the one could not but
presently sink, and the other not long continue.

And, for as much as some few among us in their private opinions dissent from
us, not only godly polity teaches, and Christian humility requires, but
also the Law of God which is of highest authority prescribes and commands,
that these few should submit themselves to the wisdom of the State, rather
then the whole state should yield, and give place to the contradiction of
those private spirits. When certain brethren at Antioch varied about
circumscision, Act. 15. 1.
they were ouerswayed by the censure of the Council held at Jerusalem to whom
the hearing of such differences, and disciding of such coutrouersies, did of
right belong, but the sentence of the Council gave no way at all to those
brethren. And Saint Paul having spoken of the ceremony devised by 1. Cor. 11.
the Church, and used in his time, in prayer and prophecy, that men should be
bare, and women covered: notes them for contentious persons which oppose
themselves against this ceremony, alleging: that it once being approved, and
received into the Church, ought not to be called into question, vel to nomine,
because the Church had received it, when he says: If any man list to be
contentious, we have no such custom among us, nor the Church of God.

For the better enlarging of this point, that I may not instance in the Turkish
Government, which suffers no question to be moved against Ecclesiastical
rises, but ends all such controversies by the sword, neither yet in the
Lutheran Church, which admits none to any place in the ministry without
subscription and oath to the reformation of Angsburge; nor in the Church of
Rome, which inioyneth their Clergy to maintain the doctrine concluded in the
council of Trent: the Church of Geneua, whose laws See the laws of the book
of Geneua. Chap. 1.
and government our brethren would impose upon us, as ^he only pattern of
holiness, and example of a true Christian reformation, inioyneth all their
Ministers before their admition, not only to make open protestation, that they
do receive and maintain the doctrine approved in Geneua, but simply, and
absolutely to swear, that they will keep the Ecclesiastical ordinances,
which are passed and Chap. 2. in the form of their oath.
ordained by the small, great, and general counsels of that City. By which
law and practice of theirs, it is a clear case, that with them there is no
respect of private men's opinions, no satisfaction to be yielded to particular
persons, no conference or disputation granted with men of contrary judgments.
But, it must be held pro concesso, for a conclusion or principle already
proved, that all their ordinances are according to Gods word, and of that
undoubted truth, that they may not be argued, sifted, or controuerted. Chap. 2.
Finally, if there arise any difference concerning doctrine, which has not
been already reconciled, it is inacted by their laws, that the Ministers
shall be called to a conference; if then it cannot receive an end, the
Magistrates shall interpose their authority, and so proceed to a final
decision. And for the better strengthening of their proceedings, it is further
inacted, that all opposition against their ordinances, shall be held for an
heinous crime, called by the title of rebellion against Ecclesiastical laws:
and it is set down as punishable among the notorious crimes of heresy, scisme,
blasphemy, simony, bribery, perjury, and drunkenness, The punishment to be
inflicted upon Ministers thus rebelling, is deposition from their ministry,
and all contempt against Ecclesiastical orders, in what persons soever, after
three admonitions, is censured by excommunication. Yet I desire that no
sinister or uncharitable construction should be made hereof, as if a state
should urge them which feel any the smallest check in their tender consciences
with shipwreck of conscience, rashly to subscribe unto that which they do not
approve, or for worldly respects, to allow of that whereof they cannot satisfy
and well inform themselves. For albeit the state, which is well advised, has
sufficient warrant to impose, yet the bare authority of the state, is no
warrant unto them to obey, which be not yet resolved, but stand in doubt,
because they must build upon this ground of the Apostle, that be the thing in
it self never so lawful, without faith, it is sin. But only I exhort them
better to instruct and inform their weak consciences, which if they cannot,
or will not do, the imputation of this schism must not be Romans 14. 1. Cor. 10.
laid upon the state, which is well advised, but upon their weakness, which
will not be persuaded when they are persuaded, which are men wedded to their
own opinions, or that I may speak more mildely of them, which either cannot,
or will not reform their judgments.

But for the better satisfaction of our Christian brethren, we will not refuse
to yield reasons of our government, albeit it has been so long by law
established: and for the justification of our state, we will by Gods
assistance, prove it in the chapters following, to stand with the laws of the
holy Bible. As namely, that the state of Archbishops and Bishops, which has
continued among us ever since we first received the Gospel, had their
institution from God himself, whereas parish Churches are man's invention: and
the government of the Presbitery, is not only repugnant to the laws of the
holy Scriptures, but also prejudicial to the state of a Kingdom.

A defense of Church government established in England.
Of Eldership.
ALl would be in title as high as Aaron, all would be governors rather then
private Ministers; but because the keys of the Church are not committed unto
all which be of the ministry; therefore some of our brethren, being
discontented with the present state, make it now a question, whether the Church
of right, ought to be ordered by elders, as it is in Geneua, or by Diocesan
Lord Bishops, as it is in England? I cannot deny but the government of the
Church is committed to Elders in the new Testament, where the Apostle says:
The elders which rule well, are worthy of double honor, 1. Tim. 5. 17.
especially they which labor in the word and doctrine. But, the disputation is
between us and our brethren, which stand for the eldership; whether these
elders were lay men of trades and worldly vocations, as they be now in Geneua,
or preachers, and ecclesiastical persons? whether this Eldership was an
annual, or a perpetual office? whether they ought, their year being ended,
to relinquish that office, and so to return to their trades and occupations,
as they do in Geneua, or else to continue the whole term of their lives? They
allege for the establishing of their lay Presbytery, that because Saint Paul
uses these words: especially they which labor in the word: therefore two
sorts of Elders are there included, some learned and preaching Ministers, some
unlearned, and therefore unpreaching and silent governors. Therefore, to come
to the true construction of this text, and due understanding of the words,
which may be consonant, and agreeable, both to the analogy of faith, and of
that place: the doctrine of the Apostle includes two things: a thesis, or
general conclusion; and afterward a particular exposition of that thesis or
general conclusion, by a kind of epanorthosis or reuocation of himself by a
restraint and limitation of that general doctrine, showing how far it is to
be understood; as namely, that if they labor in the word and doctrine, they
are worthy of double honor: but if they labor not in the word, he
vouchsafes them no double honor. So that out of these words, can be
collected no such distinction as they do imagine, of preaching elders, and
governing elders, which are no preachers, but of governing elders both of them
preachers, one sort which labors in the word, the other which preaches
also, but labors not in preaching. For, it is one thing to be a preacher,
and another thing to labor in preaching. And what it is to labor in
preaching, he expounds in an other place, where he says: I charge thee
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall judge the quick and the
dead, 2 Timothy 4.
at his appearing, and in his Kingdom, preach the word, be instant, in
season, and out of season. The Greek word is (copiontes) which is as much as
to endure the heat and burden of the day, to take extraordinary pains in the
ministry. But that the writings of the Apostles acknowledge, neither annual,
nor lay elders, my reasons are these.

Because eldership is a lawful ministry, therefore it is of Demas to forsake
Saint Paul's fellowshippe, and to Psalm. 114. 2. Tim. 4. 1. Cor. 3. Luke 9. 62
embrace this present world. This ministry is the Lords husbandry; that is,
the Lords plough: and, having once laid their hands to this plough, if they
look back, they make themselves unfit for the kingdom of God.

God calls no man, whom he furnishes not with some Matt. 25. Act. 8.
such lay elders have no talents at all committed unto them: And therefore I
say unto them, as Saint Peter did to Simon Magus: They have no part nor
fellowshippe in this business.

The Church must be ordered accorcing to the precepts 1. Pet. 5. John 2. Epist.
1. Act. 20.
have express commandments. Saint Peter a preacher, calls himself an
elder, and charge other elders to feed the flock. Saint John, a preacher,
calls himself an elder, in his epistle to the elect Lady. Saint Paul
charge the elders of Ephesus, to feed the Church of God which he purchased
Tit. 1.
with his blood. And to Titus, he gives charge that he appoint over every
City Elders, and he shows that by such elders he means Bishops, which
must be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and to convince them which say
against it.

Deacons which be of an inferior calling in the Church, Choose you out 7. men
of honest report, full of the holy Act. 6.
Ghost, and wisdom, whom we may appoint to this business, and we will give
our selves continually to prayer, and the ministration of the word. In these
words: full of wisdom: they mean not worldly, but heavenly wisdom, which
is the knowledge of the Scriptures: but whosoever has such fullness of
knowledge and understanding of the Bible, is very able to preach. And where the
Apostles say: we will give our selves continually to prayer, and ministration of
the word: it does not follow that therefore the deacons being appointed to
their office of Deaonship, did wholly neglect preaching, and the ministration of
the word, no more, then that they did also give over praying, which is here
mentioned in the employment of the Apostles, as well as preaching, (for then
had they been reprobates.) And that after they were called to be Deacons, they
did also preach, and minister the sacraments: it appears by the examples of
Stephen, and Philip, which both preached, Act. 7. Act. 8. 35. 38. 50.
and baptized. Neither can a man of sober judgment conceive such an idle
opinion of the Apostles, that they would have admitted them to that office, by
that great solemnity of prayer and imposition of hands, if they should have
been estranged from the ministry, and wholly attended upon tables, and been
but gatherers of alms.

God which has established kingdoms, and ordained secular Populo Eucan: de
iure regni apud Scotos.
iu^^ est, vt imporiu^ cui velit deferat. It rests in the hands of the
people, to set the Crown upon whose head they please.

B. Nam nisi regem suffragijs electum habeamus, vereor ne legitimum habituri
simus. M. Ego quoque idem islud vereor. No man is a lawful King, but by
election of the people.

Nam, and quem nes Venetorum (...) vocamus, is nihil aliud est, quam rex
legitimus. He whom we we call the Duke of Venice, is nothing else, but a
lawful King.

Leges igitur hac de causa inuentae sunt a populis, regesque coacti, non sua ^n
iudicijs licentia, sed quod populus in se dedisset iure, vti. For this cause
laws are devised by the people, and Kings constrained, not to use their own
liberty in the seat of Justice, but that whereunto the people has restrained
them.

Sit, quando ita vis, p^ne^ populum vt leges serat, and perferat, sint reges
velut tabularioru^ custodes. The making of laws is only in the power of the
people, kings are but as it were keepers of the records.

Vides opinor, quantam vno versu des principi licentiam: nempe, vt quod velit
ipse, dicet lex, quod nolit non dicat. Id si semel recipiamus, non proderit
bonas leges condere, quae principem bonum officij sui ^oneant, malum
circumscribant. Immo, vt dica^ apertiu^^, nullas omnino* leges habere
praestaret, quam liberum latrocinium, atque etiam honoratu^, sub legis
praetextu tolerari. M. Certe, non modo potest^te^ legum iubendaru^, sed etiam
eas interpretandi, regiabstulist: As kings may not be makers of laws, so they
may not be trusted with the exposition of laws, for then it were all one as if
no good laws were made, which may put a good Prince in mind of his duty, and
compel an evil Prince to do his duty, because they will wrest them to their
own purpose. And so robbery shall not only be free, but also rewarded and
honored under the color and pretense of law.

Concerning such Princes as behave not themselves well in their government: Deo
and hominibus habendes inimicos, eosque in luporum, aliorumne noxiorum
animalium genere, potius quam hominum, habendos putem, quae qui alit, and sibi
pernicie^ alit, and alijs and qui occidit, non sibi modo, sed public vniuersis
prodest. Interfectoribus autem praemia decarni non ab vniuerso tantum populo,
sed a smgulis: quemadmodum vulg o fieri solet ijs qui lupos aut vrsas
occiderunt. They be enemies to God and man: Wolves, who so kills them,
benefiteh the common wealth, and is to be rewarded as he that kills Wolves,
Bares, and such harmful beasts. And what is this less then which the
conspirators of Rome do hold it meritorious to murder Princes.

Again, says this Presbyterian: Quemadmodum in primis regibus vsque, ad
Kennethum 3 qui primus regnum in sua familia stabiliuit, perspicua^ est quae
fuerit potestas populi in regibus creandis, and in ordinem redigendis: ita
necesse est vt is aut populo inuito id fecerit, aut a persuaso impetrauerit.
Perro, si ceegit populum sibi parere, populus quoque vbi primum caeperit suis
viribus confidere, violentum illud imperium poterit excutere, cum a regibus and
populo recepta iura pronuncient, and natura clamet, quicquid per vim fiat
simili vi solui posse Si tu mecum ex conuentu agas, quid causae est, quin ego
ex aduerso eas causas ponam, cur pacta and conuenta solui possint? What power
the people has both in setting up kings, and ruling them after they be
established, Kennethus the third, is an example, which first established the
kingdom in his own family. If by violence he compelled the people to yield
unto it, by the same violence they may free themselves again, if by their
consent, they may pretend cause enough to reuerse that whereunto they gave
consent. And what is this but the doctrine of the Papists, that faith with
heretics is not to be held?

To them which allege that we must pray for Princes, though they be wicked,
and therefore not lift up our Tim. 2.
hands against them; he answers. Nec slatim, si promalis principibus orandum
est, hinc allegare debemus little vitia non esse punienda: non magis quam
latronum, pro quibus etiam orare iubemur, nec si bono principi parendum est,
ideo malo non est resistendum. We are bound to pray for wicked Princes, in such
sort as for thieves: we must pray for them both, and punish them both.

Quod autem ad Caligulam, Neronem, Domitianum and reliquos eius generis
tyrannos attinet: cur violats iuris diuini and humani poenae non ^ebeant exigi,
nihil hic apud Paulum habes, qui de ipsa magistratuum potestate, non de malis
ma^e potestatem eam gerentibus disserat. Nec, si ad Pauli regulam id genus
tyrannorum examines, omnino magistratus erunt. As for Caligula, Nero, Domitian,
and such tyrants, it stands with Paul's doctrine that they may be punished
for their offenses. For he disputes only of the lawful authority of the
magistrates not of wicked magistrates which abuse their authority. Neither
according to Saint Paul's doctrine are such Kings to be held for Magistrates.

Vt cunque negare non possunt: aulici adulatoras carnificis functionem pariem
esse muneris publici, and fortasse etiam regij, vel ipsorum regum testimonio,
qui quoties aliquis e ministus publicis violatur, se, suamque maiestatem, and
corpus violari queruntur. The flattering Courtiers cannot deny, but that the
office of the hangman does belong to the King, witness the Kings themselves,
which when their Catchpoles, and hangmen receive any wrong, do complain that
their own person is in them wronged, and their princely Majesty.

M. Quid tande^ e scripturis profers cur liceat tyrannos impune occidere? B.
Primum id affero, quod quum diserte praeceptum sit de scelere, and sceleratis a
medio tollendis, sine vlla exceptione gradus aut ordinis nusquam tamen in
saeris literis tyrannis magis quam priuatis est cautum. Having a general
commandment out of Gods word, to put to death wicked men, without respect of
any degree or order in particular, tyrants have no more privilege then private
men, and therefore, according to his word, it is lawful to kill tyrants.

Rationem excogitarunt Canonistae qua and scelera plecterentur, and Papa tame^
sacro sanctus and inuiolatus haberetur. Aliud enim Papa, aliud illius hominis
qui Papa esset, ius existimabant, etc. We may distinguish between the Kings
person and his office, to punish him as he is a man offending, setting a side
his place, and so not the King, but the malefactor is chastised.

Nos contendimus idem ius reges habere in multitudinem quod illi in singulos e
multitudine habent. The people have jointly the same authority over the King,
which the King has over every several person among the people.

The French Consistorians write in this manner: Subditi Vindiciae contra
tyrannos.
non tenentur regibus obedire, siquid aduersus legem Dei imperent. Subjects are
not bound to obey Kings, if they command any thing contrary to Gods word. In
which assertion, first they be an easy matter for them at their pleasure to
discharge themselves of all duty and obedience to the King. Secondly, they
deceive the simple reader by a fallacy, for, the ambiguitie lies in these
words: Si quid aduersus legem dei imperant, If they command any thing contrary
to Gods word. For, the question is, whether they mean only in that particular
thing which is against Gods word, the King is not to be obeyed, or else, that
in nothing he is to be obeyed, because he has commanded some one thing
repugnant to the law of God? In this last sense, it is by them understood, as
appears by the words following, which are these: Vassallus se Domino
superiori iuramento diuincit, sic and Rex, ex legis diuinae precepto se
imperaturum jurat. Vassallus denique nisi iusiurandum seruat, feedum committit,
ipsoque iure se omni praerogatiua private. Rex quoque si deum negligat etc. ipso
iure regnum committit, and ex facto plerumque amittit. Duplex autem foedus in
regum inaugurations legimus, primum inter De^m, and regem and populum, vt esset
populus Dei populus, secundum vero inter regem and populum, vt been
obtemperanti been obtemperaretur. The vassal is bound to his Lord by an oath,
and the King swears that he will rule according to Gods word: if the vassal
keeps not his oath, he forfeiteth his estate, so if the King break his oath,
he forfeiteth his Crown. There is a double covenant at a Kings Coronation,
the first between God on the one side, and the King with the people on the
other side, that the people shall be Gods people: the second between the King
and the people, that the people shall be faithful subjects no longer then the
King shall continue a good King.

Populus si regem non coercet, culpa tenebitur, quia correi sunt. Licet Isreal's
si Rex legem Dei Ecclesiamne euertat, resistere: nec id Vindiciae contra
tyrannos
modo, verum nifecerit, eiusdem criminis tonebitur, and eandem poena^ luet.
Resistat vero verbo si verbo oppugnabitur, vi si vi, art inquam and mart,
quin et dolo bono si bono, cum nihilintersit vbi iustum bellu^ susceperis,
vtrum aperte pugues an ex insidijs. It is lawful for the people to resist the
King which impugneth Gods law, or his Church, and unless they do resist him,
they shall be accessarie as he is principal, and incur the same punishment
which is due unto him. If he deal by sword or word, they must oppose
themselves against him with the same weapons. For as much as the war which in
that cause they do wage against him is just, it makes no matter whether they
use open war and hostility, or secret slight and polity.

Nemo rex nascitur, nemo per se rex est, nemo absque populo regnare Vindic^oe
contra tyrannos,
potest, populus per se esse potest, etc. No man is borne to a kingdom, no man
is of himself a King, no man can reign but by the favor of the people, but
the people are absolute Quum reges a populo constituantur, vniuersus populus
rege prior est etc, Seeing kings are appointed by the people, the whole people
is above the king, his authority being derived from them, he is under them as
Joseph was under Putifer, Daniel under Nabuchadnazer. The king is but a servant
to the commonwealth as a shipmaster to the honor of the ship. Whatsoever
accrueth to the king by wars, or by his Exchequor, he must be accountable for
it to the people, as a Merchants factour is to his. Mr: Let the people forsake
their king, he will be a conte^ptible person in the eyes of all men, when they
shall put him from his dominion over men, he will be glad to be some
paedanticall fellow, and to use his paedagogical authority over boys.

As for our English Consistorians, they have these words: T. C. lib: 2. page
15. 7. T. C. lib. 2. page 165. Admonit: 2.
No civil Magistrate has pre-eminence by ordinary authority to determine of
Church causes. And, no civil magistrate in Councels and assemblies for Church
causes, can be chief moderatour, Judge, or governor. And, no civil magistrate
has such authority, as that without his consent it should not be lawful for
Ecclesiastical persons to make any Church orders or ceremonies. For as much
therefore as God has established kingdoms, but a presbytery and a kingdom
cannot both stand together, because one standing, the other falls. They are
enemies not only to Gods ordinance, but also to the state of Kings, which go
about to establish this Eldership in a kingdom.

Of Diocesan Bishops.
Master Jacob, in his Book of reformation obiecteth against the state of
Bishops, and Cathedral Churches, that of right there are no Diocesan, but
only parochial Bishops, that the authority, and jurisdiction, and rites of a
Bishop, are no other then belongs to all parsons of parish Churches, and
consequently that every parson is a Bishop. That there is no visible Church
ministerial, besides the parish Churches, and that they as depending upon no
other, nor subject to any other, nor parts or members of any other, have
absolute authority and power, as well of government as of teaching within
themselves, and so consequently, there are no cathederal Churches. And, as one
absurdity being granted, a thousand will follow, so upon these proemises,
which without proof, he takes for granted, he infers these five
conclusions, to the slander of our state, as absord as the proemises were, That
the case standing thus: 1. Our Bishops be no Christians, for (says he) every
Christian is a pastor, or one of the people, of the people they deny
themselves to be, and pastors they are not, 2. Being not lawful Diocesan
Bishops, much less may they be Lord Bishops. 3. Having no lawful authority,
nor calling their selves, they cannot confer Ecclesiastical orders, and lay
hands upon others, and so consequently our ministers by them ordered, have no
lawefull ministry. 4. That by their means we are defrauded of a main point
of our ordinary means of salvation, which is the true Ecclesiesticall
discipline.

5. That in our state Christ is robbed and spoiled of some parts of his kingly
and prophetical office, his kingly office being to appoint us, and his
prophetical office, being to teach us solely of himself the true
Ecclesiastical government, which our Bishops take from him, and ascribe unto
men, altering that discipline and government, which he alone as king has
appointed, and as a Prophet has taught in his holy word, which co^clusions
because they are inferred upon false, grounds, the grounds being shaken, the
conclusions will fall of themselves. Therefore let us come to the examination
of these grounds, to show how weak, and insufficient a foundation they be to
build upon.

He impugneth the Church and state of Bishops, first by show of argument,
secondly by his own idle conceits, vain conjectures, and imaginations. He
makes show of two arguments, the first is this; that the state of Bishops is a
breach of the 2. commandment, and by a consequent, idolatry. For in this
commandment: Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, thou shall not
bow down to it* nor worship it (says he) are forbidden all means being humane
inuentio^s, whereby men would give honor to the true God. But, one of these
means of divine worship being an humane invention, he says, to be the state
of Bishops, our Diocesan, and prouincial Churches using government, with the
ministeries and offices proper to them. For answer to which argument, I deny
the MINOR proposition, which consists of 2. parts, means of divine worship,
and humane invention. And because he brings no proof of his MINOR being the
subject of his disputation, which all opponents ought to do, I will disprove
it, and each part of it. And first, Diocesan and provincial Churches using
government, and their ministeries, which are of Archbishops, and Bishops, were
never intended by the founders of them, nor used by the officers and ministers
of them, nor held by the defendours, and maintainers of them, nor conceived by
men of understanding, to be any means of divine worship but of government. God
can be, and is worshipped, without these, and was worshipped as sincerely as
now he is, when they were not, but the Ecclesissticall state under a kingdom
cannot be peaceably governed without these. God is worshipped alike in Geneua
and in England* though this government and these offices, are not in Geneua
which are in England. And God is worshipped as sincerely, and as fully, and
amplely in our parish Churches as in our cathederal churches, and by ordinary
pastors, as by Bishops, so that their ministeries and high callings do not
afforde them any greater or other means to worship God; then they had when
they were first admitted to be private ministers. But their places, and high
callings do strengthen and arm them with authority for the better governing
of the churches which are committed to them, whereas being but private
ministers, they had no such charge of government. These things therefore are
not moral or doctrinall, and therefore belong not unto worship, but
political, and therefore belong unto government. And according to the course
of the holy Bible, that which is political and that which is moral, being of
sundry natures, are to be distinguished the one from the other. God in his
word established 3. laws among his people, one political, which did bind the
Jews to the observation of it, but, it was not imposed upon other nations that
they should be bound to receive it, further then that it might stand with the
peace, and good of the state. The other ceremonial which was to abide in force
till the coming of our Savior, and by his death to be abolished, so that now
ceremonies under the Gospel do cease, excepting those only which serve, not
for worship, but decensie, comeliness, and good order, and so the primitive
Church did in the days of the Apostles, and the Church of Geneua now does
devise ceremonies, witness their own Book of Laws, and that all 1. Cor. 11.
Churches may do the like, witness Calvin, Beza, Vrsinus, their own Doctors.
The third moral, which contains rules of Gods worship, which was from the
beginning, and must continue as a pattern of holiness to the end, and binds
all to the observation of it. But this is no part of that law, and all these
three Laws differ in nature one from the other. Secondly, that such Churches,
and Church offices, are not humane inventions, I prove by evident
demonstration. For, the first Church ministerial that ever was, had ordination
from God, which was the Church of the Jews under Aaron and his successors,
and that Church was both Diocesan, and provincial, and also national, having
all rites and jurisdiction which a Diocesan, or provincial, or national
church ever had or could have. Also under the Gospel, Saint Paul by warrant
from the holy Ghost, appointed Timothy a provincial Bishop of Ephesus, having
many Bishops under him, and Titus a national Bishop over all the kingdom of
Crete, having many Churches and Bishops under him, witness Tit. 1. 5.. 1 Timothy
1. 3 Eeseb. hist. l. 3. c. 4.
not only the Scriptures, but also Eusebius, his words being these: Timotheus
sane primus Ephesinae paraechiae, sicut and Titus Cretensium Ecclesiarum
Episcopatum sortitus scribitur. Timothy was the first Bishop of the whole
praecinct of Ephesus, in as ample manner as Titus of all the Churches of
Creete. Thus have I freed our Church Government under Diocesan and Provincial
Bishops, from that slanderous imputation of idolatry, seeing their institution
is of God, and no way opposite to his commandment.

In his second argument, he defines that only to be a visible Church, which
is endued with outward spiritual government. And so concludes, that there can
be no Diocesan or Provincial, or National Church, nor by a consequent, any
such Bishop, but only parish Churches, and by the like consequent, parish
Bishops. The reason of this sequel, he produces only this: Because, if there
might be such Diocesan, or Provincial, or National Churches ministerial, or
endued with Church government, then also would it follow, that there might be a
Catholic, or universal Church, visible ministerial; and so by a consequent,
the Papists might lawfully enforce a Catholic government, and so establish the
Papacy again.

To the sequel of which sequel I answer, it is no good consequence, that; it
being granted one may be a Bishop over one Diocese, Province, or Nation:
therefore one may be a Bishop over the world. For first, one Bishop cannot
govern the whole world, consisting of many Kingdoms, Oligarchies, and
Democraticall states, and subject to several Princes, and temporal
governors, as he can one Diocese, Province, or Nation, subject to one secular
Prince. And secondly, we have no example of any universal Bishop that ever
was since the beginning of the world, not the Pope himself, which chalengeth
that title, For the east part of the world, which is the Greek Church, was
never yet subject unto him, neither could be induced to use the same rites,
ceremonies, and leitourgie which he uses. But of provincial and national
Bishops, we have examples out of the Scriptures: the high Priests among the
Jews were so ordained of God, and that office not only ceremonial, but also
political; which office, so far as it was political, might as well
continue, and be executed in the same Temple by Saint James, the first
Archbishop of Jerusalem under the Gospel, as it was by the high Priests under
the Law, that which was ceremonial being abolished, even as the observation of
the Sabbath, being partly ceremonial, and partly moral, the ceremony being
out of date, that which is moral, does abide. Our Savior in the Gospel
reformed the Temple, but he did not pluck it down, to show that it Ioh. 2. 15.
might continue still being lawfully used.

Having answered his arguments, we will come to his suppositions, and bare
conjectures, which without show of argument, he brings in defense of his
assertion. He distinguishes Bishops into six sorts, two lawful, a
parishionall Bishop, or ordinary Pastor, and a Diocesan titular Bishop, who
has a bare title above others, but no Episcopal jurisdiction at all: these
two sorts it pleases him to allow. A Diocesan ruling Bishop, which has more
power than Parsons of parish Churches, yet not sole power to rule in his
Diocese, a Diocesan Lord Bishop' which rules by his sole authority, a
Patriarch, and a Pope; which four sorts he condemns as repugnant to the
laws of the Scriptures. To speak therefore of the first, which is but a
Parson of a parish; what example can he allege to prove, that ever there was,
or place of Scripture to prove that there ought to be such a Bishop? His bare
opinion without proof, can be no satisfaction to persuade others, howsoever in
his own conceit, he may please himself. He alleges, that all Bishops
mentioned in the new Testament, and in the Ecclesiastical writers which were
within 200. years after our Savior Christ, were such Bishops. But that is his
own assertion without proof, neither does he instance in any author which
does affirm the same. To disprove him, besides that, neither parish Churches,
nor parishes were erected or instituted until 260. years after our Savior
Christ, in the Platina dvitis pontiofi^um. Charion Monarch. 4.
days of Dionysius Bishop of Rome, and that they had their institution not
from God, but from the Pope, whereas we have examples of Diocesan Churches out
of Gods word, as before I have proved: that all the Bishops mentioned in
Ecclesiastical writers, within 200. years after our Savior Christ, were not
parish Bishops: we have for instance Julian, the tenth Bishop of Alexandria,
in the year of our Lord 181. which was Bishop of many Churches. For Eusebius
Eusebius. hist. l. ^. c. 9.
writes: Alexandrinarum Ecclesiarum Episcopatum accepit: he took upon him the
Bishopric of the Churches of Alexandria. And again, Eusebius writes of a
Bishop which was set over many Bishops long before that time, in the days of
Saint John the Evangelist, and by the appointment of St. John himself. His
words are these: Post, mortuo tyranno quum Easeb. hist. l. 3. c. ^0.
ex insu^a Pathmo Ephesum reuersus esset, abijt etiam rogatus ad vicina gentium
loca, vt partim constitueret Episcopos, partim totas Ecclesias componeret,
partim clerum ex his quos spiritus sanctus indica^a^, sort deligeret. Quum
ergo ad ciuitatem quandam haud procul dissitam, cuiui etiam nomen nonnulli
dicunt, venisset, verso ad cum vultu qui super cunctos Episcopos erat
constitutus, adolescentem corpore valido, facie eleganti, animoque feruenti
conspicatus, hunc, inquit, tibi summo studio, testibus Christo and Ecclesia
commendo. When the Tyran (meaning Domitian) was dead, he returned out of
Pathmos to Ephesus, at the request of others, he visited the places bordering
there upon, that he might ordain Bishops, constitute Churches, and elect
clergy men by lots, whom the holy Ghost had assigned. And coming to a City
not far of, which by many other writers is expressy named, he cast his eye
upon that Bishop which was set over all the rest, and committed to his tuition,
a young Gentleman proper in body, and fair in face, youthful in courage,
saying: I do earnestly commend unto you this young man, witnesses Christ and
his Church.

Such pregnant examples, all making against him, and none for him, that ye may
know what motive has induced him to write, that all Bishops within 200.
years mentioned in Eusebius,, were but parish Bishops: surely he suffered
himself willingly to be deceived by the fallacye, called, fallacia figurae
dictionis. For, Eusebius (says he) shows that the Churches of most famous
Cities, were but parishes only, as the parish of Jerusalem, the parish of
Ephesus, of Alexandria, Assert. 2. Eusebius. hist. l. 3 c. 11. l. 3. c. 28. l. 2.
c. 13. l. 4. c. 11. etc. 22.
Hierapolis, etc. But all the cunning rests in the proof thereof, to show
that Eusebius did call them parishes. Eusebius indeed writes, that Celedion
and Agrippa were Bishops in Alexandrina paraechia, and so that Dionysius in
paraechia Corinthiorum Episcopatum tenuit. But can Master Jacob be so simple,
as to take that weak advantage of the word, and so to interpret that Latin
word paraechia, parish in the English tongue? and to restrain that word in
Eusebius, to as small limits and confines as a parish is with us, that all the
Christians in it might meet together in one place to hear Divine service, as
with us for the most part they do? though in some places they cannot do so.
Can he think this a good argument, that the praecincts of their Bishoprics,
were called by this general name paraechiae, bounds, or borders, containing
and including some set compass of ground and place; and this general name
paraechia, may also include the small circuit of a parish, as well as a larger
jurisdiction: therefore they were but parish Bishops? that the precincts of
their Bishoprics were no larger then the praecincts of a parish, and that
their Episcopal authority, was no more then the jurisdiction of every private
Pastor? In like sort may I as well conclude, that paraechia does also signify
a larger jurisdiction, so as it have confines, and a certain limitation, as a
Diocese, a Province, a whole Kingdom: therefore that they were Diocesan,
Provincial, and National Bishops. It is well known that Alexandria contained
many Churches, as appears by Eusebius, whom I have already cited, where he
says, that Inlian the tenth, had Alexandrinarum Ecclesiarum Episcopatum, Eusebius
lib. 5. hist. c. 9.
the Bishopric of the Churches of Alexandria. And again, where we writes:
Primus post Marcum Apostolvm and Euangelistam Eeseb. hist. l 4. ca. 24.
Anianus paraechiae Alexandrinae administrationem suscepit: Anianus immediately
succeeded Mark the Apostle and Evangelist, in the government of the paraechia
of Alexandria. That this parechia was such a limitation as contained in it many
Churches, it is manifest by the confession of Eusebius, where he has these
words: that Saint Mark did primuus Ecclesias Alexandriae constituere: first
institute the Churches of Hist. l. 2. c. 16.
Alexandria. So then, if because of the word paraechia, Ananias Bishop of
Alexandria, should be held only for a parish Bishop, by the like absurdity,
Saint Mark, which was an Evangelist, and did first convert the Citizens of
Alexandria, and instituted many Churches there, should not have authority over
his own Churches, which his self instituted, but only pastoral authority
over one of them, because he was Alexandrinae Ecclesiae administrator,
governor of the Church of Alexandria: as Eusebius writes. And, that being an
Evangelist, and of higher authority, which founded many churches, should not be
Bishop over as many as Julian his successor, which was no Evangelist, nor
founded none, and therefore was of less dignity and authority, because the
argument must follow, being derived from the word in the singular number, he
did Alexandrinam Ecclesiam administrare, govern the Church of Alexandria. And,
what is the true grammatical signification of this Greek word (paroicia) of
whom paraechia, the Latin is derived, no better witness then Scapula
himself, which in his Lexicon writes; That it signifies any jurisdiction
which is limited, or any Church, be it great or small, or many Churches. His
words are these: (paroicia) incolam esse, item accolarum conuentus, and
accolatus, sacraque vicinia, pro Ecclesia vsurpari dicitur Can: 18. Concilij
Ancyrani.

And, to speak of the Bishop without a Bishopric, whom he calls Titular
Diocesan, I would gladly have for instance, when, and where there was any such
Bishop? For proof thereof, he alleges nothing else, but his own
doubtful conjecture, saying: Perhaps Julian, the tenth Bishop of Alexandria,
was the first of that sort. And again: It seems to me that this was Ieroms
meaning, that the first ruling Bishop was Diony sius, the thirteenth Bishop of
Alexandria. And again, At Heracles it is probable there was a period of one
sort of Bishops, and with Diony sius began another. That priority of order of
one Bishop over a parish, seems to have continued from Marcus to Iulianus.
And again, Nothing lets us, but that we may think, etc. To which I answer:
his bare and naked conjectures, and idle surmises, grounded upon no reason nor
authority, or proof, but only upon: perhaps, it seems, it is probable,
nothing lets but that we may think, are no warrant to the state to disturb
the peace, and discipline of our Church so long established, and to overthrow
the government of Bishops, which has continued among us since Christian
religion was first planted, and the land converted to the faith. And therefore
to him may fitly be applied, the saying of St. Paul: They would be Doctors of
the law, and understand not what they 1. Tim. 1. 7
speak, neither whereof they affirm. It is more safe to believe with the
Church, that Julian the 10. was not the first Bishop which had many Churches
under him in title and name, but that all his nine predecessors, Marcus,
Anianus, Albialus, Cerdon, Pius, lustus, and the rest, had the same
praeheminence which he had, and especially Saint Mark being an Evangelist,
and the first conuerter of that people, and founder of those Churches. And that
in other places, Bishops were set over many Churches before his time, because
I have instanced out of Eusebius already in a Bishop in Saint John's days,
which was supra cunctes Episcopos constitutus, set over all the Bishops in that
place. And it is far safer to believe the words of Eusebius: Alexandrinarum
Ecclesiarum Episcopatum accepit, and supra omnes Episcopos constitutus est, he
was Bishop of the Churches of Alexandria, and, he was set over all the
Bishops, to be understood of both title and jurisdiction, according to the
interpretation, use, and practice of all Churches, and not of bare title,
without jurisdiction, rather then to subscribe to Master Jacob, his opinion,
which has nothing to ground upon, but his own opinion, which has no better
proof, then test me ipso, witness my own self.

And, not to pass over with silence those four sorts of Bishops whom he
condemns as unlawful. Maiority, says he, of ruling Bishops in the
Diocese, seems to have begun with Dionysius, the next successor after
Heraclas. To which I answer as before. Quaedam videntur and non sunt, many
things seem to be otherwise then they are: among which, this his supposition
is one. Again, Quoedam videntur paucioribus and indoctioribus, quaedam
pluribus and san oribus, that may seem so to the fewest, and vnlearnedest, but
to the most and soundest of judgment, it seems otherwise, that this maiority
of ruling in the Diocese, began in Alexandria, not with Dionysius which was
the fourteenth, but with S. Mark which was the first Bishop of that place; and
with the Apostles in other places: and so continued by succession from them,
until these days, unless when their succession was interrupted by wars, or
schism, or persecution.

But to come to a Diocesan Lord Bishop, ruling by his sole power, which is
indeed, the chief matter now in question. Such a Bishop, says he, seems
not to have been established in Ambrose, Ierom, and Augustines time. It may be
it seems not so to Master Jacob; but it seemed so to Zozomene, that Saint
Ambrose himself did rule like a Lord Bishop Sozom. l. 7. ca. 24.
by his sole authority, when meeting the Emperor Theodosius as he went to
Church, without any consent or consultation had with other Priests, on a
sudden took him by the gown in the sight of the people, interdicted him both
from the holy communion and the Church, for the offense he had committed; and
the Emperor obeyed his authority. His words are these: Imperator quum
Mediolanum venisset, ad Ecclesiam processit vt oraret. Sed quum ad ostium iam
pernenisset, occurrit et Ambrosius eius ciuitatis Episcopus: and apprehensa
illius purpu-a in prae^entia populi, siste gradum inquit, homini enim ob
peccata prophano, and manus innoxio sanguine comaculatas habe^ti, fa^ non est
antequa^ poenitentia^ egerit, vel sacrum ingredi solium vel ad diuinoru^
mysteriorum communionem admitti. Imperator libertatem sacerdotis admiratu^,
cogitationibus conscientiam accusantibus, regressus est poenitentia compunctus.
The Emperor, when he came to Millanie, went toward the church to pray, when
he was but at the door: Ambrose, the Bishop of that city, ran to him, caught
him by his purple robe in the presence of the people, commanded him to stay
there, showing that it was not permitted him, having defiled his hands with
innocent blood, to go into the Church, nor to be partaker of the Sacrament,
before he had showed himself penitent. The Emperor meruailed at the great
spirit of the Bishop, his conscience pricked him, upon his remorse, he went
back and repented. And afterward, more plainly he says: Ambrosius Imperatorem
insimulans, vt consentaneum est, ab Ecclesia arcuit, and a communione seclusit.
Ambrose laying to the Emperor his charge his crime which he committed, as it
did behooue him, thrust him out of the Church, and secluded him from the
communion. In this Story, that action is ascribed solely unto the Bishop: no
mention is made of any other, whose consent was required. Though soon after we
doubt not (says Master Jacob) it took place in the Church. Therefore, by his
own confession, the office of Lord Bishop, ruling by his sole authority, is
of great antiquity: and therefore to be preferred before the Eldership, which
is but a nouelty, and never prevailed until our age, and that but in some few
Churches.

And that I may speak something for the justification of Bishops, ruling by
their sole authority, Timothy and Titus were such Bishops. Master Jacob
replieth two manner of ways. First he says: the Apostles did not ordeine
Ministers, nor censure offenders by their sole authority, much less then
Timothy and Titus, which were inferior to the Apostles. For answer to his
reply, which consists of nothing but manifest untruths, I do instance in S.
Peter, which by his sole authority, censured Ananias and Suphira, when they
lied to the holy Ghost, smiting them with present death: and St. Paul, which
alone censured Elymas the sorcerer, when he smote him Acts. 5. Act. 13. 11
with blindness, for seeking to pervert the deputy from the faith, And both
these censures were then in the place of excommunication, Vide Bucerum de
clauibus. 1. Cor. 16. 22. anathema marannatha. Politiae Iudaicae. c. 2.
which is now the ordinary censure of the church. And besides that Saint Paul
by his sole authority excommunicated in general, all that loved not the Lord
Jesus; even under the time of nature, Henoch as Cornelius Ber^ram writes in
his book Printed at Geneua, and allowed of by that church did alone: anathema
illud solenne suoe aetatis hominibus proponere quod extat Iudae ver: 14 and.
15. pronounce that solemn sentence of excommunication against the men of his
time, of which mention is made in S. Jude ver. 14. and 15. Behold the Lord
comes with thousands of his Saints to give judgment, etc. And so did Saint
Ambrose, by their examples. And as for making Ministers, our Bishops do not
confer orders alone, but assisted with other ministers which join with them
in prayer and imposition of hands. Yet still the chiefest authority rests in
Bishops, as S. Paul writes to Titus: For this cause I left thee in Creete,
that thou should ordain Elders in every city. And to Timothy: Tit: 1 5.
lay hands suddenly on no man: by which words it appears that ordination, and
imposition of hands belong to the Bishops 1. Tit: 5. 22.
principally, and to the inferior Ministers but as assistants to the Bishop.
But that it belonged to the same men to censure offenders, and rule by their
sole authority, the places of Scripture do make it so plain, that ir may not
be denied. Rebuke 1. Tim: ^. v. 1. 9. 11. 17. 19. 21.
not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father. Let not a widow be taken into the
number under 60 years old. Refuse the younger widows. The elders that rule
well, let the^ be had in doble honor, Observe these things without preferring
one before another, and do nothing partially Receive no accusation against an
elder, but under 2. or 3 witnesses. Secondly, he says: that if these things
were granted, that Timothy and Titus ruled by their sole anthoritie, it would
not follow that therefore our Bishops might do the like: his reason is this:
For, says he, they are not to be reckoned in the catalogue of Bishops; neither
were they properly called Bishops, because they were not affixed to certain
places, but often removed to other churches as the Apostles did. Which reason I
refute by manifest text, for as much as Timothy was affixed to Ephesus as his
proper charge, and so Titus to Creete as to his peculiar place, witnesses the
Apostle.

I besougbt thee to abide still in Ephesus. For this cause have I left 1. Tim.
1. 3. Tit. 1. 5.
thee in Creete that thou should continue there to redress the things that
remain But what then, though they afterward removed, and were called to other
places? so are our Bishops also, and private pastors, oftentimes called from
one congregation to another. I cannot deny, but the cannon Law has
determined, that Bishops shall not remove from one Bishopric to another,
without some urgent cause, as when they are required by another Church, their
gifts being thought fitter for a greater charge, and the law is grounded upon
the decrees of the first general council of Nice, which so concludes:
Episcopus, Presbyter, aut diaconus, non aebet transferri ab vna ciuitate ad
a^iam, quia id est contra regulas, and si transferatur, Concilij Niceni: 1.
Can: 15. and 16.
mitti debet ad ciuitatem vbi primo ora^a^us fuit. It is against the Canons,
that Bishops, Priests, Deacons, should be translated, and therefore, if any be
so translated, let them be dismissed, and sent back to the places to which
they were first appointed. And, Qui discedit ab Ecclesia fibi commissa, ad
aliam, excommunicetur, and reuerti cogatur. Who so remoueth from one Church to
another, let him be excommunicated, and forced to his first charge. But these
are the ordinances of men, we find nothing in the word of God, why Bishops may
not be translated, neither does it follow that Timothy and Titus were not to
be reckoned for Bishops, because they removed from one place to another.

Last of all, Patriarchical Churches (says he) began sometimes before the
council of Nice. I answer, therefore they are of more credit then the
Presbytery, which began but with Master Calvin. And as for that Council,
it was in the pure age of the primitive Church, before corruption crept in, it
was the first general council, and therefore of greater authority, called by
the Emperor and not by the Pope, and therefore freest from suspicion, a
Greek, and not a Latin Council, therefore more sincere. And whereas it
seems to him, that patriarchical Bishops began but sometime before the
Council of Nice, it seems to the Council it self, that they began long
before, because the Canon it self speaks in this manner: Seruetur antiqua
consuetudo, vt Episcopus Alexandrinus habeat potestatem in Aegyptum,
Pentapolin, Libiam, quia and Episcopo Council: Nicen 1. Can. 6.
Romano parilis mos est, sie apud Antiochiam, and ceteras Ecclesias sua
priuilegia seruentur. Let the ancient custom be kept, that the Bishop of
Alexandria have his jurisdiction over Egypt, Pentapolis and Libia, because the
Bishop of Rome has the like custom, so let the Church of Antiochia and other
Churches keep their privileges. But if patriarchicall churches be of such
reverend antiquity, and allowed of by so venerable a council: that makes
much for the credit, and dignity of Diocesan churches, which are more ancient
and of less jurisdiction, and not so subject to envy, and nere unto Papacy,
as the Patriarchicall churches are. It cannot be denied, but the Fathers which
were present in that Council, were prouincial, Diocesan, and patriarchicall
Bishops, ruling by their sole authority. And concerning the credit of that
council, with the other three following, which were oecumenicall, as that was;
Gregory affirms that their doctrine and decrees were consonant to the
writings of the 4. Evangelists, and no way to be impeached. And Master Jacob
his own Doctor, whom he Greg: li. 1. epist 24. Page 31. Respons: ad 4.
Campiani rationem.
calls the reverend Master Whitaker, gives as large a testimony of them,
saying: Et nos illorum quatuor Conciliorum saluberimam fuisse authoritatem
planissime confitemur. Master Jacob therefore, must either deny the
authority of his own Doctor, and of this Council, which no learned man will
do, or else subscribe to the state of Diocesan Bishops ruling by their sole
authority, which hitherto he has impugned.

Of Cathedral Churches.
IN defense of Cathedral Churches, we have to allege, Platima de vitis
Pontificu^. Carrion in ann^l: monar.
that till the time of Dionysius Pope of Rome, no other kind of Church
ministerial was ever heard of from the beginning of the world. For, from Adam
to Moses there was no Church ministerial at all. In Moses his time, a
Tabernacle was erected by Gods commandment, which stood in steed of a Church
for all the land of Iudaea, and was to be carried up and down, until the days
of Solomon. But Solomon erected Exed: 25. 40. Act: 7. 44 2. Sam: 7. 6. Act. 7,
47.
a Temple as a standing church at Jerusalem, to be in the place of the
Tabernacle. And until the time of the Gospel there was no other Church for
Gods people through the whole world. And that Church was more then Diocesan, or
Provincial, for it was National. After the Gospel was preached to the
Gentiles, and al nations were converted, sundry churches ministerial were
erected, according to the number of the Bishops, so that every Bishop had his
Church after the imitation of the Jews, which having but one Bishoprik, had
also but one Church for that whole nation, until afterward humane polity
under Dionysius the Pope devised parish churches, and divided every Bishoprik
into particular constant congregations, which were but members of the Diocesan
and provincial Churches. But says Master Jacob, Although the Jewish Church
were national under one Bishop or high Priest according to Gods ordinance, yet
now under the Gospel, our Savior Christ has changed that form of government
into parochial Churches, which are every one a particular congregation, and
every particular congregation is a divided body by it self, and of it self a
visible Church, and being absolute of it self, ought to use within it self
proper Ecclesiastical government. So then two things rest to be proved by him,
first that every particular congregation is a divided body of it self, and
secondly, that every particular congregation is to use government of it self
without reference unto any other above it self.

The first he would prove by this argument. There was, says he, but one
Church at Corinth, because the Apostle says: When the whole church is come
together in one place, etc. And the same may be affirmed of Rome, Antioch,
Jerusalem, and the other 1. Cor. 14. 23.
cities, therefore in every of these cities, though they were so populous, yet
the believers were so few, that they all assembled in one place. Again says
he, Ignatius persuading the Church of Philadelphia to concord, writes: I
exhort you to use one faith, one preaching, one supper of the Lord, for there
is Ignatius ad philad:
but (en thusiasterion pase te ecclesia) one communion Table to the whole
church (HERE IN THIS CITY). For answer whereof I deny his argument, for a man
may in the like manner write to the Citizens of London dwelling in Bow parish,
when your whole Church is come together: and so to them which dwell in any
other parish, though there be many other Churches in London, and they not
divided bodies absolute of themselves, but all subordinate unto, and members of
that Church which belongs to the whole Diocese. And so I answer to Ignatius
his words: every one of them have one communion Table, not every one
collectiue, but distributive, not jointly, but severally. But whereunto
Ignatius; his words, he adds his own words (HERE IN THIS CITY) he deals
not ingenuously. For these words which he alleges out of Ignatius, as he
alleges the^, do not import that yt whole city should have but one Communion
Table, and by a consequent but one church, but that the city might have many
churches, and every church his proper Communion Table, as with us in this
City. And again, that there were many churches in those cities which he
named, eue^ in the Apostles time, I have already proved, when I showed out of
Eusebius that not only Julian the 10. did Alexandrinarum, Ecclesiarum
Episcopatum accipere, take upon him the government of the Eusebius: hist: l. 5.
cap. 9. l. 2. c. 16.
churches of Alexandria, but also that Saint Mark did, p^imus Ecclesias
Alexandriae constituere, first institute many churches in Alexandria. And that
the believers were not so few, as that they might be assembled in one
congregation, it is evident by the story of the Acts of the Apostles, and
because he names Jerusalem, I will instance in Jerusalem. It is written in the
Acts, there were men at Jerusalem that feared God, of every nation Act. 2. 5.
under heaven, which heard the Gospel preached in their own language* and
concerning the multitude of these says Master Beza, they are to be
understood: Quicunqu^x^eri illo Beza in annotat: mai^rib in ^ilum locum.
tempore Hierosolymis vrsabantur: adeo vt non modo exteros comprehendat,
quisedes illic vt in vrbe maxima, and frequentissima posuerunt, sed eos quoque
qui studiorum, and religionis discendae cansa illic ad tempus commorabantur,
quorum distributa fuisse collegia intelligimus ex ijs quae narrantur Cap, 6.
verse 9. and 9. 29. All strangers which at that time were resiant at Jerusalem,
that such a multitude comprehends not only the strangers which had dwellings
there, being so great and populous a city, but also those which were students,
and came thither as university men for learning sake, which were divided into
Colleges as appears by the Act. Ch: 6. 9. Where there arose certain of the
Synagogue which are called Libertines, and Cyrenians, and of Alexandria, and of
them of Silicia, and Asia, which disputed with Stephen, and Act ch: 9. 29 where
the Grecians disputed with Paul. And again (says he) Oportuit tam amplam
ciuitatem ad quam etiam vndique Iudaei tanqum ad co^munem Academiam suos
erudiendes mittebant, in varios cae^us distribu^, quos apparet ex hoc loco pro
nationum varietate fuisse distinctos, vt hedie Lutetiae multa collegia, etc. So
spacious a city to whom the Jews far and wide sent their sons as to a
common university to be trained up, was of necessity divided into many
Colleges, as it is now at Paris, according the diversity of the nations as
out of this place it appears etc. Again, how did they all hear the Gospel
preached in their own languages? Narrat Apostolus varij^ linguis loqui
coepisse, id est modo hac modo ilia, non tame^ co^fuse aut furiose, sed prou^
h^c vel ille in varias gentes inciderat, The Apostle shows that they spoke
diverse languages, not co^fusedly like mad men, but as this or that Apostle did
happen upon this or that nation so he spoke to them in their own language.
Therefore, at the very first there were diverse Preachers, and several
congregations, speaking several languages, incapable of hearing the word
preached before them al at one time, as they which be but one church or
congregation. And again, in the same chap: v 41. there were added to the
church in one day about 3000. and ver. 47. the Lord added to the church from
day to day. Yet Master Jacob would have all these, being so many thousands,
and so many nations, not of one language, but speaking diverse languages, to
have bin but one congregation. Neither were they first all one congregation,
and then by reason of their great increase, as not able to assemble in one
place, divided themselves into many congregations, upon the persecution of S.
Stephen, as Mr. Jacob affirms, but they were many churches at the first, as I
have already proved, being several nations, and speaking several languages,
and those many Act. 8. 1.
churches were scattered as it is written: A great persecution was raised
against the cburch of Jerusalem, and they were scattered abroad through the
regions of Iudaea and Samaria. In which words the holy Ghost calls Jerusalem
but one Church, which we have proved to have consisted of diverse
congregations, and because all those congregations were but one church,
therefore they could not be divided bodies absolute of themselves, etc. And,
whereas Mr. Jacob obiecteth that these congregations so divided, were not to be
called churches, because they were uncertain, and but occasional. I answer,
that so were all other churches in time of persecution, even those churches
which he mentions out of Ignatius, for as much as all the time of Ignatius
there was persecution, and long after his time, and therefore they were but
occasional, and uncertain. But this disproueth me not, but that I do rightly
allege against him, that the believers in Jerusalem were more then could be
assembled in one congregation, and so in Alexandria, and other cities.
Secondly, he goes about to prove that every congregation is a divided body
absolute in it self, because the Scriptures still speak of the churches as of
one. There is one Body, one Spirit, one Lord, one Ephesians. 4, 4. 5.
faith, one baptism, etc. To which I answer, that these words are understood
of Christ his universal church, which is inded vnica sponsa, vnica columba, one
Dove, one spouse, betroathed to one husband, one body knit and united to one
head, which is Jesus Christ, for one head cannot have many divided bodies. And
therefore this argument makes against himself. The whole church is but one,
and therefore parish churches are but members of that one, and not divided
bodies, for vnitas non potest diuidi, that which is but one cannot be divided.

And that every parish, or particular congregation must use government within
it self; he takes upon him to prove by the words of our Savior: If thy
brother trespass against thee, Mat. 18. 17.
go tell him his fault between thee and him alone if he hear thee, thou have
won thy brother, if he hear thee not, take with thee one or two, that by the
mouth of two or three witnesses every thing may be confirmed, if he refuse to
hear them, tell it unto the church, if he refuse to hear the church, let him
be to thee as a heathen and a publican. Out of these words (says he) is proved
that every ordinary congregation is a proper visible Church, and a visible
Church is but one congregation, and every such Church is endued immediately
from Christ with power absolute to govern within it self, and every member of
the Church must have a sensible and visible use of the whole entirely together.
In which words he ascribes the Ecclesiastical government to the whole
multitude of every parish. Further, he divides this Church government into
these two parts, to wit, excommunication and elections, so that every private
man (be he never so unfit) should have his free voice and consent in all
excommunications and elections. Eor answer whereof, I deny his argument. For,
besides that, in the fifth page of his book, he affirms that man cannot make
a society to be a visible church, but Christ alone, and it is proved that all
these parishes are the institution of men, which only have distinguished the
bounds of Parishes, and that very unequally, making some too large, and some
too small, and so he contradicts himself: the multitude have not the keys
of the Church committed unto them, but only the ministers, where our Savior
says to Peter, in the behalf of the rest: Tibi dabo claues, to thee I will
give the keys. And to the Apostles, whose sins ye remit, they are remitted:
and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. And whereas there be two keys
Mat: 16. 19. Ioh. 20. 23.
of the Church, the one of the word and the Sacraments, the other of
government: the key of government witness Master Beza himself, is not given to
all ministers, much less to the people, but only unto such ministers as be
magistrates of the Church, as Timothy and Titus was. For says he: Ecclesia
interdum pro Senatu Ecclesiastico vsurpatur vt infra Cap: Mat: 18. verse 17.
Dic Ecclesiae. This word Church, is sometimes taken for Beza in annotat: mayor:
in Mat: 16.
the senate or Consistory Ecclesiastical, as Mat: 18. 17. where our Savior
says: Tell the Church. And his own Doctor Master Beza upon this place
expounds these words: Tell the church, more at large in his notes upon that
place, showing that Master Jacobs exposition is very absurd, and that such
discipline as that the peoples consent should be required in excommunications,
is very far from the discipline received in Geneua. His words are these. Dic
Ecclesiae, spectat ad forum Ecclesiasticu^, quia versu proximo fit mentio
ligandi and soluendi Haec potestas erat penes eos qui (archisunagogo^) vocantur
Marci 5. 22. Et huius conscietudinis exemplum extat. John 9. 22. and 12. 42.
and 16. 2. Vt apud Iudaeos idem fuisse videatur paenaegenus (aposunagogon
genesthai) atque apud Christianos excommunicari. Sed notandum est turpiter
errare qui ex hoc confici volunt, de singulis rebus referendum esse ad totius
multitudinis caetum A^unt enim Ecclesiae nomen nusquam aliter accipi quod vel
ex hoc ipso loco falsum esse counincitur. Nam certe, tanquam ae Iodaeis haec
dici apparet, saitem ex eo quod addit: sit tibi ficut Ethnicus and publicamus.
Sed iudicia de his rebus penes seniores fuisse apud Iudaeos, nec semper cogi
consueuisse totum populi caetu^, omnes illaru^ rerum scriptores testantur Et
certe Christus nisi ad suoru^ te^poru^ consuetudinem totu^ hunc sermone^
acco^modasset, quis eum loqu^nte^ intellexisset? Quod si quis excipiat
tyrannica^ fuisse illa^ consuetudine^, ne id quide^ vere dixerit quum Christus
sic loqui non potuer^t, quin eum more^ vt legitimu^ approbaret. These words:
te^ the Church, belong to the Ecclesiastical court, because in the 9 verse,
mention is made of binding and loosing. For this power belonged only unto the^
which Mark 5. 22. were called the Rulers of the Synagogs. And we have example
of this custom. John. 9. 22. where the Jews had ordained, that every one
which confessed Christ should be excommunicated out of the Synagogue. And John
12. 42. Among the chief Rulers, many believed in him, but because of the
Pharisees, they durst not confess him, lest they should be cast out of the
Synagogue: and Ioh. 16. 12. They shall excommunicate you, and cast you out of
their Synagogues. And among the Jews, to be cast cut of the Synagogue, was all
one, as among the Christians to be excommunicated. And, it is to be noted, that
they err filthity, which out of this place conclude: that in all matters of
excommunication, the multitude must be consulted. And where ^^ they object,
that the name of the church is no where vnderstord otherwise then for the
multitude, their exposition is out of this place convicted to be false and
erroneous. For our Savior delivers these laws of discipline to Christians,
in the same manner as if he spoke to the Jews because he says: let him be to
thee as an heathen and a Publica^. But only the Magistrates among the Jews, did
exercise these iudgme^nts without the consent and knowledge of the people, as
all their writers do testify. And surely, unless our Savior had applied his
speech unto the custom of his times, no man could have understood what he
meant by these words. And, if any shall object, that this custom was
tyrannical and unlawful, he delivers an untruth in so saying: because our
Savior could not have spoken to christians after this manner of the Jews,
unless he had approved this manner of excommunication among the Jews, which
was by the Magistrates, and not by the people, to have been also lawful, and
to be used among christians. So far Theodorus Beza upon this place.

And, as for popular election, which is the other part of government
Ecclesiastical, to which he intituleth the whole multitude: let the case be
put, that sometimes of fact, the people had a consent in the election of their
Bishops, in time of persecution: and, when the church being not endowed with
any lands or maintenance, they lived only by charity and devotion of the
people: what proof has he that it ought to be so? or that ever it was so in
any settled estate? He says it is plain, the people had their free election
of their Bishops in the days of Ignatius; because in one epistle he writes
these words: Prepon esi vmin es ecclesia theou cheirotonesai ton episcopon
vmon; which ignorantly he englisheth in this manner: It is meet for you, being
the church of God, to choose by common consent your Bishop. First, it is well
known, that when Ignatius lived, which was in the very infancy of the Church,
there was neither any certain maintenance for the Ministers, nor any settled
estate of a Church, but all lived upon the benevolence of the people. Secondly,
this word Church, signifies not the people, but the Ecclesiastical persons,
as before I have showed you out of Mr. Beza. Thirdly, no learned man would have
translated this word (cheirotoneo) to choose by common consent, as he has
translated it. For, the very grammatical signification of this word is, not to
elect by suffrages, or voices, or lifting up of hands, as the people choose
their Mairos, or Bailiffes, and civil officers; but consecration by imposition
of hands, as all Ministers are to be consecrated, by the rule of the
Scriptures. That the people should have any voice in elections; it is so
strange a position as was never read of in the Scriptures. For, as no man
Matthew. 3. Exodus 3. Exodus 4. Matthew. 4. 1 Timothy 1. Tit. 1.
may enter into the ministry without a lawful calling, (for our Savior had
his calling from his Father, Moses from God, Aaron from Moses, the Apostles
from our Savior, Timothy and Titus, from S. Paul) so we must consider in whom
this authority rests, to call men to the ministry: for none of these of whom
I have spoken, had any consent of the people. This custom of popular election
is borrowed out of the Turks Alcaron, and not of the Bible. It is said to the
congregation, concerning the election of Deacons; Look ye out 7. men of honest
conversation, etc: by which it is justified which our law does require, that
they upon whom the Bishop Act. 6.
shall lay hands, must bring with them sufficient testimony of their
worthiness: but in the words following it is said; whom we may appoint to this
business. And afterward, verse 6. when they were found out, they set them
before the Apostles, and the Apostles prayed, and laid hands upon them, but
not the people, as our Bishops assisted with other ministers, without the help
of the people, ordeine ministers with us. Therefore in their objection out of
the Acts, where they allege these English words; When they had ordained Elders
by Act. 14.
election, in every Church, etc: they do but deceive themselves. For the
Greek word is (cheirotoneo) of (cheir) an hand, and (teino) porrigo, extendo,
noteleno, to reach, or stretch forth, or lay on, not to eleuate or lift up; so
(cheirotoneia) is not elevation, but imposition of hands, in Eccesiasticall
writers. These words then: (cheirotonesantes eautois presbuterous) is, manuum
impositione consecrantes sibi ipsi^ presbyteros, when by imposition of hands,
they had consecrated Elders, or Ministers, as Moses by imposition of hands,
conferred the holy Ghost upon Joshua, and sanctified him to be a Magistrate: and
our Deuteronomy. 24. Matt. 19.
Savior in the Gospel, by laying hands on the children, blessed them. And th^^
(cheirotoneia) is expressed more plainly by another Greek word in the Acts of
the Apostles, concerning Act. 6.
the consecration of Deacons, to be (epithesis ion cheiron) imposition of
hands, where the text says: (proseuxamenoi op^thecan autois tas cheiras) when
they had prayed, they laid hands upon them. And Gual^er in his Commentary upon
that place of the Acts, which before was alleged, when they had ordained
Elders by election in every City, after he has justified these popular
elections used in the Church of Tigurie, and dispraised our manner of
ordination, reuoketh himself, and confesses by the word (cheirotonesantes)
magis verisimiliter hic incelligi manuum impositionem, and non incerto populo
rem tam seriam committendam: that in that place, imposition of hands is rather
to be understood, then any popular election, and that a matter of so great
importance as the ordination of Ministers, is not to be committed to the rude
and inconstant common people.

He comes now to his ob and Sol: and obiecteth in our behalf, as we do our
selves commonly allege; that it cannot stand with the state of a Kingdom,
that there should be a popular government of the Church. And he answers
himself, that it is not requisite that the government of the Church should be
answerable to the government of the Realm. To which his answer I reply, that
if the government of the Church be not answerable to the government of the
Realm, then our assertion is true, that this popular government cannot stand
with the state of a Kingdom, because the King is by the people excluded out of
the Church government. With us Bishops are the Kings Lieutenants in
Ecclesiastical causes, and all Ecclesiastical Courts are the Kings Courts,
they be held immediately under the King, his authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, being subalternate, and immediately subordinate unto our
Savior Christ. Now for as much as they which hold with the lay Eldership, and
popular government, do claim their authority immediately from God, without
the King, they derogate from the Kings authority in Ecclesiastical causes, and
in Church matters they hold him for no King.

Lastly, whereas we object, that popular government with us, cannot be but
tumultuous: and he answers, that no tumults can arise by their government,
considering four circumstances. First, that it is Gods ordinance. Secondly,
that it is to be executed by no greater multitude then a parish. Thirdly, that
the Church guides being separated from the people, determine the matter and
prepare it, only the people consent with them. Fourthly, if any few be violent
and unruly, the next Justices are to keep the peace among them. It is but an
answerlesse answer. For first, that popular government is not Gods, but man's
ordinance, as I have showed. Secondly, it is apparent, that diverse parishes
with us be so populous, that they consist of many thousands, and are as large
in compass, as some Diocese in other places. Thirdly, for the guides of the
Church, privately to agree upon the matter, and to urge the people, and
constrain them by the authority of Justices of peace, to yield unto that
which they have decreed, is as much as to make it no popular election at all,
because then free consents are denied them, and all authority rests in the
guides of the Church. For, if there be no tumult, it is wholly in the power of
the Church Magistrates, to conclude and establish what they list, and the
people must agree to it: if there be a tumult, the Magistrates of the Church
are to command the Justices to execute what their selves would have done: so
that the people are used but as ciphers, and have no liberty in themselves. So
this is as good as no election.

Of Lord Bishops, and Ecclesiastical persons, exercising civil authority.
THe common objection is, that our Savior being the chief Bishop, was not
held for a Lord, neither had he any outward pomp or glory in this world. To
which I answer: if so be they infer this conclusion upon that example
therefore, Bishops must not be Lords: the weakness of that argument will
appear by the like: for they may as well conclude against Kings; that because
our Savior being a King, yet was no Lord, had no pomp nor glorie-therefore
Kings must not be Lords, etc. I could answer further, Tit. 2.
that he was a Lord, and so the Apostle does call him a great Lord, and the
head of the Church, and the Prince of Ephesians. 4. 15. Apoc. 1.
the kings of the earth: and because he is head of the Church, all Kings do
hold their Crowns under him. That the world did not acknowledge him for a
Lord, it was their blindness. He came to be crucified, and had the world
known him, non Dominum gloriae crucifixissent, they had not crucified the Lord
of glory. And yet in his state of humility, he had an honorable retinew to
attend upon him, to the number of eighty two, his twelve Apostles, and seventy
Disciples, Matthew. 1^. Luke 10.
Judas was his treasurer or pursbearer, he sent Philip to the market to buy
bread, he employed his Disciples in such services as to him did appertain, as
appears by the story of the Gospel. But thus I prove that Bishops ought to
be Lords: Our Savior being asked whether a man might put away his wife?
answers negatiuely, his argument of proof being drawn from the law of
nature, saying: Ab initio non fuit sic, from the beginning it was not so.
Likewise the argument Mat. 19.
follows: Bishops ought to be Lords, and Ecclesiastical persons to exercise
civil authority, quoniam ab initio fuit sic, because from the beginning it was
so. From Adam to Moses it was so, from Moses to our Savior Christ and the
Apostles it was so, with them it was so, and from them it has continued so
until this time, excepting only the times of persecution, when the course of
the Gospel was interrupted, and there was no settled state of a Church. No
marvel though in time of persecution, they were not held for Lords, for then
they were not allowed to be Citizens, nor thought worthy to live in a Common
wealth. The Pagan Emperors held them for seditious persons, troublers of the
state, and of all men most worthy of death. Our question is not what then was
of fact, but what ought to have been of right. It must not seem strange that
Saint John, or Saint Paul could not be in authority under Nero and Domitian,
nor the godly Bishops under the ten persecutions, sceing our Savior was not
allowed any authority under Herod, nor Pilat, nor Augustus, nor Tiberius. No
marvel though Titus could not be held as a Lord in the Kingdom of Creete,
seeing that neither Iehoahaz, being lawfully anointed King of Judah, could not
reign 2. Reg. 25. 2. Rug. 24
as a King, being taken captive by Pharao, nor Iehoiakim nor Sedechias, being
oppressed by Nebuchadnezer.

From Adam unto Moses, he that was the eldest of every Genesis 1. 26 Genesis 2. 23
Genesis 4. 3. 4
family, was both the king and the priest over his own family, among Gods
people. So Adam was a king, because God gave him absolute power over the whole
world: he was also a priest, for he offered sacrifice: Caine and Abel brought
to him their sacrifices, that he might offer in their behalf, they are only
said to have offered, as Asa the King, and all the people are said to have
offered, when the Priest did offer in 2. Chr. 15
their behalf. Henoch seeing the children of God to fall daily from faith to
infidelity, which was the cause of the deluge, published against them the
sentence of excommunication, saying: The Lord comes, which is the most
grievous kind of exco^municatio^. And S. Paul did borrow that form of him
Iudae. v. 14
where he writ; He that loves not the Lord Jesus, let him be an athema
marannatha, cursed until the Lords coming. And Moses 1. Cor. 16
did reckon up so long a catalogue of all the eldest sons descended from Adam
before the flood, to this end, that it Genesis 5.
might appear unto whom from time to time the Lord committed the care of
governing and instructing the Church. Noah a king, was a preacher of
righteousness one hundred and twenty years before the flood, he offered
sacrifice after the flood. That Iethro the father in law of Moses, was both a
2. Pet. 2. 5 1. Pet. 2. 19 and 4. 16. Genesis 8. 20. Numb. 3. 12. 12. and 8. 16.
17.
prince and a priest: and likewise Job, in the land of Huz, no learned man will
deny. And that none might offer sacrifices, but the eldest and Princes of every
family, it appears by the writings of Moses, because God said, he would take
the tribe of Leui, to be separated for his service, as a redemption of all the
rest of the first borne of Israel. In which words, he did but call to
remembrance the time of nature, wherein the eldest were all his: that is, they
were consecrated for the offering of sacrifice unto him. When Melchisedech was
King and Priest of Salem, Ge. 14. 18
Abraham also was King and Priest over his own family. It was said of him,
Thou art a great Prince of God among us Genesis 23. 6 Ge. 18. 19. Ge. 22. 10 Genesis
17. Ge. 26. 24
And he taught them Gods word, he erected an altar, and offered sacrifice. To
him first was committed the sacrament of circumcision, and he circumcised his
son Isaac. Isaac his heir, crected an altar, and offered cacrifice for the
exercise of his faith. Jacob after him did the like, taught purity of religion,
and how Idols were to be abolished. Ge. 35. 11.


In the days of Moses, under the time of the law, when priesthood was
appropriated to one peculiar tribe of Leui, and the Bishopric to one certain
family, Moses and Aaron both being priests, Moses the younger brother had the
chief authority in civil businesses, Aaron the elder in Ecclesiastical
causes: but all supreme authority was committed to these two priests, Moses
and Aaron. That Moses was a priest, Exodus 24. 6. 7. 8.
it is evident, because all the whole tribe of Leui, were then consecrated ^o
holy priesthood, whereof he was one, he in particular offered sacrifice,
preached Gods word, consecrated Exodus 40. Numb. 20.
Aaron to be an high priest, and Eleazar in his place when he was dead,
consecrated the altar, which none could do without sacrilege but a priest. Yet
he was the supreme civil Magistrate. And in his absence 40. days he
substituted Aaron the priest in his room, to hear civil causes, and supply
the place of a civil Magistrate. Phinees the high priest, Numb. 25.
was a Captain in war, and busied himself with secular affairs, and it
pleased God so much, that the priesthood was conferred not only upon him, but
also his posterity. Samuel the Prophet, who ministered before the Lord in a
linen Ephod, was also the chief civil Magistrate, and in his own person did
ride his circuit as a Judge every year over all the 1. Sam* 12. 18. 1. Sam. 7.
1. Sam. 8.
land. All the days of the Judges, which was about two hundred ninety and nine
years from the death of Joshua, unto Eli the priest, there was no certain
supreme civil magistracy in any, but in the high priests or Bishops, among
the people. When the people desired a king of God, they co^sulted with Samuel
in that secular business. After those 299. years of the Judges, Eli the Bishop
reigned as supreme civil Magistrate 40. years: so did Samuel after him the
space of 40. years. Afterward, when Saul was by him anointed King, yet
Samuel ruled jointly with Saul so long as he lived, and indeed, bore the
greatest sway in the realm, because Saul had little more then the title of a
King, during the life of Samuel, and was to do nothing without allowance from
him.

How the Clergy among Gods people busied themselves with the affairs of the
temporal^ie, and how much they pleased God in so doing, it appears by these
examples. Numb. 31 6. 26. Numb: 34. 17. Joshua. 22. 13. Numb: 26. 63. 64. 2.
Chron: 13. Joshua, 6. 1. Pet: 23. 4.
Phinees the Son of Eleazar the Bishop, was a Captain against the
Midianites, and Eleazar his self, jointly with Moses divided the spoils among
the Soldiers, Eleazar with Joshua divided the land of promise among the Tribes,
Phineas the Bishop was sent Ambassador to proclaim war against Gad, Ruben,
and half Manasses, Moses and Eleazar numbered the people in the plain of Moab,
and Moses, and Aaron in the wilderness of Sina. The Priests and Levites sounded
their Trumpets, and bid the battle in the war of Abias against Jeroboam. The
Priests ouerthrewe the city Jericho. And the godly King David setting the
Kingdom in better order then it was before, appointed 6000. Levites to be
Judges and Magistrates over the people. Likewise, beyond Jordan toward the
West, 1700. both to serve God in the place of Levites, and also to serve the
King in civil offices pertaining to the common wealth, and also 2700. he set
over Ruben, Gad, and Manasses to hear and determine all causes, both
ecclesiastical and civil, concerning God in the Church, and the King in the
common wealth.

The Kings were anointed, and confirmed in their kingdoms, by the hands of
the Bishops, and ecclesiastical persons. 1. Sam: 10. 1. Sam: 16. 1. Reg: 1.
So Samuel anointed Saul and David, Sadoc anointed Solomon, when Adoniah had
proclaimed himself King, by help of Abiathar the Priest: Nathan the Prophet
said to David: me thy servant, and Sadoc the Priest, have they not called, nor
Benoiah the son of Ichoiada. Then David said: Call me Sadoch the Priest, and
Nathan the Prophet and let them anoint and proclaim Solomon Ier: 26. Exodus: 32.
King. Jeremy was condemned to death by the Priests and the Prophets. The
Levites by the commandment of Moses slew with the sword 3000. that committed
idolatry.

It was commanded by God, that when they went to war, Ex: 32. Deuteronomy: 20. Deuteronomy:
21. 19. 1. Sam. 15
the Priests should go before them and exhort them to be courageous and
valiant. That if there were inquisition after murder, the Priests should come
forth, and by their word the cause should be tried. Samuel valiantly slew Agag
the King of the Amalakites, whom Saul the King for foolish pity could not
find in his heart to smite.

Godly Iosephat in his reformation of the Church and common 2. Chron:
wealth, appointed Judges in euey city throughout the land, as it appears,
verse 5. And what kind of men these Judges were, it appears in the 8. verse
following. In Jerusalem, as also in other cities, he appointed Iuges out of the
Princes of every family, and the Priests and Levites which were to hear both
civil and Ecclesiastical causes, (and so does Tremelius expound it according to
the truth of the Hebrew text) and at Jerusalem which was the chamber of the
Kingdom, there was established by him the highest bench of justice, unto
which, as unto the highest court, it was lawful to appeal from all inferior
Courts and Judges, even as it is now with the Kings Bench, and the high
commission Court at London. And among these Judges who were to take place
before other, it is explaned in the 11. verse of that chapter, namely, in
ecclesiastical causes, ecclesiastical men: in temporal causes, temporal men:
but so that in every civil court of Justice there should be some Priests and
Levites in Commission.

Moreover the Lord says: If there arise a matter too hard for thee in
judgment, between blood, and blood: plea, and plea: plague, Deuteronomy: 17. 8.
and plague: in the matters of controversy within thy gates, then shall thou
arise, and go unto the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, and thou
shall come to the Priests of the Levites, and to the Judge that shall be in
those days, and ask, and they shall show thee the sentence of judgment; and
thou shall do according to the thing which they of that place (which the Lord
has chosen) shall show thee, etc. and that man which will do presumptuously,
not hearkening to the Priest which stands before the Lord thy God to minister
there, and the Judge, that man shall dye, and thou shall take eway evil from
Israel, so all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously.

As for Ezra the Priest, he had authority from Artaxerxes the King of Persia,
to order all matters whatsoever, spiritual, Ezra. 7.
and temporal: concerning the return of the people out of captivity, he
ordered both the Princes and the people, Priests and Levites, he appointed all the Judges in the land, that whosoever would not do according to the Law of
God, and the Kings Law, should have judgment without delay, whether it were
unto death, or banishment, or confiscation of goods, or imprisonment. And there
was by Ezra set down the whole Ezra. 8.
platform of the civil estate of the common wealth. Again, he gathered
together the Princes, and all the Clergy, proclaimed a fast, humbled them
before God, that he would guide them in their journey, being ashamed to ask
of Artaxerxes an Army of horsemen to help them, because he had said before,
that their trust was in God alone. In the 10, Chapter he causes all, as well
temporal as spiritual, to swear that they would put away their strange
wives, caused a proclamation to go out through Judah and Jerusalem, to assemble
in Jerusalem within three days in pain of confiscation of their goods.

How afterward the Maccabes, being Gods servants, held both the Priesthood and
the Kingdom among the Jews being Gods people, and that without impeachmenr,
the learned know very well, and that they continued both high Priests and also
Kings until the land was conquered by the Romans, and the civil government
committed unto the family of the Herod's, until the coming of our Savior
Christ, who translated both the kingdom and the Priesthood of right unto
himself.

And, whereas some men do object against these examples Ioh. 18.
by me alleged for confirmation of spiritual men's authority in temporal
causes among Gods people; That when our Savior Christ was to be arrayned,
they brought him from the high Priest, to the judgment seat of Pilate a
temporal Judge, and said to Pilate, verse 31. It is not lawful for us to put
any man to death. I answer, first the Priest in particular did not say these
words: It is not lawful for us to put any man to death, but the Jews in
general, not to the prejudice of Priests only but of the whole nation of the
Jews. Secondly, they speak not these words, as if the Jews had of right
from God no authority to put me^ to death. For Pilate himself does confess,
that they had right in themselves, where he says: Take him, and judge him
according to your own law. But these words are to be understood, that
according to the Laws of Herod a stranger, and of the Romans which made them
tributary, and by force took from them all power of life and death, not only
from the Priests, but also from the whole nation, 40. years before that time,
as Master Beza has well observed, it was not lawful for them to put any man
to death. Thirdly, if the Jews had had all their authority in their Beza in
annot: maiorib: in Ioh: 18.
hands without controlment, yet it appears by the 28. verse of that chapter,
that the Priests at that time would not be present at that judgment where
sentence of death was to be pronounced, because the feast of Easter was at
hand, and so doing they should have made themselves unclean, and by a
consequent disinabled themselves from executing their office at that solemnity.

Thus you have heard proved out of the holy Scriptures, that among Gods people,
in that kingdom which was governed according to Gods own laws, even then when
it was reformed by godly kings, there was no bench of Justice for hearing and
ending of civil causes, upon which Priests and Levites did not sit as Judges
and Justices. Therefore I demand other sound reasons, or places of Sctipture,
to prove why it should not so continue among us which are also Gods people,
especially our Ecclesiastical persons being more honorable under the Gospel,
then they were under the law? I confess that the Popes laws have decreed the
contrary, but Lancelelot iustitut: iuris can: l 1. Tit: 4. Council: Lat: 31.
partis 1. can: 12.
it is not fit that we which are a reformed Church, and have long since
abandoned the Popes authority, should now forsake God, and the examples of
the holy Bible to follow the Pope and his Canons. The Popes law says: Laici
sunt quibus licet temporalia prssidere, vxere^^ ducere, causes agere, inter
virum and virum iudicare, Clerici qui diuinis officijs mancipati sunt, and quos
ab omni strepitu cessare conueuit. Lay men are they to whom it is lawful to
have temporal possessions, to marie wives, handle causes and controversies in
Law, to judge between man, and man: but as for Clergy men, their state and
condition is otherwise, they are so devoted and mancipated to the service of
God, that they must not intermeddle with such worldly troubles. Some of our
brethren give this answerles answer: that arguments drawn from the state of
the Ministry in the old Testament, to that which is under the Gospel, do
not hold, that we must not follow examples of the old Testament in Church
government, and that therefore the argument does not follow, that because
Bishops in the old Testament were Lords, and of the Kings Counsel in the
highest place, and inferior Ministers were civil Magistrates, therefore under
the Gospel it may be so, although what should hinder, they cannot show. But
that I may follow them in that course of disputation: They say we must not
follow the examples of the old Testament in Church government, and that
therefore the argument does not follow: Bishops in the old Testament were
Lords, and Kings Counselors, and inferior Ministers were civil Magistrates,
therefore under the Gospel they must be so. To who^ I allege, that by the like
reason, these arguments which Bishop Iuell, and the learned men of the reformed
churches have urged against the Popes authority, and for the upholding of
Princes cannot follow, when they conclude in this manner: Solomon deposed
Abiathar the Priest for committing high Treason, and placed Sadoc in his room,
therefore under the Gospel Christian Kings may punish their Ministers for high
Treason: Ezechias reformed the Church, Josias read the Law before the
Priests in the house of the Lord, and commanded Helchias the high Priest, and
the Priests of the second order, to bring forth of the Temple all the vessels
made for Baall, put down Idols, 1. Reg: 2. 2. Reg: 18.
slew the idolatrous Priests; therefore Christian Kings may put down
idolatry, and reform the Church: You see thereforefore the weakness, and
great insufficiency of this answer.

Again, why do the Laws of Geneua punish adultery with death after the
example of the old Testament, and why do our brethren, which stand for the
reformation, labor that the same punishment may be inflicted upon adulterers
with us, urging us with the authority of that Law, if so be that they will
hold that the Laws of the old Testament may not prevail under the Gospel?
In their simplicity and want of judgment, they shape this answer, as if it
were the Trumpet to blow down Jericho, David's sling to kill Golias, Sampsons
iawe-bone to slay a thousand Philistines, that the ceremonial Law is
abolished, whereas before I have showed, thal this is not ceremonial, but
political, and that the Priesthood is abolished, whereas only that which is
ceremonicall, concerning the Priests office is abolished, but that which is
moral indureth to the end. And again, a Minister of the Gospel may with more
conueniencie be a civil Magistrate, then the Priests under the Law, because
now the daily sacrifices, the great number of feasts, and solemnities, the
infinite number of ceremonies do cease, which then procured unto them a whole
world of businesses in their Ministry* by which they had less vacant time to
hear civil causes, then our Ministers have under the Gospel.

The answer to the common objection, Luk: 22, 25. they that bear rule over
them, are called gracious Lords, but ye shall not be so.
FOr the opening of this text, these things are to be examined? First, whether
our Savior spoke these words to his

Apostles only, or in the name of the Apostles to al Christians? For albeit
the Apostles only were personally present, and his apostrophe was unto the^,
yet many circumstances do prove that these words do concern al Christians.
For, first we find else where another speech parallel unto this: The Scribes
and Pharisees love the chief places at feasts, and to Mat: 2. 3.
have the chief seats in the assemblies, and greeting in the markets, and to
be called of men: Rabbi, Rabbi: that is, Lord, Lord: but be not ye called
Rabbi: for one is your Rabbi, to wit, Christ, and all ye are brethren, etc. but
he that is greatest among you, let him be your servant. No man can justly say,
this was spoken unto Ecclesiastical persons only, but also to lay men, for so
the text says: Then Jesus spoke to the multitude, and to his Disciples. 2. In
the same chapter it appears, that our Savior did celebrate his last Supper
immediately before he spoke these words, but that story being set down more
plain by the other Enangelist, he said: drink you of this all, Mat: 26.
which words were spoken only to his Apostles, and yet, none but they of the
Church of Rome will so conster them, as if they were meant only of
Ecclesiastical persons. For, even as the Cup in the holy Communion, did not
appertain only unto the Ministry, but also unto the laity; so humility,
which is the Subject of this speech, is not commended only to the Apostles,
but to all men. So that, if the title of Lord belong not to the Apostles,
neither does it belong unto any other, because these words do indifferently
concern all.

The second question is, whether in these words of our Savior any mention is
made concerning the title of Lord, or no? Surely whosoever shall say that the
title of Lord is here forbidden, he has as little judgment in the Greek
tongue, as the man in the Gospel, which was not able to discern men from
trees. For the Greek which is authentical, because it was written by the holy
Ghost, has no such words as gracious Lords, but euergetai bountiful, or
benefactors, or doers of good: they which bare rule over them are called well
doers, but ye shall not be so. There cannot be one place of Scripture alleged
between the first of Genesis, and the last of The Apocalips, to prove that
Gods Ministers may not be called Lords, but some places may be alleged to
prove that they are Lords. Our Savior his self does accept of that titile
Ioh: 3* 2.
of Lord given him by Nicod^mus, when he called him Rabbi, that is, my Lord.
For Rabbi, as Pagnin shows in his Lexicon, signifies: Magistrum;
honorabilem, inclytum, ob multiplices quibus po^let dignitates, a Master, an
honorable Ioh. 13. 13.
person, a man that is eminent by reason of his manifold dignities, and places
of honor which he holds. And in another place he says, the name Kurios
Lord, does of right belong unto him, Vmeis phoneite me o didascales, caio
Kurios, cai calos legete, eimigar. You call me Doctor, and Lord, and ye say
well, for so I am. Furthermore, Saint Paul and Silas accepted of the same ^itle
of Curios Lord, when it was given them by the keeper of the prison, when he
fell down before them, and said: Kur^oi Lords, what must I do to be saved?
to whom they Act. 16. 30
answered: believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved. And a greater
title then Lord is given to Gods Ministers in his own word, they are called
Gods. For that of the Prophet: Psalm. 82. 6. Ioh: 10. 33.
God stands in the assembly of Gods, and I have said ye are Gods, meaning
of Princes and Judges, our Savior his self expounds of Ministers. For, when
the Jews said to him: For thy good work we stone thee not: but for
blasphemy, and that thou being a man, make thy self God. Jesus answered
them: Is it not written in your Law, I said ye are Gods? if he call them
Gods unto whom the word of God is given, and the Scripture cannot be broken,
say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into the world, thou
blasphemest, because I said: I am the Son of God? You see how in the whole
course of the Scripture the Minister and the Magistrate go together, both of
them are Gods anointed, both called Gods, because they represent the person of
God upon earth: both Lords, because they be the deputies and Leiftenants of him
that is the Lord of Lords: to the civil Magistrate is especially committed the
temporal sword, to the Minister the dispensation of the word. And you see here
the reason plainly expressed, why our Savior calls Ministers Gods, because
unto them the word of God was given, and the same word which was committed to
the ministers under the law, is committed more abundantly to the ministers of
the Gospel, and must continue with them to the worlds end. The king is called
Poimen, shepherd, so is the minister, and in the original tongues, pascere,
and Psalm: 2.
regere, to feed and to govern is all one And that the English translation is
corrupt, where it has; ye shall not be called gracious Lords: it appears,
not only by the original, but also by the analogy of faith: because according
to faith, Bishops may be Lords, as I have showed, and then much more gracious
Lords: for else they were graceless Lords. For this word grace, according to
the Scriptures, is taken actiuely for the love and favor of the superior,
which he vouchsafes the inferior. So the Apostle says: By the grace of God,
I am 1. Cor. 15. Luke 1. Luk 2. Luke 4. Romans 3. Tit. 3. Ephesians. 4. 1. Tim. 4.
that I am: or else passiuely, for any good parts and gifts in the inferior,
by which he is respected of his superior. So the Virgin Mary was full of grace,
the child Jesus grew in grace: they all meruailed at the words of grace which
proceeded out of his mouth, we are freely justified through his grace; if of
grace, then not of works; we are saved by grace through faith. To every one of
us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Do not
neglect the grace which is conferred on thee by imposition of hands. Let every
man 1. Pet 4. Ephesians. 2.
as he has received grace, minister the same one to another.

Thirdly, that we may come to the true exposition of these words: There arose
a controversy among them, who should seem to be the greatest, etc. In which
story, are two things to be observed: their example of ambition, which did
strive for superiority, and our Savior, his doctrine of humility, teaching,
that such ambition is found among the Gentiles, and ought not to be among
Christians. The Kings of the Nations, says he, reign over them: that is,
over the Nations which are under them, and that by oppression, as Saint
Chrysostom, and Musculus have ezpounded it, not according to justice, as Gods
word wills them to do, but after their own sensual lusts and fleshly
desires, and they are called (euergetai) doers of good, as the Ptolomes King of
Egypt, two of them did sername their own selves, albeit they were not doers of
good, but of evil, and oppressors of their subject Concerning the application
of this to christians, he says you shall not be called so: that is, you shall
not reign as kings, but govern as subjects, not tyrannically, but justly, you
shall not be called doers of good, but (cacoergoi) evil doers, and
malefactors, although ye do good, as the Apostle speaks; We are reviled,
and yet we bless, we are persecuted, and we suffer, 1. Cor. 4. 12. 13. Act.
10. 38
we are evil spoken of, and we pray. It is your duty to do good, as it is
said of our Savior (dielthen euergeton) he went about doing good: yet you
shall not have the due praise of your well doing, as our Savior himself was
called Beelzebub, a glutton, a drunkard, John the Baptist an hypocrit, all the
Apostles seditious men, etc: notwithstanding they were all doers of good. So
then, in this place is not forbidden honor and authority, but ambitious
seeking of it, as when they strove, and unjust using of it, as the Kings of the
Nations did: as when he says; The Scribes and Pharisees love the chiefest
places, etc: and to be called Rabb, etc: Master Beza upon that Mat. 23. 8 In
annot. maioribus.
text, says; The title of Rabbi, was given to such as were Doctors in the
Chaldaean universities, as also which in Iudaea by imposition of hands, were
declared to be the wise men of the land, as also it was a title given to those
noble and wise men which were counselors to King David. And says he; When
our Savior forbids them: be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your Doctor,
to wit, Christ, etc: Ne vocemini, id est, ne ambiatis, neque enim vetat
Christus ne suum honorem exhibeamus magistratus, vel doctoribus, sed ambitionem
damnat, vt declarat August: ser: deverbis Domini ex Matthaei. 11. Be not you
called Rabbi: that is, do not you ambitiously seek after that title; for
otherwise our Savior does not forbid us to give due honor to the Magistrate
and Doctor, but only he forbids the ambitious seeking after such honor,
as appears by Saint Augustine, his exposition. One is our Doctor, that is,
the chief pastor, the fountain of all knowledge, according to that of the
Prophet: And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord. Call Esa. 54. 13
no man your father: that is, nourish no man in his ambition, which glories in
such titles, respicit enim Iudaeorum consuetudinem, apud quos non modo Aboth,
id est patres, sed and Abothenu, id est patres nostri, salutabantur Rabbini: he
has reference to the custom of the Jews, among whom the Rabbines would not
be contented to be called fathers, but our fathers. Ye are brethren, that is,
beat down the pride of them which exalt themselves above their brethren. For
otherwise it is lawful to call them fathers which are fathers. So the King of
Israel called Elisaeus his father: and Saint Paul will have an elder to 2. Reg.
6. 21.. 1 Timothy 5. 1. Cor. 4. 15.
be rebuked as a father, and he calls himself a father of them whom he
has instructed in the word. As for the Apostles, they did not exercise civil
jurisdiction, according to form of humane laws, as Magistrates in Courts of
justice use to do, partly because they being to travel through the world, had
no certain abiding place, and partly because Judges and Justices are
subordinate unto Kings and Princes, and have their commission from them, as our
Savior speaks: Quis me constituit Iudicem? who has appointed me to be a
Judge over you? But all Kings and Princes were at that time Luke 12. 14
infidells, and therefore would not call them to such offices, which if they
had been called unto, they might lawfully have executed. And yet it may be
justified, that Saint Peter executed civil justice upon Saphira, when he
pronounced sentence of death against her, saying: Behold, the feet of them
Act. 5. 9.
which have buried thy husband, are at the door, and shall carry thee out: and
Saint Paul upon Elymas, when he pronounced sentence Act. 13.
of deprivation of his sight, saying: Thou shall be blind, and not see the
Sun for a season: although outward form of proceeding was wanting; like to
that example of David a King which said of the man which brought tidings of
Saul's 2. Sam. 1. 15. 1. Sam. 19. 33.
death, without any further process or course of law: Go, fall upon him; and
he smote him that he died: and of Samuel which took Agag, and he wed him in
pieces: and of Ioiada the priest, which when Athalia the Queen in the Temple
cried; treason, treason, without any judicial examination, or kind 2. Reg.
11. 15.
of proceeding, commanded the Captains immediately to carry her out and kill
her.

And that these things may not seem strange, the Apostle Saint Paul, and the
Prophet Esaias foretold so much. For the 2. Cor. 3. 6
Apostle writes in this manner: He has made us able Ministers of the new
Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit, for the letter kills, but
the spirit gives life. If then the ministration of death, written with
letters, and engraven in stone was glorious, so that the children of Israel
were not able to behold Moses his face, for the glory of his countenance,
which glory is done away, how shall not the ministration of the spirit be more
glorious? For, if the ministry of condemnation was glorious, much more does
the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory: for if that which should
be abolished was glorious, much more shall that which remains be glorious.
In which words are to be observed two things: the anti^hesis or contrariety,
between the Ministers of both the Testaments, and then the correspondency and
agreement between them both: that is, wherein they consent, and wherein they
dissent. They disagree in these points, the letter and the spirit, death and
life, condemnation and righteousness, that which was to be abolished, and that
which is to abide until the end of the world: and yet both agree in glory,
but the spirit excels the letter, life death, righteousness, condemnation,
that which is that which is not. Therefore the ministry of the Gospel by an
argument, a minori ad maius, is also glorious, and by so much more glorious
then the ministry of the law, by how much it is more excellent then the law.
The question is now, what is meant by glory? And because men may be resolved of
that point, the text it self does make it plain, it was outward. The children
of Israel could not behold Moses his face, for the glory of his countenance.
After he had talked with God, the skin of his face shone so bright, Exodus 34.
Exodus 33. Matthew. 17
that they were afraid to come near him. And that shows what is meant by the
glory of God which Moses desired to see, when answer was made, he should see
his back parts only, but not his face. And it is showed by example, how our
glorified bodies shall look after the resurrection, when the face of our
Savior being transfigured, did shine like the Sun. The Lord said to Moses:
Thou shall make holy garments for thy Exodus ^8.
brother Aaron, glorius and beautiful, of gold, blew silk, purple, etc. The
holiness of his garments consisted in this, that they were consecrated to an
holy use, they were for the priest to wear in his ministration, the glory of
them is specified to be the outward beauty, that they were of glod, silk,
purple, etc. Solomon in his glory was not like a lily in the field, but wherein
Mat 6.
Solomon's glory co^sisted, no man is ignorant: that is, in his outward pomp,
riches, service, honorable retinew, the adifice of his Temple, the world did
admire him. So it is plain, that the priesthood of Israel, the glory of it
consisted in the riches of the Temple, the large possessions of the Levites,
their authority and worldly reputation, the high Priest being next in place of
honor unto the king. But how the ministry of the Gospel should exceed them
in glory; the Prophets have foretold, and especialle Esaias, where he says:
Esa. 60.
Thine heart shall be astonished, and enlarged, because the multude of the Sea
shall be converted unto thee, and the riches of the Gentiles shall come unto
thee, the multitude of Camel^s shall cover thee, the Dromedaries of Midian and
of Ephah, they of Sheba shall bring gold and incense, and show forth the praise
of the Lord, etc. Surely the Isles shall wait for me, and the Ships of
Tha^sis, as at the beginning, that they may bring thy sons from far, and
their silver, and their gold with them to the name of the Lord, and to the holy
one of Israel, because he has glorified thee. The sons of strangers shall
build up thy walls, and their Kings shall minister unto thee, etc. The Nation
of the Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish, and those Nations shall
be utterly destroyed, the glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fur, the
elm, the box, to beautify the place of my sanctuary, for I will glorify
the place of my feet. The sons of them that afflicted thee, shall come and
bow unto thee, all they that despised thee, shall fall down at the souls of
thy feet, etc: Thou shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, thou shall suck
the breasts of Kings, etc.

That the Reader may be yet better satisfied. Flacius Iilyricus In claui
scripturae.
divides glory to be two fold, the one of God, the other of men: and as for
the glory of God, it cannot be understood in this place, but of men only;
because he speaks only of the glory of the Ministers of the old and new
Testaments, which were only men. Again, he divides the glory of men, either
into that which is eternal in heaven, or temporal upon the earth: but the
latter only is understood, because it is the glory of the ministry, which
ministry is temporal, and must cease after this life, even as also then faith
and hope must cease, only love must endure. Thirdly, he divides this
temporal glory of men, into gloriam fame 1. Cor. 13
and bonitatis rei; the glory of words, and of matter and substance, the glory
of words or fame, which consists in the fame and good report of other men,
which is chiefly in them which do glorify us, and not in our selves which are
glorified and magnified, but the glory which is not in words, but substance,
which indeed is the cause why men do praise and magnify us, is our riches,
honor, authority, all outward ornaments, which stir up the outward senses,
and men's affections, to admiration of our persons, places, and calling, is
only to be understood in this place, as appears by these reasons. First, the
glory of fame is defined by Illyricus, and also by Melancthon, in his common
places, to be: Approbatio conscientiae nostrae recte iudicantis, and al^crum
recte iudicantium: The testimony of a good conscience, approving us that we
have walked sincerely, and the report of other men, consenting in judgment
with us, that we have so walked. But in that sense, we cannot be more
glorious then Aaron and Moses, and the Priests of the old Testament, because
they were men of as holy life as we, and walked every way as sincerely in
their calling, as we do in our vocation, and were as pleasing to God, and as
well approved of Gods people as we be. Secondly, it were unworthy of the
Majesty of the holy Ghost, to play the so phister in this place, and to use
aequiuocation of the word glory, as if by their glory and ours, he did not
understand one and the same thing: for then it were no just comparison. For the
things which be compared together, must agree in that thing in which they be
compared: therefore, being compared in glory, they must agree in the same glory;
only they must differ secundu^ magis and minus, being compared not in the
positive, but in the comparatiue degreee, one must be more glorious then
another. So then, the glory of one being outward in pomp and state, the glory
of the other must also be so, but in a greater measure.

Thirdly, if some men should be so ignorant as to say, that the glory of our
ministry consists in this, that it is the ministry of the spirit, of life,
of righteousness, and of that which must remain. I answer; that cannot be,
for then the glory of the ministry of the old Testament, should consist in
letters, death, condemnation, etc: but that is disproued by the text it self,
which shows that these things were the subject of that ministry, but the
glory consisted in the brightness of Moses his face: therefore I say; spirit,
life, righteousness, are the subject of our ministry, and not the glory of
it: and the cause why it ought to be so much the more glorious then the old
priesthood was. Fourthly, if we consider the scope and drift of Saint Paul in
that place, it was to magnify himself, and credit his calling, that so it
might not be brought into contempt, as poor and beggarly, which were
inglorious. For, says thee: Do we begin to praise our selves? Need we as
some other, an epistle of commendation? He answers: that he needs not to
commend himself, he needs not man's commendation to credit his ministry,
for as much as his calling is of sufficient credit of it self, and his own
person credited by it three manner of ways. First, by the Corinthians
themselves, to whom he did minister. Secondly, by that which was inward in his
ministry, as spirit, life, righteousness. Thirdly, by that which was outward,
and apparent to the eye, and that was glory.

Now, lest any man should object out of Saint Chrysostom, Theophilactus,
Aquinas, and others, that in their interpretation of that place of Saint Paul,
they affirm that the glory of his ministry, was no such glory as was visible
and subject to outward senses. I confess that when Saint Paul wrote that
epistle, it was not so of fact, although it was so of right. It could not be
then outwardly glorious, by reason of the present persecution, the ministry of
the Gospel being not established by Princes. Therefore the Apostle spoke not so
much of the glory which then was, as of that which in the peace and prosperity
of the Church, should afterward be, when the world was converted. For his words
are these: P^s o^ch^ mallon e diaconia tou pneumatos estai en doxe? how shall
not the ministration of the spirit be more glorious? where he speaks in the
future tence, as of a thing in due time to be performed, and not present. And
therefore, where he speaks in the present tence in the next verse; Pollo
mallon perisseu^i e diaconia tes dicaiosunes en doxe; much more does the
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory, as it is a figure called
enalloge temporis, where one tense is used for another, as it appeared by the
event (which is the best interpreter of all prophecies) when the riches,
authority, and outward pomp of the Church was increased. And yet it cannot be
said, that the ministry of the Gospel was without outward glory, in the
extremest poverty of the Church, for as much as the Apostles at Jerusalem had
all the riches of the Church laid at their feet, and at their own
disposition; and when worldly promotion was most of all wanting, they had the
gift of working miracles, which was a greater glory and countenance to their
ministry, then any Kings or earthly means could give unto them. St. Peter,
his shadow was more glorious and more honored then the body and person of any
Prince. Saint Paul's napkins and handkerchers, and such like rags which came
from his body, Act. 5. Act. 93.
were of more account then the purple robes, and gold and silver of earthly
Kings. And this gift of working miracles, continued as the portion and
inhaeritance of Christ his Ministers, until they obtained peace, and so were
indewed with worldely possessions, and honors, which were to countenance their
ministry in the place of miracles which did cease. So that still the
ministry of the Gospel was outwardly glorious and honorable, not vile,
abject, or contemptible. The Lord of his mercy continue the state of it unto
his own glory, to the worlds end.

Amen.
AN ANSWER TO THE TREAtise of the Cross in Baptism, contracted into this
Syllogism.
"No humane ordinance becoming an idol, may lawfully "be used in the service
of God. "But the sign of the Cross being an humane ordinance, "is become an
idol. "Therefore The sign of the Cross may not be lawfully used in the
service of God.
OF THE SIGN of the Cross in Baptism.
FOr as much as we be no plaintiues, but defendants, neither does it belong
unto us, as opponents to object, or allege any arguments for proof of that
truth which is already established, but only, as respondents to answer such
objections, as are brought by our adversaries to overthrow that hold whereof
we are possessed: we will therefore, so far as by the Laws of disputations
we are bound, make answer to all points in particular, as they are urged
against us. And therefore, first of all we will examine the title of the book
which is contracted into this Syllogism.

"No humane ordinance becoming an idol, may lawfully "be used in the service
of God. "But the sign of the Cross being an humane ordinance, "is become an
idol. "Therefore The sign of the Cross may not be lawfully used in the
service of God.
Because this Syllogism is intended to be in the first figure, we wish the
author had explaned his meaning, in what mood it is concluded? because, as it
is set down in these English words, it is uncertain whether it be in
CELARENT or in FERLO, in one of them it must be, for else it is no lawful
Syllogism. If it be in CELARENT, then the MINOR must be understood to be
universal affirmative, and then, these words: The sign of the Cross being
an humane ordinance is become an idol, are equivalent to these: Every sign of
the Cross is an humane ordinance, and every sign of the Cross is become an
idol. Which, if it be so understood, then the MINOR is to be denied as untrue.
For, the visible and permanent sign of the Cross, which appeared to
Constantine the great, by which he was converted to the Christian faith, Eusebius:
de vita Constable: lib: 1. cap: 22.
was neither an humane ordinance, because it was the work of God, and not of
men, it appeared in heaven, and not on earth, neither was it an idol, because
it was neither worshipped, nor showed to that end that it should be worshipped
(the Author his self in his Treatise says, nothing is an idol, unless it be
worshipped) neither was the invisible and transient sign Ezech: 9. 4.
of the Cross in the Prophecy of Ezechiel any humane ordinance because God
commanded it, nor any idol, because it was not worshipped. Only it was a
mark of them which were ordained to salvation, and it was to be signed in
their forheads by the Priest in the Surplesse, or linen Ephod, resembling the
blood of the paschal Lamb which was sprinkled Exodus: 1^. 7.
upon the door cheeks in Egypt by the Angel, which was to pass over the
houses so marked, and to save them from death which were in the houses so
marked. And that in Saint John's revelation was but a resemblance of them both,
where the elect had the seal of the living God in their forheads. This Apoc:
7. 4.
sign in Ezechiel, was the sign of the Cross, because it was the Hebrew
charactar, T AV, which letter as it is now printed in the Alphabet, resembles
the Gallows, or instrument of execution of thieues and murderers. But, as
Saint Hierom shows: when this prophecy was first written, the Jews having
Hierom: in Ezech: 9.
then the same letters which the Samaritans had, according as they were devised
by Moses, the Hebrew T A V was of the same form which the Greek T AV is of at
this day, which is such a Cross in form, as that which was,, ara mundi, the
Altar of the world, upon which our Savior Christ was crucified. And that
afterward it was changed into this ordinary form of Gallows by Ezra, after
the captivity, which altered all the letters in the Alphabet into this form
which is now used in all Hebrewe impressions, that the letters of the believing
Jews might differ from the letters of the unbelieving Samaritans. The sign of
the cross in the forheads of the elect was as especial in the days of
Ezechiel, as the mark of the living God in their forheads, in Saint John's
revelation, and the sprinkling of the dore-cheekes in the days of Moses, and
did outwardly show that none could escape death, which had not interius
expressam fidem crucis and mortis Christi, quique exterius Cerisium intrepide
profiteretur, an inward impression in their hearts, of the Cross and death of
our Savior Christ, and made an outward constant profession of the same to the
view of the world, to show that they were not ashamed of their crucified Lord
Jesus, nor afeard to drink of his cup, and be baptized with his baptism,
which was calix amaritudinis, and baptismus sanguinis, and Math. 20. 23.
crucis, the cup of bitterness, and baptism of blood and martyrdom, of the
Cross and tribulation. Now, the Christians in the infancy of the Church, did
sign themselves with this TAV or sign of the Cross, in ea part vbi est
signum pudoris vt non puderet eos crucifixi, as Saint Augustine witnesses, in
their De verbis apostoli Ser: 8. De catherudibus. cap: 20.
very forheads, to testify their profession, in imitation of the examples of
the holy Scriptures which I have recited, as the same Saint Augustine
witnesses, and that before popery had crept into the Church, witness
Tertullian, which lived within two hundred years after our Savior. And in the
imitation of these examples, the sign of the cross is continued among us, to
be signed upon the forheads of them which are baptized, and that without any
worship or divine honor done unto i^, therefore it is no idol.

But if this Syllogism be in FERIO, as according to the rules of Logic it
ought to be, because it is an indefinite proposition in matter contingent, then
is the MINOR particular, and likewise the conclusion, and then it is all one,
as if he had said: Some sign of the Cross is an humane ordinance, and some
sign of the Cross is become an idol, therefore some sign of the Cross is
not to be used in Gods service. And then we grant both the proposition and the
conclusion, as no disadvantage unto us, because he concludes nothing against
us. For our sign is neither that which man has divised, neither that which is
worshipped (the Author his self does confess in his Treatise, that we do
not worship the Cross in Baptism, nor any way make an idol of it). Neither
can any particular conclusion overthrow a general point of doctrine, as if
because one Cross is so, therefore all Crosses should be so. A general is not
to be concluded by a particular, but a particular by a general. Syllogizari
non est ex particulari.

Having answered the matter which is contingent, and the quantity which is
indefinite, it follows that we examine the form of this syllogism, and lay
open the manifold defectes of it, to show how indeed it is no true
syllogism, but a fallacy, which that we may the better effect, we must first
scan every word in order, as they be placed in the Syllogism.

First of all therefore, where he says: No humane ordinance being become an
idol may be used in Gods service. Iwould know then whether a divine
ordinance being become an idol may be used in Gods service? If it may, then
the bread in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which is Gods ordinance being
hallowed by the Priest, elevated upon the Altar in the Mass, adored by the
people, being put in the pix, and reserved, may be afterward broken by the
hands of the Minister, and delivered to the people in the celebration of the
Sacrament of the Lords Table. I hope, to that question he will answer
negatiuely, therefore this caution which he puts in, to wit, No humane
ordinance, is but superfluous, and might as well have been left out of the
syllogism. Nay, he might as well have said: No divine ordinance becoming an
idol, may be retained in the Church, much John 3. 14. Numb: 21 9. 2. Reg: 18.
4^
less used in divine service.

For the brazen serpent being Gods ordinance, and ordained to be a most lively
type and figure of our Savior Christ, when they burnt incense unto it, was
defaced by Ezechias, and for so doing he was commended, to have done uprightly
in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his Father David had done. And
yet, I say, the idol being removed, Gods ordinance ought still to stand. The
bread which is consecrated, elevated, and adored in the Mass, is unfit to be
taken and eaten in the Lords Supper, and yet bread is still to be used in that
Supper without such elevation, and adoration. And as for the brazen Serpent,
here is the difference between that and this: Had the people ceased to burn
incense unto it, yet being broken and defaced, no other like to that was to be
erectect, for as much as that was but a temporal ordinance of God for that
present time, when they were stunge with fiery Serpents in the Wilderness,
serving for that use to heal them when they looked upon it, which virtue of
healing afterward ceased, but, had Serpents still stunge them, and the sight of
a brazen Serpent served still for healing of such wounds, a new brazen
serpent which was never worshipped, might have been made in the place of it
which was defaced.

Secondly, I would know also, whether an humane ordinance being no idol may
be used in Gods service? To that Master Jacob answers negatiuely, in his
Book of reformation, likewise, the Author of the Treatise of divine worship,
therefore this clause: becoming an idol, was but idle, and might very well
have been spared, and it stands but in the place of a ciphre, or rather an
idol it self, because, as the Apostle writes: idoium nihil est, 1. Cor: 84.
an idol is nothing, and this also stands for nothing. Let the framer
therefore of this syllogism speak whether he means: in sensu diuiso,
because it is an humane ordinance? or because it is an idol? or else, because
joined both together in sensu coniuncto, it is both an humane ordinance and an
idol, it is unfit for Gods service? If he make it a sufficient reason why the
sign of the Cross should be crossed out of the s;eruice Book, Vel eo
nomine, because it was an humane ordinance, then he might have spared to make
mention of an idol, if he mean eo nomine, because it was an idol, then might
he have spared to speak of humane ordinance, as words idly put in. Frustra
fit per plura quod aeque been fieri potest per pauciora. If ye mean an humane
ordinance might have been used, so it were not become an idol, or an idol,
had it not been an humane ordinance, or otherwise, if he meant none of them
both, then these two were not well joined together in this syllogism. But, as
for our sign of the Cross, with which we sign infants in Baptism, we do
not in so doing imitate the examples of men, but the holy Scripture, and so
deny it to be an humane ordinance, we adore it not outwardly with the body,
nor inwardly in our minds, and therefore we deny it to be an idol (for
still I build upon that ground of the Author of this syllogism, that nothing
is an idol unless it be worshipped) therefore, no worship, no idol. And
therefore notwithstanding this syllogism, nothing hinders but that it may
be used in the Sacrament of Baptism, which is a part of GODS service.

Thirdly, the argument does not follow, that because the bread which is adored
by the Papists, is become an idol, therefore the bread which is not adored by
us is an idol, because the Sun and Moon were as Gods to the heathens which
worshipped them, therefore they are Gods to us which vouchsafe them no worship,
because Gedeons Ephod was an idol to them which worshipped it, being hung up
in Iud: 8. 27.
Ophra, therefore that Ephod which the Priest did wear in Solomon's Temple and
not worship, was an Idol in Jerusalem, because the altars which were erected
for sacrifice in the high places, and that upon which Iereboam offered incense,
were monuments 1. Reg: 13. 1. Joshua 22. 10.
of idolatry, therefore the altar which the two tribes of Ruben, Gad, and half
Manasses, erected to be a witness between themselves and the other tribes,
upon which no sacrifice nor incense was offered, nor intended to be offered,
should also be held for a monument of idolatry, because the name of Jesus was
abused and vainly taken by the coniurers, it might not be lawfully used by the
Apostles: so the argument Act: 19. 13.
does not follow, that because the sign of the Cross is an idol to the
Papists which worship it, therefore it should be an idol to us which worship
it not. The Author his self, as before I have showed, says nothing is an
idol but quatenu^ it is worshipped: and again, he freeth us from the crime
of idolatry, saying that our Church ascribes no worship unto it, therefore he
does not justly call it by the name of an idol; and apply it unto us. Their
abuse cannot disanull our lawful use, and whatsoever may by them be abused,
may by us be lawfully used, therefore their superstition cannot make a
nullitie of our sincere and true devotion. As the Cross has been abused, so
has Gods Temple been profaned in the days of Ezechiel, and in the days of
our Savior Christ, yet Ezechi: 8: Ioh: 2.
neither of them would have the Temple to be suppressed. Masses have been
said in all our Churches, shall we therefore be as the Brownists which refuse
to come to Church to hear our dinine service? They are the same Churches
numero, the Cross is not, therefore the argument follows a maiori ad mious,
the Churches may be as well removed as the Cross.

Fourthly, the sign of the Cross he says: is become an idol, therefore he
denies it to have been originally an idol as the golden colfe was which was
erected in Horeb, and because Ex: 32. 4.
he denies it to have been originally an idol, he must needs overthrow
that first ground which he laid in his MINOR proposition, where he affirmed
that it was an humane ordinance. For the Author of the book of reformation
alleging the authority of Vrsinus in his exposition Master Jacob.
upon the second commandment, and the Author of the treatise of divine
worship, affirm that all humane institutions in the Church are idolatry,
because they impugn the second Commandment of the first Table, and that the
word of God is so perfect and all-sufficient of it self, that man may ordain
nothing in the Church, but all additions of men are idolatry. I conclude
therefore, out of their own words, that if it be become an idol, it was no
humane ordinance, and if it were an humane ordinance, it could not become an
idol, because it was an idol ab initio, from the first institution of it. And
therefore, because he says, it is become an idol, he must grant, that it was
God ordinance. And so I deny not but the holiest creatures in the world may
become idols by man's worshipping the^. For so is the bread in the sacrament,
so is the beginning of S. John's Gospel, In principio erat verbu^; being hung
about childrens necks, with certain charms of sorcery to keep the^ from
stumbling, become an idol. And the 18. verse of the 50. Psalm: When thou
saw a thief, thou did run with him: being used with other circumstances
by co^iurations to find out stolen goods, which is to ascribe divine power to
these creatures. But, for as much as originally, the use of the Cross was
lawful, we do retain it in our Church as originally it was used: and
therefore we may justify the use of it.

Fifthly therefore, whereas he says: that which is an idol may not be used in
Gods service: it makes nothing against us which have proved the Cross to be
no idol. Therefore, that I may lay open the manifold imperfections of this
kind of argumentation, to show that it is no lawful syllogism, but a flat
paralogisme, in it I will discover four fallacies. And that I may not be like
them, which as it is in the proverb, will spell law, and conster logic, I
must be forced to use such terms as belong to the Logitians, which cannot be
well expressed in English, that I may observe the laws of schools. Out of the
premises which before I have observed. First, there is fallacia a dicto
secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, quia in conclusione falso id tribuitur rei
simpliciter consideratae, quod in praemissis tributum fuit aliqua condition,
seu determinatione and circumstantia, as Abetzon speaks: In the conclusion,
the sign of the Cross is condemned as simply unlawful, being simply
considered without any respect of worship, which in the premises is not
understood but upon circumstances, and conditions of divine worship to be
ascribed unto it.

Secendly, it is a paralogisme, called ignoratio Elenchi, the ignorance of that
fallacy, quia non est idem respectus, res non intelligitur ad idem secundum
idem similiter and eodem tempore: there is not one and the self same respect,
but diverse, the thing is not alike, but diversely understood, it is not
referred to one and the same things, according to the same, after the same
manner, and at the same time, but all these circumstances are different one from
another.

Thirdly, it is fallacia no^ causae pro cau^a, such a fallacy wherein that is
taken for a cause, which is no cause: the abuse of them which worship it, is
here alleged for a cause why it may not be lawfully used among us, which their
abuse is no cause at al.

Fourthly, it is fallacia accidentis, a fallacy by reason of the accident which
is included in that which belongs only unto the substance, and ought to be
understood without any such accident. For he draws his argument from the
event, which was merely accidental unto the Cross, unto the nature of the
Cross it self, as idolum fit, ergo vere idolum est. It is among some used as
an idol, therefore properly, and originally the thing it self is an idol.
They do a praeteritis accidentibus aut euentis ad praesentiam rei argumentari;
draw their arguments from the accidental events which are passed, unto the
thing as among us it is now used: as for example, because the sign of the
Cross was worshipped in the time of ignorance and superstition among Papists,
that therefore it is now worshipped among the Protestants, after the
reformation of the Church.

To leave the title of the book, and come to the tract it self. For proof of
the MAYOR, he alleges Saint John's authority, Babes, keep your selves from
idols: as if that were a John. 5. 21
good argument; we must keep our selves from idolis, therefore we may not
make the sign of the Cross in Baptism: which before I have showed to be no
idol, which is but petitio principij, a begging of the question. But for
explanationof this text of Saint John, he undertakes two things: first, to set
down the definition of an idol: and secondly, to limit us how far we are
to keep our selves from idols, and therein he presses us with the authority
of learned Zanche, when his self refuses not only to stand to the authority
of learned Calvin,, and learned Beza, and learned Peter Martyr, but renounceth
all other humane authorities, which are by us alleged against him, saying; he
will stand to no authorities, but to the canonical Scriptures.

But to come to the definition of an idol, he defines it to be, A quicquid
praeter Deum diuino honor colitur, a whatsoever ye will besides God, if it be
worshipped with divine worship. And he that will define an idol to be a
quicquid, will not refuse to say a quidlibet, whatsoever his own idle brain
shall apprehend. He might rather have said with the Apostle, it is a nihil,
then a quicquid, a new nothing, rather then every thing, Scimus quia idolum
nihil est in mundo, says St. Paul, 1. Cor. 8. 4
we know that an idol is nothing in the world. For though in matter it be
somewhat, as wood, or stone, etc: yet in form it is nothing, because it
represents that which is not, as were the idols of Mercury, lupiter, and
such like. And therein it differs from an image, which represents that
which is comprehended within the universality or nature of things, as the
Schoolmen call it, as the image of a man, of a lion, and such like. But,
because it pleases him to confound idols and images, which in nature do
differ: yet for as much as they serve for one purpose in this place, and the
worship of either of them is a breach of the second commandment, we will be
contented to comprehend them both in one definition. And for as much as every
definition must consist of a Genus, and that which is loco differentiae, at the
least, I marvel that he does call it a quicquid, and so make it a
transcenae^t, as if it were in no praeaicame^t. For in that God says: Thou
shall not make sculptile aut simulacrum; any graven image, nor the likeness of
any thing, etc: thou shall not bow down to it nor worship Exodus 20.
it: by these words it is plain, that it is in the predicament or action, and
out of it may be gathered this definition; that it is the workemanshippe of a
man's hand, whether carved, painted, molton, or facioned howsoever by the art of
man, whether in the air, as the sign of the Cross transient, or otherwise,
as the Cross of wood which is permanent, represe^ting some substance or
figme^t, to which we ascribe divine power, and by a co^sequent, we give divine
honor. And whereas the author replieth, that then the worship of Angels, souls
of just men, and invisible spirits, were no idolatry. I answer, that such
worship is a breach of the first commandment; Non habebis Deos alienos coram
me: thou shat it have no other Gods besides me: as also the worshipping of the
Sun and Moon, which are the workmanship of God, and not of men.

As for the second, where he says: we must keep our selves both a cultu and ab
vs^ idoli, f^o^ the worship of the idol, and also from any other use of it, in
so much that we must not retain it among us: his own self does clear us that
we do not colere, worship it. And as for the use of it, which he says; may be
either civil, as for story, Princes banners, coignes, or else religious, it is
an idle distinction, for it is repugnant to the nature and definition of an
idol, that it should be civil. Idols are made for divine worship, and for no
other use: therefore for Ecclesiastical and religious uses only, and being
not so used, they are no idols, as the author his self confesses. If he
Page 11.
mean by the use of idols, the bare retaining of them in the Church without
any worship, as in many Churches of the Lutherans, where the images, which he
calls idols, do stand in the Temples for ornaments only: It is easily
answered, we removed them out of our Churches, and defaced them long since. But
he says; that by religious use of idols, he means: when any thing of men's
devise being worshipped as an idol, is used in the worship of God. For answer
whereof, we use no such thing in our service: the Cross which we use in
Baptism, is not worshipped at all.

Yet, says he: this point is farther strengthened by the commandment, which
forbids not only to worship, but also to make an image ad cultum, or for
religious use. In which words, he should do well to see his own weakness, or
rather folly. I do not deny, but as it is unlawful to worship it, so it is
unlawful to make it ad cultum, that another should worship it, as Demetrius
the siluer-smith and his fellows did, which Act. 19.
made shrines and images for Diana, her Temple. But, whereas he says: it is
forbidden to make any similitude ad cultum, or for religious use; if he make
these English words, for religious use, to be an interpretation of these Latin
words, ad cultum; as if they were but the same thing: he erreth, because
there be other religious uses besides worship: but, if he understand them
disiunctiuely, as they ought to be taken; that is, signifying diverse things,
then he falcifieth the second commandment, which says only; thou shall not
make it to bow down to it, nor worship it: but makes no mention of other uses;
neither expressly, nor by way of implication; for the^ God should be contrary to
himself, which after this commandment was given; yet commanded images to be
made for religious uses, as the brazen Serpent, and the images which were in
Slomons Temple, and ihe Cherubins upon the mercy seat: so that these words;
religious uses, are an addition of his own unto Gods word. And, whereas he
says; all occasions and means leading to idolatry, are forbidden. I answer;
the Cross in Baptism is no leading to idolatry; for as much as our doctrine
concerning the use of it, is clearly set down; that we put no confidence in
it, and our use of it is according to our doctrine: if he use it otherwise, it
is his fault, and not ours. Our doctrine and practice is as plain to the
contrary, as that of Ruben, Gad, and half Manasses, concerning the altar which
they crected, their doctrine explaining there intent, and their use of it being
consonant to their doctrine, removed all scruples and jealousy out of the
minds of their brethren, which before were offended, and so concerning that
point they were well satisfied, as also our brethren would be concerning this
controversy, were they as charitably minded toward us, being Christians, as
the Jews were toward their brethren being Jews. Therefore, where he says:
we offend against St. John's precept, warning us to keep our selves from
idols; because we do use an idol in the service of God. I answer as before,
it is petitio principij. a begging of the question: for I have showed, how it
is no idol, and he is greatly destitute of a medius terminus, to prove that
conclusion which he undertook to prove. If we grant all Crosses which are
worshipped, to be idols: it cannot follow, that our Cross in Baptism which
is not worshipped, is an idol, no more then this: that because all altars,
erected for sacrifice in places prohibited of God* were abomination, therefore
the altar of which before I spoke, being not ercted for that end, was also
abominable. Neither does he so fitly allege for his purpose, that our Church
of England in the Homily against peril of idolatry, justifies the removing of
images out of churches, which were set up by Papists to be worshipped, and are
worshipped, to prove that by the same reason, the Cross in Baptism allowed
by Protestants; should be also abrogated, which neither was appointed for
worship* nor yet worshipped. Neither is that place of Saint Augustine alleged
against images August. in Psalm. 113.
which have eyes, ears, noses, which do valere ad curuandum infaelicem
animum, deprave the mind of man, which is very apt to be deluded and carried
away, and also are an object to the eye, very dangerous to entice and allure to
idolatry: fitly applied by him to the sign of the Cross, not visible, not
permanent, and of which, none of these things may be verified, which are
incident to the images which have eyes, ears, and noses. And for our part, we
do as much abhor such, both images and image-makers, as this author does, or
as ever Epiphanius and Tertullian did, whom he cites, how improperly soever.

And to answer the conclusion, which so idly he infers upon these
authorities: That, if godly fathers were so vehement against erecting images of
Christ and Saints, even at that time, before any worship was given unto them:
much more would they withstand it now, after men have made idols of them: and
therefore he condemns us for enduring the idol of the Cross (as he calls
it) in the service and sacraments of God, and contrary to David's doctrine,
keeping an honorable memory of that which the Prophet Esaias wills us to
abandon. I say, it is no marvel though they were so vehement against erecting
Psalm. 16. Esa 50, 22
of images in Churches, for we are as vehement in that cause as they were, and
it behooved them at that time to be vehement, considering that the whole world
then was given to idolatry, and in every city the Pagans had their Temples,
and as they worshipped idols in their paganism, so they were prone to
worship images after their conversion to the Christian religion. And seeing
they which were not converted, were ready to offer sacrifice to Paul and
Barnabas Act. 14. 13
then alive: no doubt but they would have worshipped their images when they
were dead. But all this is unfitly applied unto the sign of the Cross in
Baptism.

To come to the MINOR, in which he indeuoureth to prove that the Cross is an
idol.
HE writes for a marginall note in capital letters, THE PROOF OF THE MINOR:
because in his own conceit it is already proved. But for the proof of it, he
only alleges the authority of Bellarmine, Potiformus, Heart, Costerus,
Aquinas, being Papists, which hold that the sign of the Cross is to be
worshipped with divine worship, and ascribe to it divine power. And grant all
this to be true, that the Papists worship the Cross, and ascribe so much to
it. I answer as before, it touches not our sign of the Cross in Baptism,
which ascribe no such thing unto it. Therefore nothing is here alleged by him
for the confirmation of the MINOR, which is not already by us answered and
refuted sufficiently, in the confutation of the MAYOR.

The author now comes to his Ob: and Sol: and in our behalf obiecteth, that
our Cross is neque numero neque vsu, the same Cross which was among the
Papists, neither yet used among us as it was used among the^ The validity of
this objection in our behalf, we show to be of as great validity on our side,
as it was for the tribes of Ruben, Gad, and half Manasses on their side, which
being challenged by their brethren for suspicio^ of idolatry when they erected
an altar, which as it was not numero, so they answered it was not vsu, such an
altar as they suspected it to be: which answer contented the Jews, and might as
well satisfy our brethren, if they were as charitable.

But let us examine the answer he makes to this objection. When (says he) God
commanded his people to break down the images of the heathen, and to
extinguish the very name of them, they could not have performed that charge, if
they had burnt all the idols of Canaan, and made others new of the same form,
though to another use not idolatrous: so cannot we discharge our duties, if
having defaced the Popish idols, we erect them new in our Church, though not
to worship; because it cannot be without breach of the commandment: Babes,
keep your selves from idols. So far disputes the maker of the syllogism,
in our behalf. But, because it may be verified of us, which was said of the
blind man who received his sight; aetatem habet, pro se respondeat, we are old
enough to answer for our selves; we will answer our own selves for our selves,
we crave no help of our adversary, but we will show the insufficiency of this
answer two manner of ways. First, he has dig^essed from his matter, because
the subject of this disputation is an humane ordinance become an idol, whereas
he instanceth in humane ordinances which are not become idols, but which
originally were idols, and erected by infidells to this end, that they should
be worshipped: for that was to the imitation of the heathen people, and this is
not so. And, according to this kind of disputation, he might as well impose a
necessity upon us, of suppressing all our parish Churches, as the Brownists do;
because they were not only the Popes ordinance, but also ordained for the
celebration of the Mass, and so employed from their first erection, until
this late reformation of the Church. For, according to Gods commandment, not
only the idols their selves were to be put down, but also the altars,
groves, and high places, where the idolatry was committed, and the Priests
which did offer the sacrifices, all they being abominable as the idol it
self. Secondly, in that he takes it pro concesso, as a thing granted, that
the Cross is an idol, it is but a begging of the question, as before I have
showed; because it is not yet proved, that the sign of the cross is an idol
among us: neither does it follow, that if with the Papists it were so; therefore
with us it is so, no more then because their bread in the sacrament is an idol,
therefore ours is also an idol. That only numero which is worshipped is an idol;
for ye author confesses, where there is no worship there ca^ be no idol.

That we may proceed farther. For as much as the sign of the Cross, like the
bread in the Lords Supper, in the beginning was free from superstition, and the
abuse of it which grew after, is removed by us, why may not the one continue
among us as well as the other without any such slanderous imputation of
idolatry? His answer is; because one is an humane ordinance, and the other
divine, as the brazen serpent which being an humane ardinance when it was
abused, was defaced by Ezechias. To which we reply, that neither the sign of
the Cross is an humane ordinance, as before we have showed, neither might an
humane ordinance be used though not an idol, by his own doctrine, neither an
idol, though at the first it were a divine ordinance, neither was that brazen
serpent an humane ordinance, as by the text it appears: For the Lord said to
Moses, make thee a serpent, and set it up for a sign, that as many as are
bitten may look upon it, and live; So Moses made a serpent Numb: 21. 8.
of Brass, etc. And, whereas he alleges out of Tertullian: horum si legem
postules scripturarum, nullam inuenies, that we have no warrant out of the
Scripture; it is to be understood that according to Tertullian we have no
express commandment out of holy writ to use the sign of the Cross
particularly in baptism, and therefore we hold it as a thing indifferent,
whether it be used or omitted, yet we have an example of signing with the sign
of the cross out of Ezechiel as I have alleged, to show that man is not the
first deviser of it, but that man follows gods example: so the^ albeit we
have not legem aut praecaptum, a law or commandment to impose upon us the use
of the cross, yet we have an example to show that God was the first author of
it. And again, authoritas in negatiuis non valet, it follows not that
because the Scriptures make no mention of Melchisedech his father, therefore
he had no father: or because the Scriptures commend Joseph for a just man, and
make no mention of his sins, that therefore he had no sins as Rodolphus
Agricola in his Topics observes out of S. Augustine. All things necessary to
salvation, are expressly set down in the holy Scriptures, but this is a matter
indifferent, and no way concerning the state of our salvation.

Now he comes with his coleworts twice sodden, and repeateth that which he
has so often said before: that the cross is become an idol, and therefore
not fit to be used in the service of Iehoua, which because it is but a
tautalogy, or repetition of the same thing, I refer this objection to the
answer made before. And farther, to press us with more vnthruthes, he
alleges that it is retained among us with opinion very superstitious and
erroneous, because in our 30. Canon ecclesiastical, we read these words: That
the child is dedicated by it, to the service of him that dyed upon the cross,
which (he says) is to equal the ordinance of man, with the ordinance of God,
to ascribe that unto the Cross which is due unto Baptism, such an absurdity,
as no water can cleanse it. To which I answer: that which cannot be washed
away by water, may be avoided by distinction.There are two sorts of
dedication to the service of him that died upon the Cross, one active, the
other significatiue, action is due to Baptism, but signification after the act
is ended, is ascribed to the sign of the Cross, because the ministration of
Baptism dedicateth them, and the signing of the Cross signifies, that they
are already dedicated unto that service, but there is the difference between
the work it self, and the declaration or testifying of the work after it is
finished, when Baptism being ended, we make a solemn declaration of it unto
the people. Farther, this syllogiser says: we use not the sign of the Cross
as Augustine, Cyprian, and Chrysostom did, which used it to consecrate the
elements, and not to cross the children, but referred that to the Bishops
confirmation, as if we were necessarily tied to follow their example, or as,
if because they did that, we might not do this, or as if because they did
that, therefore they did not this: or as if the sign of the Cross were not as
effectual to living children which are members of the body of Christ, as to
dead elements to whom the merits of the Cross and sufferings of Christ do no
way appertain: or as if it were not as lawful for the minister to use the
cross in baptism, as it was for the Bishop to use it in confirmation, or the
sign were less effectual in the one then in the other. But, let us examine
his proofs by which he confirms his assertion, that the Fathers used not the
cross in baptism. First he says by way of anticipation, that this place of
Tertullian: The flesh is washed, that the soul may be purged: the De
resurrestione caruis.
flesh is anointed, that the soul may be consecrated: the flesh is signed,
that the soul may be guarded, may as well be referred to confirmation as to
Baptism.And, I retort it again upon him, that it may be as indifferently
understood, of baptism as of confirmation. But says he: the fathers
describing the form of baptism did make no mention of it in baptism. To
which I answer, Martyr in defens: ad Antoninu^ Tertul: de Baptismo, et corona
mil^tis.
that the Cross is no part of the form or essence of baptism, but only the
word and the element, neither is it used until the sacrament be finished, and
therefore no marvel though describing the form of baptism they made no
mention of the Cross, therefore this negative argument cannot overthrow the
use of the Cross. And yet, that the Fathers did use to sign them with the
Cross which were baptized, it is evident by their own words: for Tertullian
says in these general De corona cap: 3.
terms: ad omnem progressum atque promotum, ad omnem aditum atque exitum, ad
vest^tum, ad calciatu^, ad lauacra, ad meusas, ad lumina, ad cubilia, ad
sedilia, quaecunque nos conuersatio exercet, frontem crucis signaculo terimus,
that in his time, at their goings out and commings in, when they put on their
clothes, their shoes. when they wash or eat, or light the candle, at their
lying down, or sitting up, whatsoever they do, they sign their forheads with
the sign of the Cross. And Cyrillus Hierosolymit says: Non pudeat igitur nos
crucifixum confiteri, Cyrillus
sed in front confidenter signaculum crucis digitis imprimatur, and in alijs
omnibus crux fiat. That we may not be ashamed to confess Christ crucified, we
sign our forheads confidently, and in all other actions we make the Cross.
And S. Iero^ says: Heiron: Epist: 22.
Ad omnem actum and progressuus manus crucem pingit, whatsoever we do we make
a Cross. The conclusion follows out of their assertions, that if in their
days, in all actions the cross was used and the forheads signed, then a
Cross was made upon their forheads which were Baptized.

As for our signing with the Cross, we do it after Baptism is finished, to
show that we add nothing to Gods institution, and that we think so honorably
of that ordinance, that it needs no addition, to clear our selves of that
iniust imputation which is laid upon us, of adding unto it. And therefore,
whereas he alleges that the praying and crossing are one continual action
of the administration of the Sacrament, and that by our selves the Cross is
called signum crucis in Baptismo, the sign of the Cross in Baptism. I
answer: Baptism is taken two manner of ways, for the sacrament it self,
simply and barely considered in its own nature and essence, consisting only of
the element and word, and as in the holy Scriptures it is set down and commended
unto us, and so Signum crucis est extra the sign of the Cross is no part of
baptism, nor any addition unto it: or else it is taken, Pro sacrame^^^ v^a cum
singulis baptismu^ conco^itantibus, for the action, together with all
sole^nities which man has appointed for the celebritie of the action, and so,
not only the Cross, but also the prayers which are used, and preaching, which
are not commanded by the Scripture, are extra baptismum, no part of baptism,
and yet may be called preces lectae in baptismo, prayers which are read in
baptism, and so concio habi^a in baptismo, a Sermon made at Baptism, so crux
in baptismo the Cross in Baptism, though neither of them are held for any
part of Baptism, and therefore by them no violence is offered to the divine
ordinance.

We conclude, This signing with the sign of the Cross, has been commended
to us from antiquity of the primitive Church, to show that it is not a
novelty of 60. years old, as this syllogiser has objected, neither do we
allege antiquity as though we did ground upon bare antiquity without reason,
but we alledg antiquity against the nouelty of the^ which slander us, showing
that antiquity in points of Religion is to be preferred before nouelty. And,
to his reply which asks why we do not also give unto them which are
Baptized, milk and honey? why we do not use the sign of the Cross with
opinion of virtue and efficacy as the ancient Fathers did? and ascribe that
unto it which antiquity did? I answer: the argument does not follow that,
because we do colliger^ vuas, gather grapes: therefore we may not cauerespinas,
take heed of being pricked with thorns, 1. These. 5. 21.
but we must first by the Apostles rule omnia probare prove all things, and
the^ quod benum ^ct tenere retain that which is good. And if there be any which
think baptism vnauailable without the cross, insomuch as that they rebaptize
when the cross is omitted, as this syllogism maker alleges, the fault is in
their superstition, and not in our religion, which teach the contrary by our
canons, and punish such offenders by our laws.

FINIS.

