AN HVMBLE APPEAL TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.

Wherein is proved, that our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, was Author of the
Catholic Roman Faith, which Protestants call PAPISTRIE.

Written by JOHN HVNT, a Roman Catholic, in defense of his Religion against
the Calumniations and persecutions of Protestant MINISTERS.

JOHN 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for you think by them to have life
everlasting, and the same are they, which give testimony of me. THE PREFACE.
Most dread Sovereign:
SO heavy, for many years, has been the hand of Protestant Ministers, upon us
Catholics, your ancient and faithful subjects, that heaven is full with our
cries, the world with our afflictions; the earth is drunk with our blood, the
air a receptacle for our quarters; prisons are filled with our bodies, and
Pursuiuants, infamous men, at their pleasures enriched with the spoil of our
goods; in such sort, as with the Apostles living in like persecution, we may
truly say: We 1. Cor. 4. 9.
are made a spectacle to the world, and to Angels, and to men: that the
extremity of our afflictions enforces us to Appeal unto your Majesty,
prostrate at your feet, in most humble manner, to beseech your Highness to
hear the truth of our cause, and take notice of the sincerity of our
affections to God, your Person and State.

God Almighty out of his infinite goodness having created us, according to his
own Image, and after our fall Genesis 1. 27.
redeemed us from eternal pains; in token of homage, exacteth of us the
practicing and professing of that Faith and Religion, which was planted upon
earth by his only Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and that with such
rigor; as whosoever at his death shall be found faulty herein, shall not only
lose the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, and the happy vision of his
divine Majesty, but also condemned into fire everlasting, which was prepared
for Matthew. 25. 41.
the Devil and his angels, there to endure the wrath and vengeance of God for
ever and ever.

And lest any one should doubt, which was this Faith or Religion; he swore he
would multiply it in men, as the Genesis 22. Isay 88. Isay 54. Isay 62.
Stars of heaven; that remaining in all ages and times visibly seen and
professed; none could or should have occasion of doubting, which was this Faith
or Religion, unto the which he was so straightly bound; unless he would wilfully
be obstinate and blind: And yet notwithstanding your Protestant Ministers,
contrary to the oath of God, and without respect of the penalty of eternal
damnation imposed upon misbeleeuers, would persuade us that their Religion,
which about threescore years ago was invented in England by Queen ELIZABETH
(only to keep your Majesty's Mother, and her issue from their lawful right to
the Crown of England) is the Religion which was planted by our Savior; and
afflict upon your ancient subjects, (who have maintained your Progenitors in
the state of Kings and absolute Monarkes, many hundred years) confiscation of
goods and lands, imprisonment, loss of liberty and life, and the benefit of
all Civil and Humane laws and conversation; for that we will not believe them,
to the loss of our own souls, and in continuance of time, the destruction of
your Monarchy; according to the Prophecies, saying: I will bless them that
bless thee, and curse them Genesis 12. 3.
that curse thee: In thee shall all the Kindreds of the earth be blessed. The
Nation and the Kingdom that Isay 60. 12.
shall not serve thee shall perish. Which we have seen so manifestly fulfilled
in all ages and times amongst Christians, that hitherto never any Nation,
People, or Country of Christian men, did separate it self by Schism from the
Catholic Church, the spiritual seed of Abraham, dilated over the world; but it
was within few years conquered by barbarus people.

Whereupon, we your ancient subjects, fearful lest we should be forsaken of
God, and fall into these evils, and timorous in any thing to offend your
Majesty, our dearest Sovereign; prostrate at your feet, do humbly offer
unto your Highness; the grounds and foundations of our Faith and Religion; by
which we prove that it is the same Faith and Religion, which was planted upon
earth by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in which all the Kindreds of the
earth were to be blessed: hoping thereby to remove away from your Majesty's
mind, these sinister false informations, which such as neither wish well,
either to your Person or State, more then may serve to the accomplishing of
their designs, daily publish in your presence, viz. That we are wilful
disloyal Subjects, who under pretext of Religion, pretend Rebellion. Ignorant
blind people, that have nothing to say for the Religion we profess. Enemies
to your Majesty and State, etc. That your Majesty being better informed; we
also may taste of the sweetness of your Government, who are at al times, and
in all things, as ready to obey and serve you, our dread Sovereign, as our
Ancestors have served and obeyed your Progeniters, Kings, and absolute
Monarkes of this Island; or as the Catholic subjects of the Emperor, or of the
King of Spain, or France, or Polonie, do serve their Sovereigns: And in
testimony hereof, we offer to bind our selves, always to remain loyal and
faithful Subjects unto your Majesty, your Heirs, and lawful Successors, by
amoath; whereby we may not, in effect and deed, swear that God Almighty is
forsworn, in violating his oath and promises, which he made to the Patriarks
and Prophets, every where spoken of in the Scriptures, to be fulfilled in that
Faith, Seed and Religion, which was to be planted upon earth by his only Son,
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Your Majesty well knows, that it is not yet much about threescore years,
since these your Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland were Catholic,
and the most of us, together with our Ancestors, never were of any other
Religion, See this proved in the second Chapter*
then this we now profess, since our Conversion to Christianity from
Paganism: And if we should now forsake it, for fear of the loss of temporal
goods, imprisonment and hanging; and not out of information in belief, we
should be but Atheists, and be worthy to be hanged up indeed, for dissembling
with men, and violating all obligation to God.

Moreover, the means which God Almighty appointed his Officers to use in the
conversion of Kingdoms and people, was, Humility, Patience, Charity, etc.
saying: Behold Matthew. 10. 16.
I send you, as sheep in the midst of Wolves: he did not say, I send you as
Wolves amongst sheep, to kill, imprison, spoil, and devour those unto whom
they were sent. Again he said: They (to whom I send you) will deliver Matthew.
10. 17.
you up in Councels, and in their Synagogues they will scourge you. And to
Presidents, and to Kings shall you be led for my sake: He does not say, you
whom I send shall deliver the people, whom you ought to convert, into Councels,
and put them in prisons, and lead them to Presidents, and Tribunal seats, and
make their Religion Felony and Treason. Again he says: When ye enter into
Matthew. 10. 12.
the house, salute it, saying, Peace be to this house: He does not say, you
shall send Pursuiuants to ransacke and spoil the house. Again he says: The
good Pastor gives John 10.
his life for his sheep. The thief comes not but to steal, and kill, and
destroy: He does not say, the thief gives his life for his sheep; and the
good Pastor comes not but to steal, kill and destroy.

Wherefore, so much as is lawful for poor subjects, we humbly beseech your
Majesty, that converting of us by killing, imprisonments, confiscation of
goods, ransacking and spoiling by Promoters and Pursuiuants, etc. laid aside,
(at which the Christian world is scandalized) it would please your Majesty to
give order, that Disputations, Conferences, and sweet means may be used for
the discussion of truth, according to the doctrine of our Savior and his
Apostles, which is Peaceable, modest suasible, consenting to the good, full of
mercy: and by those means, if ^^m^s 3. 17.
we should be in error, your Majesty might easily gain us. And if your
Majesty be amiss, as errare facile est, we may gain your Majesty, and bring
all things to his happy issue, that God Almighty may be glorified by the
salvation of our souls; and your Highness may, to our great comfort, so
reign over us upon earth, that you may also reign amongst us in heaven, which
with all my heart I desire, and to that end proceed to set down the grounds
and foundations of our Catholic Faith and Church, by way of an Appeal unto
your Highness, this being the best way, as your Majesty most graciously has
signified unto all your Subject in your Speech in the Star Chamber, upon the
twentieth of June, in the year of our Lord, 1616. in these words: Why should
you spare to complain unto me, that being the highway, and not go the other
by-way, and back-way, in contempt of our authority. According to which speech,
worthy of a Royal King, with Saint PAVL in the like case of Religion, I
appeal to Acts 25. 11.
CAESAR, your Majesty, my dread and Supreamest Sovereign, as follows.

THAT OUR SAVIOVR PLANTED the Catholic Roman Faith.
CHAP. I.
Wherein is proved by the Scriptures, that the Catholic Roman Faith, is the
Faith which was planted by our Savior: and how it has continued, and shall
continue amongst the Romans, until the day of Judgment.

FIRST, that the Romans received the Catholic Faith which our Savior planted:
Saint Paul witnesses, saying, To all you that be at Rome beloved Rom: 1.
of God, called Saints, grace to you, and peace from God the Father, and our
Lord Jesus Christ. First truly I give thanks to my God, through Jesus Christ
for all you: Because your faith is published throughout the whole world, etc. I
desire to see you, and to be comforted in you, by the faith, which is mutually
yours, and mine. Which desire afterward he obtained, And tarried (in Rome) full
two years Act. 28. 30.
in his hired lodging, and he received all that came unto him, preaching the
Kingdom of God, and teaching the things that concern our Lord Jesus Christ,
with all confidence, without prohibition. Whereby it is manifest that the
Romans received the Catholic Faith, planted by our Savior, and that their
faith was published throughout the whole Romans 1.
world, and was Catholic and Universal.

Secondly, that the Romans were to continue in this their Catholic Faith, thus
planted amongst them, until the worlds end, is manifest by the Scripture,
saying: I Isa. 66.
will send of them that shall be saved to the Gentiles, into the Sea, into
Africa and Lydia, into Italy and Greece, etc.

And they shall show my glory to the Gentiles, etc. And I will take of them to
be Priests and Levites, says our Lord. Because as a new heaven, and a new
earth, which I make to stand before me; says our Lord: so shall your seed
stand, and your name. And there shall be month after month, and Sabbath after
Sabbath. Again, the Scriptures speaking of the Romans, who at the coming of
our Savior were the strength, glory, and pride of the Gentiles; say, The
strength of the Gentiles shall come to thee. Again, And Isay 60 5.
thy gates shall be open continually, day and night they shall not be shut,
that the strength of the Gentiles may be brought to thee. Again, You shall
eat the strength of the Gentiles, and in their glory you shall be proud, etc.
For as the Earth Isay 61. 6.
brings forth her Spring, and as the Garden shoots forth her seed: so shall
our Lord God make Justice to spring forth, and praise before all the Gentiles.
Again, Thus says our Isay 66. 12.
Lord, Behold I will decline upon her, as it were a flood of peace, and as a
torrent ouerflowing the glory of the Gentiles, (the Roman Empire, which at the
birth of our Savior was the glory of the Gentiles) that it might be verified
which was spoken by the other Prophets, saying, I will make Genesis 12. 2.
thee into a great Nation, and I will bless thee, and magnify thy name, and
thou shall be blessed. Again, I will put him, Psalm. 88. 28.
the first begotten, high above the Kings of the earth: And I will keep my
mercy unto him for ever, and my Testament faithful unto him, I will put his
seed for ever and ever, and his throne as the days of heaven. Again, Ask of
me, and Psalm. 2. 8.
I will give thee the Gentiles for thine inheritance, not the refuse of the
Gentiles, but the Roman Empire, the strength, glory and pride of the Gentiles,
and not only for a short time. But as a new Heaven, and a new Earth; which I
make Isay 66.
to stand before me; so shall your seed stand, and your name, according to the
words of the Prophet Isay before rehearsed.

Whereby it is sufficiently manifest, that the Romant received the same Faith,
they now profess, from the Apostles, and they from our Savior: and that the
Catholic Roman Faith, is the Faith which was planted upon earth by our
Savior, and has continued, and shall continue Catholic, or universally
published throughout the world, until the day of Judgment.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is proved that the Catholic Roman faith was planted in this Island of
great Britain, by the Apostles, or Disciples of our Lord, and has continued
here ever since, without alteration or change, except in the keeping of
Easter, and some ceremonies in Baptism, and that no other doctrine but it, can
be taught for Christian doctrine, without incurring the penalty of Anathema,
and separation from God for ever.

THE Apostles and Disciples of our Savior Matthew. 28. 19.
going by his appointment to teach all Nations, to observe, and do all things
whatsoever he had commanded them; came within so short a time after the death
of our Lord into this our Island of great Brittan, as that the Britains,
ancient inhabitants of this Island; received their Faith and Religion from Saint
Simon* Zelotes, Saint Paul, Saint Joseph of Aramathia, a Disciple of our Lords,
or from all, or some of them, as besides these ancient Writers, Theodoret de
cur Graec. affect. lib. 9. Dorotheus Bishop of Tire, in suo Synopsi
Apostolorum; Aristobulus, in his Epistle which he writ to the Romans: Guildas,
cap. 7. Nicephorus, lib. 2. cap. 40. do affirm also these Protestant Authors,
Camden in his Britania, page 40. and 52. and 157. Bale, Cent. 1. cap. 26.
Doctor Caius de Antiq. Cantab. Harrison in his Description of Britain,
annexed to Hollinshead his great Chronicle of the last edition, vol. 1. page
23. Clapham in his Sovereign remedy against Schism, page 24. Fulke in his
book against Heskins, Saunders, etc. page 561. and in his Confutation of
Purgatory, page 332. Godwin in his Catalogue of Bishops, page 1. Barlow in
defense of the Articles of the Protestant Religion, page 21. Mayson in his
book of the Consecration of Bishops, etc. That it might be verified which was
spoken by the Prophet Isay, saying, I will send of them, that shall be saved
to Isay 66. 19.
the Gentiles, to the Islands far off, to them that have not heard of me.
Again, The Islands expect me, and the Isay 6. 9.
ships of the sea in the beginning, that I may bring thy sons from a far, etc.

That the Brittans, the ancient Inhabitants of this Island, did persevere in
this said Christian Faith and Religion, which they received from the Apostles,
or Disciples, not only these ancient Writers do testify every one for his
time, Tertullian, lib. contra Iudaeos. Origin in Ezechiel, hom. 4. Athanasius
in his Epistle to the Emperor Iouinian. Theodoret hist. Eccles. lib. 1. c. 10.
But also Protestants themselves give ample testimonies, that the Britains, who
inhabited that part of the Island, which is now called England, being destroyed,
and their name extinct by the Pagan Saxons: yet the remnant of the Brittans,
which remained in Wales, retained the Faith and Religion which they received
from the Apostles or Disciples, even unto the coming of Saint Augustine into
this Island, for to convert the English Pagan Saxons, which was about the year
of our Lord, 599. as Bale in his Pageant of Popes, where he says, The Brittans
being converted by Joseph of Aramathia, held that faith at Augustines coming.
And Fulke in his Answer to a Counterfeit Catholic, page 40. where he says,
The Brittans before Augustines coming, continued in the Faith of Christ, even
from the Apostles times. FOX his Act. page 463. printed 1576. says, The
Britains after the receiving of the Faith, never forsook it, for any manner
of false preaching of others. And Midleton in his Papisto mastix, page 202.
proves by the testimony of the ancient Fathers, in succeeding ages, that the
Britains did not forsake the Faith, and Religion which they received from S.
Paul, and Saint Simon Zelotes, and Saint Joseph of Aramathia, but continued in
it, with the Catholic Christians in other parts of the world.

That this Faith and Religion, which the ancient Britains received from the
Apostles or Disciples, and perseuered in until the coming of Saint Augustine
into this Island, did not differ from that Faith and Religion which Saint
Augustine professed, and planted in this Island amongst the English, except the
keeping of Easter upon a wrong Sunday, out of ignorance in Astronomy, and the
accomplishment of some mysteries used in Baptism: besides the testimony of
Saint Beda hist. lib. 2. cap. 2. these Protestant Authors do affirm, Francis
Mayson in his book of the Consecration of the Bishops of the Church of England,
page 58. where he says, that Augustine said to the Britain Bishops: If you
will in these three things obey me, that is, in celebrating of Easter in due
time, in accomplishing the mysteries of Baptism (by which we are borne to God)
according to the manner of the holy Roman and Apostolical Church: and last of
all, in preaching with us to this English Nation the word of our Lord: all your
other ceremonies, fashions and customs, though they be contrary to ours, we
will willingly suffer, and be content to bear with. And the like affirms
Hollinshead, Vol. 1. page 103. Godwin in his Catalogue of Bishops, page 6. And
the Protestant Author of the History of Great-Brittaine, printed 1606. lib. 3.
page 133.

Whereby it is manifest, that (the keeping of Easter upon a wrong Sunday, and
the accomplishment of the mysteries of Baptism excepted) Saint Augustine and
the ancient Britains held, professed, and taught, one and the same Faith and
Religion, and planted it amongst the English of this Island, who then were
Pagans.

That the Faith and Religion which Saint Augustine professed, and planted
amongst the Pagan English of this Island, was the same, which at this day the
Roman Catholics of this Island do profess, not only all Catholic Authors
do affirm, but also Protestant Writers do confess, as John Bale, Cent. 1.
cap. 73. where he says, That King Ethelbert, an English Pagan King, First of
all English men, received of Gregory the first, Bishop of Rome, by Augustine,
the opinions of the Roman Religion. And Cent. 13. cap. 1. he says, That
AUGUSTINE brought in (amongst the English, who before were Pagans) Monks,
Altars Vestments, Images, Masses, Chalices, Cross, Candlestickes, Banners,
holy (as they call them) Vessels, holy water, and books of Roman custom.
Their chiefest studies were about the oblation of Masses. Doctor Humfrey in his
Iesuitisme, part. 2. page 5. and 627. affirms, That Saint Gregory and Saint
Augustine professed and taught Mass, Purgatory, Oblation of the wholesome
Host, prayer for the dead, Relikes, Transubstantiation, hallowing of Churches,
Indulgences, Monkish life, Papacy, and the rest of the caos of Popish
superstition, as he calls it. And these (says he) did AUGUSTINE, a great
Monk taught by GREGORY, a Monk) bring to the English, who before were Pagan.
Ascham in his Apology, pro Caena Domini, contra Missam, page 33. affirms,
That Augustine was The establisher of all Popish doctrine. HARRISON in his last
edition of his Description of Brittanie, Vol. 1. page 27. says, That Augustine
brought in Popery amongst the English Saxons, who then were Pagan. And the
like affirms Osiander in his Epitom. hist. Eccl. Cent. 6. page 289. The
Century Writers in the 6. Cent. chap. 10. col. 748. and other Protestants set
down more at large in the Protestants Apology for the Roman Church.

Now seeing that the Britains (the keeping of Easter upon a wrong Sunday, and
the accomplishment of the mysteries used in Baptism excepted) were all of one
Faith and Religion with Saint Augustine, and Saint Augustine was in Faith and
Religion a Roman Catholic, or Papist: we rightly infer, that our Savior was
Author of that Faith and Religion, which Protestants do call Papistrie: since
that the Brittans received it, as is before said, from the Apostles or
Disciples, and they from our Lord, and perseuered in it with Saint Gregory and
Saint Augustine, and the rest of the Christian world, without any alteration or
change, saving some mysteries used in Baptism, and the keeping of Easter upon
a wrong Sunday. In all things else they were so agreeable to the Faith and
Religion, which Saint Augustine held and taught; that these two things
reformed, he desired their help and assistance in the conversion of the Pagan
English Nation, by preaching unto them the Word of God, which he neither
could, nor would have done, had they not both (these two things excepted)
agreed in one, in all points of Faith and Religion: neither did S. Austen labor
to teach, or reform the Britains in any thing else: and seeing in these two
things (which to Protestants seem of little moment) Saint Augustine made so
great difficulty, that he would not receive them into the Communion of the
Catholic Roman Church, until they condescended to reform them: far greater
difficulty would he have made in receiving them, if they had held any point of
Protestantisme, and had denied the Mass, prayer for the dead, worship of
Images, and esteemed him an Antichristian man, or Idolater, etc. Neither would
he (though they should have offered themselves) have admitted them to preach,
and contradict, and defame him amongst the English Pagans, or Gentiles, unto
whom he was sent as an Apostle: much less would he have required their aid
and assistance in preaching unto them, if they had accused him, as Protestants
do now, of Idolatry, Antichristian doctrine, and to have been son of the
Whore of Babylon, etc.

That the Catholic Roman Faith, which Saint Augustine planted amongst the
English Saxons, is at this day, and in all ages and times, since the said
planting has been confessed, by some known English inhabitants in this Island,
all our Writers, Chronicles, Histories and Monuments, Laws in ancient time
made in favor of it, Statutes of late years made to suppress it, the death
of many for it, and the prisons full of such as at this instant do profess
it, give ample testimony: and if any require further proof, I refer him to a
book entitled The prudentiall Balance of Religion, which treats hereof at
large.

Whereupon I conclude, that our Savior was Author of the Catholic Roman
Faith, and that (the keeping of Easter upon a wrong Sunday, and some mysteries
used in Baptism excepted) it has in all ages and times, since the plantation
thereof by the Apostles or Disciples, continued in this Island; and that no man
can or may preach, or teach any doctrine for Christian doctrine, but the
Catholic Roman Faith, under pain of Anathema, etc. according to the words of
Saint Paul, saying: Although we, or an Angel from Galath. 1. 8.
heaven Euangelize to you, besides that we have Euangelized to you, be he
Anathema: as we have said before, so now we say again; If any Euangelize to
you, besides that which you have received, be he Anathema, that is, separated
from God, according to the words of our Savior saying, Depart from me ye
accursed into everlasting Matthew. 24: 41.
fire, which was prepared for the Devil and his angels.

So I appeal to your Majesty well pleased, to consider the wrong and
injustice, your Protestant Ministers do unto us Catholics, your ancient
subjects, in persecuting us, for professing that Faith and Religion, which was
planted upon earth by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and even from the
Apostles times until this day, has continued in this Island: and humbly
beseech your Highness, that you would not think us disloyal or unfaithful to
your Person or State, for that we will not become Anathemaes from God.

For the difference which was between the ancient Brittans and Saint
AUGUSTINE, about the time of the keeping of Easter, it is manifest by Saint
Beda, lib. 3. cap. 4. that the Brittans fell into this error, for want of skill
in Astronomy, For they knew (says Saint BEDA) as Christen men do, that the
resurrection of our Lord ought always to be celebrated on Sunday. But as
Wilfred in S. Beda, l. 3. ca. 25.
ignorant men (in Astrology) they had not learned when that Sunday should
come. That the Brittans fell into this error, after Constantine his time, is
manifest by Eusebius, who, lib. 3. de vita Constantini, cap. 8. affirms, that
the same keeping of Easter was observed in the City of Rome, in Italy,
Afric, Egypt, Spain, France, Britanie, Lybia, and all Greece, in the
Diocese of Asia, and Pontus, and finally in Cicilia, with one uniform consent.

CHAP. III.
Wherein is briefly proved by the general consent of all known Christian
people, who lived in all ages and times, between the death of the Apostles,
and rising of Luther, that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was Author of the
Catholic Roman Faith, which Protestants call Papistrie, known Heretics on
both parties only excepted.

FIRST. Protestants themselves confess, That the true Church (so they call
their Church) decayed presently after the Apostles times. So Fulke in his
answer to a Counterfeit Catholic, page 35. Sebastianus Franciscus, in his
Epistle de abrogandis statutis ecclesiasticis, affirms, That for these
fourteen hundred years, the Church (of Protestants) has been no where
external and visible. Peter Martyr de Votis, page 477. says, That errors (so
they call our Catholic Faith) did begin immediately after the Apostles times.
And page 476. he says, That presently after their age, men began to decline
from the word of God: so they esteem their Protestantisme. The Protestant
Author of the book entitled Antichristus sieve Pronostica finis mundi, page
13. affirms; That from the Apostles times, till Luther, the Gospel (of
Protestants) had never open passage. Melancthon in 1. Cor. cap. 3. affirms,
Thet presently from the beginning of the Church, the ancient Fathers obscured
the doctrine, concerning the justification of Faith, increased Ceremonies, and
devised peculiar Worships. Whereupon Peter Martyr de Votis, page 476. says: As
long as we shall insist upon Councels and Fathers, we shall be always in the
same errors. And Whitaker in his Controu. 2. quest. 5. page 299. de Ecclesia,
says: BELLARMINE does bring forth certain testimonies out of Calvin, and the
Centurie Writers, who have noted certain errors of the ancient Fathers, which
they hold common with Papists, that is to say, of Free Will, of Merit, of the
Limb, of Invocation of Saints, of the Unmarried life of Bishops, of
Justification, etc. I answer that it is true, which Calvin and the Centuries
have written, that in many things the ancient Church has erred, as of the
Limb, of Free Will, of the Merit of Works, and in other things which are
above rehearsed. WHITGIFT in his Defense to the Answer to the Admonition, page
473. says: How greatly were almost all the Bishops, and learned Writers of the
Greek Church, and Latin also, for the most part spotted with doctrine of
Free Will, of Merits, of Invocation of Saints, and such like? And page 473. he
says; Surely you are not able to reckon in any age, since the Apostles times,
any company of Bishops, that taught and held so sound doctrine in all points,
as the Bishops of England do at this day. Whereupon, Luther in his book De
seruo arbitrio, tom. 2. Wittenb. 1551. affirms the Fathers to have been
blind and most ignorant in the Scriptures, to have erred all the time of their
lives (from his doctrine) and that unless they were amended before their
deaths, they were neither Saints, nor pertaining to the Church (of
Protestants). And in his Colloquijs mensalibus, he says: In the Writings of
Hierome, there is not a word of true faith in Christ, and sound religion.
Tertullian is very superstitious. I hold Origin long since accursed. Of
Chrysostom I make no account. Basil is of no worth, he is wholly a Monk.
Cyprian is a weak Divine. The Apology of Philip Melancthon does far excel
all the Doctors of the Church, and exceed even Augustine himself. POMERAN, a
Protestant upon Ionam, says: Our Fathers, whether holy, or not holy* I esteem
nothing, they have been blinded with the Spirit of Montanus, by humane
traditions, and doctrine of devils, etc. They do not teach purely of
Justification. Beza in his Preface upon the New Testament, Dedicated to the
Prince of Condy, printed 1587. affirms; That even in the best times, the
ambition, ignorance, and lewdness of Bishops was such, that the very blind
may easily perceive, how Satan was President in their assemblies or Councels,
because they taught opposite doctrine to the doctrine of the Protestants of
this age. Whereupon Perkins in his Exposition of the Creed, page 400. in
behalf of himself and all Protestants, says, We say that before the days
of Luther, for the space of many hundred years, an universal Apostasy (from
Protestantisme, as he means) ouer-spread the whole face of the earth, and
that our Church (of Protestants) was not visible to the world. And many more
Protestants confess that the Faith or doctrine, which Protestants now teach
and profess, has been no where visibly known, published, or preached, since
the Apostles times until Luther, as is set down more at large in the
Protestants Apology for the Roman Church.

And it is of it self so manifest, that no Protestant has hitherto bin able
to assign in the time between the death of the Apostles, and rising of
Luther, one only Protestant Minister, Doctor, Writer or Teacher, that held,
professed, or taught the doctrine which Protestants do now hold and teach.

Whereby it is manifest, that in all that time, which is about the space of one
thousand four hundred years, there were no known Protestants, but all known
Christians, who lived within the compass of these years, were either Roman
Catholics, or reputed Heretics by both parties. Whereupon we rightly infer,
that all known Christian men, who lived in all ages since the time of the
Apostles, until the rising of Luther (known Heretics, and so reputed by both
party only excepted) do testify that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was
Author of the Catholic Roman Faith; every Christian believing that our Lord
Jesus Christ was the Author of this Religion, and Planter thereof upon earth.

Now that there were known Roman Catholics, living, and being, during these
fourteen hundred years; Protestants themselves confess. Fulke in his
Treatise against Stapleton, page 25. affirms: Some Protestants have written,
that the Pope has blinded the world these many hundred years; some say a
thousand, some one thousand two hundred, some nine hundred. And the same
Protestant in his retentiue Motives, page 248. speaking of Leo and Gregory,
Bishops of Rome, the first of them living about the year of our Lord, 440. and
the second of them about 590. says: The mystery of iniquity (so he calls
the Pope and our Catholic Faith) wrought in the Sea of Rome, near five or six
hundred years before them. MIDLETON in his Papistomastix, page 193. affirms,
saying: We are sure that the mystery of iniquity (so he pleases to call the
Pope, and our Catholic Faith) did work in Paul's time, and fell not a sleep
as soon as Paul was dead, etc. and therefore no marvel though perusing
Councels, Fathers and Stories, from the Apostles forward, we find the print
of the Popes feet. SEBASTIAN FRANCVS, in his Epistle De abrogandis Statutis
ecclesiasticis, affirms: That for certain through the work of Antichrist
(so he calls the Pope, and our Catholic Faith) the external Church (of
Protestants) together with the Faith and Sacraments vanished away presently
after the Apostles departure. So potent were the Pope and Roman Catholics,
even in the Apostles times, that presently after the Apostles departure, they
were able to make the external Church of Protestants, together with the Faith
and Sacraments of Protestants vanished away, as this Protestant affirms.
Brokard in his Treatise upon the Revelations, page 110. affirms, That the
Church (of Protestants) was trodden down, and oppressed by the Papacy, even
from Syluesters time unto these times. Which he there, and page 123. accounts
to have been for the space of 1260. years. Napper in his Treatise upon the
Revelations, page 68. says: Between the year of Christ, 300. and 316. the
Antichristian and Papisticall reign began reigning universally, and without
any debatable contradiction, 1260. years; and page 145. he says, even 1260.
years the Pope and his Clergy has possessed the outward visible Church of
Christians. Yet the Pope and his Clergy could not come to reign universally,
and without any debatable contradiction upon a sudden, as we see by experience
in Protestant Ministers, who have been now about an hundred years, and yet
do not reign, or possess their Religion in any one Country: without some
opposition, whereby it is manifest, that the Pope and his Clergy were many
hundred years, before they could obtain to reign universally without any
debatable contradiction. Downham in his Treatise of Antichrist, lib. 2. cap. 2.
page 25. affirms; That the general defection of the visible Church, foretold
in the second of the Thessalonians (which he esteems to have been wrought
by the Pope and Roman Catholics) began to work in the Apostles times. Caelus
secundus Curio, in his book De amplitudine Regni Dei, lib. 1. page 43. says;
Are we ignorant in how great darkness, blindness, and ignorance (so he
calls our Catholic Faith) the world has continued almost from the Apostles
age, to these very times, in which above all expectation our Lord began to
manifest himself. And Perkins upon the Creed, page 307. affirms; That during
the space of nine hundred years, the Popish heresy (so he pleases to call
the Catholic Roman Faith) has spread it self over the whole earth: whereby
appears that it was five or six hundred years before; since it could not
spread it self of a sudden over the whole earth. And by these confessions of
Protestants themselves, and by many more, set down in the Protestants
Apology, it is manifest that the Catholic Roman Faith did begin even in the
Apostles times, and has reigned universally over the visible Church of
Christians 1260. years, if we will believe the confession of our Adversaries
themselves.

So dread Sovereign, if the testimonies of all known Christian men, who lived
in all ages and times, from the Apostles times, until the rising of Luther,
may find grace and credit with your Majesty, they all (known Heretics, and
so reputed by both parties only excepted) do witness, that our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, was the Author of the Catholic Roman Faith; for that
they all believed and esteemed our Lord to be Author of that Religion, they
themselves professed.

And this were sufficient to show unto your most excellent Majesty, that the
Son of God was Author of the Catholic Roman Faith: but because Protestant
Ministers do so often brag, that the Scriptures, or written Word of God does
make for them: I will further examine the Scriptures, to see what they say of
the Religion which was to be planted by our Savior, and will begin with the old
Testament, according to the directions of our Lord, saying; Search the
Scriptures, (the old Testament, for as then no part of the New John 5. 39.
was written) for you think by them to have life everlasting, and the same are
they that give testimony of me: and after descend down unto the New, and so
prove by the general consent of the whole Scriptures, that our Savior was
Author of the Catholic Roman Faith.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein is proved by the testimony of Moses and the Patriarchs, that our
Savior was Author of the Catholic Roman Faith.

TO discern the true Prophet from the false, and to discern the word of God
from the words of arrogant men; God Almighty gave us this rule, saying: If in
secret cogitation thou answer. How Deuteronomy. 18. 21.
shall I understand the word that our Lord spoke not? This sign thou shall
have: that which the same Prophet foretells in the name of the Lord, and
comes not to pass, that our Lord has not spoken. But by the arrogancy of
his mind, the Prophet has forged it. And the Prophet, that being depraved
with arrogancy, Deuteronomy. 18. 20.
will speak in my name the things that I did not command him to say, shall be
slain. Whereupon our Savior says, All things must needs be fulfilled, which
are written in the Luke 24. 44.
Law of Moses, and the Prophets, and Psalms of me, otherwise Moses and the
Prophets, should have been false Prophets, and our Savior none of the Messiah,
but a seducer and deceiuer, and the God of the Scriptures a false God. So
supposing that our Savior was the Messiah promised to be sent, for the
redemption of mankind, and that the Prophets of both Testaments were true
Prophets, and not guilty of death, but prophesied things which must be
infallibly fulfilled. We will seek out what they say of the Seed, Faith,
Religion, or Gospel, which was to be planted by our Savior upon earth.

And to let pass other promises and prophecies written by Moses, we will
begin with that great promise and oath made by God to ABRAHAM, the Father of
all that believe: Whereupon is grounded and Romans 4. 11.
founded the succession of the Church in all ages; the oath of God being the
highest act, that can be made in heaven or in earth, in confirmation of a
truth, it cannot be contradicted without great impiety; or denied to be
fulfilled, without making the God of Abraham our Lord, to be forsworn, and a
false God, which is the highest kind of untruth; opposite to the greatest
truth that can be given.

Abraham going to sacrifice his only begotten son Isaac, according as God had
commanded him; so greatly pleased his divine Majesty in that act of obedience,
that he confirmed his former promise made unto him (that he should be heir of
the world) by an oath, saying; By my own self have I sworn, says the Lord,
Genesis 12. 3. and 15. 5. Romans 4. 13. Genesis 22. 16.
because thou have done this thing, and have not spared thy only begotten
son for my sake. I will bless thee, and I will multiply thy seed as the
stars of heaven, and as the sand that is by the seashore, thy seed shall
possess the gates of his enemies, and in thy seed shall be blessed all the
Nations of the earth, because thou have obeyed my voice. He says not (says
Saint Paul) and to seeds, as in many; Galath. 3. 16.
but as in one, and to thy seed, which is Christ. That in Christ Jesus, the
Son of David, the Son of Abraham, not the Nation of the Jews, or Brittans
only, but all the Nations of the earth should be blessed, and become children
of Abraham, and sons, and seed of Christ Jesus, borne again (as Saint Peter
says) not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible by the word of God. 1. Pet.
1. 23.
Whereupon Saint Paul says to the Corinthians, In 1. Cor. 4. 6.
Christ Jesus, by the Gospel, I begat you. And to the Ephesians he says,
That the Gentiles are coheires, and of the same body, and partakers of his
promise by the Gospel. And so says, That Christ has redeemed us from the
Galath. 5. 14.
curse of the Law, that on the Gentiles the blessing of Abraham might be made
in Christ Jesus, that we may receive the promise. The Scriptures foreseeing
that God instifieth Galath. 3. 8.
the Gentiles by Faith, showed unto Abraham before, that in thee shall all
Nations be blessed. Not for a day, or a year, but for ever, according to the
words of Saint Luke, saying: He has received Israel his child, Luke 1. 55.
being mindful of his mercy: As he spoke to our Fathers, to Abraham and his
seed for ever. So likewise God said to ABRAHAM, SARA thy wife shall bear thee
a son, Genesis 17. 19.
and thou shall call his name Isaac, and I will establish my covenant to him,
for a perpetual covenant, and to his seed after him. Whereby we see that this
oath of God to Abraham, is to be fulfilled in and upon Christians, professing
the Faith and Gospel planted by our Savior, and that those Christians, upon
whom this oath can, or may be fulfilled, are the seed of our Savior, and the
children of his Kingdom, and heirs of the Promises, and none else, unless we
will make God Almighty forsworn, which is too great impiety, and a vanity
for any man to acknowledge him for a God, whom he professes in deeds to be a
violater of oaths and promises. So it rests to examine, whether this oath of
God be verified upon Roman Catholics, or upon Protestants: that we may
clearly see which of them are true Christians, and heirs of the Promises, and
seed of our Savior.

And as for Protestants, they themselves confess, that their Faith and
Religion, which they now profess, has been so far off from being multiplied
as the Stars of heaven, and as the sand that is by the sea shore, that
presently after the Apostles times it became no where external or visible; as
we have showed in the precedent Chapter: And it is of it self so manifest,
that Protestants are not able, from the time of the Apostles, until the rising
of Luther, which is during the space of fourteen hundred years or thereabouts,
to assign one known man of the Religion they now profess. If this oath be
made to Protestantisme, where is the seed of Protestants multiplied as the
Stars of heaven, and as the sand that is by the seashore? Seeing that for
many hundred years, never a Protestant Star appeared. And if this oath was
made to Protestants, That they should possess the gates of their enemies, and
that in their seed, all the Nations of the earth should be blessed: As he spoke
to Abraham, and his seed Luke 1.
for ever. How comes it to pass, that presently after the Apostles times,
Protestants were so overcome by Roman Catholics, that from that time until
Luther, they have been no where visibly known, but so latent and invisible, as
for all that space they cannot produce one Protestant Minister or Doctor, who
taught or maintained the doctrine they now teach?

If it be true that the God of the Protestants has made these promises, and
this oath to them, it must needs be, that he is a very wretched unfaithful
God, that has for fourteen hundred, or fifteen hundred years together
violated his oath and promises.

And I appeal to your Majesty, well pleased to consider how great injustice
it is, to have your ancient Subjects spoiled of their Lands, Goods, Liberty
and Life, and be condemned as Fellons and Traitors, for that they will not
believe in such a prejured God. And how happy a thing it is to be a Roman
Catholic, seeing this oath of God is so manifestly fulfilled in them, that (as
it is set down in the last Chapter) even our Adversaries themselves confess,
for twelve hundred ceares together they have bin dilated over the world, and
possessed the gates of their enemies, and blessed all the Christian Families of
the earth with temporal and spiritual birth, by regeneration in Baptism, and
education, etc. These are the seed of Abraham his servant, Psalm. 104.
the children of Jacob his elect, he is the Lord our God, in all the earth are
his judgments, he has bin mindful for ever of his Testament, of the Word
which he commanded unto thousand generations. Our Lord is not as Deuteronomy 32. 31.
their Gods: our enemies also are Judges.

It may please your Majesty to observe the notes and marks of our Catholic
Roman Church, and Faith, here set down in this oath of God to Abraham, viz.
Unity, Universality, and Succession. The Unity is promised in these words, Thy
seed, not diverse seeds, that there might be as many sects, as men, as some
Elizabethians, some Lutherans, some Caluinists, some Hussites, some
Anabaptists, some Armenians, some Gomaristes, some Trasquits; all differing in
Faith and Religion: but one seed, Faith, or Word of God planted in the hearts
of men, by the preaching of our Lord, as witnesses our Savior, expounding the
Parable of the Cockle of the field, said to his Disciples: He that sows good
seed, is the Son of man. Again, Matthew. 13. 37.
The good seed, those are the children of the Kingdom. Matthew. 13. 38.
Again. O Father, the words which thou gave me, I Io. 17. 8.
have given them: and they have received, and knows in very deed, that I came
forth from thee, and have believed that thou did send me, to fulfill the
promises made to Abraham, the Patriarchs and Prophets.

The second mark is Catholic or Universal, here promised in these words:
And I will multiply thy seed as the Stars of heaven: which do manifestly
appear and shine in all Countries. And God brought Abraham Genesis 15. 5.
forth abroad, and said to him: Look up to heaven, and number the Stars if
thou can. And he said to him, so shall thy seed be, as the Stars of heaven,
shining in all Countries; not only in Brittanie, France, or in Germany, but in
all Nations, according to the oath of God, saying: In thy seed shall be blessed
all the Nations of the earth. Whereupon our Savior said; He that sows good
seed, is the Son of Man, etc. and Matthew. 13. 37.
the field is the world. Again, You are the light of the Matthew. 5. 15.
world. Again, Teach ye all Nations, etc.

The third mark is Succession, which is promised in these words: Thy seed
shall possess the gates of his enemies. Genesis 12.
As he spoke to our Fathers, to Abraham and his Luke 1. 55.
seed for ever: not that the Succession should decay, or become invisible; that
there should need new missions, but that it should continue until the worlds
end; according to the words of our Savior, saying: I have Ioh. 15. 16.
appointed you, that you go and bring fruit, and your fruit abide. Again, And
this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be Matthew. 24. 14.
preached in all Nations, and then shall come the consummation of the world.
Again, The gates of hell shall not Matthew. 24. 3.
prevail against it, etc. And the like three marks, or notes of the Church,
which was to be planted by our Savior, your Majesty may observe to be set
down almost in every Prophecy; though I omit to speak more of them for
breuities sake.

Secondly, God Almighty promised to Isaac, saying: I will perform the oath*
which I swear unto Abraham Genesis 26.
thy father, and I will multiply thy seed as the Stars of heaven; and in thy
seed shall be blessed all the Nations of the earth, because Abraham obeyed my
voice, and kept my precepts and Commandments.

Thirdly, he promised to Jacob, saying: Thy seed Genesis 28.
shall be as the dust of the earth, thou shall be dilated to the West, and to
the East, and to the North, and to the South, and in thee, and thy seed, all
the Families of the earth shall be blessed, and I will be thy keeper wheresoever
thou shall go, and I will bring thee again into this Land, neither will I
forsake thee, until I have performed whatsoever I have spoken. Which
Prophecies we see have been manifestly fulfilled in our Catholic Roman Faith,
which has been universally and successively dilated over all Nations,
according to these Prophecies, as we have proved in the former Chapters: and
can no way be verified upon Protestantisme, since it decayed presently after
the Apostles times; and for a thousand and four hundred years together, was
never known to have been taught or practiced, and now is but scattered in
diverse corners of the earth, divided into many sects, teaching opposite
doctrine in matters of Faith, and here we seek for one Faith, or seed dilated
over the world.

God Almighty here says; I will perform the oath which I swear to Abraham,
neither will I forsake thee, until I have performed whatsoever I have spoken.
And I appeal to your Majesty well pleased to consider, whether it be more
convenient to believe the words of God, when he says, he will perform his
oath and promises, then the words of Protestant Ministers, who affirm that the
seed of Christ has failed, and now after a thousand and five hundred years,
they are sent to plant it, in corners of the earth. What is found more mad,
(says Saint AUGUSTINE) then this folly, or August. cont. epist. Parmeniani.
lib. 1.
rather frenzy? In so many Nations of the world, and for the most part God
has fulfilled, and does yet fulfill, until it come unto all, which he has
promised; who said, I will not leave thee, until I do these things, which I
have spoken unto thee: And now these (Protestants) do believe such as tell
them, that it is not fulfilled what God promised; and that therefore the seed
of Abraham, which is Christ, to have decayed in those parts of the earth, in
which it was planted; and that the promises of God are void, because they are
not admitted into their Communion, amongst whom it is fulfilled. Thus Saint
Augustine.

So If the oath of God, or the Promises made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
written by Moses, may find grace and credit with your Majesty, it is manifest
by their testimonies, that our Savior was the Author of the Catholic Roman
Faith.

CHAP. V.
By the testimony of the Prophet DAVID, and the Psalms, our Savior was Author
of the Catholic Roman Faith.

OUR Savior says, That all things must Luke 24. 44.
needs be fulfilled which is written in the Psalms of him. So we will examine
what the Psalms say of our Savior and his seed, the Christians, that we may
see, whether the Prophecies contained therein be verified upon Roman
Catholics, or upon Protestants; it being now a thousand and six hundred years
since the Nativity of our Savior; those must needs be his seed, and true
Christians, upon whom they are verified, seeing that it is impossible Hebr. 6.
for God to lie.

First, the Psalms say; Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: Ask
of me, and I will give thee the Psalm. 2. 7.
Gentiles for thine inheritance, and thy possession, the ends of the earth.

Secondly, All the ends of the earth shall remember, Psalm. 21, 27.
and be converted to our Lord: and all the Families of the Gentiles shall adore
in his fight: Because the Kingdom is our Lords, and he shall have dominion
over the Gentiles.

Thirdly, For thy fathers there are borne sons to thee, Psalm. 40.
thou shall make them Princes over all the earth, they shall be mindful of
thy name in all generation, and generations, for ever, and for evermore.

Fourthly, The God of gods, our Lord has spoken, and Psalm. 49. 1.
has called the earth, from the rising of the Sin, unto the going down
thereof.

Fifthly, Their sound is gone into all the earth, and their Psalm. 18.
words into the ends of the world.

Sixthly, He shall descend as rain upon a fleece of wool, Psalm. 71. 6.
and as the drops distilling upon the earth. In his days shall arise Justice
and abundance of peace, so long as the Moon endures. And he shall rule from
sea to sea, and from the river unto the end of the world.

Seventhly, I will put him, the first begotten, higher Psalm. 88. 27.
then the Kings of the earth. I will keep my mercies unto him for ever, and my
Testament faithful to him. I will put his seed for ever and ever, and his
Throne as the days of heaven. But if his children shall forsake my Law, and
keep not my Commandments, I will visit their iniquity with a rod, and their
sins with stripes; but my mercy I will not take away from him, neither will I
hurt in my truth.

And many more the like Prophecies of the conversion of the Gentiles, and
propagation of the Faith, or seed of our Savior over the world for ever;
which cannot be verified upon Protestants, or Protestantisme, who have been
so far off from having the Gentiles for their inheritance, and their
Possessions unto the ends of the earth, or converting all the Families of the
Gentiles, or from having abundance of peace, as long as the Moon endures, or
from having their seed to endure for ever, and their throne as the days of
heaven: that in all the time which was between the death of the Apostles, and
the rebellion of Luther; which is for one thousand and four hundred years or
thereabouts, they are not able to assign one Doctor, Preacher or Writer, that
held or taught the doctrine Protestants do now preach and teach.

That our Catholic Roman Faith was planted by the Apostles and Disciples of
our Lord, and has continued successively dilated over the world, according to
these Prophecies, we have proved in the first, second, and third Chapters.

Whereupon we rightly infer, that by the testimony of David and the
Psalms, our Savior was the Author of the Catholic Roman Faith, and conclude
this Chapter with the words of Saint AUGUSTINE, saying: We may see many accuse
themselves of their former August. epist. 48:
blindness, who could believe that Christ was exalted above the heavens,
though they did not see it, and yet did deny that his glory was over all the
earth, although they did see it: When the Prophet has so clearly comprehended
them both in one sentence, saying: Be exalted above the Psalm. 107.
heavens, O God, and thy glory over all the earth.

CHAP. VI.
By the testimony of the Prophet Isay, our Savior was Author of the Catholic
Roman Faith.

THE Prophet Isay speaking more abundantly of the seed (Faith and Religion,
which was to be planted by our Savior) then the rest of the Prophets, says:
It is a small thing, that thou Isay 49.
should be my servant, to raise the Tribes of Jacob, and to convert the
dregs of Israel. Behold I have given thee to be a light to the Gentiles, that
thou may be salvation, even to the furthest part of the earth. Kings shall
see, and Princes shall rise and adore for our Lords sake, because he is
faithful, and for the holy one of Israel, who has chosen thee. Again, Behold
I will Isay 49. 22.
lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and to the people I will exalt my sign. And
they shall carry thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters upon their
shoulders. And Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy nurses, with
countenance cast toward the ground, they shall adore thee, and they shall lick
up the dust of thy feet; and thou shall know that I am the Lord. This
Prophecy cannot be verified of Protestanisme: First, for that they were never
yet any light to the Gentiles, and a salvation to the furthest part of the
earth, that they might become Christians; many Protestants denying
Christianity, become Turks in Transiluania and Hungary, and many English at
Tripolis, Algiers and Tunis: And some learned Protestants, as Sebastian
Cestalio, Bernard Ochine, David George, Adam Neucers and others, who being
obstinate against Catholic Religion, either turned Turks or Jews, seeing the
Prophecies not fulfilled in Protestantisme.

Secondly, for that they are not able to produce any one Heathen or Pagan King
or Queen, that hitherto has embraced Protestanisme. Your Majesty and other
Christian Kings and Queens, your Predecessors, in the Kingdom of Great
Brittanie, have had no other Christendom, then that they have received from
Catholic Roman Priests.

Thirdly, It is not the custom of Protestants to adore their God with such
respect or reverence, as the Prophet Isay here speaks of: every Protestant is
so well assured of his salvation, that he has no need to humble himself
before his God; to ask forgiveness of his sins, or salvation of his soul.
Not a Protestant Boy or Girl, that does not use more respect or reverence to
their masters, when they speak unto them, and all Protestants in their degrees
and estates, to their temporal Lords and Princes; then they do, when they
pray, or speak to their God. When they speak to their earthly Lords or Kings;
either they Pan, the god of Clownes, that can endure no ceremonies or good
manners: whereby it is manifest, that this Prophecy is not verified upon so
uncivil, and unmannerly a Religion as Protestantisme is: but upon our
Catholic Roman Faith and Religion, which all the known Christian Kings and
Queens, that ever have been before Luther, professed (reputed Heretics by
both parties only excepted) as we have set down in the third Chapter.

Again, God Almighty by the Prophet Isay says to the Gentiles, whom he
calls the barren women, for that before the Incarnation of our Savior, they
were without fruit of eternal life. Praise O barren Isay 54. 1.
woman which bear not, sing praise and make joyful noise, which did not
bear, because many are the children of the desolate (of the Gentiles which
were before the coming of Christ desolate of spiritual help) more then of her
that has a husband (the Synagogue of the Jews) enlarge the place of thy tent,
and stretch out the skins of thy Tabernacles, for thou shall penetrate to the
right hand, and to the left, and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles. Again:
For a moment, a little while, have Isay 64. 7.
I forsaken thee, and in great mercies will I gather thee, in a moment of
indignation have I hid my face a little while from thee, and in mercies
everlasting have I had mercy on thee, says thy Redeemer our Lord. As in the
days of Noe, is this thing to me, to whom I swear, that I would no more bring
the waters of Noe upon the earth. So have I sworn not to be angry with thee,
and not to rebuke thee, for the mountains shall be moved, and the little hills
shall tremble, but my mercy shall not depart from thee, and the covenant of my
peace shall not be moved, says our Lord thy Miserator. Again, Every vessel
that is made against Isay 64. 17.
thee shall not prosper, and every tongue resisting thee in judgment, thou
shall judge. This is the inheritance of the servants of our Lord.

This Prophecy of Esaias cannot be verified upon Protestantisme, for that since
our Saviors time, there has not been more Protestants then Jews, neither
have the children of the Protestants bin more in number, then the children of
the Jews, who are a great people in number, and have continued visible in
great numbers, dispersed through many parts of the world, as Protestants
themselves confess: as the Centurie Writers, in the fourteenth and fifteenth
Chapter of every Centurie, where they make mention from time to time of their
abode, and at this day the Synagogue of the Jews is more dilated, and greater
then any one Sect of Protestants in the world.

Secondly, neither can this be verified of Protestantisme, that after our
Saviors coming, They should enlarge the place of their tents, penetrate to
the right hand and the left, and that the seed of Protestants should inherit
the Gentiles. Neither could this oath of God be made to Protestants: I have
sworn not to be angry with Protestants, and not to rebuke them; for the
mountains shall be moved, and the little hills shall tremble, but my mercy shall
not depart from Protestants, and the covenant of my peace shall not be moved,
says our Lord thy Miserator: unless they will make God Almighty forsworn,
since they themselves confess that Protestantisme vanished away presently
after the Apostles times, and was so extinguished, that for a thousand and
four hundred years, they cannot name one Protestant man, that taught the
doctrine they now teach. In such sort, as this malediction of the Prophecy is
fulfilled in them, as upon the enemies of our Savior; where it is written,
Every vessel that is made against thee shall not prosper. And all the blessings
of this Prophecy are verified upon our Catholic Roman Faith, which was
planted by the Apostles, and has been dilated over the world, and embraced of
all Christian people, who lived between the death of the Apostles and rising
of Luther, (reputed Heretics to both parties only excepted) as we have
proved in the first, second, and third Chapters.

And by this oath of God here set down, it is as certain that the Catholic
Roman Church and Faith shall never be suppressed; as it is certain that the
world shall not be drowned with water any more: the oath and promise of God
Almighty being equally given for assurance of both, saying: As the day of Noe
is this thing to me, to whom I answer, that I would no more bring in the
waters of Noe upon the earth: so have I sworn not to be angry with thee, or
rebuke thee, for the mountains shall be moved, and the little hills shall
tremble, but my mercy shall not depart from thee, and the covenant of my peace
shall not be moved, says our Lord thy Miserator. And your Majesty may be
pleased here to observe, that those Kings and people, who persecute the
Catholic Roman Faith, do but bring misery and unhappiness upon themselves,
according to the word of God in this Prophecy, saying; Every vessel that is
made against thee shall not prosper: and after all their rage and cruelty of
hanging, drawing and quartering, imprisonments, and severe Laws made against
Roman Catholics, they must come to be judged by them, according to the words
of God in this Prophecy, saying; That every tongue resisting thee in
judgment, thou shall judge, this is the inheritance of the servants of our
Lord (Jesus Christ) and their justice with me, says our Lord; to be Judge of
those, who resisted them in judgment.

Again, God Almighty speaking of the increase of Christian Religion, says;
Arise, be illuminated Jerusalem, Isay 60.
because thy light is come, and the glory of our Lord is risen upon thee: Upon
thee shall our Lord arise, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And the
Gentiles shall walk in thy light, and Kings in the brightness of thy rising,
lift up thine eyes round about, and see al these gathered together, they are
come to thee: thy sons shall come from a far, and daughters shall rise from thy
side. Then thou shall see and abound, and thy heart shall marvel and be
enlarged, when the multitude of the sea shall be converted unto thee, the
strength of the Gentiles shall come to thee. Again, For Isay 60.
the Islands expect me, or the ships on the sea in the beginning, that I may
bring thy sons from far. Again, And Isay 60.
thy gates shall be open continually, day and night they shall not be shut, that
the strength of the Gentiles may be brought to thee, and their Kings may be
brought. For the Nation and the Kingdom that shall not serve thee, shall perish.

Now suppose that there were Protestants in our Savior and the Apostles times,
yet is it manifest that these Prophecies cannot be verified upon them, That the
Gentiles should walk in the light of Protestantisme, and Kings in the
brightness of their rising, and the multitude of the sea be converted unto
them, and the strength of the Gentiles, or that the Islands did expect
Protestantisme, and the ships of the sea in the beginning, or that the gates of
Protestants Temples, were open continually, day and night, that the strength of
the Gentiles might be brought to Protestanisme, and their Kings. Since the
Protestants themselves confess, that after the Apostles times Protestantisme
vanished away, and was no where so much as visible, for a thousand and four
hundred years. In such sort, as within all that space they are not able to
name any one man; much less one Heathen or Pagan King, converted to the
Religion they now profess.

So, suppose that in our Saviors time there were Protestants, it is manifest
that they were these enemies of Christian Religion, upon whom was verified this
part of the Prophecy, saying; The Nation, and the Kingdom that shall not
serve thee, shall perish.

Again, God Almighty speaking of the Christians after our Saviors coming,
says by the same Prophet: I will give their works in truth, and make a Isay.
61.
perpetual covenant with them, and they shall know their seed in the Gentiles,
and their bud in the midst of peoples, all that shall see them, shall know
them, that these are the seed which the Lord has blessed. Again, Upon thy
Isay 62.
walls, Jerusalem, I have appointed watchmen, all the day, and all the night,
for ever, they shall not hold their peace. And you that remember our Lord, hold
not your peace, and give not silence to him, until he stablish, and until he
make Jerusalem the praise in the earth. Our Lord has sworn by his right hand,
and by the arm of his strength: If I shall give thy wheat any more, to be
meat to thy enemies, and if the strange children shall drink thy wine,
wherein thou have labored. Because they that shall gather it together, shall
eat it, and shall praise the Lord, and they that carried it together, shall
drink it in my holy courts. Suppose that there were Protestants in our
Saviors and the Apostles times, yet these Prophecies could not be verified
upon them, that God Almighty should make a perpetual covenant with
Protestants, visibly to maintain their seed in the Gentiles, and their bud in
the midst of peoples. Neither can this oath be verified upon Protestants: Our
Lord has sworn by his right hand, and by the hand of his strength, that he
would give the wheat of Protestants no more to be meat for their enemies, and
that strangers should not drink the wine, wherein Protestants have labored:
who decayed presently after the Apostles times, as they confess, and were so
far off from enjoying these blessings here promised, that all the
maledictions prophesied to wicked and impious men, enemies to Gods truth, fell
upon them in such sort, that there is less memory of them, then of Sodom and
Gomorra, which was destroyed with fire from heaven, or of Coar, Dathan and
Abiron, who were swallowed up quick into the earth; of whom there is some
mention made in other men's writings. But of Protestants living after the
Apostles times, who should before Luther hold, and teach the doctrine they now
teach. No Author does give testimony of any such men, or make so much mention
of them, as of any of their names, or Countries where they dwelt, or where they
were destroyed: wherefore it seems, that if ever they were in these times,
they were enormous wicked vile people, cursed of God above all the men that
ever lived upon the face of the earth; even such abominable people, as all men
were ashamed to name, or make any mention of any one of them; people that
descended into hell quick, of whom they would keep no memory. Now, that all
these Prophecies are verified upon our Catholic Roman Faith and Religion, we
have sufficiently showed in the first, second and third Chapters of this book:
whereupon we infer, that by the testimonies of the Prophet Isay, our Savior
was Author of the Catholic Roman Faith, and planter of it upon earth. And so
conclude this Chapter with the words of Saint AUGUSTINE, saying: What can be
exacted August. de Unit. Ecclae.
to be spoken more manifestly? Behold how many, and how clear testimonies have
been brought out of one Prophet, and yet there is resistance and contradiction
made, not to any man, but to the Spirit of God, and to the most evident truth.
And yet the glory of Christ is envied by those, who will boast of the name of
Christians, that those things wbich have been so long before foretold of him,
may not be believed to be fulfilled; whereas now they are not foretold, but
showed, seen and possessed. So Saint AUGUSTINE; and we with him.

That these Prophecies of Isay are spoken of the Church of Christ; Protestants
themselves confess in the Collections of the Contents of the Chapters, set
down before every Chapter, in their English Protestant Bibles.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein is proved by the testimony of the Prophet Ieromie, that our Savior
was the Author of the Catholic Roman Faith.

THE Prophet Jeremy speaking of the estate of the Church after our Saviors
coming, says: Behold the days Ierem. 31. 37.
shall come, says our Lord, and I will make a new covenant with the house of
Israel, etc. And this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel: after these days says the Lord, I will give my Law in their bowels,
and in their heart I will write it: I will be their God, and they shall be my
people. And a man shall no more teach his neighbor, and a man his brother,
saying; Know our Lord, for all shall know me, from the least of them, even to
the greatest, says our Lord, for I will be merciful to their iniquity, and
their sin I will remember no more. Thus says our Lord that gives the Sun
for the light of the day, the order of the Moon, and of the Stars for the
light of the night: that troubles the sea, and the waves thereof do sound,
the Lord of hosts is his name: If these Laws shall fail before me, says our
Lord, (that there be no more Sun for the light of the day, and Moon and
Stars for the light of the night, and ebbing and flowing of the Sea) then also
the seed Israel shall fail, that it be not a Nation before me for ever.
Whereupon our Savior says; This Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in the
whole Matthew. 24.
world, for a testimony to al Nations, and then shall come the consummation of
the world, and the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light,
and the stars shall fall from heaven. Until then, if we will believe the Word
of God, the seed of our Savior, the Church of God shall in all ages and times
so flourish upon earth, as that the Christians shall not need, secretly one to
teach another: But all shall know our Lord, from the least of them to the
greatest, and be a visible Nation for ever.

So I appeal to your Majesty well pleased to consider, how ignorant he should
be in the Scriptures, that should make himself of the Congregation of
Protestants, in hope to enter into this Testament with God, when they have been
so invisible for one thousand and four hundred years together, that they are
not able to assign one man, who for all that time professed the Faith they now
hold; much less one Nation. So if Protestants would prove by the Scriptures,
that their Religion (which has been so many hundred years unknown) were the
Faith planted by our Savior, they should first prove, that for one thousand
and four hundred years, there has been no Sun for the light of the day, or
Moon for the light of the night, to make good the Word of God: otherwise they
prove nothing, but that they are ignorant in the Scriptures, and in effect and
deed, blaspheme God and his holy Word, by affirming him in effect and deed, to
be a violater of his promises written in the Scriptures.

That this promise of God here spoken of, is to be performed in, and upon
Christians: Saint Paul witnesses in the eight to the Hebrews, where he
repeateth the foresaid words of Ieromie, as to be fulfilled in and upon
Christians.

That our Catholic Roman Faith has successively continued according to this
Prophecy, we have showed in the first, second and third Chapters.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein is proved by the testimony of Ezechiel, That our Savior was the
Author of the Roman Catholic Faith.

THE Prophet Ezechiel speaking of the estate of the Church after the coming of
our Savior, says; I will save Ezech. 34.
my flock, and it shall be no more into spoil, etc. And I will raise up over
them one Pastor, who shall feed them; my servant David he shall feed them, and
he shall be their Pastor. And I the Lord will be their God; and my servant David
the Prince in the midst of them. I the Lord have spoken, and I will make a
covenant of peace with them, and will make the cruel beasts to cease out of the
Land. And they that dwell in the desert (the Hermits and religious men, who
now, and in the Primative Church lived in the desert, as witnesses Saint
Austine, Epist. 121.) shall sleep secure in the forrost. And I will put them
round about my hill (his Church) a blessing. And I will bring down the shower
in his time, there shall be raynes of blessing (abundance of spiritual
graces, and consolations of the holy Ghost, according to the words of our
Savior, saying: He that believes in me, out of his belly shall John 7. 38.
flow rivers of living water.) And the tree of the field (our Savior the Vine,
or Olive tree) shall give his fruit, and John 15. Romans 11.
the earth (humane nature, of which it is said, thou art earth) shall give his
spring, and they shall be in their Land Genesis 3.
without fear, and they shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall have broken
the chains of their yoke, and shall have delivered them out of the hand of
those that rule over them. And they shall be no more for a spoil to the
Gentiles, neither shall the beasts of the earth devour them: but they shall dwell
confidently without any terror, and I will raise up to them a bud of name, and
they shall be no more diminished for famine in the Land, neither shall they bear
any more the reproach of the Gentiles.

This Prophecy to be spoken of our Savior under the name of David; first,
Protestants in their Bibles confess it: secondly, it is manifest, for that
David the Prophet was dead many years before the time of Ezechiel. Yet this
Prophecy cannot be verified upon Protestants, that Protestants shall live in
their Land without fear, delivered out of the hand of those who rule over
them, and be no more for a spoil to the Gentiles, nor be any more diminished,
nor bear any more the reproach of the Gentiles, since they have bin so spoiled
and oppressed for one thousand and four hundred years together, that during
all that time, they are not able to assign one known man, who professed the
Religion they now profess. This Prophecy to be verified upon Roman
Catholics, we have showed in the first, second and third Chapters.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein is proved by the testimony of the Prophets, Daniel, Joel, Micheas,
Abacuc, and Zacharias, That our Savior was the Author of the Catholic Roman
Faith.

AND in like manner all the rest of the Prophets, as often as they have
occasion to speak of the estate of the Church, after the coming of our
Savior, say; that it shall be universally dilated over the world for ever, as
Daniel, saying: In the days of Dan. 2. 44.
those Kingdoms, the God of heaven will raise up a Kingdom that shall not be
destroyed for ever, and this Kingdom shall not be delivered to another people:
and it shall break in pieces, and shall consume al those Kingdoms, and it self
shall stand for ever. Which Prophecy we find verified by experience upon the
Catholic Roman Church, which as Protestants themselves confess, was so potent
presently after the Apostles times, that it destroyed and consumed the Church
of Protestants, and for these one thousand and two hundred years has reigned
universally, without any debatable contradiction, as is set down in the third
Chapter. Again, we see by experience, that all other Kingdoms and Monarchies
of Christians have been interrupted and changed; as the Empire first from the
West unto the East, and after into Germany: Spain was first possessed by the
Romans, after by the Goathes, and lastly, for many years by the Moors: France
was long time tributarie to the Romans, and about the year of our Lord 451.
the Franck Germans, who dwelled beyond the Rhyne, began to conquer them, and
in process of time obtained their Kingdom, and changed their name from Gauls
to French; and about the year 461. elected Mirouee for King: after France was
possessed by the English, and Henry the sixth was crowned King of France, about
the year 1422. from which time the Kings of England have always challenged to
be Kings of France.

England was under the Romans until the time of Honorius, and shortly after
it was conquered by the Saxons, and then by the Danes, and last by Norman
French: In so much as that it is manifest to experience, that the Catholic
Roman Church is the Kingdom raised up by God, which shall not be destroyed
for ever.

Whereupon the Prophet Joel says: Ye children of Joel 2. 23.
Syon (the Church of God) rejoice and be joyful in the Lord your God, because
he has given you a Doctor of justice, and he will make the early and the
late shower to descend to you, as in the beginning. And the floores shall be
filled with wheat, and the presses shall ouerflow with wine and oil. And I
will render you the years which the Locust, the Bruke, and the blast, and the
Eruke has eaten: my great strength which I have sent upon you. And eating, you
shall eat, and shall be filled, and you shall praise the name of the Lord your
God, that has done maruailes with you, and my people shall not be confounded
for ever. And you shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and I the Lord
your God, and there is none besides, and my people shall not be confounded for
ever.

So the Prophet Micheas says: And thou Bethelem Mich. 4. 2.
Ephrata art a little one in the thousands of Judah, out of thee shall come
forth unto me, he that shall be the Dominator in Israel: and his coming forth
from the beginning, from the days of eternity, etc. and the remnant of his
brethren shall be converted to the children of Israel: And he shall stand and
feed in the strength of our Lord, in the height of the name of our Lord his
God; and they shall be converted, because now shall he be magnified, even to the
ends of the earth, etc. And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the Gentiles, in
the midst of many peoples, as a Lion amongst the beasts of the forest, and
as a Lions whelpe amongst the flock of cattle, who when he has passed, and
trodden down and taken, there is none to deliver. Thy hand shall be exalted
over thine enemies, and thine enemies shall perish.

So the Prophet Abacuc says: God will come from Abac. 4. 3.
the South, and the holy one from the shady mountain, his glory shall cover the
heavens, and the earth is full of his praise. That is, says S. AUGUSTINE, the
Gospel shall begin from Jerusalem, and Mount Oliuet, and so be dilated over
the world: For Jerusalem (says Saint AUGUSTINE) is placed Southward, as is
read in the Aug. ^p. 166.
book of Jesus Naue, from whence the name of Christ has been spread, and
there is a shadie mountain, Mount Oliuet; from whence he ascended into heaven,
that his virtue might cover the heavens, and the Church might be filled with
his praise, throughout the whole earth.

So the Prophet Zacharias says: Behold thy King will come to thee, the lust,
and Savior: himself, poor and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt, the Fool
of an Ass, etc. He shall speak peace to the Gentiles, and his power from sea,
even to sea, and from the rivers (of Jordan, Matthew. 5. 13.
where he was baptized) even unto the end of the earth; not for a day, or a
month, or a year: But as he spoke to Luke 1. 55.
our Fathers, to Abraham and his seed for ever. These Prophecies to be verified
on our Catholic Roman Faith, we have showed at large in the first, second, and
third Chapter, and are so far from being verified upon Protestantisme, that for
a thousand and four hundred years together Protestants are not able to name
one man, who held and taught the doctrine, they now hold and teach.

So dread Sovereign, if the testimonies of Moses and the Prophets may find
grace and credit with your Majesty, they affirm that our Savior was Author of
the Catholic Roman Faith, as we have abundantly showed. Yet the testimonies
of Moses and the Prophets were of such force with our Savior, as he brings
in Abraham, saying; If they hear not Moses and Luke 16. 31.
the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rise from the dead.
Again, he says to the incredulous Jews; Had you believed Moses, you would
peradventure John 5. 46.
have believed me, for he wrote of me. And if you believe not his writings,
(which are confirmed by so many oaths, and promises, and found true by
experience) how will you believe my words?

And so I conclude the Prophecies of the old Testament with the words of Saint
Augustine, saying: The Aug. in Psalm. 30.
Prophets have spoken more obscurely of Christ, then of the Church, I think,
because they did see in spirit, that men would rebel against the Church, and
would not have so great strife concerning Christ, but would raise up great
contentions concerning the Church: therefore, that about which men were to make
great strife, was more plainly foretold, and more manifestly prophesied; that
it might serve for their condemnation, who did see it, and fled out.

CHAP. X.
Wherein is proved by the testimony of Angels, that our Savior was the Author
of the Catholic Roman Faith.

HAVING (most dread Sovereign) according to the counsel of our Savior, John
5. 39.
sought the old Testament, to see what it says of the Faith, Seed, and
Children of the Messiah, and having found that by it, our Lord was the Author
of the Catholic Roman Faith, Seed or Religion: we will now descend down unto
the New, to see what it says in general, of the Faith, Seed, Word, or Gospel,
which our Savior planted upon earth: that we may also see, whether according
to the testimony of the new Testament, our Lord was Author of our Catholic
Faith and Religion.

And first the Angel Gabriel foretelling the estate of the Church to come,
says to our blessed Lady, Thou Luke 1. 31.
shall conceive in thy womb, and shall bear a Son, and thou shall call his
name JESUS, he shall be great, and he shall be called the Son of the most High,
and our Lord God shall give him the seat of David his Father, and he shall reign
in the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. And
in like manner, an Angel of our Lord said unto the Shepherds: Behold, I
euangelize Luke 2. 10.
to you great joy that shall be to al people; not to one people of Brittans, or
Germans, but to al people: because this day is borne to you a Savior, which is
Christ our Lord. And suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the
heavenly army (a multitude of Angels) praising God, and saying: Glory in the
highest to God, and in earth Peace to men of good will. As it was foretold by
the Prophet Isay, saying: A little child is borne to us, etc. His Empire
shall be multiplied, and there shall be no end of peace: he shall sit upon the
throne of David, and upon his Kingdom: that he may confirm it, in judgment
and justice, from this time, and for ever.

That the Kingdom here spoken of, is the Church professing the Faith, or
Gospel planted by our Savior, our Lord himself does witness, saying: In the
Matthew. 13. 14.
end of the world, the Son of Man shall send his Angels, and they shall gather
out of his Kingdom all scandals, and them that work iniquity. Again, And
this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in the whole world. Again, Matthew.
24. 14.
And Jesus went about teaching, and preaching the Gospel Matthew. 4. 23.
of the Kingdom.

So if the Angels of God, and multitude of his heavenly Army, may find grace
and credit with your Majesty, to be believed by their testimonies, it is
manifest, that our Savior came to plant the Catholic Roman Church and Faith:
which, as we have proved in our first Chapter, was taught by our Savior, and
planted by the Apostles amongst the Romans, and has continued, and shall
continue amongst them until the day of Judgment: and as is confessed by
Protestants, has reigned universally: without any debatable contradiction,
1200. years, as is set down in the third Chapter.

CHAP. XI.
Wherein is proved by the testimony of our Savior himself, that he was the
Author of the Catholic Roman Faith.

OUR Lord and Savior Jesus Christ foreseeing that many Heretics would arise;
and say, that his Seed, Faith, Word, Church, or Gospel had failed and
decayed, and that they were immediately sent from God, to plant a new Faith, or
reform or restore the Gospel, etc. To prevent their heretical falsehood, he
warns all his faithful that they should not believe them, saying: Do not
think that I came to break the Law (the old Matthew. 5. 18.
Testament) or the Prophets, I am not come to break, but to fulfill; for
assuredly I say to you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one tittle
shall not pass of the Law (the old Testament) till all be fulfilled; and the
Church of Matthew. 5. 2.
God, begun in Jerusalem and Judah, be dilated to the West, and to the East,
and to the North, and to the Genesis 28.
South, as God spoke to Abraham and his seed for ever. Luke 1. 55.


So supposed that our Saviors words are true, and that he was the Messiah,
and came to fulfill and perform the things promised by the Prophets, and not
to break or violate their promises; the Sun was never more manifest in the
month of August, then it is manifest that he fulfilled the Prophecies, by
planting the Catholic Roman Faith, and not by planting Protestantisme, since
Roman Catholics have been visibly multiplied over the world, for many hundred
years; some Protestants say for nine hundred years, some say for a thousand,
other Protestants say for twelve hundred, and others say for more, as is set
down in the third Chapter: whereas the Prophecies have been so far off from
being fulfilled in Protestantisme, that presently after the death of the
Apostles it vanished away, and has been no where visibly known, for one
thousand four hundred years. So we may speak to Protestants (who imagine that
their Religion is true, or was the Faith planted by our Savior) and say to
them in the words of our Savior: Do not think that our Savior came to break
the Law or the Prophets, Matthew. 6. 18.
he came not to break, but to fulfill.

Secondly, our Savior foretelling the estate of his Church to come, says: All
things must needs be fulfilled which are writted in the Law of Moses, and the
Prophets, Luke 24. 44. Genesis 22.
and the Psalms of me. And the Law of Moses says: I will multiply thy seed as
the Stars of heaven, etc. The Prophets say; Behold thy King will come to
thee, the Just one, and Savior, himself poor and riding upon an Zach. 9. 9.
Ass, etc. He shall speak Peace to the Gentiles, and his power from sea, even
to sea, and from the rivers, even to the end of the earth. Again, And I will
send of them that shall be saved to the Gentiles into the sea, into Asricke Isay
66.
and Lidia, into Italy and Greece, to the Islands far off, to them that have
not heard of me, and have not seen my glory. And they shall show forth my glory
to the Gentiles, and they shall bring of your brethren of al Nations, a gift to
our Lord, upon horses, and in chariots, and in horselittors, and on Mules, and
in coatches, to my holy mountain Jerusalem. Because, as new heavens, and a new
earth, which I make to stand before me, says our Lord, so shall your seed
stand, and your name. The Psalms say. All the ends of the earth shall remember
and be converted to our Psalm. 41. 28.
Lord: and all the families of the Gentiles shall adore in his sight. Again,
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten Psalm. 2. 7.
thee, ask of me, and I will give thee the Gentiles for thine inheritance, and
thy possession the ends of the earth. Again, I will put his seed for ever and
ever, and his throne Psalm. 88.
as the days of heaven. I have sworn in my holy, if I lie to David his seed
shall continue for ever. All which, and many more the like promises and
Prophecies, of the increase, continuance, and dilatation of the Christians, the
seed of our Savior, the seed of David, the seed of Abraham over the world,
must (as our Savior Luke 24. 44.
says) needs be fulfilled, and yet we see by experience, that they are
fulfilled in no other people kindred, or Nation, but Roman Catholics, whom
Protestants confess to have reigned universally over the world, for twelve
hundred years, as is set down in the third Chapter. And so I conclude out of
our Saviors words, that the Catholic Roman Faith, must needs be the Faith
and Religion which our Savior planted, and that Roman Catholics are true
Christians, since neither the promises in the books of Moses, nor in the
Prophets, nor in the Psalms, are, or can be verified, or fulfilled in, or
upon any other.

Thirdly, our Savior speaking of the estate of his Church, says: The Kingdom
of heaven is resembled unto a man that sowed good seed in his field, but when
men Matthew. 13. 24.
were asleep, his enemies came and ouer-sowed Cockle among the Wheat, and
went his way, and when the blade was shut up, and had brought forth fruit, then
appeared also the Cockle. And the servants of the Good Man of the house,
coming, said to him: Sir, did thou not sow good seed in thy field? Whence
then has it Cockle? and he said to them; the enemy man has done this. And
the servants said to him, Will thou we go, and gather it up? And he said noe:
lest perhaps gathering up the Cockle, you may root up the Wheat also,
together with it, suffer both to grow until the harvest: and in the time of
harvest I will say to the Reapers, Gather up first the Cockle, and bind it into
bundles to burn; but the wheat gather ye into my Barn. And expounding this
Parable of the Cockle of the field, he said to his Disciples; He that sowed the
Matthew. 13. 37.
good seed is the Son of Man, and the field is the world, and the good seed,
those are the children of the Kingdom, and the Cockle, those are the children
of the wicked one, and the enemy that sowed them is the Devil: but the Harvest
is the end of the world, and the Reapers are the Angels. So our Savior in
describing his Church, by which description it is manifest, that our Savior
sowed the Catholic Roman Faith, and that Roman Catholics are the children
of the Kingdom of God, and all other Sects, of what kind or sort soever, are
Cockle sowed by the Devil, after death, or at the end of Matthew. 13. 38.
the world, to be gathered up and cast into a Furnace of fire. Since there
neither is at this instant, nor yet has been heretofore any Nation, People,
Faith, Religion, or Sect, which challenged the name of Christians, that has
been successively dilated over the world, according to our Saviors
description, but the Catholic Roman Faith, which as Perkins, a Protestant,
says: Upon the Creed. fol. 307.
During the space of nine hundred years, spread it self over the whole earth.

Fourthly, our Savior speaking of his Church, says: The Kingdom of heaven is
like unto a mustardseed, Matthew. 13. 31.
which a man took and sowed in his field; which i^ the least surely of all
seeds, but when it is grown, it is greater then all herbs, and is made a
tree, so that the fowls of the air come to dwell in the branches thereof.
Again, The Kingdom of heaven is like to Leaven, which Matthew. 13. 33.
a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, until the whole was
leauened. Again, The Kingdom of heaven Matthew. 13. 47.
is like to a net, cast into the sea, and gathering together of all kind of
fishes. Which words of our Savior cannot be verified upon Protestantisme,
supposing that it was in the Apostles times, as they affirm, since it did not
increase or grow greater then al other sects, nor leauened the whole world, nor
gathered together all kind of people. But so vanished away after the Apostles
departure, that for fourteen hundred years together they are not able to
assign one man, professing the Religion they do now.

Fifthly, Our Savior setting down the state of his Church to come, says: I
chose you, and have appointed John 15. 16.
you, that you go and bring fruit, and your fruit abide. Again, This Gospel
of the Kingdom shall be preached in Matthew. 24. 14.
the whole world, for a testimony to all Nations, and then shall come the
consummation. Again. Holy Father, I pray John 17.
not that thou take them away out of this world, but that thou preserve them
from evil, etc. And not for the Apostles only do I pray, but for them also
that by their words, shall believe in me. Again, Teach ye all Nations, and
Matthew. 28.
behold I am with you all days, even to the end of the world. Which words of
our Savior cannot be verified upon Protestants, that our Savior has
appointed Protestants to go and preach in the world, and bring fruit, and
their fruit abide; or that Protestantisme should be preached to all Nations; or
that our Savior prayed that Protestants should not be taken away out of the
world, but be preserved from evil; or that our Savior would be with
Protestants, ayding and assisting them in the conversion of Nations, even to
the consummation Matthew. 28. 20.
of the world: since we see it false by experience.

Sixthly, Our Savior speaking of the estate of his Church, says to the chief
Priests, and Ancients of the people: Have you never read in the Scriptures; The
stone Matthew. 21. 42.
which the builders rejected, the same is made the head of the corner. By our
Lord was it done, and it is marvelous in our eyes. Therefore I say to you,
that the Kingdom of God shall be taken away from you, and given to a Nation
yielding the fruit thereof. And he that falls upon that stone shall be broken,
and on whom it falls, it shall al to bruise him.

These words of our Savior cannot be verified upon Protestants, that our
Savior should become head, to unite Jews and Protestants together in one
family of Christians: or should take away his Church, and Kingdom upon earth,
from the Jews, to give it to Protestants, or that the Church of Protestants
should yield more fruit then the Church of the Jews, or he that should fall
upon the Church of Protestants should be broken: since as Sebastianus Francus,
a Protestant, In epist. de Abro. stat. Eccl.
affirms; That for certain, through the work of Antichrist, the external
Church (of Protestants) together with the Faith and Sacraments, vanished away
presently after the Apostles departure, and that for these fourteen hundred
years, the Church (of Protestants) has bin no where external and visible.
Which being so, dread Sovereign, I appeal to your Majesty, well pleased to
consider, how ignorant he should be in the Scriptures, that should make
himself a Protestant, out of hope to become one of the Kingdom of God, here
spoken of.

That all these promises and Prophecies of our Savior are verified upon
Papists; Protestants themselves give sufficient testimony, who affirm that
Papistrie began in the time of the Apostles, and has reigned universally for
twelve hundred years, as is set down in the third Chapter.

So if the words and testimonies of our Savior himself, may find so much
grace and favor with your Majesty as to be credited, it is manifest that by
this testimony and description of his Church, that he was the Author of the
Catholic Roman Faith.

CHAP. XII.
Wherein is proved by the testimony of the Apostles, that our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ was the Author of the Catholic Roman Faith.

FIRST, Saint Peter speaking of the estate of the Church planted by our
Savior, says: MOSES indeed said, that a Prophet shall the Act. ^. 22.
Lord your God raise up to you, of your brethren, as my self, him shall you
hear, according to al things whatsoever he shall speak to you. And it shall be,
every soul that shall not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed out of the
people. And all the Prophets from Samuel and afterward, that have spoken, could
of these days: you are the children of the Prophets, and of the Testament
which God made to our Fathers, saying to Abraham: and in thy seed shall all the
Families of the earth be blessed. To you first God raising up his Son, has
sent him, blessing you. That this Seed here spoken of, is the Church of
Christians, our Savior and Saint Paul do witness, saying: The good seed,
those are the children of the Kingdom. Again: If you Matthew. 13. 38. Galath.
3. 29.
be Christ's, then are you the seed of Abraham, heirs according to promise.

That this blessing can no way be verified upon Protestantisme, is manifest,
for that it vanished away presently after the time of the Apostles, and for
faureteene hundred years together, there is not to be found one man that
professed it, much less one Family, or all the Families of the earth. That
this blessing in general, has been verified upon Roman Catholics,
Protestants themselves confess; some Protestants affirming, that Papistry has
been spread over the world for nine hundred years, some for a thousand, some
for twelve hundred, and some for more, as it is set down in the third Chapter.

So if the testimony of Saint Peter, Moses, and all the Prophets, from Samuel
and afterward, may find so much grace and favor with your Majesty, as to be
credited; they all affirm that our Savior was to be the Author of our
Catholic Roman Faith. And supposed that there were Protestants in our
Saviors and the Apostles times, who after their departure vanished away (as
Protestants affirm) it is manifest by the testimony of Moses and Saint Peter,
that they were enemies of Christian Religion, and so were destroyed from among
the people, according to the words of Moses and Saint Peter, saying: Every
soul that shall Act. 3. Deuteronomy. 18.
not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed out of the people.

Secondly, Saint Poter speaking of the estate of the Church, says: Behold I
put in Syon a principal cornerstone, 1. Pet. 2.
elect, preciaus. And he that shall believe in him, shall not be confounded. To
you therefore that believe, honor; but to them that believe not, the stone
which the builders rejected, the same is made into the head of the corner, and
a stone of offense, and a Rock of scandal to them that stumble at the Word,
etc. But you (who believe) are an elect generation, a Kingly Priesthood, a holy
Nation, a people of purchase, that you may declare his virtues, which from
darkness has called you into his marvelous light.

Now supposed that there were Protestants in our Saviors time, yet these words
of Saint Peter cannot be verified upon them, that they should not be
confounted, but honored, and made an elect generation, a Kingly Priesthood, or
holy Nation, a people of purchase, to declare our Saviors virtues in
fulfilling the promises, by converting the Gentiles to the Christian Faith:
Since they vanished away presently after the departure of the Apostles.

Thirdly, Saint Paul describing the estate of the Church to come, says: Christ
ascending on high, he led captivity captive, he gave gifts to men. And he gave
some Ephesians. 4. 8.
Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and other some
Pastors, and Doctors, to the consummation of the Saints, unto the work of the
Ministry, unto the edifying of the body of Christ, until we meet all into the
unity of Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, that now we be not
children, wavering, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, in the
wickedness of men, in craftiness to the circumuention of error: So Saint Paul
describing the estate of the Church to come. If this be spoken of the Church of
Protestants, where were their Protestant Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets,
Pastors and Doctors, for fourteen hundred years together? Since for all that
time, they are not able to assign one man, who held the doctrine they now
hold, much less one Apostle, Evangelist, Pastor, or Doctor: and yet Saint Paul
says, that they should teach and preach truth, even unto the Consummation of
the Saints, that the Church might not be wavering, and carried about with every
wind of doctrine, in the wickedness of men; whereby we see, that if Saint Paul
were a true Apostle and Prophet, the Church of Protestants is a false Church:
That this Prophecy of S. Paul is verified upon Roman Catholics is manifest,
for that Roman Catholics have had Doctors, Preachers, and Teachers, in all
ages, as we have proved in the first, second, and third Chapters.

Again, Saint Paul speaking of the estate of the Church to come, says: God
according to his promise Act. 13.
has brought forth to Israel a Savior. Again, We preach Act. 13. 32.
unto you that promise which was made to our Fathers, which was, I will
multiply thy seed as the Stars of heaven, Genesis 22.
etc. As God spoke to our Fathers, to Abraham, and Luke 1. 55.
his seed for ever: which words and preaching of Saint Paul should be false, if
Protestantisme were the Faith and Religion planted by our Savior, and Preached
by Saint Paul: since it has been so far off from fulfilling the promise,
that it vanished away presently after the Apostles times.

Again, Saint Paul speaking of the estate of the Church, says: By the offense
of the Jews, salvation is to Romans 11. 11.
the Gentiles, that they may emulate them: And if the offense of the Jews be
the riches of the world, and the diminution of the Jews the riches of the
Gentiles? how much more the fullness of them? Again, If the loss of the Jews
Romans 11. 15.
be the reconciliation of the world, what shall the receiving be? Again,
Blindness in part has chanced in Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles
might enter, and so all Israel might be saved: Which cannot be verified upon
Protesta^tisme, supposed it were in the Apostles times, since Protestants have
neither been so eminent, as that the Jews should emulate them, nor the riches
of the Gentiles, neither has the world been reconciled to Protestantisme,
neither has the fullness of the Gentiles entered into Protestantisme, which for
fourteen hundred years together was not known unto the men of the earth:
That all these words of Saint Paul are verified upon Roman Catholics,
Protestants themselves give ample testimony, as is set down heretofore.

By these and many more Prophecies of the estate of the Church to come, set
down by the Apostles and Evangelists, it is manifest that our Savior was the
Author of the Catholic Roman Faith.

So dread Sovereign, if the General consent of both Testaments, the
testimony of God, of Angels, of Patriarchs, of Prophets, of Apostles, of
Evangelists, and of all known Christen men that ever were before Luther, may
find grace and credit with your Majesty, to be believed; they all (reputed
Heretics by both parties only excepted) affirm that the Son of God was
Author of that Catholic Roman Faith, which is now persecuted within your
Dominions.

CHAP. XIII.
Answers to Objections.

OBJECT. 1.
ALL Protestants do not affirm, that their Congregation has been invisible
for these fourteen hundred years, which were between the death of the
Apostles, and the rising of Luther: but some say that they were visibly
conversant in the world, administrating the Sacraments, and preaching the pure
Word.

Ans. These Protestants did not live in any of those ages, to affirm that
which they did see, Revelations, Miracles, and Traditions they deny, Writings,
Records, Antiquities, Councels, Histories, or any ancient testimony of such a
visible company so administrating of Sacraments, they have none; yet there is
no other means of knowing things past, but by a vain imagination of an idle
brain, proper to lunatike men in Bedlam and Bridewell, who talk of strange
fantasies and chimeraes, we look for a people that should be made Princes
over all the earth: To whom Kings were Psalm. 44.
nursing fathers, and Queens nurses. That did ouerflow Isay 66.
the glory of the Gentiles. That did possess the gates of their Genesis 22.
enemies, in whose seed all the Nations of the earth should be blessed: And
they tell us of a people, that supposed they were, yet they were the most base,
vile, contemptible, and wretched people, that ever lived upon the earth: such
liars and dissemblers, as that it could not be known what Religion they
professed: So impious, that it is never heard of, that ever they used any
Sacraments, Sermons, or Prayers: So barbarous, that it is not found upon any
Record, that ever they were married, but if they were, it seems that they
accompanied together like horses and dogs: so ignorant, that there is not
found one man amongst them, that ever writ any thing: so vile that they never
did any thing worthy of memory: So lawless, that there is not found any Order,
Statute, or Decree they had; such Rogues and Vacabonds, that none until this
day can find out where any of them dwelt: Such enemies of Christ, and
Christianity, that not any testimony can be found of their being Baptized, or
Christened: So if they were, it seems that they were rather the seed of the
Devil, then of Abraham or Christ Jesus, or of any Christian man.

Object. 2. Waldo, who lived in the year of our Lord God 1220. and Wickliffe,
who lived in the year of our Lord 1370. and John Husse, who lived in the year
1400. were Protestants, and held and taught the same doctrine Protestants do
now.
Answ. First, Waldo did so extol merit for good works, that he did forsake all
things to become poor, and follow Christ and evangelical perfection, as
witnesses Doctor Humfrey, a Protestant, in his Iesuitisme, part. 2. fol. 270.
Secondly, he denied the Sabbath, in regard whereof, the Waldenses were called
Insabbatists, that is to say, people who had no Sabbath: as affirms Fox, Acts
and Monuments fol. 41. Thirdly, he taught that Laymen and women might
consecrate the Sacrament, and preach. Fourthly, that there should be no
division of Parishes, Fifthly, that men ought not to swear in any case. Sixthly,
That neither Priest, nor Civil Magistrate, being guilty of mortal sin, did
enjoy their dignities; or were to be obeyed: and many the like, as witnesses
ILLIRICVS in catel. testium veritatis.

Wickliffe taught, that if a Bishop or Priest were in deadly sin, his
ordaining of Priests, Consecrating, and Baptism, was not Valide, and that
Ecclesiastical Ministers should not have any Temporal possessions, Fox Acts
fol. 96. Moreover, he condemned lawful oaths, as affirms Osiander in his
Epito. hist. Eccles. fol. 459. Yet maintained he the worshipping of Images,
intercession to our blessed Lady, the Mass, and seven Sacraments, as is
manifest in his books.

And for John Husse, except the doctrine of the Communion in both kinds, which
he would have given to Laymen: and the doctrine of Wickliffe, in defending,
that if a Prince, Priest, or Bishop, committed mortal sin, they did lose
their dignities, and were not to be obeyed, for the most part he retained the
Articles of our Catholic Faith, as the Seven Sacraments, the Popes Primacie,
the Mass; in so much as Luther in Colloquijs Germanicis, ca. de Antechristo,
says of him: The Papists burned John Husse, when as yet he depapted not a
fingers breadth from the Papacy, for he taught the same which Papists do.

Object. 3. The Church of the Protestants was in that of the Papists, so if
Protestants were not, neither should Papists be.
Ans. That is to confess that the Papists Church is the true Church, and that
Protestants are Schismatikes or Heretics, according to the Scriptures, saying:
They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had John. 2. 19.
been of us, they would surely have remained with us. Again, Out of your
selves shall arise men speaking perverse Act. 10. 30.
things.

Object. 4. The Church is compared to the Moon, so it may increase, and
diminish, and yet be a true Church.
Ans. The Church is compared to the Moon, not for that it waneth, and
increases every month, as the Moon in our Horison does, but for because what
it loses in one Country, it gains in another, as what light the Moon
wants on the one side, it has on the other; and so as the Moon changes his
light, sometimes on the one side, and sometime on the other, according to the
aspect ^e has to the Sun, and yet (except it be by an Eclypse for a little
while) always has his full light. So the Church of God, unless it be for a
little Eclypse of persecution, is always dilated over the world, though more
manifest in one Country, then in another; as we see by experience, that the
loss which the Church has in England, and some corners of the earth, is more
then restored in Asia and America. So it was promised by the Prophet, saying:
Thy Sun shall go down no more, and thy Moon shall not be diminished, Isay
60. 20.
because our Lord shall be unto thee for an everlasting light: As our Savior
said: I am with you all days even Matthew. 28. 20.
to the consummation of the world. And this was the promise of God to David,
saying: His seed shall continue Psalm. 88. 37.
for ever: and his Throne as the Sun in my sight, and as the Moon perfect
for ever.

Object. 5. Our Savior calls his Church little flock, saying: Do not fear
little flock, because it Luke 12.
has pleased your Father to give you a Kingdom.
Ans. Little in the beginning, after to increase according to the words of the
Prophet Isay, saying: Jacob Isay 27. 5.
shall flourish, and Israel shall grow, and they shall fill the face of the
earth with seed. So our Savior compared Matthew. 13. 31.
his Church to a Mustard Seed, which is the least of all seeds when it is
sown, but when it is grown, it is greater then all herbs: And to Leaven,
which a woman Matthew. 13. 33.
took, and hid in three measures of meal, until the whole was leauened.

Object. 6. In the time of Constans, Constantius, and Constantinus, the Arians
so prevailed, that there remained no Catholic Bishops, but Liberius and
Athanasius.
Answ. In their times was the Council of Sardis, where were three hundred
Catholic Bishops, as is set down in the said Council.

Object. 7. Our Savior says, That many are called, Matthew. 20. 16.
but few chosen.
Ans. He has called the earth, from the rising of the Psalm. 49. 1.
Sun, unto the going down thereof. So in respect of the number of all
people, of what sect or sort soever, the Elect shall be but few, yet dilated all
over the earth, as our Savior witnesses, when he says; That at the day of
Judgment, he will send his Angels with a great Matthew. 24. 31.
sound of Trumpet, and they shall gather his Elect from the four winds, from
the one end of the heaven to the other.

Object. 8. Our Savior says of the Jews, I know John 8,
that you are Abraham's seed, and yet, says, Ye are of your father the Devil.
Ans. This place demonstrateth, that men are not justified by Faith only,
showing that neither the Jews, who were Abraham's seed by carnal generation,
nor the Christians, who are his seed by Faith only, shall be saved without good
works, saying: I know you are Abraham's seed, but ye seek to kill me,
therefore ye are 1. John 3. 8.
of your father the Devil, begotten of him by evil life: Catholics do not
defend salvation by Faith only, but by Faith and good deeds.

Object. 9. Some of the Fathers do understand by Babylon (spoken in the 17. of
the Apocalypse) Rome. Apocal. 17.

Ans. Tertullian, lib. contr. Iudeos, and Saint Jerome Epist. 17. ad Marcellum,
understand by Babylon, Rome, as it persecuted Christians, and worshipped Idols,
and not Rome Christian. S. Augustine upon the 26. Psalm, Aretas upon this
place, Haymon and Saint Bede do understand by the great Whore, great Babylon,
etc. not Rome: but the universal City of the Devil, which in Scriptures is
called Babylon, and is opposite to the City of God, which is his Church: and
by the seven Hills, these Fathers understand the general estate of proud men,
as the Scriptures use, saying: Every Valley Luke 3. 5.
shall be filled, and every Hill shall be humbled.

Object. 10. In our Creed we say, I believe in the Catholic Church: but the
things that we believe, cannot be seen: therefore we cannot see the
Catholic Church, but must believe it only.
Ans. Herein consists the ignorance of Protestants, that in one and the same
thing, they distinguish diverse acts, as the act of Faith, and the act of
corporal seeing, both in one and the same man: but do not distinguish in the
same men or things, diverse objects, as the object of the act of Faith, and the
object of the act of corporal seeing. So the things that we believe, we cannot
corporally see by an act of Faith; that is true, otherwise our Faith should be
in our eyes. The thing that we believe, we cannot corporally see with an act of
seeing, that is false: the Apostles did both see and hear our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, and believed him to be our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
Catholics can corporally see the Catholic Church, but not with an act of
Faith proceeding from their eyes: and believe the same Catholic Church, but
not with an act of seeing, proceeding from their understandings, but with an
act of Faith proceeding from their understandings, and so at the same time,
though not with one and the selfsame act, both see and believe the same
Catholic Church. But see it, as it is object of their eyes, and believe it, as
it is object of their Faith, which for the salvation of their souls, I wish
Protestants could do: Since the same God Almighty, and the same Prophets which
tell me, I must believe the Church, do also tell me, that it shall be
corporally visible, according to their descriptions, until the worlds end; and
he makes God and the Prophets liars that denies it.

Object. 11. The Protestants yet may hope, that the Prophecies may be verified
upon Protestantisme hereafter.
Answ. That were to make Luther the Messiah, and him, and his Ministers of
greater power, then our Savior and the Apostles, and is contrary to the
promises of God and Prophecies. Again, the Prophets do not speak of
converting Papists, but Gentiles to our Lord; which are in great part converted
already, and there is no probability that Ministers, tied to women, children,
servants, good fare, soft beds, commodities of the world, and flesh, should go
to convert Gentiles in Africa, or America. Again, What should they convert
them unto? to believe:

That the God of the Christians has for fifteen hundred years failed of his
oath and promises.

That the Apostles, and those men who planted Christian Religion, are not to be
called, nor esteemed of as Saints.

That Baptism is not necessary to salvation.

That the Sacraments of the Christians do not confer grace.

That the whole Church, and General Councels of Christians may err, in things
that appertain to God.

That Fasting and Penance is not necessary to salvation.

That the Mass is superstition.

That the Romish doctrine concerning Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping and
Adoration, as well of Images, as of Relics, and also Invocation of Christian
Saints is a fond thing.

These and many the like Articles of the English Creed, the Heathen and Pagans
believe, and have believed many hundred years, before Luther and Calvin, or any
Protestant man was borne, that held and maintained the same Faith Protestants
do now.

Object. 12. The Church of Protestants is far extended, and so, in some part,
the Prophecies may be verified upon it.
Ans. Though it were as far extended, as Turcisme, yet it would be inferious
to the promises, and latitude of our Catholic Church, and wants the other
properties, set down by the Prophets, all Heretics have possessed some place
or Country, and at this day Protestantisme is but in this corner of the world.
Thomas Rogers, a Protestant, seeking out the Rogers upon the Creed.
Protestants of other Countries, can find, as it seems, none to name, but
Suitzerland, Basil, Bohemia, Ausburge, Flanders, Saxony, Sueuia, Wittenberge,
France, yet in France there are ten Catholics for one Protestant; in
Suitzerland, six Cantons or Provinces of Catholics; in Bohemia many
Catholics; Ausburge but one City; Wittenberge a City; and these are but a
heap of diverse Sects, whereof the chief are Caluinists, Lutherans, and English
Parliamentary Protestants. The Caluinists, who are most in number, deny the
Supremacy of Kings, and authority of Bishops, which is Treason amongst the
English Protestants; the Lutherans hold Consubstantiation in their Communion,
and deny the Communion of both Caluinists and English Protestants, and they
both the Communion of Lutherans, all of them esteeming their Communion a
Sacrament, and matter of Faith. Many more Sects there are amongst the^, as
Anabaptists, Hussites, Arians, Brownists, Family of Love, Thrasquites, and
others.

Octiect. 13. In time of Elias there was no visible Church, Elias saying, I
alone am left: therefore the 3. King. 15.
Church may decay and become invisible.
Ans. When Elias spoke those words of lamentation, there were two Kingdoms of
the Jews, the one known, and called by the name of Judah; and the other called
and known by the name of the Kingdom of Israel: over Judah at this time reigned
Asa a good King; ASA did right before the sight of our Lord, as 3. King. 15.
DAVID his Father did: over Israel reigned ACHAB, a wicked King, And ACHAB did
evil in the sight of 3. King. 15.
our Lord, above all that were before him. ELIAS speaks of the Kingdom of
Israel, and not of Judah, saying: The Children of Israel have forsaken thy
Commandment, 3. King. 15.
etc. And our Lord said to him: I have left me in Israel seven thousand men,
whose knees have not bowed before BAAL: of whom, at that time it seems Elias
knew not of. So in the time of Elias, the Church was so far off from being
invisible, that besides the seven thousand in Israel, there was the whole
visible Kingdom of Judah, under Asa and Iosephat his son, who was likewise a
good King: IOSEPHAT walked 3. King. ^2.
in the way of ASA his Father, and he did that which was right in the sight of
our Lord.

Object. 14. I have, says the Puritan, a true feeling of the Spirit, and am
assured to be saved, all others may err, I am assured I cannot, for my spirit
does tell me that I am in the right way of salvation.
Answ. The way of a fool (says the holy Ghost) is Prou. 12. 15.
right in his own eyes. I desire thee to consider what a misery it is to be
obstinate in opinion, since it makes a man to use all the means and shifts he
can to get to hell, and does not give leave either to reason, or to the senses,
to execute their functions: God Almighty has promised that the Christians
shall be as the Stars of heaven, Genesis 22.
and as the sand that is by the sea shore, and that they shall possess the
gates of their enemies, the mountains shall be moved, and the hills shall
tremble, but his mercy shall not Isay 54.
depart from them, and the covenant of his peace with them shall not be moved.
According to Gods promise, such a seed, or succession of Christians, we see,
Writings, Registers, Chronicles, Antiquities, Churches, Chapels, the report
and traditions of our Parents, al spoke it, our Adversaries themselves confess
it, experience does teach us that it must be so: All seeing it fulfilled from
Abraham, until the Nativity of our Savior, for one thousand nine hundred
years, or thereabouts, yet rather then the obstinate man will yield to so
manifest a truth, and save his sou^* he will seek out all the corners, malice,
shifts, tricks and doubts that can be to deny it, and go to Hell: and if none
will serve to cloak his obstinacy, yet rather then he will change his
nature, he will go on, he will not believe any thing but his own fantasies and
imaginations: All others may be deceived, he is sure he cannot. O be not
obstinate, but have pity on thy poor soul; Was thou never deceived in any
thing in all thy life, whereof thou esteemedst thy self sure? certainly thou
have. And if thou will not be an Ethnicke and Publican to thy own
Congregation of Protestants, thou must defend, that nothing is more certain,
then that the Church of Protestants millitant and visible may err, as is
affirmed in the English Creed, Art. 19. prop. 6. and Art. 21. So if thou be
not already gotten into heaven, into a triumphant Church, and art become an
invisible man, in thy own militant Church, there is nothing more certain, then
that thou may err. Well then, thou may be deceived in this; that thou
think thy self so sure of. Thou will grant me this principle, that God
Almighty can neither deceive* nor be deceived; since he is verity it self,
and the first cause: so if he affirm one thing, and thou, and Luther, and
Calvin, deny the selfsame thing, yet that must be true which God Almighty
affirms, and that false you affirm: Thou willest not deny this? But God
Almighty affirms that the Christians, the Seed of Abraham, the people of
Genesis 22.
God, should be multiplied as the Stars of heaven, and as the sand which is
by the sea shore, and should possess the gates of their enemies, and be
dilated to the East, and to the West, and to the North, and to the Genesis 28.
South for ever. Well then, it must be true, though thou Luke 1. 55.
Luther and Calvin deny it. But thou will say, these promises are not made to
Christians: Again, whom shall we believe in this, God Almighty, or thou, or
Luther, or Calvin? God Almighty affirms, that these oaths and promises of
God are to be fulfilled upon the Christians, saying: All things must needs be
fulfilled Luke 24. 44.
which are written in the Law of Moses, and the Prophets and Psalms of me.
And the like affirm the Apostles, as we have set down at large in the
eleventh and twelfth Chapter.

So if thou will not, according to thy own confession, be wilfully deceived,
thou must believe, that there must be Christians, the people of God, the Seed
of Abraham, embracing one and the same Faith, multiplied as the Stars of
heaven, and as the sand that is by the sea shore, dilated to the East, and to
the West, to the North, and to the South, possessing the gates of their
enemies: As he spoke to our Fathers, to Abraham and his Luke 1. 55.
Seed for ever. And if thou do not believe this, thou must confess, that,
that thou art so far off from being of the Seed of the Faithful Abraham,
that thou do not believe the promise which God Almighty made unto him, and
so may manifestly see thy own infidelity.

And this second principle supposed to be a divine truth, as now thou
confessest: Art not thou again wilfully blind, that will not see those
Christians, the Seed of Abraham, the people of God, to be the Catholics, whom
thou call Papists? since at this day there are no Christians, upon whom this
promise can be fulfilled, but upon them: and as for former ages, thy own
fellow Sectaries confess, that for many hundred years, The Popish Heresy
has spread it self over the whole earth, as is set down in the third
Chapter; and since for one thousand four hundred years together, thou art not
able to bring forth any writing, testimony, antiquity or evidence of any one
Protestant Minister or Doctor, that held the doctrine Protestants now teach:
Wilt not thou then obstinately go to hell, that will be a Protestant, and in
thy imagination find out them, which have not bin to the dishonor of God, and
thy damnation? And willest not see a multitude of men, which are, and have been
as the Stars of heaven, for the salvation of thy soul, and glory of God, in
fulfilling his oaths and promises?

But thou will say, that suppose there were such an infinite number of
Christians, the people of God, so visible, as that they possessed the gates of
their enemies, as God Almighty affirms: yet I cannot find such a multitude
of men, professing one and the same Faith. To which I answer, that hereby thou
should most manifestly see that thou art obstinate: thou will confess that
all Christians, which ever have been, may be comprehended under one of these
three sorts, known Heretics to both parties, Protestants and Papists: known
Heretics on both parties, thou will confess, not to have been this seed of
Abraham. Protestants thou can not assign one, that taught, and held the
doctrine thou now hold, in all them one thousand four hundred years. See
now if thou be not obstinate, that will not know that the seed of Abraham
were the Papists: when it is so manifest, that reputed Heretics to both
parties excepted, for one thousand four hundred years together, thou can
find none else.

Again, known and reputed Heretics, thou acknowledgest to have bin amongst
the Christians, during the time of them one thousand four hundred years; but
they were not known, or reputed such in these ages by Protestants, who then
were not; but by Papists, who both spied them out, and overcame them, according
to these Prophecies: So art not thou obstinace, that do not see the
Prophecies verified upon the Papists?

Again, all the Christian Kings and Kingdoms (known Heretics on both sides
excepted) as their Histories, Chronicles, Laws, Antiquities, reports of
Parents do testify, were Papists: then art not thou obstinat that will not
see the Prophecies to be verified upon Papists?

But thou will say that the Papists Church has failed; but so should not the
seed of Abraham. To which I answer, that God Almighty affirmed that his
Church, the seed of Abraham, should not fail, and cannot be contrary to
himself; and thou find no other congregation of men, which even in thy own
judgment, has longer endured according to the Prophecies of the Prophets, then
the Papists, even admitting the worst thou say of it: so if thou will not
be obstinate, and fall into Atheism, thou should conclude; certainly it is
false that the Papists Church has failed: for when thou say that the Church
of Papists fell; thou can not say that it fell to Protestantisme, so it
makes nothing for thee, unless thou would be an Atheist, and prove that
God Almighty has violated his oaths and promises; and go against the first
principle, and say that God may be deceived, but man cannot; and likewise
against the second principle, and say there were no known Christians of the
seed of Abraham upon earth, for many hundred years together. If thou be a
creature of God Almighties, thou art first bound to maintain his honor and
glory, and show upon what Christians his promises are fulfilled, and then thine
own, otherwise thou make thy self an Idol, and denyest God. So first show
us Protestants multiplied as the Stars of heaven, and as the sand that is by
the sea shore, dilated to the East, to the West, to the North, and to the
South, which possessed the gates of their enemies; and then show us, when and
where the Papists Church decayed, and what Religion they embraced, when they
fell from Papistrie.

That it did decay, thou alledgest the authority of some few; that it did not
decay, I bring thee the authority of Scriptures, and the general consent of
all known Christians, for one thousand four hundred years together (known
Heretics, and so reputed on both parties, only excepted) as is set down in
the first, second, and third Chapters. So if any reason may prevail with thee,
thou must needs confess, that Papists are the Seed and children of Abraham,
and that our Lord by the testimony of the Prophets, and Apostles, and himself,
planted that Religion Protestants call Papistrie.

Neither may thou object that the testimonies of the Prophets, concerning
our Savior and his Church, are obscure, and their meaning hard to be found
out; when God Almighty affirms by the mouth of Saint Peter, That they are as
a candle shining in a dark place, 2. Pet. 1. 19.
into which, if thou do but look, and not obstinately shut thy eyes, thou
may see light: So open thy eyes, and accommodate thy understanding to the
Prophets, and believe firmly, that to be the true Seed of Abraham, which has
been spread over the earth many hundred years, according to the Prophecies,
and do not accommodate the Prophets to thy understanding: take not for a first
ground, that thy sect is true, and then seek to shape the sayings of the
Prophets to thy vnderstdanding, and to thy sect, so thou shall make thy self
an Idol, and be always blind, until thou fall into everlasting darkness,
and there lamenting, say; We have groaped as blind men for the wall; and as
Isay 59.
without eyes have feeled, we have stumbled at none day, as in darkness, in
dark places as the dead, that could not see the Seed of Abraham, the Church
of Christ, a multitude of men, which held one and the same Articles of Faith
upon earth, without preuaricating in sense, when even in our days; they were
multiplied as Genesis 22. 28.
the Stars of heaven, and as the sand that is by the sea shore, dilated to
the East, and to the West, and to the North, and to the South (in Europe, Asia,
Africa, and America) ouerflowing the glory of the Gentiles, and being a light
and Isay 49.
salvation to the furthest parts of the earth, who had Kings their nursing
fathers, and Queens their nurses, who with countenance cast down to the
ground adored them, and kissed their feet: Deserts as delicasies, and
wildernesses Isay 51.
wherein lived contemplative men, as the gardens of our Lord, upon whose walls
stood watchmen day and night, holding not their peace, keeping the Quier in one
place or other perpetually: We senseless, esteemed their life (...) 5. 4.
madness, and their end without honor. Behold how they are counted among the
children of God, and their lot is amongst the Saints. We therefore have erred
from the way of truth, and the light of Justice has not shined to us. Such
things said they in Hell which sinned. And I set it down for thy example, that
yet whilst there is time, thou may become one of the Seed of Abraham, and
be partaker of his blessings, which with all my heart I wish unto thee, and all
Protestants, and Puritans.

Thus having abundantly showed unto your most excellent Majesty, that our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ was Author of the Catholic Roman Faith: It rests to
set down, who was Author of the Faith and Religion now publicly professed in
England by Protestant Ministers.

CHAP. XIV.
That Queen ELIZABETH was Author of the Faith and Religion publicly now
professed in England, and upon what occasion.

THE Kingdom of England together with the Crown, after the death of Queen
Mary, belonging by all Law and right, unto your Majesty's Mother, as lineally
descended from Henry the seventh (Henry the eights lawful Line being ended in
Queen Mary): to the great prejudice of your Majesty's Mother, Lady Elizabeth
took upon her the Crown; and knowing, that not only of all Catholics, she
was esteemed Illigitimate, and for such published by the Church of God, planted
by our Savior, for that she was borne of Anne Boloigne, during the life time
of the first wife of King Henry the eight, her supposed Father; but also by a
Decree in public Parliament, holden in the eight and twentieth year of the
Reign of Henry the eight, her supposed Father: She was (to use the words of
the Statute) judged Illigitimate, excluded and barred to claim, challenge, or
demand any Inheritance, as lawful Heir to Henry the eight; as remains yet
to be seen amongst the Statutes of Henry the eight, printed by Thomas
Berthlet, the Kings Printer, and set forth with Privilege.

And fearing, lest for the said cause of Illigitimation, her Subjects should
forsake her, and stand to the right Heir, your Mother, or that Christian Kings
would not permit so evil a president, in prejudice of the lawful Lineall
descent of Kings: casting off all fear of God, she resolved, at what price
soever to reign, and to that end began to practice Ieroboams policy, of
whom it is written, that having obtained a part of Roboams Kingdom, Thought in
his heart, now will the 3. Reg. 12.
Kingdom return to the House of David. If this people shall go up to make
Sacrifice in the house of our Lord, into Jerusalem, the heart of this people
will be turned to their Lord Roboam, the King of Judah, and they will kill me,
and return to him: and finding out a device, he made two golden Calfes, and
said to them, Go up no more into Jerusalem: Behold thy Gods, Israel, which
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: And he put one in Bethel, and another
2. Parap. 11.
in Dan. And he made Priests of the objects of the people, which were not of
the Tribe of Leui, and cast off the Priests and Levites, that were in all
Israel, and their posterity, that they should not execute the Priesthood of
our Lord. And by these means Jeroboam esteemed, though falsely to establish
the Kingdom of Israel in him, and his Posterity.

So Lady Elizabeth being thus ascended to the Crown of England, contrary to
the Law of God, Nature, and Nations, fearing lest her Subjects should forsake
Her, and adhere unto Your Mother, the lawful Heir (if they continued in the
Catholic Faith, with Your Mother, and other people, and Kingdoms) she put in
practice this Ieroboams wicked policy, and Cassered all the Catholic Priests
and Bishops in this Land and their Posterity, that they should not execute the
Priesthood of our Lord, and under a veil of a Supreme Governor, she took
upon her all spiritual Power and Authority, and would not admit any to be
Archbishop, Bishop, or Minister, who would not abjure and renounce all
authority derived from Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and his Apostles, and
receive all their Power, Spiritual Authority, and Jurisdiction from her a
woman: So that none could in her time be made an Archbishop, Bishop, Minister
or Deacon, or receive any Degree in Schools, or bear any Office under her,
but he must first take the oath of Abrenunciation, of all power and authority,
which was not derived from Her, as follows.

I. A. B. Do utterly testify, and declare in my conscience, Stat. An. 1.
Eliz. cap. 1.
that the Queens Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and
of all other Her Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual,
or Ecclesiastical things, or causes, as Temporal, and that no foreign
Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate (such as were our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, and the Apostles, who were borne in Judah, or thereabouts) has or
ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiorite, Pre-eminence or Authority
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realm, and therefore I do utterly
renounce and forsake all foreign Jurisdiction, Powers, Superiorities and
Authorities.

And if any did refuse to take the said oath of Abrenunciation of all foreign
Authority, such as was the Authority derived from our Savior and the
Apostles, and deny her Supreme Spiritual Authority in all things, they
should neither bear Office, nor be admitted to any Degree in Schools, or be
made Archbishops, Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, as is set down at large in the
first Chapter of the said Statute made in the first year of her reign. And
that there should be in her time no person or persons, or man whosoever, that
might challenge any authority from Christ Jesus, or the Apostles; but that all
Spiritual Power, and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, might be wholly in her, and
received from her: She made a Law in her said first Parliament, That no
foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, Stat. An. 1. El. cap. 1.
State or Potentate Spiritual or Temporal, shall after the last day of this
Session of Parliament, Use, enjoy or exercise any manner of Power,
Jurisdiction, Superiority, Authority, Pre-eminence or Privilege, Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical, within this Realm, or within any of her Majesty's dominions,
or Countries that now be, or hereafter shall be, but from henceforth the same
shall be clearly abolished out of this Realm, and all other your Highness
Dominions for ever: any Statute, Ordinance, Custom, Constitutions, or any
other matter, or cause whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

By which Law, she has not only abolished out of this Realm, all the
Authority which the Son of God left upon earth, but also as much as lies in
her power, she has debarred him from coming to Judgment within her
Dominions, or sending any one hither to preach or teach, that all authority
might be in her self, and come from her, to her Subjects, as from their God,
or golden Calfe, upon earth.

And lest there might be some doubt, how far her womanly Supreame-headship, in
all things, might extend, she made another Law, to make it as large, as ever
was the authority of our Lord, or his Apostles upon earth; saying in the
aforesaid Parliament: Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid; That such
jurisdictions, Stat. An. 1. El. cap. 1.
privileges, superiorities, and preheminences, Spiritual and Ecclesiastical,
as by any Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical power, or authority, has heretofore
been, or may lawfully be exercised or used, for the Visitation of the
Ecclesiastical State and persons, and for reformation, order, correction of the
same, and of al manner errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts
and enormities, shall for ever, by authority of this present Parliament, be
united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. That being crowned
Queen, though a woman, and a Bastard; yet now she might have as large
Spiritual authority, as any man ever had, or might have.

And so she translated the Spiritual authority of Priesthood, not only from
Spiritual to Temporal, but also from male unto female, that whatsoever
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power or authority, has heretofore been, or may
be lawfully used or exercised, for the visitation of the Ecclesiastical State
and persons, and reformation and giving of orders, and for the correcting them,
and all manner of errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, was by this law
supposed to be wholly in her a woman. And executing her Supreme Spiritual
Function, in the first years of her reign, she set out two and fifty
Injunctions, under title of the Queens Injunctions, with this Conclusion
annexed to them. All which and singular Injunctions, the Queens Majesty
ministers unto her Clergy, and to al her loving Subjects, straightly charging
and commanding them to observe and keep the same, under pain of deprauation,
sequestration of fruits and Benefices, suspension, excommunication, and other
such cohersion of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

And by this means, she had all the Clergy at her command, both the enjoying
of their Temporal Benefices, and Spiritual Offices, depending wholly upon her
feminine authority. In so much as, in the first year of her reign, there
arising some doubts about the lawful making of her Archbishops, and Bishops;
she by her effeminate authority, dispensed with all their disabilities, in
these words: Her Highness by her Supreme Stat. An. 5. El. cap. 1.
power, has dispensed with all causes or doubts of any disability, etc. about
the making of the said Archbishops and Bishops, etc. that no cause or scruple,
ambiguitie or doubt, can or may be justly objected against the said Elections,
Confirmations, or Consecration. And in the eight year of her reign, doubts
arising again about the Consecration and making of her Archbishops and
Bishops, she signifies her former dispensation, saying; For as much as diverse
questions has lately grown, about Stat. An. 8. El. cap. 1.
the making and consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops within this Realm,
etc. Her Highness by her Supreme power and authority, has dispensed with all
causes or doubts of any imperfection or disabilitie, that can or may any wise
be objected against the same. And in the nine and thirtith year of her reign,
yet some doubts remaining amongst her Subjects, that the Catholic Bishops,
whom she out of her effeminate authority had deprived, were lawful Bishops,
and hers false: she deprived the Catholic Bishops again, and made their
authority void, to all intents and purposes, establishing by her Law; That al
and every deprivation, and Stat. An. 39. El. Cap. 8.
deprivations, and al every sentence, and sentences of deprivation whatsoever,
had, pronounced, or given, at any time between the beginning of the reign of
the Queens most excellent Majesty that now is, and the tenth of November in
the fourth year of the same, (against any person or persons, which was, or
took upon him to be Archbishop, or Bishop of any Sea, or Bishopric, or Deane
of any Deanery, within this Realm, or any the Dominion thereof, in the reign
of the said late Queen Mary, from such Sea or Bishopric) be adjudged,
deemed, and taken good, and sufficient in Law to all intents and purposes, and
so shall remain and continue, any appeal, exception, or other matter, or thing
whatsoever to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding: And that al
such Archbishops, and Bishops, and Deanes as were ordained, or made, by the
authority or license of the Queens Majesty that now is, at any time between
the beginning of her reign, and the said tenth day of November, in the fourth
year of her Majesty's reign, shall be taken and adjudged to be lawful
Archbishop, or Bishop of the Sea or Bishopric, and Deane of the Deanery, unto
the which he was so preferred, assigned or appointed: And that the same Sea of
Archbishop or Bishopric and Deanery, unto the which he was so preferred,
assigned or appointed (though there were in it a Catholic Bishop, as they were
all in the beginning of her reign, yet it) shall be deemed, and adjudged to be
merely void to all respects and purposes, etc. And by this means, as much as
lay in her, she deprived all the ancient Archbishops and Bishops, both of
their Spiritual authorities, and Temporal Bishoprics, to all intents and
purposes, and admitted and established these only, who, whereas the Statute
says, ordained, or made by the authority of the Queen: and allowed, and
admitted of no authority, Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, but in her and from
her derived to them. In so much as Fulke, glorying in the Spiritual influence
he received from this Illigitimate Lady, in his Answer to a Counterfeit
Catholic, page 50. says to Catholics, You are utterly deceived, if you
think your Offices of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, any better then Laymen;
and you presume too much, to think that we receive your ordaining to be
lawful. And in his Retentiue Motives, page 67. he says; With all our hearts,
we defy, abhor, detest, and spit at, your stinking, greasy Antichristian
Orders. And WHITAKER cont. Durem, lib. 9. p. 821. says; I would not have you
to think we make such reckoning of your Orders, as to make our own vocation
unlawful without them, and therefore keep them to your self.

And all the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, which any Archbishop, Bishop
or Minister, has either to teach, preach, administer Sacraments, or ordain
Ministers, together with any right, which they can pretend to any
Archbishopricke, Bishopric, Parsonage, etc. does so fully and wholly depend
upon Queen Elizabeth her womanly authority, and Statutes made by her, that her
femall Supreme Spiritual authority and Statutes repealed, all the
Archbishoprickes, Bishoprics, and Parsonages within this Realm, together with
their Offices, are void in Law, and as void, rest to be disposed. So that no
other can, or may be justly said, to be the Author and Founder of that Faith
and Religion, which is now by public authority professed in England, but only
Queen Elizabeth, for that from her, the English Protestant Archbishops,
Bishops and Ministers, had whatsoever Priesthood, or Spiritual authority they
can, or may pretend, or challenge, either to administer Sacraments, Teach or
Preach, or execute any other spiritual supposed function: neither can English
Protestant Ministers deny it, unless they deny the Queens Supremacy, and
proclaim themselves to be perjured in the oath of Supremacy, which they have
sworn. Whereupon they are justly and truly called Elizabethians, and ought
not, nor should not be called by any other name, seeing they have no other
Author, or Founder of their Religion and Priesthood, but Queen ELIZABETH, as
we have proved by public Statutes.

And this Queen ELIZABETH did, not that she did think, that she being a
woman had Supreme authority in all Spiritual things, or causes, the
Scriptures saying: Let women hold their peace in the Church, 1. Cor. 14.
for it is not permitted them to speak, but to be subject. Again, It is a
filthy thing for a woman to speak in the Ibid.
Church. Again, Let women learn in silence, with all subjection, for I do
not permit a woman to teach. But desirous 1. Tim. 2.
to reign in this world, with whatsoever dishonor of God, and danger soever of
losing of her soul, and damnation of her Subjects, she took upon her
IEROBOAMS Policies, to strengthen her self against Your Mother.

So I appeal unto your Majesty, well pleased to consider the wrong, and
injustice your Protestant Ministers do unto us Roman Catholics, your ancient
Subjects, in persecuting us, with the loss of goods, lands, liberty and life,
for that we will not forsake the Religion planted upon earth by the Son of
God, to profess in place thereof, a Policy invented by an Illigitimate woman.

THE CONCLUSION.
AND for Conclusion, I humbly beseech your Majesty, well pleased to consider,
that without a true Faith it is imposible Hebr. 11. 6. John 3. 8.
to please God. Again, He that does not believe (the Faith planted by our
Savior) is already judged. And the Judgment is, Get ye away from me ye
accursed into fire everlasting, Matthew. 25.
which was prepared for the Devil and his angels. And presently after this
sentence given, they are cast into Hell; which is as the Prophet Isay says: A
profound and spacious room, his food is fire and store of wood, the breath of
our Lords mouth does kindle the same, like a maine River of Brimstone: and
there bound hands and feet, they are placed in a bed of Moathes, to gnawe
perpetually on their carcasses; and in scorn of the pride of life, in which
they lived upon earth, covered with a covering of Lice; as the Prophet Isay
witnesses, saying: Thy pride is drawn down into Hell, thy carkas Isay 14.
is fallen, the moath shall be strowen under thee, and worms shall be thy
covering. And placed in this woeful and lamentable estate, they are delivered
up into the hands of Devils, who as ministers of Gods wrath, power out upon
them, Fire, hail, famine, death, teeth Eccles. 39. Apoc. 14.
of beasts, scorpions, and serpents. And the smoke of their torments shall
ascend up for ever and ever. Without any hope of ease, or any possibility for
one moment, ever to have their torments lessened, for that they shall be for
ever the same, as the Prophet says; He loved cursing, Matthew. 25. Psalm. 108.
and it shall come to him, and he would not blessing (that with which God has
blessed all Nations of the earth, according to his promise) and it shall be far
from him, in all eternity he shall neither hear, or have any: which
considerations ought much to move the heart of your most excellent Majesty, to
take pity upon a number of your Subjects, who have no other Faith or Religion,
then that which is grounded upon the maledictions of God, and out of your
compassion to restore unto them again the liberty of embracing the Catholic
Roman Faith, which as we have abundantly proved, was planted upon earth by
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and there is no salvation
in any other. And by so doing, your Majesty shall much honor God, put an end
to all new Sects, establish your Throne as the days of heaven, bring
abundance of peace and quietness to your afflicted Subjects, and as you have
united the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland in one; so you shall unite
your self and them to God, and the rest of the Christian world, and be
partaker of all the blessings promised to the Catholic Church.

The means is so easy, that if your Majesty please, you may do it without
infringing any Law, by dispensation out of your Prerogative Royal, with all
Statutes made against the Catholic Roman Faith: which Faith not being evil in
it self, but truth and verity, as we have abundantly proved: the Laws of the
Land give your Majesty full leave to dispense with then all, as is set down in
Termino Michaelis, An. 11. Henrici Septimo, Your most worthy Ancestor, Chap.
35. saying: The diversity between malum prohibitum, and malum per se malum
prohibitum, is where the Statute does prohibit, that a man shall coin no
money, and if he do, he shall be hanged; this is malum prohibitum, for before the
said Statute, it was a lawful act to coin money, but not after; and for this
evil the King may dispense, etc. Even so, if a man ship wool, for other
places then for Calleis, this is malum prohibitum, for it is prohibited by
Statute, and for this evil the King may dispense, etc. in like case: But malum
in se, neither the King, nor any other can dispense withal, as if the King
would pardon to kill another, or give leave to rob upon the highway; this is
void: yet when they are done, the King may pardon them: So it is, if a man be
bound by Recognisance in the Chancery, to keep the Peace at the suite of
another man, the King cannot release the duty, for the prejudice which may
happen to the other, yet when it is forfeited, he may well release, and before
not: and so neither King, Bishop, nor Priest can give leave to one to commit
Lechery, because it is evil, in se, in the Law of Nature, but when it is done,
they may absolve them very well.

Thus the Laws of the Land, give liberty to the Kings of the Land to dispense
with any thing, which is not evil in it self, but made evil by Act of
Parliament, as was the Catholic Roman Faith, in the Parliament holden in the
time of King Henry the eight, Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and yourt
Majesty. Whereby it is sufficiently manifest, that your Highness may out of
your prerogative Royal, as well, and with as good authority dispense with all
penallties imposed by Statute upon your Subjects, for professing the Catholic
Roman Faith, and give them free liberty to profess it, as you may dispense
with Merchants freely to transport out of the Realm, Silver, Wool, or other
Merchandise forbidden by Act of Parliament.

And the reasons or motives, which ought to move, your Highness to dispense
with the said Statutes, are as many, and as weighty, as in any case can be
given: whereof I will repeat only some few, out of which others may be
collected.

First, for that the said Statutes are contrary to the honor of God, his
oaths, words, and Law, as we have abundantly proved throughout this book,
and as your Majesty well affirms in your Speech in the Star Chamber, printed
1616. There is another Law, of all Laws free and Supreme, which is Gods Law:
And by this all common and municipall Laws must be governed: And except they
have dependence upon this Law, they are unjust and unlawful.

Secondly, they defame Christ Jesus, and all Christian men, who ever were
before the time of King Henry the eight, known and reputed Heretics by both
parties only excepted. For that they all either committed, or helped, or
assisted, or gave counsel to commit these actions, which are by the said
Statutes made Treason, Felony, or Criminal, as we have proved in the first,
second, and third Chapters.

Thirdly, they are contrary to the solemn oaths of the Kings of England,
taken at their Coronation, according to the ancient Laws and Customs of this
Land, as in the Saxon Law, left by King Engward the Lex Sancti Edwardi 7.
Confessor, it is said: That the King, because he is Gods Vicegerent upon
earth, is ordained to govern his earthly kingdom, and people of God, and
above all things, that hereuerence the holy Church (which is our Catholic
Roman Church, as I have abundantly proved) defend her from the injurious, pull
the evil doers from her, and utterly disperse them. Again, The King ought to
fear God above al things, and keep his Commandments through-out the Land: he
ought to preserve the Lands, Honors, Rights, Dignities, and Liberties of the
Crown, and the Rights of the Realm (such as is especially the Catholic Roman
Faith, planted in this Land by the Apostles) lost, dispersed, and wasted, to
recall with all his power to their ancient and due estate. He ought to set up
good Laws, and approved Customs; and evil Laws destroy, and put from his
kingdom, etc. All which to do, the King in proper person ought to give an
oath, upon the holy Gospel, and upon the blessed Relics, in the presence of
the whole kingdom, the Priesthood, and the Laytie. So likewise Bracton, an
Bracton, l. 3. c. 9.
ancient Lawyer, says: The King at his Coronation, under an oath, in the name
of Jesus Christ, ought to promise these three to his Subjects. First, That he
will command, and to his power do his endeavor, that true peace be always
observed to the Church of God, and to all Christian people. Secondly, That he
should forbid rapine (such as is the Purseuants taking away of Catholics
goods, without form or order of Law) and all iniquities, to all sorts of
people. Thirdly, That in all manner of judgments he command equity, and mercy
to be used, as he would that our benign and merciful God should show mercy
unto him.

According to which Law, the Kings of England at their Coronations have always
bin solemnly sworn to defend the Church of God, and her liberties, to set up
good Laws, and destroy evil, and do justice, etc. So William the Conqueror
at his Coronation, took an Stow in his life.
oath on the Altar of S. Peter, where he promised before the Clergy and all
the people, to defend the holy Church of God, the Pastors thereof, and all the
people subject unto him, he should justly govern, he would ordain good Laws,
and observe true justice, and to the uttermost of his power to withstand all
rapines, and false judgments. MALMESBVRY makes mention of the oath of King
Stephen, to this effect. In the Records of the Tower, in the first year of
Edward the second, and first year of Edward the third, are set down their
several oaths, to this effect. And your Majesty makes mention of your oath
in your Speech in the Star Chamber, 1616. saying: I protest in Gods presence,
my care has ever been to keep my conscience clear, in all points of my oath
taken at my Coronation. Again in the same book, and leaf, I have resolved to
renew my promise, and oath made at my Coronation.

Herein your Majesty may be like Asa the good King of Judah, who at the words
of Azarias the Prophet, 2. Parel. 15.
Took away the Idols out of the Land of Judah, and Benjamin, and gathered
together all Judah and Benjamin, and when they were come into Jerusalem, he went
in after the manner to establish the covenant, that they should seek our Lord,
the God of their Fathers, in all their heart, and in all their soul. And if
any man, quoth he, shall not seek our Lord, the God of Israel, let him die,
from the least to the greatest, from man unto woman. And they swear to our Lord
witb a loud voice, in iubilation, and in noise of Trumpet, and sound of
Shalmes, all that were in Judah with execration, for in all their heart did they
swear, the King, and all the people, to seek our Lord, the God of Israel, his
Law, Religion, and Commandments.

Fourthly, (if we will believe the Scriptures) they will be the destruction of
your Kingdom and Posterity, and therefore oblige all those who sincerely love
your Majesty, and your Posterity, to desire their abrogation or dispensation.
Samuel said to the Children of Israel, which now we Christians are, I will
teach you 1. King. 12. 23.
the good and right way. Fear our Lord and serve him in truth, and from your
whole heart. But if you shall persevere in malice, both you, and your King shall
perish together. Again, Samuel said to SAVL, Thou have not kept the 1. King.
13. 31.
Commandments of our Lord thy God, which he commanded thee, which if thou
had done, even now had our Lord prepared thy kingdom over Israel for ever,
but thy kingdom shall no further arise. So MOSES says, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
When he shall hear the words of this oath (of the Covenant between God and
man) he blessed himself in his heart, saying: I shall have place, and walk in
the priuity of my heart, etc. then (shall) Gods fury most specially fume, and
his zeal against that man, and all the curses sit upon him, that be written in
Deutronomie, and our Lord will abolish his name under heaven. Which we see by
experience to have been verified of late years, upon two of the greatest
Monarkes that were in Christendom, Henry the eight King of England, and Henry
the second King of France: Henry the eight was the first beginner of these
Statutes: Henry the second went in person with thirty thousand men, to aid
the Protestants of Germany, as witnesses Serres in his life: Henry the eight
had five or six wives, and five or six children: and Henry the second had
five sons, yet we see that both their names are abolished from under heaven,
their Kingdoms or Reigns ended, and not a man of them left to piss against
the wall; according to the words of God.

And amongst the many temporal maledictions, which God promises to send upon
that Nation which shall forsake his Word and Law, to follow humane inventions,
and policies for Religion: this is one, That the stranger that lives with thee
in the Land (a fornicator Deuteronomy. 28. 43.
after man's inventions as thy self) shall ascend over thee, and shall be higher,
and thou shall descend downward, and be inferior. He shall be as the head, and
thou shall be as the tail. Whereupon the children of Israel, after they had
embraced Ieroboams policies for Religion, were delivered into the hand of the
spoilers, until God threw them away from his face, even now from that time 3.
King. 17.
when Israel was rent from the house of David, and made Jeroboam the son of
Nabat their King, for Jeroboam separated Israel from our Lord, and made them to
sin a great sin, etc. And Israel was transported out of their Land, unto 4.
King. 15. 19.
the Assirians, and made slaves and tails unto those Idolaters, with whom, not
long before, they had made covenants of association and defense. So the whole
people of the Jews renouncing our Savior, the Messiah, are as we see by
experience, even until this day, the tail of all people, and under all, and
above none. Many people and Nations forsaking the Catholic Roman Faith, to
embrace Arianisme, became tail to the barbarous Goathes: Africa infected with
the Heresy of Donatus, was conquered by the Vandals. The East Church, which
whiles it was Christian Catholic, held the Empire of the world, now for her
Schism is become slave and tail to the Turk: and many Kingdoms in Asia and
Africa, which heretofore have flourished under the Catholic Roman Faith, by
forsaking it, either became base, vile, and contemptible, or quite extinct, to
the verifying of the words of God, saying: Whosoever shall glorify me, I will
glorify him; and they 1. King 2. 30.
that contemn me shelbe base. And who is able to express the present
maledictions which are fallen upon Germany, by forsaking in this our age the
Catholic Roman Faith? Since before it flourished both in dominion and
prosperity above all the Nations of the West, which now is punished with all
the plagues of God, as Famine, Pestilence, Sects, Civil war, and in danger
to be swallowed up by the Turk. And if before the rising of Luther, there ever
were any Christians, that made profession of the Religion now publicly
professed in England, as some of your Protestant Ministers would seem to
affirm; we see by experience that they were the tail, dross, and refuse of
all people, so lodened with the curses and maledictions of God, as that there
rests no more memory of them, then if they never had been; to the verifying
of the Prophecies, saying: The enemies of our Lord, forthwith Psalm. 36. 20.
as they shall be honored, and exalted, vanishing shall vanish as smoke. Again,
I have seen the impious lightly Psalm. 36. 35.
exalted, and advanced as the Cedars of Libanus. And I passed by, and behold he
was not: and I sought him, and Psalm. 36. 38.
his place was not found. Again, the unjust shall perish together, the
remaynes of the impious shall perish.

God Almighty having created all creatures, and given to every creature
whatsoever good it has, and to certain Kingdoms and people, particular
divine favors and graces, above other people; as the Faith planted upon earth
by his only Son, by the practice whereof, they may live upon earth, like
Citizens of Saints, and domesticals of God, and even in this life, taste of the
comforts and consolations of divine pleasures: when this people in stead of
gratitude, shall become so base and vile, as to forsake this Faith, to follow
the crafty inventions and politic devices of men: Then says MOSES, Our Lord
will not forgive him: Deuteronomy. 30. 19.
but then his fury will most specially fume, and his zeal against that man,
and all the curses sit upon him written in Deutronomie. And the generation
following shall say; and the children that shall be borne from henceforth, and
the stranger that shall come from a far. And all the Nations seeing the plagues
of that Land, shall say: Why has the Lord done this to this Land? And they shall
answer: Because they forsook the covenant of the Lord, which he made with
their Fathers, therefore the fury of the Lord was wrath against this Land, to
bring upon it all the curses written in Deutronomie. That the just may see and
Deuteronomy. 28.
fear, and say; Behold the man, that has not put God for Psalm. 51. 8.
his helper: Behold, they that make them far from thee, Psalm. 72.
shall perish: thou have destroyed all that Fornicate from thee.

Fifthly, they are Laws and Statutes made against all Law, and the grounds of
Law: for that Protestants would not be content, that the Catholic Kings of
France or Polonie, who have many Protestant subjects, should make
Protestantisme treason or felony: yet as our Savior says: Whatsoever you will
that men do to you, Matthew. 7. 12.
do you also to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.

And to conclude, the precident of making or approving such Laws followed,
will serve to make any thing Felony or Treason, or to change the Monarchy
into a Commonwealth, or to set up any Intender, or Usurper: whereof your
Highness ought to have especial care, both for the good of your Person,
Posterity, and Kingdoms; over which, God of his goodness grant, that your
Majesty and your Posterity may most happily Reign, in the estate of Monarkes
and absolute Kings, unto the worlds end.

FINIS.
The faults escaped I leave to the courteous Reader to correct.


