A DISPROVFE OF M. NOVVELLES REPROVFE. By Thomas Dorman Bachiler of Divinity.

Dignare ergo rescribere nobis, vt sciamus quomodo fieri possit, vt ecclesiam
suam Christus de toto orb perdiderit, and in vobis solit habere coeperit.

August. ad Honorat. epist. 161. Vouchesaufe to write again to us, that we
may know how it can be, that Christ should leese his church over all the
world, and begin to have it amongst you only.

printer's device of Johannes de Laet, featuring a farmer scattering seed in a
field (not in McKerrow) SPES ALIT AGRICOLAS


Imprinted at Antwerp by John Laet, Anno Domini 1565. 3 Decembris, with
special priuileage.

REGIAE Maiestatis priuilegio permissum est Thomae Dormanno S. Theologiae
baccalaureo, vt per aliquem typographorum admissorum impune ei liceat imprimi
curare, and per omnes Burgundicae ditionis regiones distrahere, librum
inscriptum: A disproufe of M. Nowelles Reproufe, and omnibus alijs inhibitum,
ne eundem absque eiusdem Thomae consensu imprimant, vel alibi impressum
distrahant.

Dat. Bruxellae. 17. October. Anno. 1565. Subsig. Pratt.

THE PREFACE TO THE READERS, CONTAINING THE ANSWER TO M. NOWELLES PREFACE.
IF as in war where worldly titles use by dynt of sword to be determined /
so in skirmisshes of learning / where truth in doubtefull matters / is only
attempted to be tried out: where gods glory not man's preferment is chiefelye
sought: where the limits and bounds of Christ's eternal kingdom the church
/ not of worldly dominions which shall perish and have their end / are
defended it were laufull (good Readers) to use false undermining / and
Stratagemes to deceive / to raise smokes to blind the eyes of the simple
readers / as does the politic captain when to conceal the better* the
weakness of his power / which being known to the enemy might breed
boldness / and increase courage / he makes fires of green fearne or wette
straw / that under the darcke smoke thereof he may the saufflier lie
unespied) finally if in controversies about religion / it were laufull to say
with Lisander the Lacedemonian / that where the lions Plutarch. in Lac^.
skyn will not serve, it may and must be eached with the case of the fox:
then in this respect / the auctor perhaps of the Reproufe / might for this
smoky preface of his have deserved at your hands / the name at the least and
title of a wary and circumspect captain / and be thought herafter worthy / to
have the leading of a greater army then hitherto he has had. But if on the
contrary part / as the nature of the things about the which in these two
kind of wars the strife is / is contrary: so the manner of trial and
conquest be also diverse: if truth be strong enough of herself and need not
the help of by practices to be supported by: if her bright beams disdain to
be obscured with clowdy mystes: then has this auctor not furthered but
hind^e^ his ^ause / then has he discovered his weakness / not showed his
prowe^se / then may he be termed a cowardly soldier / not a valiant
capiteine. Now here must I desire you as many as will adventure to give
judgment of the event of this conflicte between us / to open the eyes of your
understanding / and to considre the vain smokes whereby in this preface of his
he labors to blind you / and to disgrace both me and all such as have
written of late in English. The way (you know well that be of the learned
sort) to bring this to pass / ought to be by comparing matter with matter /
cause with cause / and reason with reason. But the aduersarye forseing when it
shall come to the close / and to the point that the matter must so be tried /
how weak and feeble he is like to be found / thought it a point of wisdom /
first before all things to get by stea^^h) / the possession as it were of your
minds / and there leaving prejudice his lieuetenaunt / him self to be
afterward occupied about the residue of his affairs. For this cause he
raised these foul and thick smokes / that such as have written of late in
english, be but seely translatours or borowers of those books, whose first
authors they would In the first side of his praeface.
seem to be, that therefore mistrusting that such kind of writing or rather
translating, should not appear worthy to be accounted the earnest doing of any
learned or wise man, they have done wittely, either to pretend that to be
written but lightely for a private friend or twain, and not meant to be printed
etc. or else to appoint such to bear the name as authors of their books, as
may seem most meet therefore, being accounted of all that know them, for
learning and discretion the simplest men amongst them: that these books have
been elaborated at convenient opportunity by common conference.

Behold here I pray you / the fond conjectures that have smoked out of M.
Nowelles idle brain / wherewith he thinks so to dymme the eyes of all men /
that he may under these clouds steal when he To the 1.
will in to their bosoms. If no new book may be made (as here he seems to
maintain) because all that can be spoken is said already: if for this cause
/ who so ever will wright now / shall be but a seely translatour Nihil est
dictu^ quod non est dictum prius
and borower of other: may we not justly say to him and all such: who be you
that obiecte to us the translating out of other men's latyne worckes in to
our English books? Are you not of the conspiracy of them / that robbed all
the heretics that ever wrote before you / to patche up your clouted Apology?
Is there any one sentence there that has not been filched from some one
heretic or other? Your great Bassa, if his doings be thus examined / is he
not like to be nombred amongst M. Iuell.
the seely translatours? If he should be cruelly called upon to restore to
your Apology / to Musculus his common places / to his master Peter martyr
his note books / the debte that he has borrowed of them / might he not think
you become banckerout shortly? Your self also / and that other that
skirmisheth with the cross of Christ / should you be in any better case /
the one of you borowing from Calvin his in stitutions / Brentius / and such
like / the other taking out of the history of Magdeburg / and the English
homily against images / such matter as he found there ready framed to his
hands? But what speak I hereof / seeing that by this means / neither is there
any new book now adays made / neither of long time has been / or
hereafter can be made. For neither made Cicero the books De Oratore, neither
Plato De Legibus, neither Hipocrates his Aphorisms / neither Aristotle his
Physica, because all these learned what so ever they wrote / of other that were
before them. Thus much may be said to M. Nowell susteining this paradox (to
deface us to the world) that we are seely translatours, because nothing can
now be newely written for the maintenance of the popes supremacy, or any
other matters which we now treat of, but such as has been already both
written and printed many years ago etc. The which so strange an opinion / as
for his small skyll some simple Idiot may maintain / so is it for the person
of M. Nowell / one that bears some countenance of learning / and is in deed
in the place and room of a learned man / altogether unsitting. And this I
doubt not but he him self / as well by the experience of his own writing of
late / as of other of his side that wright daily / knew well enough. But to
much Rhetorike made him play the fool / and while he followed to near the
precepts of his art / he straied to far from the rules of all good reason.
For allthough it be trick of Rhetorike / to labor to bring the adversary in
the very entry in to the matter / out of credit with the reader or hearer:
yeat is it a point of reason to forsee and provide withal / that the means
which a man uses / be not such as may be returned against him self.

Well this being now in the hearing of M. Nowell who peeped bylike To the. 2.
there while in at the key hole) concluded amongst the catholics in this
solemn conference of theirs / that some thing should be set furthe in
English / the next devise was of the manner of publishing it. Which was / if
the Reporter lie not) that because they mistrusted dest this kind of writing
or rather translating, should not appear worthy to be accounted the earnest
doings of any learned or wise man, they should pretend either their books
to be written lightely for private frindes etc. or appoint such to bear the
name as authors of such books, as were the simplest men for learning and
discretion amongst them.

If malice had not altogether blinded him / and as it were bereued him of
common sense / never would he have abused your ears (good Readers / with
such vain toys as these are. For there is none of you I trust / but that he
judges better of the whole nombre o^ catholics / then that he can be
persuaded to think / that there should be amongst them any so wittelesse /
(much less that a multitude should agree in conference) to think / that to
wright of a matter either in the same tongue or any other / whereof an other
has written before / were a thing not worthy to be accounted the doing of any
learned or wise man. Which if they should think / what were it else but to
condemn all the learned writers of so many hundred years / of ignorance and
lack of wit / as either being seely translatours or needy borowers. Beside
this / there is none of you I trust so simple but that he can easily imagine
with him self / that it is not likely / that any Catholic should be so far
from all reason / as to fear this that M. Nowelles fantasy surmiseth / having
especially in his eye the example of heretics them selves / who writing daily
in the vulgar tongues / are yeat therefore counted of none but fools in deed
/ the less learned or wise.

He notes in the margent M. Doctor Harding and M. Rastell / for pretending
their books to be written for private frindes. And why ought they not rather
(being both of them to speak the lest men of no in famous manners or godless
consciences) to be beleuid / affirming the same in their several prefaces to
the Readers / then M. Nowell with his most vain and unlikely conjectures /
being already infamouse for beelieng that learned man M. Doctor Redman / as
to honest / learned / and good men yeat living it is notoriously known?

As for us whom he calls the simplest amongst the Catholics for learning
and discretion: if that be true / so much have we the greater cause to render
thanckes to allmighty God / who has preserved free from the infection of
their heresies / such a nombre no worse learned / nor of less discretion then
we by gods grace are. Who may when it shall please his wisdom to appointe
the time / and to move the heart of our prince to call us home / show our
selves worckemen in buylding up that / which heretics have destroyed and
pulled down. But I fear me and would it were not so / that even in this
point also / M. Nowell has made a Rhetorical lie.

The next thing that he burdeneth us withal / is common conference. I would
it were true that he lays to our charge. If we were as To the 3.
wise as we should be / it should be true / and we would in this point
imitate our adversaries. But our savior has said (it can not be false) Filij
huius seculi pruden^iores fili^s lucis in generatione sua sunt. Lucae. 16.
The children of this world be wyser then the children of light / in their
generation. And so it happens unto us. But here I pray you good readers /
marcke how he doubleth and faltreth in this tale of his / that so you may the
better understand with whom you deal in this case. First he says that all
our doings be but seely translations / the which he makes so easy a matter
/ that the meanest (he says) amongst us (have they only a little
understanding in the latin tongue) may after this sort load them with
havoc of books. Here / (forgetting that ever he spoke these words) he
says that these books have been long elaborated by common conference. What
shall we say? If this kind of writing called by him translating M. Nowelles
tongue faltreth in his lieng tale.
be so easy as he makes it / what need was there of long or common conference
/ which things be only required in matters of great hardenesse and
difficulty? What cause of fear of committing the handling of matters of such
weight to a few / allthough young men year understanding the latin tongue as
well as him self / then which / less knowledge by his own confession would
serve to load them with havoc of books? If this be true / what neded M. D.
Harding or M. Rastell either / to use the advice of their learned frindes / to
have any survey made by others of their doings / seeing it is well known /
that as they are both hable to translate out of latin books before written
in to theirs made in English: so they would for their wisdoms translate out
of such (beside Pighius / Gropperus / Hosius / whom in this place he names)
as being never yeat by heretic answered / have by the consent of all learned
catholics / and very silence of heretics / been so already allowed for sound
and good / that to make any doubt thereof now / might seem a thing altogether
nedelesse and superfluouse? Now here again I pray you considre / how
unlikely it is / that ever any wise catholics should be of this mind to
publishe their common devise unto the world / in the name of a few of the
simplest sort among them? Their doings M. Nowell says were taken out of the
books of such catholics as had written before. This being granted / that
minding to overthrow heresies they would choo^e out of the worst / who is so
foolish to believe? If they chose out of the best whom envy her self can not
deny but to have been learned / and to have written learnedly / Roffensis
Pighius Gropperus Hosius. Alphonsus de Castro^*
what a high point of policy had this been / to make a few of the simplest
sort among us / to bear the name of such learned men's worckes / whereas
contrariwise the most learned (if they would not have their council bewrayed)
should have borne the name thereof?

This being good Readers M. Nowelles most fine discourse touching the late
printing of certain English books: you see I trust / how much he has set
forward more hastily then wisely. Yeat he upon the same as a truth most
clearly proved / brings in a comparison between the chief of the catholics
/ and the Phariseis sending their disciples to Christ to appose him / when for
fear they durst not come in presence them selves. And to give the more
authority herto / he brings the exposition of Chrysostom thereupon. A
solemn interpretation in a matter not necessary / and a sad bringing in of
witness to prove that that is not in question. For till this be first proved
that the catholics had such politic fetches as he imagines / to resemble
them to the Phariseis / and to allege Chrisostomes interpretation upon the
place / it was to give a sad sentence clean beside the matter. But such is
the noble courage of M. Nowell: Luther must be Christ and he one of his
disciples / yea though he be Judas that betrayed his master / who so ever say
nay / as in the process of this Reprouffe of his / wherein nothing is with
him more common / then to call us Phariseis / and him self and his companions
Apostles and disciples / most evidently it does appear. Wherein he seems to
me (I may say with better right then he applies against us the exposition
of Chrysostom) to resemble very much mad Hawkins of Bedlem / who persuadeth
him self and would all other to believe the same / that he is descended of the
blood royal / his father being well known to be a mean man / and a bruer of
Oxforde.

Hitherto has M. Nowell in general words labored / to deface The 4. side.
and to speak.
the doings of such as have written of late in English: now steppeth he
from thence to me / against whom his special grudge is. Of me he says:
first / that it was no great labor to borowe out off my master D. Harding
his book so lately before written, of auctorities and reasons ready framed to
my hands, so much as liked me etc. secondarily / that they that do know me
better then he does, merueiling of my doings in divinity matters, do think
that I have all my learning not of inheritance but by legacy etc. For the
first he might have beleuid me at my word if it had pleased my book dependid
thereupon. Now as for them that knowing m^ better then M. Nowell does /
merueile at my doings in divinity: A shift to convey a lie.
name of some other / because he him self had so lately before pronounced /
that I had taken my auctorities and reasons ready framed out of M. Doctor
Hardinges book / which if I had met with such a legacy / it might have
seemed nedelesse to have done. But be it his / or be it whose it shall / suer I
am that the auctor thereof is none of my acquaintance: for never was I yeat
acquainted I thank god / with so very a fool. Notwithstanding for the
satisfieng of his great merueiling / may it please M. Nowell when he meteth
him next (if it be not him self to ask of him by what means he that was but
Bachilar of art in the same colleage that I was of / when I was bachilar of
the law / start up so sone a preacher at Powles cross / and a public reader
of english divinity in the university of Oxford? May it please him further /
for the Sir Greshop.
removing this scruple that so troubles him / to demand of him / whether I
were not as likely at that time in the judgments of as many as knew us both
/ within three years after to wright the book that I have written / as he was
within less then the space of one year after / to occupye the place at Powles
cross / or to preach and re^de publicly divinity in Oxforde? Which sermones
and lessons (such as they were) would have made diverse books (he may be
hold to tell this merueiling man) every one of them by many parts greater
then mine. If these questions be asked / I dare assuer you / this old
acquaintance shall be either thoroughly satisfied / or forced to confess the
cause of difference to be^ because as says Tertullian: Nusquam facilius
proficitur He means the schools of heretics rebelling against God and his
church.
quam Lib de praescript. haeretic.
in castris rebellium, vbi illic esse promereri est: men come forward no where
sooner then in the tents of rebels / where the very being / is to be
advanced.

Where M. Nowell scoffeth at my proceeding bachiler of divinity / this I do
him to understand / that I proceeded not upon the bridge / but in the public
schools / in the face of the whole university / in the presence of an
honorable and a learned audience. I answered for my degree in two several
questions / the^rst being. De primatu summi pontificis: the other / An liceat
homini Christiano diuertore ab vxore propter adulterium, and aliam ducere? I
disputed after the manner of the schools / a question out of the Sentences pro
and contra. I declaimed in the praise of the study of divinity: I read for
my form the beginning of the. 6. chap. of the first epistle of S. Paul to
the Corinth. And all this under a most Learned president (as to the world his
sundry writings have made him known for no less) Matthaeus Galenus
Vestcappellius. How I behaved my self in these exercises / if modesty would
suffer it / I could here by the inserting of the testimony of the university
vnd the seal thereof / make it appear to the world. This I trust without
offense being urged thereto by mine adversary I may be bold to say / yea in
conscience I take my self bound to say / seeing this contemptuouse abasing of
me / tends to the only discrediting of the catholic faith (which by gods
grace I maintain) that my demeanure was such / as neither my country
sustained dishonor / nor my self dishonesty / nor the part of the questions
which I chose to defend (being yeat the first of them / impugned with as
learned arguments as M. Nowell has hitherto brought) any prejudice in the
judgment of the learned hearers: as by the degree bestowed upon me by the
colleage of divines / and the honest commendation given to me by Franciscus
Balduinus, present while I answered in the first question two hours together /
afterward it appeared. Thus much has M. Nowelles slaunderouse report /
forced me (good readers) to utter of my self / which otherwise it could have
becommed me in no wise to have done. If his good Master M. Grindall / would
try them as well and sift them as near / whom he admits to preach at
Powles cross (a place sometimes for bachilers and Doctors in Divinity) as I
was tried / such store of unlearned but most railing sermones / should not
be made there as daily there are. Now I could here imitate M. Nowelles
Rhetorike / were I disposed to enter in to such vain contentions and
fruitelesse comparisons / and tell him also / that some one of his
acquaintance who knows him better then I do / merueileth also at his
doings in divinity matters / the knowledge whereof being neither to be found
in Rodolphes logic (wherein his greatest learning and study both was in
Oxford) neither in westminstre schole where Terence his comoedies will give no
place to Pawles epistles / he thinks that he met at Geneua or else where /
with some scattred scrappes of John Caluins / old / cast and ouerworne /
heretical divinity / or else he thinks he could never returning home /
before he was known to be a student in divinity / become so soddenly of a
mean scholemaister / so valiant a preacher. Unless perhaps / the same
spirit that has created of late divines (not on the bridge but in their
shoppes / or disputing upon the alebenche for their degree) so many tinckers /
cobblers / cowheardes / broom men / fiddlers / and such like / have also made
him a preacher amongst the rest.

Now follows a reason of M. Nowelles / why not provoked The. 5. side Now if
any do marvel.
as may seem, he answers my book written against the B. of Sarisbury. I
think no man w^ll merueile of his writing / and therefore he might have saved
that cost / and rather have satisfied men in this / why writing only against
fiftene leaves of my book / he is so impudent leaving the substance untouched
/ to pretend that he answers my whole book.

After this he adds certain other causes / why he answered no sooner / and
why he proceeded no further. He stayed he says in answering / because he
understood at the length / that M. Doctor Harding his book and mine were so
agreeable in substance / that M. Iuell who had then he heard say made his
answer to D. Harding ready to printe / should in answering the one / in
effect have answered both / and therefore he would in no wife prevent his good
Lord. That this is a false forged cause invented only to save the honor of the
brotherhode / who lingered so long in answering / he that has readen both
our books will easily perceive. For of the second ^ proposition handled in
my That temporal princes may not govern in religion.
book / it is clear / that it has no manner of affinity with any article
handled by D. Harding. Except M. Nowelles discretion will serve him to say /
that if M. Iuell should be able to disprove the popes supremacy / it would
follow thereupon that lay princes should govern in causes of religion.
Which if lack of due consideration should move him to say / yeat the
wisdom of other would not suffer them to believe. And therefore this being no
article of M. Doctor Hardinges / it was never likely that M. Iuell would ever
do such a work of supererogation / as to encombre him self any further then
occasion was given him. Besides / if this were the cause of M. Nowelles stay /
why began he then to answer me at all: Forsothe he preuenteth this objection
by saing / that he knew not before he begone / that our two books were so
agreeable. Now forsothe a discrete writer by his own confession / that will
begin to answer a book before he have readen it over. Is this credible good
Readers? And yeat thus must it needs be were it true that he pretends.
Except having read over my book / he had not readen M. Doctors / against
which nevertheless being long in England or my book came / he had vttred
before his malice at Powles cross / and therefore bylike had first readen it /
or else like wrighter like preacher. But well know all men / that / that
grave and sobre stayed head of his / could not admit any such rash and
temerariouse fact / and therefore this was but a zelouse lie / whereby to excuse
the common lingering of them all / he was content to hazard his own worship.
For whereas now he feared lest it would be espied / that all this patched
tale is but a lewd lie / seeing that he neded no more to fear to go before M.
Iuell in answering my whole book / then in answering fiftene leaves thereof /
which having in his hands he might have chosen whether he would have
delivered to the printer or no / to help that he says: For even now being
come thus far, the Bishops answer as The 7. side But when I had passed.
the report went being then not fully finished, and many good men much
desiring some answer, and as many adversaries as much bragging that their
books would never be answered, the council of some frindes, and continual
brag of so many adversaries, caused me to suffer this little taste as
untimely fruit, the sooner to come abroad. You must here imagine good Readers
/ that even just at that time when the report went that M. Iuelles answer was
not fully finished / M. Nowell was come to the 15. leaf of my book. You must
also think that this knowledge was brought to him by common report / because
you may not suspecte any conference between them. But above all things as
you tendrelye regard M. Nowelles pore honesty / you must understand two
reports / and one of them a false report / or else must he be a false
reporter. And all this does M. Nowell / because for his experience he knows
/ that a lie may better be fathered upon report or common brute / then upon
one man alone. The first report cried as it were to M. Nowell: hold your
hands for gods sake / the B. of Sarisbury has killed them both with one
blow. His answer to D. Harding is already made / and ready to printe.
Herupon M. Nowell (as he is a very pitiful hearted man) loathe to kill them
that were already dead / by and by stayed. But this was false report / who
was no sooner out of sight / but in comes the other report / accompanied with
certain of M. Nowelles frindes / and here began a new cry / that he should
give the onset / the bishops band was not yeat ready. And so he did / so
hard a matter it was for him and his companions / to obtain (they had gone so
long upon their credit) any longre time of susteining the expectation of M.
Iuelles answer / at the hands of either frindes or adversaries / that needs
must M. Nowell be thrust forth against his will / to go before M. Iuell. How
likely these pretenses are to be true / time will discover it M. Nowell stay
here and go no further. In the mean season how likely they are to be true /
the wise will be able to judge by the circumstances of this his halting and
doubtefull tale.

We are now come to that part (good Readers) of M. Nowelles Now that I have
preface / wherein he gives certain reasons / why he has so diligently,
largely, and as it may seem carefully also answered me: whose own doings he
affirms / to be more worthy of laughter then of any earnest answer. I
perceive it troubles M. Nowell to think / that Demit honoem aemulus Aiaci.
But I pitye him the less / because he made the match him self. His reasons
are / that he The first.
answers not the reasons alleged by me as mine, but as D. Hardinges, and not
only D. Hardinges, but of Eckius, Pighius, and Hosius, yea and of all those
that have written in latin for the popes usurped power etc. Lo the noble
courage of M. Nowell / for whom no one man can be found alone able to match
with him / but they must be all called furthe at once / that ever wrote in
latin for the popes supremacy, Which seeing it is so / now be of good comfort
M. Calfhill / whose Calfhill in epist. ad Martialem.
only sorrow you say was / that M. Nowell had not a more learned adversary.
You see that there is not only no cause of sorrow / but much occasion to
reioise / that with the answering of 15. leaves of my book / all that ever
wrote for the pope shall be answered in me. Where was your wit when you
feared this? Thought you that M. Nowell would not provide for such a foul
blemishe to his honor? But to the matter. I am not ashamed good readers to
confess / that in writing Ipse the learned arguments of such as have handled
the like matter before / and that if any reasons be weaker then other / they
be those especially that be of mine own framing. And is it not so think you
with M. Nowell? Those amongst you that be of the learneder sort know that
it is so / and that in answering him I answer their Apology / Calvin / Luther
/ Melancthon / Bucer / Brentius / Peter Martyr / in whose writings the like
reasons are to be found / and that what so ever he has not in them / is
foolish / fond / and unworthy to be answered. The second The. 2.
reason why M. Nowell answers me so diligently and carefully / is he says /
because I have set furthe a book, sclaunderouse not to several persons only,
but to our whole country, to our laws, and to our gratiouse Sovereign,
whom (he says) I charge as usurping undue authority: sclaunderouse, not at
home only, but abroad also in foraigne countries. Wherefore whom so ever I
show my self to be, and how sclendre an answer might best become me, he
thought it should become him not sclendrely to esteem the honor of his
prince, his duty to his country and to the laws of the realm, but with
earnestness to repel such reproaches, as I have attempted to blemishe them
withal.

As I have sclaundred in my book no private persons / nor said of any one that
which is not publicly known to be true: so have I in the whole discourse
thereof / had that regard to my duty toward my most redoubted sovereign /
that reverence to her laws / that natural affection to my country / that
allthough truth of her self be sower and hateful / yeat have I been allwaies
most far from these sclaundres wherewithe I am burdened. Neither doubt I any
thing / but if not before / yeat in that great day of revelation her highness
shall most clearly see / whether our plain dealing be sclaunderouse to her
person / or their hypocritical flattry traiterouse to her soul: whether he
be a good bishop or no / qui laicis (to use the words of S. Ambrose) ius
sacerdotale substernit, Ambr. lib. 5. epist. 32.
that brings the priestely right in subjection to lay men. I charged never
her highness with the usurping of undue authority: I charged those
clawebackes and flattring parasites for forcing upon her grace a Fol. 28. a. in
my first book.
title / which Calain him self as I proved) denied to her father. And now I
charge them again for the same / and add thereunto beside / that they are the
men them selves that are sclaunderouse to the Queen / to her laws / to the
whole realm. First for bringing in laws ecclesiastical the like whereunto in
all christendom are not to be found: then / for forcing upon her grace a
title / which no king or Queen christened will use beside: but above all
things for this / that they that call her grace supreme governor in all
things and causes as well ecclesiastical as temporal / The protestants
doings sclaunderouse to the Queen and the realm.
are noted / not at home only but abroad also in strange countries / most
lewdely to abuse the same / while even in a matter of no greater importance
then is the wearing of a square cappe / they refuse the order of the supreme
governor in all things and causes and as in words they call her)
ecclesiastical and temporal: while for the sign of our redemption (the
cross) which her majesty keeps most reuetently in her chapel / she is in
her own realm (by a book printed and set says) by a mean and base subject
/ inalapertly comptrolled * What may foraigne princes think of such a
cont^^mely / if as her graces affection toward the cross is unknown to none
/ so the only knowledge of the title of such an infamouse libell rather then
a book / be brought to the ears of any of them? But what may they say / if
understanding the tongue / Calshil. in ^pist. ad Martialem. page 7.
they should read* within four leaves of the beginning: As for her private
doings, neither are they to be drawn as a president for all: nor any ought to
crepe in to the princes bosom, of every fact to judge an affection. What
could they gather hereof but that the princes honor were vilanously touched /
as though in religion which is but one and therefore not subject to change /
she did use one religion her self / and deliver an other to her subjects: as
though (which is worse) she kept for her own private use the bad / and gave
to the rest the better: yea (which is yeat worst of all) as though she should
pretend one thing outewardly / and be of an other affection inwardly / which
could not be perceived but by creeping into her bosom. But if he that sets
forward so unhappily) sail the rest of his course with no better fortune /
he should in all wise judgment have done more wisely / if he had continued
still in the quiet haven at the ancre whereat once he lay / then he has done
by committing him self to the mercy of the winds and waves of these
troubelouse seas of controversies / wherein no skilfuller pilote then he
shows him self to be / may easily make a foolish shipwreke / and be cast
away.

These be the sclaunderouse persons good Readers / whom M. Nowell (if he have
that regard to the honor of our sovereign lady the Queen / his duty to
our country and laws thereof / that he pretends) will shortly have in the
chase / and let me and such as I am alone / who protest never to desire to
live hour longre / then we shall be contented to live like true subjects
under the humble obedience of our gratiouse sovereign The prince gods image
in earth.
/ whom we acknowledge to be the image of God in earth / in all civil and
politic government. But now here I pray you behold / how M. Nowell that
makes these great bragges / of repelling with earnestness such reproaches
as I have attempted (he says) to blemishe my prince, laws and country
withal, quitteth him self of his promise. Does he not even then when he
comes to that article where these surmised reproaches should be / flee back
and give over in the plain field? Is not this repelling with earnestness a
plain mockery to be laughed at / when about the matter that made him (he
says) to wright so carefully and diligently / of 124. leaves / he bestows
not fully three: when he ends there / without entering in to the article /
where he should rather have begone?

The third reason that has moved M. Nowell to wright the more largely
against me / he expresses in these words: because the simple and unlearned
readers have often best liking in books more boldly then learnedly written,
and are most in danger to credit most lewd and sclaunderouse lies, I
therefore, have in answering more at large, applied my self to such as be of
mean understanding, to whom the guilefull dealinges of the papists can not
with brevity be made manifest. These be M. Nowelles causes for his excuse why
in so many words he has vttred so little matter. But the truth is / when
after long streining of curtosy amongst the brethren which of them should
answer my book / they all agreed / first in this / that something must needs
be said thereto / and finally that M. Nowell of all other should take the
matter in hand / as he that for his rare gift of railing were best able to
feed the humor of such simple and unlearned / as here him self says /
have often best lyking in books more boldly then learnedly written, then he
deeply considering / that the greatest vauntage that he could find against
me / must be by making men believe / that the places of S. Cyprian. S. Hierome
and such like / brought for the confirmation of that first proposition of mine
/ That there must be one head in earth to govern christ's church, were
alleged directly for the B. of Romes supremacy / to the which being contained
withein the compass of 15. leaves of my book / if he should but answer
after like proportion / his answer were The true cause of M. Nowel les so
large writing.
like to be counted but a twopeny book / and he for no better then a
threehalfepeny doctor: his high wisdom in respect of these considerations
found it best / to dilate so that little stuff that he had to utter / that he
might seem to have made a just volume / and to have answered therein the whole.
For this respect / because to have entitled his book: A Reproufe written by
Alexander Nowell of a piece of a book etc. Why he termed his book a Reproufe.
had been to great a blemishe to his worship / and call it a confutation or an
answer to my whole book by any means he could not / he devised to term it
a Reproufe of my book / a word as he thought such / as in reproving only 15.
leaves he might seem to be able to justify / and which should sound in the
ears of the unlearned (not accustomed to look so narowly in to the nature of
words) as much as a confutation of the whole. For this cause / to pacify the
learneder sort whom he saw he should not be able by such a trick of
ligier de main so easily to deceive / and who would he knew well not stay at
the title / but take a diligent view of the contents of the whole / he
ransacking all the corners of his iugglers box / brought furthe at the length
a trick of deceptio visus, whereby he would make them believe (as you have
heard) that M. Doctor Hardinges book and mine were so like in substance /
that M. Iuell in one should answer both / and that therefore his further
travel should be nedelesse: whereas you know / that my second proposition
and the whole conclusion of my book / have no manner of agreement with any
argument handled in D. Hardinges book.

You have heard the effect of M. Nowelles smoky preface / wherein all his
labor taken is bestowed to this end / to excuse the not speedy answering of
the whole brotherhod / his own parcel answering / his so large and earnest
answering to so mean a man as I am / finally to deface me and other that have
written / by most lewd / foolish / and untrue surmises. Which nevertheless
he aduoucheth so confidently / as though he had been present at Louaine and
priuey to all our doings / and thoughts / yea and to more then ever we
thought toe. Wherein how vain he has showed him self to be / if nothing had
been said allreadie / even this that he has of M. Rastell / whom he
affirms to have had his book lienge by him ready made four years at
Louayn (whereas yeat he has been Nowell in his praeface 3. side 35 Calfhill
in his epistle to M. Martial, and praeface to the reader.
scarce on this side of the seas half four year / and at Louain when he
printed his book not four full months) were alone sufficient to declare.
This deceitful dealing of his / by defacing us to the world / liked so well him
that came next after him to wrighte / that he thought his part not to be well
played / unless he endeavored also and enforced him self to do the like. And
for this cause forsothe ruffling in the figure of Ruffinis^us, he calls M.
Doctor Harding How much better would this name have beco^med M. Iuell, that
of a catholic became an heretic, of an heretic a catholic, of a catholic
an heretic again?
Apostata: at my name he scoffeth calling me worthy Man who gave but a Dor. M.
Rastelles because it lay not so open to his scoffing spirit / he depraved
vttrely / calling him Rascal. But o I would it might please almighty God /
who has bestowed upon him whom he so calls / so bountifully so many
excellent gifts of virtue and learning / that they were both thoroughly
known to the world for such as they are. Then should M. Rastell to speak
the least / be found to be as far in all respects from all base and vile
condition / as this shameless man is him self from all honesty and
Christian-like behavior in so calling him. To M. Stapleton this painted poppet
threateneth dry blows / yeat wisely under an if / and in the name of an
other. The book of Staphylus he compares to a Ruffians sword al to be hacked
/ calling by the way a most learned and grave councelour to the late Emperor
Ferdinandus / Ruffian. In deed there was a rude black Iacobus Smidelinus.
smythe / that did the best he could to break the edge and to leave so^e
gashes in this sword / but those little nickes that he made / the Staphyl. In
defens. Apol^g. Calf. fol. 17. b. 33.
owner thereof ground out so conningly again / that the edge of it was after
more sharp then ever it was before. Lest all this should not be enough to
discredit us / last of all he charge such of us as being in Louain have been
of new colleage / with the smoky styrres blown in Scotland, the fyry
factions inflamed in France, the Pholish treason condemned in England, the
popish conspiracy attempted in Ireland. Comes not this think you of a high
wit / and a great discoursing head? Thanks be to God it is yeat no horned
beast that assaulteth us thus cruelly. He charge us with gaping for
bishoprikes / but surely if him self labored not ambitiously to be chief
councelour to some lord of misrule at Christmas / he would never have stremed
so far the streightes of his simple brain / as by this most singular
discourse upon these late troubles and treasons (which beside him self never a
man I believe in England could have dreamed of) to give a most undoubted
experiment / what wonders he were able to work by his wit / if he listed to
bend it. But this is the lewdenesse of our adversaries / when to the doctrine
that we defend they are able to say nothing / to deface as much as in them
lies our persons by untrue surmises / by false and sclaunderouse reports /
by all means direct or indirecte. For this they are once as it should seem by
their doings persuaded (how truly God he knows) that they shall be able to
write nothing so absurd / that shall not with some get credit / and find
frendely entreteinement. Wherefore this is good Readers the common request of us
all unto you / that rejecting vttrely these vain / untrue / and impertinenent
exceptions of our adversaries / whereof your ears be long since full / it
may please you to have a diligent eye to the matter it self / and not to
suffer your selves to be thus shamfully abused / and carried from thence to
such sciendre considerations as are these: whether the writers be young men /
or old: many in conference / or few alone: whether they wright in short
space / or take long leisour: whether they translate or make of their own. For
surely they that propose these exceptions / as it is an evident argument that
they mistrust their cause / so seem they not to savor of the spirit of
humility / which seeks nothing but the honor and glory If S. Cyprian
writing this epistle to Cornelius the B. of Rome, M. suell in his Replye fo.
228. begins to ^hrincke from his challenge.
name him either the high priest, or christ's vicair general in earth, or
universal bishop, or head of the universal church etc. then may M. Harding
seem to have some honest color for his defense. For these respects therefore I
say / and other which here for good causes I conceal / it has been thought
good to requier you / to signify to us / whether you will ratify the
doctrine contained in that book made against the cross / lest after you flee
to the Praetor his exception: Quod nomine meo gestum non est raiu^ no^ habebo.
It is reason that we demand / and it is law. Consulte your lawier so well
known in Oxforde for his three gifts of heresye / frenesy and Ialousy / and
he will tell you no less. When we understand your mind herein / you shall
know more of ours. It would do well that you declared it at Powles cross /
from whence we are contented to take notice: the rather / because we trust you
will say nothing there / but that whereto you will stand hereafter.

Faults escaped in printing.
Leaf. Side. Line. Fault. Correction. 23 a 25 wolud would 26 ouersthrowe
overthrow 27 b 25 tho warte thou art 51 a 32 betwe between 57 b 3 saunderouse
slaunderouse 58 a 29 as in well as well 64 b 2 plaees places 65 b 3
praesbiterum presbyterum 74 a 24 ades heads 81 b 25 Macedonio Macedonia 82 b 5
next chap. next chap. save one 96 b 6 Agipto AEgipto 98 b 26 Aricans Africans
108 a 1 took on take on 155 b 10 amsuer am suer 179 a 15 churchand church and
182 a 13 not not compare not compare 192 b 23 Specially to be corrected.
fidei ecclesiae 198 b 1 call then call them 205 b 32 African Africanes esbeare
bear 211 b 7 in ipiet incipiet Specially to be corrected.
ipsa est seeds Petri ipsa est petra shall not do not

In margin.
86 a 21 Dorman. Nowell. 108 a 28 Gods gooddes.

If you find any other faults I trust you will frendely amend them your
selves, and considre that we printe not with such ease as do our
adversaries, whose books yeat lack not their faults.

blazon or coat of arms of England and Wales, surrounded by the garter HONEY.
SOYT. QVI. MAL. Y. PENSE: God save the Queen.


A DISPROVFE OF M. NOVVELLES REPROVFE.
THAT the sentence prefixed before my book to prove the Protestants
Schismatikes, was not abused: and that M. Nowell has passed over in silence
the chief point in it. The. 1. Chapter.
I TOLD you M. Nowell before, that in this your long Reproufe of mine so few
leaves, you had for your pleasure walcked oftentimes far out of the way, and
that therefore I would in no wise bind my self allwaies to follow your
steps. As even here in the very entry (to give men to understand what they
are like to find you in your whole process) leaving S. Austens
interpretation upon the place of scripture whereby he proves them to be Math. 7.
the ravening wolves that are schismatikes, and those to be schismatikes, who
communicate not with all nations, nor those churches that have been founded by
the Apostles labor: you slily slip from that to your own, and bear us in
hand that we are the Phariseis of whom our Savior spoke the said words,
Because we walcke gravely in long garments, pretend long prayers etc. Leaving
therefore all this by talcke of youres, as wide from our purpose, I will come to
the point of the question, which is between us M. Nowell, whether I lacked
judgment or store of choice in choosing this sentence of S. Austen to set
before my book, or no. Of the which I say, that all were it so that you had
clearly vanquished S. Austen, and proved that this text had been to be
understand against us, because we go in long gowns gravely, and you clime in
clokes up in to pulpites, or walcke in long robes lightly: yeat had this mised
to leave no one such sentence unanswered. Ergo, the reader may judge by this,
how likely you are to deal truly hereafter, that begin so trustely.

That the places alleged by me out of S. Cyprian, Lib. 3. epist. 11. and lib.
4. epist. 9. were alleged to the purpose. The. 2. Chapter.
I conclude therefore; that these places are by M. Dorman falsely, Nowell. Fol.
2. b. 7
and shamelesly alleged, to make a show or as he calls it an introduction
to the B. of Romes authority, whereunto they appertain nothing at all, but
only to the euersion thereof.

I never brought these places M. Nowell to prove the Dorman.
popes supremacy. You need not therefore to trouble your self with the prouse
of this, that they apperteine to the deacon disobeing his bishop Rogatian, and
to Pupianus abusing S. Cyprian. But allthough I grant you thus much M.
Nowell, yeat that these places because they prove not the popes supremacy,
appertain therefore nothing at all to him, but only to the euersion of his
authority, that faulty and untrue conclusion I can in no wise grant to you:
not allthough you think to underprop that ruinouse collection (as you do)
with this sclendre stay, that there is not one word in these places of the
bishop of Rome Fol. 2. a. 1. and. b. 6.
or his Supremacy, nor he as much as once named therein. For you should have
considered M. Nowell, that I entreat here in this place of the manner and
nature of heretics and schismatikes. Which is I say to rebel against their
heads, to contemn their superiors and laufull governors. Now as your
self would not I trow say, that if any of you should by writing or any
other unlawful means (which god forbid) go about to stir up the people
against our laufull Queen, he should speak impertinently to the purpose,
that to dissuade them therefro, should begin his purposed talcke after this
manner: Remember my friends, that the nature and propretie of heretics is and
allwaies has been, after that they be once waxen strong, to rebel and make
war against their laufull governors: Remember the late tumultes raised in
France by the Huguenotes there against their governor: as I say, it is not
to be thought that you would reject this man's exhortation, calling it
impertinent to the matter, tending to the euersion of the Queen's authority,
because the example brought, was of disobedience to an other prince, between
him and his subjects, and not in terms of the Queen our maistres: so surely
ought you no more to have quarelled against me bringing these examples out of
S. Cyprian. Especially seeing that I presupposed and afterward proved in the
discourse of that article, that the B. of Romes authority was no less over
the whole church in spiritual matters, then is that of other princes over
their several kingdoms in temporal jurisdiction. The which point (if you
had done ordrely) you ought first to have confuted, that so justly after such
disproufe you might have reproved the applieng of these auctorities.

There is no mention made in any of these places of the B. of Cauntorbury, ne
yeat of London neither, all though your self grant that by these places yt
is proved, that every inferior ought to be obedient to his own bishop as Fol.
^. b. 14.
his superior, and that the disobedience of such is cause of schisms and
heresies. Whereupon what let me in my preface, to apply as well these places
to the disobeing of the B. of Rome, allthough he be not there named, as for you
when the case shall so requier, to apply them to the bishops of Cauntorbury
or London, no more there then the pope mentioned by name. Who is as I said
before as truly the bishop of the whole church, as any other is over his own
propre diocese. You go forward and say.

Only this is most evident in what sense so ever S. Cyprian Nowell. fo. 2. b.
19.
takes these words (One bishopp that rules the church) the B. of Carthage
is that one bishop, and not the B. of Rome, and therefore that phrase of one
bishop can make nothing for the B. of Rome his supremacy, but rather does
vttrely overthrow it, as apperteining specially to the B. of Carthage in
Afrike not to the B. of Rome in Italy: and declaring in deed the bishops of
all places to be equal in authority, and consequently overthrowing the
supremacy of one over all.

I deny not but that this phrase may here specially apperteine Dorman.
to the B. of Carthage. No more ought you make strange to confess, that if S.
Cyprian would say that heresies and schisms rise of the contempt of the B.
which is one in a diocese, much more of him which is one in the whole
church, and who is the chief and root of byshoply order as shall hereafter
be by S. Cyprian declared. And thus you see, that I applied it not evil to the
purpose, although it prove not immediately the popes supremacy, the thing which
here I take not upon me to prove. That which you say of these testimonies,
that they declare the A lie fathered upon. S. Cyprian. 3
bishops of all places to be of equal authority is a most vain and
impudent lie fathered upon S. Cyprian.

That the place of S. Basile was alleged to the purpose, and that the same and
the other taken out of S. Cyprian, are both falsely impugned. The. 3. Chapter.
It is far (you say) from all purpose that I allege by Nowell.
patching here and there out of Basilius magnus his 69. epistle to the
bishops of Italy and France etc.

If you in this Reproufe of youres had brought nothing Dorman.
further from the purpose, it would never by the tenth part have been half so
great as it is. For I tell you once again that my purpose was not here (as
you untruly surmise) to prove the B. of Romes supremacy. My meaning was to
persuade men to continue and abide in the obedience of the head of the
church: the rather, because as Ciprian before gave a general rule, that all
heresies and schisms rise by going from the head: so here S. Basile
exemplifieth the same, in that vnreuerent demeanure and unseemly behavior that
the Arrians of his time used toward their heads and governors: how say,
you makes the place for this purpose or no?

I abuse both the Readers, mine own, and other men's time Nowell. fol. 3. b.
1.
(you say) in charging you with the crimes of those men whose heresies and
wickedness it is well known you detest.

I trust no man thinks so but you and your fellows Dorman.
M. Nowell. For standing the case so, that you detest the Arrian heresy where
withal I charge you not and therefore A lie. 4.
you have beelied me: yeat may you this not withstanding right well agree with
them in other their evil manners. I will not charge you to be infidelles with
Julian the Apostata, yeat is your hatred against the cross off Christ no
less then his.

You note me in the margent for turning the words Nowell. fol. 3. a. b.
praesidentias inuadunt, they invade and set upon their heads, and say: He
should have said, they do invade the chief roumes or places, and again:
for joining blasphemias protulit, to those which follow ad populi episcopum.

For the first I sustain that I translated the words well Dorman.
and truly, as he should, that would give to the word potestati resistit in
S. Paul, this english, resists the magistrate, Roma. 13.
by the figure called Metonymia. As for the fault in pointing (if it be one)
yeat of this am I suer, that neither is it great, nor came of malice such as
it is, but of some such small oversight as may happen some time to the
diligentest writer that is. How ever it be, this the rigorouse nothing thereof
may give men to vndrestande, that it went hard with you when you were driven
to seek after such aduauntages.

You say of this place of S. Basile, that it does most Nowell. b. 30.
lively represent the doings of the Papists.

Your only proof hereof stands upon a heap off Dorman.
sclaunderouse lies: Because the place of S. Basile is extant to be seen, I
will trouble no fardre the learned reader, but desire him only to confer it
with these M. Nowelles sclaundres.

Here M. Nowell you charge me once again with a conclusion, gathered (you
say) out of that which hitherto Nowell. fol. 4. b. 22
has been alleged out of S. Cyprian and S. Basile, and say that I am not
ashamed to apply the places before mentioned to the proof of the B. of Romes
supremacy.

First, I gather here no conclusion out of the places before Dorman.
alleged, and therefore apply not by the way of concluding these auctorities
to the B. of Rome his supremacy, and so that is an other lie. It is a
transition rather, so drawn A lie. 5.
out of the 3. first alleged auctorities, that it served also to make a
step, and a new degree to the second point touching more specially the
pope: wherein I much marvel that you should so fowly miss your terms M.
Nowell. And as here you missed the quisshin: so played you as homely a part
in making me to reason upon the pretended conclusion in this wise: The entry
into all heresies M. Nowell makes me to reason after his pleasure. fol. 5. ^,
1.
is to make open war against the bishopp appointed by God to be the laufull
governor and head of the church: but the B. of Rome is the bishopp appointed
by God, to be here in earth the laufull governor and head of the church.
Ergo, the entrye into all heresies is to make open war against the B. of
Rome. The which reason although it be most true in it self, and I minded to
defend every part thereof, yeat reasoned I not so here, but minded only in
this place to pass to the example of Nouatus the heretic, that as before I
had showed how heretics in diverse particular churches went from the obedience
of their laufull bishops: so here I might set before the Readers eyes one,
who spared not even the Bishop of Rome him self, that so this property of
heretics and schismatikes might appear and be the better proved, while they
forsake not only the inferior bishops, but him also that is the chief of
all other.

But what if I had reasoned as you would make me to reason M. Nowel, might I
not have defended that argument trow you? Yeas forsothe might I, not proving
my minor by this place of S. Cyprian, but supposing it to be true, till such
time as I came to the place where it ought to be proved. So that you need not
to tormente and vex youreselfe about these words (the bishopp appointed by God
to be the laufull governor and head of the church) which I never alleged,
(as you untruly say of me) to prove directly the B. of Romes supremacy, but
only to prove A fortiori, that much greater occasion there was of heresies and
schisms, when men should depart from the obedience of the pope the chief
bishop of all other, and therefore neither without cause or guilefully to
deceive the simple, as you uncharitably surmise. Which your self also
perceived very well, and therefore by the figure called extenuatio, you term
this reason of mine a simple collection, after this manner.

Now if he think yeat that he might make such a simple collection Nowell fol.
5. a. 31.
of S. Cyprian and S. Basile his words as this, that as the beginning of
heresies in their time was the contempt of the inferiors toward their own
bishops (for so Saint Cyprian teaches) so in likewise is the contempt of
the Pope as the highest of all bishops, the beginning of heresies now: First
I deny the argument, for that it follows not, though it be evil for the
inferior to disobey his own bishop to whose obedience in all godliness he is
bounden, therefore it is evil for a straungier not to obey a strange foreign
usurper, to whom he owes no duty of obedience. Again I say, though it be
the beginning of heresy to disobey Cyprian, Rogatian, yea or Cornelius being
godly or catholic bishops: yeat is it not likewise the beginning of
heresies, to disobeye any the late Popes of Rome, who were not only no godly
bishops (as were Cyprian, Rogatian, and Cornelius) but both most wicked,
and in deed no bishops at all, but false usurpers of wordly tirannie. Whom
for the subjects of an other Christian and laufull sovereign to obey, and
not to disobey, is the beginning of heresies, treasons, and other mischiefs.

This is my simple collection you say. I acknowledge it D^^man.
for mine as simple as it is, and to your double answer thereto replye as
follows. First, to the first, that it is most false that you lay for a
grounded truth, that the bishop of Rome is a foreign usurper, as when I so
gathered in my introduction I minded to prove in the handling of the first
principal article of the popes authority, and so sense have done. Whereof
seeing your self are not ignorant, you have dealt not simply but doubly,
laboring to deceive the simple, by defacing (as you thougth) my preface as
unskillfully written, for that I have there only said and not proved, that the
pope is the chief head of Christ's church in earth, whereas that I referred
(as by good order of writing the learned know I ought) to the first article of
the popes supremacy. To the reasons and proufes in which place brought, as in
all your answer you never come near, but cavil and wrangle against my
Introduction, which shows the cause of schisms to be disobedience against
pastors and bishops: so if they be applied to this place as they must, then
shall it appear how falsely you say, that the words of S. Cyprian were
alleged without all cause.

But because the whole force of this first answer of youres to prove my
argument naught stands in this, that the bishop of Rome being a forriner, no
such reason can be made from S. Cyprian and S. Basile his words: I will here
over and above that which I have allreadie said in the handling of this
article in his propre place, presently prove The pope taken for no foriner by
S. Cyprian and S. Basile
by S. Cyprian and S. Basile both, that he was taken by them for no foriner,
neither in Africa, France, Spain, neither yeat in the East church, of the
which S. Basile was.

For Africa first, was the B. of Rome think you taken Afrike.
there by S. Cyprian to be a foreign vsurpar, whose church he called
ecclesiae catholicae radicem and matricem, the root, Lib. 4. epist. 8.
and mother church of the catholic church? If the church of Rome be the
root and mother to all other churches, then, if the mother be above the
children: if the mother and root be no foriners to the children and branches
of the tree, it will follow very well, first that the church of Rome, as it is
no foriner to the churches of Africa and to the other churches through out the
world, but above them all, that so the bishop of the same is above the B. of
Carthage and all other bishops, and no foriner or usurper. And as carnal
children how far so ever they live from their natural parents cease not
therefore to be their children, nor their said parents become thereby
forriners: even so the bishop of Rome who governs that church that is mother
to all other, ceasseth not to be a father to his children dwell they never so
far of. Was the B. of Rome reputed a stranger to the bishops of Africa,
Lib. 4. epist. 8.
who used to send their legates to him to pacify matters, and to bring
knowledge of the truth? Whose communion to hold, S. Cyprian calls in this
epistle the firm holding and allowing of the unity and charity of the
catholic church. When all the African bishops assembled together in
council, directed their lettres to the bishop Apud August. epi* 90.
of Rome, praying him to confirm their doings by the authority of the
Apostolical See, pro tuenda salute multorum and quorundam peruersitate
corrigenda, for the preservation of the health of many, and the amendment of
the frowardenes of diverse: took they him think you for a forriner? If S.
Cyprian had had of the Sea of Rome that opinion that you would gladly persuade
men he had, would he think we have said of those schismatikes that sailed
out off Africa to Rome to complain upon him to Cornelius: Post ista adhuc
insuper, etc. Beside all this they have been so Lib. 1. Epist. 3.
bold having appointed to them by the heretics a false bishop, to sail even
to Peter's chair, and the principal church from whence priestly unity sprang,
and to carry from schismatikes and profane men, lettres: not considering that
the Romans are they whose faith by the Apostles mouth is praised, and to
whom false faith can have no access? Would he have said: Romam cum
mendaciorum suorum merce nauigarunt, quasi veritas post eos nauigare non
posset, quae mendaces linguas rei certae probatione conuinceret? They are
sailed to Rome with their merchandise of lies, as though truth could not
sail after them, able to convince their lieng tongues by suer and undoubted
proof? Nay he should, and would you may be suer had he been of your
mind, have said: Let them go on gods name, what care I for the bishop of
Rome. Shall I be so foolish to follow them to debate the matter before him,
who is a plain forriner to us, and has nothing to do therein? For thus
would you I dare say, at this day answer, if one should go to Rome and
complain of you. But now considering that saint Cyprian said not thus, but
contrariewise made his account to stand with them and try the matter before
the bishop of Rome, as it is manifest by these words (as though the truth
could not sail after them, etc): seeing that this whole epistle was chiefly
written to Cornelius to exhort him to give no credit to those schismatikes,
as by this amongst other may appear, that he says to Cornelius: Non attendas
numerum etc. Consider not their nombre: seeing that the words, rei certae
probatione conuincere, to overcome by evident proof, again: Ita enim scelera
festinant quasi contra innocentiam festinatione praeualeant, for so do wicked
deeds hasten as though they should by haste prevail against innocence, be
words of judgment (for where be prouffes offered, where do men prevail in
suits but in judgment?) finally, seeing men that think them selves wronged,
never use to complain but to such as they are persuaded have auctorite to
help them: of al these things it follows, that in Africa where S. Cypria^
governed, the Pope was taken to be no foriner. Now from Africa to France.

Of Arles a town in France was bishop in S. Cyprians France.
time one Martianus, a follower and professor of the heresy of Nouatus. Of him
S. Cyprian writes to Stephanus the Pope in this wise. Dirigantur in prouinciam
and ad plebem Lib. 3. epist. 13.
Arelate consistentem a te literae, quibus abstento Martiano alius in locum
eius substituatur, and grex Christi qui in hodiernum ab illo dissipatus and
vulneratus contemnitur, colligatur. that is to say: Address your lettres to
the province and people of Arles, by the which Martianus being excommunicate,
an other may be put in his place, and the flock of Christ which to this day
being scattred and wounded is contemned, may be gathered together. Now consider
I pray you that have learning and wisdom to judge, whether it be likely that
S. Cyprian if he had taken the B. of Rome to be a forriner in other countries,
would have ever willed him to have sent such lettres, as whereby he should
excommunicate, and deprive of his bishoprike a stubborn or wilful heretic,
when with as good right as M Nowell dother here, the heretic bishop might have
bidden him go shake his ears foreine usurper as he was, and meddle in his own
diocese with excommunicating, depriving and placing of his own subjects, and
let Arles in France where he had nothing to do, alone. Considre whether these
words (and the flock of Christ scattred etc. may be gathered together, do
not argue as much, as that when peculier pastors do not their duties,
recourse ought to be had to the bishop of Rome the head and chief shepherd of
all? Finally Let M. Nowell considre, whether he would him self (having that
opinion that the B. of Orleance for example, in France, were as he is, a
forriner in England) write unto him, to send his lettres to the city and
people of London to excommunicate, and deprive M. Grindal because he is an
heretic. If he would not (as that is to be judged) truly he should do S.
Cyprian wrong to make men believe that he would play such a foolish part as
he would not him self. It follows therefore, that in France by the judgment
of S. Cyprian the B. off Rome was taken for no foriner. Spain.


Of Spain, whether there the B. of Rome were a foriner, let the restoring of
Basilides by Stephanus the Pope to his bishoprike, be a witness. Against which
sentence when S. Cyprian with the other bishops of Africa gathered to gather
defendid Sabinus the new made bishop, they had no other thing to object, but
that Basilides the heretic had Cyprian Lib. 1. Epist. 4.
deceived Steuin the bishop of Rome, long positum, and rei gestae, ac
veritatis ignarum, dwelling far of, and being ignorant of the case and truth,
by wrong information. If Steuin the Pope had been taken by S. Cyprian to be a
forriner in Spain, would he not rather have taken against his sentence that
peremptory exception, then have used that which confirms his authority in
Spain? For seeing the sentence was unjust for no other cause, but because the
suggestion was untrue, it follows that if it had been true the sentence had
been good, and the judge not foreign but laufull. Otherwise should S. Cyprian
never have said: Neque enim tam culpandus est ille cui neglige^ter obreptu^,
quam hic execrandus qui fraudulenter obrepsit. For he is not so much to be
blamed that was stolen upon by negligence, as he is to be abhorred that
guilefully did steal upon him. But he should contrary wise have said rather:
He is not so much to be blamed, that to help his own matter told a false
tale, as he is to be abhorred, that would presume being a forriner, to meddle
in strange countries where he had nothing to do. But S. Cyprian said not so,
and therefore upon this place, and also the virtue and holiness of Steuin
considered, who dieng after for Christ's faith a blessed and constant martyr,
would not it is like do willingly such wrong as to invade an other man's
jurisdiction, I may be bold to conclude, that as in Africa and France, so in
Spain also, the B. of Rome was by S* Cyprian taken for no foriner.

To come now to S. Basil, Let his epistle written to Epist. 52. How the Pope
was esteemed of S. Basil.
Athanasius, wherein he shows his advise to be, that the bishop of Rome be
written unto, to send his legates in to the East where they were, to condemn
the false council of Ariminu^, be a sufficient testimony, whether at that time
his power were counted foreign or usurped. For if they had judged his
authority there to be none, never would they have used this word: vt ipse
auctoritatem rei conciliet, that he may get authority to the matter, or
devised between the^ selves to have such men sent from Rome as might be meet
to govern, and admonish those that should be found froward and perverse
amongst them, to undo and overthrow the acts of the heretical council
holden at Ariminum before. If S. Basile had taken the bishop of Rome for a
foriner, never would he have sent to Rome for visitours Epist. 57.
to be sent from Italy to visit the^ in the East part of the world. Finally
if the B. of Rome had been a foriner, never durst he have been so bold as to
have sent to Caesaria, so far from Rome, his legates Lucifer and Eusebius, to
appease the strife that was there between S. Basil and Eusebius. Grego.
Nazianz. in Monodia.


By this that has been alleged you have heard M. Nowel enough, and more
perhaps then you would toe, to show that S. Cyprian, and S. Basile took not
the B. of Rome his authority for foreign or usurped. So that I may now be
bold to conclude, that this first answer of youres being proved to be false,
there is no let in that, but that my simple collection (as you call it) may be
taken as it is, for good and sufficient.

Your second answer (for the first it seems that your Evil manners of
rulers no cause to with draw obedience.
self mistrusted, and therefore added this as it were to vndreprop it) is of
all other most vain and fond. For what scripture have you, what Doctors,
what councelles, if it were granted to you that the bishops of Rome have
been of late years wicked men, to prove that because of their evil manners,
their subjects may forsake them? Our Savior said of the Phariseis
(allthough Matthew. ^3.
naughty and wicked men) to his disciples, that no man should withdraw his
obedience from them, but every man Do what they taught to be done, but not
what they did them selves: upon the which words S. Austen says. Illa ergo De
doctr. Christ. l^b. 4. Cap. 27.
cathedra, non illorum sed Mosis, cogebat eos bona dicere etiam non bona
facientes. Agebant ergo sua in vita sua: docere autem sua cathedra illos non
permittebat aliena. That chair therefore being not theirs but Moses his,
compelled them doing evil, to speak good things. They did therefore in their
own life their own deeds, but to teach their own an other man's chair
would not suffer them. If moses his chair had this priuileage (as if you will
believe S. Austen it had) that they that possessed it, how vile so ever their
lives were, were yeat assured allwaies to teach no evil doctrine: what object
you for defense of your running out of the church, and forsaking the head
thereof, the evil life and wicked manners of the^ that of late years have (you
say) sitten in Peter's chair, for whom our Lord prayed that his faith
Lucae. 22.
might never fail. as though our Lord god had only remembered the Iues and
forgotten his church. But considre I pray you M. Nowel against what men you
speak. You reason against the government of the bishops of Rome, whose
succession has continued these 1500 years, and hold, that because of the
evil manners of the latter popes they are not to be obeid, as who would say,
so long as their life was upright, and manners honest they were to be obeyed:
otherwise this exception should be in vain. Noweturne that part of the
wallat that hangs before you, and is ever in your eyes, behind, and placing
the other before, look upon your own bishops not yeat settled in full 15.
years quiet possession. See whether they that before cried out upon ambition,
pride, covetousness, lack of hospitality and such like, have not in these
few years overtaken the bishops of 900. years before them, and gone
beyond them toe. What were to be looked for then (might you quietly continue)
after one hundred years, that have profited in wickedness so much in these
few? Might not your scholars think you even by your own lesson, both now
and then give you over in the plain field? But if there be no remedy but
that you will needs conclude thus of the popes of this latter age (by which I
think you understand as you are wont all since S. Gregory's time, and without
any great streining of curtosy him toe) that because of their evil manners
they were no bishops at all: then give me I pray you leave good sir, to say
as much to you being as yeat no bishop, but taking upon you to reprove the
chief of al bishops, as did S. Cyprian to Pupianus judging his rulers, no
less then you do now all the latter popes Quis est enim hic superbiae tumor
etc. What swelling pride is this? What arrogancy Lib. 4. epist. 9.
and puffing up of mind, for the to call to thy examination thy rulers and
priests, and except we make our purgation before the, and be absolved by thy
sentence, for the space of six years, neither had the brotherhode any bishop,
neither the people any head, neither the flock any shepherd, neither the
church any governor, neither Christ any bishop, nor God any priest. Is it
not so with us M. Nowell, not for the space of six years, but for the
continual space of 900, if it were true that you Absurdity.
say? Should not the church by this means have be^ without any head at all,
universal or particular? Seeing that all other bishops thorough out the
world have been made bishops by the popes, who being them selves no
bisshoppes could not have the authority to make other. And then will it
follow also, that the church having no bishops, could have no priests: if
no priests, no sacraments rightely ministered, beside infinite absurdities mo
that will follow, if that of all other most foolish doctrine of youres were
true, that naughty manners should make of bishops no bishops.

Thus your double answer made to my simple collection being confuted, it
remains that either you confess the collection to be good, or seek out new
matter to impugn it. One sclaunderouse lie of youres there remains yeat to
be confuted. Which allthough to the learneder sort be nedelesse, yeat for
their sakes who be of the simpler, with whom your chief labor taken in
your book, is to deface me, I shall shortly answer thereto in mine own
defense. Nowell. fo. 5. b. 23.


In the conclusion it is to be noted, when Basile speaks of all the bishops
of the East as the shepherdes stricken, M. Dorman altering the nombre, speaks
it of the Pope as the only shepherd.

Here appears M. Nowell your singular honesty, who burn with such a
hatred toward my person, that so that somewhat you may say to ease your
stomach, you pass not, all is one to you by what right or wrong. For I A
sclaunderouse. lie. 6.
never alleged these words as the words of S. Basile, but alluded only to
the scriptures, where the prophet has: Zachar. 13.
Percute pastorem and dispergentur oues. Strike the shepherd and the sheep
shall be scattred. You have therefore dealt uncharitably so falsely to sclaundre
me, and given the world withal to understand, that your maliciouse
affections bear no less swaye in your pen in writing, then in your tongue
in preaching.

That the history of Nouatus is truly applied, and that I am clear from those
lies which M. Nowell sclaunderously lays to my charge. The. 4. Chapter.
You say M. Nowell, that I may be ashamed to forge so manifest alye, as that
Nouatus exacted an oath against the Popes supremacy, Nowell. Fo. 7. q. 3
or that you follow Nouatus in exacting the like oath as he did, and to prove
this conclusion of youres, you lay for a ground, that Nouatus his oath is not
only unlike, but clean contrary to your oaths, that the controversy betwixt
Cornelius and Nouatus was not, whether the B. of Rome were the supreme head as
it is now between you and us, but whether Cornelius or he was by right the B.
of Rome.

I never said that Nouatus exacted an oath against the Dorman.
popes supremacy. I said, and do still, that he exacted an unlawful oath
against Cornelius then Pope, and in that respect the head and governor of
Christ's church. The likeness of the oath wherein I matched you, was, that both
that oath which Nouatus offered, and this which you tender, tend to one end,
to trouble the beautiful order of Christ's church, and to withdraw men from
the obedience of their laufull pastor. For as laufully is the B. of Rome in
spiritual matters our head, as he was head to Nouatus. So that what so ever
you say here of the controversy between Cornelius and Nouatus for the
bishoprike of Rome, what so ever you imagine of the laufulnesse of your oaths,
being as you say of obedience to your natural prince and ours, and of the
iniquity of Nouatus oath being against his laufull bishop, all is to no
purpose. For I sustain still, that let the controversy be as you imagine it
was, yeat till you be hable to prove that the B. of Rome is to us a forriner,
and that our obedience to him in spiritual causes ca^ in no wise stand with
our lauful odience to our prince in temporal jurisdiction, the resemblaunce
made between Nouatus and you, will ever hold and be good. Of our obedience
toward our prince (whom as Gods ministre in earth in worldly affairs we
honor and reverence) as our doings for the time past can bear sufficient
testimony: so shall I trust our demeanure for the time to come be such, as
shall be able to stop the mouths of al such fawning parasites, as labor to
make princes believe, that these two obedie^ces can not stand together, as here
M. Nowell does, making that the ground of this lie of his, that Nouatus his
oath was not only unlike but A lie. 7.
clean contrary to theirs.

You bring for an other difference between Nouatus case Nowell. Fo. 6. b. 27*
and youres, that his oath concerned the maintenance of his heresy, which
as well S. Cyprian B. of Carthage, as Cornelius B. of Rome with all other godly
bishops condemned.

What conclude you M. Nowel hereof? Do the that prove any difference? Naie
does not that match you together so Dorman.
much themore? For your oath is it not for the mainteinaunce of your heresies,
which be so horrible, that as well by all general councelles, and all the godly
learned bishops in the world, as by Pius the Pope thy are condemned.

You say that as Nouatus required an oath of his folowers etc: Nowell. fol. 7.
a. 7.
So did the professors of the same heresies travel in Afrike with their
disciples there being Africanes, that they should not return to Cyprian B. of
Carthage to communicate with him, which as it makes nothing for any supremacy
of S. Cyprian B. of Carthage, no more makes the other for any supremacy of
Cornelius B. of Rome.

If you mean that the professors of Nouatus his heresies Dorman.
in Afrike did exact an oath as did Nouatus, as your words, so did the
professors etc. (which must needs have relation to that which goes before)
do importe no less, or if you mean not so, but that they traueiled to win
men from Cyprian, as the other did from Cornelius, how so ever you mean, you
can not prove so much out of the place that you allege. If you could, yeat
would it Lib. 4. epist. 9.
make nothing for your purpose. for I never alleged the oath of Nouatus to
make for the bishop of Romes supremacy, and therefore care not whether this
that you say the folowers of Nouatus did in Africa, make for S. Cyprians
supremacy or no. I alleged the fact of Nouatus to prove that heretics
trouble the order of the church: that did they that you speak of in Africa,
as well as Nouatus in Rome. If Dorman had written thus absurdely he had dreamed,
but such egle birds as M. Nowell is, never sleep I warraunt you, but be
allwaies waking. It follows:

And where Nouatus began first his heresy in Afrike by striving Nowell. fol.
7^. 24.
against S. Cyprian, and not by striving first against Cornelius B. of Rome (as
M. Dorman untruly reports) the beginning of heresies is rather to make war
and strife against the B. of Carthage, then against the B. of Rome.

You observe well the precepts of your art, to stay Dorman.
upon small points, when to the greater you be hable to say nothing. But to
the matter, where so ever heretics begin: in Africa (as you say of Nouatus
concerning his heresies untruly, though concerning schism truly) or in
Germany, as did Luther, or in England as diverse have done: as immediately they
make war against the whole church, so strive they specially against the
head, whose part is to provide for the body. For seeing that no man is to be
counted an heretic, but he that renounceth the unity of the church: no man
do the that, who is contented to obey the head thereof: it follows very
well, that who so ever is an heretic, whether he begin in Africa, England,
or else where, strives furthwith against the pope the head of the church,
which can not be said of the bishop of Carthage, who has no such office in
the church.

I have done (you say) maliciously and untruly calling Nouatus Nowell. b. 11.
your auncestour, and your bishops as his disciples, indurate heretics.

You purge your self of that which before I charged Dorman.
you not withal. For I compared you only together in that one point of
forcing men by oaths to forsake the B. of Rome. Yeat forasmuch as you take the
matter as you do, bragging here of your most earnest and pithy sermons and
writings against Nouatus doctrine etc. I shall desire the learned reader to
confer this place of S. Ambrose, Lib. 1. de paenitentia cap. 2. Hist.
Tripart. lib. 8. cap. 9.
written of the Nouatians, with your doctrine of penance: Sed aiunt se domino
defer reuerentiam cui soli remittendorum criminum potestatem reseruant. But
they say that they are reverent toward God, to whom only they reserve power
to forgive sin. Do not you maintain that man has no authority to remitte
sin, and call us at your pleasure for saying that God has given the same
power to man his ministre? Be not you the folowers of Nouatus in this point?

You say. I believe also that M. Dorman in the allegation off Nowell.
Nouatus his oath, had a further respect to that he makes mention of the
body and blood of Christ: by the which because Nouatus caused them to
swear, M. Dorman thought belike, thereby to prove, or at least to make an
insinuation to the simple, that the body and blood of Christ should be
corporally present in the Sacrament. But the daily oaths of blasphemouse men
swearing likewise in his corporal absence do confute that collection.

What respect so ever I had, this answer of youres to Dorman.
this place, borrowed of Ruffians and ribauldes, not of any that have either
learning or wit, is most far from the auctours meaning, which as any that
vieweth the place will easily perceive: so is it in Eusebius from whom
Nicephorus took it, most evident even at the eye. For Eusebius has, that
Nouatus made them swear per ea quae vnusquisque tenebat in manibus, by those
things which every one Lib. 6. cap. 34.
of them held in his hands: but they swear by the body and blood of Christ
says Nicephorus: ergo, they had the body and blood of Christ in their
hands. Well although you doubted whether your stamping, staring and swearing
alehouse solution, should find with all men such credit that they would by
and by believe you: yeat of this you doubted nothing, to make some men at the
least believe, that the doctrine of transsubstantiation Fol. 8, a. 4.
were by this place quite overthrown, and withal to set forth your selves to
the world as the very folowers of the primitive church, in delivering the
sacrament into the receivers hands. But this joy (if you conceived any
hereof) you are like to enjoy but a while M. Nowell. For both Eusebius and
Nicephorus calling here the sacrament by the name of bread, are to be
understand to have followed therein, the phrase of scripture, which either so
calls it (as did S. Paul) because a littell before it so was, as Moises rod
being 1. Cor. 11.
turned in to a serpent was in scripture called notwithstanding Exodus 7.
a rod, and said by the name of a rod to have devoured the rods of the
enchauntors, which were also serpents, or as our savior him self did, not
meaning by this word bread, the substance of material bread, but the true
bread of life. Joan. 6.


Whereas you say out off Nicephorus, that they Fol. 8. b, 5.
tasted that which they received, and expound it thus that is to say bread,
that is your own blind gloss, and is not in the text. If you would needs
play the expositour you should have referred that tasting of theirs to the
body and blood of Christ, which he made them swear by, and which went next
in the sentence before. So should you have done the part of a true
interpretour and have made Nicephorus agree with the ancient fathers of
Christ's church, and namely to omit Tertullian, Chrysostom, and diverse
other, with Cirillus the B. of Alexandria, who says of this matter: quomodo
Lib. 4. in Joan ca. 14
non viuemus qui carnem illam and gustamus and manducamus? How can it be that
we should not live who do both taste and eat that flesh? But what speak I
of making him to agree with other, when by this means you should have made
him to agree with him self? who in other places for that which he calls here
simply bread, ioining thereunto an epitheto^ calls it vitalis panis, lively
bread. And (whereas Lib. 1. cap. 30.
you would have him to say, that in this place the communicantes held bread
in their hands and tasted bread) in rehearsing the oration which S. Ambrose
made to Theodosius the emperor minding to enter in to the church of Milain,
brings in S. Ambrose amongst other things speaking after this sort.
Quomodo manus extolles quae caede Lib. 12. cap. 41.
iniqua diffluunt? Quomodo in eis diuinu^ etiam corpus excipies? Quomodo
sanguine^ praetiosum ad os afferes per quod ira transuersim actus tantu^
effudisti sanguinis? that is: How wilt thou lift up thy hands which flow with
wicked murdre? yea how wilt thou receive in them the divine body? How wilt thou
bring to thy mouth the pretiouse blood, by the which being carried away with
anger, thou have spilt so much blood? B. 15. S. Austen calls the sacrament
of Chr^stes body and blood the sacrament of the altar


I made no lie, neither yeat dissembled the truth or cloked the matter, (as
you charge me untruly) by calling this heavenly and lively bread, the blessed
sacrament of the altar, with the which word if you be offended you may
challenge S. Austen, for his word it is and not mine. It is you M. Nowell that
have much daungered your honesty by falsifieng this place of Nicephorus. For
where he has, Cum Lib. 10. de Ciuit dei cap. 6.
oblationes offerret qui mos sacerdotibus est, when he offered the oblations as
the manner of priests is: you add to the text, this word, his: and say, when
he made his oblations. Which The place of Nicephorus falsified
word of youres so conueighed in, is such a spiteful word, as destroieth the
whole mind of the auctor. For whereas we defend the consecration of Christ's
body and blood (of which name you are ashamed as appears by your,
Consecration
as they term it, although S. Austen so affirmed the same against Manicheus
the heretic, that he says plainly if Lib. 20. cap. 13.
the bread and chalice be not consecrate, it is food for refection but not a
sacrament of religion) whereas we I say, defend such consecration to be an
oblation and sacrifice, when you saw the words of Nicephorus to mean the
public oblations of the whole church, which are the body and blood of
Christ, you thought that sense to be little for your advantage, and therefore
it seemed good counsel, to shift in the word (his) to the intent it might be
thought, that Nouatus had offered somewhat of his own private devotion. Let the
world now judge M. Nowell, whether this be true dealing or no.

As for your bragging how you follow the usage of the primitive church, by
giving the sacrament into their hands who receive it: I ask you this
question, grounding the Ad Ianuar epist. 118.
same upon S. Austen, why you wrangle more about the giving the sacrament in
to the receivers hands, because they so took it in the primitive church, then
you do about the receiving it fasting, which Christ and his apostles did not?
If that be altered which Christ and his apostles did, for the more honor of
this great sacrament: why might not (for the same reason or for some other as
great or greater) the other, manner of receiving it into the hands be
abolished also and taken away, and you counted schismatikes for breaking the
peace of the church? Why cause you not young babes to communicate again as once
they did in the primitive church, and then make your bragges thereof to, that
you keep the usage of the primitive church?

Now that you have discoursed learnedly as you think Fo. 9. a. 3.
upon the place of Nicephorus, with charging me off mingling impertinent
things by the way etc. Whereas he that has but half an eye may see, that
without I would have out of half the sentence I could do no otherwise then
I did. Which if I had, you would not belike neither have taken in very good
part, seeing that even for that which as not perteining to the matter I
omitted, you reprehende me, cauilling that I have passed over in silence that
which is against me:

You return (you say) to the purpose again, and to discredit Nowell. a. 17.
me for ever, you couche together a nombre of evident lies which you affirm,
no less then in one half leaf sieve on a clustre, to have been made by me.

Well seeing then now we be come to that point, let us Dorman.
two count together that by even reconing we may continue long friends, and
see who is in others debt. Now say on M. Nowell, which is the first of these
five lies?

The first lie is, that after his discourse out of S. Cyprian of the Nowell.
bishop appointed by God to be the governor and head of the church, he
says the B. of Rome is that head, whereas by S. Cyprian the contrary is
evident: and that him self, or B. Rogatian is that head whereof he speaks.

They are two things to say, that the B. of Rome is the head appointed by
God to govern the church, and Dorman.
that in the places alleged out of S. Cyprian for an other purpose, S. Cyprian
meant so. I said I grant that the B. of Rome is the head appointed by god to
govern the church: prove you the contrary then say I have lied. That S.
Cyprian in the places by me alleged was of that mind, that said I never: as
by the place whither I refer my self I offer to be tried. So that of this I
am cleared, and the lie returns to you for belying me, not alone but
accompanied with an other in that you say, that by S. Cyprian A double lie. 8.
9.
the contrary is evident, that is to say, that the B. of Rome is not head of
the church, and so is this on your part a pregnant lie.

The second is, that to make war against the B. of Rome, is the first entry
in to heresy. Whereas S. Cyprian teaches that the Nowell. a. 24.
contempt of every godly Bishop in his own diocese by such as are their
inferiors is the beginning of heresies.

If you mean that directly I used as for a proof S. Cyprian, Dorman.
to prove that to make war against the B. of Rome is the first entrye to
heresy, that I deny: and so you belie me therein. If you mean that because I
concluded so much by the way of introduction that therefore I lied, then you
have made your self a lie that ways. For the argument holds and is very
good: The beginning and entry into heresies is to rebel against the head.
ergo a fortiori, to rebel against the chief head of all other, by S. Cyprian
must needs be the beginning of schisms and heresies. And so this stands for
an other lie. A lie. 10.


The. 3. lie that you lay to me is, because I say that Nouatus made his first
entry in to his heresies by making open war against the B. of Rome etc.
Which you call a double lie, because first Nouatus began his heresies by your
opinion in Afrike: next, because I say that Nouatus made war against
Cornelius as the governor and head of the church. For you say my words,
Thus did Nouatus, must needs be referred to that which went before*

To the first part of this forcked lie I answered before, in proving that
wheresoever heretics begin, they assault the head of the church: and
therefore to say the contrary because Nouatus should begin his heresies first
in Afrike, is a lie on your behalf. As is also the second part, when you
charge me to have said that Nouatus striued against the pope as head of the
church, thinking to prove the same by referring my words, Thus did Nouatus, to
those that went before: which if you do, you shall prove thereby naught else,
but that he made war against the beautiful order of the church, and the
bishop of Rome by god appointed to be the head thereof. Not all one, to strive
against the head of the church, and to strive against him as head of the
church two Lies 11. 12.
For those are the words that go before. And so have you made here two lies.

The fourth lie that you burden we withal, is a very sclaunderouse and most
peuish lie, without al reason wrested and wrong by force out of my words to
make up a nombre. As first that I say the receiving of the blessed sacrament
of the altar instead of the distribution of the bread, that you count one lie,
because Nicephorus you say b. 25. 26.
has no such words. Nicephorus has not I confess the same words, nor I
ever said he had, nor promised to allege the very same, but was contented to
use a word signifieng asmoche and better known to all men then the other, and
therefore as long as I kept the sense of the auctor as you can not deny but I
did, I lied not: Ergo, you lied The other surmised lie is, because I say, they
that minded to receive it etc. And why is this a lie M. Nowell? You answer:
because they had received it already in to their hands. Yea but I tell you
again M. Nowell that they came not thither as much as you triumph of
receiving in to their hands, to receive it only in to their hands, but
especially to receive it into their bodies: and therefore you should to prove
me herein a lier have concluded, that they could not be said minded to
receive, as they who had received already both into their hands and bodies.
And of this principal M. Nowell a wrangler.
receiving seeing you could not be ignorant that I meant, you have not only
proved your self a lier, but declared also to the world that you conform
not your self in writing to that spirit that becomes a divine, but to such
wrangling and quarelling where no cause is, as very common skoldes would be
ashamed to use.

The 5. lie is, that I affirm, (you say) that you swear Nowell. fol. 10. a.
1.
men in such sort as Nouatus did. And here you repeat again, that the oath
exacted by Nouatus was unlawful, because he exacted an oath of the Romans to
cleave to him against their own bishop: you require an oath of subjects
English men, of obedience to their and our natural prince, and of renouncing
all foraine and usurped power. Again, Nouatus caused the^ to swear that his
heresy was the truth, and that Cornelius true doctrine was heresy: you have
no such matters in hand but are on Cornelius side against Nouatus etc. Upon
these two differences you conclude, that look how often I say, so did Luther,
so did Calvin, So do those wicked men in our country: etc as often as I say.
They exacted this oath etc. If he give not this oath etc. so many loud and
lewd lies I have made.

Until you be hable to prove M. Nowell, that the B. of Rome is not our
laufull bishop that be English men, Dorman.
that his power is fortaine and usurped, even in this point shall you agree
with Nouatus, that you swear men against their laufull bishop as he did. You
may not think your self sufficiently discharged because you say his power
is usurped, for that color Nouatus also I warrant you gave to his wicked
doings. As for the heresy of Nouatus although your oath tend not specially
to the maintenau^ce of that, yeat makes it directly for the maintenance of
diverse other more abominable. But you contrary to all good learning, as
though you wrote only to deceive the simple not passing for the judgment of
the learned, think your selves marueilously well discharged, if the
comparison made between you and Nouatus agree not justly in every small point.
Thus you see for 5. lies which in these fewelines you sclaundre me to have
made, whereas I have now cleared my self of them al five, it follows that as
often as you say that I lie, so often times, that is to say five, you have
lied your self, and thrice more beside, as in the count between us it
appears. So that now that I have answered you for such matter as from the
beginning you could charge me withal, you must not think me to deal hardely
with you, if I call you also to account of such manifest and inexcusable lies,
as hitherto in these few leaves of youres you have made. Wherein I shall
desire the (gentle reader) to show thy self a good and upright auditor
between us.

First you say M. Nowell, that the sentence of S Austen In the beginning of
his book.
prefixed by me before my book, makes directly against the papists, as you
term us. That is an evident lie as has been declared.

Item, that you promised to leave no saying of any old doctor unanswered,
alleged by me. Which seeing you have not performed in that which being brought
out off S. Austen was of all other the first, but have passed over in silence
these words. Thou do not communicate with all nations, wherein the force of
the place consisted, this is the second lie.

Item that Cyprian declares in deed in the 9. epistle of the fourth book,
that the bishops of all places be of equal fol. 2. b. 28
authority, it is an other lie grounded falsely upon S. Cyprian.

Item, that I falsefied S. Basile his words (of the which I fol. 5. b. 22.
made no mention) it is a sclaunderouse lie.

Item, that Nouatus began his heresy first in Afrike, it is a lie falselie
fathered upon S. Cyprian, who mencioneth fol. 7. a. 24 Li. 2. epi. 8.
his schism, not his heresy, which all writers agree that he fell first into
at Rome, upon displeasure conceived of the repulse that he suffered in standing
for the bishopric off Rome.

Item, that the professors of Nouatus heresies travailed in Afrike against S.
Cyprian as Nouatus him self did in Lib. 4. Epist. 9.
Italy against Cornelius the B. of Rome, it is affirmed by you M. Nowell to be
proved by S. Cyprian, but the place fol. 7. a. 7.
having been examined has no such thing.

Item, whereas Nicephorus has: Cum oblationes offerret fol. 8. a. 17.
when he offered the oblations, you cast in this word his, and so belie
Nicephorus.

The gross and total some of al your lies hitherto made, beside those, which
because having all ready declared that Nouatus and you agree in swearing men
against the bishop of Rome, I am clered of, how often so ever I say: so did
Luther: so did Calvin: so do these wicked men in our country: fol. 10. a. 13.
as often as I say, They exacted this oath, etc. If they give not this oath,
etc. must needs also return to you) rises to 15. lies, and with that
captain lie, of al other which hitherto you a. 22. At Paul's cross.
have made, as well for the place which was public, as the audience which was
honorable (in saying that you had not found any one authority by me, so
far as then you had read, truly alleged) the very greatest of all, to
sixtene. Now keep you the count and let us proceed.

You find fault with untrue coating of the places alleged, which although to
all writers it be a thing that commonly happens, and to none so common I
refer me to your Apology.
as to those of your occupation: yeat in me so maliciouse a man I am, it must
needs be of set purpose that such as would be desirouse to see the
originalls might not to spedely find out the lewdenesse Nowel 26.
of my allegations, serving nothing to the purpose, unless perhaps (you
say) I did never use mine own eyes in vewing of those places.

Well M. Nowell I pray you yeat stand good master Dorman.
unto me, or at the least favor your self. For I think for any great
faults that be yeat committed, you are run as far into the lashe as I,
although in the space of one leaf b. 4.
or little more, you say that of four only places alleged, three thereof be
noted untruly. For touching the first, which yeat you noted before with the
other two in the margent, but here rhetorically for lack of store, you serve
to the table again dressed after an other sort (a point of cookery much used
by you in this book of youres) yeat iwysse two of them may so be excused, that
your cancred suspicion shall take no place. For whereas I alleged the first
sentence of S. Cyprian as out of the third book the 11. epistle, whereas it
is the 9. epistle, the copy is extant to be seen printed first by Griphius at
Lions Anno Domini. 1537. then at Basile, anno 1540, wherein both the places by
the printers error it is so printed as I alleged it. The second error in
printing the 30. chapitre of Nicephorus for the third, was committed by this
means. I wrote in my copy, cap. 3o. as you see here. The composer of the
letters unacquainted with this kind of writing, mistaking the o above for a
figure that should stand beneathe placed it so, and made of three, thirty.

I would have been loathe to have troubled the (good reader) with so many
words in the excuse of so sclendre faults, were it not that mine adversary
charge me so heinously therewithal as he does, and that I perceive them to
be the greatest that he could find in my book. The third escape was also the
printers fault, although I be not able to prove it so well, and yeat as well
to, as he shall be to prove the contrary. For the which he neded not to take
the matter so whot, him self having alleged before an epistle of S. Cyprian,
where is no such thing to be found Fol. 7. a. 11 lib. 4. epis. 9.
as for the which he brings it in.

Where you object to me I wot not what collectours, whom I should trust in
these places: Suerly unless you had said perhaps, which helps the matter,
you must Fol. 10. b. 2 A lie excused by perhaps
needs have scored up an other lie there had been no remedy. But as good then
as now, for it follows even there, where you say that you most abhor
Nouatus and his A lie. 17.
heresies. For I noted you an other point before beside the swearing against
the B. of Rome, wherein you were plain In the. 4. chapitre. Fol. 12. a.
Nouatians, and therefore that is a bragging lie.

You say that this oath which I talk of, was never required Nowell. B. 18.
of such of the Clergy as be in prison.

The oath that I talk of is of forsaking the B. of Dorman. A lie. 18.
Rome. Will you stand to this lie, that this oath was never required of such
of the clergy as be in prison? Diverse of them, even of the best, have died
therefore constant martyrs in prison you can not truly deny it: If some of them
that remain, pine not (as you say) but fare well and of other men's cost to:
the greater cause have they to thank god and their friends therefore,
amongst whom perhaps although you be at no great part of the cost, yeat
you may in this respect deserve also some thanks, that remembering them
oftentimes in your charitable devotion at Powles cross, you procure them by
such hearty remembrance, the rather the almoise of good men. If all pyne not
away: if some be well fed and in good liking, and so fat (as you say) that
they wallow to: as they have the more to render thanks to almighty god who
gives such ability so well to bear adversity: yeat are there other some,
and no small some to, whose holow eyes, pale faces, and heavy looks, bear
witness sufficient of an other manner of pasture then our smothe smicker
ministres live in.

You are able to name no great nombre hanged in stocks Fol. 10. b. 23.
by legs, or fingers, as some of them (you say) that be in prison used
others etc. and those that were so served (if any so were) if the matter were
well known, it was their unruly and unbridled tongues, their vnsemly language
toward their superiors, (from which kind of behavior let these six years
passed over in durance bear witness for the Catholics how far they be) and
not religion, for which they were so ordered. This mildness of the Catholics
only defending the catholic faith and liberty of their consciences, without
either bitter talcke, seditiouse books, or other by practices against their
prince and magistrates by her appointed, was the cause I nothing doubt, why her
highness naturally inclined to mercy, extendid the rather her gratiouse favor
to the enlarging of their prisonnes, which you by a scornful term to show
how sore it was against your will, call progresses. Besides that, there is at
all no comparison between men forsaking the common known faith as your
selves confess of these last nine hundred years through out all the world,
and such as departing from the rest of Christendom, join them selves to a
faith whereof there was not one man to be found in all the whole world fifty
years ago. Which consideration (in a manner I assure my self) has not been
the least respect, why the Queen's grace has allwaies so mercifully regarded
those pore prisoners, and withal so graciously withstanden your cruel
motions tending to their dispatche out of the way: whom she thinks to have
punishment enough of prison, loss of liuinges, and liberty, though she take
not from them their lives: who teaching and defending that faith which they
were borne and baptized in, which they many years continued in, which all the
world within these fifty years believed, can not so sone be brought from the
same.

I looked ever when you would answer to that where Fol. 11. a. 1.
with I charged you, for offering the oath against the pope to gentle men, lay
men, and scholars of the universities without all face or color of law, but
your own conscience told you that you had therein done such injury to her
graces laws, so extended and racked them to serve your furiouse spirit, that
it should be best as you do, to pass that over in silence, and not so much
as once to twang upon that string of your harp. If there were any punished
for not swearing to the pope in times past, they were punished by order of
law: why mention you that to excuse your vexing of men beside law?

You take on like a mad man and ask of me: seeing Nowell. b. 1. Fol. 11. b.
that so many as well learned as unlearned: as well of the laity as of the
clergy, women as men, young as old have lost liuinges and gooddes, and after
long punishements and pyning most paineful and pitefull also, have finally lost
their lives being most cruelly consumed by terrible flames of fire into ashes,
if they might obtain so much mercy as to escape that usual long lingering in
slack and smoke fire: why I should think it much, that they who have in this
wise used others for refusing of most wicked oaths, and the authority of a
false forain usurper should them selves lack What such persons M. Nowell
r^teine any part of their liuinges?
some part of their liuinges and liberty, for refusing to acknowledge the
laufull authority of our natural sovereign.

Here before I answer to your question I would Dorman.
feign know what they were either learned or unlearned of the laity, what
women, what young men, to whom this oath was offered, and how many died for the
refusal thereof? Truly the greatest nombre that suffered in England died for the
sacramentarie heresy, not in such lingering flames as you speak of, but
compassed about with bags of gonne powder procured by their own means (a
kind of practice amongst Christ's Martyrs never I trow hard of) the sooner
This agrees not with the martyrdom of Policarpus. Vide Euse. li. 4. cap. 15
to dispatche them selves, as with mine own eyes I saw Ridley and Latymer
burned. But if it had been true that so many had died for refusal of this
oath as you suppose, yeat were they not, for answer to your demand I say,
lay gentlemen, nor scholars that used them so. And therefore no reason is it
why you should wreake your selves upon them. And this you wot is the question
that is demanded of you. Again how ever you name the oath wicked, yeat is it
laufull and nothing derogating the Queen's authority, which we covet as much to
maintain as you, although we flatter not so much, but youres is wicked and
most abominable, and therefore it is no good comparison that you make between
us, Finally how ever it be, the oath was then tendered there as it was offered,
according to the law, you offered it to those that I spoke of, injuriously
without authority of special commission.

As for your promise that you make, in place convenient fol. 11. b.
to bring good proof that the B. of Rome has wickedly exacted most unlawful
oaths both of subjects and of princes, etc. when you do so you shall hear
what I will answer: in the mean season I count it but an ordinary brag.

Of the place of S. Basile epist. 70. that it was truly applied to the
heretics of our time and cae. The. 5. Chapter.
M. Nowell would induce the reader to think, that this place of S. Basile
should be brought by me to persuade that he and his companions were Arrians.
And therefore purging him self and his mates of this crime, he concludes thus.

Wherefore his sainges in that Epistle apperteine nothing to Nowell. fol. 12. b.
18
us, who are nothing guilty of those crimes and heresies, but they are brought
in by dreaming M. Dorman without any cause and beside all purpose.

What need this affected ignorance M. Nowell? You Dorman.
know well enough that I never charged you with the Arrian heresy. But thus
it pleases you to handle me, as though you might by this means bring me in
to an evil conceit with the reader, by persuading that I allege no place to
the purpose. The Arrians you wot well (for it is a thing incident to heresies)
had beside their errors in doctrine many foul deformities in manners. Now
what a new kind of reason is this I pray you that you use: I am not like
Dauus or Syrus in one or two properties that they have: Ergo in no property at
all. Do you agree with the Arrians in no point of their manners, because you
believe (you say) well concerning the doctrine of the Trinity? If you believe
well, God continue you therein, at the least some of your pewe fellows
prete^ding once as good affection thereto as you do now, have come so far,
that they not only have blasphemed it in open sermons, but protested See
Staphylus in English. fol. 113. a.
also to be readier to return to their Cloisters, then to believe thereoff as
the catholic church does. But let that be their fault, I say not here that
you be yeat come so far, which notwithstanding, your conclusion that you
infer (wherefore his sainges in that epistle apperteigne b. 18.
nothing to us) is false. For you overthrow churches, you pull down altars,
you contemn the traditions of the fathers (the diligent observation whereof S.
Basile says in this place was condemned by the Arrians as a great fault)
beside other things, as may to them that read the histories more plainly
appear. So that when you called me dreaming for bringing this as not to the
purpose, you were belike your self nodding.

You ask: why these bisshoppes of the East (whose epistle Nowell. b. 25.
I alleged here) wrote not to the pope, as head of all the church, but
indifferently to all the bishops of France and Italy, without any mention of
the B. of Rome at all, whereoff you gather a folishe fond conjecture, and of
that, that S. Basile placed the bishops off France before the Italian
bisshoppes, which I, (you say) craftily dissembled, that the B. of Rome
should not be head of the church.

Truly M. Nowell I never brought it to prove the bishop of Romes supremacy:
I brought it to prove, that the face of our time was not much unlike to that
of the Arrians, and to that it is not impertinent. For your demand I ask
you again, what if he wrote to the pope special lettres for his aid in these
difficultyes? And if he did, how that should not make greatly for his
supremacy, to whom he would not write as to a common bishop amongst other,
but severally to him self alone, as being the head of his other brethern.
Truly there is an epistle of his not many before this, written by him to
Athanasius, wherein conferring with him about the withstanding of the Arrians
heresy, he tells him, that his counsel is, that they send lettres to the
B. of Rome, that he may considre the matter and Epist. 52.
give his sentence, that because it would be very hard to have first a
common council called, and then so to send from thence, he him self chosing
mete men for the purpose, such as should as well be hable to bear out the
pains of the journey, as for their gentleness and sincerity off manners to
warn and reprove such perverse men as troubled them, should give authority
to the matter, etc.

Why might not this epistle M. Nowell, be touching the same matter whereof he
wrote to the bishops of France and Italy? why might it not be that knowing
the honor of that see of Rome to be so great as it is, he would by no means
wright unto the bishop thereof alone, but jointly together with bishop
Athanasius: whose fame he knew to be in the church such, that he could ask
no reasonable petition which should not be granted: or what can you say why
the epistle written to Meletius, that they two should send to Rome for
visitours to visit their country which was in the East, might not be
concerning Epist. 57.
this matter? How ever it be, these two places argue, that the omitting of the
B. of Rome his name here, was not as you suppose, for contempt of his
authority. And thus is this fond conjecture of youres showed to be vain and
of no force. Now for dissembling (as you say) the order of the bishops named
in the epistle, truly you show your self to be made even of the paringes of
malice, who judge so maliciously where no cause is. For to what purpose should
I conceal that, which no man could suspect, that any would ever have been
so foolish as to have brought for an argument against the popes supremacy?

It follows: S. Basile with the other bishops of the East, Nowell. fol. 13.
a. 3.
called the bishops altogether brethern and fellows in the ministry, which
they would never have done, had they had this opinion of his supremacy, that M.
Dorman and other papists do now defend and maintain. But in the said 70.
epistle the said bishops of the East, which do not once speak of the pope, do
pray the French and Italian bisshoppes to make humble suit to the Emperor,
that he by his authority would repress their ennemies the Arrians, and
relieve their miseries, which makes rather for the Emperors supremacy in the
church then for the bishops of Rome.

I told you a little before of S. Basile his counsel to Dorman.
Athanasius, to send to the bishop of Rome for help against Epist. 52.
the Arrians. Whereby as it appears to be more then probable, that these
latter lettres were written to the other bishops of Italy and france only,
not to the pope: so is it evident also, that the mention of the emperor and
silence of the pope, came not of lack of acknowledging his authority, (to the
which before they fled) but of this, by joining both the swords together,
the spiritual and the temporal, the rather to vanquishe and discomfite the
enemy. But now if it were so that amongst the rest the bishop of Rome had
been comprehended in this epistle, yeat the calling of him brother or fellow in
the ministry, is no cause to conclude (as you do) against his authority.
For neither do I now, nor ever has any Catholic hitherto, so defended or
maintained the popes supremacy that it has not been allwaies acknowledged,
that both he and other bishops be the ministres of one common master,
allthough that master have made him the ruler of his fellows and ouerseer of
his brethren. Yea the popes them selves have ever used to call the other
bishops their brethern and fellow bishops, not renouncing thereby the
authority of their seat. What marvel is it therefore, if the bisshoppes of
the East had called the pope (amongst the other to whom they wrote) brother
and fellow in the ministry, by the which name he calls him self, it can
not be denied.

Now where M. Dorman speaks of persecution, as he did Nowell. Fo. 13. a. 13
alittle before of our most cruel practice, I refer it to the judgment of
all the world, whether the papists or we be more cruel persecutours: and
wheather have suffered more persecution they or we.

If they be more cruel persecutours that lacking power Dorman.
show notwithstanding more cruelty in words then other do in deeds: if
their cruelty be greater who punish beside and against law, then theirs who
follow law: if it be no cruelty at all, to punish a few to save the nombre,
by terror of lighter pains (to use the words of S. Austen to ^ib. de vinit.
eccl. cap. 17.
the Donatistes complaining of the Catholics as you do now) to preserve from
greater evils, then is the matter judged allreadie in all upright judgment,
then needs there no further process. As for the lenity by the which you
would commend your selves to the world, your charitable sermones made
as well before the Queen's most excellent majesty at the court, as before the
nobles and other honorable of the Realm at the Cross: in the which you have
consumed all your eloquence, to provoke our most gratiouse sovereign to
imbrue her chaste and unspotted hands with the innocent blood of true
Catholics, has long since made that well known to the world. So that I may
now truly say to you, as did S. Austen to certain heretics in his time,
bragging of their lenity toward the catholics, as you do of youres. Nulla
bestia si Epist. 48.
neminem vulneret propterea mansueta dicitur, quia dentes and vngues non habet.
Seuire vos nolle dicitis: ego non posse arbitror. No beast if he wound no
man, is therefore called tame, because he lacks teethe and nails: you say
you will use no cruelty: I think you can not. Is not this your very case M.
Nowell? See you not a perfect pattern, of your pity, a copy of your
dissembled and countrefeite kindness? O were your murdering mouths by our
most gratiouse Souereignes commandment vnmoosseled, (which god for her sake
forbid) your blood thirsty hands at liberty: how would these tame beasts
bestirre them?

You say that I go about to burden you with envy of churches either pulled
down or altered to other uses, and of altars Nowell. a. 12.
destroyed, much like as the rebels did burden king Henry the eight etc.

How the rebels burdened king Henry, or whether Dorman.
they burdened him at all or no as you say they did, I will not entremedle my
self therein. Of this I am suer that you be burdened of me none otherwise,
then S. Hierome burdened the Hunnes and wandalles being infected Epist. ad
Heliodoru^.
with Arrius heresy, when he wrote of them after this sort: The churches be
overthrown, at the altars be horses stabled, and a little after. How many
monasteries be their taken? And again, none otherwise then Optatus the bishop
of Lib. 6. co^^^^ Donatist.
Mileuite in Afrike burdened the Donatistes there doing the like: when he told
them that there could be no greater sacrilege then to break, shave and remove
clean away the altars off God, on the whicht both they them selves some times
had offered, and the prayers off the people and members off Christ were carried.
As for your excuse that you make, why Abbayes were overthrown in our
country, it is not truly much pertinent to our purpose in this place. For
had it been all true whereof the greatest part was most certeinely false,
that you sclaunderously and falsely laid to the charges of religiouse men
(amongst whom as there were many offenders, even those that have been since
in England great pillars, and in your new church chief favorers of your
new religion: so were there many innocent and good, who ceased not day and
night to lament the disordred life of those other their brethren, to pray most
earnestly to almighty god for their sins and the sins of the people) yeat
was this no cause sufficient, to turn up the churches, to overthrow the
altars. Which you your self also perceiving, and knowing that as well in king
Henry's time, those good fathers of the Chartrehouse, as in the late reign of
Queen Marie, both they in Shene, the mo^ckes of westminstre, the Franciscanes
of Grenewich, the preachers of S. Bartilmewes, the nonnes of Sion and Dertford,
lived every order so honestly in all virtue and godliness according to their
rule, that many were edified by their good examples, none offe^did by their
evil: you flee to an other shifte, against the fundations off such religiouse
houses forsothe.

Which because (you say) were laid upon prayer for the redemption Nowell. fol.
13. 2. 23.
of the souls of their founders and their progenitors souls. etc. Were so
vnsuer and weak or rather wicked, that they could no longre bear such huge
superstructions and buildinges as were laid upon them.

Well, such fundations may be well counted weak Dorman.
or rather wicked by wicked Aerius who was condemned for Aug. lib. de haeresib.
haer. 53. lib. 3. haere. 75.
the like heresy as witness both S. Austen and Ephiphanius above 12. hundred
years since. But to all good Christian men they seem and ever have done
proufitable and meritoriouse, as to him that will take the pains to read the
book of late learnedly written of purgatory, it shall I doubt not evidently
appear. Beside that, by this means our colleages at home in the universities,
yea your cathedral church and Deanery it self M. Nowell, might be in some
danger to be overthrown, if you fall to such scanning of their first
fundations.

Here you compel me to enter with you into a disputation about altars. And for
the justifying of your communion Fol. 14. b. Altars. Nowell. 1. Cor. 10.
table, you allege first that our savior instituted the sacrament at a table
etc. And that S Paul calls it mensam dominicam our Lords table.

To the fact of Christ may be answered two ways. Dorman.
First, that we considre not in this word (altar) so much the matter whereof
it is made, as we do the thing which is executed upon it. For it is not stone
that makes it to be called an altar: no more then wood, silver or gold, but
it is the sacrifice done upon it which makes it so to be called. So that when
Christ our savior instituted this sacrifice or oblation of the new testament
(as namely the ancient father Irineus calls it) although (as you say) Li.
4. c. 32
men had in those days in their houses no altars instead of tables, yeat was
this table made an altar by Christ's offering him self thereapo^. Again if you
will yeat reason that because it was a table of wood or a wooden altar,
therefore we must change the order off Christ's church, and down with our
stone altars and set up tables of wood: then must I answer you, that this was
one of the things, which our savior determined nothing of, but left to the
discretion August. epist. 118.
of his Apostles by whom he would dispose the business of the church, and that
by the same very mean that you wolud have altars pulled down, you may also
ouersthrow churches. b. 13. A reason of M. Nowelles to overthrow churches.
For except you think M. Nowel (to use your own reason made here against
altars) that me^ used to dwell in those days in churches instead of private
housen, you will grant I dare say that Christ instituted this sacrament in a
private house, and so by that reason of youres down with the churches, and let
your communion be ministered in parlors of private houses.

Neither I, nor all the papists with me (you say) ca^ bring so much Nowell. b.
20.
out of the new testament for altars as you have done for the Lords table.

Yes that I can my self alone M. Nowell without any Dorman.
other help. Is the first epistle of S. Paul to the Corinth. any part of
the new testament? I trust you will say yea, seeing that one of your places is
taken out of that epistle. Yea but is the ninth chapitre any part of that
epistle? If it be, then have you there express mention of altars, where the
text says that they that serve the altar shall live by the altar. And again
to the Hebrews: we have an altar whereof they may not eat that serve the
taberuacle. Where you 1. Cor. 9.
can not say, that he meant of any altar other then of the Hebr. 12.
new testament: for he compares together the tabernacle of the old law and
the altar of the new. How say you now M. Nowell have we scripture for altars
out of the new testament or no? I think you will say that we have, and he
that shall well way the places, that they are better applied the^ are youres toe.
For whereas you would seem to wipe away all such places of the fathers and
ancient writers (which be infinite, and the word altara hundred times no
doubt mentioned in their writings for the word table once) by a figurative
speech (by which reason and by better to as you have by figures robbed us
already of Christ's body and blood, the sacrifice of the church: so you might
bring the temple it self to a figure, because the Apostle says, templum Dei
quod estis vos: the temple of God which are you) it is the word table that is
figuratively used, as well in the scriptures as the fathers writings. As namely
in this place here alleged by you of the Apostle, where it is said: You can
not be partakers of the table of the Lord, and of the table of the 1. Cor. 10.
devils. Is not the word table which you here bring to prove M. Nowell
avoiding the word (alta^) by a figure, alleges the word table that can not
otherwise be understand.
your communion table by, (whereas if you would needs use that word, you
should have taken the table here mentioned in the second place which agrees
more aptly thereto) is it not I say a plain figurative word, signifieng to
us the feast or banquet exhibited thereupon? For when he says, partakers of
the table, it should go very hard with them that should eat, if that were
propre speech you wot well. And thus you may see, that we have not only
scripture for altars as well as you, but more proper also, and that better prove
the same then the places by you brought.

You say, that if S. Basile and some other old writers call it Nowell. fol.
14. b. 27.
an altar, that is no propre but a figurative name etc.

O M. Nowell you know well enough how ever you Dorman.
would here extenuate the matter, that it is not S. Basile alone with some
few other that so call it, but all the ancient writers even from the Apostle
Paul's time to ours, have so called it, and that the contrary is most true,
that as they have used this word table seldom times: so they have used it at
such times (as did S. Paul) to signify by a figure either the heavenly
banquet delivered upon the same, or for that an altar has the office and is in
deed a spiritual table. The which thing your self would not stick to
grant, were it not that the granting of a true altar were like to enforce a
true sacrifice. But to the intent the world may perceive how you abuse them
both in the one and the other: I will here out of certain ancient writers
say so much as I trust they shall all perceive, that this figurative altar
and figurative sacrifice, is the false fable and vain dream that you speak
of, only mete for such figure flingers as you are your self. M. Nowell,

Touching altars that they be not so called of the fathers by figure but truly,
what better proof can you have then out of Martialis the B. of Burdeaulx, one
of the 70. disciples of our Savior: who speaking of such altars as were
thrown down by the Apostles, and at the last of that dedicated to the
unknown God, whereof is mention made in the acts of the Apostles, writes
thus. Dum altaria daemonum Act. ca. 17. Epistol. ad Burdegalens.
in puluerem redigerentur, aram ignoti Dei reseruari iussimus. Qua dedicata in
nomine Dei Israel, and ipsius testis Stephani, qui pro eo a Iudeis passus est,
non hominis cultum sed Dei in ea frequentatis. That is to say: while the
aultars of the devils were brought to powder, we commanded the altar of the
unknown God to be reserved. The which being dedicate in the name of the God
of Israel, and of his witness Steuin which suffered for him of the Jews, you
do not now practice thereupo^ the worshipping of man but of god. Can there be
a plainer place then this M. Nowell to prove that which you deny, and which
you would draw to so great an absurdite, as that because the Jews had
altars, b. 25.
therefore it were unlawful for us to have them. Whereas you here may learn,
that Christ's own disciples without pulling down, without any other changing
or altering then by dedicating it in the name of god and S. Steuin, used a
material altar to worship God upon. Can you call this a figurative altar?

Chrysostom in a certain homely or sermon that he Homil. 53.
made to the people of Antioche asks this question. Si quis hanc destrueret
domum and hoc suffoderet altar nonne qui^^ (...) prophanum and impium? (...)
would not every man cast stones at him as a profane or wicked man? How
think you M. Nowell when to overthrow altars they must be dug up, meant
Chrysostom of figurative altars or real tables? There needs you wot well
neither matock nor pykeax to remove your tables. If there did they would not
I trow walk their stations so often in the church from place to place as they
do, especially if the clarcke or ministre should be in danger to be stoned
to death, to be taken for a profane and wicked man so often as he should do
it. For altars this may suffice, especially the testimony of Chrysostom, who
living in the same age ought to persuade all reasonable men what manner of
altars they were that S. Basile meant of, rather then M. Nowels simple reason,
because it is said that Fol. 15. a. ^
Christ offered him self upon the altar of the cross, therefore no altars may
be set up unless we will turn all crosses in to altars. Whereas although it
were true, that he imagines, that the cross whereon Christ suffered was called
an altar by a figure (as in deed to him that considers the greek word it is
not true (...)
but false, for a true altar was it) yeat had it not followed, that because
there was a figure in those words, where so ever in any place else there
should be mention made of an altar, there it should be understand by a figure

For the sacrifice offered upon our altars which we say to be the very body
and blood of Christ: You phantasye to be a spiritual thanks giving only,
and draw to the sacrifice of prayer, how much might here be said to the
contrary if it were not impertinent to the matter? Omitting therefore
Irinaeus, Cyprian, Ambrose, Austen, Chrysostom, Cirillus, Athanasius with the
rest: I shall here be contented to have alleged one only testimony out
(...) council of Calcedon so evident to the purpose, that both the
distinction of the bloody and unbloody offering of Christ's body and blood,
(which you M. Nowell thought you might here upon the credit of your bare
honesty without farther proof affirm to be abused) is proved thereby to be
good, and your only spiritual sacrifice utterly condemned. The place is
taken out of the libell which one Is^hyrion a deaco^ of the church of
Alexandria offered up to Leo the pope, and the whole council against Dioscorus
the bishop there, and is this: Tanta autem contra omnes Act. 3.
(non sicut decebat episcopum, and maxim tantae ciuitatis, and euangelicae
illius sedis praesulem constitutum perpetrare ausus est, vt etiam and frumentum
quod a pi^ssimis nostris imperatoribus, ecclesijs Libiae propter ariditatem
illius prouinciae, and quia ibi omnino triticum non nascitur, praestitum est,
inprimis quidem vt ex ipso hostia offeratur: deinde vt and peregrini, nec non
etia^ and prouinciales pauperes ali quod mereantur solatium, non permit^eret
suscipere sanctissimos episcopos illius prouinciae, sed aestimaret memoratum
frumentum largissimis praetijs, ipsum vero in tempore famis amarissimis
estimationibus venundaret. Et ex hoc, neque terribile and incruentum
sacrificium celebratum est, neque sic (vt dixi) peregrini aut prouinciales hoc
solatio fruiti sunt. That is to say. He has been so hardy to commit so great
things against all men (not as it became a bishop, and especially of so great
a city and of that evangelical seat) that even the very corn which was
given by our godly emperors to the churches of Libya for the bare^nesse of
that province and because there grows no wheat there, chiefelie Vt ex ipso
ho^li^ off^ratur.
that the sacrifice might be offered of that, and next that strangiers and such
pore nedy men also as be of the same province, might receive some relief
thereby, he suffers not the holy bishops of that province to receive, but
prysing the said corn at excessive prices, in time of famine he sells it
most rigorously. And thereby neither is the dreadefull and unbloody sacrifice
celebrate, neither do either strangers or those of the province enjoy this
comfort. Hitherto the words of this godly deacons supplication, whereby all
men may see, that the belief of the church at that time was, that the
unbloody sacrifice which was offered on the altar, stood not in the only
offering up of prayers and praises unto god. Which kind of sacrifice might and
may be offered at al times were there never so great lack of corn, and can be
by no means called dreadefull. For it is not dreadefull M. Nowell to praise
god inwardly: it is the only comfort to our consciences, so far is it from
all terror. But terrible is it to come to gods table, where we shall receive
either to our damnation or salvation the very body and blood of Christ. Go
now and say that the wheat here mentioned was figurative, that this naughty
bishop sold, and took money for it by a figure. For except you say thus you
can never avoid this place.

Now whereas you call it a false fantasy that the body Fo. 15. b. 13
and blood of Christ are offered for the quick and the dead etc. therein
surely you note not so much me of dreaming, as if it were true that you say,
you should note all the fathers of Christ's church of sleping. For to begin
with S. James the apostle of our savior, prays he not in his mass extant
in the greek tongue to be seen, that this oblation sanctified by the holy ghost
may be acceptable to purchase rest for their souls which sleep before us? Do
not Chrysostom and S. Basile the like in their masses? Does not Athanasius
expressly affirm, that by the unbloody oblation the souls of sinners Lib. de
Varijs quest. q. 34. In cap. 11. proverb.
departed this world receive comfort? Does not S. Hierome hold that venial
sins may be purged after this life by the prayers or almoise deeds of their
frindes, or by the celebrating off masses? As for S. Austen who calls it a
tradition of the fathers, De verb. apost. sermon. 52.
an observation of the whole and universal church, to offer for the souls
departed the sacrifice of Christ's most pretiouse body and blood, the
sacrifice of our mediator, who offered the Lib. confess. 9. cap. 13.
same for the soul of his mother Monica, and had it offered after his death
for his own: these and many other places in his worckes, are to most men so
well known, that to allege them here it may seem superfluouse. What
remains now M. Nowell, but that as S. Austen said to Julian a scholar of
Pelagius, after he had alleged against his heresies the learned writers of the
church: Ego a Pelagianis Lib. 2. contra Julian. cir^asin.
ad istos: tu ab istis ad quos? I go from the Pelagians to these (learned
fathers) thowe from these to whom wilt thou go: so I say to you (a scholar of
Caluins) touching this matter: I go from the Caluinistes to S. James, to
Chrysostom, to Basile, to Athanasius, and you M. Nowell from these to whom
will you go? If you say to the scriptures, whereby it appears that Christ
offered him self once for all, etc. the^ harke^ how you be yeat pressed farther
by S. Austen. Hebr. 10.
Why (says he) be al things so out of frame, is darcknesse so come to pass
to be light and light darkness, that Pelagius, Celestius, Ibid.
Iulianus, should see: and Hilary, Gregory and Ambrose should be blind? Why M.
Nowel, is the order of things so inuerted, that Nowel, Iuell, Grindall, Horn,
yea Luther and Calvin if you will, should see this objection, and S. James,
Basile, Athanasius, Hierome, Austen, and he which moves the same objection out
of the 10. chap. of S. Paul to the Hebrews, Chrilostom him self, and
answers thereto, should be blind and not see it? Thus appears it, by how
fo. 16. a. 10
good right you overthrow our altars, on which the greatest Idolatry that you
feine to have been committed, was the oblation of Christ's body and blood,
which you see to be by the judgment of the most ancient fathers of Christ's
church justified, and therefore were the examples of Asa, Iosaphat, Ezechias,
and Josias, most wickedly abused by you for the overthrowing of our altars,
and consequently that your doctrine is diuelishe whereby altars are taught to
be overthrown, whereby the visible sacrifice of the church is abolished, and
such like.

As for the holy days how ever you keep those that be left, you can not deny
but that many a one instituted by the church you have put down, and would
count the keeping of them now superstitiouse. And as for hymns and singing in
the night if you counted it not superstition: why have you taken that manner
away, which Chrisostom Homil. ad popul. Antioch. 59.
witnesses that the monks in this time used for the most part of the night?
Which singing of theirs in the darcke and when other were a sleep, he preferred
before the melodiouse harmony of any musical instrument what so ever it were,
and therefore to this you have answered but scle^drely, saing that you have such
godly and goodly songs in the day, as though we had song only in the night
and not in the day.

Your ministres what manner of men they be I am content to leave to their
judgment who living in the realm emo^gest the^ ca^ better witness thereof.
Of whose co^ning in the English tongue as much as you brag and deface the
latin, as did once a gentleman in king Edward his time, who minding to commend
to Hoper for orders forsooth, one of these mere English brethren, said of him
very sadly, that he was an honest man, in who^ a man should find no other
lack save that he had no knowledge in the popish tongue: yeat could I name you
some iwisse, eue^ the pewterer of Oxford with one eye, that when he happened
upon the words of the prophet. (...) upon him, was straight in a great rage
against the papists, saing that they had corrupted the lively word of the lord
by adding to the text the word (ostes: again that other great clerk that
for Christ is the propitiation etc. read Christ is the provocation: these I
say with other of like skill in the English tongue many mo, I could name if
I thought it needful. And all though these have not perhaps yeat any great
learned man's living: yeat has he, that was made not many years since
believe by these words Missa fuit a Corintho (which are in some bibles after
the end of the epistle to the Romans) that the name of the mass was
expressly Cole.
mentioned in the scripture.

To cloak the better the ignorance of your ministres, Nowell. fo. 17. a. 11.
you tell us, that S. Peter a fisher and S. Paul a tente maker used their
arts after their calling to the Apostleship, that you much merueile of my
judgment who do place Peter the fisher in the highest room above all
bishops, and can not suffer other honest artificiers sufficiently exercised
in the scriptures to have any place at all in the inferior ministry.

Peter was a fisher, and placed above all bishops, Dorman.
not by me (to take away your merueilinge) Hom il. in Math. 55.
but by Christ him self, if you believe Chrysostom, who says of him, that
Christ promised to make him by these words. And I say unto the that tho
warte Peter etc. being an obscure fisher, the shepeherde and head of the
church, Matt. 16.
that God the Father saing to Hieremias: I have placed the as an Iron pillar,
and a brazen wall, made him the governor but Herem. 1.
of one nation, but that Christ placed Peter over all the world. Paul had
his learning in the scriptures and so had Peter to Note.
by inspiration. Will you now because after their calling to the Apostleship
they used their occupations, make this special working of God, done of his high
^^^dom (...) the princes, and worldly wise of this world, a cloak for every
malapert artificer to brag of the spirit, to clyme into the pulpit, more mete
as one no less truly then merely said, to clyme a dawes neast as though
Christ used now to work by miracles, as he did the^, and not by ordinary
means and degrees. This is a reason, M. Nowel rejected of al learned me^, but
common I confess to your apren ministers. Read the epistle of S. Hierome to
Paulinus, and you shall see, that although the Apostles were Theodidacti, yeat
men must look now adays to come to the knowledge of scripture by exercise and
daily meditation.

As for that that you say they are sufficiently exercised in the scriptures,
because no man shall say that I charge you further then by them of your own
side has been acknowledged: call to your remembrance the oration made in the
convocation by him that was then prolocutour not long since, wherein speaking
of your ministres he vttred these words: Hodie plerisque locis reperias aut
sutorem, aut bubulcum, Ianuarij. 13. 1562.
aut tonsorem, aut circulatorem and circumforaneum, aut alique^ huiusmodi
ministerio adhibitu^, qui bonas liter as ne a limi ne quide^ vnqua^ salutarit.
At this day in many places a man shall find, either a shoemaker, or a
cowhearde, or a barbar, or a iuggler, or a mountebancke ronneagate, or some
such other made ministre, who never strided so much as over the tresshold
into the schole where good learning is taught.

Where you say that we have burned so many of your learned clerckes that you
are driven to supply small cures with fol. 17. a.
some honest artificiers: surely look over your calendre again and you shall
find, that the greatest nombre of them was of such craftesmen as we speak
of, and that the learned that passed that ways, were very few to have
furnished those cures that your honest crafts men, be as it is were into
their shoppes crept into.

How the saing of S. Cyprian that heresies and schisms rise of the contempt
of the bishop which is one, is applied to the B. of Rome. The 6. chapitre.
I said that it had been declared by S. Cyprian before, Epistol. 9. Lib. 4.
that the devil in his attemptes against the church used always to begin
with the banishement of the bishop which is one, etc. By this one bishop in
this place you say I make Saint Cyprian understand the B. of Rome. I do so
M. fo. 17. b. 18
Nowel, but not directly or immediately. You are deceived much and understand
not my meaning if you so think. For as I confess that both in the one place
and in the other of S. Cyprian, he may understand the bishops and
governors of every particular church: so am I not also ignorant, that your
conclusion. Ergo, there is not one word meant off the bishop off Rome. is most
false. For when S. Cyprian said in these places that schisms which arise by
the devils worcking, where so ever they spring up, come by the banishing of
their authority who be appointed to govern the church (let it be I grant so
much, of every bishop in his own diocese) might not I who presupposed in
this introduction of mine (which in the process also I proved) that the B. of
Rome was the chief head of all other, conclude, that then by a greater reason
S. Cyprians mind was that schisms and heresies should come by the forsaking
of the B. of Rome, allthough by name he spoke not of him. As if for example it
were written in the laws of our realm. Treasons and rebellyo^ rise by the
co^temning of the lieuetenaunt which is one in the Shiere: should he now say
amiss that to exhort men to abide in the obedience of their prince, would
reason from the authority of the law, that by contempt of the king,
rebellion the troublefeast of all good order takes beginning: I think no man
will so say. And yeat speaks not the law by name off the king. Allthough no
man can deny, but that if the law would so say of an inferior membre, it
would not let to say as much of the chief membre of all. You will grant
your self, that although S. Cyprian named not the B. of Rome, yeat in that
sense, as he is bishopp of the diocese of Rome, he meant of him. Which seeing
you do, why may not I, who take him to have as well jurisdiction over the
whole church, as over that of Rome, apply to him by the way of introduction
this place as well as you do to every particular bishop, notwithstanding they
be not by name mentioned, which is your reason here made to the contrary? And
thus much for the applieng of this place to the B. of Rome. And as for the
quietness, peace, security, B. 25.
plenty of things etc. that (you say) you have now more then of late under
the pope: if you mean of your self and your companions, comparing your
present state with that of late of Geneua, surely I think you say truth.
Although I meant generally and of the better part of the realm. For allthough
you wallow in wealth, and your selves be so provided for, either to abide or
to fly, with your banckes as it is supposed all ready made in the marchantes
hands: although the wooddes wasted, the lead plucked from the great palaces
haules and kitchins (to great for your little hospitality and small roste)
the beneuolences exacted of the pore priests, have filled your coffers:
finally although your brattes be provided of the best fermes and manours
belonging to the churches, to the which by the old canons (I speak of the
children of Con^i^. Tol^^an. 9. Can. 10.
priests, for you I understand are but a single solled ministre) they ought to
be bond sclaues: yeat are other men pinched and complain of the lack of that
quietness, that peace, that security, and plenty of things that 30. years ago
they had. For you abuse men to much to compare the time present, with the late
time of Queen Marye, in the which neither was the popes authority fully
restored with all men, neither would Dauus suffer us to enjoy this quietness,
peace etc, that you speak of: who by violent arms, by seditiouse books, by
sclaunderouse tongues, by infamouse and lieng libelles, finally by all means
sought to hindre the same, and to stir up the subject against the prince. And
yeat in good sooth the comparison being so made, the odds is not so clear as
you take it to be. But how ever it be M. Nowell, I spoke here of no such
worldly respects as you would seem to make me. I spoke and meant of
overthrowing of churches and altars, of the contempt of learned men, of the
teaching of evil doctrine, of the promoting to ecclesiastical ministeries,
weuers, tynckers, cobblers, bromemen etc. I meant of peace and quietness in
conscience, of simplicity and upright dealing between man and man, with such
like things. Which if your self do not perceive since our first revolt
from the pope to be much empaired, then are you a piece of dead flesh and
desperately brain sick. For so says Hippocrates of them who being sick
feale not the grief of their disease. Your promise to prove that where the
pope has had the greatest authority, there he has brought in with him all
miseries, mischiefs etc. shall in the place where you perform it be answered.

How Maximus, Vrbanus and Sidonius, went from the church by not acknowledging
the authority of the B. of Rome, and how they returned to the same again by
acknowledging it. The. 7. Chapter.
M. Nowell, after that he has declared that the state of the controversy
between Nouatus (whom Maximus, Vrbanus, and Sidonius followed) and Cornelius
the pope, was, which of them two was a catholic bishop holding the truth, and
truly, and laufully chosen by God, and which was the intruder, and not of the
catholic church, but an heretic, concludes thus:

Wherefore it is evident, that when M. Dorman says, tha^ Nowell. Fo. 19. a. 32
those men returned again to the church by this way, that is to say, by the
acknowledging Cornelius to be the head of the universal church, he says
most untruly.

If you considre well my words M. Nowell that went Dorman.
last before, and upon which these depend, you shall find that I do here as
sense the beginning I have done, keep my self close to the argument of my
preface or introduction. Which is to show, that the going from the head is
the cause of all schism, and the returning to the same the cause of unity and
concord. This as it is evidently true whether the head be particular or
general: so the more that such head is general and universal the more true
is it. The schism has been proved by the departing of Nouatus the heretic
from Cornelius his laufull head, the B. of Rome: The unity is here declared by
the return of Maximus, Vrbanus, and Sydonius from the Lib. 2. epist. 12.
faction of Nouatus to pope Cornelius. What need you then here to lay to my
charge, that I say untruly that these men returned to the church by
acknowledging Cornelius to be the head of the universal church, which as I
say not in this place, so was it not needful that I should. My words have
relation to those other where I say, that we first revolt from the church by
contemning and not acknowledging the head (without any express mention of the
head of the universal church) and that so must our return thither again
be by the contrary etc. And that so did those that after their fall with
Nouatus, S. Cyprian received into the church again. What (So) did they,
construe english M. Nowell I pray you) did they not so return to their head
as they had forsaken him? Do not you confess as much your self in this
very place? well then this place proves well that unity acknowledged is the
end of division, which is the only mark that I shoot at in this preface.
That this unity is especially to be considered in the pope, that was not to be
showed here, but would follow I knew of it self upon this fundatio^ laid,
here after, there where the popes authority should of purpose be handled. It
comes in by the way as it were, that the example is found between the B. of
Rome and Nouatus going from his unity, and Maximus returning to it. Any other
example would have served my turn in this behalf, but the case standing so,
that I had to treat of the B. of Rome, those examples liked me best which
being directly of him, might better declare the unity and more lively set
furthe the schism, by how much the one or the other was greater, as falling
from or joining with him, who was not a common bishop but the head or chief of
all other. Although I might well defend that this example is such (as is that
which follows of Vrsatius and Valens) as may serve both for my preface to
commend unity, and for the matter it self to prove the popes authority by
acknowleding thereof. For you see here that they confessed that there must be
one bishop in the catholic church. Which words not withstanding that you
labor to draw to an other sense, and I deny not but that they have some
ambiguitie: Yeat if we considre of whom they were spoken, that is of Cornelius
the B. of Rome, and successor of Peter, called by Arnobius an ancient writer,
Episcopus episcoporu^, the bishop of bishopps, it will not be absurd to think,
that by that one bishop they me^t the B. In psalm. 138.
of Rome successor of Peter and so the bishop of bishops.

Here because no small vau^tage as you judge, lies in the tra^slating of these
words in ecclesia catholica, you think that Nowell. Fol. 20. a. 20.
I should have said, in a catholic church.

In deed if I were of your mind that the chair of S. Dorman.
Peter were but one amongst many like or equal, and his church as one of
the rest, the translation might well have been used that you speak of. But
whereas I am resolved and prove it in place, that there is difference between
S. Peter's Lib. 2. de baptis. co^tra Donat. Cap. 1.
chair (as has S. Austen) and the chaires of other bisshoppes, that the
church of Rome is not only a catholic church being taken for a peculier
place: but in a true sense also the catholic church, when it is taken for the
mother church of all Christ's flock, because it is all one to say the
church of Christ in earth, and the church of Rome, as by S. Ambrose it is to
be proved: who when S. Paul had said the church of God to be the pillar of
truth, S. Ambrose well knowing that he spoke not of any one church but 1.
Timoth. 3
of the whole, doubted not yeat to say cuiis hodie rector est Damasus, whose
ruler at this day Damasus is, who was tha^ pope: you may not marvel if I
translate not the words as you do. The same S. Ambrose in the funeral
oration of his brother Satyrus tells, that minding to receive theblessed
sacrament whereby he had a little before been saved from drowning in the sea, he
asked the bishop at whose hands he thought to take it, whether he agreed with
other catholic bishops, that is (says S. Ambrose) with the church of
Rome. What was this else but to ask him whether he agreed with that church,
which because it contained all catholic bishops in her lap, and none he
took for a catholic but him that agreed with that church: he judged to be the
catholic church. You see therefore M. Nowel that it is no such absurdity as
you think, to translate these words in catholica ecolesia in the catholic
church. For what priuileage have you I pray you more then I, that you may
translate the word catholicae ecclesiae: of the catholic church, and that I
must english the same words of a catholic so. 19. b. 8
church? Or why should it be laufull for you so to translate them twice, when
alleging those words of S. Cyprian Episcopo Cornelio in catholica ecclesia,
You english them the second time, the B. C ornelius in the catholic church,
which fo. 20. a. 8 Cipr. li. 3. epist 13.
you will not suffer me to do so much as once? Ah M. Nowel is this even
dealing? Or think you when you have done to color the matter by a feined rule
of your own making, which says that Episcopus catholicae ecclesiae, and
Episcopus in ecclesia catholica are as much to say as a catholic bishop. I
grant that in some places they are so M. Nowell. Will you therefore make a
general rule that they must always be so taken, and in no place otherwise?

Much like to this is the argument that you make Li. 3. Epist. 11. f. 20. a. 13
to prove that Maximus and his fellows called not Cornelius bishopp of the
catholic church in this place here brought by me, Cyprian (say you) called
not Cornelius bishop Li. 3. ep. 13
of the Catholic church: but bishop Cornelius ordained in the catholic
church. Ergo, Maximus and his two companions called not Cornelius bishop of
the Catholic church Is not this a goodly kind of reasoning? Will you see the
like? M. Nowell preached not at Poules cross that there was no scripture, no
councelles, no doctors, no allowed examples of the primitive church to prove
the supremacye of the B. of Rome, ergo, M. Iuell did not. I think M. Iuell
would give you a good flice out of his benefice upon the condition that you
could prove this consequent to be good. And that thus you reason can you not
deny. For the Lib. 3. epistol. 11.
words alleged by me here out of S. Cyprian be not Saint Cyprian his, but the
very words by his own confession of the pore penitentes. And therefore to
bring a phrase out of S. Cyprian to prove that because he did not so say,
therefore an other did not, if this were all, were a great fault in
reasoning. But now if the words had been in both the places S. Cyprians own,
then had your reason been like to this: M. Nowell preaching before the Queen's
highness at the court said not that it would do him good to raze his buckler
upon a papists face: ergo, he said not so at Powles cross.

You object again against this place to be meant of one chief bishop over the
whole church, that then as there is one Nowell fol. 20. b. 12.
only God and none but he: so there should be but one only bishop and no
more but he.

That were true M. Nowell, if as God is the name off a Dorman.
most simple nature and excellency, so the name of a bishop were such as
would admit no degree of dignity. When it is said that there is one bishop
in the catholic church, it is meant one chief bishop. For it is not
necessary that in all points this similitude of one God, and one bishop
should agree. It ought to suffice you, that the similitude stands upright in
that, wherein the comparison is made, which is here of government: that as one
God governs heaven and earth: so there should be one chief bishop to
govern under him the church in earth. Thus forasmuch as there be degrees in
bishops, though in God there be naturally none (for by abuse of Idolatres,
and by participation of name there be also many Gods and many lords as
witnesses S. Paul) it is sufficient, that as 1. Cor. 8.
there is one God, so there ought to be one chief bishop, not excluding the
rest, but referring them to their head, by means whereof and in which sense
there is one bishoprike and one bishop. And so consequently it follows, that
my marginall note of one God: one bishop (meaning as you say I did) was not
in vain.

The next objection of youres, why in this place these words one bishop in the
catholic church, should not be understand of one especial bishop over
all: you confirm by S. Cypria^ in diverse places. First by that which he has
of one Nowell. fol. 21. a. 6 Lib. 4. Epist. 9,
Bishop in the first book the 3. epistle, then by a sentence taken out of his
epistle to Pupianus, afterward by certain words of his to Antonius, and
last of all by that which he has in his book de simplicitate praelator. or de
vnitate Ecclesiae. not far from the beginning. To the first two places your
self seem not much Dorman.
to trust (although following the precepts of your art you are content to use
them to make a show of store) either because your conscience tells you that
the reason follows not. He says so in this place: therefore he must needs
say so in the other, either else, because your self perceived, that there
is a great difference between these places by reason of the word catholic.
For in the place here alleged, the schismatikes returning to the church
confessed that there must be one bishop in the catholic church: in these two
places avouched by you S. Cyprian says that heresies do spring or arise by
contempt of the bishop which governs the church and is one. Now as the
latter words may according to the circumstances of the place and here are I
doubt not, taken for the several head of every bishoprike: so the first can
not well otherwise be taken then to exclude all particular churches, by reason
of the word catholic which signifies universal, addid thereto: especially
the words being translated the catholic church and not a catholic church,
as by your own so turning of them and otherlike to them it appears they
must. Off the third place out of the epistle to Antonius you conclude nothing
neither, but turn the matter over to the last authority of S. Cypria^, in
his book De simplicitate praelat. where most plainly (you say) he declares
his mind of this one bishoprike wholly and equally possessed of all and ouerie
bishop. Well then at the length M. Nowell from post to pillar, you be come
thither where you will cast ancre. Wherewith I also for my part am well
contented, and desire no better then to be in this controversy tried by S.
Cyprian.

Now show how S. Cyprian makes for you, that is, nothing for the B. of Rome
his supremacy, but directly against it. For those be the words that you
conclude Nowell. fo. 21. b. 25. Lib. de Simplicitat. praelator. Dorman.
withal upon this place. That do you after this manner. S. Cyprian says that
there is one bishoprike which every bishop has wholly for his part. Ergo,
consequently all bishops be equal and no one can be above an other. I deny
the co^sequent M. Nowell. Will you know why? This word (episcopatus)
comprehends here by S. Cyprian his mind, the whole nature of that kind of
government which bishops have, as if in like wise a man should say: Vnum
est sacerdotium there is one priestehode in the church, which every priest
has wholly for his part, would you now think that upon this proposition it
were well done to conclude of priests (as you do of bishops) that therefore
because in nature off priestehode they be all equal, the meanest as truly and
wholly participating the nature thereof as the chief, there should be no one
priest in dignity of government above the other, and so overthrow the office
of archipresbiteri, chief priests, whereof the council Can. 15. ite^ Council.
Carthag. 4. can. 17.
of Toures in France about the time off Pelagius the first above a thousand
years past makes mention. But what speak I of priesthode, will you condemn
the whole church of Christ for making of Archebishoppes? I think you will
not. And what signifies this word Archebishoppe but a chief bishop? If there
may be one chief bishop in every province, above the rest of his fellow
bishops, and yeat no hindrance to the rest or diminishing of their power,
that they should not be bishops as well as he, why may not the same
proportion be kept between the pope and the rest of the bishops of
Christendom, that is between the archbishop and the other bishops of the
province? But these be but words you say. Call them what you will, they lack
not reason, and therefore answer them as you can, for answer them you must,
without you will give over in the plain field. But I will join to reason
authority, not of any mean writer but even of S. Austen him self, who it is
likely understood as well the meaning of S. Cyprian, as you M. Nowell. I trust
you will not be angry with me for saing so. For as good I say it as other
think it. The words of S. Austen writing to pope Boniface about the resisting
of the Pelagians heresy, are these. Cum vero non desinant fremere ad dominici
gregis caulas, atque ad diripiendas tanto praetio redemptas Lib. 1. co^tra duas
epist. Pelag. Cap. 1.
oues aditus vndecunque rimari, communisque sit omnibus nobis qui fungimur
Episcopatus officio, quamuis ipse in eo praemineas celsiore fastigio speculae
pastoralis, facio quod possum pro mei particula munerisetc. Now whereas the
heretics cease not to gnash and whett their teethe at the foldes of our
lords flock, and by all means possible to search out, where they may find
any entrance to spoil those sheep, that have been so dearly raunsomed, and
the bishoprike the office whereof we sustain is common to us all, although
your self have the preeminence therein, by reason of the higher top of the
pastoral watch tower: I do what I can for that piece of charge which is
committed to me, as much as our lord by the help of your prayers
vouchesauffeth to give me, to withstand their pestilent and deceitful
writings by other that shall be both wholesome and defensive, whereby either
the rage wherewith they are starcke mad, may be utterly cured, or at the One
bishoprike common to all, excludes not one B. to be above all the rest.
least kept from hurting of others. These be the words of S. Austen, who
confesses with S. Cyprian, that the office of a bishop is common to al
bishops with the pope, and yeat condemns notwithstanding most plainly
your consequent falsely brought in there upon, Therefore all bishops be
aequall and none above an other. For you have heard, that the pope Boniface,
to whom he wrote, was above all the rest in express words. Thus is this
conclusion of youres. Every bishopp has in solidum, that is to say, fo. 22.
a. b.
fully and wholly that one bishopric or bishoply function and office. ergo no
one can have more than the whole, and therefore no one can be above all other,
by grauntinge the consequent to be true touching the nature and substance of a
bishopes authority and office, but denieng it to follow in preeminence and
dignity, showed to be a false conclusion.

But yeat you go forward and say, that this one bishoprike Nowell. a. 25.
is divided aequally amongst all bishops, as faith and baptism are
aequally and wholly divided amongst the faithful baptized, and that therefore
as no one man has any superiority In solidum
in baptism or faith above other truly faithful and baptized, so has no one
bishop superiority over other bishops, etc.

S. Cyprian makes not his comparison here between Dorman.
faith, baptism and the whole bishoprike of the church, otherwise then in
this respect that each of them is one, and the point that he compares them in,
is this, that as baptism is one, as the faith of all faithful christians is
one, and yeat al faithful and baptized have not aequall authority in
government, so the bishoprike is one, that as no man has superiority in
baptism or faith to be more a faithful man or more baptized the^ an other:
so no bishop has of the one bishoprike common to all touching the true nature
and substance of bishoply order, more superiority of being a bishop then an
other, but all bishops a like, the one as truly a bishop as the other
touching order, although as you heard before out of S. Austen, the pope altius
praeeminet, has the higher preeminence, that is to say, is in higher
auctorite of jurisdiction then other bishops are. Thus much touching your
surmised comparison, which if it should have been made, as you imagine, then
must you either condemn S. Cyprian him self for bearing the name of an
Archbishop, or feine, that there is also an archebaptisme to set against the
dignity of archebishoprike, off the which two as no good man will do the
first, so no wiseman will think the last. But how so ever you take the
matter M. Nowell, there is no comparison made in this place, till you come to
the sentence, Episcopatus vnus est, there is one bishoprike. For the better
knowledge whereof, it is to be understand, that the thing which in this place
S. Cyprian labors to persuade, is (both in the bishoprike and in the
church) unity. To prove this he uses a comparison, in this wise. Episcopatus
vnus est, etc. Ecclesia vna est, quomodo solis multi radij, sed lumen vnum etc.
The bishoprike is one etc. The church is one, even as many son beams make
one light etc. But now let us examine some one of these several comparisons,
and you shall see, how little this word in solidum, wholly, makes for your
pretensed aequalitie amongst all bishops, and whether S. Cyprian meant as you
do, or no.

Imagine you therefore with S. Cypr. this whole bishoprike The bisshoprike of
the church compared to a tree.
of the church to be a tree, the branches whereof be the bishop pes severed, the
body of the tree the same bishops joined together, the root, the chief
bishop that holds the^ together. Except this be the meaning of S. Cyprian,
you can not make this comparison agree. For the way to make the things
compared agree, is (because of the^ selves both the bows of the tree, and
bishops of the church are many) to reduce the^ to one beginning. And as the
same thing that makes the tree one is a membre and part thereof: so must that
which shall make the bishoprike one, be a member of the same bishoprike, that
is to say, a bishop, although in that respect that he is a part of the same
body, equal with the rest, as the root by being of one common substance with
the body and branches, is above the other parts of the tree notwithstanding,
because they are all made one thereby; and take their life thereof, as
appears at the eye. For cut away the root and the body perishes: Take
away the root of this bishoprike, that one chief bishop, which conioyneth
all in one, you shall see so many schisms, as there be bishops, and so shall
all come to naught. Thus may appear, how little the word, in solidum, wholly,
whereby you would wrest S. Cyprian to a forced meaning of youres, to say, that
be cause every bishop had a part of this bishoprike wholly, therefore they were
all equal in that bishoprike, makes for you, whereas in this tree compared to
the whole bishoprike of the church, all and every bow thereof has of that
common life which is in it, part thereof in solidum, wholly, as well as the
root, which contains them together, and the root has but his part of that
life in solidum no more then has the least branche there, and yet is the
chief part of the tree for all that. Thus you see, how even by S. Cyprians
own authority, you be cast in your own turn. And look what has been said
of the tree, the same may be said of the light of the son, or of many rivers
coming from one head spring.

As for that, that you note me of falsehoode for removing of the word
Sanct^ssimae, from his place, and changing fo. 19. b. 4
it into Sanctissimum, for the removing of any word, that is a false lie. For
it is you that place the word Sanctissimum A lie. 20.
out of his order, putting it before Episcopum, whereas it should and does
follow in S. Cyprian after, and not I. As for the word Sanctissimae changed in
to Sanctissimum, I confess, that the best books read otherwise. Which fault
either I committed by following some copye, which had so, either else as it is a
thing easily done in writing, by taking out the place amiss. For to do it of
set purpose as your spiders nature, which is to turn all into poison,
surmiseth, what vauntage should I have gotten thereby? If such titles would
help, I could have brought forth the Aug. epist. 90. et 92.
epistles of the fathers of the councels of Carthage, and Mileuet, where in
their several letters, they use oftentimes to the pope, the word Sanctitas
tua, your holiness, with diverse other to that effect.

To conclude the matter (you say) that Maximus and his Nowell. fo. 22. b. in
fin.
fellows had a controversy with Cornelius altogether diverse from ours, and
therefore that their example apperteineth nothing thing to this case of the
Popes supremacy, which then was neither moved nor known. And again, that
being priests of Rome, it

For the first, what controversy so ever they had it makes Dorman.
no matter. For heretics they were, and went from the

That the recantation of Vrsatius and Valens offered up to Julius then pope
makes much for the Bishop of Romes Supremacy. The 8. Chapitre.
Does not M. Nowell think you good readers play the M. Nowel answers to
that which no man obiecteth.
merry man, both with you and me and all the world beside in the handling of
this place of Vrsatius or Vrsitus and Valens? First while he makes me to
reason of the titles that these two bishops used in their libell of
recantation, and then solemly confuteth my reasons by other out of Saint
Augustine and S. Ciprian, with double epithetons for my single, whereas I have
no such one word. Next in co^cluding the whole matter to recreate your
foreweried spirits and to send every man to his home in love and charity,
with a fit of mirthe. For his music reward you him as you shall see cause,
for, for your sakes it was and not mine. To his answers to my reasons of the
titles of beatissimus Dominus Papa the most blessed lord pope, or what so
ever else, I will replye when that or any other shall be proved to be mine.
In the mean season to this reason off his: Vrsatius and Valens offered up their
recantation to Athanasius the Nowell. fol. 23. b. 22.
bishop of Alexandria: ergo, This makes as much for the Supremacy of
Athanasius as it does of Julius the Pope, because it has some appearance, I
will here make answer. First I say Dorman.
M. Nowell that the antecedent, that is, that they offered in A lie. 19.
lie: then, that if it were true, that yeat the conclusion does not follow, and
so the reason is faulty. For the first, let Nicephorus Nicephorus has, that to
Julius the B. of Rome they offered libellum poenitentiae, a libell of their
repentance: of Athanasius he says no more, but only that after their
reconciliation to the pope they wrote lettres to him, signifieng that they were
now quieted, and agreed in communion with him whom before they had so cruelly
persecuted. Of their recantation, which is understand by the word Libellus
poenitentiae, he mentions no word at all. But let us now compare together
the words, first in the libell offered to the pope, and then in the lettres
sent to Athanasius. To the pope they say, Beatissimo domino papae Iulio
Vrsitius and Valens. To the most blessed Lord, pope Julius, Vrsitius and
Valens. To Athanasius they write: Domino fratri Athanasio episcopo, Vrsitius
and Valens episcopi. To our Lord and brother Athanasius the bishop, Vrsitius
and Valens bishops. I do not here urge these words as you bring me in at
your pleasure M. Nowell (To the most blessed Lord etc.) to prove thereby the
popes supremacy, but I will here note to the reader in this comparison, the
familier kind of writing to the one, calling him brother, and the reverent
manner of writing to the other, where of reverence they absteined from that
word. To Athanasius they called them Julius they used their propre names
without all titles. And will you know the cause why? Why Vrsitius and Vale^s
called not Julius the Pope brother.
Forsooth when they wrote to Julius, they knew them selves to stand at his
mercy as men that were out of the church, therefore neither durst they call
him brother being a catholic bishop and chief of all other, neither them
selves bishops, having made them selves unworthy that name. But as soon as
they were pardoned of the pope, in their lettres sent to Athanasius, they used
boldly the titles of brother and bishop. Whereby may easelie be gathered that
it was no recantation that they sent to Athanasius. In the Julius, they
profess to desire to be in communion with Athanasius. This request (say they
to him) we trust you will not deny, praecipue quum pietas tua pro insita sibi
integritate gratia^ nobis erroris facere est dignata. Nicephor. li. 9. ca. 27.
especially seeing that your godliness according to that natural vprightnes
which is in you, has pardoned us already our fault. They add further, that
if these of the East Athanasius him self Note.
would call them into the law touching these matters, that without his
consent they would not go. Finally Arrius the heretic with all his fautours:
In the letters to Athanasius there is no renouncing of the Arrians heresy:
there is no mention of pardon, neither of any thing else, but that he might
understand that they were now reconciled. Whereas if they had contained a
recantation, the matters should (no doubt) in as ample manner have been
specified, as in that to Julius they were. The Tripartite history says, that
these men offered to Julius, libellum poenitentiae, their recantation in
writing, and that to Lib. 4. cap. 34.
Athanasius, miserunt literas, seque ei deinceps communicare professi sunt:
they sent lettres, and professed that they would communicate with him
hereafter. Of all other Epiphanius writes of this matter most plainly. His
words are these. Vrsatius ac Valens vna cum libellis profecti ad B. Iulium To.
Lib. 2. haeresi. 68.
episcopum pro ratione reddenda de suo errore ac delicto, quod calumnias
struxissent papae Athanasio: At suscipe inquiunt nos ad communitatem ac ad
poenitentiam. Sed and ad ipsum Athanasium ijsdem conscriptis confirmationibus
vsi sunt propter poenitentiam, that is to say: Vrsatius and Valens going
together with their libelles to Julius the B. of Rome to give account of their
error, and fault for that that they had gone about to entrappe Athanasius:
But receive us (say they) to the communion and to penance. Yea and to
Athanasius him self they used the same confirmations for penance. Lo M.
Nowell one of the places that I of set purpose B. 31.
would not note, least my fraud might be perceived in alleging that which
made nothing to the matter. Makes it

Well by this I trust it appears, that as I had no cause to co^ceale these
places, as though (as you say) I feared lest thereby it would fall out that the
world should understand my guile in alleging that which made not to the
purpose: so, that it is you, who in saing that Vrsatius and Vale^s offered up
their recantation as well to Athanasius as to Julius, have to further your
heresy made an impudent lie, and fathered Li. 9. ca. 27.
that upon Nicephorus which is not in him, and thought to dor us and out face
us to with a card of te^. Beside this I say as I said before, that if it had
been true, that they had made their recantation to Athanasius also, that yeat
the consequent follows not, that then the B. of Alexandria should have been
by this means as well head of the church as Julius. For what lets why the
pope might not enioine them after their recantation made at Rome, to make the
same again to the propre bishop of that place where their heresies were most
notoriouse? Or how is this any diminishing of his authority? The force of this
example consists VVherin the force of the example of Vrsitius and Vale^s
does consiste.
in this, that being bishops so far from Rome, they should skippe
Alexandria and come to Rome: why they were reconciled at Rome first, and then
in Alexandria afterward. So that, what lets now to conclude as I did: By
this means returned they to the church etc. What lets me to reply to your:
I took my harp into my hand and twang quoth A twang of M. Nowelles harp.
my stringe a: Your stringe is broken between your hands, and where is now
your twang a? O M. Nowell, when you thought with such a seely twang of your
harp as this is, to shift your hands of this grave and weighty testimony,
you thought belike withal so to bring all the world a sleep with that sweet
melody, or rather as Orpheus is reported by the poets to have by the music
of his harp moved wooddes, mountains, and rocks, to appease the furye of
wild beasts, so contrary wise by that sweet noise off youres, to make wise
men such tame fools, by a strange metamorphosis so to turn them into blocks
and stones, as that they should not be hable to perceive your uneven dealing.
Surely in my pore conceit you littell regarded your calling, you much
empaired your name, in answering thus lewdely. Was this deanlike? Was this
preacherlike? Was this minister like? Nay truly it was minstrellike.

That the places hitherto alleged, are not impertinent to the Popes
authority. The. 9. Chapter.
Although I have heretofore in the several defense off every one of these
places, said so much as may suffice for the justifying of them to be alleged
to the purpose, yeat does your Rhetorical repeating of them here, enforce
also me to trouble the reader therewith again. I say therefore as I did
before, that if the going out of the church be by the rebelling of the deacon
or priest against his bishop, as S. Cypria^ said in the case of the deacon
disobeieng his bishop Rogatianus: if Pupianus ought to reconcile him self to
Cyprian his bishop and metropolitan, that then by this reason of S. Cyprian,
much more ought the going out of the church to be by the Deacon, priest* or
bishops rebelling against the Pope the chief bishop of al other: much more
ought they to reconcile their selves to him, who is chief shepherd of their
souls in earth. If S. Basile spoke of the bishops in the east church, it
is but a sorry shift to say, that his words may not be extendid to all rulers
where so ever they be. If Nouatus swear men to stick to his heresy, to take
him and not Cornelius for their bishop, he swear men against the Pope and so do
you. If Maximus, Vrbanus and Sidonius reconcile them selves to their own
Roman bishop whom they had unjustly forsaken, you must do the like to him
being your bishop (although not so immediately) whom you have as unjustly
forsaken. If Vrsatius and Valens offered only their recantations to Julius and
not to Athanasius as I showed before, then have you made a lie, and so both
this authority and the other are not impertinent but to the purpose.

An answer to such lies, scoffs, sclaunders, falsefied auctorities, and
other cancred matter as M. Nowel in the 25. 26. 27. and 28. leaves, has powered
out against the Popes. The. 10. Chapter.
As I mind not to defend the evil manners of Popes, as neither of temporal
princes if any have governed evil, and have abused perhaps the power given
to them by God: so will I neither measure their authority by their lives as
did the frantike Donatistes, and Anabaptists do, neither reveal the
turpitude of my father as did wicked Cha^, Genesis 9.
neither judge my head as is the manner of heretics and schismatikes to do,
as witnesses S. Cyprian, as has been said before, applied the^ to the same
sense that it is now. For Li. 4. ep. 9
of this am I suer, that how evil so ever their lives be: how far so ever they
abuse the authority given to the^, yeat shall that nothing preiudicate the
church, nor hurt the innocent Chriflia^s. If these were my words I ca^ guess
what were like to be your answer, but being not mine but S. Augustine his,
nor his so, but that they be grounded upon the words of Christ: truly if I
were my self an heretic, I confess I know no way to avoid them. The
words of S. Augustine after that he had rehearsed by name, all the popes that
were from S. Peter to Anastasius time, 39. in nombre, amongst whom* there was
he said no one Donatist to be found, are these: In illum autem ordinem
episcoporum qui Epist. 165.
ducitur ab ipso Petro vsque ad Anastasium qui nunc eandem cathedram sedet,
etiamsi quisquam traditor per illa te^por a subrepsisset, nihil praeiudicaret
ecclesiae and innocentibus Christianis, quibus Dominus prouidens, ait de
praepositis malis, quae dicu^t facite, etc. Vt certa sit spes fidelis, quae no^
in homine sed in domino collocata, nu^que tempestate sacrilegi schismatis
dissipetur, that is to say. In to this range of bishops drawn from Peter
him self to Anastasius which now sits in the same seat, although some
betrayour had within that compass crepte in: yeat should this nothing have
preiudicate the church and innocent Christians, for whom our Lord providing
faieth of evil heads. Do what they bid you do, etc. That Matthew. 23.
the hope of the Christian man may be sure, which being grounded Note.
not upon man but upon God, can not by wicked schism be scattred.

This place good Reader, as it may serve the for a lesson to beware how thou
rashely judge of their doings whom God has so especially priuileaged: so
ought it to be no small comfort to all true Christians to think, that god has
provided for them such a head to direct them here, as whose judgment, what
ever his life be, they are sure can not be false: and may withal serve for an
answer to all such spots as M. Nowell here, and other else where (were
they all true and much worse then they speak of) have noted in the popes
manners to overthrow their authority. Whereby also stands that proposition
of mine fol. 25. a. 15.
saulfe, meant of things concerning his office: the pope commands it, ergo
it must be obeyed: if S. Augustine have any credit with us: if Christ may be
believed. Who beside the words alleged by S. Augustine, has given us also an
other most sure stay to ground our selves upon, when Lucae. 22.
he assures us, that Petres faith shall not fail, which although it please
you M. Nowel in your swinishe eloquence, to say that it pertains as much
to the pope as does a saddell to a sow, yeat was S. Bernard (to allege him
rather then any other, for that your self in this place bring him in against
the pope, and M. Horn I am credibly enfourmed gave to him not long since, in
the university of Oxford such praise, as that he has it is supposed not a
little enflamed the hearts of diverse young men, to the study of that blessed
author) of a far other judgment then you are. For he writing to Innoce^tius
the pope, after salutatio^s begins his epistle thus. Oportet ad vestrum
referri Epist. 190
Ap^stolatum pericula quaeque and scandala emergentia in regno Dei, ea
praesertim quae de fide contingunt. Dignum nanque arbitror ibi potissimum
resarciri damna fidei, (vbi non possit fides se^tire defectu^. Haec quippe
huius praerogatiua sedis. Cui enim Lucae. 22.
alteri aliquando dictum est: Ego pro te rogaui Petre vt non deficiat fides
tua? Ergo quod sequitur a Petri successore exigitur, Et tu aliquando conuersus
confirma fratres tuos. That is to say. All dangers and offenses rising in the
kingdom of God must be referred to your apostleship, those especially which
concern the faith. For there do I think it to Note.
be most mete that the hurtes of faith should be redressed, where faith is
sure not to fail. For such is the prerogative of this seat. For to what
other was it ever said: I have prayed for the Peter that thy faith may not
fail? Therefore that which follows is demanded of Peter's successor. And
thou being once converted strengthen thy brethern. Hitherto S. Bernard, against
whose learning and life as you can take no exception: so have your self
clered him of all suspicion of flatterye, by those words which so freely and
franckly without all dissimulation he vttred to pope Eugenius. Which makes not
a little for his faith and uprightness in applieng this text as he does. This
you well perceiving, either else to show your self learned in the canon
Laws, attribute rather to Bonifacius the 8. those words Ecc^ duo gladij, then
to S. Bernard whose they are in deed vttred fol. 25. b. 13. Lib. 4. ad Eugen.
in this sort. Quid tu denuo vsurpare gladium tents, quem semeliussus e^
ponere in vaginam. Quem tamen qui tuum nega^ non satis mihi videtur attendere
verbum domini dicentissic. Convert gladium tuum in vaginam. Tuus ergo and
ipse: tuo forsitan nutu etsi non tua manu euaginandus, etc. Why then does thou
assaye to usurp the sword which thou wast once bidden to putt up into thy
sheate? Which yeat he that denies to be thine, seems not to me well to
considre the word of our Lord saing: put up thy sword into thy scabbard.
The sword is therefore thine, to be drawn out at thy beck percase, although
not by thine own hand. Otherwise if it should have perteined to the no way,
our Lord would not have answered to his Apostles saing. Behold here two
swords: it is enough, but he would have answered, it is to much. Both the
swords therefore belong to the church, the spiritual and the material: but
this is to be occupied for the church, that of the church. Thus much S.
Bernard, which words notwithstanding I confess, and those other also of the
prophet Hieremias: Behold this day do I Cap. 1.
set the over people and kingdoms, Bonifacius modestly applies B. 18.
to the church and ecclesiastical power, and to the pope no otherwise but as
to the chief ministre of this power, Cap. vinc. de maiorit. and obed.
extrauag. com.
as appears by this conclusion, Ergo si deuiat terrena potestas iudicabitur a
spirituali. If the earthly power therefore be out of the way it shall be judged
of the spiritual.

By this it appears, that what so ever S. Bernarde has written or spoken
against the pomp and abuse of the B. of Romes authority, that yeat by his
example we are taught this lesson, not to cut of our head because it aketh.
And therefore him self when he had said all that you are wont to bring
against the abuses of the court of Rome in his time, yeat he confessed, that
as in heaven angels and archangelles, De considerat ad Eugen. li. 3
Seraphins and Cherubins are disposed under one head which is God: that so
here also under one high bishop, be primates, patriarchs, archebishoppes,
bishops, priests, abbattes, with the rest in like manner, which head in how
many places of his worckes does he call the B. of Rome?

Yoy say that the popes brag that they have in the box off Nowell. fo. 25.
a. 8.
their bosoms all scriptures, all interpretation of doctors, etc.

The popes that you name are Boniface the 8. and Dorman.
Paul the 2. The place of Boniface is you say sext. Decreta. lib. 10. tit. 2.
cap. licet. You should have said primo. No great fault I confess if there
were either so many books and not only five, or if you used not so
rigorously to note such scapes in other men your self, laing to their charge
that they mean to entangle the readers that their fraud (you say) may not
be espied. Whereas surely in you there might be great cause to think no
less. For what? Does Bonifacius say in this place that he has all the laws
in his breast? No truly does he not. But he says A lie. 21.
that pontifex Romanus censetur habere. The B. of Rome is judged or presumed to
have, although sometimes it may otherwise happen. I merueile that you
remembered not the chapitre beginning praeterea in the decrees, where the B. of
Rome has, speaking of laws, that he never read any such thing, except by
forgetfulness he be deceauid, whereby Did. 22.
you might have understood, that some time by the popes own confession it may
happen otherwise. But if he had said as you say he did, had he done any
otherwise then borrowed a phrase of the emperors Honorius and L. omnium C. de
testa^. How* rulers are vnderstande^ to have the laws in their breasts.
Theodosius, who used first the same? Whereby is signified, that such states
by reason of their learned council, which they have allwaies about them ready
to instruct them, are presupposed to have the laws ripe in their
remembrance. As for Paulus the second, I marvel how it happens that
Platina may be allowed to be a witness against him, A 19.
professing in his life so little good will toward him, for the putting him
out of his office, seeing you are in the examining of other witnesses so hard.
But let it be true that Platina says hardely, it makes to our purpose
neither of nor on.

It is a worthy thing to be read in Platine you say, how Gregory Nowell. b.
26. Matthew. 16.
the 7. upon these words what so ever thou do bind or lose upon the earth
shall be bound or losed in heaven, gathers this reason, that much more the
bishops of Rome in earth may take away and give empires, kingdoms,
principates, and what so ever mortal men have else.

It is a worthy thing to be noted, how you continue Dorman.
allwaies like your self, in feeding the reader with vain matter nothing to
the purpose, and alleging such places as you bring otherwise then they are in
the Originalls from whence you take them. For look in Platine once again, and
you shall find, that the words be not so odiouse as you would have them seem
to be. For whereas you affirm them to be spoken of the Pope, Platine has,
that the B. of Rome spoke them of Peter and Paul. How ever it be, it is no
point to be reasoned here as being, impertinent to our principal question of
one head, beside that (as I protested in the beginning of this chapitre) if
these words or any other like were untruly or arrogantly spoken, yeat they
could derogate nothing from the authority otherwise laufull.

You care not what you say, nor how shameful or sclaunderouse your lies be,
so that you may satisfy your cancred hatred against the Pope, as appears
here by this, that you would make men believe, that Julius the third f. 25. b.
2^
caused to be stamped on his coin, these words: the nation and people that
shall not serve me shall perish: as though me^t Hierem. 1.
of him self, whereas you might have as well said that they were to be
referred to the money it self, as though all the world should be sclaues to
money, and yeat neither of these the true meaning of it. But if his coin had
any such inscription, as it may be doubted for any proof that you here
auouche M. Nowell to prove it, the meaning was rather this, that that coin
apperteining to the church should bear upon it that prophecy, which was
spoken of the church, as a posy most meetest for that place, specially the
manner of that See being, to stamp on the one side of their coin the image of
Petre and Paul.

The pope may be blamed of no man do he never so much hurt Nowell. fo. 26. a.
5. Did, 50. ca^. si. papa Dorman.
you say. Although the word from whence you gather this, be redarguere, blame
or reprove: yeat the words which follow, containing the reason of the canon,
are, a nemine est iudicandus, that is, he is to be judged of none, and so they
do us to understand, that laufull and reverent admonishing the pope of his
faults is not forbidden to his brethern, but as laufull for them to do now,
as it was for S. Paul ever, but only the judging of him. And except this were
the true meaning of the word redarguere in this place, surely a homely sense
were it to say. The pope must be blamed of no man because he ca^ be judged of
no man. Your other place alleged out of the gloss you understood as evil as
you did the text. The text and the gloss both Extranag. Iuan. 22. cap. fin.
de Conces. praeb.
speak in that place of the dividing of certain churches united together: in
which things says the gloss no man may be so hardye to ask the pope why he
does so. Because in those things that belong to the positive law he may
dispense as shall reasonably please him. Thus be the words of the gloss to be
understood and restreined, which it becomes you as handsomely to talk of,
as does a gold ring the groine of a sow. But it is a token that divinity
goes low with you, and is at a very ebb when you fall to the alleging of
law. Remember the proverb M. Nowel. Ne Suitor vltra crepidam.

Your text, Principes gentium etc. Princes of nations bear rule over them:
but you shall not so, but he that will be chief let a. 14. Math. 20. Lucae. 22.
him be your servant etc. with the rest that follow, takes not away
authority to rule from the clergy, but ambitiouse and tiranouse ruling, as
appears by S. Bernard, who alleging this very text to Eugenius the Pope,
says notwithstanding in the same book: Habent illi sibi assignatos greges,
singuli singulos: tibi vniuersi crediti vni vnus Nec modo ouium sed and
pastorum tu vnus omniu^ pastor. They have their propre flock assigned unto
the^, every one one: to the being one all are committed in one, neither only
art thou the only shepherd of the sheep, but of the shepherdes to. The
apostles the^ selves ruled they not because they were servants? What manner of
servile slavish service you would have the pope brought to I wot not: but S.
Paul served I wot well his masters so, the Corinthiens, that he asked them
whether he should come to the^ with the rod. He gave some of them to the 1.
Co. 4. 1. Cor. 5. 1. Ti. 1. Act. 5.
devil. S. Peter was such a servant that Ananias and Saphyra his wife he
punished by death. If you say you deny not this power but speak against the
abuse, of that you hard my mind before, and I think all good men be of the
same, who pray most earnestly (the only remedy that Christ has left us
in this case) that such as abuse the same may acknowledge the fault and
spedely redress it. So shall their mouths be stopped, who when they can say
nothing against the power it self, are driven to pick quarelles and find
faults in the ministers thereof,

If you should make a voyage to Rome to the pope, to tell him beside the
textes of scriptures that you have alleged, which are, Principes gentium, etc.
Nolite vocari Rabbi, etc. Vos omnes fratres estis. Ne sitisseu dominium
exercentes in cleros: that by the doctors also and councelles he is forbidden
to Nowell fol. 27. a. b. 7.
use such tyrannical power, you should you say profit no more by such
allegations, then by the allegation of the scripture it self.

Why you should do well to prove it M. Nowel. It is not Dorman.
unlikely, but that so eloquent a man as you are, and thereto so well practiced
in the Popes own gloses, were like surely to be admitted to his speech, and
to persuade very much. Well you will not putt the matter in trial you say,
fearing lest by that means you might be canonized in M. Foxes calendre, and
shrined in his dounghill, and therefore you are contented to bring forth your
doctors and councelles against me, whom you take I doubt not to be the popes
proctour. Your councelles are the council off Carthage, a. 22. Cipr. in
council. Carth.
and an other whole council also you say, although you name no other neither
broken nor whole. Your doctors S. Cyprian and S. Augustine. Which councelles
and doctors Aug. lib. 2. contra Donat. cap. 2.
say thus much: Nemo nostrum episcopum se episcoporum constituit etc. None of
us makes him self bishop of bishops, or does by tyrannnicall fear force
his fellows to the necessity off obeing, seeing every bishop has according to
the license of his liberty, and power, his own judgment, as he that can not
be judged of an other, seeing that him self can not judge an other. These be
the words of the council: these be the words of Saint Cyprian and S.
Augustine, which serve as much for your purpose, as does a rams horn to
make a flight.

For the better declaration whereof it is to be understand, that as these
words were spoken by Saint Ciprian in a prouincial council that fell into an
error, so was the meaning of them to auaunce the opinion of S. Cyprian
touching the rebaptising of those that had been baptized by heretics, which
doctrine is now condemned by the church for an heresy. To bring this the
better to pass, he tells them first, that he had received lettres from
Iubaianus a bishop, who although he were before of a contrary opinion, was now
come to his part. It remains (says he) that every one of us show his mind
what he thinks of this matter, no man judging an other, or removing any man
from the communion if he think otherwise then he does. For none of us makes
him self the bishop of bishops, and so furthe with gentle words the rather
to win them to his opinion, and to assure the^ that they may be bold to
say their minds, seeing that every one of them had (he said) license to use
the judgment of his liberty and power. Which word (pro licentia) M. Nowel
mangleth S. Cipria^.
you guilefully left out of your translation, showing your self thereby to
be no simple translatour, but a crafty falsefier. Now if they had license in
that council of theirs every man to say frelye his mind, if S. Cyprian said
that notwithstanding he was their archbishop, and bishop off them all, yeat
for the present time he did renounce that authority (as in this sense his
words are to be taken) what makes that against the authority of the B. of
Rome? Does not the B. of Rome say as much to all his fellow bishops in all
general councelles? Had not you the same offer made unto you in the last
council of Trent, to have been quietly hard, and no man by tirannie to have
been compelled In saluo co^ductu co^cilij Trident.
to the necessity of obeing?

If this answer satisfy you not, let S. Augustine teach you the true
understanding of this place. Who expounding August. li. 3. ca. 3. co^tra Donat.
these words of S. Cyprian, Seeing every bishop has according to the license
etc. against the Donatistes, writes thus: Opinor vtique in his quaestionibus
quae nondum eliquatissima perspectione S. Cypria^ expounded by S. Austen.
discussae sunt. Nouerat enim quantam sacramenti profunditatem tunc omnis
ecclesia varia disputatione versabat, liberum que faciebat quaerendi arbitrium,
vt examinata veritas panderetur. I think verily (that is to say) that S.
Cyprian means in those questions, which be not yeat by manifest examination
discussed. For he knew what a deep mystery it was that was then tossed in the
whole church, with ambiguouse disputations, and made it free for every one to
search and enquire, that the truth being examined might be revealed. Thus you
see M. Nowell, that your falsehoode in leaving out in your translation the
word (pro licentia) will not help you, S. Augustine by this word (liberum
faciebat) Wherein one bishop cannot be judged of another.
he gave them license, expounding the meaning of S. Ciprian, and telling us
beside, that this place of bishops liberty whereby every one may think
what he will and can be judged of no other, is while things be not decided but
remain in doubt. And therefore if you have no other doctors or councelles to
present to the pope but these, you did like a wise man to tarry at home.

That you say, that neither the text of the scriptures, nor the fol. 27. b. 7.
interpretation of doctors, nor judgments of councelles can have any credit
against the pope, and bring Pighius to prove it, that is a manifest lie. For
when Pighius says that for the A lie. 22.
most part there is nothing done in general councelles, but that the
bishops coming together give their consent to that which the Apostolic See
decreed before, he says not that it is so allwaies, that it can be no
otherwise? As though the time of deliberation during, the Apostolic See upon
the reasons of the council might not be moved to decree that which otherwise
it has not determined: he says not that against the pope neither the text
of the scriptures, nor the interpretation of doctors, nor judgments of
councelles b. 24.
can have any credit. And therefore most impudently (again I tell you) you
have belyed Pighius. The council is no council if it lack the authority of
the head No general council without a head
the B. of Rome. And therefore you have Pighius at no such advantage, because
he says that the only judgment of the Sea of Rome is more sure then the
judgment of an universal council of the whole world. which if it be true
Why councelles be called.
then were it (you say) for bishops to come to councelles a vain thing. Not
so M. Nowell: For although before God every country being present, who be able
to make faith hereof to their subjects. Last of all this calling together of

Pighius (you say) teaches that to the sea of Rome the ordering, Nowell. fo.
28. a. 7.
defining, and determining of all questions and controversies is given by
Christ etc. And the same does M. Dorman to teach in the 62. leaf b. out off
pope Innocentius epistle

That which I have there affirmed, I have by the authority Dorman.
not of Innocentius alone (which yeat to any reasonable Apud August. epist.
90. 91. 92 93.
man might seem enough, considering that they were no babes to whom he wrote)
but even by the authority also of those fathers of the two councelles of
Carthage and Mileuite, especially of S. Austen, expressly affirming that he
answered them to all their questions even as was right and for the bishop of
the apostolical See mete, sufficiently proved. Answer you to it when you
shall be hable. In the mean season it is true that I said, that the
authority of the B. of Rome is the fundation of all true religion, the comfort
and stay of the catholics etc. Against the which few words couched in
less room then five lines, you have not in four leaves and more, brought
truly so much as one word, but in the whole process plaing the ape in
mocking, mowing, and tossing of such grave auctorities as may serve for the
confirmation thereof, you have not impugned my proposition but scoffingly
confirmed it. Which manner of answering how it is to be liked, I pray (the
discrete reader) to judge.

Of the necessity of one head in Christ's church. The 11. chapitre.
When I minded to handle in writing the preeminence and superiority of the B.
of Rome over Christ's universal and catholic church, and considered first
that the scripture it self, then the fathers and councelles: finally the
examples of the primitive church allowed the same: I laid for a fundation to
build upon, that there must needs be one head in Christ's church to govern
it. Not as though if to the wisdom of him who does in his wisdom all things
it had so seemed, the government of Aristocratie, that is to say, off the best
and wisest men might not have been preferred by him which is Lord over nature
before the rule of Monarchy, that is of one alone, which is most agreeable to
nature. And for this cause I said that of necessity it must so be. Which
necessity if I had not been able to prove (as the contrary shall hereafter
appear, by that, that you keeping your self to the title of your book have
only reproved and not disproued any one reason off mine) yeat must all men
off necessity needs confess, that seeing Christ committed in the scriptures
the whole charge of his church to only Peter, giving him authority to feed
al, La^bes, and sheep: seeing that the fathers with Joan. 21.
such co^formitie confess the same of Peter and his successors, as namely to
omit other, because I have handled this matter else where, and this is not the
place propre therefore, Chrysostom, who says that Christ committed the whole
charge of all to Peter, and his successors: needs I say must Homil. in Maeth.
55 and li. 2. de Sacerdot.
all me^ acknowledge, the necessity of that one head which by such good
proufes they see confirmed, although I nor any man else were able to prove the
same by reason. To make the matter more clear by example: the church of
Christ holds that our blessed lady was a perpetual virgin, as well after
the birth of Christ as before: Eluidius the heretic holds the contrary. If
I now to overthrow Eluidius, should first place this proposition for my
fundation to build upon against him: That of necessity that woman what so
ever she were, of whom the Savior of the world should take flesh, ought
as well to be preserved pure (that that place might not be defiled through which
Christ him self had passed) after her bringing furthe, as before it was
preserved from being contaminat because he should pass through: if this
proposition were not proved or could not by reason or scriptures be proved,
would you then that Eluidius should go from the received faith of the
church, and say there neded no further battery or undermining to be made, to
overthrow that which is manifestly proved in the person off our lady by the
faith of the church (as the matter is here in the person of the pope) What
if disputing against a Jew or infidel that would deny that Christ suffered
death for the sins of the world, I should lay for the fundation, this saing
of the gospel, Oportebat Christum pati etc. Luca. 24.
If Iwer not able to prove this necessity because gods omnipotent power
might by other means have wrought our salvation, does it by and by follow,
that the infidel has proved his purpose, that Christ did not suffer death for
us? I wright not this as though I mistrusted the proving off this proposition
of mine, that there must be one head etc. but to encountre with you who being
comen but thus far, began to repent you of the long journey that you had to
make, and therefore to abridge the same, thought here to make, and therefore to
abridge the same, thought here to make the reader believe that it should be
nedelesse to go so far as to Rome to the Popes own sight, that so your
shunning of the matter might seem to come of politic forsight, not of
dastardly cowardnesse.

I said that the state of gods people in the old law, and experience of
civil government did prove the Nowell Fol. 29. 2. 23.
necessity of one head. You answer: that as gods people in the old law
were one several people and had one high priest, so that no further can be
gathered thereof, but that likewise in every diocese or country it were good
to have one chief bishop to rule in the clergy.

Oh M. Nowell, think you thus to ouerbeare your pore Dorman.
neighbors? You must remember, you must remember, that you fight against
truth, that will not so be outfaced. You must remember, that when we talk of
the Jews as of the people of God, we do not in that point recon them as one
several people. They were in deed several, in respect of other nations which
had forsaken God, but never in such sort several, as though the whole church
of god were not under the gouernemnet of their law and chief priest. They
were therefore a figure, not only of one diocese or one country, but of the
whole church that now is, and made the church that then was. And so the
example holds still.

You make my reason taken from the examples of kingdoms, fol. 30. a. 21.
societies, families, etc. and applied by force of greater reason to the
church, to come from S. Cyprian to Pighius, to D. Harding and so to me. The mo
that have it the gladder I am. But I pray you what is this to the purpose whose
it be, except you do this to show your self to be a man of great reading,
and ignorant neither in the old writers nor in those of latter time. What so
ever you make of me, or how so ever it please you to take me: I am not iwisse
so very a dolt but I could have made this reason even by the experience of
those things which run daily into mine eyes, and never have looked either in
S. Cyprian or Pighius, or borrowed it off D. Harding, and had not your memory
failed you, you could have said your self, that I told you that experience
was the thing that moved me to say it.

Whose argument or reason so ever it be blind you say it is. That let
indifferent eyes try M. Nowell. I reason thus: Every kingdom has his
several king: every people, city, town village, house and so furthe, have
their sever all head or governor. ergo: the whole church which is but one,
divided into many members (as says S. Cyprian) must have one head as well as
has one kingdom, one people, one city, etc. Now what fault find you Li. 4
ep. 2.
with this reason, I pray you that see so clearly, and have eue^ your eyes as
a man would say in your hands? For so the I should have concluded with S.
Cyprian (you say) ergo, b. 11.
in likewise every diocese, and every church ought to have their several
head prelate or bishop. I took not my reason out off S. Cyprian, and
therefore I follow not his conclusion. What so ever it be my reason is, that
the whole church dispersed through the whole world, is as truly one kingdom
of heaven, one society, one body, as any other company through out the
world is one, be it great or little. Therefore if I had concluded as S.
Cyprian does, upon your granting the same to be true (as here you say you
would have done) that every diocese and particular church needs a head,
it would well have followed spite of your bearde, ergo, in the whole church
being also one, is more need of one head. These co^clusions of S. Cipria^s and
mine be not contrary but stand well together. Eue^ as if one should infer in
our country upon such a proposition as is this of S. Cyprians: ergo, every
city, every shiere has need of a head to govern it, and then upon that
again: ergo the whole realm it self containing all these cities and shieres
has much more need of one head to govern that. And yeat you (so shameless
you are) say, that S. Cyprian has the clean b. 21.
contrary to this conclusion, saing thus: Singulis pastoribus, etc. that is.
To every pastor is a portion of our lords flock appointed, the which every
one ought to rule and govern, who shall give account of his doing to our
Lord. This place (you say) Lib. 1. epistol. 3.
makes plainly against the supremacy off one. These words convince you
plainly of a lie. This place if you know A lie 22.
not how to understand it, be not ashamed to learn of S. S. Cypria^ expounded
by S. Bernard.
Bernarde, of whom you disdain not to learn matter to reprove the manners of
the bishops of Rome, when you think he may serve you to that effect. He
tells us speaking to pope Eugenius: Habent illi sibi assignatos greges:
singuli Lib. 2. ad Eugen.
singulos: tibi vniuersi crediti, vni vnus, that is to say: They have also (he
means the other bishops of the church) every one their several flocks
assigned unto them: to the being one all are committed in one. Lo M. Nowell S.
Bernard tells you, whom your self both allege for your purpose, and to
whom you give the title of a blessed saint, that this reason of youres is not
good: Every pastor has a portion off Christ's flock allotted out to him to
govern: Ergo, there is no one head over all. For by this means if such
collections might be allowed, as well might every parson and vicair because he
has also a portion of the flock committed to his charge by him self, be
discharged from the obedience of his bishop, as may the bishops from the
government of one chief head. The mayor, bailif or other officier of any
the Queen's good towns in England, has a portion of the realm committed to
his charge to govern: will your wisdom serve you M. Nowell to conclude upon
this, that therefore there is no one in our said country, who has the
supremacy over all?

This is S. Cyprian his reason, this is (you say) his conclusion. You beelye
S. Cyprian M. Nowel: he neither reasons nor fol. 30. b. 30.
concludes against the supremacy of one, as I trust I have made evident. You
might rather think that he who was for every portion so hofull, would be no
less careful to provide for the whole, where was more danger and cause of
fear. For that you reason after your manner negatiuely, that neither S.
Cyprian nor any other learned man does use these examples or similitudes any
where, to prove that there ought to be one head or governor over the
universal church: that reason shows it self from whence it comes. Will
you now as you have taught us a new kind of divinity, so teach us also a
new way of reasoning? Yea will you teach the learned Lawiers and grave
judges off the realm never to decide case but such as they shall find
recorded in their year books in the same terms? Shall it not be laufull for
them by your deep divinity, whereas it is impossible so to conceive laws
that all cases may be expressly comprehendid, when such a case shall happen,
to proceed therein by the judgment given in other cases, where although the
case be diverse the reason is one? If your discretion will serve you to allow
this kind of reasoning in the law, which is nothing else but altogether
reason: why take you then such hold of this, that S. Cyprian did not in
terms, that is to say in the self same case of one head over the universal
church, apply these examples, seeing that as I proved before, S. Cyprians
reason is one in both the cases, yea greater and of more force in the fol. 30.
b. 31.
case of one head over the whole church, then of one over every particular
church.

Because M. Nowell thinks as the truth is, that this conclusion, that there
ought to be one general head over all churches likes me well, and yeat that
I have handled it but ill: it pleases him here of an extraordinarye
liberality for the pity that he takes upon me, to play once again the
scholemaister in his old days, and now because I am past my Grammar to teach
me logike. I should have reasoned thus my master says: There is one
general king over all the Nowell. fo. 31. a. 2.
world, one general head over all people etc. Therefore there must be one
general head over all the church.

My master plaieth here with me, as S. Thomas More Dorman.
writes that a poet of Cambridge did once with his boy whom (plaing with him
being a young Sophister on a time for his pleasure) he offered to prove an ass:
which when the boy denied, well quoth the poet thou wilt grant me this
first, that every thing that has two ears is an ass. Nay mary master will I
not quoth the boy. No wilt thou quoth the poet? Ah wyly boy there thou
wentest beyond me. For and thou would have granted me that, I would have
proved the an ass anon. Mary master quoth the boy ye might well, and so
might every fool toe. Well quoth the poet I will go now an other way to
work with the. Thou wilt grant me that every ass has two ears. Nay
marie will I not master quoth the boy. Why so boy quoth he. Mary master
quoth he, some ass may happen to have never a one, for they may be cut of
both. Nay then quoth the poet I give the over, thou art to froward a boy
for me. Would not you now M. Nowell make me here to reason as pleases you, as
the poet would have made his boy to answer? But how little need I have of
your help (God I thank therefore) to frame this reason to my purpose, the
argument made before will speak though I hold my peace. In the mean season
this of youres might have some probability, if as Christ has appointed one
church: so God had assigned one kingdom in the whole world. But seeing that
from the time the tongues were dispersed in Babylon, many several companies of
men, and not long after many several Genesis 11.
nations: and consequently many several heads were so appointed by God, that
whether it were for the pain of sin, or else to have the parts of the
earth more quickly inhabited, ones they were not one of them bound to be
under the other, nor all to be under one head in earth (whereas on the other
side Christ came to gather together Psalm. 146.
the dispersed of Israel in to one body, one kingdom, one fold, and all the
churches in the world be reduced accordingly to one church, which can not be
said of all the kingdoms) for you now to requier no more one head in the
church, then there is one king in the world, it is such a kind of argument,
as I think beside your self it would have been hard to have found one
other so foolish that would have made it.

What D. Harding says out of Homere or Aristotle it fol. 31. a. 15
makes no matter to me, allbeit it proves very well that those Gentiles
saw, that the government of one body belongs to one head. And therefore
if they had been as verily persuaded then, that the whole world is but one
kingdom, as you are that the church is but one body, as they would of all
likelihod have concluded that it had not been good to have many rulers: so
living now and being persuaded the like of the church, it is not to be doubted
but that they would have been touching the same off the same opinion. As for
that that you add scoffingly to deface it, that it is M. D. Hardinge his
poetical argument for the popes supremacy. I pray you be good M. Nowell to
poetos, of whom you savor so much in your sermones and writings, and who
the time has been, were the fairest flower in your garland. Otherwise you
will give men occasion both to think and to say, that the old proverb is
true in you, that the parish priest remembers not that once he was parish
clercke. But I pray you may it be laufull for you to follow poets in lieng
as you do, and may not other men allege for their purpose, one grave
sentence of a poet: yea all were it so that it were directly to prove the
popes supremacy as this is not so brought in? If it be so, then scoff also
hardely at S. Paul, who to prove the omnipotent power of God, alleged the
sentence of the Act. 17.
poet Aratus, not so famous iwisse as Homere is.

Aristotle misliketh not the government of the best and wisest, yeat
prefers he Monarchy, the government that is to say, of one alone, before
Aristocratie. Even so do both D. Harding and I, And therefore to say that I
am in fol. 31. b. 1.
this point against both my master (for so you call D. Harding and I will be
always ready to confess no less, so long as it shall please him not to be
ashamed of such a scholar) and Aristo^le so noble a philosopher, I can call it
no better but A lie. 23.
a very lie.

You say that the government of the universal church Nowell b. 5.
consisting of so many or rather innumerable thousands of men and women, of
all countries, nations, and languages, can not possibly be ruled by one,
neither was by God appointed to be so governed.

What God has appointed I showed in the article of the Dorman.
popes supremacy, whereunto you durst not approach, and this will be bold to
say thereof in this place, that Monarchy Not impossible to govern the church
by one.
being as your self can not deny of all other the noblest kind of
government, it is likely that Christ would provide the same for his spouse
the church: in the which willing especially unity and concord, and
commanding nothing more, it follows, that he would bind it in one with that
band wirhout the which it could not either at all be had, or not so
commodiously had. As for the possibility, I pray the gentle reader considre
with thy self what preachers and masters thou have, who are now so malepart
with God, that beside that which their peuishe heads shall like to fantasye,
they will allow him to be hable to do nothing.

Thus in our present question does M. Nowell, having so much at the length
prouffited by teaching in the schole, that he dares now take upon him to set
God him self to schole, and to tell him plainly that this order of his
appointing in the church one head, is such, as by no means possible can
stand. Think thou not good Reader that he mistrusted all other proufes when
he flees to this sorye shift? Yes verelie does he. For as in the matter of the
sacrament very need drives them to this miserable refuge: so persuade thy
self that it stands with them here.

But now to you M. Nowell: is the arm of God shroncken Esaiae. 50. and 59.
or shorter then it was wont to be think you? Can not he that appoints one
son to give light to the whole world, he that by diverse rivers, streams
and brooks, dispersed thorough the parts of all the earth, makes one body of
the elements of water, both to come from one head the sea, and to return to
the same again: he that of so many contrary and disagreing qualities, as
heat, cold, moisture, drougth, makes one well agreeing world: is not he M.
Nowell possibly able to rule and govern his church dispersed through all the
earth by one chief and supreme head? Especially since one prince or Monarche,
as namely Assuerus being him self an infidel, was able to govern Hester. c.
1.
from India to Aethiopia, a hundred twenty and seven provinces. The which as
he governed by captains and under officers, after the example of Moises, who
being Exodus 18.
not able to bear the burden of ruling the whole people alone, did it
notwithstanding with much facility by the help of such rulers as he called
to part of his charge: which were captains or heads, some over thousands,
some over hundreds, other some of fifty, yea of ten: so the pope governing the
whole church, by patriarchs, primates, archebisshopps, bishops,
Archedeaco^s, Archepriestes and priests, every one in their degree, with grace
in him for that purpose by the worcking of God sufficiently multiplied, is
right well able to rule and govern the church were it greater then it is. And
this al wise me^, and such as yealde to the omnipotency of God, see to be so
far from all impossibility, that some one perhaps moved with just
indignation against your blasphemouse reasoning, is likely enough to tell you,
that I may iustlier say to you, that such talk proceeds not so much from
the absurdity of the matter, as b. 12. Nowell. Fo. 32. a. 6.
it does from the disposition of your noddies nowle M. Nowell, and sight not
dim but altogether blind, then you do to me affirming the contrary, that
it may seem to some that such kind of speech springs not so much out of
the absurdity of the matter, as out of the disposition off my drowsy head.

Note that M. Nowel aloweth to bishops the order of religion, to kings and
other governors the procuring of civil order and peace. Dorman.
It follows, that schisms and troubles rising in the church may by the
several bishops of every diocese, and several chief prelates of every
province as well be avoided and appeased, as the several kings of every
kingdom, the several governors of every country and city etc. are able to
ouersee their several charges and to keep their people in civil order and
peace:

Not so M. Nowell, the reason of difference betwe these two states of
ecclesiastical and temporal government is great. For in the one, that is in
that which pertains to the The difference between the two states off the
world and the church.
world, every kingdom, every nation, every people have their propre and
several laws: yea often times not diverse only but contrary the one to the
other. This bredeth no disordre because they be diverse bodies. But to come to
the church which as it is one, so has it by Christ one faith, the same laws,
the same sacraments delivered to be common to all that will be members thereof,
without variety in matters of substance: here what need is thereof one head,
that this one faith may be of all me^ and every where inuiolably holden? Seeing
that even in kingdoms and common wealths daily experience tells us, that
how well and quietly so ever such kings and rulers govern their subjects,
them selves they be not yeat hable so to govern (while I proud and thou
proud each one thinks him self as good as the other) that they can abstain
from mortal and cruel battle, whereby their innocent people perish full often
on both sides most miserably. If this be so emo^gest worldly kings, where the
dissenting of their laws and ordonau^ces the one from the other, is no breach
of amity: how much more is it to be feared amongst bishops, where one faith
must be common in all, where unity may be so lightely broken? Which if it
happen, how should it be suppressed? The debates and quarelles of princes are
tried for most part by battle. Will you that in this case each bishop make
his fre^des and try the matter by most voices. The chief prelates (you say)
of every province are able to take order in the matter. What M. Nowell is the
wind in that door? Have you so soddenly found a superiority in bishops,
that so lately before pronounced, that as no man has any Superiority in
baptism or in faith above other truly faithefull and baptized: so no one
bishop has any Superiority over other bishops? Is it now at the length
found out, that you mistook S. Cyprian, M. Nowel contrary to him self in one
leaf.
when in the 22. leaf of your book, a. you grounded upon him, that there was
no difference of dignity amongst bishops? May you not be ashamed in this
very leaf, first to say that there be chief prelates in every province,
and yeat after in the second side of the same leaf, to affirm by the
authority of S. Ciprian wrongly construed, that none but naughty and desperate
men do think the authority off some bisshoppes to be inferior to other?
Will you needs be of the nombre of those naughty and desperate men? Well M.
Nowell, as very necessity forced you to go from that principle of youres,
that all bisshoppes be of equal authority, because otherwise you saw that
schisms could not possibly be kept out of particular churches: so shall I
trust the same, before you and I have ended, force you to acknowledge a chief
prelate over the whole and universal church for the appeasing of schisms
therein. In this point because the very necessity of one head to govern
Christ's church does specially consist: I shall desire the learned reader to
use good circumspection, and with advised deliberation to way with him self
the reasons brought on both sides. I object therefore to M. Nowell, that for
the appeasing of schisms, and restoring the church being troubled to quietness,
it is necessary that there be one chief head. He makes me answer as you
heard before, that the several chief prelates of every province are as well
able An absurd doctrine that schisms may as well be appeased by many heads
as by one.
to take order therefore, as the several governors of every country for their
several charges. The absurdity of this answer shall appear by a
demonstration. There is now a controversy in their new church of England
about no small matter, but concerning the real presence of Christ's blessed
body in the sacrament: M. Gest preaching at Rochester for the real presence,
M. Grindall at London for the contrary. Shall these two prelates be tried by M.
D. Parkar of Cauntorbury suspected to be a Lutheran? Although that I think M.
Nowel would be loathe to grant being him self a Caluinist, yeat if he did,
and the matter were thoroughly decided on the one side: might not the like
schism arise in the province of York, and bachiler Young there calling his
brethern together determine the co^trouersy on the other side? If this should
happen (as it easily might) in this equality of power between these two in
these several provinces, how should the schism be appeased? They would
perhaps procure a parliament to be called, that by authority thereof the
matter might be determined. Were the bishops that could not agree before,
like the sooner to forsake their co^tentiouse minds by this means? Or should
the matter be put only to the debating of the laity? Or how ever it were, the
matter being brought thither, and then the order of the house being such, that
it must pass as well through the lower house as the higher, might not the house
be equally divided, or the thing brought to so narowe a point, that the
conclusion of this weighty controversy might depend upon the mouth of some
simple burgoise and mean artificer, who might easily by lack of judgment
choose the worse part? Or if they all agreed upon the truth, might not the
like controversy, arise in France, Germany, Spain, or in some other
country, and every one determine either in this article, or any like, contrary
to the other? If they did, as by the confesion of Augspurg, and their communion
book allowed by the parliament of England, the one so much disagreing with
the other it appears they do, should not the church in this case be
miserably shaken notwithstanding the labor of the chief prelates of every
province? Now to come to princes, and te^porall governors, if they have as
many several or contrary laws as their be several countries or nations,
concerning the keeping of their people in civil order and peace, what breach
off unity? What hurt? What disordre in the world will follow hereof I pray
you? So that to have made this reason of youres probable, you should thus have
reasoned. As in the whole world there is no disordre, because several princes
have several and contrary laws: so in the church will there be also none, if
diverse bishops teach diverse and contrary faithes. But as no man is so
blind but he sees the falsehode of this comparison: so is no man I trust so
void of wit but that he sees this to be as true, as that which you made
before.

Thus by reason we find, that schisms can not be appeased without one head
in the church, to whom the greater causes ought to be referred, whom the
rest ought to credit and obey. To the which head because he is by Christ's
own mouth so priuileaged in Peter's faith, that as he never yeat delivered to
the church any erroniouse doctrine to be believed, but has allwaies continued
the faith received from the Apostles, so are we suer that he never shall: we
ought and may in matters of faith give full and assured credit. As by S.
Austen we be counceled, who to this purpose brings this saing of the
gospel: Quae dicunt Epist. 165 Matthew. 23.
facite etc. Do what they bid you do, and adds for the reason, that in so
doing, our faith being most certain, as being grounded not upon man but
upon gods promise, can never be scattred by the tempest of any schism. This
being most true, we may boldly conclude, that this state of Monarchy, that
is of governing the church by one head, as it is most necessary, so because
we are suer that this one head can not give wrong judgment in matters of
faith, it is of all other for the church the most convenient, as being the
very best. For in this point do all men agree, even the most adversaries to
this state, that if one Monarche were suer allwaies to govern well, that then
that state off government were to be preferred before all other.

To all this that has been said may be added, that if you will needs have
the several diocesses and churches off every bishoprike to be like several
kingdoms, then as there is no only kingdom in earth: so by you it should
follow that there is no one only church in earth. Or if it may be enough for
the church in earth to be one body because Christ in heaven is the one head
thereof: why may not then the kingdoms of the earth be in earth one,
because Christ in heaven is the king of them also? This being not I think
unknown unto you, how uneven this comparison of youres was made, you will
now leaving your reason, try the matter by authority.

S. Cyprian (you say) does most plainly teach that Nowell. fo. 32. a. 30
it is right and reason, that several bishops have the government of
several diocesses, even for the same cause for the which I (you say) do
untruly allege the necessity of one head.

To the place of S. Cyprian beginning: Cum statutum sit Dorman. Lib. 1. Epist.
3.
omnibus nobis etc. I answer: that it is right and reason that several
bishops have the government of several diocesses, and that to appease
schisms and correct vices, as often as these things may be in such several
diocesses commodiously done. But that this may be allwaies performed in
particular bishoprikes, and that if it can not, recourse may not be had to
higher power, that you should have proved, and that S. Cyprian has not.
Therefore this place makes not against the authority of one head. But you
force it further and say.

S. Cyprian affirms all such appellations from a bishop off Nowell.
one country to a bishop of an other country to be unlawful, for that, that
all bishops of all countries be of like authority, and that none but
naughty and desperate men do think the authority of some bishops to be
inferior to the authority of other.

S Cyprian affirms not here that all appellations from Dorman.
one bishop to an other be unlawful. He says that it is reason and has
been ordained amongst them, that the subjects of every bishop have their
causes heard, there where the fault was committed. And may not the B. of
Rome do this by sending his legates in all such cases of appeal to the places
where the offenses were committed, there to examine the process, to receive
witness, to determine the matter? Beside this, if S. Cyprian had in this place
vttrely forbidden all manner of appeals to Rome: yeat by the phrase of his
words it appears, that it was decreed amongst them by a local statute of
their own, for the better maintenance of brothrely concord. Which as it
exte^ded no fardre then to that place: so if any of them that once agreed to
that order, refuse at any time to obey it, although it ought to be a bar to
him that once gave his consent to the contrary, yeat is it none to the pope,
why he may not proceed in the cause (who never renounced his right) if it be
appealed to him. The like to this is to be seen in the colleages of our
universities, where the founders in most places have ordained by their
statutes, that the members of such colleages for the better reteining and
upholding of quiet and brotherly agreement amongst them, shall propose such
quarelles and contentions as happen amongst them to the several heads of
such colleages. This order thus taken right and reason would have kept, but
if some froward body not contented with this, will complain further to the
chauncelor of the university or chief patron of his colleage, he may at their
hands have justice. That this was the case that S. Cyprian speaks of, many
things may persuade. First that he says: Cum statutu^ sit omnibus nobis
whereas an order is taken emo^gest us all, he gives us two things to
understand, that whereas they took such an order emo^gest S. Cyprians place
expoundyd.
the^, it was not ordinarily so before, but accustomed rather to be otherwise,
or else what neded a statute to be made to for bid a thing never any otherwise
practiced? Next, that it was but for the^ only, for he says, omnibus nobis,
emo^gest all us. So that in other places he denies not, yea by these words he
confesses rather, that it was otherwise. And therefore you have done lewdly and
made alowde lie M. Nowel, to gather of this place, this general proposition,
that all appellations from the bishop of one country to the bishop of an other
be unlawful. Whereas this order being taken only in Afrike by common Cypr.
lib. 1. epist. 4.
consent of the Africans, was not in Spain, as appears by the appealing from
thence of Basilides to Rome. Which if it had been unlawful, never would S.
Cyprian we may be suer, have made other exception why the sentence given by
Stephanus the pope for his restitution should not be good, then this, because
it was given by him that was no judge at all, of all other the best and most
peremptory: never would he have objected that it was obtained by false
suggestion and wrong information, which argues the goodness and validity of
the appellation of it self. But what speak I of Spain, when S. Cyprian his
own laboring Li. 1. ep. 3.
at Rome with the pope by lettres, by legates, by all means possible, that
this unjust appeal might not be received, when his counting to sail after
them, to convince their lieng tongues by undoubted and assured proof of the
truth, ought sufficiently to make faith, that seeing the pope had never
confirmed this local statute of theirs, and thereby not renounced his right:
seeing his subjects against the order taken had appealed to Rome, he must also
needs answer the appeal, for the vnlaufulnes whereof on their parts that
followed it, he alleges here their own consent, in these words omnibus nobis,
agreed by all us, to move thereby the rather the B. of Rome not to receive their
appeal, but to remit the cause home again.

Whereas you say that S. Cyprian has, that none but naughty and desperate
men do think the authority of some bisshoppes to be inferior to the
authority of other, surely you go about both to prove your self, S.
Cyprian, S. Austen, and all the learned fathers of Christ's church naughty and
desperate men. You condemn in like manner the ancient general councelles and
continual practice of the catholic church. For who is so ignorant that he
knows not, that the books of the learned fathers, the canons of the ancient
counsels, the usage of Christ's church, have so religiously always observed
this difference of bishops, that the very names of patriarchs, primates,
Archebishoppes, retained allwaies and used in the churches, are able to
convince him to be an impudent lier that shall sustain the contrary. Your
self confess, that there be chief prelates in every province. If chief,
Ergo inferious. You call him a naughty and desperate man that thinks the
authority of some bishops to be inferior to the authority of other. You
say the same your self by granting that there be chief prelates. Having
sought all the means that my pore wit can invent to exempt you from this
company of naughty and desperate men, I find no other then this, that
perhaps you only say it for a shift, and think it not in deed. But if you
were to be accounted naught and desperate for this, yeat had you in this
respect cause to rejoice, that you were like to have the company of S.
Austen: who tells Bonifacius the pope, that in the Lib. 2. de baptism. contra
Donat. cap. 1.
government of the church he was not only above him, but above all other
bishopps (although the office be common to all) in sitting in the highest top
of the pastor all watch tower: who says, comparing together S. Petre and S.
Cyprian. Sed and si distet cathedrarum gratia, vna est tamen martyrum gloria.
But although between the grace of their seats there be difference, yeat the
glory of martyrdom is all one. And again comparing Innocentius the pope with
Irinaeus, Ciprian, Hilary, he has: Cum his Innocentius Romanus Pontifex
consedit, etsi posterior tempore, prior loco. With these sat Innocentius the
bishop of Rome, although behind them Lib. 1. co^tra Julian. c. 2.
in time, yeat before them in place. Yea to comfort you the more, I dare
promise you the company of S. Cyprian him self. For if he had not been of the
mind that some bishops are inferior to other in jurisdiction, although not
in the substance or nature of bishoply order, would he have exhorted, yea and
required the B. of Rome to write lettres in to France, to direct them to the
province and people of Arles, whereby they should depose Martianus the B.
there? Lib. 3. epi. stol. 3.
With what face could he have done this had he thought that the authority of
one bishop were no greater then that of an other? But here you will urge me
that it is not enough to show by probable conjectures that in these words
Saint Cyprian had no such meaning, unless I show withal what was his
meaning. Yes verily M. Nowell it were enough for me to prove that the sense
which you give to these words of his could not be true, but for their sakes
who desire to know not only what is false, but what is all so true, I will
open that point to. This is therefore by this epistle of S. Cyprian most
evident, that these naughty men who complained upon S. Ciprian at Rome, went
first before they took their journey to Rome in to Numidia, and there joined
them selves to certain heretical bisshoppes of whom Fortunatus was made a
bishop, and so by reason that none were made bishops that stood excommunicate
it must needs be that he was by them first absolved. These heretical bishops
of Numidia, these wicked subjects of his own, who demanded help and
complained where they ought not, he calls by the name of a few lost and
desperate men, who had attempted and done so many things to the derogation of
the authority of their own primate, and submitted them selves to the
unlawful authority of heretical and schismatic bishops, quasi minor
videatur esse authoritas episcoporum in Africa constitutorum. As though the
authority seem to be less of the African bishops, then of those of Numidia
(we must supplye) who took upon them to defend and maintain Fortunatus and
his fellows condemned in Africa before. By which is meant Africa the lesser
wherein Carthage stood, from which Numidia was a distinct province, whereas
you M. Nowell take Africa for the whole, as it is counted the third part of
the world, pretending as though no one bishop of the other two parts of the
world had more authority then the bishops of Africa. Except this be the
meaning of the place, you can not excuse S. Cyprian of being contrary to him
self, as by the authority acknowledged by him in the pope, in France, in
Spain in Carthage, as you have heard, as by the calling in this very epistle
the church of Rome the mother church and root of the catholic church, it
does manifestly appear. Which of so grave an auctor is not to be thought. To
conclude therefore, S. Cyprian does not here forbid all appellations S.
Cyprian. A clustre of lies. 27


You repeat again, (as that is a great figure with you) Nowell. fol. 33. a.
6.
that which you said before, that it is impossible that there should be one
general head in earth over the universal church, or that such a head can
ouersee his charge, and keep all churches from schisms and troubles, and
pacify them when they are risen. This as a thing tried by the state of the
world at this day and ever since the first beginning thereof, you will leave
to the reasonable reader to determine betwixt us.

As for the impossibility I answered before, and say again, Dorman. fol. 50.
b.
that how ever it seem impossible (the weak nature off man considered), yeat
suer we are that he that appointed that order, God him self, is so able to
multiplye grace in his ministre, and to provide him of such help by the
means of other inferior ministres governing their several charges under him,
that it shall not only not be impossible but easy enough. Whether this one
head be hable to keep the church from schisms and pacify them when they are
risen better then many heads, let the indifferent reader on Gods name, take
the late table of Staphilus, and after he has upon the view thereof joined
the fruiteful increase of heresies in our days, to the quiet agreement in
faith wherein we lived under the obedience of one head, let him judge
whether he think more necessary for either the avoiding of schisms, or
suppressing of them when they be raised. Which offer of youres to betried by
the state off the world at this day, argues to the world that you have
neither wit in your nowle, nor shame in your foreheade.

That the place taken out of S. Cyprian lib. 1. epist. 3. proves that for the
which it was brought, that is, that there ought to be one general chief head
over Christ's universal Church. The 12. chapitre.
I promised to bring the judgment of certain notable Nowell. fo. 33. a. 29
men to prove the necessity of one head, lest any man should think me to
be the auctor of that assertion. You say it was the invention of ambitiouse
popes.

I think other men have been ambitiouse as well as the Dorman.
popes of Rome. Yeat never was there hitherto any king or emperor, much less
bishop or spiritual man, able so many hundred years to maintain a
superiority by ambition only without all good title. Neither was the devil
able to plant a succession of so many and so notable martirs, confessors,
learned and virtuous men as have been in the Sea of Rome, to deceive the
world by the instruments of Christ. It is Christ M. Nowell who has so by
his authority disposed the order of his church, that if you Lib. de unit.
eccl.
will believe S. Cyprian, to make the same one, he has appointed one head
thereof in earth, as many rivers have one spring, many branches one root
etc. Which neded not by your high divinity, seeing that it has Christ the
head thereof in heaven, in which respect it might be one. But now to the
place of S. Cyprian here by me alleged, seeing thus much may serve to prove
you to have made a saunderous^e lie.

You say, that this place of S. Cyprian here alleged by me Nowell. fol. 33. b.
is not spoken of the pope.

Neither does it skill whether it be spoken of the pope Dorman.
or no. And yeat in this point you spend a great many of idle and
superfluouse words. For I am not as yeat come to prove the pope to be supreme
head of Christ's church, but am only in the proving hereof, that it is
necessary that there be one such head. If you would needs comptrolle the
alleging of this place, you should show that S. Cyprian speaks not at all,
of any necessity to have any one head or judge in the stead of Christ
obeyed in earth, neither in particular churches, neither yeat over the
universal church. For so long as you conclude not thus, it will ever Note.
follow, that if one priest must be obeyed in his own diocese for the
avoiding and appeasing of heresies and schisms, that by much more greater
reason must one priest above all priests be obeyed in the stead of Christ,
to appease heresies and schisms in the universal church of God. I had
thought M. Nowell that you had known the proportion that is between the part
and the whole, the less and the greater in the same kind. If one villaige can
not consist without a head, much less can one city, and yeat less can one
shiere, and lest of all can a province or whole kingdom. Now when we speak
of the church, one diocese is in respect of the whole church, as one
villaige, town, or shiere is in respect of a whole province or kingdom. As
therefore it is not sufficient for the quiet governing of a province or
kingdom, that every village and city within the same have a several head to
ouersee the inhabitants of such villaiges, or cities, without there be beside
one general head to ouersee all those inferior heads: Even so the several
governors in particular diocesses, exclude not, but infer by a stronger
reason, the necessity of one head over all other heads in Christ's being
head of the Church, excludes not the ministry of man.
the whole church. Which reason you can not shift away by saing that Christ
is that only head: for so (it may be truly replied to you) he is of all the
particular churches in the world toe. And yeat (this not withstanding) as
there would heresies and schisms rise in particular churches if (to use S.
Ciprians words) there were not one priest and judge obeyed in the same, in
the steed of Christ, and for this cause one such in every diocese supplieth
the room of Christ not visibly present in earth: so is not Christ's being
head over the universal church, any more let why there should be a visible
head in his steed of the whole church, which is but one. Especially seeing
the bishops may as easily, and are much more likely to stir up schisms
in the whole church, as are the particular members of every particular
diocese, as the examples of your first 600. years in which there was never
yeat any notable heresye that was not by bishops either begone or
maintained, sufficiently bear witness. Which chance happening, seeing that
means must be sought to appease it, as well as the schisms of particular
churches, and yeat Christ no more visibly present to be consulted in this
case, then he is in the other: what remains to think, but that he has
supplied the lack of his visible presence by appointing as in well one in his
steed to the behooffe of the whole church, as of particular churches? For
this one head (lest any man might cavil that he might err and draw all
after Lucae. 22.
him) Christ him self prayed, saying in the gospel to Peter whom he left in
his place to be that head. I have prayed for the that thy faith may not
fail. We may not doubt therefore but that he obtained his petition. We have no
cause to doubt, considering that hitherto all other apostolical seats and
most famous churches of the world, as Antioche, Alexandria, Jerusalem,
Constantinople, having perniciously erred in the faith and being quite
overthrown, this onley seat of the chief head of Christ's church, the
church of Rome I mean: against so many wicked Emperors openly assaulting
it, so many De vtilit. credendi ad Hoaorat. Cap. 17.
subtle heretics craftily undermining it, and barcking round about it as S.
Austen says, so many means invented to bring it to defend evil and
perniciouse doctrine, has in all these difficulties continued allwaies, and
by gods grace ever shall continue, pure and unspotted.

Beside this, (to stop all your starting holes at once now for hereafter)
you can not say, that by this reason of mine, whereby I go about upon the
necessity of one head in every diocese, to prove the like over the whole
church, it should follow as well that there ought to be over all the kingdoms
of the world, one chief king or emperor, because as I said once before, all
the kingdoms in the world meet not together by gods ordinance in one
kingdom, as all the churches do in one church: Which if they did, off
necessity they should being one body have one head. And therefore in this
case I Lib. de vnitate eccles. Cap. 12
may say with S. Austen: Neque enim quia and in orbem terarrum plerunque
regna diuiduntur ideo and Christiana vnitas diuiditur. Neither because
kingdoms for the most part be divided through the world therefore is
Christian unity divided also. And yeat this is the thing that M. Nowell
labors to bring to pass, that because there be many kingdoms and
consequently many kings, there should be many churches, and so many rulers of
the church: or gods apointment of governing the world by many kings made
frustrate, and so no mo kingdoms then there be churches.

Thus I have showed you M. Nowell how this place of S. Cyprian makes for my
purpose, referring those words: Neque vnus in ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos and
ad tempus iudex etc. Neither that there is one priest and one judge
acknowledged in the church in the steed of Christ for the time, to the
proof of the necessity of one head over the whole church, by an inevitable
consequent taken from S. Cyprians words, not as directly meant of the pope, as
you labor to make men believe, spending many words here in vain to prove
that these words should be spoken of S. Cyprian him self. To all the which
long process of youres I will then make answer, when I shall use the place to
such purpose as you imagine I do. Although this I will advertise you of by
the way, that the case is not altogether so clear as you take it to be, that
this place of S. Cyprian is only to be taken as spoken of him self and not of
Cornelius, as to him that shall considre that no particular bishop is able to
stay schisms so conveniently (whereas the bishops of diverse provinces be
of equal authority) as that one bishop that has authority over the whole
nombre of bishops, it can not but be manifest. And yeat may every man see
in this place, that the one bishopp of whom S. Cyprian speaks, should be
such, as being obeyed there should be no schisms in Christ's church. Which
can be understand of no one particular bishop, but of some such one, as
because his authority is universal, it will follow that the obeing of him
shall procure to the whole church, to the colleage of priests, quietness and
unity. Again, when S. Cyprian because they go not to the beginning of the
truth, seek not out the head, observe not the heavenly masters teaching,
and adds immediately that our lord said to Peter: Thou art Peter, etc. (as
though he would teach Not as M. Iuell iuglgeth with this place in. 3. his
printed sermon.
us thereby Matthew. 18.
to come to the beginning of the truth, to find out the head, to keep the
teaching of Christ,) that he disposed by his authority that unity should
begin of one: Last, of all that he holds not the faith that holds not the
unity of this church that began of Petre: ought not these words vttred to
teach us to avoid schisms, be a rule to direct us to S. Cyprians meaning in
this place, where he says that heresies and schisms rise, because one judge
in the church in the stead of Christ is not obeyed? But leaving the defense of
this interpretation, to those that have so alleged and understood the place
(who are able it is not to be doubted to give good reason of their doings) I
will proceed to that which follows.

Concerning the Apology wherewith I found fault for saing, that Christ in
the government of his church ^ol. 38. b. 7
uses not the ministerye off any one general head, etc, which you labor
here to defend, I say: that it has not only committed this fault in
denieng this manner off government which two if I should add this beside,
that it was most Not impossible for one man alone to govern the church under
Christ.
your cholere a little, but yeat M. Nowell it is true. For what man that had
but a cromme of wit in his head, would call that a thing impossible to be
done, which him self for the space of 900. years can not deny to have been
done? Deny if you can, that thus many years the whole world has not in
spiritual matters obeyed one head the B. of Rome? I press you not now with
the first six hundred years before, in the which the ecclesiastical histories
and writings of the fathers make most evident mention, that this authority
of one general head, was thorough out the whole world acknowledged of all
men. To this one head appellations were made from all parts of the world.
This one head executed the censures of the church upon See M. Doctor
Hardinges book the second edition fol. 111. b.
malefactors and transgressors of the ecclesiastical canons, confirmed the
ordinations and elections off bishops, approved or disalowed councelles,
restored bishops wrongfully condemned and deprived, received into the church
such as had erred and gone a straie, and all this thorough out the whole
world. But with all this I say I will not press you, because your Apology
and you be it never so easy to be proved, will yeat for your honor sake
perhaps deny it. Only this I ask of you, how you be not ashamed to say,
that it is impossible for one man to govern the whole church, seeing by your
own confession for 900. years it has been so? If you will say that the
church has been evil governed these latter 900. years, allthough that you
could right well prove, as you shall never be hable: what makes that for this
assertion off youres that one man can not possybly govern the whole church,
containing (to use yowre own words) so many nations, so diverse Languages
and natures of men, How proves it, that one general head can not so ouersee
his charge that he shall be able to keep all churches from schisms and
troubles, and pacify them when they are risen? If one man alone could for the
space of 900. years so rule all churches dispersed thorough out all the
world, that he Note.
was able to plant amongst so many nations, so diverse languages and natures
of men, one naughty and corrupt faith, (as you say) might not the same, or
may not an other with as much facility have planted or plant (if it were to
be planted) a truth thorough out the whole world? If the church have been so
governed during this term of 900. years, that all the affairs of the church
have by one head been so ordered, that no membre has had just cause to
complain, that all members have agreed in perfect quietness one with an
other and all with their head, as your self hereafter confess, allthough
you labor to qualifye the matter in this wise: In deed we must needs confess
a truth, M. Nowels confession concerning the quiet agreement under the
government off the Pope. fol. 56. b. 25.
that whilst we all remained under the quiet obedience off your Romish
head, in doctrine of his traditions, there was a colored hind of quietness,
concord, and love, amongst all the members of that head, the subjects of
that one governor and ruler, and specially amongst the clergy of that one
church: if I say, (by your confession) there was such a quiet agreing
thorough out all the world in false doctrine, will you still abide by it, that
the same one head that governed in this peasable manner all the world whom he
fed with evil doctrine, might not have governed them as quietly if he had
deliuerd to them sound and wholesome doctrine? Or will you say that God can
do less in procuring good things, then the devil in promoting evil? that
God can make one man hable alone to govern all the world without schisms, or
to appease them being moved as great as it is, in evil government, but not in
good? If you will not say thus, you must needs say, that it is nothing
impossible for one man assisted by gods grace, to govern the church of the
whole world were it greater then it is, and so to confess with all, that the
Apology in saing the contrary, and you in defending the Apology, have both
off you, falsely, blasphemously and foolishely erred.

As for the reason whereunto the Apology and you lean, that as God has
given to no one king to be above all, so to no one bishop to rule the whole
church, that is as I told you before, to appoint God, because he has made
many kingdoms to make many heads of the church which is but one, and so
consequently to multiply religions, and make many faithes. But because you
repeat very often this comparison, and think it so absurd that there
should be any more one head over the whole church, the^ one chief king
above all the kingdoms in the world: I will here prove, that within the first
six hundred years it was taken for no absurdity. There is no man I think
that has bestowed any time in the ecclesiastical histories ignorant, what a
do Theodora the Empress, wife to Justinian the Emperor, made, to have
Siluerius the pope deprive Menna the good archbishop of Constantinople, and to
restore Anthimius the heretic laufully before by Agapetus the pope deprived.
To the which wicked attempt when by no means the good pope could be brought
to consent, false accusations were brought in against him, and so he was by
tirannie removed, and co^streined to flee to a town called Patara of the
province of Lycia. Whither the emperor Liberatus in Breuiario cap. 22.
on a time coming, the bishopp there (as Liberatus the Archedeacon of Carthage
writes) complaining to him, and calling to witness the just and terrible
judgment of God, for the unjust expulsion of the bishop of so great a seat,
adds at the last these words: Multos esse in hoc Many Kings to govern the
world, one pope to govern the church.
mundo reges, and non esse vnum, sicut ille papa est super ecclesiam mundi
totius a sua sede expulsus: that there are many kings in this world, and
that there is no one only king, as that pope is over all the whole church of
the world, expelled from his seat. Do you not here see M. Nowell that within
the first 600. years the whole world was governed by one head in spiritual
matters, without any necessity to have it so governed in temporal? Would
this good bishop (is it credible) being a suter to the Emperor, if the church
had not been governed by one head at that time, or if it had been an
absurdity that there should be one chief bishop and many equal kings,
have dasshed the Emperor in the mouth with such an absurd and flat lie?
Or would the Emperor upon this talcke, immediately have caused Siluerius to be
called back again into Italy, and not rather have checked the bishop for
abusing him with a lie, if he had not acknowledged his words to be true? Thus
much I trust may serve to make the indifferent reader understand, that I
reprehended not the Apology without just cause.

Your railing against me because it is (as your self confess) fol. 39. a.
beside the matter, I pass over. But so can I this by no means, that you take
it for no reproach (you say) to have Nowell. b. 1.
your congregation secret, scattred, and unknown to all the world, because
this is common to you with the primitive church of our Savior Christ, and
his holy Apostles.

Considre I beseech the good Reader, whether these new Dorman.
vpstart heretics of our age be not brought to a very Exigent, and to extreme
desperation, when to excuse the secretenesse of their congregation, their
hidden and unknown church, they wrappe them selves like crafty wolves for
fear of being betrayed, in the fine fleeses and soft wool of the name of
Christ and his Apostles. As though after so many hundred years that Christ's
faith has floorished thorough out all the world, it were now new to begin
again. Considre whether they ought not to be ashamed (if shame there were any
in them) to say, that the church was in Christ's time and his apostles
secret and unknown, seeing that to them that shall read the Acts Act. 2. 4
and alibi.
of the Apostles it can not be unknown, how mightily the church increased
even in their time: Seeing that the Apostle S. Paul witnesses the contrary in
saing, that the Romans 1.
faith off the Romans (Christ's true faith) was preached even then in the
universal world. It is therefore a A sclaunderouse and blasphemouse lie. 28.
most sclaunderouse and blasphemouse lie to say, that Christ's church was at
any time after the coming down of the holy ghost secret or unknown. It is
a lie to say that it was so hidden, that who so ever would at any time have
joined him self thereto might not have known it. But this is an old shift
off the Donatistes, who when they could find none off their religion but only
in Africa, were driven to say that there the church was only, as you must say
it was 50. years ago in Germany, or else no where. Of whom as S. Auste^
said then, so will I say of you now: O impudente^ voce^ etc. O impudent voice,
is there no church because thou art not in it? See to thy self lest thou be
not (in it) In psalm. 101.
therefore. For the church shall be allthough thou be not. This abominable,
this detestable voice of presumption and falshoode, boulstred with no truth,
lightened with no wisdom, seasoned with no discretion, vain, rash, hedlong,
perniciouse, did the spirit of God forsee, and spoke even as it were against
them, when he preached unity: In gathering the people and kingdoms together
to ser us Psalmus 101.
our lord. Where is now I pray you your church spread thorough all nations?
Where was there any sign thereof in all the world the year before that
Martin Luther began to preach his gospel? When I call your congregation
scattered and unknown, I have relation to that time in which you first showed
your selves to the world. For that you now brag that the pope and his, have
both more knowledge and feling also of your co^gration the^ liking, that is
common to you, seeing you will needs hold in common, with the Arria^s. Whose
heresies were as famous in the world as yours are, and yeat could never by
time so grow in credit God be praised therefore, that their first beginning
bewrayed them not to the world, as youres does you. Might you not be ashamed
M. Nowell, if there were any shame in you, to go about to persuade me^, that
Christ's church after fiftene hundred years, should be now in her enfancy,
yea within these fifty years not borne at all? Ihon Calvin your late master,
in a little treatise that he made against Michael Seruetus whom for his
heresies he put to death in Geneua, disputes thus against him. Ecclesiam
fingit ab annis mill ducentis and sexaginta fugatam Caluins opinion of the
church.
a mundo fuisse, vt coelum illi exilium fuerit. Nos certe e splendidis aedibus
eiectam fuisse fatemur, sed it a vt electas a se reliquias admirablili gratia
seruauerit dominus. Alioqui mentitus foret, qui semper aliquem sibi populum in
terra fore promisit, qua^diu Sol and Luna in coelo fulgebunt. Scimus quid
passim de aeterno Christi regno testentur prophetae. An eius sedem in coelis
locant? Imo fore praedicunt, vt sceptrum eius e Sion procul dominus ostendat
quo dominetur ab ortu vsque ad o^casum, and eius haereditas sit terraru^ orbis.
Nunc ergo populo eum priuare qui nome^ eius celebret, est ac si abscissa eius
part, ipsum in coelo multilum includere tentemus. Seruetus (says Calvin)
feineth the church these 12. hundred and three score years to have been chased
out of the world, so that it must be in banishement in heaven. We truly
confess, that she has been cast out of glittring and shining palaces, but
yeat so that the lord has preserved his chosen remena^tes by his merueilouse
grace. Otherwise he should have lied, who ever promised to him self some
people in the earth, so long as the son and moan should shine in the
firmament. We know what the prophets do in every place witness of the
aeternal kingdom of Christ. Do they place his throne in heaven? Yea truly
they prophecy that it should come to pass, that the lord should show a far
of his scepter out of Sion, with the which he shall rule from the east unto
the west, and his enheritaunce shall be the whole world. Now therefore to
deprive him of his people which should glorify his name, it is even as though
cutting of a part of him, we would assaie to include him mangled in heaven.
Thus far Calvin touching the church. And therefore you may not blame me M.
Nowell, if I reason as your master does, nor may not think your self well
excused, if after fifty years you show a few remenantes of your church,
which at the beginning thereof, 51. years ago, could not show in all the
world one man that might be as a stone thereof, so secret, so scattred, so
hidden and unknown was it.

You are not headless you say, you have Christ in heaven and your prince
under him etc. you have the rules and grounds Nowell. fol. 39. b. 3
of gods word.

You are not headless, if so many bishops as you have, so many heads you
be under. But you join in no one head Dorman.
in earth, for which cause only I call you headless. Your prince in earth
(for now your mind is changed, and being past the places of S. Cyprian, which
made so much for the authority of priests and bishops, you cry that the
prince is your head) can not make you have a head in earth, in so much as
your whole congregation whereof I trow you will confess your selves in
England to be members, is not under any one prince*

You have not the rules and grounds of gods word to stay upon, forasmoche
as you reject the certain means and ways to understand gods word by. And
therefore you know not whither to go nor whereupon to rest.

That S. Hierom was of the mind that there ought to be one chief bishop in
Christ's church. Dialog. aduersus Lucifer.
The 13. Chapter.
You grant M. Nowell, that saint Cyprian and saint Hierome fol. 30. b. 23.
fol. 40. a. 1.
were both of one mind. Therefore say I, they both prove the necessity of
one head. Neither care I whether S. Hierome speak in this dialogue of the B.
of Rome by name or no. It suffiseth to prove my intent, that as by your own
confession S. Cypriah is of the mind that in every diocese there must be one
priest and judge in the stead of Christ whom all the rest must obey: so S.
Hierome also is of the same. The which being once granted, it follows very
well, that seeing for one little diocese, a head over so mean men as parish
priests be, is precisely necessary, much more is a head in earth over all
the bishops which have every one of them so great power over their own
flock (lest theye abuse the same) of greter and more forcible necessity. And
therefore you take great pains to no purpose, to prove that S. Hierome
speaks not of the B. of Rome, but of every other bishop, the which thing I
would hier you to prove for me. For whereas if he had spoken of the B. of Rome
by name, it had been a reason grounded upon the authority of S. Hierome alone,
now being spoken of every bishop, it confirms by reconing the necessity of
one head particulerly in every diocese, the great necessity of the same
one head in the whole body of the church by natural reason also, which
proves my purpose better then any private man's authority can do. If
cancred malice, and desire to be revenged had not carried you so far and fast
away, that it gave you no leisor to look back to the title of the argument
that is here handled, your self would sone have perceived how little it were
necessary, to have in this place any special mention made of the B. of Rome.
Which if you had once marcked, then would you never have gathered so
foolilishely and unlearnedly, out of the argument of the dialogue fol. 40. a. 6
written by Erasmus: Liber est, etc. The book is very worthy to be read, as
the which does conceine many* wholesome precepts M. Nowell a weak reasoner.
concerning the life of bishops, that there was nothing in the same dialogue,
not as much as one word that is special to the B. of Rome only. For all
though there be no one word there special to the B. of Rome, as it is not
necessary that there be: how should yeat this authority press him that
would maintain the contrary, and say to you: what M. Nowell I think your
wits fail you: May there not be some one word special to the B. of Rome
in that dialogue, because it contains many wholesome precepts concerning
the life of bishops? Is not the B, of Rome a bishop? Much like or more
foolish then this, are your other notes gathered here and there out of this
dialogue to prove that which you say of every bishops authority, and to
reprove my wresting as you term it of this place to the auctority of one
bishop over the whole church. For who sense reason was first poured in to
man's head, hard ever of one that occupies the place of a wise man, a more
folishe or brainesicke kind of reasoning then is this: S. Hierome speaks in
diverse places of this dialogue of many bishops, because the question was
whether bishops returning from their heresies should be vnbishopped or no,
before they were reconciled. Ergo, He meant not in the place alleged that
there shoulder be one chief bisshoppe in the church. This seemed to your self
to be far from the mark I doubt not, when you promise to come nearer to the
place by fol. 40. b. 22. fol. 41. b.
me alleged. And therefore you bring in certain sentences going next before,
to prove that which I deny not, that S. Hierome speaks of every bishop in
his own diocese. And thereupon you conclude.

And therefore this whole matter is altogether impertinent to Nowell. fol. 42.
b. 9
D. Harding and M. Dormans purpose of one only head over the whole church.
Unless M. Dorman would frame us thereof this lewd argument. S. Hierome
says that every bishop ought to have authority above all other priests of
his own diocese: Ergo, the B. of Rome ought to have a preeminence peerless
above all bishops of all diocesses, and over the whole church thorough out
the whole world.

No M. Nowell I will not reason so in this place, because Dorman.
the argument which I handle forces me not so to do. But if I had so
reasoned or would so reason, as you think no man being awake will: yeat am I
he, that eue^ in my sleep M. Nowell were able to defend that argument against
you, staring with both your eyes wide open upon me. And that your self
perceived well enough, and therefore like a tender hearted man, as loathe to
break my sweet sleep, you stolle from it as softlye as you might. For this
being, I pray you first granted, that every bishop ought to have authority
above all other priests of his own diocese, and the reason being (as S.
Hierome has here, and you in making the argument guilefully left out) for the
avoiding of schisms: I would infer for the minor or second proposition: but
the same reason (for the avoiding of schisms) does no less, yea more enforce
that one have perelesse authority over the bishops and priests of the whole
world. Ergo, there must be one such head, and that by a consequent the B. of
Rome, who has ever so been reputed and taken, except you by your deanely
authority have power to appoint some other. But I brought not S. Hieromes
authority Why S. Hierome was first alleged.
M. Nowell to conclude so particulerly, or to force it to the B. of Romes
supremacy, but only to prove the necessity of one general head over Christ's
universal church, the which no reasonable man can deny but that most
effectually it does. So that now your great musing at any man that shall to
this sense allege this place of S. Hierome, may appear rather to proceed off
some dumpish melancolike vapors occupieng your fond and idle head, or lack
of other matter to think upon, then upon any just cause or good ground, and
that also you have untruly said of me that I have wrested this place.

In answering the place of S. Hierom to Euagrius you say, Nowell. fo. 4^. b. 18
first that he shows that praesbiter and episcopus, a priest and a bishop,
be all one by the first institution and by the law of God.

If it had pleased you so to have taken S. Hierome, he Dorman.
might have meant that the name of a priest, and the name of a bishop was all
one in the use of speech, in the holy scriptures, and in the sacrament of
ordres, but not in dignity, preeminence and authority. For a bishop is
preferred before a priest in jurisdiction, allthough their names were once
confounded. Neither are all those things by and by to be confounded as one in
truth and nature, the names whereof be confounded. Otherwise because the
Apostles are in the gospel called disciples, an Apostle and a disciple are all
one, which is well known not to be so. Likewise though the terms of priest
and bishop were common, yeat the things were never one: in so much that S.
Austen making mention of the heresy of Aerius says, Dicebat etiam
praesbiterum ab episcopo nulla differentia secerni debere. He said Ad quod
vult Deum haeres. 57.
also that a priest ought to be distinguished from a bishop by no difference.

But what mean you here M. Nowell to talcke so much of the equality of
bishops and priests, being a matter in this place nothing to our purpose?
Or if it were, seeing it might be said, that even as the old canons (as I
declared before) in that equality which is in priestehode, used yeat In the 6.
chapitre. fol. 33. b.
the word Archipraesbiter, chief priest, and ordained such a dignity in
the church: so there is nothing that lets, why in the equality of
bishops and priests, while no one is more bishop or priest then an other,
there may How one bishop is equal to an other.
not be degrees notwithstanding of superiority, allthough not in the sacrament
of ordres, which is common to them all, yeat in the execution of that power
that is conferred thereby. But perhaps you be of the opinion your self that
there ought to be no difference between a bishop and a priest, and therefore
are the gladder to snatche occasion by all means, direct or indirect, to utter
your mind therein. Now follows upon this ground laid, that bishops and
priests be by the first institution and the law of God one, your conclusion:
whereby you will make it appear, that you have not without cause made mention
of this equality of bishops, and priests.

So that all bishops, which be the successors of the Apostles, Nowell. b. 24.
be also praesbiteri, that is to say elders or priests. Whereof it follows
also, that there is an equality amongst all bishops by gods law, as the
equal successors of the Apostles. And that this is S. Hieromes mind in that
place, all learned men who have read the said epistle do well know.

This was not the mind of S. Hierome, but is an idle Dorman.
phantasy of your own. The learned know and to their judgment I appeal,
that his mind was here to compare together the state of a priest and a bishop
in the sacrament of holy ordres, common as well to the one as to the other:
that so he might refell the better the error of those, who held that deacons
ought to be equal to priests, as appears by these words of his in the
beginning of the epistle: In this epistle ad Euagri^
Nam quum Apostolus etc. For whereas the Apostle teaches manifestly that
priests and bishops be one, what eyleth the servant He means deacons.
of widows and tables, arroga^tly to extol him self above them, at whose
prayers the body and blood of Christ is made. Does not this example, put in
the consecrating of the body and blood off Christ (the which the poorest
priest that is, has as good authority to do, given him in the sacrament of
holy ordres as the pope him self) declare that S. Hieromes mind was no
otherwise to make priests equal to bishops, but in the only order of
priestehode common to both? Yea but you will say that the Apostles were
equal in all respects. (for if you say not so you can not conclude
absolutely as you do, that all bishops their successors be so equal). If
you say so, that is but your bare Lib. 1. contra Iouinianum.
saing only, not by the authority of S. Hierome confirmed, but most plainly by
the same impugned. Who in one place says, that amongst the twelve there was
a head chosen, Peter by name, and in an other place, that Christ made Peter In
cap. Marci 14. Note the cause of appointing one head.
the master of his house, THAT UNDER ONE SHEPHERD THERE MAY BE ONE FAITH.
Which is directly against the equality that you build upon. But let it be
granted unto you that the apostles were equal, yeat shall not your conclusion
follow for all that. For it is to be considered that in the Apostles there is a
double respect which is to be weighed now of us. Either we considre them as
they were all Apostles, or as they were bishops. As they were Apostles they
How the Apostles were all equal.
were all equal, they had all like power to preach and teach thorough out
the whole world. As they were bishops and rulers of particular churches,
they were all subject to Petre the chief bishop of all. As they were Apostles,
that is to say general legates, to plant Christ's faith thorough out all
the world, to found churchs, to preach the word of God, finally to govern
universally in all places where their should come, they tra^smitted this right
none of the^ to their successors, but only Peter: who was the general
shepherd of all. Which is the cause that some of the fathers (namely S. Auste^,
say, that the power given to Peter was given to him In psalm. 208.
in the person of the church, because it was not given to him alone, but to
all his successors to continue for ever. As the Apostles were bishops of
particular places their authority ended not with them, but went further to the
whole church to continue for ever. Now to apply this to our purpose, how do
the bishops that now are succeed the Apostles? They succeed them as
bishops, not as Apostles. For if they succeeded them so, who sees not that as
the Apostles made laws, absolved, excommunicated and ruled thorough out all
How bisshoppes be the successors of the Apostles.
the world where so ever they came, so might the bishops that now succeed
the^ do the like. The which thing seeing we find by no records since the
apostles time that ever it was practiced in the church, and if it should, it
were the next way to disquiet all the world, and to fill the church full of
schisms and heresies, reason it self does convince, that the order taken
amongst the Apostles was but by special priuileage, not appointed to continue
for ever, or to derogate any thing from the general order begone in Peter,
and appointed to be perpetual as long as the church should endure. To
conclude therefore, I grant to you M. Nowell that the Apostles were equal as
they were all the general legates of Christ, but not as they had their
special bishoprikes and charges limited unto them. In which latter sense
because the bishops that are now, succeed the Apostles, in which point they
were not equal, it follows against you that all bishops be not equal. If
you will say that the Apostles were also equal, even in that, that they were
bishoppees of private places: you have against you S. Hierome him self. Who
can not be otherwise taken the^ to mean thus, by calling Petre (as you hard
before) the head of the other Apostles, the master of Christ's house, the one
shepherd under whom there might be one faith. You shall speak against
Chrysostom, who speaking of S. James the B. of Jerusalem, has: Quod si quis
percontaretur, quomodo Homil. ^^lt. in cap. Joan. vlt.
igitur Iacobus sedem Hierosolomis acceperit: responderem hunc totius orbis
magistrum praeposuisse. That if any man would ask, how then James came by the
bishoprike of Jerusalem: I would answer that the master of all the world
(Peter) made him bishop. And a little after in the same place. Nam quum magna
Christus Petro communicasset etc. For when Christ had communicated great
things to Peter, and committed to his charge the care of the whole world etc.
Last of all, if you will needs contentiously maintain that Petre was no more
above the Apostles as they were bishops, Arnobius.
then as they were Apostles: the^ (to omit diverse other that might be
alleged to this effect) you shall say against that ancient, eloquent, and
learned father, who lived in the In psalm. 138.
time of persecution before the reign of Constantine the great, Arnobius, the
scholemaistre of that eloquent and learned Lactantius: who by name calls
Peter EPISCOPVS EPISCOPORVM the B. of bishops. Seeing now that Peter is
confessed by the fathers to be the head of the apostles, the one pastor, the
master of the whole world, and bishop of bishops, which ca^ not be in that
respect that the Apostles were all the general legates of Christ thorough
out the whole world: what remains but to acknowledge that superiority to
have place (as Arnobius words importe) over them, as bishops. And so is
your argument taken from the equalitye of the Apostles showed to be
insufficient to prove your fantasied equality of all bishops.

Hitherto you have talked generally of this epistle of S. Hierome to Euagrius.
Now will you come to the place (you say) alleged by me out of this epistle:
Quod autem postea vnus electus est, etc. That one was afterward chosen to rule
the rest that was done for a remedy against schisms, etc. To this place you
add an other sentence of S. Hierome, where for example of that which he had
said, he brings the church of Alexandria, Where from Mark the Evangelist
unto Heracla and Dionisius being bishops, the priests did ever place one
chosen off their company in the higher room, and named him bishop. etc.
Upon this place you conclude as follows.

Whereby it appears plainly, that the words of Saint Hierrome, Nowell. ^*
a.
one chosen afterward amongst them to rule the rest, for a remedy of
schisms, do apperteine to every bishop as head ruler of the clergy off
his own^ diocese. For says Saint Hierome such an head ruler was chosen at
Alexandria in Egypt etc.

The example of Alexandria makes nothing against Dorman.
my understanding of these words to be meant of the Apostles. For why might not
S. Mark the B. of Alexandria, be made bishop there after this form of
government used amongst the Apostles, that as amongst the Apostles one was
above the rest: so in Alexandria should be one chief ruler above the rest of
the clergy there? But in this point I will contend with no man. For how
ever they be to be understand, of the Apostles, or of every bishop as head
ruler off the cleargye in his own diocese, once this is clear, that by them
is proved, that of one company there must for the better avoiding of schisms
be one head. Again on the other side, you seem to be as indifferent, and
therefore you add:

And withal what so ever was done afterward, was not done Nowell. fol. 43. a.
23
de iure diuino upon the ground of Gods law, but of an ecclesiastical
order and policy.

I pray you what if this were but an ecclesiastical order Dorman.
M. Nowell? Think you it nothing to break the canons and constitutions of the
universal church? Because with men of your vocation that is counted a small
fault, I will prove to the reader even by S. Hierome him self, that this
order to have one general head over Christ's church, is neither the
invention of ambitiouse popes (as before sclaunderously you said), neither
grounded only upon any ecclesiastical order and policy, (as here upon better
advise more modestly you report) but upon the infallible ground of Christ's
own express ordinance.

S. Hierome therefore writing against one of your ancestors Iouinian the
heretic, who maintained that votaries and professed persons might laufully
mary, for the defense Aug. lib. 2. Retractat. cap. 22. Haeresi. 82.
of this heresy of his (for so has S. Augustine termed it) brought the
example of Peter, who was he said a married man. By this occasion offered, S.
Hierome vttreth of S. Peter these words. At dicis, super Petrum fundatur
ecclesia, Lib. 1. co^tr^ Iouin.
licet idipsum in alio loco super omnes Apostolos fiat, and cuncti claues regni
coelorum accipiant, and ex aequo super eos ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur: tamen
propterea inter duodeeim vnus eligitur, vt capite constituto schismatis
tollatur occasi^* Sed cur non Ioannet electus est virgo? AEtati delatum erat,
quia Petrus senior erat, ne adhuc adolescens ac pene puer, progressae aetatis
hominibus praeferretur, and magister bonus, qui occasionem iurgij debuerat
auferre discipulis, etc. causam praebere videtur inuidiae. That is to say: But
thou say the church is builded upon Petre, allthough the same in an other
place be done upon all the Apostles, and al of them receive the keys of
heaven, and indifferently upon the^ is the strength of the church grounded:
yeat therefore is there one chosen emo^gest the 12, THAT BY APPOINTING A HEAD,
OCCASION OF SCHISMS BE TAKEN AWAY. But why was not John chosen being a
virgin? Age was preferred because Peter was elder. Lest a strippling and yeat
almost a child, should be preferred before ancient and elderly me^, and the
good master which Christ appointed Peter to be head.
should take from his scholars occasion of strife, etc. might some to ministre
cause of envy. Hitherto the words off S. Hierome. Of the which may be
concluded: First, that S. Hierome teaches us, that this common objection of
the heretics, that Christ gave power of losing and binding to al
indifferently, and that therefore Peter had no more premine^ce then the rest, is
a naughty and untrue reason, as appears by these words of S. Hierome, tamen
etcae. yeat one is bishops, this Maxim of youres is clean overthrown, that
all bishops be equal, and that no one has any other over him: seeing the
Apostles being bishops had Peter to be their head. Fourthly I note, that
this confession Erasmus, who in his notes upon the epistle Ad Marcellam where
S. Hierome has again, that the church was builded Tom. 2. ad Marcellam
adue^sus Montanum.
upon Peter, gives this judgment: Hoc detorquet in commendationem Petri. This
he wresteth to the commendation of Peter. Last of all it is to be noted, that
in S. Hieromes time it was acknowledged even by heretics, that

To this place of S. Hierome I will add one other, to show that you abuse his
authority to much in laboring to found upon him this untrue proposition of
youres, that not by gods law but by man's, this order of one head in
Christ's Church should be established. The words off S. Hierome alluding to
the house mentioned in the gospel, where Christ eat his passover are
these: Dominus domus Petrus apostolus est, cui dominus domum suam In cap. 14.
Marci.
credidit, VTSVBVNO PASTORE SIT VNA FIDES. The master of the house is Peter
the Apostle, to whom One head shepherde that the faith may be one.
our Lord committed his house, that under one shepherd the faith may be
one. Do you not see M. Nowell the necessity of one head, that under one
shepherd the faith may be one. Hear you not that it is not man's devise
that it be so, but Christ's own ordinance? Have you not with all S. Hierome
expounding (as it were) the words of S. Cyprian: tamen vt vnitatem
manifestaret, vnitatis eiusdem originem Lib. de vnitat. ecclesiae.
ab vno incipientem sua auctoritate disposuit, yeat to make unity manifest, he
(Christ) disposed by his authority the beginning of this unity to proceed
from one) by these words of his: That under one shepherde there may be one
faith?

By this it appears, that S. Hierome is not of that mind that you would
have him to be, that is, that this order of having one head in the church
should be off man's ordinance, not of Christ's institution. But here you
will ask me how I can then reconcile him and make him agree with him self:
who in this place has, that one Quod vnus postea electus est. S. Hierom
expounded by him self.
was afterward chosen to rule the rest. If after (say you) then not upon
gods law. Yes I reconcile him after this sort M. Nowell. If you understand
this place to be of the Apostles, then he expounds him self in the place
that you hard before: where allthough he confess, that in one place Christ
builded the church equally upon all his Apostles, (which was done straight
after his resurrection) Joan. 20.
yeat in an other he grants, that the good master (for so he calls
Christ there) builded it upon Peter, a little before his ascension into heaven
whom he appointed Joan. vlt.
to be the head of the rest. So that the word here Postea, afterward, has
relation to that ordinary prerogative of S. Peter given to him at Christ's
assension, at which time he perfourming the promise made before to Peter in
the future tense, to build his church upon him, Matthew. 16.
appointed him as Chrysostom says upon that place, to have orbis terrarum
cura^, the charge of the whole world. Homil. vlt. in Joan. vlt.
If you understand not these words (one chosen afterward to rule the rest)
of the Apostles, but of the government in particular churches (as because of
the example brought by S. Hierome of the church of Alexandria you think they
should) then Postea, afterward, must have this sense, that whereas under one
general head of Christ's church, the particular churches were at the
beginning governed by many heads and common consent (which was as Epiphanius
says because the apostles could not furthwith take order for all things: his
words are, non enim omnia statim potuerunt Apostoli constituere, for the
apostles could not furthewith take order for all things) afterward the state
of the church being better Lib. 3. hae^es. 75.
settled, and being come (to use the words of Epiphanius) ad propria^ mensura^,
to her own measure, that order appearing to be such as was not convenient for
the government of the church, was alltered, and one chosen to rule alone for
the avoiding of schisms in every particular church: not as though S. Hiero^
should mean that the universal church lacked at any time one head, or had
been governed by diverse (the contrary whereof he affirmed before) but that
afterward particular churchs began to see the necessity of one head over
every church, according to the pattern wherein Christ appointed Peter to be
the chief head of all. As S. Hierom him self in an other place does well
declare: where he says: An tequam diaboli instinctu studia in religione
fierent etc. Before by the instigation of the devil, factions were made in
religion, and In cap. 1. epi. ad Tit. 1. Cor. 1.
one said: I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I of Cephas, the churches were
governed by the common council of priests. But after that every one thought
those that he baptized to be his and not Christ's: it was thorough out all the
world decreed, that one being chosen out of the priests, should be set over
the rest, to whom all the care of the church should belong, and the occasion
of schisms be taken away. Thus far S. Hierom. By which words as it
appears, that the schisms were in particular churches, so the heads of
whom he speaks, were afterward by his mind chosen in particular churches.
Thus is S. Hierome expounded by him self, which I trust the learned will like
much better, then such crooked gloses of youres, as tend to no other end,
but to the defacing of the grave and learned fathers: as this could not choose
but here discredit S. Hierome, if in a matter of such weight as this is, he
should be found contrary to him self. It follows:

This which was thus done afterward says S. Hierome, was done rather for the
honor of priestehod then for the necessity of Nowell. fol. 43. b. 4
the law. For by the law of God which is first, the priest (as S. Hierome
says (may do as much excepting ordering only, as may the bishop: but
afterward for order, one was placed in the highest place for the avoiding of
schisms. And if a priest by S. Hieromes mind may do as much as a bishop, I
think also one bishop may by gods law do as much as an other bishop.

Behold here (good reader) in M. Nowell a singular Dorman.
point of false and untrue dealing, which although it be with him in this
book of his, and other his companions in their other doings, a thing very
common, and therefore the less to be merueiled at: yeat surely is it in the
wresting of this place of S. Hierome of all other most evident to be
perceived. For whereas S. Hierome in his Dialogues against the Luciferians,
has, that this order in the church, (that the bishop confirms those that
are Christened not the priest), was taken rather for the honor of priestehode
then for the necessity of the law. M. Nowell to make the matter S. Hierom
beelied by M. Nowell. 29.
probable, that this order of having one head in the church should not be
grounded upon gods word, and that there is no necessity in it, but done
rather to honor priesthode: applies it to these words of S. Hierome to
Euagrius, where in express words he has, that the appointing one to rule
and govern the rest, was to be a remedy against schisms. For the better
understanding of this false dealing of his, I shall wish those that either
have not the worckes of S. Hierome at hand, or if they have understand not
them in Latin, or if they do, can not so easelie turn to the place, to
considre them as they follow here in this place: Quod si hoc loco quaeris quare
in ecclesia baptizatus nisi per manus episcopi, non accipiat spiritum sanctum,
quem nos asserimus in vero baptismate tribui: disce hanc obseruationem ex ea
authoritate descendere, quod post ascensum domini spiritus Hieron. in dialog.
aduer. Lucifer,
sanctus ad apostolos descendit. Et multis in locis idem factitatum reperimus,
ad honorem potius sacer dotij quam ad legis necessitatem. Alioqui si ad
episcopi tantum imprecationem spiritus sanctus defluit, luge^di sunt qui in
viculis aut castellis, aut in remotioribus locis per praesbiteros, and diaconos
baptizati, ante dormierunt quam ab episcopis inuiserentur. That is to say. But
if in this place thou ask of me wherefore he that is baptized in the church
does not receive the holy ghost but byt he hands of the bishop, the which
holy ghost we do all affirm to be given in true baptism? Learn this
observation to come of that authority, that after the ascension of our lord
the holy ghost came down to the Apostles. And we find that the same is done
in many places, rather for the honor of priestehode, then of necessity of
the law. Else if the holy ghost come down only at the prayer of the bishop,
they are to be lamented who being baptized by priests and deacons in little
towns or villages, or places further of, do dye before they be visited by the
bishops. Hitherto the words of S. Hierome. Next after the which because it
follows, that the high priest must have authority peerless above all
other, otherwise that there will be as many schisms in the church as there
be priests, M. Nowell thinks that he might understand, both the peerless
authority above all other that is mentioned in the dialogue against the
Luciferians, and the preeminence that one had given to rule the rest as for a
remedy against schisms, spoken off in this epistle to Euagrius, to be meant of
only power to confirm children or other lately baptized, which because
bishops had, and priests had not, he thinks S. Hierome should call by the
name of a peerless power, able to be a remedy against all schisms. For so
understands he this place here and before. fol. 41. b. 20.

But now I pray you let me ask of you M. Nowell, when S. Hierome had said,
that this observation that the bishop should confirm and not the priest,
came of this that the holy ghost after Christ's ascension came down to the
Apostles, when he added. Et multis in locis idem factitatum reperimus, etc. And
in many places we find the same to be done rather for the honor of
priestehod, then necessity of the law: What idem, what same thing (constrew
M. Nowell) was it, that was so done to honor priesthode, rather then for
necessity? Was not it the ministering of the Sacrament of Confirmation? Do not
the words that follow next after: Alioqui si ad episcopi, etc. Otherwise if
the holy ghost come down only at the prayer of the bishop etc. spoken to
prove, that there was no such necessity of the Sacrament of Confirmation, as
though to them that dwelling far from the bishop, and dieng before they were
confirmed, the holy ghost should not be given in baptism) evidently
convince, that S. Hierome meant off that point of preeminence that the bishop
has above a priest in ministering of this sacrament, that that was not of the
necessity of the law etc, not of that power of government that we dispute
of? But what labor I to convince this wresting of youres to belieng and
untrue, which who so ever shall read the place, can not but presently
perceive, if he have his common senses? Who is so very a dolt, that when he
hears you bringing in S. Hierome providing for the peace of the church, that
is the avoiding off schisms, this sovereign remedy that the bishop of every
diocese may confirm children or other lately baptized, which the priests
ca^ not do: and that there in consists his peerless power, will not be able
to tell you that this reason proceeds from some frantic brain M. Nowell, not
from the stayed and grave head of S. Hierome? For what stay for schisms,
what remedy against heresies were it like to be (tell us I conjure you by
your wisdom that first found out this special remedy) if the bishop had
only this power more then a priest, that you speak of? Might not the meanest
priest in his diocese for all this, imagine and sow amongst the people what
lewd opinions he list, and tell the bishop to his face, if he should reprove
him therefore, that he passes the bounds of his office, who has nothing
else to do but to confirm such as were lately baptized? If this be true M.
Nowell, where is now, Vnus ad tempus index vice Christi, one judge for the
time Lib. 1. epistol. 3.
in the steed of Christ, mentioned before by S. Cyprian, and acknowledged by
your self, to be the bishop in his diocese? If he be the judge in Christ's
stead over all the rest, then his power extends further I trow then to
confirmation. For what judicial act is there done in the ministering thereof?
Thus it appears how shamefully you have beelied S. Hierom, how lewdely you
have abused his words, to such a foolish sense as no learned or wise ears
can abide.

Now to your thinking, that if a priest by S. Hieromes mind may do as much
as a bishop, that then one bishop may do as much by Gods law as an
other, Isaye: S. Hierom beelyed again. 30.
that I think not but I know and believe, that you lie upon S. Hierome, who
says not nor is of that mind that a priest may do as much as a bishop.
For in this epistle to Euagrius, he excepteth the power of making priests: in
the dialogue against the Luciferians, the authority of ordinary confirming,
and in both the places, he grants to one (which must needs be the bishop) a
peerless power above all the rest, for the avoiding of schisms. So that this
being true, you should rather have thought that one bishop might do as much
as an other certain things excepted, or else you should have been better
ocupied to have thought upon some other matter. I marvel M. Nowell that you
harp so much upon this string of making bisshoppes and priests equal,
whereunto if your Archebishoppes and bishops look not in time: I think
those goodfelowe ministres, shoemakers, weuers, tinkers, broomemen, coweherdes,
fiddlers etc, whom your bishops have made equal to you that be* inferior
ministers, you of your goodness will shortly make equal to your bishops and
archebishoppes. You proceed and say:

Further seeing this one afterward chosen to rule the rest was Nowell. fo. 43.
b. ^^
chosen as well at Alexandria as at Rome orolles where etc: It must needs fall
out, that these words one chosen to rule the rest, either make for no
supremacy of any one bishop over all the church, as apperteining to every
bishop in his own diocese, or if M. Dorman will needs enforce a supremacy by
the said words, he shall be enforced to confess the said supremacy to be
common to the B. of Alexandria (where S. Hierome says this one was chosen to
rule the rest) with the B. of Rome, as by the other place last alleged by M.
Dorman out of S. Cyprian, the said Supremacy should apperteine to the B. of
Carthage etc.

I have showed so often before how I enforce upon these Dorman.
words a supremacy over the whole church, to wit, not directly but by an
inevitable consequent, that it is needelesse to repeat my words again. And
therefore in thus applieng this place to my purpose, there is no fear of
bringing the general government over the whole church to Charthage or
Alexandria. If you have no other thing to trouble you then that, you may be
quiet and take your rest. As for that, that you say, that Christ is as much
A sclaunderouse lie 31.
blasphemed at Rome, as he is either at Alexandria or Carthage, that is one of
your sclaunderouse lies, as they can well tell, who travailing thither
heretics, and finding there more fervent devotion then else where, with all
things contrary to your sclaunderouse reports made at home in your
sermones and writings, have returned (God be praised therefore) good and
perfect catholics. Of the true religion used in the which place, as if it were
not impertinent here, I could say much: so one thing written by S. Hierome
in the praise of Rome (which I doubt not but you count amongst those
blasphemies that are there you say used against God) I ca^ in no wise omit.
Vbi (says he) alibi tanto studio, and frequen^ia ad ecclesias and ad martyrum
s^pulcra Hieron. in proaemio. 2. epist. ad Galatas.
concurritur. Where in any other place is there such concourse, with such
affection and nombre, to the churches and sepulchers of martirs? Seeing that
this, a praise and token of devotion (for so says S. Hierome in this place)
is more in the Romans where this frequeting of churches, visiting of martyrs
is so much used, then in other places where it is less, yea nothing at all,
as at Carthage and Alexandria: if there were nothing else this alone would
prove you a lier. For even at this day the same devotion is as much used at
Rome as in S. Hieromes time it was and in Carthage and Alexandria where
Machometans now dwell, as much frequented as it is with you and your fellows
in England.

S. Hierome says expressly that all bishops be equal, and Nowell. fo. 44.
a. 3
none superior and inferior to another by gods law.

S. Hierome says that all bishops be of one priestehod Dorman.
and merit, that is to say, no one more a bishop then an other. That no one
is in jurisdiction above or beneathe the other, that he has in no place. And
yeat is this the thing that you should prove.

It hurts not our cause in case that we grant, that this place Nowell.
do the apperteine to the Apostles, and that one was chosen amongst the
Apostles them selves to have the chief place: that is to speak first, to
moderate other, to stay contention, and to remedy schisms Naie it makes
with us directly, who do grant that as amongst those 12. one was so chosen
to be ruler, so it is good that in every competent nombre of priests and
clergy, (...) be chosen likewise to be ruler.

If you will be liberal M. Nowell, be liberal as you Dorman.
should be, and mar not all with a little pelting. If you will at the length
yealde to the truth that Petre was head Lib. 1. contra Iouinia^.
of the other apostles, confess also with S. Hierome that it was not the
Apostles doing to choose him amongst them*selues, Note.
but that it was magister bonus, their good master who chose Peter to be the
head, for the avoiding of schisms. Confess that this makes not with you but
directly against you, who maintain that all bishops be equal in
jurisdiction, and no one above the other. For you deceive your self and other
toe, when you say, that as amongst the 12. apostles there was one above the
rest: so in every competent nombre of priests there ought to be one chief
ruler chosen: as though only Petre had been a bishop, and the other apostles
pore priests and no more. Where is now the equality that you are wont to
object to us of the Apostles with Petre? Who makes the Apostles more inferior
to Peter you or we? We say the Apostles all of them were bishops in one
place or other: you make your count that they were only inferior priests.
Now being all of them bishops and Peter by your confession their head: Who
sees not that the order planted by Christ in his church is, that there be one
bishop for the pacifieng of schisms over the rest? Again, if 12. persons so
well instructed by the spirit of God as the Apostles were, had a head
appointed over them for remedy against schisms: what reason leads you to
think, that amongst so many ^ades as be in the universal church governors
of particular churches, not so priuileaged with grace, there may not be the
like, yea greater cause to fear schisms, and so consequently that there ought
not to be the same remedy, that is to say one head? So that if you count
your self hurt when it is proved that there ought to be one chief head of
Christ's church, you are by granting of this prerogative to S. Peter above
the rest of the Apostles, very daungerously hurt. Yea but you were provided
for all such after clappes before I doubt not. Other wise so circumspect a
man as you are, would never have yealded so far. And therefore you add.

And if M. Dorman upon this grant would infer such a Nowell.
supremacy of one over the rest of the Apostles, as the pope claims over the
church, S. Paul reproving Peter more sharply Galat. 2.
to his face, then is laufull now for any bishop to deal with the pope, does
prove that Peter had no such supremacy.

One thing I must here tell you by the way M. Nowell, Dorman.
that in debating this matter of the authority of S. Peter above the rest of
the Apostles, except you forsake S. Hierome, you must forgo this example of S.
Paul his reproving of S. Peter, which S. Hierome holds against S. Austen
(how truly I dispute not in this place) to have been but a made matter between
them, that Paul should reprehende, and Peter suffer him self to be
reprehendid for using the legal ceremonies, as appears in the epistles
written to and fro between them. And therefore if you willbe tried by S.
Hierome, he should rather hold with this supremacy, as the man who if he
erred in striving with S. Austen about this reprehending of Peter, erred only
because he thought it a thing unseemly and unlikely, that S. Paul would so
reprehende the prince of the Apostles. Which was he says the cause, why
Origin and other to stop the mouth of Porphirius the heretic, who laid to
S. Paul's charge that he was ouerbolde to reprehende Peter the chief of the
Apostles, expounded this place as he did.

But leaving S. Hierome, and granting that Peter was truly and in deed
reprehended by S. Paul, let us examine whether such a supremacy as is here
spoken of, may not by the judgment of the learned fathers of Christ's
church, stand well enough for all this reproving of S. Peter used by S. Paul
I will amongst other allege to this purpose two only S. Cyprian and S.
Austen. Epist. ad Quintum.


The words S. Cyprian are these: Na^ nec Petrus quem primum dominus elegit,
and super quem aedificauit ecclesiam suam etc. For neither Pure whom our
lord chose to be the chief, and upon whom he builded his church when he
contended after with Paul about circumcision revenged him self, or challenged
any thing insolently or arroga^tly in saing that he had the primacy, and that
he ought rather to be obeyed of those that were nouices and came after. Thus
far S. Cyprian. With whom agrees S. Austen as he that alleges this very
place, to prove that S. Cyprian (to whose authority the Donatistes leaned,
Lib. 2. de baptis. contra Donatist. ea.
for the baptising again of such as were Christened by heretics) would
easily suffer him self (for his humility), being but one bishop, or the
doings of his own province either, to be corrected by the statutes of the
whole church, seeing that he praised S. Peter in whom was the primacie of the
Apostles, for the same virtue of humility, in suffering him self to be
reproved of S. Paul. Thus it appears that S. Paul's resisting of S. Peter
was no derogatio^ to S. Peter's authority, as the which by the confession of
both these learned fathers remained saufe and whole, notwithstanding the
reprehension of S. Paul, and withal that you and your fellows M. Nowell, who
use so often to the derogation of S. Peter's authority to cite this place of
the epistle Galat. 2.
to the Galathians, do shamefully abuse the same, with no small injury to the
blessed apostles both.

But yeat you fare that I have said nothing all this while to this, that
Peter's supremacy was no such as is the popes, whom no man may blame what so
ever he do. Yes sir the pope may be blamed: Neither do the text nor the
gloss by you here alleged say the contrary. And so have diverse good men
freely reprehended diverse popes. S. Bernard a monk reprehended Eugenius the
third, more sharply iwisse (as your selves can full well tell and therefore
make much of him in that respect) then ever did S. Paul reprove S. Petre.
Paulus 4. was admonished by lettres written by one in Rome, of the dishonest
behavior of his nephues the two Caraffas He took the aduertiseme^t in good
part; and banished them the court immediately. What should I remember the
lettres written by Petrus a So to a friar also, to Pius the pope that now is,
wherein he admonished him freely, to take order that bishops and other
inferior pastors might be compelled Dat. Tridenti. 17. Aprilis Anno Do. 1563.
Nowell. fol. 44. b. 24.
to keep reside^ce with their charges, and threatened to him utter damnation in
the judgment of God, unless he did.

It follows not you say, that one being chosen to beruler amongst twelve,
that therefore one may be also chosen to be ruler over all the clergy of the
world. No more do the it that because there was one chosen of every one
church or diocese to rule the rest, that therefore there should be one
chosen to rule all bishops of all diocesses: namely at Rome, and the said
ruler to be called pope or head of the universal church.

The first answer touching that one head amongst Dorman. Institut. li. 4.
cap. 6. Sect. 8. fol. 53. a. b
the Apostles, you learned of your Master Calvin, against whom I have proved
that the consequent holds very well in my first book. The argument I have
showed oftentimes how it holds, and last of all in the beginning of this
chapitre. That, that one head should be the bishop of Rome, that was not to
be proved here, it is proved hereafter there as it should be. No more do we
care for the name, whether he be to be called pope, head of the universal
church, or by what so ever name else, so that you acknowledge his anctoritie
over the whole church indede.

Where as you say that this kind of collection used by me fol. 44. b. 3.
you have proved by my former reasons and similitudes, by my own witnesses S.
Ciprian and S. Hierome, to be vain and lewd, the reader has now my replye
in those places to yowre answer. If to the learned it seem so, then you may
brag. As I trust I have satisfied the sounder judgments there in: so will I
when you perform your great promise that you here make, assaye good willing
to do the like.

That the testimony of LEO is authentike, and proves directly that, for the
which it was first alleged. The 14. Chapitre.
To begin with that which you note in the margent, fol. 45. ^.
that I have otherwise alleged this place then it is in all the printed books
that you have seen: I infer, that then you have not seen all. For you have
not seen that copy which being printed at Colon by John Birckman the younger,
bears the date of the year off our Lord 1561. and reads as I alleged.
But of that you give me more occasion to speak hereafter. Now to the place of
LEO it self.

You grant, that the council of Chalcedon called Leo of Nowell.
whom we now dispute, sanctissimum and beatissimum, most holy and most
blessed, but with all (you ask) what that makes for a. 21.
his supremacy.

If it make not for his supremacy, it is no great matter Dorman.
M. Nowell. For who brought it for the proof of his supremacy I pray you let
me ask you that question? You play with me here as you did before, when you
brought me in solemly reasoning upon certain titles used by Vrsatius and
Valens to Julius the B. of Rome to prove his supremacy, of the which
notwithstanding to be applied to that purpose as I never made any mention: so
never entered there any such imagination into my mind. Yeat both there then
and here now, you fight with your own shadow like a tall man, under S.
Cyprians baner, and count the field half won, where there is no man to
match with you. If I should use you so M. Nowell, you would say and so you
might iustlye, that I dreamed. What such dealing ought to be called in you let
the wise Reader judge.

To the purpose why I alleged this honorable mention made by 630 fathers
assembled out of all the world of Leo the Pope, I did it to encountre with the
sclaunderouse report of that venimouse viper hissing out of his done of
Geneua, who when he could not deny that he Calvin. Lib. Instit. 4. cap. 8.
Sect. 11.
was both learned an eloquent, would yeat (he thought) take from him that,
which is and ought in all men to be chiefly valued, the name of virtue and
holiness: and therefore he says, that he was a man above measure desirouse
of glory and dominion. This I judged also, not amiss, would be a chief
exception against this blessed bishop by his scholars and folowers in England,
and therefore I provided so to arm his innocence by the judgment off so
many virtuous and learned fathers, as who so ever would hereafter deprave
his name, well might he show him self a maliciouse fool, but the fame of Leo
with wise men he should never be hable to empaire. And surely if Leo to
auaunce his own See had taught a false doctrine, the council would never we
may be sure have called him most holy. But that matter the fathers them
selves in that certificate of theirs which they sent to him, both by words
and deed have put out of all doubt. By word, Act. 3.
when they called him the man to whom our Lord had committed the custody of
his vin yard: By deed, when they desired him to ratify and confirm their
doings. But now you will propose your exceptions against this testimony of
Leo, in order and form of law, and fight with me here upon mine own ground.

First you lay for the fundatio^ of your first exception, that Nowell. fo.
45. b. 6 Borrowed of Calvin li. 4. Inst. cap. 8. A lie. 32.
it is most evident that the epistles carried about in the names off the first
ancient popes, are either forged or at the least corrupted by their
ambitiouse successors of latter time. You prove yt to be most evident,
because it is you say, easy to be perceived. As you will hereafter by many
circumstances declare.

If you never declare it, it will never be perceived. It Dorman.
will be taken in the mean season to be but as it is, a sclaunderouse lie.
Which your self as it should seem half suspecting, grant unto us that it
may be taken for Leo his own epistle. And suerlie if you would not have
granted it, you had been much to blame. For Calvin your Master durst not
deny it to be Leo his, yea confessing that there remained true epistles of the
old bishops off Rome, wherein the authority of that See was set furthe (of
which sort says he, are some epistles of Leo) he notes amongst other for
one of them this epistle to the B. off Vbi supra.
Thessalonica. To the which your master had nothing to say, but that whether
the churches then believed his testimony Caluins vain reproving of this
epistle of Leo.
when he so advanced him self, that is it (quoth he) in deed that is in
controversy. From the which without any further proof why it should be in
controversy, he passing, adds: But it appears that many offendid with his
ambition did also withstand his gredie desire. The which he also affirms
without any proof, as though his words ought to have with us the authority
of epistle or gospel. Except the next sentence that follow prove it, where he
mentions that in this epistle, Leo appointed in his stead the B. of
Thessalonica thorough out Gracia and other countries adioining, the B. of
Orleance or some other thorough out France, Hormisdas B. of Hispalis to be his
vicair in Spain. Against all the which he has nothing else to say, but that
he ever granted his co^missions upon this condition, (which we grant and
never pope denied) that the metropolitanes should have their ancient
priuileages saufe and whole: so much was your master either more shamefast
then you or less impudent, who when he acknowledged this to be the true
epistle off Leo, and had as many subtle shifts to avoid it as you, durst
yeat never bring into the light such foolish exceptions as you do. But now
let us here you propose the first, for the which you have laid as a fundation
to lean unto, so notable a lie.

The first exception against this testimony of Leo is this: Nowell. b. 13.
No man may be witness in his own cause nor judge. Therefore Leo his
testimony brought furthe for the preeminence of his own See is not to be
admitted etc. This exception of youres you prove by reason, by scripture, by
law.

First to answer your reason if reason their may be in Dorman.
any so uncharitable a judgment: I say it is false that the holiest and best
men be lightly partial in their own matters. He is neither holy nor good,
much less to be accounted amongst the holiest and best, that for the bettring
off his own cause will swerve from the truth. Your testimony alleged out
of the gospel is not to the purpose. Joan. 5.
For that place proves not, that allwaies the testimony that a man gives of
himself is false, but that when a man has to do with adversaries that will
not otherwise believe him, as the Phariseis would not Christ, then he must use
the testimony of other the^ him self. Which as Leo in such case you may be
suer did: so when the matter was so far from being by any adversary
gainesaide, that he made his commission B. 25.
to the bishop of Thessalonica to be in his stead thorough out Grecia and
other countries adioning as he did here, what need had he there to bring any
proufes, where there was at all no doubt? If you will say, that I defending
the authority of the pope bring Leo against you which are the adversaries, and
that therefore now becawse you are against Christ's vicair, as the Phariseis
were against Christ him self (for so do you confess that you M. Nowell
confesses him self to reason against Leo as the phariseis did against Christ.
reason as they did, although perhaps you would have been angry with an
other that should have said so much) so I must bring other witness then him
except I will take the foil: To that I answer, that you come now to late
with that exception if it had no other fault. For to answer you who dispute
so depely out of the law like one that is not altogether ignorant therein,
conclusum est in causa M. Nowell, and sententia transijt in rem iudicata^. I
need not to expound these terms unto you who have the marow of the gloss even
at your fingres ends. For other men who have not atteined to such knowledge,
I say: that seeing in Leo his time when he appointed in this epistle the bishop
of Thessalonica in his stead thorough out Grecia, and other countries
adioining, in an other place the B. of Orleance or some other thorough out
France, Hormisdas bishop of Hispalis to be his vicair in Spain, the churches
that the^ were and in to whose power the churches of this time succeed,
excepted nothing against these doings of his in his own cause as you surmise,
but suffered the^ to pass till our time, the space of 1100. years and odd: I
answer I say for reply to your exception, that had this testimony been
(being urged by the rigor of the law) insufficient, that yeat forasmoche as
the church from that time hitherto accepted it for sufficient, you come now to
late to propose matter against it. To make the matter by example more plain:
if my auncestor a hundred years past in a contention between him and some
other about a piece of lands, would upon trust of the upright conscience of
some near kinsman of his adversaries, admit him to be a witness or judge in
the matter whom he might laufullie repel: might I if sentence were given
against my auncestor by the means of this judge or witness, come after the
100. years and except against the witness or judge? Leo speaks not now M.
Nowell, he gave this testimony that the gives 1100. years ago. The whole
church justified his person then, to be both holy and blessed. It is to
late and to much shame also for you to starte up now and say the contrary.

Thus much might be said if it were true that Leo had been witness or judge
in his own cause. But the truth is, it is not his cause, it is the cause of
Christ's church and of the whole order of priesthod. For he pronou^ceth for
that seat vnde vnitas sacerdotalis exorta est, from whence priestly unity
Cipr. li. 4. Epis. 9. and ^libi.
came: Neither is Leo in this place more to be rejected for mainteining the
supremacy of Peter's seat wherein he the^ sat, then are the testimonies of S.
Cipria^, mainteining the jurisdiction of his own bishoprike against stubborn
rebels. Shall S. Hieromes authority against deacons who would be equal
with priests, be of no authority because him self was a priest? This is not
the meaning M. Nowell of the gloss, as great a gloser as you be. The gloss
means that in private matters that concern the pope, as he is likewise How
the gloss brought by M. Nowell is to be understand.
a private man, he shall not him self be judge, but in those things which
concern the whole body of the church and belong to the order thereof, and have
no other judge in earth, it takes not away the power of being witness or
judge.

Pighius you say alleged beside the decree of the pope, the council Nowell.
fol. 46. a. 1
of Vienna, lest any man might estemethe authority the less as proceeding
from the pope in his own case. And by this you say it may seem that he
thinks the popes only testimony in his own cause not to be sufficient.

Pighius was never of that mind that you would have him seem to be. When he
spoke these words he touched Dorman.
the humor and noted the fashion of heretics, and therefore ex abundanti he
cast in the mention of the council of Vienna, which I could do also if that
would help the matter, and for Vienna give you Calcedon: for 300. bring you
630. bishops, that called Leo the kepar of Christ's vineyard, universal
bishop, with other terms to that effect.

I forbear to allege (I confess so much) in one place off a, 28.
my book, the notable testimonies of Clemens, Anacletus, Euaristus, Alexander,
Xistus, Telesphorus, Pius, Victor, Fabianus, and such other, only because the
gainesaiers might happily have excepted against them, that because they were
bishops of Rome they were not in that cause which was there own, indifferent
witnesses. How say you M. Nowell what gather you hereof? That you might
laufullye take exception to them as not indifferent? If you gather so you
wrangle with me. My words that went before, in which to justify their
persons and to show how vnlaufullie you should do it, I called them martirs
and in the whole course of their lives very apostles, do witness with me the
contrary. Yeat said I that you might do it, de facto not de iure, as you
may kill a man in deed but not by law. As fast as you say I laid on load
of not only popish witnesses, but popes them selves: for popes I think it
will be hard for you to name but one beside Leo, Innocentius and Gregory the
first, whose sainges I alleged. And why I brought those rather then other I
showed good cause. I deny not yeat for all that, but that even this only Leo
I think is a heavier load then you would be glad to bear. That I yealded
so much at that time as to omit the testimonies of those notable popes. I
repent me thereof. By popish witnesses you can mean no other but the fathers
off Christ's church, and those to within the first six hundred years, for
other I alleged none. If as you would discredit A shift of M. Nowelles not
heard of before to discredit all the fathers that make for. the popes
authority.
the popes because they be popes: so you will discredit these ancient writers
because they be popish and write for the pope, then you have found a more
near way I confess then M. Iuell could. Who allows all within the first
600. years.

As before for the fundatio^ of this your first exception you laid a false
sclaunderouse lie to build upon: so now to underprop the same, under the
color off a more reasonable cause of exception, you bring in a feined story of
Sozimus bishop of Rome, who (you say,) did falsefie the decrees of the Nicene
council, whereupon you will conclude, that neither Leo b. 3.
nor any other pope neither, is to be believed in this matter. Not unlike to
the foolish gentle woman that swear she would never love our Lady more,
because she was a Jew borne and the Jews had put Christ to death. I know I
shall seem to many men to digress to far from my purpose in following your
rouing from the matter, yeat something will I say thereto, because I know it
to be one of the principal baits which such fishers as you be M. Nowell,
use to lay to bring men from the obedience of the Sea of Rome, and hitherto in
our English tongue nothing has been answered thereto. But because it is here
impertinently entermedled with the answer to Leo, I will first to avoid
confusion end that matter, and then handle the other by it self.

You say that Pighius affirms and I deny, that the title Nowell. fol. 48.
a. 9
off oecumenicall or universal Patriarch apperteineth to the bishop of Rome
of right, and that therefore there must needs be some error.

You report untruly of me M. Nowell. Look better upon Dorman.
the place. I rehearse there the words of S. Gregorye who reprehended John the
B. of Constantinople for taking on him the name of universal bishop. Which
title although it perteined to that John in no sense, and was as he affected it
a profane title and altogether mete for Antichrist: yeat in that sense and
meaning that it belonged to S. Gregory (in which sense only it is to be
taken when it is applied to the bishop of Rome) I denied it not to perteine to
the pope. Thus do Pighius and I agree. Thus is there no error: thus go you
forward to increase the number Lie. 33.
of your lies.

You merueile greatly that Leo would so ambitiously challenge Nowell. a. 14.
in this epistle the same title in effect which he refused so freely offered
unto him by the whole council etc.

LEO, Gregory after him, Pius which is now, nor Dorman.
any pope that ever was before did strive about titles you may be suer. The
best title that they have each off them, has been and is, to be called Seruus
seruorum Dei, the servant of the Servants of God. But of this may be
merueiled more in what schole you have learned this manner, with him that of
humiltie refuses such titles as seem to gloriouse, to deal so hardelye, that
because he refuses the name, he must needs be deprived of the thing. The
histories make mention that Vitellius the emperor would neither be called
Augustus nor Caesar, Caesar refused the name of king: Augustus and Antonius of
Lords. Would your wisdom have served you now M. Nowell if you had lived
in their time, to deny them their Imperial, kingly, and lordly authority,
because they would not be called by such names?

The council is no council where the head is absent or ^. ^0.
co^senteth not being present, and therefore if here this company gathered
togather in giving this title to the pope had judged amiss, yet had not the
council erred. I deny not as you say I do, that the council did well:
both the council did well in offering a name mete to express the authority
which the pope had, and so erred not, and the bishop also well to refuse the
same. Except you will say, that S. Paul when he refused the almoise and
charity off good 1. Cor. 9.
men, either did evil in refusing it, or they evil in offering it. The pope
claims not this title, no more then Leo did accept it being offered. Call
him by what sobre honest name you list: Grant him the authority due to him,
let all titles go. This is that which the pope claims and you ought not to
deny. This is that which Leo most modestly, not as you falselye term it
(ambitiously) challenged to Peter's seat. Now let all reasonable men judge
hardely of the goodness of this exception, which is a. 24.
your first.

The second exception that you use against this testimony of Leo (for now you
say you will go an other way Nowell. a. 28.
to work with me) is, that Leo says here vntruelye (if these be Leo his
words, for that you say is yeat in controversy). But before you prove it,
you will first ask me a question, whether I have truly translated the place,
and if I have, how I can make these words in this epistle, there is one
dignity common to all bishops, to agree with these following, there is
difference of power amongst them, and, it is given to one to be above all the
rest whose judgment is of most authority, b. 1.
and how this man is not in dignity differing from the rest?

You do like a wise man to go an other away to work, Dorman.
for some men think, you did but play before. But I merueile why you should
put any doubts whether these be Leo his words or no, seeing that Calvin
confesses this epistle to be true and to be his. To your first question I
answer, that I have translated this place truly according to the copy
printed at Colein anno 1561. To the next moved upon this, how then I can make
these words agree, one dignity common to all, and difference of power, that
they agree thus, that allthough they have all one dignity of priestehode or
bishoprike, that yeat there is difference of power in jurisdiction. If
spiritual examples like you not: if you can not perceive this agreement at home
in your own chapitre, where being all equal in the dignity of canons or
prebendaries, yeat one deane, him self also a canon and in that respect
equal to the rest, is above the other in power, nor in your province of
Cauntorburie where all the bisshoppes equal in that dignity, are yeat
inferior to the Archbishop in power, as your self some times grant,
namely before fol. 32. a. where you use the word chief prelates of every
province: yeat take the pains to make a step to westminstre hall, where when
you behold the honorable judges sitting in their places, although they
beequall in this dignity that they be all the Queen's judges, yeat is there you
can not deny difference of power amongst them. And so have they all one
dignity common to them, allthough some of them be in superiority above the
other. I showed you before, but it pleases you that it be repeated here
again, where with I am also not offendid, that so the reader may the better
understand your vanity, how S. Austen Contra duas epist. (...) ea. 1. Tom. ^
writing to Bonifacius then pope, confesses that he and other bishops have
all one bishoprike common with him (behold the dignity common) but that yeat
altius praesidet he sits higher, preaeminet celsiore fastigio speculae
pastoralis he is above the rest in the higher top of the pastoral watch
tower. And what is this but in one dignity, difference of power, whilst other
bishops sit beneathe and look only every one to his own flock, and he
that sits above has power to ouerloke all? This Jar as you call it, is
framed M. Nowell. You may now when it shall please you do this great act
that you speak of, that is prove Leo untrue by two witnesses against one.
Although this M. Nowell calls Leo thief by craft.
I can not pass over in silence, that where you call Leo such a witness as
if a man should ask your fellow whether you be a thief or no, you liken and
resemble him in those words to a thief, whom the whole council of Calcedon
B. 24.
as your self confess, called most holy and most blessed: you sclaunder
him whom they reioised that God had Allocutione Calcedon Council. ad Martianum
Imp.
provided for his church an impregnable defendour against all errors, whom
they called their head, and the kepar of our Lords vineyarde. Your
venimouse and virulent tongue has not spared him being dead, whom Attila
that cruel In Relatio. Synod. ad Leon.
barbarouse tyrant, he whom the world called flagellum dei the scourge of
God, durst not touch being a live. Paulus Diaconus an approved historiographer
makes mention, Lib. 5. de Gestis Romans
that when having now spoiled Thracia, Illiricum, Macedonio, Moesia, Achaia,
Graecia, Hungary, Germany, he was entered with like fury into Italy, and had
taken even the high way to Rome to sack and destroy that, this holy bishop
and virtuous old man Leo, accompanied (as some say) with one Consul, and
part of the Senate, met him in the way. To whom after he had made a very
short but pithy oration, to this effect to show mercy to the city off Rome,
the cruel monstre without any further hurt doing reculed back, granted to
the bishop even as he had wished before: and confessed after to those that were
nearest about him, merueiling at and demanding the cause of this sodeine
change of his mind, that it was not for the fear of his person who came
unto him, but of an other reverent old man standing by him in priestly habit,
who threatened him terribly with a sword ready drawn, unless he accorded to
all things that he should require. Now considre you good readers what manner
of man he is that raileth thus upon such a father as Leo was, and think what
it is that he will take conscience in the doing or saing, who is not ashamed to
diffame the chief man in his time of all the world. But now let us see how
you prove Leo to be untrue.

You say that he dissentith first from S. Cyprian, and next Nowell. fo. 49. a.
23
from S Hierome. From S. Cyprian, because he is of the mind that controversies
should be determined in the place where they do arise, and that this sentence
of his, and that no, appellations should be made to any B. of an other
province, yea and that namely not to the B. of Rome, nor that he should send
any legates Laterall to hear or determine foreign matters, does the whole
council of Carthage where in was S. Augustine, Orosius, and Prosper confirm.

Your allegation out of S. Cyprian is of no effect Dorman.
because you belie him. He speaks not there against laufull appellations but
only, that criminal causes should be judged at home. And so the pope
allwaies observes. He calls not the witnesses to Rome from far countries,
but delegateth a legate to the province where the controversy is. The thing
that specially grieved here S. Ciprian was, that these desperate men of whom
he speaks, ran to certain Numidian bishops to be reconciled of them. Of
the B. of Rome that he never meant to diminish his authority, his sending a
messenger to Rome to purge him self and prosecute the matter against those
naughty me^, with other diverse arguments and co^iectures mentioned before in
the 11. chap. do well witness. Of the 6. African council because it
depends upon the matter of Zosimus, I shall in the next chapitre entreat.

S. Ciprian you say applies many such places of the scriptures Nowell. 49.
b. 3.
as are customably alleged for the popes supremacy over all bishops, to the
declaration of the equal authority of every bishop in his own diocese.

The places brought by S. Cyprian, are alleged to persuade Dormen.
obedience to those that be heads and governors. The granting of one chief
head over all diminishes not the authority of inferior bishops, who in
respect of the priests and people under them, are in their diocesses the high
priests and princes of the people. And thus much does Leo grant in this
epistle him self. Therefore hitherto there is no Jar between S. Cyprian and
him.

You bring the place of S. Cyprian in his book De simplicitate praelatorum, or
as the truer copies read, De vnitate ecclesiae, to overthrow Leo. The which
place because your self have pitefully mangled, as one that was not ignorant
how evil it would have served your turn without some help of your
accustomed squaring: I will take the pains to allege it truly for you. The
words are these. Et quamuis Apostolis omnibus post resurrectionem suam parem
potestatem tribuat and dicat: Sicut misit me pater, and ego mitto vos, accipite
spiritum sanctum: Si cui remiseritis peccata remittentur illi, si cui
tenueritis tenebuntur: tamen vt vnitatem manifestaret vnitatis eiusdem originem
ab vno incipientem sua auctoritate disposuit. Hoc erant vtique and caeteri
apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis,
SED EXORDIVM AB VNITATE PROFICISCITVR VT ECCLESIA VNA MONSTRETVR. That is to
say: And although our Lord gave like power to all his apostles after his
resurrection and said: As my father sent me, so send I you. Take you the
holy ghost, whose sins you forgive they are forgiven, whose sins you
retain they are retained: yeat to set furthe unity he disposed by his
authority, the same unity to begin of one. That were truly the other
apostles also that Peter was, endued with like fellowship of honor and power,
but the beginning comes from unity, that the church may be declared to be
one. These be the words of S. Ciprian faithfully alleged and truly
englished. I will now repeat the matter even from the beginning and do you
good Readers to understand, the cause why S. Cypria^ mentions here at all S.
Peter, and why he enters in to this comparison between him and the other
apostles, and then after make you priuey to the mysteries of M. Nowelles
slight in alleging this place, which he perhaps thinks that no man
knows but him self, and would I dare say be loathe that any mo should.
For the first it is to be understand, that not many lines before this place
that I have now in hand, S. Cyprian complaining of the fraud and subtilite
of our enemy the devil, says, that now that idolles be every where
destroyed, he has bethought him of a new way to deceive mankind, and that
is by heresies and schisms to carry them out of the church. And this comes
to pass (says he) while men come not to the beginning of truth, the head
is not sought out, neither the doctrine off our heavenly master kept, which
things if a man would considre and examine, there would need no long
discourse nor great arguments. The truth has made the way to prove the
faith easy: Our Lord says to Peter and upon this rock will I build Math.
18.
my church. etc. And after his resurrection he says to him, feed my sheep.
And although after his resurrection he gave all his apostles like power, and so
furthe as I rehearsed before. After all this he adds: Hanc ecclesiae vnitatem
qui non tenet, tenere se fidem credit? This unity of the church he that
holds not, thinks he that he holds the faith? Thus far S. Cipria^. The
occasion you see that moved him to mention Peter, Note.
and to compare him with the other apostles, was because to avoid schisms we
must he said seek out unity by the scripture, where we should find, that our
lord would have his church to begin of one: of him, to whom he said: thou
art Petre and upon this rock will I build my church. Well then must this be
retained as a truth in the mean season, if we will be within the unity of
the church, we must keep us in that church which beginning and springing out
of one root, or flowing out of one head founteine (for these be also in this
place S. Cyprians similitudes) is one. Now let us apply the place as it is
alleged by you M. Nowell, and see whether you have used S. Cyprian well or no.
You allege the place to prove such an equality amongst the apostles as that
there should be no difference amongst the^, and so overthrow all S. Cyprians
drift whereby he would prove the church to be one, because it takes
beginning of one. For if they be all equal and no difference between them,
then either the church has no one beginning or 12. beginninges. If no one
beginning, how can the unity proceed of that which is not? if 12, how can the
church be therefore one because as S. Cyprian says the unity thereof
begins of one, or what beginning call you that of unity, that comes from
such an equal multiplicitie? If therefore it be builded upon one alone (as by
S. Cyprian it appears that it must) then is that one above the rest. Now to
have the church builded upon one, is thus much to say, that as in a
material building there is one foundation whereupon all the rest thereof,
stone, tymbre, Iron and what so ever else, leans: so there is in the church
one, to whom after Christ the great rock and first ground, all the rest
that be members thereof must as it were lean, he him self bearing the burden
of the whole building. Is not this to be the chief stone in Gods building? If
you should here perhaps wrangle, and say that although it appear by this
place, that Christ disposed the beginning of unity to proceed from one, and
from Peter toe, that yeat here is no mention that the church should be
builded upon him, notwistanding that Christ speaking off Peter said he would
build it upon that rock: then I remit you for the proof that S.
Cipria^meaneth so here, to those places of his lib. 1. epist. 3. epist. 8. 12.
lib. 4. epist. 9. lib. de habit. Virgin. lib. de bono pati. epist. ad I
ubaianum. And last of all to the epistle ad Quintum where he has in express
words against this equality that you dream of: Petrus quem Dominus primum
elegit and super que^ aedificauit ecclesia^ suam. Peter whom our Lord chose
to be the chief and upon whom he builded his church. This because you saw M.
Nowell M. Nowell shamefully misuseth S. Cypria^,
that the very words of S. Cyprian in this place did purport, and that
alleged wholly they were to unequal to serve your fantasied equality, you
first hewed of this knot, Et quamuis, and although. Then you shaued clean
away, tamen vt vnitatem manifestaret, yeat that he might make unity manifest,
unto this place. Hoc erant vtique. And yeat that sentence escaped not your
fingers, for the last part thereof: Sed exordium, but the beginning proceeds
from unity, you pared clean away. First the word Quamuis, although, is of
such a nature, that where so ever it be put, it is a messenger that signifies
some diversity like to follow, as when S. Cyprian said here, although the
Apostles were equal, that which follows, yeat he disposed the beginning off
unity to begin of one, argues in that point some inequalitye. Again, the
words that follow: tamen vt vnitatem manifestaret, yeat that he might make
unity known, and, vt ecclesia vna monstretur, that the church may be showed
to be one: These you passed over because in them lies the very cause, why our
Savior has appointed one to be above the rest, for unities sake: because
otherwise it could not have been chosen, but so many rulers so many faithes,
and then where had unity been? Beside this, the word ab vno incipientem,
beginning of one, left also quite out, overthrows that false proposition of
youres, that to unite the church and make it one in earth, there neadeth no
other head then Christ which is in heaven. Which if it had been so, what
need was there that Christ should appointe a mortal man to that office, as
here it appears he did Peter. To this most shameless mangling and
mutilating of this and other like places of the fathers used by you and your
fellows, I say as S. Cyprian in this very place says to such like crafts
men, that used so to allege things to their vauntage in his time. Corruptores
euangelij atque interpretes falsi extrema ponunt and superiora praetereunt,
partim memores, partim subdole corrumpentes. Vt ipsi ab ecclesia scissi sunt,
ita capituli vnius sententiam scindunt. That is to say. The corrupters of the
gospel, and false interpretours take that which comes behind, and leave
out that which goes before, partly mindful, partly craftily corrupting. As
they are them selves cut from the church, so divide they the meaning The
answer to the place of S. Cyprian.
of one sentence. Thus much of your falsehode in alleging this place. Now
to the place I answer, that S. Cyprian says not, that Christ gave like
power to his Apostles in all respects absolutely, but determines particulerly
wherein this equality does consist, as in being sent to preach thorough out
all the world as Christ was sent by his Father, in power of forgiving sins.
Which power being given to them straight upon Christ's resurrection, and being
common to them as they were all the general legates of Christ thorough out
the world, derogateth nothing by S. Cyprians mind from that special
authority that Christ departing out of this world gave to Peter to continue.
And therefore to show that this was his meaning, even as before S. Hierome
after the like equality mentioned Cap. 13.
in the Apostles, concludes, (that notwithstanding) that Peter was chosen to
be the head amongst them: so does here S. Cyprian after the general rule
that they had all like power, add as an exception from the rule, the same that
S. Hierome has in other words: Tamen vt vnitatem etc. yeat to make unity
manifest he disposed the beginning thereof by his authority to begin of one.
Thus much may suffice to satisfy your wondering M. Nowell, with what face I
have been so boulde and busye with S. Cyprian.

To the place of S. Hierome which you bring also to fol. 50. a. 9. b. 6.
prove that the dignity of a bishop is not esteemed by the greatness of his
diocese or city, and that all be equal in office, I say: that it is true
that the dignity of a bishop depends not upon the greatness of his
diocese: but it is false that there be no degrees in the office of a bishop.
That you bring Erasmus to prove it, it forces not. For he is with Catholics
of no more authority the^ Pighius is with you.

That between S. Cyprian Hierome and Leo there is no disagrement. The 15.
chapter.
You are now come to the comparing of the sainges of S. Cyprian and S. Hierome,
with the testimony of Leo bearing witness (you say) to him self. The which
you compare first after this sort.

Leo says, In the holy Apostles them selves there was a difference Nowell.
b. 8.
of power, and that it was given to one to be above all the rest. On the
contrary part S. Cyprian says, the Lord gave like and equal authority to
all his apostles: all the Apostles be indewed with like fellowship both of
honor and power.

Neither are Leo his words truly alleged, neither yeat Dorman.
S. Cyprians. Leo says, that inter beatissimos Apostolos False dealing in
alleging the words of Cyprian, and Leo.
in similitudine honoris fuit quaedam discretio potestatis, amongst the
blessed Apostles in likeness of honor there was a certain difference of
power, and quum omnium par esset electio, vni tamen datum est, vt coeteris
praeemineret. And whereas they had all one calling, yeat it was given to one to
be above the rest. S. Cyprians words are, that although our Lord after his
resurrection gave all his Apostles like power, (behold the likeness of honor
that Leo speaks of etc.) yeat to make unity known he disposed by his
authority that it should begin of one (Lo here, quaeda^ discretio potestatis,
that certain difference of power acknowledged by S. Cyprian, that Leo
mentions). What iarring is there here M. Nowell, their words being truly
alleged? Naie what sweet consent is there between these two learned fathers?
Leo says there was amongst the Apostles a likeness of honor, but yeat a
certain difference of power, he says their calling or election was like, but
yeat given to one to be above the rest. Does not S. Cyprian say the same, when
first in their election to be sent into all the world to preach, then in the
power of remitting sins he makes them equal, and yeat in adding afterward
this particle tamen, but yeat, he noted a certain difference of power, this
forsooth, that upon one of them the beginning and very fundation of unity
should be laid, notwithstanding all the equality otherwise? Is this true
dealing M. Nowell thus to bring in M. Nowell mangleth the words of Leo and S.
Cypria^ to make them disagree.
mangled at your pleasure the sainges of the fathers, to deface them to the
world, as here you do, by taking from the words of Leo this particle
quaedam, making him to seem the more to differ from S. Cyprian, and cutting
from S. Cyprian those words, that unity should begin of one, containing that
certain difference in likeness of honor that Leo speaks of? You say that S.
Cyprian has this in his book De simplicitate praelatorum, noting them as
double faced prelates that teach or attempt to make one bishop above an other.
The true title of the book is De vnitate ecelesiae, of the unity of the
church, as to him that shall read it, may easly by the contents thereof
appear. You are therefore a double faced or many headed prelate, that for one
chief head give us so many.

You proceed in your comparison and say, that Leo has: out of this form
is taken our difference of bishops, that in every province one be Dorman.
chief and of most authority, and the bishop of greter cities to have greater
care, and consequently that he that sits in Peter's chair should have charge
and be head of the universal church. Thus (you say) Leo says because he him
self would be Lord and head over all the church, whereas S. Cyprian on the other
side says: Every bishop has his several portion of Christ's flock to rule
and govern etc. that those who are under the charge of the B. of one country,
may not appeal to a bishop of an other, for that the authority of one bishop
is not inferior to an other, nor the auctorite of the B. of Afrike is less
then the authority of the bishopps of Italy, or Rome it self (for his words
have evidently that relation (and that none think the authority of one
bishop to be less then the authority an other but a few wicked and desperate
men.

You were driven to the wall M. Nowell when you were forced Dorman.
for a pore shift to say, that Leo said as he did, because he would have been
lord and head over the church. S. Cipria^ says that every bishop has his
several portion. The same says. Leo. Leo says that the charge of the
universal church must Lib. 1. ep. 3
have recourse to Peter's chair. S. Ciprian says not the contrary. Yea so
says S. Ciprian toe, calling Rome matricem, the mother church. And whither
should children I pray you have recourse for succor but to their mother. He
says not that the subject of one bishop may not appeal to an other, Lies.
that is one lie: He says not that the cause determined by one fol. 32. 2.
be contrary to him self, as I proved before by his writing to Steven the
pope, whereby he required him to take order by his lettres for the removing from
his bishoprike, Martianus the B. of Arles, and by that, that him self sent to
Rome to Cornelius to try the matter before him with those evil me^ that
complained upon him there, by his excepting against the sentence given by the
pope for the restitution of Basilides, for no other cause but because it was
obtained by false information. All which examples do not only prove that he
was not of the mind that no one bishop was above an other, but this also, that
the B. of Rome was of greater authority then the bishops of France, Spain,
or Afrike.

Hitherto of the disagrement between S. Ciprian and Leo, which by this time all
men, I trust perceive to be no such as you vaunted it was, yea to be none at
all, but such consent rather as in diverse words there can not be greater. It
follows that we examine how Hierome and Leo agree.

S Hierome (you say) has, that all churches worshipping one Nowell. fo. 51.
a. 10 Borrowed out of Calvin Inst. lib. 4 cap. 7. Sect. 3.
Christ and observing one rule of truth, are equal with the church of Rome,
that all bishops be the successors of the Apostles and of one priestehod,
and of the same merit and dignity. But Leo says contrary, that it was
given to one to be above all the rest, and that they who be in greater
diocesses or cities have more care and authority, and that the only see of
Peter has charge of the universal church and is head thereof.

You belie S. Hierome. He says not that all the churches Dorman. A lie. 38.
in the world be equal. If he did, he should say contrary to Irinaeus, who
says that the church of Rome has potentiorem principalitatem, greater
souereintie then other churches have: contrary to S. Cipria^ who calls Rome
the Li. 1. cap. 3 Lib. 1. ep. 3.
mother church, the root and principal church, and contrary to S. Austen
who calls it the church in the which the principality of the apostolical
see has allwaies flourished. Epist. 162.
He says that Christ's church is not divided, Nec altera Romanae vrbis
ecclesia, altera totius orbis existimanda.
as thoghe Rome were one and the whole world an other. As for that, that he
says that all bishops be the successors off the apostles, those words
make merueilously for the opinion of Leo against you. For upon that proposition
of S. Hierome I reason thus. All bishops be the successors of the Apostles:
but the Apostles were not all equal, because as S, Hierom says Peter was their
head. Ergo by S. Hieromes, mind all bishops who be their successors be not
equal, but have the successor of Peter their head. Again, Peter was head
of the Apostles, and made because there should arise no schism amongst them.
Ergo the B. off Rome who is Peter's successor, must be head of his fellow
bishops for the same cause. These two propositions, that there was amongst
the Apostles one head, and that that was Peter, be S. Hieromes own in his
first book against Iouinian. The words although I rehearsed before, yeat
because they perteine not only to this matter, but to show also how these
three, Ciprian, Hierome, and Leo, mete and knit as it were together in this
sentence, that Christ appointed over his church one general head: I will
recite once again. The words therefore of S. Hiero^ to Iouinia^ be these: At
dicis, super Petrum fundatur ecclesia, licet idipsum in alio loco super omnes
apostolos fiat, and cuncti claues regni coelorum accipiant, and ex aequo super
eos ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur, tamen propterea inter duodecim vnus
eligitur, vt capite constituto schismatis tollatur occasio. That is to say.
But thou say: The church is builded upon Peter, although the same in an
other place be done upon all the Apostles, and all of them receive the keys of
heaven, and equallye is the strength of the church grounded upon them: yeat
for all that is there one chosen amongst the twelve, that by making a head
amongst them occasion of schism may be taken away. See you not now by this
place of S. Hierome, M. Nowell how the equality of power that S. Cyprian
speaks of, the similitude of honor and equality of calling, that Leo
remembers, the building of the church in one place upon all the Apostles
indifferently that S. Hierome mentions, notwithstanding: they all three
conclude in one manner (with this word tamen, notwithstanding) that the church
was builded upon one, that there was one head, that there was one preferred
before the rest. This place of S. Hierome as it utterly stops their
mouths, who reason that the Apostles were absolutely in all points equal: so
confirms it most strongly the answer made before to the place of S. Ciprian
(that the Apostles were all of equal power and auctority) that that was true
at the first, but Joan. 20.
that after, our Lord (last before his ascension) gave the Joan. 21.
chief authority to one, in respect as one was chosen from the rest upon
whom the church should be builded. S. Hierome says that al bishops are
of one priesthode and of the same merit: you play the falsefier and add of
your own, and of the same dignity. The gentlewoman that translated a. 24. S.
Hierom falsefied by adding the word (dignity) which is not in him.
the Apology has preeminence: which makes me to think, that you borrowed
this patche of her, as liking better to be a follower of her falsehoode then of
his simplicity, that translating Caluins institutions translated the place
truly.

Now for further answer to this place of S. Hierome it is to be understand,
that he speaks here of the custom which was in Rome, that at the testimony
off deacons priests were promoted to ordres. The which when he says, he
speaks not of the B. of Rome him self and his authority, but of the use and
custom of that one city. Now is this a thing most certain, that neither
does the pope requier nor ever did, that all churches should follow the
private customs of his church. And therefore says S. Hierome, that the
custom of the city of Rome is not the custom of the world. Yea in such a
case if the custom came to be tried, the pope him self would say: Si
auctoritas quaeritur, orbis est mayor vrbe. If you seek to maintain this
custom by authority, the world is greater then is a city. Again where as
you would persuade men that all bishops be equal, because S. Hierome says
that they be of equal merit and priesthode: So were the Apostles toe, yeat
was one above the rest for all that, as Hierome him self confesses calling
Peter the head appointed by Christ.

You have heard good readers and I trust in part understood, what shameful
shifts M. Nowell has made, how busily the man has bestirred him self
with false additions, wrong translations, hacking, hewing, and dismembring of
sentences, how he has spared no vilanouse words or impudent lies to deface
this virtuous and learned father Leo.

To show him self no changling, he concludes with a conclusion like to his
premises, that he thinks that fire and water are not of a more contrary
nature, then are S. Nowell. a. 31. b. 13.
Cyprian and S. Hierome contrary to this epistle alleged as Leo the popes
epistle, beside S. Augustine and 200. and mo bishops agreing with them
against this Leo. He repeteth again his exceptions, that Leo in his own cause
is to be suspected, that it is to fol. 52. a. 2.
must burst out and lament as it were the case off the pope and popery, that
is brought now to such misery, as that being forsaken of all men almost
learned and grave, it could find no other patrones but such as I am.
Allthoughe for that he confesses, that all such as are godly and love the
truth have cause to thank almighty God.

How contrary Leo is to S. Cyprian and S. Hierome, Dorman.
let the learned judge: how S. Augustine and the other bisshoppes make for you,
the next chapitre because it depends upon the history of Zozimus shall make
evident. To the being witness in his own cawse, to the doubt of the work
whether it be Leo his or no, has been answered before. Allthough to certify
you further in the last point, albeit reason would you should have showed
some better cause of your doubt then you have, lest by that means every
authority brought against you may be called in to controversy, if it please
you to doubt thereof: I do note to you here in the margent other places out of
the same Sermon. 1. 2. 3. In die Aniuers. assumpt. suae ad Pontificat.
Leo his worckes, no epistles but certain sermons of his, where you shall
find that Peter into whose place he says that he unworthily succeeded, had
the same right over the universal church that here in this epistle he
chalengeth.

For the words that they be not falsified in this epistle, I alleged before a
copy printed at Coleine, which reads as I do. But then you say that the
words be clean contrary, and so that it is impossible that both should be
true. Nowell. B. 22.


I am content M. Nowell to you, that you take the Dorman.
place of Leo how you will, and read either as some copies have, without non,
or as other have, with non: and when you have done, all shall come to one
sense. For allthough non being but a little syllable be notwithstanding of
great importance generally, yeat here by reason of the word ordo which is
ambiguouse, and signifies either a corporation and body, as we use to say
the honorable knights off the order, or proportion in array, as when the
herald tells every Lord what order he shall keep in their solemn
processions or other assemblies, where this word is taken in an other
signification: and also of the word dignitas which being in like manner
ambiguouse, signifies either the dignity of the state of bishops, or
superiority in that state: it makes no diversity at all. When we read thus:
Quibus etsi dignitas non sit communisest tamen ordo generalis. To whom all
though there be not one dignity common, yeat is there one order general: we
understand by this word (order) the whole order of bishops, amongst whom
allthough there be diversity of dignities, yeat because bishops,
archebishoppes, primates, patriarchs, popes, be all bishops, we say: that,
that order of being bishop is common to them all. Likewise in this reading we
take dignitas, for superiority in that order. As contrariewise in the other
reading, Quibus etsi dignitas sit communis non est tamen ordo generalis, we
understand that dignitas does signify that, which ordo did before, and ordo
signifies that which dignitas did, that is superiority and preeminence in
that vocation. We were not blind you see M. Nowell, and I trust will bear us
witness. I think we saw more then you would we should have done. As for my
part, by whose taking this cawse in hand you judge that the matter should be
brought to great extremity, I confess (God is my witness) that had I known
that he had minded to have written therein who did, that I think I should
never have taken pen in hand to have written, nor when I had done and ended my
labor, and knew how much, how learnedlye had been said for the defense
thereof, should ever have suffered the same to go in to the knowleadge off
men, had I not followed the judgment off my betters therein. To which good
meaning of mine at the first, and ready obedience to my superiors at the
last, seeing that it has pleased almighty God to give such success, as that
M. Nowell having vttred all his eloquence, and spent all his other store in
awnswering (of 143. leaves) to only 15. has not yeat answered truly to 15.
words: I can not but think, that his pleasure was by a young man such as I
am, to show how little those great pillars off their side were hable to do.
I am not I confess of that reading and study in divinity that many other be
in our country. What so ever it be that is in me, I vow it to Christ and
his catholic faith against all heretics and heresies during my life. And
suerlye that littell which I have, shall I trust (I will say with S. Cyprian,
dico prouocatus, dico dolens, dico compulsus, I say it being provoked, I say
it sorowfully, I say it compelled by you thereto) be sufficient at all times
to match with you in any of those four questions that I have handled in my
book. For why should I doubt, by the aid of God to be hable to say in
defense of the catholic faith, more then you shall against it?

You say, that hitherto I have proved nothing, and that I Nowell. fo. 51. b. 1.
have gone about most lewdely to gather, that because every several country,
city, and company, have their several princes, rulers and heads, that all
churches dispersed in all countries, cities, towns, villages etc. should have
one only head here in earth.

I reasoned and yeat do reason in this wise: Every several Dorman.
country, because it is one body, every several city and company for the
same cause, must have their several rulers and heads: Therefore all the
churches in the world being but one mystical body, must have one chief
head to rule and govern the same. I reasoned after the same manner: Every
particular church as has S. Ciprian and S. Hierome, must have one bishop to
rule the same, and to be the head thereof. Therefore the whole church of
Christ where the danger of schisms is greater, and the mischief likelier to
happen, must have in like case one head. I have showed you now that your
reasons to the contrary: There is no one head over all the kingdoms in the
world, and it is impossible that there should be one such, therefore in like
manner it is impossible that there should be one general head in earth over
the universal church, Fol. 32. b. 14. ar of no force, forasmoche as the
difference of these two states is such, as suffers Supra cap. 11. fol. 49. b.
and. 50. b fol. 50. a and 61. a.
not your argument to hold. As because the division off unity, (that is of
faith) in the church, for the maintenance whereof this order was taken that
there should be one head in the whole church, is merueilouse daungerouse to
christian men, forasmoch as without faith there is no salvation, as has our
Savior him self: Qui non crediderit condemnabitur: Marci vlt. Heb. 11.
he that believes not shall be damned. And the Apostle, Sine fide impossible
est placere deo, To please God without faith it is a thing impossible.
Whereas it is not so touching the observation of any other unity amongst
Christian men in civil policy, forasmuch as it is not necessary that all
agree in common government, but they may well according to the diversity of
countries, tongues, conditions of men, have diverse manners of living and
government. Yea it is necessary (the contrary natures of men and countries
so requiring) that there be not only diverse but contrary positive laws in
diverse countries and provinces. When notwithstanding, no diversity of
natures, no variety of customs, no circumstances what so ever they be, can
excuse them from the uniform observing in all the whole world of godde^
commandments, and ministering of his sacraments, without the which there is
no entrance to life. To this may be added, that to govern the whole church
in spiritual things, how hard and impossible a thing so ever it seem to you,
is yeat much more easy to be done then to govern the world in temporal
government, both because the business and affairs of the world are more
diverse and contrary then are those of the church, and also because the sword
of excommunication wherewith the head of the church does punish rebels,
and such as forsake the truth, passes sooner and easelier to the correction
of such offenders be they never so far of, then does the material sword
which the temporal magistrate uses. Again, that there should be one head
over the whole church it is Christ's institution, who would so have it, when
committing to Peter the charge of as well his sheep as his lambs, he made him
general shepherde, and Homil. 87 in cap. 10. han. 21.
ruler as says Chrysostom, over the whole world. Whereas in temporal
government, it appears not by the scriptures that he planted ever any such
order. Nay the scripture Eccles. 17.
makes mention of the contrary if we will believe you. It follows. Nowell b.
17.


You have heard also, how ignorantly (if he did not understand) how
shamelesly (if he did understand) he has alleged S. Cyprian and S. Hieromo
for him etc.

Men have heard M. Nowell doubt you not, how like a Dorman
propre man you have quit your self. And yeat as though no man had seen you
hitherto, with a shameless repetition of a nombre of lies made before, you
turn you as it were about again to be better considred. How S. Ciprian and
S. Hierome make not against me but euidentlye with me, how vain or rather a
balsphemouse lie it is to say, (seeing God has so appointed it to be) that it
is impossible that there should be one only head over the whole church: How
my witnesses agree with most perfect consent, it has been to your shame
before declared.

You see there was no such opinion, much less knowledge, Nowell.
of any such head amongst the Apostles or in the primitive church, but that
it is a new diuelishe devise of the late ambitiouse bishops of Rome: who
when they were never able yeat hitherto, well to rule the church of Rome, one
city (as by all histories and experience is evident) would yeat of the world
usurp the superiority and supremacy. And if S. Paul did think he was not
meet to have charge of one church who could not well govern his own house: of
what mo^strouse ambition and presumption is he that being never yeat hable to
govern one peculier church, does claim the regiment of all churches thorough
out the world, whereas he is not hable to tell the only names of a small
part of the said churches, neither knows in what part a great many of
them be.

Are you not ashamed M. Nowell to call it a new diuelishe Dorman.
devise of the late bishops of Rome, and to say that there was no such
opinion of one head amongst the Apostles or in the primitive church, seeing
that S. Cyprian, and Hierome who you say untruly are against Epist. ad
Quint. fracrem. Lib. 1. aduers. Ioninian.
me, do make mention thereof as I showed before? The words I alleged before,
it shall here suffice to note the places. There was never yeat such a
governor, as could so rule his charge were it of any compass, that there
were not many things amiss therein. The church off Rome has been so
governed, that it was never hitherto steined with heresies, which seeing none
of the other apostolical seats can say, both must you be enforced to
acknowledge Gods mighty providence in preserving the same, and to grant
withal, that if that order to have one general head over the whole church
were now to begin, and the head to be chosen, that there were none to be
preferred before the bishop of that See. Because you make mention of S. Paul,
who thinks him unmeet to have 1. Timoth. 3.
the charge of one church that can not govern well his own house: you put me
in remembrance, that S. Ambrose expounding the same place, calls Damasus the
pope, the ruler of the whole church. And so there is one witness more by
your good occasion given, to prove that this manner of head was not unknown
in the primitive church, and that therefore you falselye slaundered the late
popes and so have increased the nombre of your lies Two lies. 40.
with two mo. If no man may have under his governance greater compass then
that he can tell if he be required the names off the cities, towns, villages,
hamlettes, etc. that he is king or Lord over, and in what part of his realm
they stand, you will with your wise divinity, bring the world to a good
pass shortly. It is not necessary that the French king, the King of
Spain, the Queen our maistres, or any other Prince, do know the names of
all the parts that they be chief governors of. It suffiseth that their
inferior officiers do, and that if there arise any such controversy as
they be not able to order and determine, they may then advertise the chief
governor off all, who may by his greater power redress the same. Even so is
it in the Pope M. Nowell, who has the oversight of the whole church, not to
govern all the members thereof him self by him self, but by the help of his
brethren, who are called into part of that charge with him.

That Zozimus the bishop of Rome, corrupted not the canons off the Nicene
council. The 16. Chapitre.
BECAUSE you shall not suppose M. Nowell, that I answer here to your by talk
of Zozimus, as forced by necessity, but only as I told you before, for this
that allthough it be not pertinent to the matter, it is yeat a foul fol. 46.
b. 3.
sclaunder to that blessed bishop, and brought commonly by your masters, to
bring into hatred the Sea of Rome: I will this tell you before hand, that you
are like to have as little honestye by the proposing of this exception in form
of law against my witness, as you had worship (when being prolocutour in the
convocation house, you would as it is reported, have first passed by the
house, that they should all be taken for heretics that would not agree to a
law that should be afterward made. And when you thought to conclude (being
earnest to have your wise devise take place) upon the silence that then was in
the house (every man being astonished at so foolish a demand) by this maxim
in the law: Qui tacet consentire videtur, he that holds his peace seems to
consent, where a wise man and a great lawier telling you that in making of
laws the consent must be express and not presumed: you sat down in your
place, as wise as before you stood up. If here therefore happening upon the
rule: Qui semel est malus semper praesumitur malus. He that is once evil is
ever presumed naught, you thought, that if you were able to prove Zozimus a
falsefier, you should discredit also Leo, because he was a pope as well as
the other, you were surely greatelye deceived. For this rule is personal M.
Nowell and not local. Otherwise because it is in any court in England a
good exception against his testimony that serving sometimes in your church
of Powles, and being now one of your chief preachers, stale away the
chalice, a man might take the same exception to any other honest man of the
same church. But this being I suppose well enough known, how childish and
unsavory a kind of proof, how far from the purpose this that you bring of
Zozimus is; let us examine how true it is, that he falsefied the canons of the
council of Nice. How prove you this to be true M. Nowell I pray you?

I prove it (say you) not by two only, but by 217. witnesses, Nowell. fo.
46. b. 23
the whole council of Afrike, amongst whom was S. Austen, Orosius, Prosper,
with many other bishops notable in learning and virtue.

Well I am content to wink at you M. Nowell as cruel Dorman. M. Nowell
rejecting Leo as witness in his own cause alleges the Africanes in their own
cause. Nowell. fo. 47. a. 1.
as you were with me, for bringing the testimony of Leo in his own cawse, and
I will be ignorant that this was the Africanes cause, or that they were
Africane bishops that gave this sentence that you speak of. But what be the
words I pray you that they use against Zozimus? Do they call him expresselye
a corrupter and a falsifier?

They all, as in their epistle to Celestine one of the successors of this
Zozimus appears, testify that there was no such matter for the B. of Romes
superiority as was by pope Zozimus alleged, neither in their usual copies of
the Nicene council, neither in the authentical examples which were sent them
by Cirill patriarch of Alexandria, and by Atticus patriarch of Constantinople:
which authenticalles agreing with their own copies, and all other copies
every where, had no such thing as Zozimus alleged, but had the clean
contrary: for that the 6. and 7. decree off the said Nicene council, make
the patriarchs of Alexandria, Antiochia, and Jerusalem equal with the B. of
Rome.

If this be all M. Nowell, then are you a corrupter and Dorman.
a falsifier of the sainges of 217. bishops. The mo they be 217. bishops
sclaundred by M. Nowell.
in nombre, the greater in virtue and learning, the more is your fault to be
detested of all men. They said that they had received from Cyrillus and from
Atticus certain copies of the Nicene council, in the which they could find
no such thing as the pope claimed. What thereof M. Nowell, was then the copy
that Zozimus had at Rome falsified? Or if it were falsified must it needs be by
and by falsified by Zozimus? Might he not allege it as he found it left by
his predecessors? Seeing these learned fathers never used such words, but on
the contrary part called him in their lettres to Bonifacius after his death,
beatae memoriae, Venerabilis memoriae, of blessed remembrance, of venerable
memory: suerlie you have with the better sort not a little empaired your
estimation, to use such cancred words, and father them falselie upon the
council. But not staing here, nor contentid only to have said this, you
charge him further, with the mainteining of one Apiarius against his fo. 46. b.
19.
bishop called Vrbanus. This is a maliciouse surmise of youres M. Nowell and
has no ground.

You say, that Zozimus pretended that it was decreed at Nowell. fol. 46. b. 12.
Nice, that the B. of Rome should be the chief judge above all other
bishops, and that it should be laufull for any man under any other bishop,
to appeal to the B. of Rome as to the highest judge over all ecclesiastical
persons.

You have made two lies at once. For first, whereas Dorman.
to make men believe that the Africanes acknowledged no manner of jurisdiction in
the B. of Rome, you feine the state of the cawse between the pope and the
bishops of Africa to have been, that he pretended a decree of the council of
Nice to be chief judge above all other bishops, as though the Africanes had
denied that, and not stood rather upon this point to limite and restreine his
authority in matters criminal, and causes of correction, that is one
spiteful lie. As to them that considre how in matters concerning A lie 41.
faith, the Africanes submitted their doings against August. epist 90.
Prosper lib. contra Collator. cap. 41.
Pelagius and Celestius the heretics, to Innocentius, and this very council
to Zozimus the popes, by them to be approved: how they required Innocentius to
cite to Rome Pelagius the heretic being then in the East so far from Rome,
it is a thing most evident. So that to allege this fact of the Africanes
truly, helps nothing your cause at all: as by a familier example of our
own country may be proved unto you. It is not unknown, that there be some
places in England so priuileaged, that for contractes made within those
places, they can be called from thence to none of the kings courts, yeat
cease they not therefore to be the kings subjects. Now if the Africanes
pretended that they were not to be called out of their own country to Rome,
for such causes as seemed to them reasonable, namely as they them selves
alleged, because it was a combrouse thing to call witnesses for every thing
by danger of sea to Rome: yeat would they not hereby take away his
authority, and withdraw their whole obedience. The second lie is, that the
B. of Rome should pretend that it Council. African cap. 105. A lie. 42.
should be laufull for any man under any other bishop to appeal etc. That
this is a lie the epistle written by the bishops of Africa to Bonifacius the
pope does manifestly show, in the which they making mention them selves of
such points as were contained in the popes lettres, say, that the third was,
de tractandis praesbiterorum and diaconorum causis apud finitimos episcopos, si
a suis excommunicati perpera^ fuerint, of pleading the causes of priests and
deacons before the next bishops, if they were unjustly excommunicate by
their own. Is this now sincere dealing M. Nowell, to say that the pope
pretended that any man under any other bishop might appeal to him, whereas
here appointing the priests and deacons to the bishops of their own
country, he releaseth all such right. But hereoff I shall have anon more
occasion to speak, when I come to that place where you charge the council of
Africa with making a decree, against sailing over the sea with controversies or
appellations to the B. of Rome. In the mean season I will return to the
accusation put in by you against Zosimus.

Seeing M. Nowell you have for your part done what you are hable, to prove
Zozimus a falsefier and can not: I will for the justifying of his innocence,
prove by such means as a negative may be proved, the contrary, that he is
no falsefier. First I say therefore, that this canon of the council of Nice
was not only alleged by Zozimus, but, if not before Zozimus was borne, yeat
surely almost 100. years before he was ever pope, by Athanasius B. of
Alexandria, by all the bishops of Aegipt, Thebais and Lybia. Who writing to
Felix the pope make express mention thereof, not by hear say, but of their
own certain knowledge, as they that were present at the making thereof. Their
words are these. Nam scimus in Nicaena magna Synodo etc. For Epist. Athanasij
et Aegipt. pontific. ad Felicem de in festat Arianoru^.
we know that in the great Synod of Nice where were 318 bisshoppes, it was
of them all by one consent confirmed, that neither councelles should be
holden, nor bishops condemned without the B. of Rome his sentence: that these
and many other very necessary synodicall chapitres are burned and taken from
us The heretics burned the canons of the council of Nice.
by heretics, which daily molest us and seek our destruction, that they may
thereby the easelier entrappe us. VVhereupon having found occasion, all
canonical and Apostolical authority indifferently contemned, they drive us
vnlaufullie, An absurdity to deprive bisshoppes without making the pope
priuey thereto
without making you priuey thereto from our own bishoprikes, invade the sheep
committed unto us from Christ The apostolical seat makes bisshoppes.
by the Apostolical grace, and deprive us of our degrees. To Marcus who was
bishop of Rome before Felix, they write for the true copy of the council: they
make express mention of 70. canons that were there by their own knowledge
agreed upon. Marcus writes again: his epistle is to besene, that he has not
only enquired out the truth of those canons of such about him as were also
present at the said counsel, but by searching the records of Rome, had
found all things to be as they had written in their lettres. Now join these
two lettres of Athanasius together M. Nowell with the answer made by Marcus,
and cry shame to your self that have so injuriously diffamed this blessed
bishop, as with the crime of forging a decree, which Athanasius and all the
bishops of Aegipt, Thebais, and Libia, testify by their lettres to have been
truly made almost a hundred years before his time, in the counsel of Nice,
where they were present. Co^ferre now the testimony of the bishops of Africa,
with the witness that Athanasius and the other bishops of the east give to
this matter. The one part says they could find no such canon in the copies
that were sent from Constantinople and Jerusalem: and no marvel the canons
being burned as Athanasius says so long before: The othersaieth, it was in
the copy sent from Nice to Rome. The one part denies not but such a canon
might be else where: The other says there was such a one, and shows that
it with other were burned by the Arrians in the east churches, that they might
the rather ouerronne the catholics. The one part gives a perfect cause of
their testimony, because they were present when the matter was concluded.
Imagine now the other, who having sought in the east church for such a
decree said they found no such, to say (which they do not) that they had
hard of some that were present at the council, that there was no such thing
decreed, which witnesses were to be beleuid?

This that has been said, may seem I doubt not to any reasonable man a
sufficient cause, why we ought to give full credit to Athanasius, and those
other bishops, and pronounce for the innocence of Zozimus. Yeat to make it
the better appear how true it is that Athanasius Many canons made in the 1.
council of Nice. that we have not now.
says of the burning of the Nicene canons, I will note unto you certain
canons, which the fathers and stories off the church witness, to have been
concluded in that council, which yeat are not amongst those twenty which we
have. I will first begin with S. Ambrose, who tells you M. Nowell, that you
have done evil being twice married, Epi. 82. li. 10. colu^. 11 Note. M. Nowell.
to thrust your self into the ministry of the church, not only because the
apostle (he says) forbids it, but the fathers also in the council of Nice.

S. Augustine reports that there was a decree made in Epist. 110.
successor bshiop with him, notwithstanding that him self (he confessed) by
ignorance thereof, was so ordained by Valerius his bishop and predecessor.

Justinian the emperor says, that it was defined by the Constitut. 131.
the chief of all other priests.

S. Hierome says, that the book of Judith was counted In praefat. in Judith.


Theodoritus alleges a decree of giving ecclesiastical degrees, of
consecrating bishops, made also by the council Lib. 5. cap. 9.


Leo affirms that there was an other canon touching Epist. ad Leone^, 78.


Where is there any canon of the observation of the Easter day, the desire of
the uniform observation whereof, Histor. tripart. lib. 1. cap. vlt. Haere. 70.
Lib. 2. ca. 2
was one cause why the council of Nice was called? Yeat does both Epiphanius
and the tripartite historye, make mention of a decree made by the fathers
touching the same.

Your Apology cites out of the council off Nice, that humiliter inte^ti ad
panem et vinum, over basely bent to bread and wine. We confess it to be true,
but show you it amongst the canons.

Who doubts that the council of Nice was assembled together against Arrius?
Yeat show one canon against him amongst the 20. that remain. Was there
think you none made? That were surely a strange matter, that in the whole
doings thereof, nothing should have been concluded against him, for the
repressing of whom the council was specially called together?

How say you now M. Nowell, is it likely that the Arrians burned the canons
of the council or no? Are all these falsaries and corrupters that have alleged
thus many canons to be of the council of Nice, because at this day there is
none of them extant? I think you will not say so. If you will not, why
Zozimus more then they? Yes you say there is an other cause, why if not
Zozimus (for I think by this time you be ashamed of that matter) yeat some
other has fasified those canons. What is that I pray you?

Because there appeared in the copies sent from the East, the Nowell. fol. 47.
a. 11.
clean contrary to that which the pope claims. For the sixth and seventh
decree off the said Nicene council, make the patriarchs of Alexandria,
Antiochia, and Jerusalem, equal with the bisshoppes of Rome.

Truly if it had been so, it is merueile that Athanasius, Dorman.
who was there present, should have been ignorant of it. Therefore except you
will say that either this epistle is feined and not Athanasius own (as that
is wont in other auctorities brought against you to be your common and last
refuge when you be sore pressed, which if you do, you must not only say it,
but prove it also): Or that his memory was so evil that he could not
remember so notable a thing so latelye before done, or his malice so great
that he would feign that which never was done: you must needs grant, that
this sixth and seventh canon have an other meaning then to make the patriarchs
of Alexandria, Antiochia, and Jerusalem, equal with the bishops off Rome.
And so have they in deed. For the true meaning of The true understanding of the
6. and 7. canon of the council of Nice.
them is, to appoint the limits and bounds of those primates jurisdictions,
of whom mention is there made, according to the custom of the bishop of Rome.
As the words which answer truly to the greek and are in Latin these, do
well declare. Antiqui mores obtineant in Agipto, Libia, and Pentapoli, vt
Alexandrinus horum omnium habeat potestatem, quia and episcopo Romano hoc
consuetum est. Similiter etiam per Antiochiam and in caeteris prouincijs
priuilegia seruentur ecclesijs. Let old customs be kept in Egypt, Libia,
and Pentapoli, that the B. of Alexandria have the authority over them all, for
as much as the B. of Romes manner is such. Semblablye also, thorough out
Antioche and in other provinces, let the churches have their privileges kept.
These words of the council, as they do nothing at all diminishe the B. of
Romes authority, so do they confirm it very much. The reason of the
council why the jurisdiction of the B. of Alexandria should extend so far,
being (beside the ancient custom in those parts) the custom also of the B.
Rome, who it is to be thought used of long time so to allow it, by containing in
his rescriptes those provinces under the patriarchie of Alexandria. Which was
now brought as an argument to confirm and continue the same. For this meaning
that they should be all equal in power and authority, there is no word there
able to induce. Except a man would bring in those grave fathers reasoning thus
foolishely: because the B. of Rome has jurisdiction over his own bishoprike
(for more you give him not, and the council names no place at all) therefore
the B. of Alexandria shall have jurisdiction over all the bishops of Aegipt,
Libia, and Pentapoli. Had not this been think you a goodly making of them
equal? If you will say that the council meant that the B. of Rome should be
patriarch in the west parts, and therein they should be equal, beside that
there be no such words in the council to enforce such a meaning, yeat
should we of England be never the nearer, for our lot being to be still under
the bishop of Rome, all your labor were lost. And again one chief rule of
youres overthrown, that all bishops be equal. Which I desire the learned
reader to note diligently. Because you kept before M. Nowell such a stir to
have all bisshoppes M. Nowell cast in his own tune.
equal. Whereas even this very council that your self bring, by making
only three of all the world equal (if that were the meaning of the council)
do the evidently overthrow you. Well, whether be liker of these two senses to
be the sense and meaning of the council, I will leave to the indifferent and
learned to judge, who I doubt not when they shall easelie perceive, that the
council attributed so much to the authority of the B. of Rome, that his
custom was alleged to prove the jurisdiction of the B. of Alexandria, to be
as a direction not only for that, but also for the conseruing of the
privileges to other churches thorougheout Antiochia and other provinces, he
will with as like facility epsy, how this sixth and seventh canon, do not
only not disagree with that alleged by Zozimus, but also peaseably agreing
together, the one confirm the other. Thus much touching these canons that you
would so feign have made contrary, without showing the points wherein the
patriarchs should be equal with the B. of Rome) to the other alleged by
Athanasius, and after him by Zozimus.

Having allreadie sufficiently declared, that Zozimus is not guilty of the
crime laid to his charge, I will add this as for a more confirmation, that
Zozimus if there had been No cause way Zozimus should forge a canon.
no such canon in the council of Nice, had yeat no cause to forge one (which
he was not so simple but he well knew would not if he did, long be unespied,
and then the shame would light upon him) seeing that he had for him the
council of Sardica, not long after that of Nice (for Osius the B. of Corduba
in Spain was present at them both) nor of much less authority neither, as
in the which were. 300. bishops, not of one province, but gathered together
out of all the world, out of Rome, Spain, France, Italy, Campania,
Calabria, Aphrica, Sardinia, Panonia, Misia, Dacia, Dardania, an other Dacia,
Macedonia, Thessalia, Achaia, Epiros, Thracia, Rhodope, Asia, Caria, Bithinia,
Helespontus, Phrigia, Pisidia, Capadocia, Po^tus, Cilicia, Phrygia again,
Pamphilia, Lidia, the Islands called Cyclades, Aegipt, Thebais, Libia, Galatia,
Palestina and Arabia. Seeing I say that he had for his purpose the canons
(namely the fourth and seventh) of so general a council as this was, in
which were also the bishops of Africa them selves, whom he might have
objected. 300. if you go to nombring (Athanasius that strong pillar of
Christ's church being one of them) against. 217, witnesses all (if I would
reason as you do (in their own cause. I am not ignorant that Calvin being not
so impudent as you, says that Zozimus alleged this decree of Sardica as a
decree of the council of Nice. But as you in that point more wily the^ he, saw
that he Distitut. li. 4. cap. 7. Sect. 9.
could never be hable to prove that: so perceived you also that he had far
ouershot him self in making of the council holden at Sardica any mention at
all, and therefore you thought it wisdom slyly to slip it over, and to
inuolue it utterly in silence, lest thereby you might give occasion to some to
search that council, that otherwise would never have thought of it. It
follows.

And the said. 217. bishops made a decree in that African Nowell. Fol. 47. a
15. Council. African. cap. 105.
council, that no sailing over the sea with controversies, nor appellations to
the B. of Rome, nor sending of his legates Laterall in to their countries as
judges, should be used, according as by the epistle of the said whole
council sent to pope Celestin it appears.

Behold good Reader a most impudent man, who is Dorman.
not ashamed to name an epistle for the proof of that which is not there.
Read over the epistle here mentioned, if there appear to be any such decre
made there as he says there is, never let me be credit more. The bishops
of Africa in those lettres of theirs, desire Bonifacius the Pope in this wise:
Vt deinceps ad aures vestras hinc venie^tes non facilius admittatis, that you
will not hereafter over easily admit to be heard such as come to you from us.
Again, they apply the canon of the council of Nice forbidding to receive
Can. 5.
to communion such as be excommunicat of other, to this, that the pope receive
not such, vel festinato, vel praepropere, vel indebite, either with to much
haste, or to rashly, or not duly: they desire his holiness to repel improba
refugia, wicked refuges. Finally, they pray him to call home his probitate ac
moderatione tuae sanctitatis salua, the goodness and moderation of your
holiness excepted. Where be now the words M. Nowell that you ground your
decree upon? Does not the contrary rather appear by this epistle, that he
might receive such appeals, but not commonly, and rashely, not but upon
great advise? Otherwise to what end were those words of not receiving
complaints facilius, to lightly: or these, praepropere, indebite, etc. to
rashely, unjustly? Why said they not rather boldly and freely, our
authority is as great as youres? Why invade you other men's jurisdiction?
Why usurp you where you have no right? Why bad they him not call home his
legate, telling him if they had made such a decree as you say they had, that
they had made a law amongst them selves that neither they should sue to him,
nor he send his legates to them? What means all this humble submissio^ of
theirs, but the contrary to this which you affirm, that there was yeat no
decree made, or if there were (which notwithstanding appears not by this
epistle) by this humble demeanure of theirs toward the pope, to move him the
rather to bear with, and to confirm their doings? But there appears no
such decree to be made amongst them, by the epistle here alleged. Except of
that particular narration of theirs of the incommodiouse calling of witnesses
to Rome by sea, of that they found not (they said) ordained by any council
of fathers that his holiness (I will use their own words) should send
anielegates laterall thither (all the which was written to move the pope as is
may seem, to consent to their petition) except I say of this particular
narration, your wit will serve you to make a general decree. Which is like
enough to be your meaning by the wise reason that follows, taken from the
superscription of the lettres sent to Celestinus. Belike you remembered the
maxim of the lawiers, that those things which help not alone, may yeat
gathered together stand in some stead. You go forward and say.

For the which it pleases D. Harding to call the Aricans, amongst Nowell. ^.
25.
whom S. Austen, Orosius, and Prosper with many other learned and godly
bishops were, schismatikes: as those that submitted not their necks to the
pope, and following Hosius his auctor, he says that Africa continued in this
schism 100. years, to wit from Boniface the first to Boniface the second.

M. Doctor Harding never mentto inuolue S. Austen, Dorman.
Orosius, or Prosper in any schism with the Africanes. For as at this
council it appears not in the records thereof, that Orosius (who never was
bishop but only a priest, and therefore could give no definitive voice in the
council that co^sisted of only bishops) or Prosper either, were present: so
is it more then probable, that S. Austen who to the first epistle sent to
Bonifacius gave his consent and subscribed with other, wherein they protested
to observe all things demanded by the pope till they could get from the
East the true copies of the council of Nice, it is I say more then probable,
that forasmoche as in this latter epistle to Celestinus, no mention is made of
him at all, notwithstanding that he was legate for Numidia, his name so famous,
his bisshoprike so great, that he saw in the mean season so much right in
the bishop of Romes cause, and so little in the other (allthough by no means
their doings tended to the universal abrogating of the popes authority) that
he refused so much as to put his name, or suffer him self to be named in
those lettres of theirs. So that before you had charged M. D. Harding thus
odiously, you ought to have proved that such a decree was made in the African
council, and have noted to us the canon, then that Orosius and Prosper were
present at the making thereof, and gave their consentes thereto: Last, because
you seeing that the decree of the council was not to be found, referred your
self to the epistle written to Celestinus, you should have told us in what
words there the mention of this decree lay hidden, and proved allthough S.
Austens name be not there mentioned, that yeat he consented thereto. Again M.
Nowell, when this matter between the B. of Rome and the Africanes began first
to be called in question, it was entreated with such humility and submission
by the Africanes, as appears by this epistle to Celestinus, that they could
by no means be accounted schismatikes. Afterward in deed the matter grew so
far, that it burst out in to open schism, and so continued to the time of
Boniface the 2. To the which schism that ever S. Austen, Orosius, or Prosper
consented, or any other good catholic priest or bishop, you shall never be
able to prove. And so this lie with that houge Lie. 43.
heap of all the rest remains with you, and the truth with us. But because
you brag as you do of the company of S. Austen and Prosper, and sclaundre
them to the world to be schismatikes: I will in defense of their innocence
allege out of their works so much, as shall I trust with the better sort
suffice for their purgation.

Who is it I pray you M. Nowell that says of the church of Rome, that in it
the principality of the apostolic chair has August. epist. 162.
ever flourished? Who calls Bonifacius, (the same in whose time this
controversy was moved) the bishop that has Lib. 1. contra 2. epis. Pelag.
ca. 1
the preeminence in the bishoply care above all other? Who calls the Sea of
Rome (alluding to the words of Christ in the Psalm contra parte^ Donat.
gospel) the rock which the proud gates of hell shall not overcome? Who but S.
Auste^, whom you be not here ashamed to match with your self, as thinking of
the pope and See of Rome as heretically as you do. To come to Prosper, when
you here him acknowledge, that Zozimus (of whom all this talk rises) added to
the decrees of the African councelles, sententiae suae robur, the strength and
force of his sentence: Lib. contra Collatorem cap. 41.
that with Peter's sword to the cutting of, of wicked men he armed the right
hands of all bishops, (for so are his words in Latin) ad impiorum
detruncationem gladio Petri dexteras omnium armauit antistitum. When you are
not ignorant (if you know any thing) that the same Prosper says, Lib.
contra Collatorem cap. 10.
that the holy See of Rome spoke to all the world by the mouth of Zozimus:
Will you not for shame call back again that wretched sclaunderouse lie off
youres, that Prosper should be touching the bishop of Rome of the same mind
that you are? Was Zozimus taken off Prosper to be a corrupter and falsarye, a
countrefeite catholic, and in deed a false schismatike from Christ and the
truth, as your venimouse tongue has not feared to pronounce of him? Is fire
more contrary to water then is this judgment of youres, to that of Prospers
for his virtue and authority? You pretend that the fathers of the counsel of
Carthage would bar Zozimus of al auctority: Prosper tells us that so much
he was esteemed of them, that they had the strength of his sentence added to
their decrees, as much to say, as to confirm and allow them. You call him a
corrupter, a falsarie, a countrefeite catholic, a false schismatike: Prosper
calls him one that armed the right hands of al bishops with Peter's sword
to cut of wicked me^ from the rest of Christ's mistical body the church. You
restreine his power to Rome: Prosper confesses that by his mouth the Sea of
Rome spoke to all the world. If this be not more then impudency good reader
in M. Nowel, then what is impudency I confess I know not.

But acknowledged Prosper this authority in Zozimus only? no verilye. For in
Celestinus to whom this epistle here mentioned was sent from the African
bishops, he witnesses that there was such power, that he cured the Island
The pope meddled in England, Scotland, France, and in the East.
off Britannye infected with Pelagius heresy, that he ordained Palladius
bishop over the Scottishe men, that with the Apostolical sword he aided
Cirillus the B. of Alexandria, to purge the churches of the East of a double
plague, the Nestorians and Pelagians: that in France he put them to silence
who reported evil of S. Augustins writings. Finally to them that rejected
certain books of S. Augustins upon pretense that they were not allowed by the
pope, he answered An exception in the primitive church against books that
they were not allowed by the Pope. Ibid. ca. 43
in this wise: Agnosca^t calumniatores superfluo se obijcere, quod his libris
non speciale neque discretum testimonium si^ perhibitum, quorum in cunctis
voluminibus norma laudatur. Apostolica enim seeds quod a praecognitis sibi non
discrepat, cum praecognitis probat, and quod iudicio iungit, laud non diuidit.
That is to say: Let these wranglers know, that they object superfluously that
there is no special nor several testimony given to these books, the rule
and doctrine whereof is praised in all books. Note.
For the Apostolical See allows with those books that it knew before,
those that differ not from the^, and those which it joins together in
judgment it seperateth not in praise. Now to conclude M. Nowell, are you no
otherwise a schismatike think you then S. Augustine, and Prosper? I would to
God ye were not. Then would you acknowledge with S. Augustine a preeminence in
the B. of Rome above other bishops, the seat of Rome to be such as hell
gates shall not prevail against it. Then would you submit to the pope your
doings to be allowed, as both S. Augustine and the whole council of Afrike
did: then would you extend the jurisdiction of that See to England, Scotland,
France, and to the East churches. Then would you confess that the B. of
Rome for the time being is the mouth to speak to all the world, and bears
the sword of Peter to cut of wicked men, to help and arm the good. For all
these things do S. Austen (as has been declared) and Prosper acknowledge.
Whereby appears, how shamefully you have sclaundered them with the
maintenau^ce of your schismatic and erroniouse opinions concerning the Sea
of Rome. To S. Augustine, Orosius, and Prosper, you join the patriarchs of
Alexandria and Constantinople, Cirillus, and Atticus. But why them I pray you
M. Nowell? Because in those canons that they sent there was no mention of that
which the B. of Rome alleged. I grant you, for they were burned by the
Arrians as by the report of Athanasius you heard before. And must they needs
be schismatikes with you because the Arrians burned the true copies of the
council of Nice, and they sent such as they had? How holds that argument I
pray you? Well, you thought every thing would help and therefore you
iumbled all together, let it speed as it might.

The answer to the objection made of the African council.
Now to return to the African council, and to conclude in few words all
that has been or may hereafter by me be said therein: I first say that the
African council Bonifacius the pope the first, the controversy was not about
the universal authority of the B. of Rome, but touching the moderation and
limiting thereof in certain causes of appellation. The like whereunto as it
has been attempted and done in this realm of England, in the days of that
noble prince Edward E. 3. anno 25. and. 27.
the third, by restreining the popes power in conferring of ecclesiastical
promotions, and barring the trial of certain suits out of the realm, without
breach of unity, or renouncing due obedience to that See: so was it at the
beginning in Afrike, although after it brake out in to an open schism. Thirdly
I answer, that if there had been such a decree made as is pretended, yeat
this considered that it had Sardica, in the third and 7. canon whereof (the
bishops of Africa consenting thereto) 300. if you go to nombring M. Nowell
for your 217., and chosen men all of purpose to match with the Arrians, agreed
upon this which the Africanes denied, to wit, that it should be laufull for any
bishop condemned to appeal to the bishop of Rome. Last of all, if Epistol.
Bonifacij 2. ad Eulalium Alexand. Tom. 2. Council.
years wandering a straie, after great plagues by lo^gue captivity, under the
most barbarouse and cruel Wandales, by Eulalius the Archbishop of Carthage
in the name of that whole province, to Bonifacius then pope, the second off
that name. Thus much touching the African council. It follows.

After this Zozimus, his successor Bonifacius the first, Celestine the first,
with all others allmoste, following Zozimus steps and Nowell. b. ^4.
ambition, have with toothe and nail striuen for this supremacy, and for that
purpose did stick still to the falsified Nicene canon, and have likewise
falsified other councelles in sundry places, and have forged a great many of
the epistles now abroad, in the names of the old popes, Clement, Anacletus,
Euaristus, Telesphorus and other their predecessors.

Suerlye M. Nowell if there had been that sincerity in Dorman.
you and vprightnes that should be in a divine: yff that gravity and poise
that should be in a writer: yff that common honesty, that should be in
every Christian man: you would either for the one respect or the other, have
so tempered your style, that there should never have slipped from your pen
into the view of the world, such cancred and rancorouse slanders against
such learned and virtuous fathers, so sclendrelie yea by no means at all
proved. Bring furthe the canons therefore that you say have been falsified:
name the popes that have forged these epistles? Name them not only but prove
it, otherwise you will be taken for a maliciouse Lier. Think you that it may be
sufficient for you to borowe this out off Caluins Institutions, and without
any farther proof bid Lib. 4. Inst. cap. 8. Sect. 11.
all the world believe you? You be not Calvin M. Nowell, nor England is not
Geneua God be praised therefore? But you prove it thus.

Whereas ever those godly old fathers ever subject to persecution Nowell. fo.
48. a. 3.
and death, never thought of any such matters, neither had lust or leisour
to occupy their heads and pens about such ambitiouse matters.

You are foulie deceauid M. Nowel: for the greater the Dorman.
persecution was, the more necessary must it needs be, to teach that order
which Christ left in his church of the necessity of one head, that so the
members acknowleging the same, might be out of the fear of all schismatic
discord. Neither made they so often mention thereof for ambition sake, as
your spiders nature sucketh out, having learned at their Masters hands
before, that the greatest amongst them should belike the least. Who sees not
that Lucae. 22.
by such foolish collections as this is, a froward heretic might deny S.
Paul's epistles to the Corinthia^s, especially the Latter, in the which (the
case so requiring) he glories so far, that him self confesses that he has
played the fool 2. Corinthians. cap. 11. 1^.
compelled thereto by them. Ywisse S. Paul was as much subject to persecution
and death as any of the popes that you have named. He had as little lust or
leisour to occupy his head or pen about the setting furthe of him self, to
boaste of his apostleship, to tell of his revelations, as any of them. But
necessity compelling both him and them to stand upon their authority, it
was expedient that they should earnestly set furthe the same. The epistles
that you speak of here to have been forged, were gathered together above nine
hundred years past by one Isidorus, archebisshop of Hispalis in Spain, so
that when you come to prove this matter, those popes of these latter nine
hundred years you see how they be discharged. Now M. Nowell, if you think
that you have walcked long enough out of the way, we will return thither from
whence we departed, to the. 53. Leaf of your book. The which because as the
reader may see, it contains nothing but very matter of bragges not worthy to
be answered, I step over.

Ofschismes and sects wherewith M. Nowell burdeneth the Catholics. The 17.
Chapitre.
HERE M. Nowell by occasion of a few lines (but such Nowell. fol. 54. a.
belike as touched him to the quick and made him to wynse) discourses in
many leaves in defense of schisms and sects. This note of mine, whereby I
admonished the reader for better credit to be given hereafter to the ancient
fathers Cypria^ and Hierom, (who telling us that the not obeing of one chief
head in one several diocese is the cause of schisms and heresies, say
withal allthough not in express words as much by force of greater reason,
unless there be one such head acknowledged and obeyed in the uniform
government of the whole church) to have an eye to the present schisms,
which have burst in upon us in our country, instead of one common received
truth in the days of our fathers: this note I say, so graueled M. Nowell,
rubbing him on the very head of that festred boil of his poisoned heresy,
that he could find no ground to stand upon, but needs must he fling out and
lay about him, as a man half wood, and beside himself, sparing none, not the
blessed Apostles them selves. He begins this pastime after his accustomed
manner, with this Lewd lie.

It is well known that there is as much consent in true doctrine Nowell. A
facing lie. 44.
in the church of England at this time, as ever was in any realm at any
time.

What a face think you has this man, or has he any Dorman.
face or forheade at all? I will not trouble him with foreign realms, showing
him what consent in true doctrine there is presently in many Catholic
countries, nor I will not appeal to all the former ages that have passed. I
will only put him in remembrance, of the consent in true doctrine in our own
country fifty years ago. Can you say M. Nowel (for with you I love gladliest
to talcke) that there was then any dissension in doctrine at all? Can you
reckon us up any diversity of opinions touching belief in all the realm of
England at that time? Will you say they had no true doctrine at all, and
therefore no consent in true doctrine? If you say so, then name us a time when
there was ever true doctrine in England, that such a time being known, it
may be proved unto you, that there were no such sects and schisms then, as
rage amongst you now. Note unto us the year and religion used at any time
since our realm was first christened, when you write next, that we may
ask you whether at that time Cau^torbury, Rochester, Glocestre, were of one
opinion concerning the presence of Christ's most blessed body and blood in the
sacrament, and London, Winchester, and Dirham, of a clean contrary, as they
are now that occupye these rooms. Who has not heard of a sermon latelye
preached before the Queens majesty in the defense of the real presence, and
the preacher called of his brethern for his labor an ass in a Rochet, the
Sermon it self, by a mighty Samson shortly after as it seemed confuted? Is
this a consent in true doctrine M. Nowell? Have you not heard off these
Sermones? Or if you heard them did you nodde there while and bear so little
away, that you have clean forgotten the whole matter, telling us now scarce
out of your sleep, that you have as much consent in true doctrine as ever
was in any realm at any time? How many of your brethern be of Verons mind
touching predestination? Let M. Moulins the usurper of the Archedeaconry of
London your neighbor, tell you M. Nowell, why he did excommunicate M. Thomas
Walbot a ministre in London. Let the said Walbot instruct you who they are
that in his learned supplication to M. Doctor Parker, he calls Florinitians.
Tell us M. Nowell whereof it proceeds, that three of the most grave, modeste,
and learned amongst you, men, to say the truth, in all respects (heresye
set a part) worthy to bear the office off M. D. Parker. M. Cheyny. M. Gest.
true bishops in Christ's church, are of their subjects so contemptuouslye
set at naught: whereof I say it proceeds, that one is called Matthewe meal
mouth, a Lince wolsy bishop etc. that the other has Moyer the ministre of
Wootton under headge borne out against him, the third termed an Ass, but of
this that there be schisms and sects amongst you? Are you ignorant M.
Nowell what communion M. Whittingham celebrated at Duresme, not only against
the mind of his bishop, but the order appointed also by the communion book?
Never heard you what a singular and strange manner off baptism he devised and
ministered at Duresme? Is all this in your eye consent in true doctrine, when you
agree not amongst your selves neither in the substance of the chiefest
Sacraments, neither in the manner of their ministration? Are we ignorant
think you of the Anabaptists, Arrians, Eluidians, and whole swarms of these
and other heretics, that lie smoothering in corners looking for the joyful
time of their deliverance in to the world and broad light, as you and your
fellows did 30. years ago? Are we ignorant thereoff, because when some of
them sturring before their time are brought before your bishops, they are
with good words (of great policy) dismissed, with exhortation to them to
live like quiet subjects, etc. Lest such hasty and untimely teeming, might
be not only the utter ruin and overthrow of all those heresies that having
now continued almost twenty years begin to grow to man's state, but of so
much fair issue also as that cursed moother is like to bring furthe
hereafter? Judge you us to be such doltes, and so deprived of common sense,
that we understand not to what end the favor showed to an Anabaptist, an
Eluidian or any other heretic, for the cruelty practiced on the catholic,
tends? Argues it not to the world that you seek rather means politikely
for the time to stay them, then utterly for ever to repress them?

Well, thus much off your private dissensions, and lurking heresies (whereof
one of late in spite of all polycie sustening Verons heresy touching
praedestination.
to abide no longre burst out) has the blaste off common fame blown over to
us. What other priuey store of opinions and several doctrines may be found
emonge you, they know best that best are acquainted with you. We as we can not
know all, so we can not report all. This that has been brought is
sufficient to prove you M. Nowell a loud liar, until you show the like to
have been amongst us before your heresies began. The which because you
dispaired to be ever able to do (for you confess hereafter that there was at
that time a colored kind off quietness amongst us, fol. 56. b.) You
bethought you off a better council, that is, to say that amongst the
Apostles of Christ, the learned fathers of the council off Nice, and other
off no less fame in Christ's church, there have been also schisms and
sects. Your words are these.

And though there were not a perfect consent of all men in all points, what
merueile yeat were it, if that should happen amongst Nowell.
us, which was not altogether lacking amongst the Apostles themselves, etc.

This impudent and blasphemouse shifte you have borrowed Dorman.
of your Apology, the Apology of John Calvin, he of that great Lombard the
devil him self. But here I beseech Staphilus in Epist. ad Episcop Eystete^sen.
the considre with me good reader, what either a miserable and detestable
religion is this, either else what weak but shameless patrones has it
found, when such faults as be noted therein can no otherwise be excused, but
by sclaundring most wickedly the learned doctors of the church, the general
councelles of the same: yea the most blessed and gloriouse apostles them
selves. Tell these new gospellers that whereas the church of Christ is
Matthew. 5.
a city builded upon the top of a hill, a candell set in the house to give
light to all that be in it: a kingdom that reaches from sea to sea, and from
the East to the west, that Lucae 11. Psalm. 71.
their church that they boast of is a secret scattred congregation unknown
to all the world and to them selves toe, you shall have a peuishe proctour
step furthe and answer as M. Nowell did before: we take this objection as
Supra. fol. 39. a. 32.
no reproach being common to our congregation with the primitive church of
our savior Christ and his holy apostles, specially in the time of
persecution. Charge them as I do here with schisms, and you have heard the
answer thereto already. The reporter whereof and as many as before have used
this and like defenses: I can resemble to no worldly thing better, then to a
filthy and beastly sow, who being foul and bemired her self, never cares to
be clean, but fodeth on still in the durte beraieng all things that she
meets or rubbeth her self upon, as these schismatic proctours do, not
caring so much to purge them selves, as to lay their filthe upon other that
be clean, and to make them tomble and walowe in the mire as they do. Now to
this blasphemouse shift because it is in the confutation of In the 3. part
fol. 136. and seq.
the Apology so learnedly answered, I will say no more, but that it is most
directly repugnant to the holy scriptures, credentiu^ erat cor vnu^ and anima
vna. Those which believed (at the first preaching of the Act. 4.
Apostles) were of one heart and of one mind. It tends The Apostles varied
dot in doctrine.
openly to the defacing of that marcke which Christ as of all other the most
certain and suer to discern those which are his, gave to his disciples, when
commending peace In hoc cognoscent omnes quia mei Joan. 13.
discipuli estis si diligatis inuicem. In this (marcke) shall all M. Nowell
charge the Apostles, as the heathen philosophers did.
that finally it comes from the ethnike and heathen spirit of certain vain
philosophers as witnesses the learned father Cirillus the B. of Alexandria,
who made in his time this very objection that M. Nowell now does. The Lib.
1. contra lulianu^
which place may it please the learned reader to view, and there shall he
find, that this good bishop was so assured off that perfect agreement of the
Apostles, that he was not afearde to make the offer to those vain philosophers
(that so reasoned with him as M. Nowell does with me) to leave to defend them
any farther, in case they could prove any disagrement amongst them in
doctrine. Now that you have done with the Apostles, you come to the fathers
and doctors of Christ's church, of whom you say.

What wondre if that were amongst us touching some points, Nowell.
that was not wanting in the primitive church amongst the old fathers? Let
the variance amongst the bishops assembled at Nicene council: let the
contention between the bishops of the east and west church about the keeping
of Easter day, Behold an arrogant spirit, taking upon him to judge and
reprehende, the most virtuous and learned bishops of the East and west
church. Dorman.
a matter not worthy of such variance, be a witness thereof.

This vain objection, borrowed also of your Apology, as is almost
altogether what so ever you have here patched up in five leaves concerning
this matter of schisms, is in the answer thereto made, abundantly satisfied.
Thither I refer the (good reader) where as thou may find, that some of
these controversies here mentioned by M. Nowell were of matters indifferent and
not determined by the church, other some not of doctrine or religion, but off
private quarelles, as happened amongst the fathers in the council of Nice:
finally, some such, as be schisms (if they be schisms at all) in logike, not
in divinity or matters off faith: so in matters of weight arrested upon by
the determination of the church, such striffes can not be named, neither by
this schismatic proctour neither yeat by any other. So great cause we have
to give thanks to almighty God the preserver of his church, who has so
mightily defended the same, that when schismatikes and heretics have done all
that they can, for the better cloking of their dissension, to prove the like in
the fathers and learned doctors that have gone before, they being not able
with all that malice can devise or falsehode invent to spotte them there with,
are compelled at the last with shame enough to twhite this great post to a
pudding prick, saing that there be schisms amongst the catholics about
Genus and Species, and the rest of the predicables, because forsothe some men
be of one mind about them, and are called by a name agreeable to their opinion,
Nominals: other some off an other mind, and be called Realles. But you have
better stuff then this you will say, for you ask.

What be these Benedictines, Cistertia^s, Carmelites, Carthusians, Dominicans,
Franciscanes, with others like an huge number Nowell. 54. b. 25.
but names of popish schisms and sects? Who all forsaking the religion and
name of Christ, have chosen to be called religiouse, as by a special name of
a several religion, and to be named after Matthew. 23.
men their fathers on earth, forsaking the heavenly father etc.

That whereof your Apology for shame would say Dorman.
nothing, you, so much are you one alone more impudent then so many as were
the compilers thereof, set out to the vauntage, making a great matter thereof.
Your Apology says, I say nothing of so many diversities of friars and
mockes. You say, they shall not escape your hands so. You call their names,
the names of popish schisms and sects, their persons you charge with the
forsaking of the name and religion of Christ etc. Had it not been better for
you M. Nowell to have imitated also the countrefeit modesty of your Apology,
rather then by such unmerciful dealinge to slaundre and beelye your
Christian brethren? Thought you that you should be able to make any honest
nature believe, that these religiouse men whom you here name, professing to be
of this, or that order, should in so doing forsake both the religion and name
of Christ? What is, if this be not an impudent lie, of all other that I have
heard, most like to that made by your fellow Fox, when he says that
Bradforde was charged by the Queen's council that then was, amongst other
things with the believing Acts and monumentes fo. 1173 b.
and preaching of Christ crucified. What will these lieng Masters be ashamed
to feine that utter such untruths as these are? It is false that you say (to
color the better your slaunderousse report) that they have chosen to be
called religiouse as by a special name of a several religion. For as the
religion is not several but the same that is common to all true Christians: so
never gave the professors thereof any such name to them selves to be called
religiouse. The uniform consent it is of good men thorough out all the world
that has given them that name, as to those that having chosen a kind of life
more streighter and painful the^ the common sort of men have done, the
rather to atteine to the perfection (as much as man's infirmity will suffer
in this life) of that one religion which we all profess: have seemed best
worthy thereof. It is the manner therefore of conversation and living in this one
common religion, that seuereth the folowers thereof from the rest, not religion
Religion has two significations.
it self. Religion has two significations M. Nowell. The one concerns
faith, and so there is in all the world but one religion, to wit of the
catholic Christians, as S. Austen notes: the other pertains to virtue and
good life. And so there are both diversities and degrees of religion, as the
same S. Austen reconing up Anachoretes, Eremites, Cloister monckes, nonnes, and
colleages of religiouse, not without reioising therein obiecteth Lib. de morib.
eccl. Cath. cap. 31.
to the Manichees. But how forsake they the religion and name of Christ M.
Nowell, why tell you us not? Think you that it may be laufull for you in
print to use your pulpite talcke, and flowing in your ruffianly Rhetorike to
drop in slaunderouse lies, as you do, without all proof? These religiouse
men that you mention, follow Christ in poverty as the Apostles did, and many
holy men in all ages have done, and as Christ him self gave the young man
council to do, that asked what way he should take to get heaven, when he
bad him, if he Matthew. 19.
would be perfect, to sell all that he had, give it to the pore and follow
him. They vow chastity to be the more apt to serve Christ as the Apostle
says of them that be 1. Cor. 7.
unmarried. They renounce them selves utterly (by vowing obedience to their
head) which our Savior wills Lucae. 9.
them to do that will follow him. In all this what is there to be misliked?
where is any forsaking of Christ's name and religion? Where are the popish
schisms and sects, that you rauingly talcke of? If these be schisms and
sects, if to live thus be to forsake Christ's name and religion: then is
Christ the auctor of our schisms, then have the holy fathers Paulus,
Hilarion Anthony, Basile, Hierome Austen, yea the Apostles them selves
forsaken Christ's name and religion. Who both have prac^ised this kind of
life in them selves, and earnestly comm^n did the same to their folowers. O God
for thy mercy how perilouse are the days that we live in? How far are the
heresies of our time passing those which in times past have been raised up,
and have raged in thy church? This manner of life which M. Nowell here
declameth against, and calls schismatic, persuaded by Christ, practiced
by the Apostles, and from their time continued in the church till ours, as
the stories of all ages bear witness, has been by good men always
honored, by tirantes and infidelles wondered at, even by the worst kind of men
well spoken of, only proud protestants, and licentiouse Libertines, who
neither can say well nor do well, call it schismatical, term it a for saking
of Christ's name and religion. Whereof as we have here by one of them a
glimmering in general words: so has his fellow given us a perfect sight and
full view thereof, in the combat that he keeps with the blessed spirit of
that holy saint, then whom since the Apostles time I may be bold to say,
there lived not one that expressed Fox keeps a co^bate with S. Frau^ces in his
Acts and monume^tes fol. 70
more near the life and conversation of our savior, S. Frauncis him self.
He calls him Assisian ass (because he was borne in a town called Assisium)
rude idiot, and Frantike frauncis: him self being as very an ass as ever was
bread in the mountains of Arcadia for so saing, a right idiott for calling
the wisdom of God foolishenes, 1. Cor. 3.
and if not when he made that houge donghill, yeat surely at that time when he
imagined him self to be an Vrinall, a frantike Fox. And why gives he to him
these reprochefull titles I pray you? Forsothe he calls him Ass, rude
Ideott etc. because (I will use his own words) hearing upon a time how
Christ sent furthe his disciples to preach Foxes testimony of Saint Frauncis.
he thought to imitate the same in him self, and his disciples, and left of
shoes, (...) but one coat, and that of Vile clothe, instead of a latchet to
(...), and of a girdle he took about him an hempen cord, and ^ appareled his
disciples, teaching them to fulfill (for so he speaks) the perfection of the
gospel, to apprehende pouertye, and to walk in the way of holy simplicie.
He left in writing to his disciples and folowers, his rule, which he called
Regulam euangelicam. i. the rule of the ghospel, as though the gospel of Christ
were not a sufficient rule to all Christian men but it must take his perfection
of fra^tike Frau^cis. Hitherto this fra^tike fox. Now whether these be just
causes to storm and took on as he does against this blessed saint (for
either these be the causes or he gives none at al) let the wise and godly
reader judge. Whereas he calls him frantike, for calling his rule the rule of
the ghospel, what would he have said of him, if he had termed it a rule of
man's invention, which now rages so for calling it the rule of the gospel?
But he quarelleth with him, because by this rule given by him to his disciples
it should seem that the gospel off Christ were not a sufficient rule etc. O
fond man. By that means might he also call S. Paul frantike, for writing:
Follow Philipp. 3.
me brethern, and mark them which walk so, as we have given you the example:
As though the example of Christ were not sufficient, but it must take his
perfection in saint Paul. For even as S. Paul willed the Philippenses none
otherwise to follow him, then as he followed Christ: so did saint Frauncis give
no other rule then Christ had given before, as the title of his rule it self
does declare. And as S. Paul willed them to follow him because he followed
Christ, so delivered S. Frauncis to those that would follow him, that rule of
Christ to be embrased, in such sort as he had given them the example before.
This fox runs on his course, and spares not with his tail to cast his
urine in men's eyes. For he adds: This Frauncis as he was superstitiouse Fox
counts it superstition to cast away worldly Gods.
in casting all things from him, even also the girdle, girding a coarde about
him: so in outewarde chastising of him self: so straight he was to him self
(leaving the ordinarye remedy appointed by God) that in winter season he
covered his body with yse and snow. He called poverty his lady, he kept
nothing over night. Merueile not now good reader if M. Nowell call religiouse
men popish schisms and sects, if he charge them with forsaking the religion
and name of Christ, when thou hear the abandoning and casting away of
worldly gooddes, the embrasing of poverty, the free committing of a man's
self to Gods providence, without carcke or care what shall become of him on
the morrow (according to Christ's own counsel) the chastising off Matthew. 19.
and 6.
the body to make it seruiseable to the spirit, used by saint Paul, when I
say thou hear all this expressly called superstition, cease to merueile
any longer. Of this blessed 1. Cor. 9.
saint S. Frauncis, I could say much listed I to make impertinent
discourses. Although of his virtue and holiness there can be no greater
testimony, then that his ennemies them selves can find nothing to object
against him but that which Chirste and his Apostles taught and practiced, and
every good man should wish to be in him self. For which cause Henricus
Pantaleon an heretic as M. Fox is, but yeat of a more calmer spirit, speaking
of him in his Chronographie, uses these words: S. Franciscus Asisius Page 95.
Hispanus, sanctitate and eruditione illustris in Italia claret. S. Frauncis a
spaniarde of the town of Asisium, famous for his holiness and learning
florisheth in Italy. Well you see good readers what Nowelles our unhappy age
that can abide nothing that well is, has brought furthe. You see what foxes
Satan the master of the game has vnkenelled in our country of England to
destroy our Lords vineyarde. You are not ignorant what flesheflies and canon
crows have builded their neastes even in the church off God. Our Lord
grant us as we see them and know them, so to flee them and avoid them. But
now to return to M. Nowell, some man may happily ask me what answer I make
to the scripture noted here in the marge^t forbidding expressly that we call
not men our fathers on Fol. 54. b. 31. Matthew. 23.
earth which these ordres of religiouse men do. To this I answer with
Euthimius, Theophilact, and S. Hierom upon this place, that we are not by these
words forbidden to Euthimius Theophilactus, Hieron. in. ca. Matthew. 23.
call them that begot us either to the world by the flesh, or to God by the
spirit, fathers. The words of Euthimius are these. Hoc dixit non prohibens
vocari patres eos qui iuxta carnem genuerunt etc. This Christ spoke, not
forbidding them to be called fathers who have begotten other either carnally or
spiritually, but that we might know who is chiefly and as the very first
cause to be called our father. For that father of ours is god only that is in
heaven: they that begette us after the flesh or after the spirit, be worckers
together with God and ministres rather of our nativity. He says therefore,
call none your father in earth, as your chief father, and first cause (of
your being) for that father is but one which is in heaven. With Euthimius
agrees Theophilact, saing of this place. No^ vt nemine^ patrem vocent, sed ne
ignorent quem principaliter patrem vocare oporteat. Not that we should call no
man father, but that we should not be ignorant whom we ought specially to
call fathers S. Hierome moves this very objection upon this place, How then
the monckes of Aegipt, and Palestina were called fathers, how S. Paul contrary
to this precepte 2. Cor. 5.
(forbidding as well the name of master as of father) called him self the
master of the gentiles. To the which he answers agreing with Euthimius and
Theophilact, that there is one principal master, one special father, that
all other be fathers and masters, but not properly. Thus called S. Paul the
Corinth. His children and him self 1. Cor. 4.
their father. Thus called the monckes in S. Austens time their heads fathers.
Thus call those of S. Benedicte Lib. de morib. eccl. cathol. cap. 31.
his order S. Benedict their father, because Christ wrought by him as an
instrument this spiritual birthe in them. Thus do the Cistertians,
Carmelites, Chartusians, Franciscans, with the rest. Amongst whom I can not
but note how warely and wisely you passed over the Augustines, left you should
either have been driven to make S. Austen the auctor of a popish and
schismatic sect, or else be compelled to recant your words. Now for
answer to your scripture most untruly applied, I say, that in that sense
which Christ forbids us to call men our fathers, that is as our chief
and special fathers, either carnal or spiritual, the Benedictines,
Cistertians Carmelites etc. never called any man their father, acknowledging
allwaies and confessing, that that father is but one, god him self which is in
heaven. M. Nowell marching on lustely in his lies and untrue application of
scripture, adds:

And continuing and acco^plishing the schism first begone in Nowell. fol. 55.
a. 1. 1. Cor. 1.
S. Paul's time, after the example of those who said, I am off Paul, I of
Cephas, I of Apollo, saing I am of Dominicke, I of Benedicte, I of Frauncis,
who also may directly answer S. Paul asking, was Paul or any other saving
only Christ crucified for you? Yea may the franciscanes say, S. Frauncis was
crucified for us of his family, and behold the wounds in his side, hands,
and feet.

It lotheth me to see how shamefully you abuse the Dorman.
most holy and sacred scriptures. The schism that was amongst the
Corinthians was in a most necessary point of doctrine, to wit, about the
grace conferred in the sacrament of baptism, each of them thinking that the
virtue thereof depended upon the excellency of the ministre that ministered it,
as both by the text it self and the judgment of S. Austen thereupon is
most evidently to be seen. Now is this diversity of professions in
religiouse De praedes. Sanctorum cap. 5. lib. 3. contra. Crescon. Grammat. cap.
1^.
men, not in doctrine or faith as was theirs, but in manner and trade of life,
which all though it be in some streighter, in other some looser, yeat because
all tend to one end, that is to the perfection of the gospel, allthough not
by one means, and agree beside in the three substantial points of their
profession, chastirie, poverty, and obedience: you can by no means call them
schisms. It is a foul lie therefore M. Nowell, that you labor here to color
with the pretense of gods word, to say that religiouse men do follow the
example of those, who said I am of Paul, I of Cephas etc. Who agreing all in
one faith and doctrine, how ever they differ in certain outewarde
observations, say not neither (as you also untruly report) I am of Dominike,
I off Benedicte etc. But I am of that order that S. Dominike was, that is to
say, I have professed to serve God in such sort as S. Dominike while he
lived did, and so of the rest: none of them in the mean season preferring
their patrones the one before the other, or judging them selves to be the
better for following this rule or that, but leaving the judgment thereof to him
who in the day of the revelation of his just judgment shall give to Romans 2.
Six lies in 8. lines.
every one according to his worckes. To conclude therefore, you have here in
eight lines made no fewer the^ six lies. The first is in calling the diverse
orders of religion that are conscience to lie any more for a while, and
therefore you dare not precisely affirm, that the franciscanes do say that S.
Frauncis was crucified for them, but say that they may say so. Blessed be
God you can not charge them M. Nowell that any such thing they do say,
which seeing you can not, how holds the argument I pray you, whereby you
prove them schismatikes such as were in S. Paul's time, because they may so
say? Now M. Nowel what may not you say, and so prove yourselfe, not only a
schismatike, but also an heretic if all things which you may say you
should be also charged in deed to say? You may say (for some of your
schoolefelowes have said so much Lucas Sternberger of omuluke in Morauia
Staphil. in English fol. 112. a. Instit. li. 3. cap. 23.
before you) that to worship the name of the blessed Trinity, is to imagine
falsely three Gods: you may say and must say if you will follow your
Master Calvin, that God is the auctor of their damnation that are damned:
would you now be contented because you may say thus, and yeat worse toe,
if worse may be, that one should conclude against you that you be a
schismatike or an heretic. And yeat who sees not, that such a conclusion
were much more liker to be true, your fellows and Master having taught such
opinions before, then this wherewith you burden these pore Franciscanes, of
whom there was never yeat any I believe that had so idle a brain, as to
imagine so vainly of S. Frauncis and wickedly both, as you have done. You
proceed in your pastime and say.

If S. Paul ask again, is Jesus Christ divided? Yea, may a false Nowell.
Hypocrite one of the sect of the Jesuits say: for we have the one part of
Jesus, thereof called Jesuits, and have left the other part Christ, to the
seely souls abroad, to hold them selves contented therewith, and with the
name of Christians thereof derived.

When you speak off a sect of Jesuits, I know not Dorman.
what you mean. I may guess that you mean those religiouse men that are
called of such as know them. The company or society of Jesus. If that be
your meaning what have you to say to them? Mary say you, one of that sect
may say Jesus Christ is divided. And you, may not you also say so if you
list M. Nowell? Who doubts but that you are in as good possibilite to say so
as they or any other? Why then, because both you and they, and all other may
say so, are you therefore and they, and all other schismatikes, hipocrites, and
so furthe? But why may they say so more then any other. For so the because
they are called Jesuits. For so the they be not so called truly. Look in the
decrees of the The profession of the clerks of the society of Jesus.
Late council holden at. Trent, and there you may learn how they be called.
They bear the name as I said, of a company gathered together in the name of
Jesus to serve him wholly and perfectely, abandoning all worldely care. Their
profession is to teach the liberal sciences to youth without reward, to
bring up their company in the study of divinity, in knowledge of the tongues
as well the vulgar and common, as the learned and principal tongues, the latin,
greek, and Hebrew, to preach at their home, to convert infidelles abroad to
the faith, and heretics to the church, and all this in the name of Jesus, and
for the love of Jesus. Hereafter you find fault M. Nowell with such ordres of
religiouse men, as bear the names of sinful men, as of S. Benedicte, S.
Dominike, and S. Frauncis: now you blame them which bear the name of Jesus
him self, as you imagine. Why wright you so contrarily, but because it is not
the name that grieueth you so much as the thing, the order, the rule of
religiouse men. The which because you are notable to reprove so truly as you
are (a man even made for that purpose) to scoff at the name wretchedly, you
floorishe agaainst the coat, and foyne against their garments, but their
order you can not reprove, their body you can not perce unto. For speak of
the order, life, and behavior of these whom you call Jesuits, and speak truly
M. Nowel, and one colleage of that company, as for example that in Rome, or in
Conimbra of Portugal, shall shame for virtue and learning (beside the
sincerity of religion) al your congregations of protesta^tes what so ever or
where so ever they be. The miraculouse co^uerting to the faith of infinite
millions of infidelles, in more then 20. diverse kingdoms of the East and
West India^s, and other most ample countries of late years discovered, the
miracles by the^ wrought, the Apostolical travail by land and by see a of
these good fathers, the cruel martyrdom of many for preaching the faith of
Christ to infidelles (all which may at large be seen in the epistles called
Diuersi auisi etc. in the Italian tongue, set forth from the year 1551. until
the last of 1564. in four several parts) do evidently declare, babble and
prattle, rane and rage as much as you list, that their order is no schism or
hipocrisye as you lewdely talk, but a blessed and learned company of holy
men, raised up by God in these wicked days, both to stay the faith ready
to fall in these parts, to plant it in other places where it was never heard
of before, and finally for the utter ouerthrowinge Augusta. Dilinga. Prussia.
Brunsberg. Vienna. Ments.
of heretykes where so ever theey be, as in Germanye especially (where diverse
learned colleages are of them) to the no small heart burning off your fellow
protestants and you M. Nowell, God be praised they have done. Which old
grudge made you I believe in this place more spitefully to speak off them, then
of any other order of religiouse men. For thus you continue yeat to inuey
against them.

Why is Jesus one then and Christ an other? Be there two Nowell.
Christ's then, or one divided into two? One of these must needs be.

Neither is Jesus one and Christ an other, neither are Dorman.
there two Christ's, nor one divided in two, neither was this the meaning of S.
Paul when he asked whether Christ were divided, how ever it please you
pleasantly to dally thereuppon, abusing the holy scripture most wickedly to
serve your scoffing and railing spirit. If there had been amongst the
Corinthians no other schism then that some of them for the love of Jesus
Christ leaving all worldly substance and hope thereof; had assembled them
self in to a company together, to preach, to teach, to instruct freely all
men, and that for Jesus sake, professing to be called by the title of a
company gathered together in his name, and other some not minding to follow
such high perfection continuing the common course of life were called by the
common name of Christians, he would never we may be suer have asked whether
Christ were divided. And surely if this should have been S. Paul's mind, I
see not but you might have brought a more evident place, then you have brought
any yeat, to prove that even in S. Paul's time Jesus Christ was divided, and
that so there were then schisms. For in the Acts of the Apostles we Act. 11.
read, that at Antioche the disciples were first called Christians, and then
if S. Paul chanced to be in that company, as it is not to be doubted but he
was of that company, you might prove S. Paul by his own words to have
divided Jesus Christ, and so to be a schismatike. For the text has you wot
well, that the disciples were called Christians, not Iesuchristians. But God be
praised M. Nowell, S. Paul had no such meaning as you would make the world
wene he had, no nor any such words neither as you ascribe to him, and
therefore you have most wickedly falsified the scriptures the more pleasantly
to scotne and scoff at the servants of God. S. Paul's words M. Nowell
falsifieth the scripture. 1. Cor. 1.
are. Nunquid diuisus est Christus? is Christ divided? Why make you him to
say, is Jesus Christ divided? Was there no other vauntage to be found
against those whom you call Jesuits but to make such a homely shift as this
is? Now Jesus be praised therefore, in whose name they are gathered together.

Else if Jesus Christ be not two but one (as he is most certainly Nowell.
one) and being not divided (as he most certainly is whole) then are you
Jesuits, were your religion good, nothing else but Christians.

It were pity to interrupte your pastime, otherwise I Dorman.
would put you in remembrance that there be no such religiouse men (as you
fantasy) called Jesuits, but then were all the sport marred: and therefore
let the societye of the name of Jesus be called for your pleasure at this
time, Jesuits. And now I say to your objection, that if you take Jesuits
precisely for all that believe in Jesus Christ, I grant to you, Jesuits and
Christians are all one. But they are not called Jesuits M. Nowell (if they
were so called at all) because they believe in Jesus Christ. So they believed
before they were Jesuits. But why they are called as they are, you have heard
before. And thus this argument of youres is proved to be but a sophisme, which
being thus overthrown, all that you heap thereupon hereafter, falls down
also, as when proceeding in this lewd kind of talcke, you say.

Then are all Christians Jesuits also, then do you in vain Nowell.
brag of a several name of religions, if your religion and ours be one.

All Christians are Jesuits, and all Jesuits are Christians Dorman.
touching the faith and belief in Christ. But in that some of a more passing
love to the honor of God become to be of the compaine of such as forsake the
world, the pleasure and liberty thereof to follow Jesus only, to preach his
holy word to infidelles, to convert heretics, to instruct youth in good
learning, to profess the tongues, Grammar, Logike, Rhetorike, Philosophy and
Divinity, without reward or penny taking: in that I say some addicte them
selves to this trade of life, and are therefore called the company or society
of Jesus, not every Christian is such a Jesuit M. Nowell. You your self
were not I am suer when you received your stipende for teaching at
westminster: whether you be now suddenly become such a Jesuit, that other men
know better then I. Where you say that they brag of a several name of
religions, that is one of your ordinary lies M. Nowell. Would God you and I
with other that have not yeat perfitely renounced this wicked world, could as
well practice in our doings that lesson of S. Paul: modestia vestra nota sit
omnibus hominibus. Phillip. 4.
Let your modesty be known to all men, as they have done and to the great
increase of Christian faith, daily do. Again their religion is not several
in respect of faith which they profess, being no other then that one known
faith of Christ's universal church, but of manner and kind of living, which
may be diverse without fear off schism.

But if your religion be hypocrisy (as it is in deed) then have you stirred
up an horrible schism dividing and cutting the gloriouse Nowell.
name of Jesus, in the which only is salvation: yea tearing Christ him self
in pieces, infinitely more wickedly and cruelly, then ever did the wicked
soldiers that crucified Christ, who had a remorse to cut his coat a sondre.

Hitherto M. Nowell has wrangled about the name, Dorman.
supposing the religion of those of the society of Jesus, as good as his. And
truly were it no better, it were but a starcke lump of heresies, partly old
newly scoured: partly new lately invented. Now he comes to the religion it
self, and upon a bare supposition that it is hipocrisy, this lusty Rhetorician
discharges a peale of threateninges, and concludes upon the same, that the
professors thereof are a horrible schism, dividing, tearing and cutting
Christ him self, and so furthe. But what if the religion of those whom you
call Jesuits be no hipocrisy M. Nowell? You bid me prove that. On gods name
I say it is no hipocrisye in deed. How think you have I not well and
substantially proved it? Do not I prove it to be no hipocrisy, as you prove it
is hypocrisy, when you bring only to prove it this bare assertion of youres
(as it is in deed): as though every word that you spoke were the gospel it
self? If you say that you minded not to prove it but to affirm it, then it
shall be enough for me also to affirm the contrary only, without any need to
prove it at all, attending after your proof, that so I may have some matter
to answer to. Therefore I repeat again, if the religion that you speak of
be no hipocrisy as it is none in deed, then have you maliciously lied. When
you speak of cutting the gloriouse name off Jesus Christ, the tearing of him
self in to pieces, you put us in remembrance of that miserable and most
horrible tearing that you have made of Christ, you cause us to think how you
have cut his mystical body the church by schisms and heresies, how you
have haled and mangled his sacraments, how you have rent his true body in that
most blessed sacrament, how you have trodden it under your beastly feet,
infinitely more wickedly and cruelly on the altar, the^ did those wicked
soldiers that crucified him on the cross.

And lest all these sects of hipocrites should not be known Nowell.
sufficiently, by only diversity of names, they have by other infinite ways
and means travailed to sever their sects a sondre, studieng for division as
for the best, and flieng all show of unity as the worst of all things.

The Catholics being sufficiently proved schismatikes Dorman.
by the diversity of names, M. Nowell will not stay there, but by other
infinite means and ways he will (he says) prove the same. Now I pray you
good Readers marcke well these infinite means and ways. For except they were
of great force, M. Nowell you may be suer, would have contented him self
with such stuff as he has in such abundance brought allreadie, without
heaping any more.

Wherefore to their diversity of names, they have joined diversity Nowell.
of fashions, and diversity of colors in their apparel, diversity of
girdles, hose and shoes, diversity of shauing, diversity of going, becking
and bowing, diversity of diete and meats, diversity of reading, singing, and
tuning, diversity of church service, and diversity of rules of life.

Who is it now M. Nowell that magno conatu magnas nugas Dorman.
agit? That plaieth the triffler so earnestly? Who proves quidlibet ex
quolibet, all things of every thing? What great triffles utter you to prove a
schism amongst religiouse men? What childish diversities heap you together
to prove the horrible crime of schism? If these diversities be (as you say
they are) the very property of schisms and sects: what shall we say to
our serving men, that go in diverse liuories, the aldermen of London that go
in one color, and the burgeoises and meaner Citezins that go in an other?
What will you make of the grave Judges and learned Seria^tes at the law. Shall
they be schismatikes and sectaries, because the one sort is cladde in scarlet,
the other in fine black? Doctors in the university in their scarlet gowns,
and Masters of Art in their school habit, are they sects by your judgment
M. Nowell? Your self with your long gown and square cap, maintain you a
sect because you go otherwise apparailed then other lay me^ do? Or if
judges, Doctors, Aldermen, scholars, serving men, may have diversity of
fashions, diversity of colors in apparel, and yeat this diversity in them
no property of schisms and sects: may not religiouse men also being of
diverse vocations and professions, have the like diversity of appareile and
such other things, without suspicion of sects and schisms? Let your wisdom
if you say nay, instruct us when you write next and show the cause why. But
I pray you good sir, that affirm so peremptorily that this diversity is the
very property of schisms and sects, have you any scripture that leads
you to say so? Have you any learned writer within the first six hundred
years that gives this marcke to know schismatikes by? Is there any beside
your self and the Apology, and some other of like credit, that describes
schisms and sects by this diversity? Nay if this diversity that you
vainly object to us, were the very propretie of sects and schisms, might
you not perhaps by that means prove Christ and his Apostles schismatikes?
For as you have no scripture to prove that they went al in one liuory, so is
the likelihode and presumption on the contrary part, that they went diversely
appareiled. But how so ever they were clothed, this is most certain, that
those good men that wandered about the world in pelttes and gotes skynnes, of
whom S. Paul makes Heb. 11.
mention, and says that the world was not worthy of the^, had apparel diverse
and distinct from other men, and yeat I trust you will not make them
schismatikes.

As for the other diversities that you gather, as of shauing, going, becking,
bowing etc. Who would ever have thought that a man of your qualities had been
so scrupulouse or superstitiouse, as to requier that all men should be shaven a
like, that they use the like gate in going, the same manner of becking and
bowing, and such like? But if in shauing there must needs for the avoiding of
schisms be one uniform fashion, why not in clipping I pray you M. Nowel? And
then you might do well, when you preach next, sobrely to persuade with the
barbers, that they cut hereafter all men's beardes alike, all a la marquesato
all a la philippina, all a la moresca, all forcked, all square, or otherwise,
as to your wisdom shall seem best, so that all be a like and schism hereby
avoided. Let your discretion also prescribe some one uniform manner of going,
becking and bowing. Now concerning diversity of diete and meats, you will
not I think take upon you to prescribe al England one diete and one kind of
meat, you will rather turn it over to the physician, and bid him under perile
of schism to appointe one such diete to the whole realm. But if this be a
note of schisms or sects M. Nowell for one order of religiouse men to use one
diet, an other to feed after an other sort, both of them notwitsta^ding
susteining nature with no other then with such as by order and law they may:
what are they I pray you, that in the holy time of lent when all the world
absteineth, and from the Apostles time hitherto ever has absteined from flesh,
do then of al other times most greedily desire the same? That religiouse men
have not allwaies observed uniformity neither in cutting their hear, neither
in their diete, amongst other of the ancient fathers none witnesses more
evidently then Epiphanius the B. of Cypres: who describing the form of the
church in his days, when he comes to make mention of the religiouse men,
writes thus. Quidam vero ex solitaria^ vita^ degentibus etc. Some of these
that Sub sin. lib. 3. contra haereses. Diversities of living amongst
religiouse men in the primitive church. Acto. 18.
lead this solitary life in the church, dwell in cities: Some continue in
monasteries, and get them far out of the way. Some have thought good to let
their hear grow for co^linesse sake, of the propre invention of their mind,
not of any commandment of the gospel or tradition of the Apostles: for S.
Paul the Apostle cut of this attire. There be beside other most excellent
conuersations of life, which are observed in the same holy catholic church,
I mean off them which abstain from all flesh, four footed beasts, birds,
and fish, yea eggs also and cheese, and other diverse rules of life, For
every one shall receive his reward according to his own labor. And some
truly abstain from al these: other some from four footed beasts only, eating
foul and all other meats. Some abstain from foul, and use eggs and fish.
Some eat no eggs neither, some eat fish only. Some abstain also from
fish, and eat cheese. Some there be that eat not so much as cheese. Beside
these, there be other which abstain from bread, other also from hard
fruits, nuttes, and all sodden things, many have the ground for their
bed. Other wear no shoes: other were priuey sack clothe VVearing of sack
clothe for penance.
for virtue and penance sake, which do truly well. For it is unseemly to be
seen openly wearing sack clothe, as some do. Hitherto Epiphanius touching
the diversity of manners amongst religiouse men in his time. How say you M.
Nowel, were you ignorant of this place when you made your description of
sects and schisms, or knew you of it? If you were ignorant thereof,
acknowledge at the length that you were deceived: if you knew it, cry shame to
your self that durst charge the Catholics with schisms, using such manners,
as the primitive church of Christ used? Now judge good Reader whether thou
had rather believe, Epiphanius or M. Nowell. The one, (Epiphanius) takes
occasion by these diuersityes to set furthe the beauty of the church: the
other (M. Nowell) to obscure thereby and deface the same. The one calls these
diverse fashions off living, praeeminentes vitae conuersationes, most
excelling conuerastions of life: the other, the vorie propertye of schisms and
sects. Epiphanius says they shall be rewarded: M. Nowell as much in effect,
as that they shall be condemned. But where has Epiphanius these words, for
that makes not a little to the matter? Forsothe in that work of his, where he
does nothing else but fight against heresies and sects, in the very end
thereof, when having declared before how heretics and schismatikes had
deformed the church, he would as it were oppose and set against them, the holy
life and virtuous conversation off such good men as had decked and garnished
the same. So that if these diverse fashions of liuinges had been the very
propertye of sects and schisms, he would never we may be sure that wrote
purposely against them, have commended the^ for good and virtuous. Now for
reading, singing and tuning, it greueth me to hear how far you be M. Nowel
from all good tune. As though it were either needful, or your churches at
home, used thorough out all the realm one tune and not diverse. But for this
matter I will leave you to the musicians mercy, for divinity makes no matter
thereof, I assure you. Yeat there is an other diversity and that is of church
service. If diversity herein make a schism, then woe be to you M. Nowell and
your companions, who have altered the common received service thorough out all
the latin church: Ex ore tuo te iudico serve nequam. But it is not every
diversity of church service that makes a schism, but only such diversity
as is done against order and law: I mean Gods law, the law off the
church, given by those spiritual rulers and governors whom Christ has
appointed for the building off his Ephesians. 4. Acto. 20.
mystical body the church, and to guide and rule the same redeemed with his
pretiouse blood. Is there any such diversity M. Nowell in church service
amongst religiouse men? Or how ever the same service be amongst them in this
point diverse, that in some places it is longer and has therefore mo
lessons, Antiphones, Responces, then in other: in some places shorter, and
therefore fewer (which proceeds of this that some of these ordres being
specially instituted to preach, as the Dominicanes and those of the Societye
of Jesus: other some to live in contemplations The cause of diuersitye off
church service amongst religiouse men.
and meditations, as the Carthusians, must bestow more time in study and
contemplation then in public prayer: other to be wholly in the church to
pray for their sins and the sins of the people, as the Benedictines and
other, who may and ought therefore to have their service longer) yeat all this
notwithstanding, the church service is in the substance thereof in all places
uniform. For all religiouse men worship one God, call upon his blessed
saints to help us, pray for the dead, etc. This because the whole church
of Christ does and ever has done, (deny it if you can) and you do not in
your service, the blow that you had thought to have fastened upon us is light
upon your own nowle, and your service thus far differing from Christ's
church, not theirs that agrees therewith, is schismatic. Your last
diuersitye is of rules and life. Is it any marvel good Reader, if they that
after the Apostles first practiced the imitation of their life, in renouncing
the world and vanites thereof, as S. Basile. S. Austen, S. Benedict, S.
Dominike, S. Frauncis, did deliver to their folowers diverse rules of life,
this considered that allthough Christ were the only marcke that they all shot
at, yeat the means that they used to compass and atteine thereto were diverse?
S. Dominike for example, had this special meaning to make Christ known to
the rude and ignorant by preaching. S. Frauncis both by word and example
enforced him self to persuade to the proud and arrogant, humility and
contempt of riches. Who can now deny but that such means are here to be
prescribed, as by the which the professors of this order or that, may sonest
atteine to their desired end? As it is in these, so is it in all other,
Benedictines, Carthusians, Bernardines etc. Amongst all the which, it
suffiseth us that you are able to name no such diversity of rules and life,
as being diverse one from the other, are any of them against the
commandments of God: whereas contrariwise how diverse so ever they seem to
you, they all agree in the end of glorifieng God, allthough they differ in the
means, the one worcking this way, the other that, and yeat every way good.

All times would fail me if I should or could rehearse all Nowell.
their diversities, which is the very propretie off schisms and sects.

Help the man to a day more, some good body for Dorman.
gods sake. Will you see so much worthy matter lost for lack of time to
utter it. If not a day, some man spare him an idle hour, perhaps it would
serve his turn as well as a year. O that there were now an other Johannes de
temporibus to lend you M. Nowell some of his time. But if the worst happen
that no such creditour can be found, rather take the morrow after Domes day,
or the Griekes calendes, and hold men in suspense till that time: put them not
out of all hope by such discomfortable words. Well we have all that we shall
have at this time I perceive, what conclude you therefore of these diversities
that you have rehearsed already? Forso the that they are the very propretie of
schisms and sects. Now iwisse M. Nowell if you had all times at
commandment, if you could prove no otherwise schisms and sects to be
amongst us then by this means, you need to take no longre day, the time that
you have spent already was long enough, and to long to without you had better
bestowed it. S. Austen teaches you an other S. Austens definition of a schism.
lesson to know schisms by, then this that you have learned of the Apology,
of Bale, and such like masters, of the diversity of coats, hosen, shoes
etc. For thus defines he a schism: Schisma est recens congregationis ex
aliqua sententiarum Lib. 2. cap. 7. contra Crescon. Crammat.
diuersitate, dissensio. Schism is a new dissension of a company by some
diversity of opinions. Now I pray you what schism or sect have you proved
all this while to be amongst Catholics, or what such schism or sect could
you prove if all times failed you not? The learned fathers Cyprian, Austen,
Optatus, and other, describe schismatikes to be such as set up chair against
chair, erect altar against altar. How far wide is this from your description?

These be those schismatikes and sectaries, with an infinite multitude Nowell.
whereof, of late England was replenished, of the which now thanks be to
God the realm is well rid.

Upon your false and untrue premises you infer as Dorman.
false and as untrue a conclusion. I will make therefore the conclusion true
and right for you. These be the religiouse persons, who embrasing the
perfection of christen religion, after the counsel of our Savior, after the
example of the Apostles, of the learned and holy fathers, S. Hierome S.
Austen, and S. Basile, who professing voluntary poverty, holy obedience, and
perfect virginity, served God both day and night, preached the Catholic
faith, prayed for all estates, relieved the poer about them, kept liberal
hospitalite. These be such, whose profession and order is blameless, though
the life of many were faulty, as it was also even in the primitive church, in
the time of S. Paul, of S. Basil, S. Hierom and S. Augustine, who yet have been
tolerated in Christendom for the good and virtuous sake, (as emonge all other
sorts of men, the evil are tolerated for the goods sake). These are they,
with a great multitude whereof, praised be God, and the devotion of such as
were the authors of such godly fundations, our dear country of England, not of
late only M. Nowell, but even sense the first coming of Christen faith in
to England, abunded, to the honor of God and wealth of the realm, of the
which now, thanks be to lewd Apostatas, to rennagat friars and monks, to
vowebreakes, and incestuous votaries, to vpstert protestants, the realm is
miserably spoiled, so that if you pass from one end of the realm unto the
other, of so many thousand monasteries, hospitals, alms houses, chapels and
cloisters as then stood, partly endued with bountefull lively hods, partly
charitably maintained of the inhabitants to the great weal of their souls, of
so many I say so standing, you shall not see one stand now, but either
defaced, or profaned, either all ruinouse, or in the hands of such, who use
it as temporal lands, not for the maintenance of spiritual exercises.

So that if you meet a thousand men and women, one after an Nowell.
other, and ask of them, of what religion be you, they shall al and every one
answer you, I am a Christian, we be all Christians: there shall not one
answer to you (as was wont under your head) I am of the religion of S.
Frauncis etc.

I told you before that this word (Religion) was considered Dorman.
two ways, either as it pertains to faith or to manners. In the first sense
there was never man nor woman yeat, that would otherwise have answered you,
not if you had met ten thousand one after an other, but that they were all
Christians. That they did customably otherwise answer, it was in this latter
sense, as taking those that asked them the question to mean of their rule and
profession of life not of their faith, whereof they had cause to think that
the demaunders of such questions being Christians were not ignorant. Of this
there can be no better proof, then that if in England when religiouse men
were there, of Fu^ladres, Spain, Italy or any place where they now be, a
known Iue or infidel should ask any religiouse man or woman, of what
religion they were, they would to such a one answer furthwith that they were
Christians, not Franciscanes, Dominicanes etc. because they would judge the
question to concern religion as it pertains to faith, not otherwise. And so
what have you gotten by this.

These so diverse sects of false religion abandoned now out of Nowell. fo. 56.
a. 1.
England, and the one true religion of our Savior Jesus Christ only there
remaining: I merueile with what face you can charge us with schisms and
sects, which is your own special sore.

These so diverse ordres of religiouse men being all of Dorman.
one religion by belief, and therefore no schisms nor sects of false
religion: these by your means being wickedly abandoned out of England,
whereas they remain yeat in all catholic countries to the inestimable
comfort of good people, and so many false religions, schisms and hesies
brought in by you in to their place, as well with us as else where, where you
have displaced them, I merueile with what face you can charge men and women of
one faith and belief, with schisms which is a breach of the common faith.
I merueile with what heart you could charge the blessed Apostles, the Nicene
council, the learned fathers, with norishing of schisms and sects emo^gest
them, for squaring only about private matters. I merueille with what stomach
you could allege schoolmen and Logiciners, to prove schisms* and sects
amongst the Catholics. I merueile with what unbridled boldenes you could
call the diversity of apparel, girdles, hose, yea shoes, diversity of meats
etc. the very property of schisms and sects. Last of all* I merueile, with
what face you can charge us with schisms and sects, which is your own
special sore.

And where you warn the renders upon experience of the multitude Nowell.
of schisms lately risen, sithen the forsaking of that one popish head, to
credit the ancient fathers as witnessing with you against us: you might as
justly warn them to credit the ancient Phariseis rather then Christ and his
Apostles: both for that the In psalm. 54
first heresy as S. Augustine says, sprang amongst the disciples off Christ
etc. and also for that in the Apostles time, some used such schismatic
sainges as these: we hold of Paul, some other, we hold of Cephas etc.
whereas there was no such dissension amongst the high priests and phariseis,
but great unity and concord amongst them against Christ's Apostles.

Now M. Nowell having done what he can to charge Dorman.
us with schisms, and knowing withal how simple the stuff is that he has
brought, has found at the length that it is best to renew his former plea,
that is, that it is no such great matter though they agree not amongst them
selves, especially seeing that, as before he told us that the Apostles were at
dissension amongst them selves: so here he will prove the like of the
disciples: and again to deface our unity and quiet agreement, he has
found it to be right good council to say, that that is no such great matter
as the which is common to us with the Phariseis against them, Christ's Apostles
and disciples forsothe.

Now is not here as I told you before a goodly religion, Protestants deface
unity.
that makes the Apostles and disciples of Christ schismatikes, that when it
can not have unity to maintain it, labors all that it can to deface it?
But now let us hear how he proves that their side ought not to be charged
with schisms and sects, because I might as justly (he says) warn men to
credit the ancient phariseis rather then Christ and his Apostles. Why then
were there sects and schisms between Christ and his Apostles as there are
between Luther and his folowers? or agreed the Phariseis in unity of one truth
not only against Christ and his but amongst them selves also, as we
Catholics do and ever have done against Luther (whom in this argument M.
Nowell you resemble to Christ and his Apostles?) For sects and schisms to be
between Christ and his Apostles, that you dare not plainly affirm, but
whereas that being the pretense whereby you would defend your schisms, that
you should have proved: you leaving it altogether unproven, think your self
sufficiently discharged, because the disciples of Christ fell into heresy.
Not doubting but amongst the simpler sort, heresy being proved within less
then two lines after the mention of the Apostles in the disciples, they not
observing the difference between Apostles and disciples, would easily be
deceived, and believe that you had sufficiently proved the Apostles heretics.
For answer to this that you bring here of the disciples, I say in few
words: that these disciples were not of the Apostles, but of such folowers
and hearers of Christ, as forsook him before his passion, when he preached of
the blessed Sacrament, as it appears in the gospel. The Apostles remained
still with Christ their head, Joan. 6.
and forsook him not. Between Christ and them was most perfect unity and
agreement. How can you then I pray you, charge Christ and his Apostles with
schisms, because of the disciples departing from Christ? Let us grant your
imagination, if you ca^ not otherwise understand reason, that Luther were
Christ and Carolstadius, Melanchthon, with some other his Apostles. If this
your new Christ, and his Apostles agreeing all in one faith, some other
disciples coming to them should revolt and depart from them again, were
this now a just cause to call Luther and his company agreeing all in one,
schismatikes? I think you will not say so, at the least there is no reason,
why such departure should preiudicate or hurt them that remain quiet still
as they did before. If you will not, nor can not say thus of Luther, why say
you so off Christ and his Apostles? Why say you that we may as iustlye call
them schismatikes as we do you: whereas your false Christ and his own
Apostles never agreed together, and our true Christ with his his never
disagreed? And this is the cause why we call you heretics and schismatikes,
because you nourishe and encreasse those heresies and schisms, that sprung up
even with your first master and his scholars, as your selves can not deny,
and depart from Christ's known church (or else Christ had no church at
all) as those disciples off Christ that you speak off did. With whom your
resemblaunce is so much the greater, because that as these first heretics
departed from the church (Christ and his Apostles) because they would not
believe in Christ's doctrine of the blessed sacrament: so have you parted a
great nombre of you, from us for the same cause, and maintain the same
heresy as S. Augustine In psalm. 54.
calls it. Now as it were no good reason to prove us schismatikes, because
you are parted from us: being onoe as you can not deny, of us: so can no man
justly charge Christ and his Apostles with that crime, because his disciples
parted from him. And as I answer to this, so do I to your other objections
of the schismatikes in S. Paul's time, of those other also of the Nicolaites,
the Simonians, Cerinthians, etc. who all parting from the known church of
Christ, ought not to preiudicate the same. For their departure was always so
sensible, that the true christian might say with S. John. They have departed
from amongst Joan. 1. cap. 2.
us, but they were none of us. The Apostles and their company remained always
a visible and known church. So that these examples can nothing help to cover
your schismatic sores, whereas in Christ and the Apostles them selves,
there was never any breach of unity, which you should have proved
likewise, thereby to excuse your first Christ and his Apostles.

Whereas an other plea of youres is, that amongst the high priests and
Phariseis there was no dissension but great unity and concord amongst them
against Christ's Apostles: to that I say, that although they agreed in this
all to persecute the Apostles: yeat amongst them selves they were Joseph. lib.
Antiq. Iudaie. 13. cap. 8.
divided into sects and schisms, some being called Phariseis, other some
Sadduces, and yeat a third sect called Esseni, so that they resemble more
lively you protestants, then us catholics, agreing as the Phariseis did
against the truth, and divided also with them into sects amongst
youreselues. If you departed from us as Christ and the Apostles (you say) did
from the high priests and their church, then should you be at unity and
concord emo^gest your selves as the Apostles were, then must you show out of
the scripture, the fall of the church of Christ, the corruption of Esaiae. 6^.
the same, and the restitution in the latter days to come, all Esaiae. 66.
Hierem. 6. Ezech. 44 Habacuc 2. Act. 7. 13. and. 28.
foreprophecied in the law, as the Apostles proved out of the scripture, the
fall of the Sinagoge, the corruption of the high priests, the coming of
Messiah, the placing of the new law that should continue. When you can
prove this and defeat Christ's promise made of his church to be visible, and
universal over all the world, and to his church, to continue for ever, then
call us phariseis hardely Matthew. 16.
and spare not, call your selves Christ and his apostles, we give you leave.

For further excuse of your schisms and divisions, you fo. 56. b. 1.
tell us of the troubles that rose in Jury, and shortly after over all the
world, upon the preaching of Christ's gospel etc. If divisions and troubles
were then it is not to be merueiled at, our savior him self, saing of him
self: non veni pacem Matthew. 10.
mittere sed gladium, I come not to send peace, but a sword. But our age is
not now M. Nowell the primitive church, our faith is not now to be begone
of new. It has been with consent of all the world established these 12.
hundred years. And therefore your comparison is lewd, and untrue. You say
further.

And as justly might you charge the Apostles and their doctrine Nowell.
with those schisms, sects, and troubles, as you do charge us with those that
have risen in our days.

Ever you harp upon that string that you would be Dorman.
like the apostles, which (when you can prove that Christ promised to build an
other church, beside that whereof he made Peter the head, and that friar
Martine Luther should be the second Messiah, and Zuinglius or Carolstadius
the head thereof) then we will easily grant to you. But note again I pray
you M. Nowell, the difference of the schisms arising in the Apostles time, and
of your schisms arising in our time. The Apostles were not at division
amongst them selves: you are. The Apostles were before those schisms: you
have risen together with the schisms. Those schisms departed out from the
Apostles: your schisms are within your selves. Again see the agreement of
those schisms with youres, and confer the case of the state of the church
now, with that of the primitive church then. Those schisms and sects
departed out off the primitive church: even so have you departed now out of
the same church being of longre continuance. They being departed multiplied
into mo schisms, and parted into farther division, you being departed multiply
daily from schism to schism, and new sects have risen sense your departure
from Martin Luther. They troubled and disquieted the primitive church of the
Apostles: you trouble and disquiet the catholic church that now is. If you
demand the prouffe of this which I say, answer the book (which I am suer
you will never be hable to answer) lately set furthe in our tongue, most
truly called, The forteresse of the faith etc. And show us, as you will
stand to it hereafter, when the faith and light of gods holy word, which you
say has now of late sprung again, was extinguished, where, and by whom.

Where it is well known to the world, that our learned men Nowell.
have by their writings more oppugned and repressed the said sects then all
the papists have done.

This is that which I said before, that you in deed Dorman.
wright diligently one against an other, which is a most evident assurance of
your dissension in doctrine. And if these your writings were in the vulgar
tongues to be read of all men, there would be no better argument in the
world to disgrace your doctrine for ever. Whereas you compare your diligence
in writing with that of the catholics: if the late writings of learned
catholics of all countries, especially of Germany it self, were in deed
compared to youres, it should appear how false and untrue this is.

In deed we must needs confess a truth, that whilst we all remained Nowell.
under this quiet obedience of your Romish head, in one doctrine of his
traditions, there was a colored kind of qui^tnesse etc.

Foelix necessitas quae cogit ad meliora. Happy is the Dorman.
necessity which forces to the better. Here M. Nowell correcting him self,
for that before he charged us so heynously with schisms and sects, will
somewhat mitigate that cruel sentence off his, and therefore he must he
says, needs confess, that there was when we lived under the obedience off
the pope, a colored kind off quietness amongst us. Surely I am sorye M.
Nowell that we can not say as much off you, that we can find no time, when
amongst you there was so much as any shadow off colored quietness. But
do you remember with what schisms and sects you charged us before? The
Thomistes and Scotistes, the Nominalles and Realles, met they not daily at the
scooles? The Benedictines Cistertians, Carmelites etc. kept they their names so
priuey that they were known to no man? Their habit in some whit, in other
black etc. were men so blind they could not see? Their diverse diet, their
shauing, going, becking, bowing etc. were they things so privily used, that
no man knew of them? If these things were known to all men as they were, how
say you that there was a colored kind of quietness amongst us, when the
greatest and all the schisms and sects that you could falsely charge us
withal, were so far from all color, that M. No. well writes contraries.
they were manifest and open to the eyes of all men. And thus are you
manifestly contrary to your self, saing here that we had amongst us a
colored kind of quietness, and before, that lest the religiouse men whom you
call sects Fol. 114. a
of Hypocrites should not be known, they studied for division, and fled all
show of unity.

But when that Christ the auctor of that light, as he him self, Nowell. so.
57. a. 7.
and by his Apostles bewraied the errors of the Iuishe traditions by the said
light first springing, and withal troubled their unity and concord in the
doctrine of such traditions, and their quietness in their Sinagoge so settled
before: so now the same our savior, in the time by his wisdom appointed etc.

In this place M. Nowell opens to the world the secret Dorman.
judgments of God, about the restoring the truth quite extinguished in these
latter days. For proof whereof the indifferent reader may note, that he who
triumphs so much of holy scripture, and of the necessity of proving all
things by the express lettre thereof, brings now no one text or piece of
text, out of the whole bible. Yeat shall you see how weighty the matters are
that he affirms. First (he says) that our Savior in the time by his
wisdom appointed, has disclosed that the pope and his have obscured, hidden,
broken and forbidden the law of God. Again, that this he has done by the
light of his holy word again springing and shining to them sitting in
palpable darckenes etc. Now these points M. Nowell uttered by you without all
warrant of scripture, as they are the fundation of all your religion, so
contain they against our Savior, and his holy word most horrible
blasphemies, as the which importe an utter overthrow of the church, and such
a terrible Eclipse and defect of light in that clear son, wherein the son
of God has pitched his beautiful tabernacle, that the darckenes Psal^. 18.
you say was palpable, and could by no means be chased away, till a lewd
Apostata and ronneagate friar, the worst man by the judgment of his own
scholars that lived in his time, and worst able to bridle his affections, upon
malice, envy, and covetousness, restored the same again. All that follows you
build upon this fundation, the which being naught the matter laid upon it
must needs come down withal. And therefore it follows.

By this occasion, is there risen a like schism between you and Nowell.
us, as was between S. Paul and the Phariseis etc.

Here you heap nombre of lies together, laing to our Dorman.
charge, that the cause why we cry and barcke (you say) against you, is
because by this occasion of the light our gain is decayed, our quietness
troubled, our rest interrupted, our good cheer marred, our pomp abated. We
are not offendid with you for this M. Nowell. The cause of our misliking with
your religion, and why we call you schismatikes you dare not so much as name,
which is, because you separate your selves from Christ's church, because you
teach contrary to the scriptures, that the church of Christ prophesied by
the prophets, promised by Christ to continue for ever, has been quite
overthrown. To this because you can not answer, you feine other causes at
your pleasure to bring us into hatred. Of the which faults objected by you to
the catholics, I say generally as S. Austen did to the Donatistes obiecting
the like. In his omnibus nullum crimen orbis Li. de unit. eccl. cap. 2.
Christiani esse ostendimus, we show you that in all these things (which you
lay to us) there is no fault of the whole christendom. And again: ad
quosdam quippe illa perimere possunt, non ad vniuersum orbem christianum: for
those faults may perteine to some, they can not be the faults of al
Christendom. Leave therefore M. Nowel these extrauagant excursions, of railing
against the evil life of some, or abuses of certain, wherewith a great part
of this idle Reproufe of youres is stuffed, and come to the doctrine it self.
Prove us your negative divinity by the rule and trial of holy Scripture, by
the councels and decree of the church, or by the learned fathers if you be
hable. It is an easy matter says Saint Augustine to the Donatistes, either
for you Lib. de vuit. eccl. cap. 5.
to call us Phariseis, or for us to call you so: It is as easy for us to say
that you persecute us the true beleuers as the Phariseis persecuted the
Apostles, as it is for you to say (as you do here) that we follow the
Phariseis in persecuting you. It is as easy for us to say that you are like
painted graves, full of old rotten bones within, pretending outewardly Gods
word, contempt of the world, brotherlye charity, etc. being within
couetouse, whoorders up, great exactours of money, proud, cruel, with such
like, and so call you Phariseis, as it is for you to say and write the same of
us. But M. Nowell, though Christ as the searcher Romans 8.
and judge of men's hearts might boldly so pronounce of the Phariseis, whom
he knew better within then other did without, yeat we must not judge other,
lest we be judged our selves as the gospel teaches us. Briefly the strife
Matthew. 7.
will be endelesse, vain, and childishe, if in controuerfie of doctrine and
religion, such impertinent discourses be entremingled. Wisdom it had been
for you M. Nowell, to have pricked directly at the matter of schisms,
discharging thereof plainly your selves, by showing that you join in
communion with all the world, and not to have roued as you have done, now
here, now there, at no certain mark.

And so finally for this part of purgation of our selves, against Nowell.
fol. 58. a.
your sclaunders of schisms and troubles as by us raised, do we allege the
effect of the same parable of the strong man so quiet in his house until a
strongre then he came and disturbed him, which Christ our savior in like
sclaunder, rehearsed for defense of himself.

Although the parable served our Savior against the Dorman.
Phariseis, yeat it serves not you against the church off Christ. When you
can prove that which you only without proof blasphemously hitherto have
affirmed, making it as well of the application of this parable, as of all that
you else have said touching comparing of us to the Phariseis, your selves to
Christ, and his Apostles, the very foundation: that all faitheful Christians
were in that case when Martin Luther began first to preach, that the
Phariseis were at the coming of Christ, then apply it and use it, it will
well serve your purpose. Yeat truly to make this parable in some wise to serve
your turn, it makes well for your Sacramentaries against the poor
Lutherans, whom you have in deed not only disquieted, but driven from their
possessions in most places, and devoured also and swalowed into your
hongresteruen paunches, even as is said that Pharao dreamed of the seven lean
carrion oxen, that they had eaten up the fat. And so let Genesis cap. 41.
this parable and dream both if you will, serve your turn.

If the reader shall think that I have been to tediouse in answering Nowell.
this matter here but touched as it were by the way, I trust he will bear
with me therein, for that M. Dorman, as he began and floorished the first face
of his book, with blotting us with the sclaunder of schisms, so has he
hitherto continued in the same, and applied all his allegations out of S.
Cipria^, Basile, Hierome, Nicephorus, and others, chiefly to that purpose, etc.

The reader must bear with you in mo things then Dorman.
this, or else it will be wrong with you. And even in this me thinks, and so
I doubt not but other think to, wherein you crave pardon as having said to
much, he had ned^ to bear with you for saing so little. For your own defense,
till you prove us by Scripture that Christ's church should decaie and come to
utter ruin, and that so it did, you have said nothing: against us, till you
bring better matter then different opinions of schoolmen in disputable
matters, of Logiciners about the predicables, of religiouse men in clothing,
diet, going, becking, bowing, etc. you have said as little. The first sentence
that I prefixed before my book out of Saint Augustine, you have not yeat
answered. If you had answered it there as you pretended that you would, you
should not have neded here to have troubled either your self or the reader
with that matter. For answer once directly yea or nay to this, whether you
communicate with all nations, and with those churches founded by the Apostles
labor, and the matter is answered who be the schismatikes in few words, you
or we. Where you say that my allegations out of S. Cyprian, Basile, Hierome,
Nicephorus, were applied chiefly to this, to note you of schisms: I must
note, that you be here contrary to your self and your sainges before. For
M. Nowell contrary to him self.
in your reproufe upon these places, you make me to have such sense, as
though I had alleged them all directly to prove the popes supremacy. And for
that cause you labor with toothe and nail, to prove that they ought not so to
be taken.

Neither are they contented here with, but do also play with Nowell.
pictures very pleasantly as they think, in the which they painte out a
multitude of such heretics or rebels, as our confederates or allies, whose
opinions we do most abhor, and against whom we continually both preach
and wrighte.

Yea forsothe this was the matter in deed, allthough Dorman.
you be loathe to confess so much, that made you to lavish out your store in
defense of schisms and sects. It was this table, this arbor as you call it,
or crooked tree that made you to dance. But what say you to this tree I pray
you. You say, that we have placed there a multitude of heretics whose
opinions you do most abhor. We marvel not though you like not all, for
therein stands the grace of the table, that of so many sects as be there
set out, no one of them likes the other. You should have done well to have
named the opinions which you do abhor, as perhaps you would, had it not
been for waking some of your fellows that seem to be a sleep. That these
sects appear not all of them evidently amongst you, as they do in Germany
where your heresies first began, Why sects and schisms show not them
selves so evidently in England as they do in Germany
as that excuses you not being all members of that malignant church your
mother, so is it the less to be merueiled at, because the states of these two
countries are not like. England is ruled by one sovereign head, Germany by
diverse. Which is the cause that the heads being diversely affected in
religion, auaunce every of them that religion which likes him best. Whereas
in England you lack that commodity being under the rule of one only head,
which is an invincible argument to show how necessary in the church of God
it is, to have one head to govern the reast. Had you in England as they have
in Germany, your free cities, your dukes, your Lantgraues, your Palsgraues,
every one a king within his own dominions: O how yowre sects would triumph
in the courts of princes, what combattes they would keep in open pulpites,
that now dare not but by steal the and in corners, one of them snatche and
snarle at the other. As for your continual preaching and writing against
these sects, whereof you brag so much, what you preach against the
Lutherans, Anabaptists, Osiandrins, or any such like, I report me to them
which be your hearers. I think what so ever face you set upon it here, you be
cold and rare enough in that argument, and be as plentiful and whot as you
will, you shall have these heretics and such other in places where they dare,
say as much of you. As for your writing, you protestants at home have not
written any one word that is to be seen abroad against any sect of the
table, more then in some sely translations of your fellows books, as you
term by contempt that kind of exercise. So busy you are in doing the
message of your father in setting forth to the world your Sacramentarie
heresy, and defacing the popes authority, that as little leisour have you to
wright against other sects (if you mislike them as you pretend) as you have
to exhort me^ by preaching, to fasting, to prayer, to good worckes. And
therefore your writing I let pass as a manifest Lie. 51.
lie.

And all this do they for that they are not ignorant, that such Nowell.
though most false sclaunders, being yeat so importunely and continually laid
to our charge, are of much effect to offend the weak and simple, and to
stir up their hatred against us. And therefore they use such constant
asseuerations for arguments, as in their schools they are taught to do, when
they are destitute of due prouffes etc.

If we sclaunder you, how easy a matter had it been for Dorman.
you to have recovered your good name, by saing: There be not so many sects
sprung out of Luther as the table says there are, and then have named some
such as had been falsely noted in the same. The which because you have not
done (not for lack of good will as appears.) you have very much confirmed
the truth of the table. Whereas you stand upon the bare denial against
manifest proof, you make us in deed remember a saing of the schools: plus
potest asinus negare quam Aristoteles probare. But because this table offendith
you so much, you may perchance shortly have an other of allmoste 90. diverse
sects gathered together by the reverent father WILLIAM In Dubitantio suo.
LINDAN Bishop of RVREMVND. But perhaps you count this a sclaunder, because
you acknowledge but one religion of Jesus Christ, how many sects so ever
there be amongst you. For so it follows.

For we as we have no religion but only Christ's, so desire we Nowell.
to be called after the name of none but his, etc.

Which we M. Nowell? For so says every sect Dorman.
in the table as well as you sacramentaries do. It is not enough for you to
say that you have no religion but the religion of Christ, the contrary
whereof never heretic durst yeat in words profess. Prove it first, then say
it afterward. Begin from the Apostles and come to our time, and show your
religion in every age, as ours has A reasonable challenge to the protestants
of late been learnedly showed, and then brag that you have none but Christ's
religion. We offer you fair, refuse us not, in gods name and in the behalf
of his church I say, refuse us not. If you dare and mistrust not your cause,
procure us liberty freely to send in our books, and to other indemnitie for
having and reading the^. It is the thing, that (if you mean as you pretend
the planting of true religion in the hearts of all men) you should most
earnestly have desired: refuse it not therefore being freely offered. It is the
thing, that on your knees ioyntely together with us, you ought to become
humble petitioners to the Queen's most excellent majesty to voutchesaufe to
grant, and to remove all such occasions, as might stop or hinder in any
wise the course of so necessary an attempt. It is the way to end all
controversies, to cease all striffes, to restore unity, to betraye
schismatikes, to make manifest the true catholics, and so consequently to make
it appear, whether you have no religion but only Christ's. The which saing of
youres till you prove by this means, will be counted no better then a brag
common to all heretics.

Think they that if we list and had leisor as they have, we could Nowell.
not frame an arbor or tree, twice as great as they have devised? etc.

Now let this pleasant devise of youres come forth when Dorman.
you will M. Nowell. What shall you prove or wyn thereby? No schism, no sect,
no co^trarietie of opinions in doctrine of the faith, ca^ ye prove or show
there. No blasphemy against the blessed Trinite, no heresy against the
Sacraments of Christ's church, against the godhead of Christ, against our
blessed lady, no article of our Creed denied, shall you find in that your
devised arbor, as in the table of your petigrue M. Nowel, all such things are
to be found. But think you again, that if we list and had leisure to be evil
occupied, we could not devise as fond foolish toys, as your sharp wit has
imagined, (touching your ministres and their wives, your ronnagatfriers and
mo^ckes with their strompets, your late skirmish upon square cappes and copes,
your diuersites of apparel, of hattes and clokes, of beardes and such like
trifling toys) more mete for children in a Christmas play, or for laddes of
the country in a whitson game, then for a preacher and pretended deane in his
printed works? Wherefore I conclude omitting all other not necessary trifles
in this your trifling process, that the crime of schisms and sects most
truly laid to your charge, has most falsely, unjustly and barrenly ben,
reuersed upon us, and do rebounde directly and truly upon you and your fellows,
in such sort, that while you live M. Nowell, nor in many years after the
storm of your heresies be calmed, this your horrible division and multitude of
schisms in so few years spronge up; shall at any time be forgottten, or
blotted out of eternal memory, to the perpetual ignominy of protestants, and
great glory of God and his church.

That the place brought out of the. 17. Chapitre of Deuter. is well and to the
purpose alleged. The 18. Chapitre.
YOU say M. Nowell, that the circunstances of this place Nowell. fol. 59. a.
27. B 26.
of Deuteronomium being well considered, they may easelie inform the reader,
that the popes tirannie to say and do what he list, can not be grounded upon
this place, and that if the pope or any creature do command against gods
word, he may and ought to be disobeied therein. And that therefore both
Pighius and I, have in vain alleged this place for such supremacy as the
pope claims. The circunstances to be considered are, the A 27.
place which God has chosen; the priest which must be Leuitical. Thirdly the
place to be doubtefull, whether the whole determination B 1.
do perteine to one or to many, etc. Fourthly, that it is requisite that the
said priests or priest, do teach according to the law of God, and not at
his own pleasure.

To your text M. Nowell for shame, will you ever be Dorman.
thus raunging at randon? It was not my purpose here to prove by this place of
Deuteron. the bishop of Rome his supremacy over Christ's whole church, no
more then it is Pighius his in the place by you alleged. The matter that I
have here in hand, is to prove that there must be one head to govern the
church now, as there was to govern the same in the old law before. Whether
it be at Rome, at Jerusalem, or in any place else I dispute not here. And
therefore your first The place.
consideration and The priest.
second, came without all consideration out of season. But I may bear with
you the better, because I have been used to this manner of dealing of youres
before, as the reader I doubt not can bear me witness. One thing yeat I can
not by the way but merueile at, why in chalenging the pope to be no Leuiticall
priest: you did not as well except against Rome because it is not in Judea. For
why should not the place be all one as well as the priest? Well it shall
suffice for this time M. Nowel, that as when it is not impertinent it shall be
proved that Rome is the place which God has chosen: so in the mean season it
is not nedeful, that the priest should be of the Leuiticall order which now
is abrogate, but of that only which Christ having Hebreo. 7.
planted in his church to continue for ever, has succeeded in place of the
other,

Whether the place be to be understand of one priest or many.
Your third consideration comes nearer, and is in deed to our purpose, of
one head in the church or many, yeat that also if it had been so well
considered as it ought: if you had as depelye weighed the words that follow:
nolens obedire Sacerdotis imperio, that will not obey the priest his
commandment, as you lightlye and gladly snatched at those that went before,
Thou shall come to the priests of the Leuiticall sort: You should easelye
have seen, that the plural number does note rather the continuance of the
commandment from priest to priest in succession, then that it should be
meant of many priests at one time. The judge of the nation joined with the
priest, makes for the seculer sword executing the law off the priest.

Of judging according to the law.
The fourth consideration brainsicke Brentius considered before you. To the
which I answer, that whereas now you flee to the old translation, who at
other times call us to the fountains, to the Greek and to the Hebrew verity,
as seems best to serve for your advantage, that I, not with M. Stapleton, but
with the late learned and godly council of Trent, affirming the old
translation to be specially followed in the correction of manners or
determination of faith, do auouche the same, and that yeat you are thereby
never the nearer to your purpose, the common translation as well overthrowing
you as does the Hebrew veritye. For the words whereupon you ground your
self: And thou shall do what so ever they shall say unto the, who govern
the place that our Lord has chosen, and what so ever they shall teach the
according to his Law, as though say you, the priest might teach otherwise,
and then he should not be obeyed: be not conditional, but enunciatiue, that
is to say, words that express what he shall do in deed, to assure the
rather the ignorant man to obey his commandment. This interpretation may
many ways be proved. First because it ought to be presumed, and all men are
him truth and when he failed: Neither could there any question have been
doubtefull, neither should there consequentlye have been any need to have had
such a judge. When should those words have been ever put in execution that
follow: He that off pride refuses to obey the priests commandment shall
dye, if this had been the meaning that you dream of? Might not any man have
wrangled as often as he had listed, that the sentence was not according to the
law? And therefore to put the matter out of al doubt, the Scripture says in
this very place, indicabunt tibi indicij veritatem, they shall tell truth and
give thee right judgment. To conclude, there is one place in the scripture off
Leui, that his priests should Malath. 2.
observe in judgments, truth and equitye. He pronounces that the lips of
the priest should keep knowledge, that the law should be required at his
mouth, because he is Gods angel. Can there be any thing that might more
assure us off the meaning of that place then this?

As for that that you object of S. Paul, threatening vengeance fol. 59. b. 14.
to the high priest, and of S. Peter also and S. John the Apostles, who would
not obey him because the last condition off commanding after Gods law was
lacking: for S. Paul Actor. 23.
I might answer you, that he repented him afterward and pleadid ignorance,
although I doubt not but that both by him he was justly reprehended, and by
S. Peter and S. John lawfully disobeied. And yeat will it not follow, that
therefore in this place of Deuter, which we handle, the priest might err in
his judgments. Will you know why? Forsothe because as says. S. Cyprian,
our Lord Lib. 1. epist. 3.
being now crucified, the priests began to be sacrilegouse, wicked and
bloody, and retained nothing of priestly honor and authority. Lo M. Nowell
why you may not conclude as you do, because the priests had now lost their
authority that before they had. The high priest (you say) charged them not
B. 24.
as guyltie of death for this disobedience. The text has that Act. 4.
they sent the apostles away, non inuenientes quomodo punirent eos propter
populum etc. Not knowing how to punish them because of the people. Are you
able to say that yff they had not stood in this fear of the people that they
did, that the apostles should have escaped so? Thus far I have thought good to
join with you concerning this place, from the which (craving help of Bucer
and Brentius) you thought to escape by wrangling about the words, iuxta legem
eius, according to his law. Which words toe when all is done, if they were
conditional as you would make men believe they are, be to the vttermoste
fulfilled in the pope. Of whose predecessors being in nombre 235, you are not
able to name any one, that ever delivered to the church any wrong faith or
false opinion to be believed. If any of them erred as men, yeat were they
priuileaged as the successors of Peter, and either speedily forsook the same,
or keeping it within their own breasts, were never by gods providence
suffered, to utter it to the hurt of the church. For a notable example whereof
Vigilius the pope may serve us. Who obteining that seat by unlawful means,
that is to say upon promise made to the Empress to restore to the bishoprike
of Constantinople Anthemius, deprived thereof by Agapetus for heresy: as soon as ever he entered into that seat, the empress chalenging him off his promise
(so was his wicked mind by gods special providence soddenly altered) made
answer, that rather then* he would restore an heretic to his seat from
whence he was justly removed, he would sooner suffer all the extremity that
might be. And so did he in deed, lyeng long in prison, suffer both hongre,
cold and diverse other torments. Which notwithstanding he acknowledged to be
worthily due unto him for his great offense. The priuileage therefore I say
of this seat is such, that we be assured by his promise that said to Peter
that his faith should Lucae. 22.
not fail, that as hitherto the pope has allwaies fed Christ's church
with sound faith and wholesome doctrine, so shall he continue to do so long
as there is in earth any church at all, that is so long as there is a
world, so long as Christ's church militant here in earth and triumphant in
heaven, mete not in one to join together. And therefore you talcke of the
popes tirannie to do and say what he lists, you talcke without book M.
Nowell, and continue your accustomed wont of sclaundring and lyeng.

Because you well understood that all this rouing talcke of youres was wide
from the marcke that we shoot at, and that happily some one might say unto
you, that the matter which now is handled, is whether there ought to be one
general head in Christ's church or no, and that therefore this place was
brought in, not to prove who it should be, or where he should be resident:
you thought it good to say somewhat to this effect, to prove that this place
is untruly applied to the proof of the supremacy, of one head. But how
prove you this M. Nowell?

Because S. Cyprian alleges this and other like places of scripture, Nowell.
fo. 60. a. 6
to make for the several authority of every peculier bishopp in his own
diocese, not of one head over all bishops.

What thereof M. Nowell, may not one text be applied Dorman.
by diverse men diuersely, and yeat no sense contrary to the truth? The
commandment of S. Paul. Omnis anima Romans 12.
potestatibus sublimioribus subditasit. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, makes especially for the authority of Emperors and kings,
because it imports most that they be obeyed: yeat will you not I think
say, that if the Justice of a shiere, or mayor of a city, would bring this
text to some stubborn man to win him to obedience, that it were evil
applied, or were not (when occasion serves thertoe) to be applied to the
obedience of a king or emperor, because it serves also for his subject. The
meaning of S. Cyprian was to persuade obedience to such priests as have the
charge to rule, to the which purpose the example of the high priest is well
applied, if it were for no other cause, yeat even for this, that every bishop
is in his own diocese the high and chief priest of all the other, that be
of the same: and no less to be obeyed (in that portion of his charge) of those
that be under him, then he him self is bound to obey the pope, the chief
and head in earth of all bishops.

It agrees not (you say) that because the Iues one nation, had Nowell.
one chief priest, therefore all nations thorough out the world should have
one high priest over all other.

You misuse the reader with the term (nation). For not Dorman.
as one nation, but as one Sinagoge, as the only church that then God had,
they had one high priest. And so all Christians being but one catholic
church though many nations, ought to have one head bishop over all nations.
For as for the impossibility that yeat once again you repeat of having one
head, it has been sufficinetly proned allreadie, that that plea of youres is
of no force, and so far wide from the truth, that it is not otherwise possible
to have the church well governed and without schisms, God having now taken
that order. Which I say as of the church consisting of frail and sinful
men. For as touching God, as you say it is possible to him to govern the
church without one head: so say we it is not impossible to him, to give us
one head to rule the whole, and so to direct him that he never fail in his
decrees, concerning our faith. Which because hitherto in deed he has done,
and beside has promised that the faith of Peter shall not fail, we say
Lucae. 22.
of necessity, that it is and must be so.

S. Cyprian (you say) alleges this place of Deuteronomie of obedience to the
high priest, as well for the authority of Rogatianus Nowell. a. 21. b. 28.
as for his own.

This is no more then you said before, which you often Dorman.
repeat to seem by often saing one thing to say somewhat. In deed it
confirms very much my answer made before. For whereas it is manifest that
this place concerning the obedience due to the high priest, is alleged as
well for the authority of Rogatianus who was an inferior bishop, as also for
S. Cyprian the archbishop and Metropolitan of Africa, it follows, that S.
Cyprian in the citing and alleging thereof had no other meaning, then to
persuade obedience to every bishop, of what calling so ever he were, bishop,
Archbishop, primate, patriarch or pope. Except you will say that he was of
the mind that between bisshoppes and Archebishoppes he put no difference.

Yea verily say you of that mind was S. Cypria^ in deed. Nowell. b. 15.
For he confesses in the beginning of his epistle to Rogatianus, that he did
but of courtesy and not of duty, refer this matter of his disobedient deacon
by complaint to him etc.

I need not much to travail to prove that S. Cyprian Dorman.
should not be of this mind, seeing that the learned know that the very
word it self Archiepiscopus, used in the church both in S. Cyprians time
and long before, does prove the contrary, and your self have used before the
word chief prelates of every province: which were toe foolish to be said
if there were between bishops no difference at al. Li. 3. epist. 9.
The words of S. Ciprian praising Rogatianus for that he did honorably
toward him, and according to his accustomed hunulitie, in referring the
matter of his stubborn deacon to him being his archbishop, whereas he him
self by his own authority might have punished him, make nothing for this
equality between all bishops. If they had been equal, then might belike
Rogatianus have punisshed as well one of S. Ciprians diocese, as he might the
deacon who was of Rogatianus diocese. Which if you say, then will it follow
that every diocese has not now one chief ruler but many. If you will not
so say, then must you yealde to this, that Rogatianus complaining to the
Archbishop, granted, that notwithstanding that superiority which he had
over all that were of his diocese, there was yeat the archbishop above him.
And if these two may stand together: Every bishop is the head and chief
priest of his own diocese, and yeat there is one archbishop above all: then
why may not these propositions stand together, Every Archbishop is chief of
the province where he is Archbishop, and yeat there is one pope chief of the^
all? Rogatianus did here more then he neded: who denies that? If the B. of
London have in his diocese a stubborn and unruly priest, who doubts but he
may first punish him by his own authority if he list? And yeat if he refer
the matter to the Archbishop of Cauntorburie, he does the Archbishop more
honor, and shows him self to be the more humble. The Archbishop is an eye
to ouersee the bishop that he do his duty, as the pope is to ouersee all. So
long as the bishop is hable to take sufficient order for all occurre^tes in his
diocese him self, if he use not this power, but refer it to the
Archbishop, he does more then he needs, but yeat honorably for the
Archebishoppes part, and humbly for his own.

Where you say, that such by S. Cyprian transgress the Nowell. fo. 61. a. 1.
law of God in the Deuteronomie, that make them selves bishops over other
bishops. etc.

It is true in S. Cyprians meaning, that is in such as Pupianus Dorman.
was, who being an inferior membre, no primate, no patriarche, no pope: would
take upon him to judge S. Cyprian the archebishoppe and judge appointed of God.
This place includes no more the pope who is head bishop over all other
bishops, and head judge over al judges, then it does note the bishops of
every diocese, for taking upon them, to be the judges of the curates that be
under them, who in their several cures be judges in Christ's steed it can not
be denied. For they have power given them of God to loose and bind, to judge
inter lepram and lepram between syn and syn. It pertains I say no more to
the pope, then it does to the Archbishop, who judging and ouerloking the
bishops doings, falls not I trust by your own judgment into this fault
that S. Cyprian noted in Pupianus. If then the bishop may judge over such
priests as be under him (Gods judges in their particular cures) and, the
Archebishoppes again over the bishops, without any offense, why may no^ I
pray you the pope be judge of the doings of the Archebishops and all other?
Your argument which is this: Pupianus the bisshoppe, might not be judge over
the doings off Saint Cyprian An absurd reason.
who was an Archebishoppe: Ergo the pope may not be the judge off all other
bisshoppes, is like to this: M. Nowell may not make him self judge over the
bishop of London, ergo the Archeb. of Cauntorbury does not well and is a false
usurper in making him self head bishop over all the bisshoppes and chief
judge over all the judges in his province. For such a one as is M. Nowell, was
Pupianus that proud arrogant man, a private person for any thing that
appears to the contrary, as he is. This property which you falselye note
to be in the pope, is the property of your good Lord M. Grindall with his
fellows, who occupye the places of other laufull bishops yeat living, and
therefore make themselves (as S. Cyprian notes of Pupianus) bishops over
bishops, and judges over the judges off God for the time appointed.

That the place of Gregory Nazianzen was applied aptly and to the purpose. The
19. Chapitre.
BECAUSE I say; that I remember a sayng off Gregorye Nowell. fol. 61. b. 3.
Nazianzene, you infer thereuppon M. Nowell, that men may note that I have a
good memory etc, which notwithstanding had I (you say) enlarged to a few
words going before, it had appeared, that these words being spoken of one god
governing the whole world, had been impertinent to prove that there ought to
be one pope to govern the whole church.

You may note good readers that M. Nowell has more Dorman.
wit then honesty, that can cavil at a phrase of speech pleasantly, when the
matter it self he can not reprove truly. For you say M. Nowell full
clerckely, that this place b. 29
is altogether impertinent to the purpose. Yeat in the very next words
following your shrewde wit put you in remembrance, that there was a way how I
might bring it, to make yeat at the least some show to the purpose. And
therefore you say.

Now if M. Dorman list to transfer the sentence from God governing Nowell. b.
29.
all the world, to men ruling in the world, after this sort: Nazianzene
says there is one only God who governs all: Ergo there must be one only
pope or head bishop to govern all the church: I deny the argument, and
affirm that it follows no more, then that there must be one only Emperor to
govern all the world.

I reason not M. Nowell altogether so barelye as you Dorman.
surmise, that there is but one God, and that therefore there must be but one
head to govern the church. The force of my conclusion depends upon the
reason why there is but one God, which is this: where many rule there is
sedition. This argument of mine I so little repent me of, that I will here
press you with one other coming from the same moulde. S. Austen laboring to
prove the certeintie of one God, amongst other reasons uses this for one.
Sicut enim in ipsa rerum naturamaior est auctoritas vnius ad vnum omnia Lib. de
vera religio. cap. 25.
redigentis, etc. For even as in natural things the auctoritye off one
bringing all things to one is greater, neither has any multitude in the kind
of man any power, but such as consentith, that is, thinks one thing: so in
religion the auctority of them ought to be greater and of more credit, who
call us to one. Of the place of Gregory Nazianzene as before I reasoned, that
as there was but one god in the world to avoid confusion: so there must be in
the church but one head for the same cause. Even so from this faing of S.
Augustine I reason in like manner, that as the auctoritye of them is greater in
religion, who call us to one God, because their opinion makes most for the
conservation of unity, so ought their auctoritye and credit to accounted
greatest, who call us in the church to one head. Now what have you to say
against this manner of reasoning M. Nowell? You deny the argument, and say
that it follows no more, then that there must fo. 62. a. 3.
be one only Emperor to govern all the world.

This fond reason of youres has been sufficiently answered. The 11. and 12.
chap.
It is in deed the effect of your whole answer in this your Reprouse as you
call it. Yeat have you not (so great a clercke you are) in your whole book,
brought so much as one pore sely reason for the confirmation of it. But you
(as if you were in the pulpite tanquam auctoritatem habens) affirm many
things stoutely, and will be believed at your word, without reason or proof at
all. Where you say: There is no confusion in the world nor disordre, Nowell.
a. 13.
for that sundry parts of it have sundry civil governors: Surely your
wits failed you much, and you nodded Dorman.
a little M. Nowell. For what wise man sees not, what learned man reads not,
of yearly and almost daily batailes, quarelles, contentions, bloudeshead,
conspiracies, and of infinite such disordre to be in the world at this
present, and to have allwaies been by the reason of sundry civil governors?
Our Savior when it pleased him to take flesh, and redeem man, chose that
state wherein most quiet and rest should be, that men might so the better
attend to the preaching of gods word, which by wars and tumultuouse hurly
burlies can not but be hindered. He chose to come at that time, when but 15.
years before, the whole known world of Europe, Asia and Afrike, was under
the obedience of one Roman emperor Octauius Augustus. In that state the
world was ruled certain hundred years after, until the Christian faith was
published and dilated unto all the parts of the world. Do we not read M.
Nowell, that the same emperor August bis clausit Ianum, as much to say, had
twice in his days a perfect Alexander ab Alexandro lib. 1. Gema. dier. cap.
14.
peace thorough out all the parts of the world, yea thrice as some write?
Before that state of one universal Emperor was, and sense that state has
decayed, how many wars have been to the disquieting of all Christendom
stirred up? How many battles cruelly fought? How much innocent blood
unmercifully spilt? What one year in one place of the world or other, has
not plentifully brought furthe such fruits as these are? Are not all
histories full? Have we not daily experience? Have we not heard of the Turks
wars scarce yeat cold against us at the Isle off Malta, of the late wars
in France and Scotland, of allmoste the continual wars in the days of
Charles the fifthe, now with France, now against the Mores, now in Germany,
now in Italy it self? All this is but in one part of Europa. If we had
before our eyes the acts of other countries, how much might be said
thereof? And yeat M. Nowell as though all the world were shutt up in the
house where he dwells at Poules, says there is no confusion in the world
nor disordre, for that sundry parts of the same have sundry civil
governors. This is I confess a matter more mete for some practiced Counselour
to debate, then for scholars such as I am professing no such policy to
entreat of. It reaches I wot well beyond the compass of my discourse to
say herein, but some small part of that which might be said. Yeat this small
note, shall I trust be sufficient to instruct the ignorant, and hable to move
the learned to farther consideration.

You say, the scriptures declare it to be so appointed by Nowell, a. 16.
God, that sundry parts of the world should have sundry civil governors.
Eccles. 17


So has the church toe sundry several governors, Dorman.
in sundry several diocesses, and yeat one chief head over all
notwithstanding. And therefore that text might be verified well enough,
allthough there were one general Emperor or other ruler over all the world.
And suerlie if this place of Ecclesiasticus were so to be understand, as that
it did forbid the having of one general ruler over the whole: never would
you may be suer our Savior, have chosen that time to be borne in, and that
for a special liking (as al writers agree) that he had in that state of
government that then was. But if it were so that God had appointed the order
of the world to be such, as that there should be of necessity in every
particular country a particular head, and no one over the whole (which
negative words the scripture has not): yeat might there be a secret cause
of gods providence, why this order should be rather in worldly government
then in spiritual, which we be not worthy to know. Perhaps to be a
punishment for sin this order was taken, that one off us might be a whippe
and scourge to the other, which allthough God by his justice do to our
bodies, thorough battle and war punishing them, yeat would he not of his
mercy so punish by schisms and heresies our souls. You note to the Reader
after the Hagiographa in the English The book of Ecclesiasticus rejected by
the prot^stants, alleged.
Bibles, that this book of Ecclesiasticus is of the no^bre of the^, that are
not to be alleged for the proof of doctrine. Now what double dealing is this
I pray you M. Nowell, there to reprove it, and here to allege it, and ground
a doctrine upon it never heard of before, to wit, that of necessity every
country must have a several supreme governor? If you should preach openly
this doctrine in pulpite M. Nowell, how soon would you either prove a
traitor your self, or make other traitors? For were it not think you a
fault to the crown of England, in the nature of high treason, to say that
Ireland being a several country divided from England by the maine Ocean,
ought to have a several governor other then English? Were it not treason for
your brethren protestants of these low countries, to preach by this text
as you write, that because Spain and Flaundres be far diverse and several
countries, for this cause they ought not to be under one head prince, and
king as they are? Therefore if you love the quiet of the realm, and esteem
your duty to your sovereign and ours, twange no more upon that stringe I
warn you like a friend. You prosecute your fond argument and say.

So is their no disordre that several churches have several bisshoppes to
their heads. Nowell. a. 17.


No disordre at all, but most convenient order, if those Dorman.
several bishops obey the one head placed by Christ over them. But to
make those several bishops to rule the several churches, without recourse
when occasion shall requier to a higher as you do, we say it is a great
disordre.

To return to Nazianzene his saing, where is no rule there Nowell. a. 27. b. 1.
is no order: where many rule there is sedition: you say, that if many
magistrates have equal authority in one common wealth, or if many
ecclesiastical persons, have equal authority in one several church, it is
like to their fantasy who would have many equal gods to rule the world.
But one several ruler in one several dominion, one several bishop in one
several diocese, do resemble one God ruling one whole world.

I take you at your word M. Nowell, that if many magistrates Dorman.
have equal rule in one common wealth, it is like to their fantasy who
would have many equal gods to rule the world. But the church of Christ
say I, is but one An argument against M. Nowell upon his own grant.
christian common wealth, therefore it follows by your own confession, that
if many do equally rule, without relation to one head, it is like to their
fantasy who would have many equal gods to rule the world.

One several bishop in one several diocese does not fo. 62. b. 4.
resemble one God ruling one world as you dream, but one chief bishop in the
catholic church, which in your creed you profess to be but one, he M.
Nowell resembles truly one God, without any presumption at all, seeing gods
pleasure is it shall be so. It was no presumption in the apostles to sit still
and suffer Christ to wash their Joan. 3.
feet. You know what Peter had said unto him for streining curtosye as he
did. That you say, it is a thing unheard of but in the pope of Rome, there you
made your bargain somewhat wisely. We grant the same, and add beside, that
it were intolerable presumption for any other to lay claim to that
authority. And yeat we trust because S. Peter Homil. vlt. in Joan.
was pope, and (as Chrysostom says) master of the whole world, and thereto
out of the compass of the last nine hundred years, and had this authority by
Christ and not from Phocas: you will be the better for his sake to all the rest.
Now follows your conclusion.

Wherefore M. Dorman and D. Harding may as well say, that Nowell. b. 19.
the world is seditiously governed by diverse Princes, as the church by
several bishops. But as Nazianzene never dreamed of one Emperor over all
the world to avoid sedition, though he teaches there is one God: no more did
he though he teach one Christ, yeat ever dream of one only head bishop or
pope. etc.

I have oftentimes showed here before, that the regiment Dorman.
of the church is far different from that of the world. It shall be nedelesse
to repeat it here again. You can not therefore reason from the one to the
other. Whereof Nazianzene dreamed I know not: of this I am suer, that to
apply by drift of reasoning the sentence of an Auctor to that which he never
meant or intended (so that to his meaning and intent it be in no wise repugnant
or contrary) is not only no dream, but the usage also and practice off
learned men. And therefore in the law, many a case is decided by words which
the lawier never dreamed peradventure, that they ever should be so applied.
The better and more excellent the Author is, the more ample sense may be
gathered in his writings. As in the Scripture especially, the infinite variety
of commentaries does declare. Wherefore I do the more meruell that you a man
traded and brought up in good lettres, and a professor off the same, should
rave rather waking, then talk after such a sort in yowre sleep dreaming. But
I know the cause, your part is here altogether to reprove, not to prove, as
by the title of your book you warned us before.

He speaks further in his sleep and says. How shall we Nowell. fol. 63 a.
1. Psalm. 86
then say, our lord loves Syon above all the tabernacles of Jacob? What this
does mean or to what purpose it is, I know not. Nor I believe M. Dorman when
he waketh (if ever he wake) can tell him self.

I am glad that my name ministers you so much Dorman.
matter of scoffing mirthe, and sorry that so excellent invention should be
more then half lost, for that that the gretest part of your ministres
thorough lack off the Latin tongue, can not perceive that sweet allusion,
that is between dormire in Latin, and Dorman in English. But think you thus
to pass over the scripture with a sleepish scoff? Thinks your noddis
nowlle (I might say M. Nowell, if I listed to contend with you in this kind
of eloquence) so to delude the word of God, that you may call it a dream,
and so let it sleep? No M. Nowell truth will overcome, when it shall be with you
as it was in the beginning. And therefore I repeat again: if the Sinagoge of
the Iues had one head to rule them, and the church more ample, and therefore
in more danger of schism, and consequently standing in more need of one
head, have yeat no such head: then I say M. Nowell, how does God tender
Syon the church of Christ, above the Synagoge of the Iues? By Syon is meant
therefore in this place the church, which our Lord loves more then the
Synagoge, as Saint Augustine upon this place does in these words well
declare. Diligit illam spiritualem ciuitatem super In. psalm. 86.
omnia figurata, quibus intimabatur illa ciuitas semper manens. He loves that
spiritual city above all the figurative things, by the which that city
which ever shall continue was signified. This being therefore true, it
follows, that he has left to us as well one head to rule us and direct us
in one uniform faith, as he gave to the Synagoge. Now am I awake M. Nowell
you see, and can tell you, and have told you what I mean by these words. If
you could as well tell what you meant by that musical twang of your harp,
you should take out of many men's heads many odd crachettes. You need not
now to be careful for Pighius waking, or to make any combat with his spirit
for the matter, who slepeth not, except you will defend the heresy of them
that believe so of all souls, but is in perfect rest I trust, or in assured
hope to be.

How God has provided better for the church then for the Synagoge, and of
the strength of my reason drawn from the Synagoge to the church. The 20.
Chapter.
God has provided for the church (you say) as well as he Nowell. fol. 63. a.
24.
did for the Iues and better too.

Here you grant all that I said and more too. But let Dorman.
us marcke your mighty reasoning how you prove it I pray you.

For whereas they had but one chief bishop for their whole Nowell.
nation, he has provided for the church in every diocese one, that they may
be the better governed and less pained to travail far, for the decision of
their doubts and controversies.

To this say we, if God had done no otherwise, he had Dorman.
done less for the church then for the Iues. For better it is to have one
head unto the which doubts of great importance may be referred, then to
have many in many places, and every one (without respect to one chief) to
do as he shall think good. How think you M. Nowell, is it not better in one
family to have one Master, in one city one Mayor, in one shiere one
lieutenant, then in a familye many masters, in a city many Majors, in a
shiere many lieutena^tes? I know not who governs in your house, your wife, or
you, or both: but this I think I may be bold to say, that if your wife
were, not quarter master only, but as much master as you, that you were not
therefore in better case then your next neighbor, that had the whole rule of
his house him self. If the streightes off your own house like you not, look
upon the largenes of the whole realm, and judge whether it be better to have
one liege sovereign or many. You heard S. Augustines opinion Lib. de
verarelig. ca. 25.
(a better divine I trow then you) touching this matter before, concluding
that their authority was greater, and they of better credit, that reduced all
things to one God, because in the worckes of nature he said it was so. So in
the church M. Nowell, seeing that as God is one the faith is also one, one
head is better to conserve that one faith and the unity thereof, then many.
Therefore if the Iues had one head bishop, and the church diverse heads,
it is by all reason worse provided for. Except you will say, that to have
many equal rulers in one body, in one common wealth, is better then to have
only one. Which notwitstanding before you resembled to their fantasy, who
would have many equal gods to rule the world. But you say, there is
much labor and pains saved. Here while you seek for ease you leese unity:
while you diminishe pains, you prepare the high way to the multiplieng off
schisms. You have an eye to the resorting to that one head from all places of
the world, but you considre not the fruit of peace and unity that is thereby
procured. Make diverse equal heads in the church, and you shall never be
hable to avoid schisms in the same, which S. Hierome as you heard before,
says can not be kept out of particular churches, without there be one
priest of perelesse authority above the rest. Now let the learned reader
judge whether pains be well redeemed, by such an inestimable benefit. You
clatter still that this head amongst the Iues was but of one nation. I tell
you again as I did before, it was the church that God had in earth at that
time.

But M. Dorman deals not truly with the Apology etc. The Nowell. fo. 62. b. 7
Apology says, that as the church decayed in the old law, where was the
same God, the same Christ, the same holy ghost etc. then as is now, so may
it and has it decayed now. M. Dorman handles the matter as though he could
prove by the Apology, that because where was the same God, the same Christ,
the same holy ghost etc. in the Iuishe church as is now, therefore must there
be one head bishopp over all the christian churches thorough out the world, as
there was one head bishop over all the Iues, which follows no more, then
that we must have circumcision now, for that the Iues had it then.

I merueile that you be not ashamed to make any mention, Dorman. The reason of
the Apology, The church decayed in the old law, ergo it may and has
decayed in the new, confuted.
of that foolish, false and blasphemouse reason used by the Apology. For the
concealing whereof reason would you should rather have thanked me, then have
accused me of untrue dealing. But wilt thou see good Reader how untruly I have
dealt. Forsothe because the proposition off one God, one Christ etc. brought by
the Apology, served not for the proof of that for which it was brought, I
used it being a general and true maxim, to prove a true conclusion. But why
should it not serve his purpose as well you will say, as mine? I will tell
you the cause. One especial cause why this argument of the Apology, The
Synagoge has decayed; Ergo, the church has decayed, defended here stoutely by
M. Nowell, should not be good, is, because God has made other manner of
promises for the continuance of his church, then ever he made to the Synagoge.
He has promised that hell gates shall not prevail Matthew. 16.
against it. This were not true if it had been either these 15. or nine hundred
years either, ouerrun with heresies. He has appointed it to continue with the
son, and to remain till the monel be taken away. If because the church
Psalm. 71.
of the old law was brought to that paucitie that some times there were but
eight, as in Noes time, or but Elias alone Genesis 7.
as he was persuaded, but yeat in deed 7000. mo as God told him, and that in
Israel (for in Judah notwithstanding 3. Reg. 19.
the church flourished) although your Apology had not read so far: If I
say the church of Christ might after 15. hundred years continuance be
brought to the same case In the Portress^ the 6. 7. 8. and 10. chapitres.
now, where were all these promises with diverse other, diligently of late
gathered together, made to the church and of the church? If because in the
old law God was Notus in Judea, and in Israel magnum nomen ei us, known in
Psalm. 75.
Jury and his name great in Israel, but so no farther, it may be laufull for
you to defend your secret conuenticles at Geneua or else where, where is
then, thorough out all nations Lucae. 24.
beginning at Jerusalem? Where is the prophecy of David spoken before hand
of Christ's kingdom the church, that it should rule from sea to sea, and
from the flood to the Psalm. 71.
end of the world? Seeing therefore these great promises have been made by
all mighty God to the church, whereas to the Synagoge the figure thereof
there were made no such: although it decayed, although at the last it vanished
away as the priestehod and law did: we can not conclude that therefore the
same should happen to the church which has other manner of stays to hold it
up. The compilers of your Apology might be ashamed M. Nowell, if they had not
abandoned all shame and honesty, to abuse after this sort the examples of the
holy scripture to prove that Christ's church might fail, because in the old
law it was brought to some pancitie^, which reason they borrowed of the
Donatistes those wicked heretics, as appears by Saint Augustine who
confuteth the same. And Lib. de vnitat. eccle. cap. 12.
thus have I showed you M. Nowell a cause, why this saing of your Apology
could not be applied to the church of Christ that is now: it remains that
I answer your objection made of circuncision, which you say I may as well
prove to be to be used now, because it was used in the old law, as prove the
necessity of one chief head thereby. No that I can not, I will in few words
tell you a cause why. The new law is called by the scripture Hebr. 9.
tempus correctionis the time of reformation, because it corrects and
reformeth the old which brought nothing to perfection. Circuncision in the
old law was one of Hebr. 7.
those things, that God would in the time of grace take away, and substitute
in the place thereof a better, that is Baptism. So was not the placing of one
head over the Synagoge, which being done for the quieting of controversies,
you may be suer God would no less should continue in the order of his
church which he loved so dearly, then in the Synagog which was but a figure
thereof. And yeat if we should follow your judgment, the wisdom of God
which came to reform the old law and make a new perfect law, should by
appointing over his church many heads for one, make the law in that point
less perfect then was the other. Thus you see I can not reason as you say I
might, circuncision in respect of baptism being utterly an imperfection of the
law, whereas that order of one chief priest was most perfect and appointed
to continue for ever, except you can prove, that God has changed that order
for the better, as he has in taking away circuncision.

This first side of the. 64. leaf contains no other matter fol. 64. a.
then great bragges of the Apology, with a prophecy of M. Nowells, that
none of the Romish clergy shall ever be able to answer it to any purpose.
That prophecy is now thanks be to God proved false, and M. Nowell withal a
vain lier and a pelting prophet. And now I think M. Nowell a false prophet^.
that by this time all honest men will marvel the less, to see so many lies
in this Reproufe of M. Nowelles, seeing that he has been so friendely to show
him self a patron in defending this lewd lieng Apology: of the which if I
have made any lie, it is because I called it but a fardle of lies, whereas I
should have called it as M. Nowell has sense taught me, a whole lighter.

You blame me not you say, for alleging any thing out Nowell. b. ^6.
of the old Testament, but for my guilefull and untrue application of places
of the old Testament, and of the doctors to such purposes as they apperteine
nothing unto at all, nay are most contrary to the same.

You refuse not scripture, but the wrong application. So will Dorman.
any heretic say to you (except the Swenckfeldian) with whom you shall have
to do. I apply this scripture as the catholic consent of all the world
does apply it, whom follow you in refusing it?

That there has been nothing proved by me, neither fo. 65. a. 3.
by reason, nor by examples of common wealths, it is an impudent lie of youres
M. Nowell. I have proved by both, A lie. 52.
that as every kingdom and country has his temporal head to govern the
same, by like statutes, laws, and customs: so the church which is but one,
must have one head to direct it in one faith and religion. No reason, no
examples be against me: for no reason admits, no example teaches, that one
body should be better governed by many heads then by one. And therefore that
is an other Lie. 53.
lie. S. Cyprian and S. Hierome, though they speak but of Bishops in their
own diocese: Yeat by greater reason their words take place in the whole
church, as before has been declared. That every diocese have a peculier
bishop it is not contrary to the Popes supremacy) as you untruly say). And if
it should be contrary, how would you then avoid his reason, that would
infer here upon, that the having then of several governors of every shyre
in a realm, should be contrary to the government of one supreme governor
the king or the Queen? Well then saying it is not clean contrary to the
having of one general head, to have many inferior heads, S. Cyprian and S.
Hierome be not clean contrary to me, nor contrary neither. This is therefore
also a lie. I gave to Leo such an epitheton Lie. 54.
as the whole council of Calcedon gave to him before. If you be angry there
at, wreke your self upon them. Leo makes for us directly all were it true,
that you cavil of Zozimus. But as the reader understands by this time I
dowte not, both Zozimus is proved innocente, and you a false slaunderer. a 18.


Neither the law, neither S. Cyprian upon the law, speaks against one head
bishop. That is an other flat lie M. Nowell: For to testify one sense of
scripture which Lie. 55.
Saint Cyprian does, is not to condemn an other. My collection from the one
head bishop of the Synagog has been proved to be good and laufully deduced. I
neade not here to repeat it again.

You wish that I and all other adversaries of the truth (so it Nowell. a. 17.
pleases you to call us) would reason from the shadows off the old law, as
did S. Paul, but you say we do not.

You prove your saying by a bare denial. And then Dorman.
you pass to an other clean wide from the purpose. But such is your
rhetorike most worthy to be noted. Well let us examine, your wanderinge
extrauagant note.

We have made you (you say) off Christians Iues: and Nowell. fol. b. 14.
our selves off ministers off the Gospel Aaronicall Levites, and cet.

Not we M. Nowell, but the primitive church as your Dorman.
self confess in this place, in saying that these things began in Saint
Hieromes time. You do well to follow so Lib. 4. cap. 18.
near the steps of your Master Calvin, who chargethe in his institutions
the fathers of the primitive church, for counterfeiting the Iuish manner of
sacrificing more nearly, the^ The fathers off the primitive church.
sclaundered by Calvin.
other Christ had ordained, or the nature of the gospel did bear. But if
these things were in the primitive church, then bear the people no more I
pray you in hand, that you resemble the primitive church: If S. Hierome
complained of such things in his time, then appeal no more to the first six
hundrethe years if you be wise. Then term not church ornaments late
superstitions. But if S. Hierome complained not at all of such ornaments of
the church, but in the Epistle ad Nepotianum lamented only that weightier
matters, as the true decking of Christ's church with good ministers, were
neglected: If in the epistle ad Demetriadem, he plainelye says: Non
reprehendo, non abnuo: I reprove it not: I dissent not: then have you abused
the reader with S. Hieromes name, and belied him once again. That which
follows is but a common place of railing, wherein because you talk but in
your faculty, I can the less blame you. And to reason sadlye with an
outrageous rayler, were but (you wot well) to preach to frantike Tom of Bedlem.

The foundation you say, of altars, belles, banners, candels, Nowell. fol. 67.
a. 3.
etc. leans to this reason of mine: It was so in the shaddowe, therefore it
must be so now in the body, in the truth, in our church: This reason you think
(you say) that I like as well as the former reason of one head, and that
reason it is that so I should think.

No M. Nowell, you are foully deceived if you write as Dorman.
you think. But what? It seems to me that you foregtte yourselfe. Will you I
pray you on high days, when you distribute those holy mysteries of youres,
wear no cope? Or if you do, must the foundation of the wearing thereof be
grounded upon the Iuish ceremonies? No you will answer, I wear it because
the Queen's Majesty's injunctions will have me do so. And our priests wear
them because the laws of the church will have them do so. If of your
doings the Princes law may be the grownde: Why may not the church be the
same of ours? Now if the Prince may command the ministre to wear a cope,
Why may not the same command the bishop to wear a mitre, albes and
tunicles? Why may not by the same commandment, altars, belles, banners,
candels, plenty of gold and silver, be brought into the church? And then if
the Prince may command it, why may not the church of Christ do as much?
Thus retain we these things as commanded by the church, not as used by the
Iues. Who ever uses them so is a Iue: who so uses them so, sins deadly.
Neither is the reason like, why I should reason from ceremonies in the law,
appointed but for the while (as you would have me) to that, by which I argue
from things foreshadowed in the Synagoge to continue in the church for ever.

You proceed, and (after my manner of reasoning) you ask, Nowell. a. 13.
why you may not also reason for the scriptures to be had in a language that
the people do the understand: For priests to have wives, for images to be
taken away, seeing that in the Iuish church, all the people, men, women and
children, had the scripture in a language that they did well understand, the
Levites and priests had wives and children, seeing that in that church there
were no Images, especially when reason beside the law proves that it ought
to be so:

Who can deny such a friend his request? Will you Dorman.
gladlye learn, why my argument should hold and not youres? Listen a while
and you shall know. First for the Scriptures, I take not here upon me to
resolve that question, whether it be expedient that they should be in the
vulgar tongue or no. For I know it is impertinent to our matter. But to your
question I answer, that whereas you say that women and children, had the
scripture in a language that they did well understand, that is once false: for
first that Hebrew tongue, wherein the scriptures were written, was not the
common tongue, that the people used amongst them selfs, but such as being
peculier to the learned, could not being vttred by the priest be
understand, except he did first expound and interpret it. Next being
written without points, that is without any vowell at all noted in the text,
as we have it now pointed, when or by whom it is not certeinlie known, but by
the learned Iues them selves as it is thought, being gathered together in a
council at a town called Tiberia, it follows that the unlearned, could as
evil read it as understand it being readen, till it were expounded. And for
this cause the 72. elders had only power and authority to interpret the
scripture, and to read it to the people, as here in the Chapter by you
alleged, Moses did. This being Exodus 24.
most true, as for the first point we have the testimony of that learned
bishop, Theodoretus the B. of Cyrus, for the next (that of long time the
hebrew tongue remained vnpointed) the consent of the best stories: how had
then the people of the Iuishe church, men, women, and children, the scripture
in a language, that they did well understand being readen by other? The words
of Theodoretus are these. Vocem Hebraicam arbitroresse sacram. Quemadmodum enim
In quaest. in Genesis q. 60
in templis Graecorum quidam sunt literarum characteres peculiares, quos sacros
appellarunt: Sic deus omnium per Moysen donauit hanc linguam, non naturalem sed
ad docendum aptam. Siquidem cum reliqui omnes loquantur lingua gentis suae in
qua nati fuerint, and nati in Italia Italoru^ vtantur voce, qui in Graecia voce
Graecorum, qui in Perside Persarum, and qui in Egipto lingua Aegiptiorum
loquantur: nihilominus nulli pueri Hebraeorum reperiuntur, qui statim hebraica
lingua vtuntur, sed eorum apud quos nati sunt. Deinde cum parum adoleuerint,
docentur literarum characteres, and discunt literis scripturam diuinam hebraica
voce scriptam. That is to say. The hebrew tongue I think to be holy, for as
in the Greek temples there be certain peculier characters of lettres which
they call holy: even so the God of all, by Moses has given this tongue, not
natural but apt to teach: for whereas all other do speak the tongue of
their own nation, wherein they were borne, and they which be borne in Italy
use the Italian tongue, being borne in Greece speak the greek tongue, in Persia
the Persian, and in Egipte the Egiptian tongue: yet notwithstanding none of
the children of the Hebrews be found, which from the beginning use the
hebrew tongue, but their language amongst whom they be borne. Afterward when
they wax somewhat big, they be taught the caracters and letters, and learn
in lettres holy scripture written in the Hebrew tongue. You here M. Nowell
that the hebrewe tongue wherein the old law was written, was no natural
tongue, that the characters and letters were peculiar, that is to say not to
be understand of every man, and for that cause called holy, as those were that
the Greeks had in their temples. You here that it was not learned by nature as
are the English, french, Italian and other vulgar tongues, but by art as are
the latin, Greek and Hebrew with us. So that as the readinge of scripture in
latin helpethe nothing the unlearned Englishman, no more did the reading of
the law in the Hebrewe tongue proffit the unlearned, till the reader did
expound it. For which cause by the law the people was commanded, to Malach.
2.
demand the law at the priests mowthe who kept it. And thus much for the
law: for your reason that they that are bound to obey gods law ought to
understand it, it is true I grant, by such laufull ministres as are
appointed Cap. 31.
to teach it, as appears by the very place of Deuteron. that you allege
here.

For the marriage of priests, why you may not reason from the old law to
the new to establishe it, the first Lib. 1. contra Iouinia. Ca. 3. 1. ad
Timoth. distin. 31. cap. tenere.
gospel, the priest must be ready continually and daily to ministre. This
do, S. Hierome S. Ambrose, and Innocentius the first confirm by this
argument; The priests off the old law absteined from their wives when their
course came to ministre, but the priests of the new law must be always
reaadie to ministre: therefore they may not marye at all. Again the church
makethe such only priests as do vow chastity. This vow is free to be made
or not made: when it is made not the church only, but the law of God forces
men to The married thinks 1. Cor. 7.
on those things, that perteine to the world, and how he may please his
wife: the unmarried man upon those things, that perteine to God, how he may
please him. Therefore he exhorts all men (most of all the ministers of God)
to be like to him self, that is single and unmarried. The fifth cause of
difference may be, because priestehode went then by succession within one
tribue, and therefore it was necessary, that they married to continue the same,
whereas ours goes by lauful vocation, and the priests are and may be chosen
through out the world, and therefore there is no such necessity. Last of al
Faustus the Manichee, obiecting Lib. 22. Cap. 47.
to Jacob as a great crime, the having of four wives: Quando mos erat crimen
non erat: and nunc propterea crimen est quia mos non est. When the manner was so
it was no fault: and now therefore it is a fault, because it is not the
manner. Are not these M. Nowell reasons sufficient to assoile your doubt, why
priests should not now mary, because they were married in the old law? Replye
first against these, and then shall you here more. In the mean season thus
much be said to the law. Now to your reason, why ptiestes should be married
now, as well as they were in the old law.

You reason not with S. Paul: as you brag here, but against him. For whereas
he says, that such young widows a* 28. 1. Timot. 5
as after their vows married, have their damnation, you bring him for the
contrary, disagreing by that means both with him self, and the ancient
fathers, who agree all in the interpretation of this place. He that can not
contain, let him marye etc. that it is to be understood of such, 1. Cor. 7.
Amb. cap. 5. ad virg. lapsam, and alij alibi.
as having not vowed to the contrary be yeat in the full possession of their
liberty, and intend not to use the means to atteine chastity. You reason
against S. Paul, whom you wrest here to this meaning that he should will all
men to marye. Whereas he wissheth on the contrary part in this very chapitre
all men to be unmarried, as he was him self. He means here M. Nowell, as
witness S. Hierome, S. Lib. 1. contra Iouin. Amb. in hoc cap. 7. Chrysostom.
hom. 9. in hunclocu^.
Ambrose, and S. Chrysostom, that the Corinthians (whom says S. Ambrose, he
saw so to swarm with vices, that he thought it very hard for them to live
continentlie) should continue to keep every man the company of his married
wife, which they doubted whether it were laufull for them to do or no, and
therefore consulted S. Paul therein. That this is the true meaning of the
place, beside the authority of these fathers, by the whole discourse also of
the chapitre, and these words that follow next after those alleged by you,
Vxori vir debitum reddat etc. Let the man yealde to his wife the due debt of
marriage, it may manifestly appear.

To your last question of images, I answer, that such images, as Christian
men have, were not forbidden. They were idolles, that were forbidden, or images
to be worsshipped as God, of which sort we have none. Men do not stoop to
insensible blocks or stones, no more than he does reverence to wax or
parchement, that kisseth the Queen's broad seal, and therefore that reason
argues him, that of men having life or reason so says or thinks, to be him
self for his wit a block, for his Christian charity a very stone. The
honor, that we give to images, is to the things that they represent, not to
the matter of the image it self.

You have by this time I trust M. Nowell, your request satisfied, not by great
leasoure, but all other business set aparte with as much speed, as I could. The
reason you see, why I may reason as I do, but not you as you would, is other
than my bare pleasure. And therefore I will now proceed further.

In this leaf and first side you say, first that Christ is the only fo. 68.
a. Nowell.
head of the catholic church and none but he alone, then that the scriptures
are the judge of all controversies, because they shall judge us in the last
great day.

Christ is only the chief head of his church, and after Dorman.
that manner there is no other head thereof, but he. Which as he is also of
all the particular churches that be in the world, and yeat that no let, but
that there be other inferior heads under him, so is his being head over the
whole church no more let, that there should be an other inferioure head to
rule in his corporal absence over the whole church here in earth.

When you talk of Scripture, and think it strange, that it should not be
the only judge in all controversies, we merueile not, seeing we remember, that
you have reason to hold with your forefathers old condemned heretics. But
of this, I shall, when I come hereafter to your discourse upon this point, have
more occasion to speak. Presently I will note to the reader the wise reason,
that you bring, to prove that the only scripture ought to be the judge of
all controversies, which is, because it shall judge both you and us in the
latter day. So shall our Savior in his visible person M. Nowell. So shall
the 12. Apostles: will you prove thereby, that Christ and the twelve Apostles in
their visible persons ought to be the judges of all controversies, that arise
now in the church? Beside that, these words can not be understand of the
text written, (there being then when Christ spoke these words never a word
written) and therefore must be taken to be meant as well of his word unwritten,
as written: of tradition M. Nowell, even that word of God, that once shall
judge you. So good be your reasons, and such wise consequences depend
thereon. And yeat you end with a check, as though you had given the mate, and
say. M. Doman avoid the contempt, the you may escape the judgment. Now M.
Nowell you have proved no contempt, and therefore I fear not the judgment.
Let this be neck, till you give a better check.

Of certain external furniture of the church, where with M. Nowell charge
the catholics to have blinded the world. Of the Scriptures being judge in all
controversies. The 21. Chapitre.
BECAUSE I desired that I might be suffered a little 22.
by the readers patience to open to the world your craftye dealing, and to
shake you out off your maskers clouttes etc. You cry, hold not the man for
Gods sake, Nowell.
and cet.

No haste but good sir, your fantasy feineth that reason Dorman.
never told you. I call not the holy Scripture your A lie. 56.
clouttes, (I refer me to the place for my discharge, and to prove you a liar)
but your own clouted gloses are the clowtes, the maskers apparel, the
glittering shows, the which I speak off, and by the which you blind not
only the ignorant, but the wyser sort also. To discharge your selves
hereof, it is a world to see how workemanly you handle the matter, by
discoursing shortly upon two points.

The first is, that we by copes, vestimentes, gilted crosses, ca^delstickes,
Nowell. fol. 69. a. 13.
minstrelfye, belles, banners, and other bables, have so be witched and stricken
blind both the simple and many of the wiser sort also, that neither they
can see any thing of Christ their savior, nor here and understand ought of
his most holy word. Yea that we have compelled them instead of the true
worshipping of God, to put all religion in the outewarde and dombe ceremonies,
and not to regard the God off their Father. The second, is a justifying of
your religion by the loss

To the first I make answer, that the ceremonies and Dorman.
ornaments wherewith you scornefuly twite us, were partly The use of
ceremonies.
reverent ceremonies to stir up devotion, partlye co^ly orname^tes to deck
the house of God, that even by such outewarde means, men might eftsoon be put
in remembrance to use no demeanure unseemly for that place. So far was it
from this that the people was hindered thereby from the understanding of Christ
and his holy word, that dull affections were much whetted, and cold
devotion not a little enflammed thereby. Let the manners off men that lived in
that age, when these ceremonies and ornaments were most in use, bear witness
between you and me, whether they were any hinderaunce to the knowledge of
Christ and his word or no. It is a sclaunderouse lie of youres to say, that
we compelled men in the steed off the A l7e. 57.
true worship off God, to put all religion in ceremonies, and cet. As it is
also till you can prove it, that dead beasts bones were A lie. 58.
burnished over with burning gold. But this is M. Nowelles rhetorike good
reader. After that he and his companions have brought us from firm faith to a
rash confidence, from the truth it self to signs and tokens, from one
faith to a nombre of contrary schisms and sects, from the fear of God to a
dissolute security, from praieng and fasting, to plaieng and banqueting, from
repentance and confession, of our sins to laughter and mockerye of that
holy and most necessary sacrament: after that they have spoiled the church
of five holy sacraments (the other two which remain being made but bare
signs and tokens, the one a piece of bread, the other a badge or sign of
Christianity: after they have robbed God of his due honor (the blessed
sacrifice of his body and blood) the saints and friends of God of their
due worship, the souls departed of all charitable relief: after they have
spoiled the realm of most godly fundations, monasteries, colleages,
hospitalles, alms houses, comes solemnelye this protestant proctour, and
reconuenteth us for copes, crosses, candlestickes. etc.

As for the second point M. Nowell it is not iwisse the fo. 69. b. 1.
imprisonment of heretics, not the death of your stinking martirs, not all
the Acts and monumentes of Fox, that can prove one protestant to be a good
catholic. Do not Catholics also suffer imprisonment, loss of gods, lack
of liberty, wives and childern? Are they not in banisheme^t in a strainge
land out of their own country, (then which there is no worldly thing the
lack whereof grieueth them more), not in such wealth M. Nowell as Marchantes
maintained you, no one penie (which we neither requier nor look for, but
only note your state and ours herein how different they are) coming from
them to us. Have not many of them also suffered bitter death, yea more
dreadefull (to use also in this respect your own words) then is usual to
felons, murderers, or to most savage, noisome wild beasts? Let the drawing,
hanging, and quartering, of that nombre of holy fathers of the Charter house,
the cruel execution of that good old man father Forest, and of others: let
the death of those two most worthy pearls of England, B. Fisher, and Sir
Thomas More: let the death of diverse Abbates, religiouse men, gentlemen and
other, testify, that Catholics when death was offered have not forsaken to
dye for religion also. But what Death meaketh not the cause good.
then M. Nowell, is this a sufficient argument to prove the cause good? No, no,
M. Nowell, if it were so, you Sacramentaries and Lutheranes should be of all
sects lest esteemed. The Anabaptists do in this point go far beyond you.
Who to this hour dailye suffer in all countries where they be to be found.
And that death being tombled headlong in sackes into the water they suffer
secretly. Which manner of execution, if it had been practiced upon Lutheranes
and Sacramentaries, that without the sight of the world, the admiration and
applause of the brotherhode, without glory and renown they might have ended
in this world their wretched lives, it is thought that many of them had yeat
lived, either for worse or for better. I might here bring the example of the
Donatistes, whose excessive desire to dye, and to seal with their blood their
heresies, S. Augustine in diverse of his epistles and in the later end of his
third book against the epistle of Parmenianus does well declare. But this
that has been said may Tom. 7.
suffice to conclude M. Nowell, that if all England should run to morrow next
with the blood of heretics (as God of his tender mercy forbid such hardenes
of heart in those that profess them selves to be Christians) yeat ought not
therefore the cause to be judged any whit the better, seeing that we see the
cursed sect of Anabaptists, and have heard of the wicked Donatistes, and
know beside that the devil has as well his false witnesses, ready to suffer
gladly most bitter death for their conceived opinions, as Christ has his
true martirs to do the like for the true catholic faith.

Thus much be said to M. Nowelles impertinent discourse of copes,
vestimentes, gilted crosses, candelstickes etc. and to his other idle talcke of
the persecution forsothe, and martyrdom saving your reuerences of his dear
brethern. Now at the length he comes to that which he should chiefly have
answered in this place, that is of thetrieng of all controversies by the only
scripture. To prove that of controversies rising about the true understanding
of the scripture, the scripture it self should be the judge, he uses a
similitude, wherein he compares us to the phariseis, and him self and his
companions to the Apostles. And upon that comparison reasons in effect as
follows.

As in the controversy between the Apostles and the Phariseis, Nowell. fol.
69. a. 1
the question being whether Christ were the true Messiah, the Apostles
affirming, the Phariseis denieng, if the matter had been referred to the
interpretation and determination of the high priest and his consistory, we
might yeat have looked with the Iues for Messiah to come: and as it was no
reason that in the controversy between the said high priests and the
Apostles, whether they had put Christ justly or unjustly to death, they
should be them selves the judges, who were not only accessaries, but the
principal parts to the murder: so must we now with the Apostles make the
scripture the judge of our controversies, and the pope by all reason must be
excluded, as he that is the sink of all the abominations wherewith he that
has but half an eye may see, how shamefully the law of God is, as it was by
the Phariseis, corrupted.

Your similitude M. Nowell halteth, and is not able Dorman.
therefore to go so far as it should. For the better declaration whereof it is
to be known, that as soon as John the Baptist Matthew. 11.
began to preach, the Synagoge which had no promise to continue for ever,
began to languishe, and so was at the length weakened, that after Christ's
death it came to nothing, Christ having then established a new church, and
made his Apostles the doctors and judges thereof, and Peter the governor of
all. Now see I pray you how this similitude of youres holds. The Apostles
being the true church of Christ, referred not their controversies to the
Phariseis which perteined not to the church, yea were enemies and persecutours
thereof, but referred the same to the scriptures, and judged by the scriptures
them selves, ergo, the church of Christ that is now, may not be the judge of
controversies, but we must refer the same to the scriptures. I deny that
consequent M. Nowell. You prove it, because the Apostles did not refer their
controversies to the high priests and Phariseis. I grant you, for their
priestehode, and authority was expired. When you shall be hable to prove us
Phariseis, and your selves the true church, then may you by this similitude
reason, that as the Apostles referred not the judgment of the meaning of the
scriptures to the Phariseis, which were not the church nor of the church: so
you will not being the church, refer the matter to us, but judge of the
scripture your selves as the Apostles The Apostles being the true church of
Christ judged of the scriptures.
did. In the mean season as the Apostles alleged for the^ selves the
scripture, and said it made for the^ (wherein they gave judgment of the
scripture,) so follows it that Christ's church which is now, (the same that
was then) judges in all controversies which is the right and true sense.
Neither can it serve you to say to the contrary, as you do sclaunderouslie,
that the word of God having been most shamefully by us corrupted, as he that
has but half an eye may well see, it is no reason being parties that we
should be judges therein: Seeing that thus might the Phariseis have said even
of the Apostles them selves, and laid to their charges partiality, because
they were Christ's scholars and disciples, and so parties to the cause which
they maintained, and also for that you have not as yeat proved, nor ever shall be
hable to prove, that Christ's church has ever erred in the faith, or the head
thereof at any time delivered to the church any tradition or erroniouse
opinion, whereby the word of God has been corrupted. Which assertion of
youres being most directly against the scriptures, bearing witness so
manifestly Math. 14. 16. Joan. 14. and alibi.
of the continuance of the church incorrupted, so often avouched by you, and
being the only fundation of this plea of youres that we be the Phariseis, and
you Christ's true Apostles, me thinks you should have done well once in so
often affirming it, to have proved by one sentence of scripture, or some
approved auctor, and not facingly to say, that he that has but half an eye
may see that it is so, or else till you could have proved it, it had been
more for your honesty to have absteined from such unmerciful and
unchristianlike demeanure, as you use toward both the church of Christ, and
the head thereof. Where you say that I will have the scripture rejected, there
you report untruly of me. This I say, that scripture (not thorough any
imperfection or insufficiency that is in it, but only by occasion of
stubborn, wrangling and contentiouse natures, who never will give over the
opinion that they have once conceived (every one being at apoint to receive no
other interpretation thereof the^ to them shall seem good) is not hable to end
and determine al controversies moved upon the lettre thereof, and that therefore
even as in the laws of the realm, which were to decide all controversies
sufficient, so that the law being brought every man would furthewithe
yealde to it, because they will not, there be judges by the prince appointed to
cut of all altercations, and to preserve the realm in quiet: who when the
councillors both of the one part and the other have contentiouslie disputed
the matter, each of them affirming that the law is on his side, shall by
opening the meaning thereof end the strife: So is it not to be thought, but
that God forseing the innumerable sects of heretics that should trouble his
church, of whom there should be no one, no not of them that directly blush
not to teach Suencfeldius.
that there ought to be no scripture at all, that would not colourablie
defend the same by scripture, it is not I say to be thought, that he would
in this case make less provision for his church, then a temporal king will
for the due administration of his laws, and the preserving of unity amongst
his subjects. Neither is it any injury to the scripture, or derogatio^ to
the majesty thereof, that the malice of men makes it less sufficient to
condemn heresies: especially seeing as Tertullian says, the scriptures have
been Lib. de praescript. haeretic. 1. Cor. 11.
by the will off God so disposed, as that they might ministre matter to
heretics, seeing it is written that there must be heresies, which ca^ not be
withowt the scriptures. To this objection of mine, that the scriptures be so
written, that there was never heretic yeat, that did not allege scripture for
the maintenau^ce of the same, and that thought not by the scriptures him self
well able to defend the same, note I beseech the good reader that M. Nowel
makes here no answer at al. Only he makes against this an other objection,
that so the pope may under b. 5.
the name of the church maintain and defend all errors and superstitions.
Which if it were true, what would follow other of this conclusion, but that
there should be no judge at all? Is not this a propre kind of answering trow
you? But because the matter shall not remain in that incerteintie, I will M.
Nowell answer your reason although you would not answer mine. I say
therefore, that the pope as head of Christ's church, that is to say,
defining or decreeing any thing concerning the affairs and business thereof,
never erred yeat, nor ever shall. I prove it by auctoritye and by reason. By
the authority of our Savior him self, who praing that Peter's faith might
not fail, could Lucae. 22.
not but obtain. Which priuileage so obtained, seeing that Christ builded his
church, not to continue for Peter's life time, but for ever: we may not doubt
but that it was given also to his successors. S. Augustine (as I noted before)
Epis. 165.
applied the words of Christ spoken of the Phariseis sitting in Moises chair:
Quae dicunt facite: quae autem faciunt Matthew. 23.
nolite facere. Look what they bid you do, do it: but do not as they do, to
the bishops of Rome succeding Peter, and adds, that in so doing our faith
shall be suer and certain, as the which being placed not in man but on God, can
never be scattred with any tempest of schism. You have the authority of the
Scripture: you have the judgment of S. Augustine, that Peter's faith shall
continue in him and in his successors, that to do as they command, is to
make our faith suer and defensible against the tempests of all schismatic
storms. Now harken to reason. Christ promised for ever to abide with his
church. S. Paul calls it the Matt. 28. 1. Timo. 3.
pillar of truth. If Christ be with it, it can not err: if it be the pillar
of truth it admits no falsehode, if it can admit no falsehode, the pope
which is the head thereof and appointed by God to govern it in earth, can
not in the government thereof err. For if the head might err, then might
the whole body which is bound to follow the head. And thus both by authority
and reason, by experience of these 1500. years it appears, that there is
great difference between the two likelihodes that you put in the pope, and in
other private men, touching the interpretation of the scripture. And therefore
upon the overthrow of this, down comes all that you build thereupon,
eitherin this place or else where. Having now taken your pleasure
sufficiently at us, comparing us with Annas and Caiphas, calling us thieves,
adversaries of the gospel, guilty of many heresies, corruptions of religion
and false superstitions, you enter in to a common place of councelles, whereof
you say as follows.

But the adversaries off the Gospel deal thus with us: Nowell. b. 20.
The Pope and all his cleargye being guilty off many heresies, etc. and
thereof accused, do assemble them selves together in a council, in the which
nothing may be moved, much less determined, but such as pleases the Pope
him self; there is inquiry made of us (who do accuse them thereoff and offer
to prove it) and there unheard and unseen we are condemned of our
adversaries. etc.

You here note in the margent (for the proof hereof Dorman.
that nothing may be moved in the council but such as pleases the pope)
Pighius in his 6. book and first chapitre of his Hierarchy. This place you
alleged before. As I told you then so do I now, that you have beelied
Pighius. Supra. fol. 24. b.
For he says not as you do here, that nothing may be moved in the council
but such as pleases the pope. He says: Haud fere fit, almost it is not
otherwise, not denieng as you say he does, that it can not be otherwise. The
words of Pighius note rather the great diligence of the pope, which is
such, that when all the world shall meet together in a general council,
they can not for the most part name any thing to be reformed or concluded,
that the Bishop of Rome with his learned council about him, has not before
forseene and handled, then take away liberty from any man to move any
doubt to be resolved not considered before by the pope. That the pope moves
ordinarily such doubts to the council, is it that offend you, be angry with
S. Peter his predecessor, who practiced the same first in the general
council mentioned in the Acts of thapostles. You accuse the pope and his, and
Act. 15.
offer to prove it. It is in deed the common brag of you al, to say you can
prove us Phariseis, corrupters of religion, that the church of Christ has
utterly failed, and so forth. The which if you fear to prove in general
councelles, yeat you might me thinks give us a taste of your prouffes in
your poisoned writings. To that that you complain, that you are condemned
unheard and unseen, we say as you gessed we would, that you might be heard
if you listed, against the which answer of ours you reply.

How we are called and how we may be heard, let John Husse, Nowell. fo. 70. a.
2
called by the emperor Sigismunde his saulfe conduct under his great
imperial seal, to the council of Constance with Hierom of Prague, (who both
were contrary to the faith given them by the greatest christian prince in the
world, condemned and burned to ashes) be an eternal witness: yea let their
own decree made in the said council, which was: that no faith nor promise
is to be kept to any heretic, nor that any man by any promise, stands
bound to an heretic etc. be a perpetual testimonye off the same.

Behold how many lies in how few lines. John Dorman.
Husse being called to the council of Constance, brake the conditions of his
saulfe conduct. For whereas he promised the emperor to continue at the council
to the end, and thereupon had the saulfe conduct granted, he not trusting
thereto, conueighed him self out of Constance covered in a carte with straw.
He absteined not beside being excommunicate, and not having learned so far as
you are come now, from saing of mass, contrary to the laws of the church
and express commandment of the council. So that seeing in every saulfe
conduct the party to whom it is granted, is as well bound to observe the
conditions on his part to be observed, as he that granted it, is to perform
semblably his promise, the which Husse did not, you have herein sclaundred the
council and made a lie. Lie. 59.
If you deny this you may consulte the history of Vlrichus Reichentall, who
being a citezin of Constance was su a Teutonic. histor. de Council. Constant.
then present at the council when these things happened, and reports
thereof as has been declared. That you join to Husse Hierome of Prague, that
is an other lie. For as Hierom never would venture so far as to trust A lie.
60.
to any saufeconduct, so was he taken against his will and Acts and
monumentes fo. 243.
brought to the council, as witnesses your fellow Fox. Now follows the
greatest lie of all, and that is of a decree that should be made in the
council off Constance, that no faith or promise is to be kept to any
heretic, nor that any man by any promise, stands bound to an heretic. I
will here allege the words of the decree, which this falsefier durst not for
fear of being betrayed. They are these: Praesens sancta synodus; ex quouis
saluoconductu per imperatorem, ^ess. 19.
reges, and alios seculi principes, hereticis vel de heresi diffamatis,
putantes eosde^ sic a suis erroribus reuocare quocunque vinculo se astrinxerint
concesso, nullu^ fidei catholicae vel iurisdictioni ecclesiasticae praeiudiciu^
generari, vel impedimentum prestari posse seu debere declarat, quominus dicto
saluoconductu non obstante, liceat iudici competenti and ecclesiastico de
huiusmodi personaru^ erroribus inquirere, and alias contraeos debite procedere,
eosdemque punire quantum iustitia suadebit, si suos errores reuocare
pertinaciter recusauerint, etiamsi de saluo conductu confisi ad locum venerint
iudicij alias non venturi, nec sic promittentem, quum alias fecerit quod in
ipso est, ex hoc in aliquo remansisse obligatum. That is to say. This present
holy sinode declares, that notwithstanding any saufeconduct granted by the
emperor, kings, or other seculer princes, to heretics or diffamed of
heresy, upon hope thereby to call them from their errors, with whatsoever
bond they have bound them selves, that yeat there shall not or may not,
grow thereby any prejudice to the catholic faith or ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, in such wise that it may not be laufull for the competent and
ecclesiastical judge, to enquier of the errors of such persons, and
otherwise to proceed duly against them and to punish them, as justice shall
requier, if obstinately they refuse to revoke their said errors: yea
allthough they trusting upon the saufeconduct came thither, which otherwise
they would not have done, and that he that makes this promise, when otherwise
he has done what is in him to do, remains not hereby in any thing bound.
These be the words of the council, this is the decree that you pretend to
fear. You say the council has decreed that no faith is to be kept to
any heretic: the council has only, that such faith as is given by
temporal princes (in matters of heresy not perteining to their jurisdiction)
is not to be holden, in such wise as it might prejudice the ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. The clean contrary therefore appears by the council to that
which you say: that is, that faith given by some men should hold and be
good, (otherwise the exception of seculer princes had been made in vain,
whereas the council might have said as you do, that no faith without
exception should be kept). Wherefore I conclude, that all faith given to any
heretic by any ecclesiastical person laufully auctorized is good, and to
be kept, and The counsel of Co^stance falsified by. M. Nowell, by making a
triple. lie. 63.
that therefore you have falsified this council, in making it to speak
generally of all men, of all faith, of all heretics, which speaks but only
of seculer princes, who have no authority to make any such promise of that
which pertains not to their power and jurisdiction. And therefore even as he
that promises an other man's fact, promises his only diligence and is
bound no f^rder, so the council declared that seculer princes promising to
heretics saufeconduct to come and to go, because they promised factum alienu^
the deed of other men, were having done their diligence to perform their
promise, discharged, and no longre bound. Now I pray you M. Nowel, because
you complain that offering to prove the pope and his clergy guilty of many
heresies, corruption of religion etc. you can not be heard, or if audience
were granted to you, promise were not like to be kept because of this decree
of the council of Constance, let us examine how true this is. The council of
Constance, as by the words of the decree evidently appears, declared only
that promises made by lay princes did not bind the makers. When you were
called to the last council of Trent, was the saufeconduct that was offered to
you made by the emperor only, or some other seculer prince? Was it not made by
the body and head of that most holy and learned council one of them, that
ever was assembled, with such assurance for your indemnitie, as greater by
man's wit could not be devised? Why came you not then, why put you not in
your accusations, why durst The protestants feine false causes to excuse
the^, for not appearing at the general council.
you not show your faces? Who sees not that the pretending (for the cause of
your refusal) of this forged decree, proceeded of fear to be vanquished in
your heresies, not to be harmed in your bodies? Who perceives not that in
this drawing back of youres, you countrefeited some cowardly yeoman, that
fearing to be pressed to the war, causes his wife to bind a clowte about
his head, and then his kerchiefe being sick, he must needs tarry at home
forsothe, who if sickness had not let him, would have killed the enemies all
of them him self, as you would the pope and all his clergy, had not this
decree been. Well your wit showed it self more in tarieng at home, then your
honesty has done here in falsifieng this decree.

They say we are heretics, we do deny it: if our naie may not Nowell. a.
14. Dorman.
defend us why should their yea condemn us? etc.

We say not only that you be heretics. Read M. Nowel the. 8. cause in the
conclusion of my first book. Read the discourse annexed unto the Apology of
Staphilus lately set forth in English. Read the fortress. You shall The
first part the last chap.
find there a number of your assertions holden generally of al protestants,
to be old condemned heresies in the first six hundred years: you shall find
that the doctrine of John Calvin your Master, both in the doctrine of the
blessed sacrament of the altar, and of baptism, is stuffed with a nombre of
old heresies condemned also in the primitive church. Discharge your selves
first of these heresies, and then say that we say only that you be
heretics. We say not only that we be the church, but we prove it also, and
have made it most evident that you can by no means be the church. As of late
has been proved, answer it when you can.

In some countries if the party accused plead not guilty, and say a. 19.
Nowell.
naie to the crime objected, if he by diverse torments enforced to confess,
do still maintain his nay he is discharged and let go. But it can not help
us accused as heretics to deny the false accusation etc.

I blame you not M. Nowell though for heretics you Dorman.
claim the favor that is wont to be showed to murderers, thieves and other
malefactors, allthough this reason of youres that heretics the greatest
offenders that are (for no crime is so great as the fault of heresy) should
have this favor, because other malefactors less offending have it, would
scarcely be found sound, if it should be by the rigorouse rules of logic
examined. But it needs not, it has other faults enough. For allthough in
some countries the parties accused denieng the fault in such wise as you
say, be upon their denial discharged and let go: yeat is there no country,
where if the party accused for theft would confess the deed, but say it
were no fault, he should be be so discharged (the laws co^demning theft by
death) and let go. And yeat this is your case M. Nowell. For you confess the
deed. You deny (for example) sacrifice and prayer for the dead: you stand in
defense of it as did A^rius a Epiph. lib. 3. haeresi. 75.
condemned heretic above. 13. hundred years ago. Only your denial is that
it is no heresy, which thing if it might be laufull for every heretic to
do, and to escape, every one giving to heresy the title of true doctrine,
how many think you would be condemned? Did not Michael Seruetus put to
death by the procurement of John Calvin at Geneua, deny that he was an
heretic as you do? Did Calvin any wrong to him in condemning him, who said
he could bring as good testimony of his innocencye out of Gods word, as you
say you can for your heresies? Did Cranmer any wrong to Ioane of kent,
because she said she was no heretic? Do not the Anabaptists dailye say the
same? It is toe great an absurditye M. Nowell, and sauoreth of your cholere
over much, that while you labor to bring the catholics in hatred, as though
they showed you less favor then they do to thieves, murderers, and other
offenders, you forget that in so doing you show your self M. Nowell plays
the proctour for all heretics.
a proctour for heretics of all sorts, and that yeat you miss of your
purpose, the favor of the laws extended to heretics, being greater then is
practiced upon any other trangressours. For make the comparison aright, and
you shall make it between a thief sorry for his theft, or murderer for his
offense, and an heretic denieng and repenting his heresies. Now who knows
not in this case who has the greatest favor, the heretic upon repentance
being received to mercy, which favor other offenders have not? To make
such false and untrue comparisons as you do, if it proceed not of ignorance
M. Nowell, surely it comes of malice, and that is worse? Where you say A
lie. 64. b. 6.
that I devise God to be absent, that I say that he is dombe, I said not so.
Why do you falsely burden me with that which I never thought? I said that he
is In my book. fo. 9. b
not present with us in such sort as that we may see him, and speak with
him face to face, to be resolved at his mouth of such doubts and questions
as should rise emongeste us. Say not you the same? Do you call him then
dombe, or say that he is absent? If you do not, why I more then you? Nowell.
fol. 71. a. unto fol. 74. a. 26. in which compass the testimonies brought to
prove that only Scripture is sufficient to determine all controversies are
examined. Dorman.


S. Depecca. merit. libr. 1. cap. 22. Ad Cresc. lib. 2. cap. 31. and 32.
Augustine contending against those who do attribute Gods grace and gifts
to the the worthynesse of men's merits, concludes thus. Cedamus and
consentiamus auctoritati Scripturae sanctae, quae nescit falli nec fallere. Let
us give place to the auctoritye of holy Scripture which can not be deceived nor
deceive.

We say with S. Austen. Let us give place and agree to the authority of the
holy Scripture which can not be deceived nor deceive. Will not two heirs
striving about their fathers good des say as much as this comes to of his
testament, desire that it may be brought furthe, and both of them offer to be
tried by it and to stand to it, and yeat the words being doubtefull require a
judge notwithstanding.

S. Augustine prefers the Sriptures before the private opinion off Saint
Cyprian. So do we toe, and before any other doctor disagreing from the
scripture expounded to us in general councelles, and by common consent of all
nations, How far this sense which you would wrest out of Saint Augustins
words, that the church may not be judge of the true meaning of the scripture,
Contra epist. fundament. Manicheor. cap. 5.
is from the mind of S. Augustine, his words in an other place do well
witness: where he protests that he would not believe the Gospel: if the
auctoritye of the church did not move him thereto. How often beside does Lib.
2. contra Julian. and alibi.
he in writing against Julian the Pelagian, object to him the doctors of the
church expounding the scriptures against his opinion?

As for that which you bring out of Saint Augustine against councelles, it is
falselye and untruly applied. For b. 10. Lib. contra Maximinu^ 3. cap. 14.
Saint Augustins yealding to the adversaries, whom he saw frowardly bent to
stand to the heretical council off Ariminum, does no more prove him to be
of the mind to eneruate and weaken thereby the auctoritye of general
councelles, then if I would say to you (disputing with you upon the real
presence of Christ in the sacrament, and knowing that you were as wholly bent
to maintain the Confession of Augspurg, or perhaps the solemn cup
council in Martin Luthers house at Wittemberg, as I am to defend the counsel
of Nice, Ephesus, or Lateranu^: Well M. Nowell, neither shall you at this time
bring furthe your Confession of Augspurg, or the solemn conclusion agreed
upon at Martin Luthers house, nor I will allege How S. Auste^ renounced the
authority of the Nicene council.
either the council of Nice, Ephesus or Lateranum but the scriptures etc. then
I say you could prove hereby, that I, who trusting upon the goodness of the
cause, quit for the time the alleging of the councelles, were of the mind
that the auctoritye of the councelles made nothing for the decision of
controversies. And that this was the meaning of S. Augustine, to relinquishe
only for that present time the authority of the council off Nice, that the
heretic might forsake his schismatic council, not that he esteemed either
the council of Nice or any other laufull general council so lightly as you
suppose, both this aduerbe nunc, now, (whose nature is to limite and
restreine) which you fearing lest it would mar all the marcket, and
perceiving that it would be hard to deceive the learnedersorte with this
place, alleged truly in A lie by omission 65.
the latin but left out in the english, thinking that your part should be
well enough played, if you were able to blind the ignorant and unlearned:
both does this I say argue the meaning of S. Austen to be as I say, and not
as you pretend, and also that he does every where against the Donatistes
allege, Concilium plaenarium totius orbis, the Lib. 1. de baptis. contra
Donat. cap. 18. Epist. 118. ad Ianuar. fo. 72. a. 3. S. Austen beelied. ^^ How
the scripture is judge and how it is not judge of a^ controversies.
full council of all the world, and says of councelles, quorum est in
ecclesia saluberima auctoritas whose authority is in the church most
wholesome. It is not to be forgotten in this place, that where S. Austen
calls the scripture by the name of a witness, you conclude that he calls
the scripture judge. Which if he had done might easelie have been answered to
be true also, when the church has declared what the scripture meant. As the
laws of all countries are the judges of such controversies as rise there but
not the judges alone, because they be subject to wrangling interpretations,
and therefore requier an other judge to judge their meaning. But seeing S.
Austen calls not the scripture judge but witness, you have dealt untruly by
concluding more upon his words then is in them.

To the places brought here by you out of Chrysostom, Fol. 72. ^*
I answer, that we say as much in the commendation of holy scripture as he
does. For none of those places make holy scripture the only sufficient
trial of all controversies. Therefore where as they say, we must believe
scripture rather then men, that if we would believe them we should fall in to
no errors: we grant it to be true in scripture as it is delivered by the
fathers and expounded by the church. For the first place of S. Hierom, he there
rejected an allegation of uncertain authority commonly called Apocriphu^,
about the person of that Zachary which was slain between Matthew. 23.
the temple and the altar, which because he knew was not received by
universal tradition, there remained no other ground of proving it but by
scripture: where since it was not, he might well say it is as easily contemned
as proved. M. Nowelles ignorance in the writ^nges off the fathers.
The last place, non adferamus stateras dolosas etc. is not S. Hieromes, as
you trusting over much Gratianus (to whom belike you have recourse for your
auctorities out of the doctors, to avoid either further pain, either else
because you delight not much in such company) report it here Lib. 2. de
baptis. cap. 6.
to be. It is taken out of S. Austin M. Nowell, a token that many a man
speaks (to use the old English proverb) of Robin hood that never shot in
his bow, and makes nothing against me, who wish you would in deed way things
with less deceitefull waightes of scripture the^ you do.

The places here noted out of S. Austen and Chrisostom B. 14.
touching the conference of one place of scripture with an other, of the darcke
and obscure with the clear and light, are brought to prove conference to be
good and proffitable, which we deny not. But that which we deny and therefore
you should have proved, neither those places nor any other that you have
alleged do prove. First that allwaies such conference can assure us of the
true meaning of the scripture: secondarily that in this conferring of places
there is no difficulty, variety or uncertainty: which we affirm, and prove
to be, because to one man (to the Lutheran) it seems that hoc est corpus meum,
this is my body, and verbum caro factum est, the word is made flesh, are
places of like phrase and speech: to you. M. Nowell it seems, that Ego sum
vitis vera, I am a true vine, is like to this, This is my body. Why you will
say I have proved this by Chrysostom, who says: Ad ipsum diuinae scripturae
scopum accedamus quae Chrisost. in 2. cap. Genesis Homil. 13.
seipsam interpretatur: and again, Sacra scriptura seipsam exponit, and
auditorem errare non sinit. Let us come to the marcke of the holy scripture
which expounds it self. The holy scripture expounds it self and
suffers not the hearer to err. I know that these be Chrisostomes words: I
know that they make nothing for your purpose: I know, and be it known to all
men, that they are most shamefully by you abused and mangled. For whereas
Chrysostom confuting the error of those that grounding them selves upon this
place of Genesis: and inspirauit in faciem eius Genesis 2.
spiraculum vitae, and he breathed upon his face the breathe of life,
maintained that the soul of man was off the same essence with God: where I
say, Chrysostom specially in this point says that the scripture expounds
it self, you make him generally to say, that the scripture does so in all
doubts. The which to persuade the better, whereas the last of those two
sentences of Chrysostom by you alleged, has thus: quamuis sacra scriptura
quum nos tale Chrisostomes words mangled by M. Nowell.
quiddam docere vult seipsam exponit, and auditorem errare non sinit. Allthough
the holy scripture when it will teach us any such thing expounds it
self, and suffers not the hearer to err: you mangling the sentence, cut
away the middle words, quum nos tale quiddam docere vult, when it will teach
us any such thing, lest by those words the reader might understand that
Chrysostom gave there no general rule, but spoke only of that special point
or some other like unto it. If this were not your meaning M. Nowell why cut
you of the word qua^uis at the beginning, and these other in the midst? Tell
us some other cause if you can.

Next after these auctorities, you allege a treaty of one fo. 73. a. Borrowed
of the confession of wittenberge. Tit. de Eccles.
that you set forth Rhetorically, calling him an ancient auctor printed with
Chrysostom and of long time taken for him, to prove that the church must be
tried by the scriptures.

To this place I answer, that whether it be Chrisostomes own work from
whence it is taken or no, this is a thing most certain, that it is to be
warily readen, as the book which has thrust into it if it be Chrisostomes
own, or any other catholic man's, by some false Arrian heretic many
poisoned and perniciouse sentences for the maintenance of the Arrians heresy.
Amongst other to note to you one or two, even in the. 48. homily, which is
the very next before this that you allege here, the Catholics for
mainteining the equality of Christ with God the father, are nombred amongst
heretics, and in the. 45. they are called heretics, that hold that the
blessed trinity is equal of like substance and authority. And therefore in
such places as this auctor who so ever it be, dissenteth from the common
faith of Christ's church, we have just cause to suspect, that there this
heretic (who has it appears ouerronne the whole,) has dipped in his
fingres, and therefore that we reject. As in this place it is likely that he
thought to make a way for his heresies, by chalenging to be tried by the
scripture only, the common request of the Arrian heretics, because the word
they said Homousion was not to be found in the scriptures. But now if these
words were Chrisostomes own, and not put in by the heretic: yeat follows it
not that because the church is to be tried by the scriptures only, that
therefore all other questions may be decided by the same alone. For God whose
wisdom divised, whose holy spirit brethed, whose finger wrote the
scriptures: as for heretics that contemn the authority of the church, he
has so disposed them (as Tertullian writes) that they might ministre them
Lib. de praescript. aduers. haeres.
matter: so has he again for them that shall be content humbly to rest in the
lap of the same, made that matter by the scriptures so clear, that a
catholic man may be bold to provoke an heretic, yea all the heretics in
the world to dispute by scripture only of that question, which and where is
the true church. And suerlie so was it expedient that it should be, that the
church which should judge of the true sense and meaning of the scriptures,
should by the scriptures be so evidently proved, that about that their might
be no wrangling. As it is not to be merueiled therefore, if any catholic man
give council to prove the church by the scriptures, (the scriptures speaking
of the church as has S. Austen more plainly then they ^narrat. in psalm. 30
do of Christ him self, and thereto being written so evidently that the
textes making for the trial thereof need no interpretation) Lib. de vnitate
ecdes. ca. 16
so can you not reason that all other controversies in semblable wise, must be
tried by the scripture, because the scripture is more ambiguouse in other
matters, and because the church is proved so plainly, that it might afterward
having the continual assistence of Gods holy spirit, and being the pillar
of truth, assuer us being in doubt of the true meaning of scripture. And thus
much for answer to your long place alleged to so little purpose, out of that
ancient auctor printed with Chrysostom, and of long time taken for him. By
whose authority lest the worekes of S. Clement making so much against your
new A sleight of M. nowells.
doctrine might get any credit, being here alleged by this ancient auctor
printed with Chrysostom and of long time taken for him, you took your pen in
to your hand, and cut that sentence clean away.

Having now spent your store of testimonies brought fo. 74. b. 9
by you to prove that the scripture alone ought to be the judge of all
controversies, you return to your old plea so often avouched and never
proved, that we be the phariseis, and therefore can not be the true church of
god, that you allege scriptures against us as the Apostles did against the
phariseis, of whom and us you say further as follows.

And I am suer that the high priest with his Iuishe church, Nowell. b. 29.
was able to say as much for the ordinary succession of the high priests
his predecessors even from Aaron until his time, for antiquity, for consent,
and for universality against Christ and his Apostles (so few in comparison,
and as it seemed latelye start up): as you are able to say for your church
or against us. But yeat we do think, that the word of God as it was
alleged by Christ and his Apostles against the said high priest and his
church, so may it and ought it also to be alleged by us against your
high priest and your church, and cet.

What so ever the Phariseis had to say against the Apostles Dorman.
for them selves, they had not this to say which we have against you, that
their church was by the testimonies of the Scriptures promised to continue
for ever. The Apostles proved to them the contrary out of the scriptures: if
you can do the like to us, and show by evident scriptures that the church of
Christ should for the space of fiftene hundred or nine hundred years either
be overthrown, and at the length restored by a new Messiah, we renounce the
benefit off succession, we give over antiquity, consent, vniuersalitye and
what so ever else. Thus alleged the Apostles the word of God against the
Phariseis. Thus must you allege it against us, if you will allege it at all.

And whether you be so or no (the true church of god) seeing it Nowell. fol. 75.
a. 23.
is in question, and a greater doubt and controversy amongst men I am suer,
then can be about the sense of any place off the scripture, you shall never
be hable to make any exception to the scripture as no competent judge in
controversies, but we shall be able ten times more to make exception to your
Pope and his church, as no indifferent nor meet judge.

We make no exception nor ever did, against the scripture Dorman.
as of it self an incompetent judge to determine controversies. This we say,
that the frowardenes of men addicted to maintain their once received opinions,
makes that the scripture is not alone sufficient to decide the same, till the
church have given sentence between those that shall thus contend, which is the
true meaning of the scripture How the scripture decideth controuet sies.
about the which the variaunce is. The which sentence being given, then does
the Scripture alone decide the matter, as that which contained always the
same truth, which is now manifest, being before secret and hidden.

Whereas you say that you can make such good exceptions against us that we
be not the church, if you had proposed your exceptions, you should have
heard mine answer. But to prove the contrary that we be the true church, I
refer the Reader to the Fortress of the faith off late set furthe. And
further those that have the understanding of the Latin tongue, to that short
but notable epistle of saint Augustine to Honoratus a Donatist, where this
Epist. 161.
very question (Honoratus claiming the true church to their side as you do
now, Saint Augustine defending the contrary) is attempted to be between them
louinglye debated. Vide eunde^ in psalm. 101. concione. ^.
That which served Saint Austen mainteining that the church of Christ must
be thoroughe out all the world, and that therefore he who was of that faith
that all the world held had the right church on his side, not Honoratus
whose church was only in Africa: why should it not serve for us against
you, whose congregation within these few years, was not only not in any
whole part of Germany, but in no one known man of Germany, nor of all the
world beside neither. Tell us how Christ lost his church and it came to you?
Thus much for this present may suffice, for it is not meet that every
extrauagant proposition of youres, cast in to make your book swell with
impertinent matter, because you lacked better stuffing, should be here handled
at large, of the which each alone would rise to a just treatise.

You reioise mightily in the prosperouse success of your fo. 76. 2. 6.
new gospel. Who can let beggars to make much of their rags? Yeat is it
not so far anaunced as was the heresy of Arrius before. Neither have you so
much cause to triumph upon the matter all things well considered. What
merchandise you make and how your gain rises in deceauing poor simple
craftesmen I know not: your market is thought therein to stand at a stay.
But this I know, in other countries, and here credibly that in our own, the
wyser and better learned fall dailye from you.

You would here make men believe that I was wont in times paste to make pastime
upon the stage by playeng b. 11.
the vice. If you speak this of your own devising it comes of malice: if
you speak it upon the report of others, of want of discretion, so lightly to
believe every false rumor. How ever it be a lie it is, maliciously feined to
discredit my person and writings. Although if it had been Alye. 67.
as you say, both many honest and learned men have occupied that place in
exercise of learning in the universities, and you off all other might worst
find fault therewith. Whose profession the time has been was amongst other
things to play the master fool, and to frame your scholars to these
manners. Of whom some one came sense to such excellency herein, that whether
he atteined to his masters grace I am not able to pronounce, but of this I am
suer, that of all that were in Oxforde in his time he bare the bell. You know
I dare say Alexander Nowell, that taught Gnato his nurtor to draw his cap
overthwart his fellow Parmeno his nose, when he saluted him with plurima salute
suum impertit Parmenonem Gnato. And thus much might be said to you had I ever
practiced that which you so often have taught other to do, as by the lessons
which like a master in that faculty you here give, may to any man easily
appear. My parable of the felon is not impertinent, being brought in to
disprove the heretics assertion crieng for only scripture, and rejecting the
visible head of the church, which is the thing that in this first
proposition I take on me to prove. You will help you say the surmised felon.
You do well. Why should not one frinde help an other. I perceive the old
proverb is true, kind will creep where it can not go. For how do you help
him I pray you? Forsothe you say.

If the felon appealing for the trial of his innocence to God, Nowell. fo.
77. a. 12
can bring for him so many testimonies of gods own mouth, as we are able
for our innocence to bring testimonies of words proceeding from the mouth of
God, and of our savior Jesus Christ, and yeat it will not serve the seely
fellow, nor help him any thing in his plea of not guilty: then I think
there can not be a fitter law to proceed against him then the popes canons
(which you know well M. Dorman for you have therein spent more time the^ in
the study of the scripture) neither can he have a meeter judge to condemn him
then the pope him self: and a handesomer man amongst all men to be, I will
not say his hangman but the forman of a popish quest to pass against the
seely soul, shall not any man I believe easelie find, nor a fitter then is M.
Dorman. And thus I let his parable pass.

By what name you call me M. Nowell, hangman or Dorman.
forman it forces not, your tongue is no sclaundre. It may beseme me well
enough to be miuried by that tongue by the which Christ suffers him self
and his blessed saints to be blasphemed. But I pray you how help you this
pore felon for all the malice that you bear to me? If he could you say,
bring as good testimony of his innocence owte off gods word, as you can
for youres. etc. If he brought no better, then were he like to stretche a
halter. For let us suppose your self (as meet a man as any that I know) to
occupy this felons room at the bar, and see for your only justifying
faith what one word off scripture you have? That the sacrament of the altar
is only a figure, what testimony of gods mouth could you bring? That the
lay princes are appointed by Christ to be the supreme governors in all
ecclesiastical things and causes, (no prince being Christened at the writing
of the scriptures) that all controversies ought to be tried by only
scriptures, where is the scripture? If the felon could bring as good
testimonies as you, were he not now think you like to be much helped by you?
But I merueile where your wits were M Nowell, that you be so far ouersene,
as where as I putt the case in a felon guilty and that had well deserved to
dye: you would ever make such a supposition, as though such a malefactor
might find any testimonies in the scripture to prove him innocent. But I
know your meaning well enough. You thought covertly to signify, that there
was no felon that had so grievously offendid, but that he might as well prove
his innocence by the scriptures, as you your doctrine thereby. Except you so
meant, to wrest my example to your meaning, or to suppose a thing that can not
be (as that an offendour worthy to dye by the laws should find scripture for
his defense) either it lacks (to say no worse) policy or honesty. And thus
I let this parable pass.

That which follows of Sardanapalus, Nero, Heliogabalus, fo. 77. b. 4
Ventriloqui, and such like, is but a twang of your harp, which has now
so often sounded upon one string, that you make us believe that you have no
more varitie in harping, then has the cuckoo shift of descant in singing.

It is a world to see how here you lash out the gospel in B. 26.
the margent of your book, against pardons, masses, soul masses, trentalles,
diriges: how you defend the cause of Math. 21. 23. Marc. 12.
the pore widow that had her only cow you wot not where taken away. As
though S. Mathewe and S. Marcke had expressly made mention of these things,
the widows cow and all: whereas there is no such thing in them to be found,
saving that there is mention of such as rob widows housen, and in an other
place of the castinge of the buyers and sellers owte of the temple, which if
you think you may apply to such pore priests amongst us, as were rewarded
with a grote after they had said mass for a soul departed this world: what
Merchandise is it I pray you that your ministres make, in taking a marcke,
ten shillinges, a noble at the least for every funeral sermon?

I will not match with you in Plautus terms, in whom fo. 78. a. ^
it appears you have bestowed more time then in S. Austen, or an other good
doctor of the church, and perhaps I might add, have better borne away
such Plautine periphrases, then out of the scripture good Christian lessons.
Yeat this I must needs marvel at M. Nowell, how you be so suddenly fallen out
with pore priests, lasshing at them so cruelly with your Plautine
periphrases. To the whole order of whom in king Edwardes days you pretended,
either for fear or flattry, to bear so much good will, that whereas the
auctor of the comoedy called Andrisca, had feined a priest to have misused him
self with a curriers wife: you exhibiting the same comoedy before the
reverend father in God, the B. that then was of westminstre, turned the priest
(whom now it pleases you to call by a plautine periphrasis trifur
trifurcifer) in to a souldior, whom you named Trisimachus. At this sodeine
change I say of mind I can not choose but marvel, and of the same can find
no cause, except it be that from a sobre and modest scholemaister, you be
transformed into a lewd and Ruffianly soldier, as by the warlike phrases in
your book, and gonneshot of terrible threateninges and boasting bragges so
common to you in your sermones, you give men just cause to think.

Of this argument of the Protestants: Christ is head of the church Ergo the
Pope is not. Ergo there is no other. The 22. Chapitre.
FIRST where as you say that I made a wo^dring before, fo. 73. b. 22.
that Christ should be head of the church, I never wondered thereat, but
said we found no fault therewith, but confessed the same our selves. You
beely me therefore. As A lie. 68.
for your argument surely it shall never be worth a pypt nutte. Yes say you,
the argument is good.

Because the Apology takes the word church for the Universal Nowell.
church, which has not nor can possibly have, any earthelie head over it to
govern it, as has been often at large heretofore declared.

Wheresoever you have declared any thing before touching Dorman. See the 11.
Chapitre before, and the. 12.
this impossibility of one head over Christ's church, there have I answered
you, thither I refer the reader. You might declare the good affection, that you
have to prove it, and therefore you said circunspectly that you had declared,
for surely you never proved it hitherto.

I said that your argument did not hold, whereby you reasoned that there
could be no other head of Christ's universal church because Christ was him
self: no more then if one would say, that the priest did not baptize,
forgive sins, etc. because Christ do the these things by the means of his
ministres. To this you say, that these examples make rather against me then
with me. But why M. Nowell I pray you? Your reason follows.

For one chief head has diverse vndreministres in diverse Nowell. fo. 79. a.
1.
services, and places usually: but what pertains that to prove that there
must be one head over all places, and services ecclesiastical thorough out
the whole world which is impossible to be?

These examples were never brought M. Nowel to prove Dorman.
that there must be one head over the whole church, but to remove the
foolish argument made against that one head: now they make not for one head
say you, ergo, they make rather against me.

Neither can your scholasticall distinction of caput absolutum and Nowell.
ministeriale help the matter, nor yeat Hosius declaration tending to the same
end, how bishops be both servants and lords, can in this case any thing
further you. For there can not possibly be one only head over all the church,
more then there can be one universal civil head absolute in earth, over all
the world it self.

What a blind harpar is this, that harpeth always upon one string, and
gives allwaies one solutio^ to all arguments, and yeat never gives other
reason (to fortify that common solutio^ grounded upon Gods, not omnipotency
but impotency, and lack of power) then that sorry and seely reason (which
needs as much to be underpropped as the other, and between which two
comparisons the difference has been manifestly showed before allreadie) of
governing the whole world by one universal civil head. He never proves,
but ever repeateth: It is impossible, it is impossible there should be one
head, thinking that at the least by often repeting, and stout bearing out
the matter he shall make it at the length to seem right well proved to the
reader.

I know M. Dorman does so qualify this the popes supremacye Nowell. 22. a.
terming him caput ministeriale the ministerial head, for that Christ is the
absolute head of all. But yeat in respect off the whole church, as being
under the Pope, he will have him called caput the head. But I would have him
to make that relation of caput, and these words seruus seruorum to agree, and
to be both caput and seruus or minister, respectu eiusdem: the head and the
servant in one respect, especially claiming such a M. Nowells term.
capitalitye as does the Pope, which can not agree with the humble
ecclesiastical ministry. etc.

Belike you would have apposed Christ, if it had been Dorman.
your chance to be present, when he said. Qui minor est Lucae. 9.
inter vos omnes hic mayor est. He that is the least emongeste you all is the
greatest. Belike you would have asked him how one could be the greater and the
less. But do you not your self confess that every bishop is the head of
his diocese? And how then M. Nowell does that agree (I use your own words)
with the humble ecclesiastical ministry? Is your head the bishop a headye
servant and a servile head? Kings and Princes are they not the heads of the
people whom they govern, and yeat in that very respect that they be heads,
ministres notwithstanding (as S. Paul witnesses) Romans 13.
and servants?

M. Dorman harpeth to much upon one string out of tune Nowell. b. 16.
for his purpose, I mean the example off the Iuish high priest. and cet.

Who twangeth most upon one string, that let the learned Dorman.
reader judge. Once this is suer, that the string that you should strike here,
you touch not so much as once. For I bring not in this example of the high
priest off the Iues, at this time (as because I once did, you dream that I
do still) to prove that there ought to be one only head in Christ's
church, as there was amongst the Iues, but to detecte the vanity of this
reason of youres. Christ is head of the church and able to rule the same him
self alone, ergo, there needs no other. To this answered I, so was M. Nowell
dissembleth my reason, and twa^geth upon a false string.
he being God head of the Iuish Synagoge also, and as well hable to rule the
same without any help or means as he is now to rule his church: Yeat was
his pleasure to appointe a high priest etc. And therefore that ought to be no
reason to persuade us that he does not or may not do the like now. To this
because you were not hable to replye, you dissembled my meaning, as a little
before in this very place you do, when you say, that my examples make rather
against me then with me. The which practice you use also hereafter as in place
shall be declared. For this matter I have no more to say, but to advise you
that you take your harp into your hand, and twang once upon the right
string.

In prosecuting the confutation of that naughty argument fol. 80. a. 24. 1.
Reg. 15.
of your Apology, I use the examples of Saul called in the scripture the
head over the tribues of Israel, of the husband called by Paul the head of
his wife, off the 1. Cor. 11.
Archebishoppe head over the other bishops of his province, and conclude
thereupon, that as it is no good reason to say: God was head of the tribues
of Israel, therefore Saul was not. Christ is head of us all, men and women:
therefore the husband is not head of the wife: The Arche bishop is head of
the other bishops of his province, Therefore the bishops be not hedes: even
so that the argument of your Apology: Christ is head of his church,
therefore there is no other head, is a faulty argument, because if it were good,
it should exclude also (which it does not) the other heads that I named,
confessed to be true heads in earth. For, quae ratio partis ad partem, eadem
totius ad totum: the same proportion that is of the part to the part, the
same is the proportion of the whole to the whole: that is, if their may be a
head of one diocese in earth which is part of the whole, notwithstanding
that God is head of the whole, there is no let by this argument but there may
be an other head also under him over the whole. And so I prove the reason of
the Apology naught in the whole, quia non valet in partibus, because it is not
good in the parts. To this reason of mine you never make answer, but
dissembling it as you did the other before, you say, that I bring these
examples to prove that there be diverse several b. 13.
heads in earth under Christ, So I did in deed. But why would I prove that?
To prove that there ought to be one head over the whole. Why say you so for
shame M. Nowell? Why dissemble you that which any man that has his common
sense can not but see to be otherwise? I bring it to show how absurd it is
for you to grant, that over the tribues off Israel there may be a head,
over several churches there may be heads, without derogation to Christ's
honor who is the chief, and yeat you will not grant so much to the whole
church for the impediment of that pretended reason, (because Christ is the
head) which lets not in particular churches. And therefore neither Hosius
nor I care, whether Saul were head of the tribue of Leui or no, this example
proving how ever it were sufficiently our intent, which is to disprove your
folishe reason that because Christ is head of his church there needs no
other. When Hosius or I allege this place to gather thereby that there ought
to be one head in earth under Christ over all churches, then we will follow
your mind in co^cluding. In the mean season we take your argument, that
because Christ is the only head over the universal church, therefore
there needs no other general head under him, to be by this example
sufficiently confuted, as before I showed. Yeat because your desire is that it
may be considered, whether when the scripture says that Saul was made head
of the tribues of Israe^l, he were appointed head over the tribue of Leui
also, that is over the clergy, considre it I pray you and spare not, and
when you have all considered and done, you shall perceive how much this
exemption of the clergy from the authority of king Saul makes against you
and your companions, that will make kings to rule the clergy in causes
ecclesiastical. I doubt not but some of your side that have more stayed
heads then you, and that are less passionat, will say that you might have
kept this consideration to your self still.

And where you mingle kings and bishops together whose Nowell. b. 30. and
fo. 81. a. 1.
offices are distinct, and use the examples of the Archbishop off Cauntorbury,
and the bishop of London: what titles so ever your bishops when they were in
those roumes used or abused, I am suer they who be now in place, take it for
their chief honor to be and to be called also gods ministers in his church.

What a world is this when protestants complain of Dorman.
mingling kings and bishops together? As though the world knew not who
confounds and iumbleth together these two offices, they or we. But the fault
is found with me for reasoning from their offices which be distinct. Why you
know M. Nowell if you have not forgotten your logic, that it is not
necessary that things compared should be one in all points. They agree in
this that kings and bishops are both heads and governors, the point
where in the comparison was made. Now whereas to this that I say, that the B.
of Cauntorbury is head off the bishoprike and diocese of London (as he is of
all the bishoprikes within his province) and that yeat a man can not infer upon
this that therefore the bishopp of London is not head of that his diocese, as
you do in saing that because Christ is head of the whole church therefore
there is no other under him, whereas I say to this you answer, that your
bishops take it for their chief honor to be and to be called gods
ministres in his church, so do our bishops to M. Nowell, and used no other
titles, then those which your false bishops having falsely usurped use and
abuse at this day, but what is that to the matter that we entreat of? Well be
bold man and blushe not: coffe out that tuffe fleaume that lies in your
throat, and say that the archbishop is of no more power then the bishop. If
you had said thus, then had you answered yeat some thing, whereas now you
have answered nothing. Except this may stand for your answer, when you
prove it, that neither Archbishop nor bishop may be called heads of the
churches fo. 81. a. 6.
that they govern, but rather kings and princes. Which opinion because you
see that it is contrary to all M. Nowell labors to help his own
contradiction by a folishe shift.
that you said before touching the places of S. Cyprian and S. Hierome, where
you confessed so often that every bishop was head of his own diocese, to
salve that sore you say.

Yeat I deny not but that bishops may be, and have been Nowell. a. 17.
though improprely, named heads even by good writers, as the scholemaister of
a prince, in that the prince is his scholar is his head etc.

Surely bishops are much beholden unto you, that Dorman.
you grant them so much authority over their flock, as you had over your
scholars when you were scholemaister of Westminstre. But I pray you M. Nowell
call to your remembrance, that S. Ciprian says of the bishop that he is in
the diocese where he rules the judge in Christ's stead, that S. Hierom
calls him the high priest, that he must he says have pearelesse authority
above all other, that schisms rise by not obeing him, and judge with your
self what a handsome comparison you have made. But admitting even your own
similitude, you shall see how much you have said for the authority of
bishops against that unlawful oath which you exact of all men. Eue^ as the
scholemaistre is in his schole the head of his scholars allthough they be
princes: so be bishops the heads of such as be in their several
bishoprikes all though they be princes: but the scholemaister in his school is
the supreme governor in all things and causes belonging to the schole: his
scholars allthough princes having in those things no power to command. Ergo
the bishops are, (every one in his church) the supreme governors in all
things ecclesiastical, and princes have no authority to entremedle therein.
The which conclusion deduced M. nowell from your comparison, as your self
with honesty can not mislike, so I trust it shall displease no prince,
considering that, as S. Ambrose says, there can be nothing more honorable for
Epist. 32. ad Valent.
the Emperor then to be called the son of the church. For a good Emperor
(says he,) is within the church not above the church. But because this
sentence is become now in England by the means of certain clawbackes to be
odioufe, I will in defense of M. Nowell, if any perhaps would quarrel with
him for giving to bishops so great authority, add out of Chrysostom, of
hu^dreds of places that might be brought to that effect, only one, which is
this. Quanqua^ nobis admirandus videtur thronus regius ob ge^mas affixas,
Homil. 5. de Esaiae verbis, vidi Dominu^ The power of the prince and of the
priest.
and auru^ quo obcinctus est: tamen rerum terrenaru^ administratione^ sortitus
est, nec vltra potestatem hanc preterea quicqua^ habet auctoritatis: verum
sacerdoti thronus in coelis collocatus est and de coelestibus negotijs
pronunciandi habet auctoritatem. That is to say. Allthough the kings throne
seem to us merueilouse for the pretiouse stones and gold wherewith it is
garnished, yeat has he only the administration of earthly things, and above
this power he has no authority, but the priest has his throne in heaven,
and authority to pronounce of heavenly affairs. And thus much by occasion of
the authority that you give to bishops as great over their diocese, as
schoolemaisters have over their schools. I would further if it were not for
troubling you, have desired you to have named some good auctor to justify this
saing of youres, that bishops when they be called heads are so called
improperly. But I refer that to your good discretion and to your better
laisour.

Whether Christ need to have one to govern his church under him and how.
The 23. Chapitre.
IT IS true the Apology and we all likewise say, that neither Nowell. a. 30.
and. b. 1.
has Christ need of any such one only head vicair over all his church,
which M. Dorman a little before does confess him self: neither is it
Christ's will to have any such head vicair. For though M. Dorman affirm that
he so would, yeat shall he never by the holy scripture, wherein Christ's will
is declared be able to prome it. Thirdly it is impossible for any earthely man
to have and to execute any such office etc.

For the proof of the first of these three points you Dorman.
bring my self for a witness in my book fo. 9. b. Where I have no such thing,
but only this, that Christ had as little need to govern his church in the
old law by the help of one head, as he has now. I denied not then but he
had need now. Therefore you continue your accustomed wont of beelieng me. If
you ask me how he has need A lie. 69.
which is God, I answer, that as he neded the witness of men as appears by
this: There was a man sent from God Joan. 1.
whose name was John to bear witness of the light. And again. Joan. 15.
You shall bear witness of me because you have been with me from the beginning,
for the infirmities sake of men, not for him self: so for us which can not
commodiously be governed, How God needs a head to govern his church.
nor well kept in orde without one head, (a man as we are oureselues) to whom
in all controversies we might have recourse, God has need of such a head.
Thus take I need: now taking it in your sense, for absolute need, I say that
he has no more such need to have any in his place over every particular
church, then over the whole. For as well is he present where two or three be
gathered together Matthew. 18.
in his name, and therefore with every particular church or diocese, as
with the whole. To the second point that Christ will have no such head
vicair, the contrary whereof (you say) I shall never be hable to prove by the
holy scripture, I answer, that if you will stand to the interpretation of
Christ's church, and the learned writers of the same upon such places as I
shall bring, I shall be able to prove it. Christ said to Peter. And I say to
the that thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church. Here is
Matthew. 16.
scripture. Chrysostom sayethe that by these words, Homil. 55. in Matthew.
Christ made Peter the shepherd of his church, and a little after expounding
these words: And what so ever thou shall bind upon earth, that he made him
the shepherd and head thereof. And upon that as a most sure ground and
confessed truth, he disputes against the Arrians, and proves, Note.
that Christ who gave such preeminence to Peter, was not inferior to his
father. He compares also Hieremias, and S. Peter together. To Hieremias
(says he) God Hierem. 1.
the Father said, like an iron pillar, and like a brazen wall have I put the.
But Hieremias the father placed but over one nation: Peter Christ placed over
all the whole world. Christ Joan. vlt.
said to the same Peter. Feed my lambs, feed my lambs. Feed my sheep.
His sheep were the Apostles. His whole flock consisted of Lambs and sheep.
He committed therefore to his charge, young and old, strong and weak. He
excepted none not the Apostles them selves. We have here that Christ gave the
charge even of his Apostles to Peter: We find else where that he bad him
confirm his brethern. Lucae. 22.
Show you one place in the scripture where any other had like preeminence, or
where this was taken away, and then you may say that Christ will have no
such head vicair. Chrysostom upon this latter place says: Si amas, me
fratrum curam suscipias. If thou love me Peter take upon the, the charge of
thy brethren. And in an other place Lib. 2. de sacerdotio.
because you shall not wrangle and say that this auctoritye died with Peter,
he has, that he committed the same to his successors also. S. Augustine
expounding this place of S. John has these words, Dicit Dominus Petro in quo
vno Sermo. de verb. dom. 49.
format ecclesiam, etc. Pasce oues meas. Our Lord says to Peter in whom
alone he fasshioneth and frames his church, feed my sheep. What other
fasshioning or framing can you here understand of Christ's church, then that
there should be one head for ever after, as he drew the plat thereof in
making Peter head of all? What other fasshioning then that, where of S.
Cyprian as you heard before Lib. de vnitat. ecclesiae
speaks, when he says that our Lord disposed the beginning of the unity
of his church to proceed from one. And thus much for this time may suffice
for this se conde point. Of impos sibilitie.
The third has been often times answered before.

That the grounds whereon the Swenckfeldians lean fol. 82. a.
to bannishe all Scripture, and those that the heretics use to spoil us of
one universal head over Christ's church, are like, and that M. Nowell in
handling this argument has used many shameful shifts. The 24. Chapter.
IN THE handling of this matter of Swenckfeldius, I have observed that you have
divided M. Nowell the whole process in to three parts. In the first you
purge your self and your companions of that which you say I charge you
with all, of agreeing with the Swenckfeldians in their opinion: in the second
you show wherein I compare you together: in the third you compare us with
Suenckfeldius and his. In the prosecuting of these points, you show right
well that Nowell will be Nowell, as well as Geta will be Geta, as if the reader
understand not I trust he shall ere it be long.

To the first I answer, that I never burdened you with the self same heresy
that Suencfeldius held, but only told you that by harping to much on this
string: Christ is ever present with his church, therefore there needs no man
to succeed him in the whole, you might comme as near his heresy, as he that
you charged therewith was far from it. The labor therefore that you took,
the incke and paper that you spent, to purge your self in this point was
superfluouse, and might well have been spared. And so would you I think also
have done, had you not thought that it should help your cause not a little,
to persuade the reader off me, that I were an evil tongued man, and that I
took no conscience to scalundre and sow untrue reports of such good men as
you be. And therefore you conclude thus:

Wherefore M. Dorman you have done nothing else but bewrayed Nowell. fol. 82.
a. 19.
your most maliciouse blindness, in saing that it is no other thing that
the Huguenots and heretics do: and that we do lean and rest upon the self
same reasons and grounds as did Swenckfeldius.

Lo good reader, mark here I beseech the, the dishonest Dorman.
dealing of M. Nowell. Whereas I say, that the heretics in that argument of
theirs: Christ is ever present with his church. etc. do no other thing then
lean and rest upon the same grounds for the banishing of the head of
Christ's church, on which the Swencfeldians do for the abolishing of the
scripture, in steppeth M. Nowell that true dealing M. Mowell alters my words
to save him self from ^heng.
man, and here in his conclusion divides my words, and for this one thing
that theye do no other then lean upon the same grounds, makes me to say
two things: First that the Huguenots and heretics do no other then the
Sweckfeldians: and that they do lean and rest upon the same grounds that
Swenckfeldius did. Is it all one M. Nowel to say yo do no other then Arrius
did, and you lean to the same grounds that Arrius did? Against
transsubstantiation you use the same ground, that the Arrians did against the
word Homousion: for they believed it not because they said it was not expressed
in scripture, and you believe not the doctrine of transsubstantiation for the
same cause: yeat is it not true that you do no other the^ they in all things,
because you do the same that they do in one thing.

Your railing talcke, and slaunderouse reports in calling my doings
doltishe, my head foolish, etc. because fo. 83. b. 14
they be the flowers of your rhetorike strowed here to beautify this first
point, and also because how true they are I had rather make the world judge
then my self, I esteem not, and therefore I pass over in silence. Whereas you
liken me to Judas, for that you say I have forsaken my master Christ in hope
of worldly gain, all though partly the condition and state of my life that I
now lead will answer for me in that respect: yeat thus much I may say
beside, that when I left your pestilent and perniciouse opinions being of age
between fiftene and sixtene, it is not likely that I cast any great eye after
worldly gain. If I had, I would belike having left my house and the hope of so
good a fellowship in so famous a colleage as the new colleage in Oxford is
known to be, for my conscience sake in king Edwardes days, have been afterward
when the time served better, a greater prowler, for liuinges the^ I was, the
greatest and only living that I had or desired to have, being a fellowship in
Allsollen colleage. Or if fortune had not favored me then, if worldly gain
had been so much in mine eye, I would in this time have putt my self
forward, when I saw some of mine own fellows as mean as I, called to be
Chauncelours to bishops, other some to be Archedeacons, many to great and
rich benefices, and not contrariewise have abandoned all and sought strange
countries, thinking there to find worldly gain. As for D. Harding allthough
he be able to say much more for him self, yet this may I say because it is
manifest, that in refusing to join with you in your heresies, he lost as
good promotions as you have any, and was a man could he have framed his
conscience to your procedinges, like to have had as good part of worldly gain
as you or a better man then you either. But of this lewd lie I can say no
more but A lie. 70.
transeat cum coeteris. Now to the second point, in which you proceed thus:

Swenckfield (says M. Dorman) does say, we must have no Nowell. fo. 84. a. 6
scripture etc. The Huguenotes and heretics say we must have no pope of Rome
to be head of Christ's universal church. Lo Sir you see a great likeness
between them etc.

No great likeness indede M. Nowell as you have Dorman.
handled the matter. But if you had truly and wholly rehearsed my words, and
added the cause which the Swenckfeldian brings for his opinion (because God
can M. Nowell cutteth away the chief part off my words.
teach us without) with the reason that you allege why we ought to have no
head of the church (because God is the head him self, and can rule it
without any other) then yff you had cried, Lo Sir you see a great likeness
between them, other men had been like to have soothed that in good earnest,
which now you utter so pleasantly in sport. As you cut of here the two
reasons, in which both the Swenckfeldians and you agree, they to banishe
away the scripture, and you to overthrow the head of the church: so to make
the conference the more unlike, you change my words by casting in of the
name of the pope of Rome, whom I name not here, but entreat only in
general words of one head that ought to be in christ's church.

The next point wherein I compare you with the A. 10.
Swenckfeldians is, that as they reiecte the scriptures sainge they are but
dead lettres, so do you the pope being the head of the church, saing that
he is but a sinful man as other are, and therefore as unmeet being but a
sinful man to govern the whole church, as is the scripture which they call
dead lettres and to be accounted amongst other creatures, to signify to us
the will and pleasure of our Lord God. Thus have I showed the similitude, why
do you skornefully mock at it, and show not rather the dissimilitude?

Finally I compare you with the Swenckfeldians, because A. 16.
as they bar God of such external means as it has pleased him teach to
us by, that is the scripture: so do you of such external governor as it
pleases him to govern his church by, that is, one general head to govern
the whole. Thus I reasoned, and thus you do. Against the which you have
nothing to say, but to singe your old song, often said but never proved,
that it belongs to B. 8.
only Christ to gouerue his church, and that it is impossible for one only
man to do it, and so conclude with a fit of railing against the pope, and
there an end.

Whereas M. Dorman proceeds saing, that we tell Christ that Nowell. fo. 85.
a. 7.
he is of age, and able to do it him self, and that therefore there is no
remedy but he must needs come down and give answer to all our wise
demaundes in his own person: I trust that all men do know that M. Dorman did
know, that he lied lewdely when he did write this.

I lied not M. Nowell. For allthough you say not so Dorman.
much in words, your deeds speak as much all together, seeing that you allow
us not one such head, as may by his authority end and determine all
controversies rising in the church, without the which either the church must
from time to time be miserably shaken with schisms (which I think you mean
not) either Christ come down and give answer in his own person, which is
the thing that you be offendid with me for saing of you, upon good and just
cause as you see. Having now as you think well purged your part, you will
match us with Swenckfield, and therefore you say.

And M. Dorman and all the adversaries to the truth may be ashamed, Nowell. a.
30. b. 3.
to charge us as not alowing Christ means to work his spiritual grace by,
but vexing him by calling for his corporal presence: whereas they them selves
(as those that think he can do nothing except he be corporal present)
would turmoyle him every hour, and minute also from place to place, and would
imprison him also in narowe and straight roumes, passing little ease in the
tower of London manifold.

If you allow him such means as you speak of, why Dorman.
make you so much ado about this, that he can rule his church alone, that he
needs no other and cet? It is untruly and blasphemously said of you, that we
would turmoile Christ every hour and minute (which you mean of his presence
in the blessed sacrament) from place to place, that that pretiouse body of his
being reserved for the benefit of Christian men is imprisoned. We abhor
such gross and local mutation as much as you. We say with Chrysostom: O
miraculum: O dei benignitatem, qui cum patre sursum sedet, in illo ipso
temporis articulo omnium manibus pertractatur. Lib. 3. de Sacerdotio
O miracle, o the benignity of God, which when he sits above with his
father is in the Note.
same moment of time handled with all men's hands. Thus it appears by
Chrysostom, that Christ is not called out of heaven, but being present there
with his father is also truly in the sacrament. We abhor your figurative
presence, your tropicall eating. We allow not these means, because by the
scriptures it is manifest that Christ excludes such means him self, and of
his infinite goodness gives him self corporally to us. Wherefore there is
between us and the Swenckfeldians in this point no conformity at all.

The next point that you compare us in to the Swencfeldians, fo. 86. a. 6
Nowell.
is, because they forbid the Scriptures utterly: we forbid them to be read of
the laity, keep them in an unknown tongue, and burn them written in known
language.

There was never yeat any such prohibitio^ that the learneder Dorman.
sort of the laity did not, or might not read the scriptures. If to the
vnlearneder sort it were not permitted, you shall find that it proceeded
rather of reverence toward the scriptures, and fear of that which now we
see come to pass, lest while every man should follow his own sense, the
world might be filled full of errors, and the holy scripture (as it
happens to things that be common) contemned and set at naught, then of any
such mind as with the which those heretics rejected the scripture. We burn
Tindalles testament: we burn Mathewes, Couerdale his and Geneua Bibles, not
because they are scripture, but because they are by false translations poisoned
scripture. If the mother take the poisoned bread our of the childs hand,
you ca^ not infer hereupon that she will give it no bread at all. We agree not
therefore in this point with Swenckfielde. You proceed in your comparisons and
say.

Thou must not be perfect in the scriptures, say these false papists Nowell.
to all lay men; it is ignorance that is the mother of devotion: it suffices
a lay man to have fidem implicitam an implicate faith etc.

We say not that men must not be perfect in the scriptures. Dorman.
The learned lay me^ that be and in all ages have been of one faith with us, so
excelle^tly learned, and much more perfectly traded in them then perhaps you
would, do sufficiently A lie. 71.
couince this to be a manifest and a gross palpable lie. He that said that
ignorance is the mother of devotion (if he so said) meant not to exclude the
knowledge of any necessary point of our faith, but only the desire of such
curiouse understanding, the which as being unknown it could not make men the
less Christians: so were it likely to bring to pass, that the things which
unknown before they reverenced and honored religiously, they should now
first being known begin to dispute upon, from disputing come to doubting, and
from doubting if not to denieng, yeat to less esteming of them. With whom if
you be offendid: ask S. Augustine why he taught him to Contra epist. Fundam.
Manich. cap. 4
say so before? whose words are these, after that he had spoken of the more
learned sort: caeteram quippe turbam non intelligendi viuacitas sed credendi
simplicitas tutissimam facit: For the rest of the multitude, it is not the
liveliness off understanding, but the simplicity of believing that makes them
most sure. Lo M. Nowell you may hear by S. Augustine, that it is no such
absurdity nor comes not so nere to Swenckfeldius heresy as you would have
it, to measure the peoples knowledge. Our forefathers that contented them
selves with the knowledge off the articles off their faith, the ten
commandments of almighty god, (although it please you sclaunderously to say
of them that they could no more explicate what they believed then can a
Popeniaye) passed yet so far your chattring pies, and iangling Iayes in all
civil honesty and godly devotion, as the speech of a man passes that of a
Popiniaye. I call all indifferent men to witness. Nowell. 28. a.


And the papists speak of the holy Scriptures not only as irreverently and
abhominably as ever did Swenckfielde, but Borrowed out off the Apology.
do far pass him in all outrage, calling the Scriptures most contumeliously
and blasphemously a nose off wax, and affirminge it to be but an uncertain
thing and like a rule of lead, appliable to every wicked sentence and to all
purposes, except it have the popes direct on as a most certain and infallible
rule. Dorman.


It is easy M. Nowell to be perceived, how you quarrel about nothing, and
for lack off better stuff think to stuff your book with such trifflng
toys as these are. In the words that you allege out of Pighius what harm
is there I pray you? What blasphemy have you found? fol. 87. a. 6 Pighius
belied.
Is Swenckfielde (you say) calling the scriptures dead lettres, more wicked
the^ is Pighius blasphemouse, in terming it a nose of wax? Why content your
self M. Nowell, he calls it not a nose of wax. You beely him deadly. His
words are, velut nasus A lie. 72.
cereus, like a nose of wax. Is it all one to be, and to be like? So do you
also falsify those other words of his, tanquam plumbea quaedam regula as a
certain leaden rule, and make the comparison between the heretic calling the
scriptures dead lettres, and Pighius terming them a rule of lead, a nose of
wax, and ask what difference there is between them: whereas if the words had
been truly compared, it had been eth for any man to have said that the
difference is great, seeing that Pighius spoke but by the way of similitude to
signify how ploiable the scriptures were to al purposes, not to condemn them
as Swenckfielde did, but to warn men in the interpreting of scriptures to
follow that pillar of truth, the common sense and sentence of the catholic
church, for those are his words. By this means who can let you to quarrel
with the scripture it self, and say that it speaks irreverently of Christ
whom it calls a stombling stone: yea you may find fault with 1. Petri. z.
Matt. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Apoc. 3. e^ 16.
Christ him self, that likeneth his own coming to judgment to the coming
of a thief. If you think you have any vauntage at Pighius or any catholic
man else, for sayng of scriptures that without the direction off the church
they be uncertain and appliable to every wicked sentence, as for this you
note us also fol. 86. b. I report me to your self whether this be true,
seeing that for this sentence of his of all other most wicked, Swenckfielde him
self alleged scripture. Although this sayng also to this effect be not
originally the saing of Pighius, but of Tertullian Lib. de praescript. aduersus
haereset.
that ancient writer, who writing a treatise even off purpose to displaie the
manners and nature of heretics, after that he has warned us that their
property is when scripture is brought to them, either utterly to deny it,
either else if they admit it to pervert it with false and untrue gloses,
concludes in this wise: Ergo non ad Scripturas prouocandum est, nec in his
constituendum certamen, quibus aut nulla, aut incerta, aut parum certa victoria
est. Therefore (that is to say) we may not appeal to the scriptures, neither
is the strife to be ordered in them, by whom either there is no victory to be
gotten, either uncertain, or not very certain. Now that you have done with
Pighius, you flee upon Hosius, as fierce as a ramping Lion of Cottes. hold of
whom you say as follows. Nowell. fol. 87. a. 17.


Hosius your great estate for learning and virtue etc. in comparing the
gospel written in paper and ink, with the church which he calls the
lively gospel (as though the other should be called the dende gospel) goes
as near to Swenckfielde as four pence do to a grote.

I think you will not your self deny if you were well Dorman.
apposed M. Nowell, but that the lettre of the scripture compared with the
sense thereof is dead. From which phrase and manner of speech how far wide
are those words Joan. 6.
of our Savior: The lettre sleeth, it is the Spirit that quickens?
Although you might if you had not made a vow to interpret all things to the
worst, have given a more gentle interpretation to these words off Hosius.

It is a true proposition that Hosius used, that scripture is A. 27.
the word, not of God, but of the devil as heretics do allege it. Why
seeing that Hosius took it out of S. Hierome as you confess, do you not refell
and confute it, but using your authority barely deny it? Why rehearse you
not his M. Nowell alleges Hosius words falsely.
words wholly, but cut away these in the midst of the sentence: cui absit
vt quicquam anteponendum esse putemus, before the which scripture God forbid
we should think any thing to be to be preferred? For so has Hosius:
Scriptura quomodo profertur a catholicis est verbum dei, cui absit vt quicquam
anteponendum esse putemus: quomodo profertur ab In fine lib. 4. contra Brentium.
haereticis est verbum diaboli. The scripture as it is brought forth by the
catholics is the word of God, before the which God forbid we should think
any thing to be to be preferred: as it is alleged of the heretics, it is the
word of the devil. You saw well enough if you should not have cut away
these words, all the grace of the comparison in this point had been marred by
Hosius humble and reverent speaking of the scriptures: but so were you blinded
with malice that all other you thought would have been as blind as you, and
no man have noted so foul a fault.

You stay not here, but to bring Hosius vttrely out of conceit and to deface
him with all men, you charge him with comparing the scriptures (David's
psalms) with rymes only Nowell. fo. 88. b. 11
written by princes in our days, with a blasphemouse derision in matching
them with fabulouse poe^sies.

Hosius compares not the scriptures with rymes, but Dorman. Hosius once
again misused by M. Nowell. sed by M. Nowell.
with metres quibus dei lauds celebret, to praise God by. With such meetres
what contempt or contumely is it I pray you to compare the scriptures? Are
not Dauides Psalms such meetres? you have therefore once again dealt
unhonestly with Hosius, to snatche a part of his words, and to make your
vauntage thereof, leaving those that most manifestly declare his meaning. He
matcheth not at all the scriptures with fabulouse poesies, that is an other lie
of you A lie. 73.
res. He says that as learned and unlearned write poesies every where: so
may every king or prince or any other, write to the honor and praise of
God without restreint. The comparison is not between the scriptures and
poesies, but between the liberty that men have to write of the one argument or
the other. And thus is this great blasphemouse blast God be thancked well
ouerblowen.

The Iues are not suffered by the pope to utter most horrible A lie. 74. b. 27.
blasphemies against Christ. It is a horrible lie.

We have not given over preaching of gods word. fo. 89. a. 16
Let those countries where Catholic religion florisheth, convince you to be a
liar. Where there are in most mean A lie. 75.
towns mo sermones in every of them in one day, then are commonly in London
in three. They be ordinary also thorough out the whole year, not bought with
money as youres be. We bar not the people from reading and hearing A lie. 76.
it. To that I answered before. We say not that the holy ghost uses to come
from above into our church without all help of means, as hearing,
preaching, or reading. A lie. 77.
That is the fistht lie, made within the compass off these few words.

Thus you see good readers I trust evidently, that he comparison made by me
between the protestants and the Swenckefeldians, is in that point of building
upon like grounds, the one part to abolishe scripture, the other to
overthrow the general head of Christ's church in earth, like, and
therefore truly made. The which is confirmed the more, for that, that as I
have showed before, the adversary not susteining to try the comparison by
such words as I made it, leaves out their reasons wherein they meet, and
then cries, Lo Sir you see a great likeness between them fol. 84 a. 9. You
see beside how to compare us with Swenckfield he has wrested, mangled, and
falsified the words of Pighius and Hosius, and last of all charged the whole
number of catholics, with most evident and apparent untruths.

That Cardinal Hosius was impudently beelied and sclaundred by the Apology of
the church of England, that M. Nowell continuing the same adds more matter
thereto. The 25. Chapter.
ITRVST that who so ever shall read that conformity between Nowell. fol. 90
a. 1.
the papists and Swenckfeldius, and both their heresies before declared, and
specially by the words of Pighius and Hosius him self, shall understand that
Hosius was not without cause charged with some affinity to Swenckfeldius his
heresy, etc.

Is the matter now come to affirnitie M. Nowell? Well Dorman.
let it be so, I nothing doubt the learned readers judgment even therein
also. Although this can not be denied but that your Apology which you take
upon you here to defend, in the first editio^ thereof, charged Hosius with
these words: Nos inquit, ipsas scripturas quarum tot iam non diuersas modo,
sed etiam contrarias interpretationes adferri videmus, facessere iubebimus,
etc. We says Hosius, will bid the scriptures them selves whereof we see so
many not diverse only but plain contrary expositions brought, farewell: and
will rather here God speaking then turn our selves to these beggarly
elements, and put our salvation in the^. We must not be cunning in the law
and the scriptures, but be taught of God. The labor is vain which is
bestowed upon the scriptures, For the scripture is a creature and a certain
weak element. Thus says Hosius. Your Apology goes farther, and upon these
words triumphs over Hosius comparing him to Montanus and Marcion the
heretics. Is this but to burden him with affinity M. Nowell? Fie for shame
how long will you halte down right? May you not now be ashamed if shame there
remain any in you, to say that the author of the Apology saing this of
Hosius bears witness to the truth? I have heard of certain lewd men in
our country, who agreing amongst them selves to name each thing by a
contrary name, have framed a new English speech, wherein they have been
able so to utter their minds, as beside their own companions no other should
understand them. Except you be of this brotherhode I understand not your
English, to make any other sense of it then a plain lie.

Whereas I call Hosius one of the greatest states of Christendom for learning
and virtue, you without all occasion make an impertinent discourse of
Cardinals, of their hattes, of their moiles, and that forsothe because you
think it you say, neither unpleasant nor unprofitable. If fol. 92. 25. a.
you like a merry man study to write pleasant things, and if occasion be not
offered will take it your self, rather then that such pleasant matter should
perish and be lost: I neither covet to comende and make salable to the world
my doings by such toys, and of all other think it most unmeet for men of
our profession, especially one of your years and calling, to trouble the
reader with such triffles. If this wandering discourse of youres had had any
proffit joined with the pleasantnes: yeat is not every proffitable thing to be
handled in every place. Unless you think M. Nowell (to use your own words)
that you may mingle in lent vnguentum, things most impertinent together.
And therefore I pass over this as wide from the matter, the whole effect
thereof being nothing else, but that the pope called the persons and vicaries
of the parishes in Rome to be Cardinals: a great matter forsothe and worthy
to be discoursed of at large, and therefore M. Nowell, or else because he knew
not how to make his book grow to the biggnesse that it is of, has about that
only matter bestowed all most three whole leaves.

For his learning you make Hosius no body, as he that fo. 92. b. 5.
having first borrowed the matter of his books out of other, was not hable
neither without help to put it in good order together. Which you judge
probably you think, by the style and poetical phrases unmeet for Hosius age
and vocation.

Here first the Apology and you agree not M. Nowell. The Apology and M.
Nowell agree not about Hosius learning.
For the Apology says of him, certe homo disertus, and non indoctus, and
acerrimus ac fortissimus propugnator eius causae: truly an eloquent man, not
unlearned, and an earnest and most strong defendour of that cause. If he
borrowed and stolle all the learning and reasons that are in his books, how
appears it that he is not unlearned? If he hired clerckes and stilewrightes
as this cunning lyewrighte says he did to pen it, where is his eloquence? The
Apology judged (the style, poetical phrases or verses notwithstanding) that
his books should be of his own penning, otherwise there was no cause to call
him eloquent. And surely who so ever he be that penned the Apology, if the
matter came to be tried by the country, who were best able of you two to judge
in these matters, you were like to have the worse.

His virtue you would drown with polonishe pottes, fo. 93. 14. 2
and bring for your witness as honest a man as your self Iacobus Andreae, his
known adversary. Whereas the contrary is so well known in Polonia, that the
greatest fault that some find with him is, that he will neither for any
man's pleasure quaffe to other, neither answer any other quaffing to him.
Which league of Christian sobriety, Martinus Cromerus and he making together
being then both canons of the same church, they have so truly kept ever
sense, that they have at the length obtained full quietness from being troubled
any more in any company, with such sinful civility. And a sobrer man is
there not in his diete amongst you all (look who is the sobrest) then
Cardinal Hosius is, as a good and a learned man a country man of our own,
living nearer to him the^ Iacobus Andreae, even with him and at his own table,
and observing diligently his trade of life twelve months together, has
being earnestly required upon his certain knowledge, reported to me. But let
this pass as one of the ordinary sclaunders of heretics. It is not the first
time that Iacobus Andreae has deceived you M. Nowell. It was he that made the
compilers of your Apology to tell that foul lie of Hosius, that afterward
in the second edition they corrected. You see therefore what cause there is to
trust him in his reports of Hosius.

And by the way note that to speak truly of a forrein^ false Polonishe
papist, is with M. Dorman accounted sedition, Nowell. b. 3.
and cet.

And I desire the reader once again to note, that M. Nowell Dorman.
will never make an end of belieng me. I call you not seditiouse for any
thing that you speak be it true or false A lie. 78.
against Hosius. The words that I call seditiouse be cloked with the name of
Christ, of whom you make no mention speaking of Hosius. The words that I
call seditiouse and warn men to beware of, are these: Christ is head of the
church: therefore there needs no other. As appears by the sentence that
follows next: What other thing did their forefathers Chore, Dathan, and
Abiron, etc. What mean you to say here that you have spoken truly of Hosius
in your Apology? If you spoke truly, why did the same Apology revoke it in
the second edition?

That the reason taken from the example of Chore, fol. 94. a.
Dathan, and Abiron, against the government of Moises and Aaron, is one with
that which the protestants make against the government off one head. The
26. Chapitre.
TO THIS reason you begin first to answer in the fol. 95. b. 5
second side of the 95. leaf the 4. line. All that goes before is
impertinent to the reason, and decked with the accustomed flowers of your
railing Rhetorike. The objection of Moses and Aaron, whereby you would prove
that there were two high priests at once, etc. is answered by me, if it had
pleased you to have taken the pains to have looked so far in the 34. and 35.
leaf of my first book. Now to the place of Chore, Dathan, and Abiron of the
which you say Nowell. B. 5.
thus.

Concerning the reason made by Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, that the people ought
not to obey their governors because they be all holy, These words and the
lord is emo^gest them left out by M. Nowell. Dorman.
and that therefore the magistrates ought not to lift them selves above the
Lords people, it is not our reason and cet.

No in deed M. Nowell as you have alleged it, it is not your reason. But if
you had truly reported it, it would have gone as nere to your reason as
twelve pense to a shilling. But you do here as you did before with the reasons
of Swenckfielde, that is, leave out the chief reason wherein the comparison
is made, and then cry out upon me for making such wise comparisons. Who
sees not that I compare you hereto these schismatikes refusing to obey Moises
and Aaron, not because they said they were all holy, but because they added,
and in ipsis est Dominus, and the Lord is present with the multitude, as you
refuse that one head of Christ's church, because Christ is present with his
church. As for the words that you note here in the margent of your book,
multitudo sanctorum, and populus domini papae, as though you could thereby
make some show that this place might be applied to Chanon Chore, Deane Dathan
and his fellows, it deserves to be rather laughed at then answered, seeing that
both it is a manifest lie wherewith you sclaundre the cleargye, who never
called them selves the holy people of the great Lord of Rome, as you here
feine, and also it is well known, that what so ever libertyes and immunities
the cleargye had, the same were given as the faith increased by Emperors and
kings them selves, and therefore they were most far from the manner of
reasoning used by these schismatikes.

Now whereas M. Dorman alleges the Apology as thus reasoning, Nowell. B. 25.
that the church has no need of any other ruler, because Christ is with
it: truth it is, if M. Dorma^ do mean one only head of the universal
church. For Christ needs no such general governor, seeing he is both
present him self continually by his spirit as he promised, and also for that
he has in every peculier country and church his Moises and Aaron, that is
to say his feuerall deputies in his steed every where here in earth: for
that no one mortal man can possibly suffice to the governance of the whole
world or church. etc.

If he need governors of every peculier church, where Dorman.
he is no less present then with the whole: why needs he not as well one
chief head to govern the whole? who shall amongst so many heads divided
into parts, every one thinking his opinion to be best, strike the stroke and
preserve unity? If you say God may so preserve every bishop that he fall
not into heresy, you put god to work daily mo miracles, then he does to
preserve the chief bishop of all which yet you stagger to grant as a
thing impossible. The words following in your Apology, that no one mortal
man can suffice to the government of the whole fo. 96. a. 3.
world or church, I of my accustomed sincerity omitted you say. And what
have you gotten by it, now you have alleged it your self? Verily this,
that you will make all men understand, that god is able with you to do no
more, then you list to give him leave: but of this I have entreated before
sufficiently. You say that you are far from rebelling Nowell.
against your natural sovereign and other gods ministers appointed to
govern you etc. But how far M. Nowell, I Dorman.
pray you? Who made the book of succession at home? Who sounded the two
traiterouse blastes against the mo^strouse regiment of women their Queen being
a woman? From whence were they blown but from the lake of Gehenna? Who
grudgeth against the princes ordinance in matters indifferent and of small
importance, no greater then of a square cap? Who made war against their
prince in Scotland? Who set all France in an uproar against their king? Who
but that unhappy vermin the protestants? That which follows fol. 96. b. and
97. a. b. is answered before.

That the way to overthrow Fol. 68. vsque ad fol. 106.
heresies is not by the only scripture. The 27. chapter.
THIS matter has been sufficiently handled before in the 21. chapitre. And
allthough in me it be a great fault and highly laid to my charge, to allege
thrice one place of scripture, yet must you good readers bear with M.
Nowell, if he allege his absurd and wicked assertions more then six times
thrice, and may not in any wise twite him with the proverb Crambe his, that
to much of one thing is naught: yea allthough he never prove any of them
once. But may you not be ashamed M. Nowell so unjustly to M. Nowell repre
hending other men for vnreuerent speaking of the scripture, speaks of all
other most irreverently him self.
charge Pighius and Hosius with vnreuerent speaking of the scripture, when
your self in this place, apply your profane prouer be to signify that to
much of scripture may be naught, that any place thereof may so often be
alleged that it should become unsavory? By what authority claim you (I
pray you tell us) such liberty, that you may speak of the scriptures
that which is unlawful and plain blasphemy, and other may not use so much
as similitudes or comparisons between the scriptures and other profane
things? Why is it laufull for you so oftentimes to repeat these heathenishe
words, that it is impossible for one man (assisted by gods grace for otherwise
we affirm it not) to govern the whole church of Christ, that we be like to
the Phariseis and high priests of the Iues, you to Christ and his apostles,
that there ought no more to be one chief head to govern the church then one
emperor to govern the whole world, that the pope can not be judge in his
own cause (as though gods cause were his own private cause) with such like
absurdities a nombre mo, and may not be laufull for me to allege thrice the
holy scripture of God, to prove three several points. First that it could
not be likely, that God providing for his chosen The place of Deuter. alleged
by me thrice, to three several purposes.
people the Iues a chief and head governor to end and determine all their
controversies, would not for his church which he loves more tendrely, where
he knew should be greater need, do the like: next to answer thereby your
foolish reason: Christ is head of his church, and present allwaies with
it, therefore there needs no other. By which reason I said, that God should
have provided for the Iues no chief head neither, because he was present also
with them, and no less their head then ours. Thirdlye, to show that the
only conference of scriptures is not sufficient to end all controversies
rising upon the doubtefull meaning off the lettre, seeing that if it so had,
almighty God would of all likelihode have bidden the Iues do so, and not
trouble themselves and the high priest for the matter. Thus you see good
readers how I allege thrice this one place off scripture, which argues M.
Nowell says miserable distress. But I trust such as be off sounder
judgment have learned to give that reverence to holy scripture, that what so
ever they see confirmed by one only sentence taken out of the same, that they
will think as sufficiently proved, as if there had been many brought
therefore. If a man should ask of M. Nowell what distress he was in, when to
prove that there must be many kings to govern the world, he alleges so
often alone without any other in his whole book, that sentence of
Ecclesiasticus some times twice in one leaf as Cap. 17.
fol. 32. and. 62. which neither proves his intent, and is taken besides out
of that book which he and his companio^s In the articles agreed upon in the
Co^uocation anno. 15^2
have noted to be insufficient to establishe any doctrine by, I marvel what
answer he would make. What should I here mention the council of Africa so
many times brought in? What should I tell you of the same textes and gloses so
often rehearsed to one purpose? Your selves good readers in reading this book
of his, shall bear me witness that I lie not. You have here repeated again,
that the high priest must judge according to the law which no man denies,
for so says the text that he shall: that S. Paul a 29. b. 28.
threatened Gods vengeance to the high priest, that S. Peter and S. John
asked boldly him and his, whether it were right in the sight of god, to hear
them rather then God, to all the which you have my answer before in answering
the. 59. b. and the. 68. leaves a. You have beside served in the second time,
the places of S. Austen, and Chrysostom, to fo. 99. a. b
prove that conference of the textes of scripture one with the other, is a
good way to atteine to the understanding of doubtefull places. Thus much was
said before in the. 72. leaf b. to the which in the same place I answered as
I now do, that it is a very good way in deed, but not such as is able
allwaies to assure us of the right sense. Now judge I beseech you good
readers, who uses oftenest to repeat the same thing, M. Nowell or I.

Where as you say: M. Nowell. And no doubt but the Iuish Nowell. b 26.
priest appointed to resolve other men of their doubts did him self use the
said conference of scripture, etc.

To that I answer, that this makes nothing for your Dorman.
purpose if he so did. For allthough the high priest whose lips were
promised to keep knowledge, were for the office Malach. ^.
sake which he sustained, so directed in the conference of scripture that he
never failed in his judgments: yeat hereof follows it not, that every
private man by such conference should be hable to do the like. The general
councelles at this day, the popes at all times, have used you may be sure
this way also of interpreting doubts arising upon the scripture. We mislike
it not therefore in them to whom it apperteineth to explicate such doubts,
but in such only as being private men use this for a cloak to cover their
heresies: in them we mislike it thus far, as either they content not themselves
with such sense as the whole church has allreadie upon the conference of
such doubtefull places agreed upon, either else taking that office from
public authority, will presume them selves to give such sentence (proceeding
this way) as may best seem to make for their singular opinions.

To this reason of mine, that if laing and conferring together of one text
with an other were the surest and readiest way to come to the true
understanding of all doubts, God would of all likelihode have commanded it,
and not have sent his people to the high priest, now at the length M. Nowell
in the end of two leaves and a half, in the which he has done no other
thing but first vttred himself how much this place of Deutero. grieueth him,
then vainly repeated that the priest is bound to judge according to Gods
law, that when he did not S. Paul cursed him, S. Peter and S. John disobeied
him, that conference of the scripture is good and necessary: now I say after
that he has filled up two leaves and a half with this matter denied by no
man, and with the which he filled as many before, he makes a proffer to
answer in this wise.

But says M. Dorman God commanded not, any such conference Nowell. fo. 100.
a. 29. b. 1.
of scriptures, but only to resort to the high priest: yeat I trust M. Dorman
is not ignorant what it means, that God and our Savior Christ do so
earnestly exhort all me^ to the dilligent reading and study of the scriptures,
and do condemn the ignorance or want of knowledge thereof. And where he
says, God has not commanded such conference of scriptures (which yeat in
effect he has commanded) it is happy that he can not show where God has
forbidden it, which if he could he would not have failed to have done.

You tell men what I said, which they knew before, Dorman.
but your answer to my saing which here they looked to have had, you give them
not. I say that if conference of one place of the scripture with an other had
been the surest way to resolve all doubts, God would rather have commanded
that then going to the priest: you answer, that God and Christ exhort us to
the diligent study of scripture, that The conference here me^t, is such as
must serve for the final resolution of all doubts.
such conference he has commanded in effect (without showing when, where,
or by what words, notwithstanding that herein consists the answer to my
objection) that it is happy that I can not show where it is forbidden: whereas
even in the very place that I bring here, when I show that almighty God
commanded the ordinary way of resolving doubts to be the sentence of the
high priest, I show withal, that he forbadde also conference of scripture
in such wise as we here take conference, that is to be the final and last
resolution of determining doubtefull controversies arising upon the lettre.
Except any man (you think) may be so desperate hardye, as when God has
appointed one way, to choose any other as not forbidden. That which
follows: But seeing, etc. is one of your extraordinarye walckes, and
pertains not to my objection, but yeat serves well for your purpose to give
us the slip, and to wind your self from the matter. To my demand what
heretic was ever vanquished by the scriptures, you say:

I answer, the Arrians, Anabaptists: and all heretics without Nowell. fol.
101. a. 5
exception were vanquished and overthrown by the scriptures: and that if they
were not vanquished by the scriptures, they were not vanquished at all.

By your answer it should seem M. Nowell, that either Dorman.
you understand not my demand, or you will not understand it. For when I
speak of vanquishing of heretics, I mean of overthrowing, and so co^futing
their heresies, as that they may with the world be brought vttrely out of
conceit, and the memory of them clean abolisshed and extinguished, as we see
Arius heresy (once more universal then youres) God be praised to be. I mean
not you may be sure, that the heretics them selves should confess them
selves to be ouercomen. Again, when I ask how they were vanquished by the
scriptures: I understand, by the scriptures alone, by the scriptures without
a judge, who in this doubtefull contention (where the Arrian brings scripture
as well as the catholic, as apparent as the catholic, more plentifully then
the catholic: where no other place of scripture can by the catholic be
brought to make the matter plain by way of conference, but the adversary
will be ready to allege as evident for him) may give sentence whether part
has better right, who alleges and conferreth the scriptures most
sincerely. Thus did the council of Nice overthrow the heresy of Arrius,
although not so that he him self could be brought to acknowledge so much:
yeat in such wise that in process of time the world giving credit to so
learned and general a council, fell from his heresy, and now there is not
one favorer thereof in the whole world that dare show his face. Thus should
your heresies and all other be overthrown, if we would either in such
things as the church has already determined, follow that sense of the
scriptures that it has delivered to us, either else in things ambiguouse
and not defined, ask and follow the judgment thereof. For that you here cauil,
that the pope nor popish Nowell. b. ^.
church can be convenient and co^petent judges in controversies no we risen,
for that they are both parties and parties accused therein, no more then the
Iuishe high priest with his church of Scribes and Phariseis, were convenient
and competent judges in the controversies between them and Christ's Apostles.

The absurdity of this comparison both I have there where Dorman. Cap. 12.
fol. 164.
before in like manner you made it, sufficiently declared, and the Arrians also
might have pleaded this plea against the council of Nice. In the which the
fathers assembled were as much affected against Arrius heresy, as the late
council of Trent, or any that can be holden is against youres. Yeat do not
the histories mention that ever they were so impudent.

Touching the conference of Scriptures together, I did so late Nowell. b. 15.
before at large entreat thereof, that I need not now to repeat the same
again.

As largely M. Nowell as you entreated thereof, you said Dorman.
never a word how this controversy between the Arrians and the catholics
both alleging scripture for their M. Nowell answers not the force of my
reason.
defense, might be by only scripture determined. To pretend therefore that it
is no need to repeat that which you never touched, it is a pretye figure to
excuse silence in that wherein you are able to say nothing. If you feared you
should have dwelled to long in that matter, you might have eased that by
cutting of many impertinent discourses, that both go before and follow after
in this book off youres, namely the next sentence that follows, wherein you
labor to prove your selves to be no Arrians, with the which heresye neither
I, nor any other do charge you. To proceed, whereas I ask how it happens
that the Caluinistes and the Lutherans agree not by conferring one place of
scripture with an other, to that you say. Nowell. fol. 102. a. 23.


This is M. Dormans usage, when he can say nothing off the present case to
entremingle foraigne matters, thereby to auerte the readers mind from his
principal cause remaining unproven still.

The principal cause is, that there must be one visible Dorman.
head in Christ's church to appease controversies and determine doubts: the
heretic says it needs not, the scripture by diligent conference being able
to satisfy all men therein. To this I replied, how happens it then, that the
Caluinistes and Lutheranes agree not etc? Now let all men judge how truly
you reprehende me for entremingling foraigne matters. But let us here your
answer to the question.

But how so ever Calvin and Luther agree in the exposition of Nowell.
these few words, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body, they agree both in
this, that the papists expound them falsely.

Who ever heard a more absurd or folishe answer? Or Dorman.
what answer rather is this to my question, to tell us that the Lutheranes and
Caluinistes agree together against us? So did as the scriptures bear witness
the phariseis and Sad duces: so did Herod and Pilate agree against the
pretiouse Lucae. 23.
body of Christ at the Cross, as you do against it at the altar. S. Austen
says of heretics, Dissentiunt inter se, contra Lib. sieve Homil. de ouibus.
vnitatem omnes consentiunt, Amongst them selves they are at variaunce,
against unity they all agree. My self also in the next sentence following
confess as much, that allthough heretics in some point dissent, yeat they
all join and agree in one cancred hatred against the church. What lets by
this means why you should not easelie reconcile together all that huge rabble
of heretics mentioned in the table of late set furthe by M. Stapleton, who
having one common father with you (allthough in many points dissenting)
agree yeat all with you against us? But what is this I say to the purpose?
Answer if you be hable: if scripture can alone end all controversies, how
happens it that the Lutheranes and Caluinistes end not their strife
thereby, which continues notwithstanding their agreing against us? It follows

For to use the places by M. Dorman noted out of Hosius, he, Nowell. A. 26.
nor all papists with him shall never be hable to show cause, why these
words, Ego sum vi^is vera, I am the true vine, do not prove as well a
transsubstantiation, as Hoc est corpus meum. This is my body.

What this (For) should perteine to the answering off Dorman.
my question I see not, this I see well, it confirms strongly my saing, that
by scripture alone all controversies can not be judged. For as Calvin brings
for his opinion this place: so I trust you are not ignorant that Luther had
also his places to allege for him self. When this question off the blessed
sacrament shall be the principal matter between you and me, you shall have a
cause why these words I am the true vine, prove not so well a
transsubstantiation, as the other, This is my body, do. In the mean season
where as you ask what a rule you should have had, if Christ B. 1.
had said likewise: This is my true and very body, as he said I am a true
or very vine: truly M. Nowell no highlier should the matter have been taken
then it is. For to us Christian men it is enough that Christ has once said
it is his body. We would believe an honest man upon his word if he should
tell his name and say that he were such a one, and never put him to say that
he were truly such a one: I see no cause but you might if it pleased you,
have as good an opinion of Christ. Who notwithstanding to stop the mouths of
such Capernaites as you are, has added also the word (truly) saing: For my
flesh is truly (or verily) meat, and my blood is verily drink. The which
words Joan. 6.
Hilarious expounding, says, that there is no place left to doubt Lib. 8. de
Trinit.
of the truth of the flesh and blood of Christ, seeing that both by our
Lords own words and our faith, it is truly flesh and truly blood.

I said, that if because the Apostle or Christ him self uses a figure in
one place, we must think that in all other he never spoke otherwise, by that
abominable doctrine there were no let if a man would be so wicked, to hold
that Christ were not the true and natural son of God, but by adoption
only, and bring for the maintenance of that wicked heresy, that text,
dedit eis potestatem filios dei Joan. 1.
fieri, He gave them power to be made the sons of God. An objection left
unanswered by M. Nowell.
To this you answer nothing at all: I trust it be not (you know the rule
since you were prolocutor in the convocation) because, qui tacet consentire
videtur, he that holds his peace seems to consent. Charity would rather
interpret your silence to proceed of lack of just matter to answer, and so
do I, allthough you deal not allwaies so frindely with me.

What so ever I have said here of the controversy of the B. 9.
sacrament out of place, leaving my purposed matter unproven, is (you say)
very fond. What so ever I have said here of the sacrament, has been vttred
upon the occasion of Luther and Caluins disagrement: who because they can not
be reconciled by the scriptures, that block laid by you in the way, that the
scripture only is the sufficient judge to end all controversies rising upon
the doubtefull meaning of the lettre is removed, and so my purposed matter
proved, that there must be an other judge then the scripture. What have you
now won, to show you that I am not ashamed of mine own phrase?

As before I proved that the Arrians, Luthera^s, and Caluinistes, could by no
means by only scripture be overthrown: so now I proved the same by the
Anabaptists, alleging in like manner such places of scripture as they bring
for their defense. And as you answered before nothing to the objections of the
Arrians, Lutherans, and Caluinistes: so do you here pass over in silence the
answer to the Anabaptists, and purge your self and your companions, that
you be no Arrians, no Anabaptists, with fo. 103. a. 8 M. Nowell leaves
vna^swered that to which he should answer and answers that, that needs no
answer Nowell.
the which Heresies you were never charged by me. You take hold also of those
words of mine where I say, that the catholics do repress and overthrow
the brutishe opinions of the Anabaptists. To the which (being but words
incidently cast in) I marvel how any man reading your book can forbear
laughing, to hear you slipping from the principal point, make this solemn
answer to that which neded none at all.

We answer: that it is most certain and well known to the world, that
our men have said and written more against them then ever did the papists.
Wherefore we be therein, as in all other things in deed, the Catholics and
not they.

What so ever you have written M. Nowel against them: Dorman.
you are notable by the scripture alone to overthrow them, which is the thing
that being denied you ought to have proved. But by the way note I pray the
that art the learned reader, a clerckly conclusion of M. Nowelles, whereby he A
clerckly co^clusio^ made by M. Nowell.
proves his companions to be the Catholics and not us, because they have
said and written more against the Anabaptists, then we have done. Is not this
trow you a notable argument to prove that no man is a catholic but he that
has spoken and written against heretics, nor he neither, if an other have
said and written more then he.

You say that the mention that I made of the Swenckfeldians b. 8.
Arrians and Anabaptists, was altogether impertinent to my purpose. I have
proved the contrary before: now let the learned reader judge thereof. You
charge me with declaiming against the scriptures and word of God. That is a
lie. You call it a seely similitude and cruel likelihode A lie. 79. Nowell. b.
12.
that I make between the Iuishe high priest and the pope. I marvel not that
you so call it, for it cutteth the throat of all your heresies. You use often
and gladly I perceive, this word Iuishe high priest, as though you would
thereby insinuat to the simple and unlearned, that my example were naught as
taken from the Jews, the very name of whom, to those that have more zeal
then knowledge you know to be odiouse, and therefore against that meaning I
warn the unlearned, that the Jews that were then whereof this Iuishe priest
was head, were gods church and chosen people. You call the pope and papists
heretics, and their doctrine heresies. You acknowledge him not to be the
supreme head or governor over all the church. As long as you be not able to
prove it, it makes no matter, your tongue is not autentike.

Now where M. Dorman would prove the conference of Nowell. fol. 104. a. 1.
scriptures a vain or evil thing, because the Arrians and Anabaptists used
it, and us to be heretics as they be, because we use the same grounds, to
wit, conferring of scriptures together: he might as well reject all alleging
of scripture because the Devil used it, and conclude that we be of the devil,
because we use the same grou^des that he does, that is to say, the alleging of
the scriptures. Yea and he may by the same reason* find fault with Christ
our Savior and his holy apostles, who do so much use the same alleging of
scriptures.

I go not about to prove the conference of scriptures a Dorman.
vain or evil thing, neither because the Arrians and Anabaptists used it,
neither for any other cause: you have therefore beelied me once more. I
acknowledge it to be both A lie. 80.
proffitable and necessary: only I say, that to end all controversies it is
an insufficient means. Because rejecting the determination of the church, you
take upon you as the Arrians did and the Anabaptists do, to maintain your
heresies by this pretensed conference of scripture, not regarding that such
judgment belongs to the church, therefore I call you and justly term you
heretics. And as I do reject this conference that you talcke of, because you
use it to that end that these heretics did: so do I refuse all such
scripture toe as is falsely wrested, as was that which the devil alleged. In
which sense because Christ and his Apostles never alleged any, I can not
find fault with them.

I can not (you say) devise a way that should satisfye Nowell. a. 20.
all heretics without all contradiction or exception on their part.

I can devise no way in deed M. Nowell to satisfy al heretics: Dorman.
it passes my power I confess. But God has devised a way to overthrow all
heresies, if such as you are would The way to overthrow heresies.
be no let to his working. And that is the thing that ought to suffice us.
Will you know what way it is? Forsothe if this principle and ground the
which I labor to prove, that Christ's church here in earth being but one and
visible, has also one chief visible head to rule and govern the same, were
thoroughly as it ought to be persuaded to all men, then the heretic which now
by colored arguments triumphs over, not only the meaner sort but also
oftentimes many of the wiser and better learned, the thing called into
question being either such (as is the question of baptising of infantes) as
whereof we have no express scripture, but only a tradition continued in the
church from the Apostles time, and delivered from hand to hand to us, either
else so perplexe and doubteful, as the adversary will for his heresy bring
not only as many, but mo textes also, that shall seem to make for his purpose
then shall the catholic, as did the Arrian: then should I say the heretic
in all men's judgment (although never in his own) easily be discomfited and
overthrown. For then let the Anabaptiste cry as much as he would, that the
baptism of infantes has no ground of scripture, the meanest man in a
parish would be able to tell him: Sir, the church which I am bidden to give
ear to by the scripture, uses it, and has done from the beginning, this
suffiseth me. Again let the Arrian bring and heap together all the scripture
that he has, let him use all his shifts, distinctions, and gloses: when he
has all done, the true catholic seeks after the interpretation of the
church, that interpretation to wit, that the members agreing with the head
observe and have observed universally thoroughe out the whole world. Thus if
the more part of men would do, (as they ought) neither would heretics have
any list to publishe heresies, their starting holes being by this wholesome
remedy taken away, neither should they being brought furthe into the light
be hable any while to continue. And this call I the overthrowing of heretics
and heresies. For to persuade an indurat heretic by any means, I confess it
to be a thing impossible: seeing that not every man that is a true Christian,
can by conference of the scripture be by and by persuaded in all doubts, as
you here untruly say he may. When parts be taken in opinions amongst
learned men, each part forcing the scriptures by conference and otherwise to
make for that sense which he has conceived, is no man a true Christian but he
that ca^ be satisfied in this case by the scripture? Has it not been seen that
the mainteiners of such contrary opinions, being for virtue and learning
esteemed of the world, have made also right good Christians to doubt? And what
case had Christ left us in, if in this perplexity there were not a church
to direct us, if that church had not a head to speak to us, which being in
S. Augustine and Prospers time Prosper lib. contra Collator. cap. 10.
Zozimus the Pope as you heard before, show us now if you can, why Pius the
pope should not be the like? And thus you see M. Nowell (I trust) that you
have to much abused both the Readers and me, in laboring, first to persuade
that I mislike the Scriptures (which I do in no sense) or the conference
thereof (which I do not simply, but in this respect that you contend that
that way alone is sufficient to end all controversies): next in this, that
you altre my reason, which is, that because by this pretensed conference of
youres heresies can never be overthrown, while by the subtilitye of heretics
alleging scripture, conferring scripture, and that so probably that even the
best learned may be shaken in their faith, and so heresy maintained, you
make the same reason to be, because there can no way possibly be found able
to satisfy all froward heretics. Upon this supposall of youres, that I
reject this conference of scripture as no sufficient mean to end all
controversies because it can not satisfy al men, you ask this question.

And thinks he, that Popes of Rome, men of such life, such Nowell. b. 6.
Hold the man a bowl for he will vomit.
partiality, such ignorance, such untruth, such falsehode, such bribery,
Simoniakes, poisonners, murderers, shall satisfy all men, in all judgments
of all causes and controversies, yea in their own very causes wherein they be
parties, and that without all exception? The devil they shall and that I may
say truly.

Non loqueris sed latras, you speak not here M. Nowell Dorman.
but you barcke, you reason not but you rail. If all these faults that you
here heap together were in one pope at one time, yeat should they not be all
any let why the same might not and should not, give true judgment and
satisfy all good men. To this I have answered before where Cap. 3. fol. 8. b.
and 10 fol. 39. b.
you gave me like occasion, thither I remit the reader. Yeat this I would
feign know of you by the way, and desire you when you wright next to
resolve me therein, whether if these popes had the contraries to these vices,
that is so many virtues, you think they might give true judgment and
satisfy all men. If you say they could not, what neded then this odiouse
rehersall of so many grieuouse faults, seeing by no means they could? If
you say that being good men they might, then show scripture, or bring reason
to prove, that this authority is lost by evil manners? In controversies
rising upon the scripture, the popes cause is not handled but gods, and
therefore they be no parties thereto. Whereas you promise so largely on the
diuelles behalf, you may be bold for as much as he is hable to do, he is
at your commandment.

To your conclusion, that the word of God is the true B. 13.
judge in all controversies and doubts of religion, I say (as I said before)
that when the church has given sentence of the meaning and right
understanding of the scripture, that then in that sense and no otherwise, the
scripture is the true judge in all controversies: otherwise I say that the
word of God lieng yeat in the lettre as it were in the husk, is an uncertain
judge to determine controversies, what so ever Luther, Calvin or their
adherentes, the rest of that black guard do say to the contrary, or be M.
Nowell never so angry therewith.

Whereas I declared before what starting holes the Arrians Fol. 105. a* 23.
rians, Anabaptists, Lutherans, Caluinistes, and other heretics have found
out for the mainteinaunce of their religion, and that upon the same grounds
and principles, any desperate heretic that is, may maintain any heresy:
you take occasion of that word (desperate heretic) to reherce once again a
place of S. Cyprian, where he calls by the same name (you say) all such as
think one bishop inferior to an other (as I and all other papists Cap. 11.
sub finem.
do) but the contrary to that I have showed before. And surely to think thus
if it be to be a desperate heretic M. Nowell contrary to him self, or a
desperate heretic and papist by his own confession.
or a papist either: I pray you what be you M. Nowell, that in your book
fol. 32. a, confess that in every province, there be certain chief
prelates? Does not the word chief import that there be other inferior
prelates? Which word if you will now revoke again, if your bishop will not,
I trust your pretensed Archbishop will call you to a count for it.

That which follows fol. 105. b. and. 106. a. because it contains but vain
words, and has been in diverse other places handled, I will here pass over?

Of the place of S. Hierome taken out of his epistle to Damasus, and that it
has been alleged to the purpose, without wresting or falsifieng. The 28.
chapter.
PROSEcuting this controversy, whether the scripture as we have it written,
were hable alone without other means to determine all controversies, the
which the heretic sees being proved that it can not, it will needs follow
that there must be some other judge to supply that office: I said, that S.
Hierome notwithstanding his great and excellent knowledge in the tongues,
would not take upon him to lean in the discussing of doubts to that rule of
theirs, to lay and confer together one text with an other, but referred him
self to the sea of Rome etc. whose example I exhorted also other to follow. To
this M. Nowell answers as follows.

S. Hierome says no where that he would enot compare the Nowell. fol. 106. a.
23.
scripture together for the discussing of doubts (as M. Dorman would bear us
in hand) and S: Austen says he would do it, and exhorts other to do the
same.

Where do I bear you in hand that S. Hierome Dorman.
said that he would not not compare the scriptures together A lie. 81*
for the discussing of doubts? Why noted you not here the leaf and side? I
deny not but that it is a necessary and very proffitable way of reading the
scriptures to confer the places together. And so doubt I not but that S.
Hierome as well as S. Augustine used to do. The which makes very much for
the Catholic opinion, that all questions can not be discussed by this
conference off scripture. For if they could, what neded S. Hierome (so well
learned as he was) in this controversy between the Catholics and the Arrians,
to write so far out of the wildrenes of Syria to Damasus the pope, a man
allthough singulerly well learned, yeat not comparable with him for learning,
to be resolved at his mouth what part to take, whereas he had with him the
scriptures of God, by the which (by your saing) if he had diligently
conferred them together, he might have been fully instructed in all points?
What meant he else that he used not now his accustomed manner of conference,
but that he saw that this was a question that could not so be tried, and
therefore he would consulte Damasus, who being he persuaded him self the
successor of Peter, should be able sufficiently by the grace given to that
office, to resolve him in that, which by all his own labor and diligence he
were not at all, or not so soon and certainly, hable to find out.

S. Hieromes words to Damasus Bishop of Rome make nothing Nowell.
against us, nor with M. Dorman. For what merueile is it, if that S. Hierome
borne in a coast of Italy, christened at Rome, brought up at Rome, and made
priest at Rome, would in the faith of the blessed Trinity, rather join him
self in communion with Damasus bishop of Rome a learned and godly man, then
with Vitalis and Meletius (whom M. Dorman calls Miletus) and Paulinus, who
were Antiochia^ bishops, and therefore strangiers to him, and also not clear
from the Arrian heresy?

That you report of S. Hierome that he was borne in a Dorman. The place of S.
Hieto me to Damasus Tom. 2. epist. ad Damasum examined Lib. de ecclesiastie.
scriptorib.
coast of Italy, it is untrue. For he was as he writes him self, borne in a
town called Stridon in the borders of Dalmatia and Pannonia: whereas Italy it
is well known never reached so far, or if it had, never did the peculier
province of the bishop of Rome extend thither, for which respect Damasus
might be accounted his bishop. But supposing this to be as true as the rest,
that he was Christened at Rome etc. Yeat the causes which S. Hierome adds
why he joined him self to him rather then to any other, may evidently make
faith, that neither because he was borne in a coaste of Italy, neither
because he was christened; brought up, or made priest in Rome, but because he
was the successor of Peter, he joined him self to him in communion, rather
then to any other. For that meant he by these words Beatitudinituae, id est
cathedrae Petri, communione consocior. To your holiness, that is to say, to
Peter's chair, am I joined in communion. Tell us if you can what there neded
here any mention of Peter's chair to be made, but that he would declare
thereby the only respect of his communicating with him to be, because he was the
successor of Peter. An other cause, which yeat might trulier be called a cause
or reason of the first cause, why he joined him self to him that sat in
Peter's chair, your self would seem to have found out in these words
following.

But (will M. Dorman say) S. Hierome adds a cause (which is Nowell. fol.
107. a 10.
the pyth of the matter) saing thus. Super illam petram aedificatem ecclesiam
scio. I know that upon that rock (Peter's chair) the church is builded,
which is the cause why S. Hierome joined with Damasus, will he say.

Will you see what a perilouse brained man M. Nowell is? Dorman.
He has readen my answer already, and can tell what it shallbe before I
utter it the second time. But you must give him leave sometimes to scour his
Rhetorike lest it wax rustye, and therefore here upon a bravery he sets a
lusty countenance upon the matter, and that which he knows can not be passed
over in silence, because it has been moved already, he will so bring furthe
the second time, as though such a pore catholic as I am, had not had such
an objection in store, without I had first received it by his liberality even
as it were in the way of all moise. Yeat this I can not but mislike, that as soon as he had given it, it seems that he wished that he had kept it in his
purse still, for it follows.

But he may be ashamed, had he any shame at all thus shamefully Nowell. 14.
by a false Parenthesis to intremingle these words (Peter's chair) in this
sentence of S. Hierome, and so to falsify it, as though S. Hierome had said
or meant in this place, that the popes chair is the rock whereon the church is
builded.

Well these be but words M. Nowell, how prove you Dorman.
that this is a false Parenthesis, that S. Hierome meant not that the popes
chair (as it is S. Peter's chair) is the rock whereo^ the church is builded.
Your reasons to prove it follow after that you have charged me with mangling
of the sentence of S. Hierome, in this wise.

For he did see, that S. Hierome admonishing Damasus of humility, Nowell. b.
20.
and withal professing him self to follow no chief or head but Christ, not
excepting Damasus case, but rather affirming him not to be primum, the chief,
makes clearly with us, who in this controversy of the popes usurped
supremacy say the same etc. furthermore he did see, that the words of S.
Hierome following (upon this rock I know the church to be builded) might and
ought to be referred to Christ mentioned fol. 108. a. 1.
by S. Hierome so nere before, and by Petre confessed to be that rock whereon
the church is builded, and therefore M. Dorman left out of S. Hieromes
sentence the mention of Christ, that he might most falsely and blasphemously
refer the rock to Peter's chair, as though Peter's rotten chair or ruinouse
Rome were the rock whereon the church of our Savior Christ is builded.

Your proufes that this Parenthesis is false contained Dorman.
in these words, are two. First because Hierome professed him self to follow
no chief or head but Christ, not excepting Damasus: next because these
words (Upon this rock I know the church to be builded) ought to be referred
to Christ etc. as before. To the first I answer, that you have M. Nowell
falsifieth S. Hierome in translating.
not dealt honestly and sincerely in translating the words nullum primum, no
chief or head: as though S. Hierome had been of that opinion, that he would
profess him self to follow no other head in earth under Christ, which if
it had been so: how agrees this with your own He is contrary to him self.
words in this place, that Damasus was S. Hieromes own bishop? If he were
his bishop, he was his chief or head. If he were his head, you will not I
trust make him to mende your own cause, a rebelliouse membre. One of these
two will follow, that either S. Hierome (if your translation were true,
condemns all heads in earth but only Christ, or that he will obey them
as far as he list him self. Is not this sincere handling trow you of the
fathers writings? Is not this wholesome doctrine that you would make them to
be patrones of? But I pray you that translate this word nullum primum, so
diversely, three manner of ways in little more then the compass of one leaf,
first interpreting it, no chief or head fol. 107. b. 5. line, then in the
same side. 15. no chief head, Last of all fol. 108. b. 21. no head: tell us
when you write next, to which of these interpretations you will stand. For
the second interpretation a man might grant to you, and without prejudice to
us or gain to you. For it is true in deed that in respect of Christ there is
no absolute chief head but he: the pope is but chief and supreme head next
under Christ. Although this were not in this place the meaning of S. Hierome,
but only to signify, that next after Christ he joined him self to Peter's
chair, and that he followed nullum primum nisi Christum, none first but Christ,
as much to say, as Christ first, and Damasus of all other next after.

Your next proof that the word (rock) should be referred to Christ and
not to Peter's chair, because Christ is mentioned so nere before, and by Petre
confessed to be that rock whereon the church is builded, leans to a very
fickle and weak ground, and makes me to think, that at the least you
nodded M. Nowell if you slepte not down right when you wrote this. For if you
take the book waking into your hand once again, you shall (I dare M. Nowell
over thrown by his own reason.
assure you) find, that the word (Peter's chair) is nearer to the word rock
then is Christ, so that by your own argument and reason it follows, that
the word (rock) should be referred to Peter's chair placed so near before.
Whereas you say that Petre confessed Christ to be that rock whereon the
church is builded, where has Petre those words? Note the place in your
next writing, else will it be thought that you make and coin scripture at
your pleasure. We deny not notwithstanding but that Christ is the rock
whereon the church is builded, although in Saint Petre those words be not so
to be found. Yeat follows it not that therefore Peter's chair or Petre (for
both is here taken for one) is not also the rock whereon it is builded. For
Christ is Fundamentum primum and maximum, the chief and greatest fundation
(as witnesses S. Augustine reconciling together these places of the scripture,
no man can In psalm. 86. 1. Cor, 3. Ephesians. 2.
lay an other fundation then that which is laid which is Christ Jesus, and
this: Builded upon the fundation of the Apostles and prophets) and Petre is
also a foundation, next after Christ. As to make the matter plain by
example: if a man would build a house upon a rock, that rock were the How
Christ is the rock and how Peter.
chief and principal foundation, for it has soliditie and strength of it
self not of an other, yeat all this notwithstanding, the first stone of this
building that should be laid upon the rock, were also the foundation, but
not as having soliditie or strength of it self, but of that other perfect
fundation whereunto it leans. To this alluded Saint Ambrose when in a
certain place he calls Petre firmissimam petra^, the most strong rock,
quae ab illa principali petra Lib. 2. de vocat. ge^t. cap. 9.
communionem and virtutis sumsit and nominis, which took from that principal
rock (he means Christ) communion both of virtue and name. What can be
said more plainly to express that Petre is called a rock as well as
Christ? to confirm this distinction of rocks or fundations?

Having now detected the vanity of your prouffes whereby you labor to
prove that this place of S. Hierom should be falsified by me: I will confirm
the catholic doctrine in this point, and show that this Parenthesis added by
me for the better understanding of the place, was truly added. And because
you complain of me for leaving out two lines, I will prove not only by
them, but by the preamble of the epistle, that S. Hierome wrote not to Damasus
as to his own bishop, but to him as head of the church, and successor to
Petre.

In the two lines that you say I cut of, are these words: cum successore
piscatoris and discipulo crucis loquor, with the successor of the fissher
(Peter) and a disciple of the cross I speak. Of these words I make this
argument: S. Hierome wrote to Damasus as to the successor of S. Peter. But S.
Petre was acknowledged by S. Hierome to be head of the church, therefore S.
Hierome wrote unto him as head of the church. The minor proposition is proved
by S. Hieron. in Psalm. 13.
Hierome writing upon the 13. Psalm, where expounding these words: Non est
qui faciat bonum etc. no (says he) not Petre him self, which is head of the
church. Again in an other place where he says: Coenaculum grande ecclesia
magna In cap. Marci. 14.
est, in qua narratur nomen domini strata varietate virtutum and linguarum, vt
est illud: circumamicta varietate, in qua paratur domino Pascha. Dominus domus
Petrus apostolus est: cui dominus domum suam credidit, vt sit vna fides sub vno
pastore. That is to say: The great parler is the great church, in the which
is preached the name of our Lord, garnished with variety of gifts and
tongues, according to the saing: Clothed with change of apparel: in the which
is prepared our Psalm. 44.
Lords passover. The master of the house is Petre the apostle, to whom our
Lord committed his house, that Note this reason.
there may be one faith under one shepeherd. The consequent of this argument
is proved to be good by this reason of S. Hieromes, why God appointed S. Petre
to be the ruler of the church. For seeing we must now as well avoid
multitudes of faith as the church was bound in S. Petres time to do, there
must as necessarily be now one head as there was then, which no man can
justly doubt whether S. Hierome meant that Damasus should be, seeing he
confesses that Damasus is Petres successor, who was by his confession that
one head. And that it may the better appear that this was in S. Hieromes
time the faith of the church, that as Petre was head thereof so were also his
successors: S. Ambrose living with S. Hierome, calls this very Damasus
ruler of gods house the church, whom I would In 1. Timoth. 3.
not allege but try out S. Hieromes meaning by him self, were it not that
you might see how uniformly they agree in this point, Hierome calling Petre
the master: Ambrose calling Damasus his successor, the ruler of gods house
the church. Moreover, that in calling Peter head of the church and Damasus
his successor, S. Hierome called Damasus also head of the church, is proved
by this, that S. Hierome in this place protesting that he was joined to Damasus
in communion, expounds him self, id est cathedrae Petri, that is to say to
the chair of Petre. Thus did S. Cyprian in his time describing the bishoprike
of Rome by these words Locus Fabiani, Fabians place, expound by and by his
meaning in this wise: id est locus Petri, and gradus cathedrae sacerdotalis,
that is to say, Petres place and the degree Lib. 4. epist. 2.
of the priestely chair. If therefore the popes that succeed S. Peter have the
same place, the same chair, that is to say the same authority (for this
word chair signifies no thing else) that S. Petre had: who doubts but
that S. Hierom in this place acknowledging him self to speak to Petres
successor, did agnise also the same auctorite in him, that he did in S. Petre?

Next after this, weigh I beseech you the preamble of this epistle of S.
Hierome to Damasus, vttred in these words. Quoniam vetusto Oriens inter se
populorum furore collisus. etc. Because the East being sore broosed and shaken
with the old fury of the people amongst them selves, teareth piece meal the
whole and seamelesse coat of our Lord, and the foxes destroy Christ's
vineiarde, so that amongst the leaking pittes that have no water, it is hard
to understand where is that sealed founteine and walled gardein: therefore I
thought that Petres chair and Romans 1.
the faith praised by the Apostles own mouth, ought to be consulted by me,
from thence now asking food for my soul, from whence once I received
Christ's lyuory. Thus far S. Hierome. By which words we may understand, that
he wrote this epistle to Damasus, as to him that being successor to Petre was
head of the church, and therefore in all doubtefull cases to be consulted,
not as to his own proprebishop. For if he had, why should he then have
mentioned Petres chair, which word because S. Peter was head of the whole
church (as has been proved out of S. Hierome) argues a rule over the whole,
not of a particular place alone? If now S. Hierome were not afearde to say,
that he joined him self in communion to Petres chair, that in this doubtefull
case he thought that that chair was to be consulted, why take you the matter
so whotly against me, for saing with S. Hierome that the church is builded
upon Petres chair? Why call you this more blasphemy then the other, to be
joined in communion to Petres chair, to consult Petres chair? Is it unlikely
that S. Hierome should say that Petres chair was the rock whereon the
church was builded, to the which chair he sought for council, to the which
he protested to be joined in the same communion? Or is it likely, that he
would have so said of any chair, save that on the which the church was
builded? I can not here but note by the way how to make the matter seem
odiouse to the unlearned, you use terms like your self against this chair
of S. Petre, minding as I take it, to persuade that I should draw S. Hieromes
words to such a meaning, as that he should mean that Christ's church were
builded upon a material chair. You may be ashamed M. Nowel where you lack
just matter, to blotte paper and waste incke with such cauilling triffles as
every man that has common sense will as soon as they have passed once your
mouth, be hable to discover and reprove. Does not S. Hierome in this place
make twice express mention of Petres chair? Why triumph you not over him as
you crow against me, with your foolish and unsavory Rhetorike, and say that
he was well occupied to write from Siria to Rome for council from a rotten
chair? that he was a wise man to join him self in communion theretoe? Who
sees not that you would have taken the matter as whotly with S. Hierome as
you do with me (having as good cause altogether) saving that you feared the
burning of your lips? I say therefore M. Nowell that What S. Hierome meant
by Peter's chair.
S. Hierome (to answer you in this point if you were so very a dolt that you
understood it not before) by building the church upon Petres chair, means
even as he did in those two places before, where you can not deny but that he
makes express mention of that chair. Saint Hierome means there no
material chair, and therefore no rotten chair, as you like a rotten membre
and divided from the church blasphemously say. He means as Matt^. 23
Christ does in the gospel speaking of Moises chair, as the fathers,
Cipria^, Epiphanius, Austen, Ambrose, Optatus, and the rest do, as often as
they use this word, that is to say by the chair, the power and bishoplike
authority which Petre having given to him, committed to his successors. For
eue^ as a river though it run many thousands of miles, leeseth not yeat but
reteineth nevertheless the name of the founteine and head spring from whence
it came: so fares it in the succession of bishops, that how many so ever
there be that succeed, yeat they are all said to possess the chair of him
that ruled first: yea allthough every of them had made for him self a new
chair. For the matter consists not as I said before in material chaires,
no more then does the opening or shutting of heaven gates depend upon
material keys. And as well might you like a Lucianist, or a Porphirian have
scoffed at Christ for saing that the scribes and Phariseis sat upon Moises
chair (which if they had had emo^gest them, if ever Moises sat in any,
should at that time have been as rotten as is S. Petres now, there being
between Moises and S. Petre not many fewer years then are now between S.
Petre and our time) or for making keys for heaven, as you do against me. But
to let this pass and to exaggerate no further that, for the which at the hands
of such as be of the learneder and wiser sort, you are like to sustain
punishment enough by incurring the note of this infamy to be no learned
reasoner, but a railing wrangler: I will now as compendiously as may be
justify the inserting of this Parenthesis (Peter's chair).

First these words (upon this rock I know the church to be builded) ought
to be referred rather as your self before confessed (and in this case if in
any you ought to be believed, for you have been a scholemaister and practiced
better in the gramer rules then in the scriptures and fathers writings) to the
words that go nearest before: but the words (Peter's chair) are placed
nearest before. Therefore by your own confession, the building of the church
ought to be referred thither. Again, S. Hierome in this place it is (I know
the church to be builded on that rock) to the words of the gospel: Tues
petrus and super hanc petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam. Thou Matt. 16.
art Petre and upon this rock will I build my church. But in that place
Christ appointed an other fundation of the church beside him self to wit
Peter: It follows therefore that S. Hierome in this place meant not of Christ
but of Peter's chair, that is, Peter's authority or Peter him self. Thirdly
parenthesis, and that toe, to auaunce the dignitye of the Sea of Rome, as
before the which he would prefer (he said) none but Christ. The which
being so, what sound judgment will not rather refer these words about
which the controversy is, to that which is principally and directly handled,
rather then to that which is mentioned but incidently and indirectly. Last of
all, it is are: Apostolus Petrus super quem Dominus fundauit ecclesiam. Tom. 2.
epist ad Marcella^.
Petre the Apostle upon whom our lord founded his church.

Thus you see good Readers I trust, how falselye and without all cause, M.
Nowell has quarelled with me for this parenthesis, added only to make more
plain the words of Saint Hierome. It follows that I show to you how he
prosecuteth his purposed malice by the auctorities of Erasmus, and S.
Augustine, in the 108. 109. and 110. leaves.

Erasmus (says M. Nowell) clean contrary to all papists, Nowell. fol. 108.
a. 18.
says in his notes upon these words: Super illam petram, etc. Non super
Romam vt arbitror, etc. That is to say. Upon that rock, not upon Rome I
trow, etc.

From Erasmus thus far we dissent not, that we know Dorman.
as well as he, that the church was not built upon Rome. For if Rome were
sacked (as God forbid) to morrow next, the church should continue
nevertheless, although the bishop went from thence and should sit at the
meanest town in all Italye, or else where. As for that that he would have
the church to be builded by S. Hieromes meaning upon Peter's faith: that
first he affirms not confidently, but says he troweth so: next, it may be
said, that in this place Erasmus tells his own opinion: in the other place
off this epistle upon these words Extra hanc domum without this house, he
confesses the mind of S. Hierome, which he says was utterly that all
churches ought to be under the Roman See, or no strangers from it. If Erasmus
in his interpretation before, saing that the church was not as he thought
builded upon Rome, but upon the faith of Petre, agree with S. Hierome in this
point that all churches be subject to the Roman See: how happens it that
you and your fellows, to withdraw all men from this subjection to that See,
make that principle that the church was builded not upon Rome but upon Petres
his faith, your chief ground, seeing that in Erasmus judgment both might
stand well inoughe together? If on the contrary part this interpretation
made by Erasmus can not agree with the mind of Saint Hierome: Why should we
rather credit Erasmus not sure off his own opinion, then S. Hierome
confidently affirming the contrary?

Yea and further the same Erasmus in the beginning of his argument Nowell. fol.
108. b. 1.
upon his treatye against the Luciferians, which is next to his two epistles
to Damasus, has these words: Nulla haeresis grauius afflixit, etc. No
heresy has more grievously afflicted the churches of all the world, then
the Arrians: in so much that it has wrapped in the bishops of Rome, and
the emperors them selves. It pleases M. Dorman sometime to allege Erasmus
against us, whose auctoritye if it be good, down goes the pope and all
popery. For if the bishops of Rome have been infected with heresy, then is
not there that universal rock.

As good men as Erasmus and better to have sustained Dorman.
the contrary, that there was never bishop of Rome heretic. But if there
had, it follows not thereof, that there is not that universal rock. Let that
be the answer till I come to your question, What if the Pope be an heretic?

Now if M. Dorman did not see these notes of Erasmus upon Nowell. b. 16.
the place by him alleged out of S. Hierome, I praise his diligence, he may
of Dorman be called Dormitantius, as S. Hierome (whom he falsely alleges)
called Vigilantius, and more iustlye both by nature and sound of name may M.
Dorman be so called, then ever was Vigilantius by S. Hierome, etc.

I saw them and understood them it appears, better Dorman.
then you. Read S. Hierome contra Vigilantium ad Exuperium, and then see who
is likely by S. Hieromes mind to be called Dormitantius: you, who with that
drowsy sleeping heretic rail against the tapers and lights in the church,
the worshipping of saints, the reverent keeping of their blessed relikes, or
I, who with saint Hierome maintain the contrary. But I think even for that
cause a little thing would make you to call S. Hierome Dormitantius to, for
it appears that it pleased you never a deal, that he should so roughly
handle your dear frinde, and therefore you prefer your allusion to my name,
before that of his to the name of Vigilantius. But I would counsel you M.
No-well either to get you some new trym name, such as is Theodore Basile or
some such like, or else to leave scoffing at other till this that you have
containing nothing well in it, may be mended. Because you perceived that
Erasmus either made little for your purpose, or that his authority would not
be much set by, you say.

But if Erasmus judgment be nothing worth etc. I will yeat in Christ's
quarrel, that he is the rock and not Petres rotten Nowell. B. 26.
chair, bring furthe one witness not only greater then Erasmus but also
equal with S. Hierome, and above all papists in credit and authority: S.
Austen in his 13. sermon upon the gospel off Matthew.

You fight with your own shadow M. Nowell, when Dorman. Fol. 109. ^. 1.
you imagine to encountre with any match that should offer Christ wrong. No
man denies to Christ that excellency to be the rock of his church: you
may therefore put up your dagger, the fraie was done before it begone. But
yeat hereof it follows not, that therefore Petres chair, that is to say
Peter, is not also a fundation in Christ the first and greatest fundation, as
a little before I showed. To the authority of S. Austen I answer, that even
as your other witness that you brought before, Erasmus, durst in this case
affirm nothing boldly, but only showed his mind doubtefully: so is S. Austen
in this question as it Lib. 1. Retractat. cap. 21.
appears in his worckes, not fully resolved. For in his first book of
Retractations (where you say most impudently that he repeateth and mainteineth
most earnestly this interpretation An impudent lie. made upon 12. S. Austen
B. 18.
that Christ and not Petre is the rock) he proposing both the
interpretations, that Peter is the rock (as he confessed that the same sense
he had both him self given in writing against Donatus, and was song in his
time by the mouth of many in the verses of S. Ambrose, where speaking of the
cock, he says: Hoc ipsa petra ecclesiae canente, culpam diluit, at the
singing of this cock the rock of the church him self, purged his fault):
he proposing I say this sense, and also that other, that Christ is that rock,
concludes in this wise: Harum autem duarum sententiarum quae sit probabilior
eligat lector. Of these two opinions let the reader chose that which he
thinks most probable. Is this M. Nowell to defend most earnestly that
Christ and not Petre is the rock, to set men at liberty to believe in this
point as they list? Is this the candor, the sincere and upright dealing that
you speak so much of? But if you will yeat by no means grant that S.
Austen doubted of this point, if he were resolved on any part, I will prove
by alleging diverse places against this one of youres, that he thought as we
do, and not with you.

First in a sermon that he made of Petres chair, he has these words: Petru^
itaque fundamentu^ ecclesiae dominus nominauit, August. Sermon. de cathedra. S.
Petri
and ideo digne fundamentu^ hoc ecclesia colit, supra quod ecclesiastici
aedificij altitudo co^surgit. That is to say, Our Lord therefore named Petre
the fundation of the church, and for that cause does the church worthily
worship this fundation, upon the which the height of the ecclesiastical
building rises.

Again in an other place, speaking of the first miracle Sermon. de Sanct. 26.
that S. Petre did in restoring to a lame man the use of his feet, he writes
thus. Audistis frequenter ipsum Petrum a Act. 3.
domino petram nuncupatum, sicut ait: Tu es Petrus and super Matthew. 16.
hanc petram oedificabo ecclesiam meam. Si ergo Petrus petra est supra quam
aedificatur ecclesia, recte prius pedes sanat, vt sicut in ecclesia fidei
fundamentum continet, ita and in homine membrorum fundamenta confirmet. That is
to say. You have heard often times that Petre him self is called by our
Lord a rock, as where he says: Thou art Peter and upon this rock will I
build my church. If therefore Petre be the rock upon the which the church
is builded, he did well, first to heal the feet, that as in the church he
contains the fundation of faith: so he should in this man strengthen the
fundations of his members. I might here allege diverse other places of S.
Austen to this sense, As in Psalm. 30. and alijs multis locis.
but these two here vouched, and that other which he mentions him self in
his Retractations, to be in his writings against Donatus, may be sufficient
to teach, that if he thought not fully of this point as we do, (as by these
three places for one brought by you it should seem he did) he was yeat
indifferent and not against us.

But what if S. Austen had been most earnestly against us? Yeat could you not
so press us with his authority M. Nowell, by being greater then Erasmus,
equal with S. Hierome, above all papists in credit and authority, that he
should be above, Clement, Tertullian, Ciprian, Basile, Hilarious, Ambrose,
Hierome, Cirill, Leo: who all with one voice agree in this interpretation that
the church was founded upon Petre. Epist. 1. ad Jacob. fratr. domini.
Clement says of him, that by the merit of true faith, he was determined to
be the fundation of the church. Lib. de praescrip. haeret.
Tertullian afketh whether any thing could be hidden from Petre, called the
rock of the church to be builded. Saint Cyprian libro. 1. epist. 12. libro.
4. epist. 9. Lib. de habit. virgin. Lib. de bono pat. epist. ad Iubaian. and
epist. ad Quintum: in all these places affirms, that the church was builded
upon Petre. Lib. 2. aduers. Eunoni.
S. Basile because that Petre excelled in faith to ke therefore (he says) the
building of the church upon him. In cap. Math. 16.
Hilarie the B. of Poictiers in France calls Petre Felix ecclesiae
fundamentum, the happy fundation of the church Sermon 47.
. S. Ambrose has that Petre was called of Christ, ecclesiarum petra the rock
of churches. S. Hierome amongst many other places, expounding the very
words of Christ. Thou art Petre, etc. Math. 16. gives this sense: Aedificabo
ecclesiam meam super te. I will build my church upon the. Lib. 2. in Ioannem
cap. 12. Sermon. 3. in Anniuersario assumptionis suae ad ponificatum.
Ciril says that Christ in the giving to Petre his new name, signified
thereby that in him as in a rock and most strong stone he would build his
church. Leo (to make an end) brings in Christ speaking of Petre after this
sort. Ego tibi dico: hoc est, sicut pater meus tibi manifestauit diuinitatem
meam, ita and ego tibi notam facio excellentiam tuam. Quia tu es Petrus: id
est, quum ego sim inuiolabilis petra, ego lapis angularis qui facio vtraque
vnum: tamen and tu quoque petra es, quia mea virtute solidaris, vt quae mihi
potestate sunt propria, tibi sint mecum participatione communia, and super hanc
petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam etc. that is to say: I tell the, as my father
has made manifest to the his divinity, so do I declare to the thy
excellency, that thou art Petre: that is Note how Christ is the rock, and
how Petre.
to say, whereas I am the inviolable rock and corner stone which make both
one, the fundation beside the which no man can lay any other: yeat art thou
also a rock because by my strength thou art made sound and massiff, that
those things which are propre to my self by power, may be common between us
by participation, and upon this rock will I build my church.

You have heard M. Nowell for one place brought by you out of S. Austen to
confirm your purpose, three other even taken from the same man to the
contrary. You In his books of Retractations.
have heard that in that very book where with better judgment he
ouerloketh and corrects all his former doings, he makes it a matter
indifferent to think either the one way, or the other. Last of all you have
heard the judgment of nine of the most learned fathers in Christ's church
agreing all in one sentence against you. Go your ways now and boaste of S.
Austen being against all these fathers and him self to if he should be of the
mind that you would have him to be. I trust you shall never be hable to bring
the wise or learned in to such a fools paradise, as to make them leaving the
whole consent of so many learned doctors, to follow your interpretation
grounded upon one, not much liking the same him self.

You gather of this place of S. Austen an argument against fol. 110. ^. 17.
religiouse men. You moved it before, and there the reader shall find it
answered. Yeat this to say of the Augustinia^s (of whom warily you forbear to
make any mention before) the reason that you make here why they should not be
of S. Augustines institution, is false and untrue. For neither the Dominicanes
bearing the name of S. Dominike, nor the Franciscanes of saint Frauncis,
neither yeat these Augustinians of saint Augustine, do bear these names in
such sort, as the Corinthians did claim to hold of such as baptized them.
How they did it appears by these words of saint Austen here in this place
by you alleged: Apostolus aute^ Paulus vbi cognouit se eligi and Christum
contemni, diuisus est inquit Christus? The Apostle Paul when he perceived that
he was chosen and Christ contemned: why says he is Christ divided? In this
wise M. Nowell because the Augustinians neither build upon saint Austen, nor
are called after his name, there is no cause yeat showed why they may not be
well enough of his institution, as that they are, Richardus Cenomanus in his
learned censure upon saint Austens rule, has against Erasmus most
evidently proved.

As for your other witnesses that you can join to Erasmus, that popes have
been heretics, if that could be proved A. 24.
by a hundred witnesses, yeat till you be hable to prove that they had erred in
defining any matter iudicially, and delivering the same to the whole church
of Christ, you have proved nothing against this See that there is not the
rock.

With like fraud did M. Dorman leave also that, which next Nowell. b. 17.
follows in S. Hierome of the house, without the which he that eats the
paschall lamb is a profane or unholy man: and the ark of Noah, without the
which all that be, perish by the floude. For though in that place it might
seem to make for M. Dormans purpose concerning the supremacy of the B. of Rome
(as Erasmus has noted) yet he knowing or some man warning him, that the house
without the which the paschall lamb may not be eaten, the arc, etc. by all
doctors is interpret to be the one universal church of Christ, and by none
to be the church of Rome, therefore like a wise man, or else a false fox, he
let that following alone also, as he cut of Christ the head going and joined
next before, and so he has told you a tale both without head and tail,
thereby to prove the pope who is Antichrist, to be the head of Christ's
church.

Is not this M. Nowell more then intolerable impudency, Dorman.
to charge me with fraud for the leaving out of that sentence, then which
there is none either in the works of S. Hierome him self, or any of the
other learned doctors, that more makes for the dignitye of the sea of Rome,
for the omitting whereof in my book, I deserved rather to be noted at the
catholics hands of ouermuche simplicitye, then at youres of fraud and
sutteltye? But how truly here let the place itself judge. Omitting Erasmus
whose judgment now you condemn (which yeat in me might have been counted
some point of leuitie, if I had ever praised him as you did before, to be no
unskillful or negligent viewer of the old fathers writings) I will come to
the place it self, which I doubt not but by construing (for I trust
although you care not much for the rules of the church you owe yeat for old
acquaintance your reverence to the rules of Grammar) to make both you and
other men to understand also how much this place makes for me, and how little
cause I had to suppress it, and how much yet less you had to make any
mention of it. Saint Hieromes words therefore concerning this matter are
these. Ego nullum primum, nisi Christum sequens, beatit udini tuae, id est,
cathedrae Petri, communione consocior. Super illam petram aedificatam ecclesiam
scio. Quicunque extra hanc domum agnum comederit, prophanus est. Now let us
construe M. Nowell. Ego I, sequens following, nullum primum, none first, nisi
Christum but Christ, co^socior am joined communione in communion, beatitudini
tuae, to thy holiness, id est, that is to say, cathedrae Petri to the chair
of Petre. Super illa^ petra^, upon that rock (what rock M. Nowel, but the
same chair of Peter to the which he professed him self to be joined in
communion going next before these words:) scio I know, ecclesiam the
church, aedificatam to be builded. Quicunque who so ever, comederit shall
eat, agnum the lamb, extra hanc domu out of this house, prophanus est is
profane. Now these words being truly by me thus construed, every man learned
and unlearned may see, that S. Hierome by the house which he here mentions,
meant Christ's universal church, but builded Super illam petram, upon that
rock, which rock in the words next before he called Petres chair, to say
Petres authority. If you can construe them otherwise, and make them to have
any other relation then this and prove it by the rulers of Gramer, you may
vaunt that you have showed us a scholemasters trick that never was hard of
yeat. But I am half in dispare that you shall ever be able, seeing that your
frinde Erasmus as good a Grammarian as you, and as evil in a manner affected to
the Sea of Rome, as appears in diverse places by his notes and censures,
could find no such shifte, and therefore was feign as you must at the
length, to confess the truth, that S. Hierome was of the mind that all
churches should be subject to the church of Rome, or at the least no
strangers from it. Now whereas you say that this house that S. Hierome
mentions, is of none interpret to be the church of Rome: what were that to
our purpose if it were so, seeing it is interpret of the universal church,
which is of all the ancient fathers acknowledged to be builded upon Peter's
chair as S. Hierome says here, and (as has been declared before) S.
Cyprian, who calls the church of Rome for that cause catholicae fidei Lib.
4. epist. 8.
radicem and matricem, the rock and mother church of the catholic church.
Yeat lack there not also fathers that in a sense, that is, as in the church
of Rome all other churches are contained, call it also by the name of the
catholic church. As in effect S. Ambrose did, when he called Damasus the
pope, ruler of the whole church, which he could by no means be, but as he was
bishop of Rome. Thus In comme^t. in cap. 3. 1. Tim.
much may serve for my purgation that I have not dealt fraudulently in leaving
out this part of S. Hieromes sentence. Now let us proceed.

You make much ado about Vitalis and Meletius, and say, that I say untruly
that S. Hierome says he knows not Nowell. fo. 111. a. 1.
them because they were adversaries to the seat of Rome, the cause being,
because they were adversaries to the true doctrine of the most blessed
Trinity, which Damasus did defend.

I report me to the learned, whether I had cause to say Dorman.
so or no, not because of these words (who so ever gathers not with the
scattreth) alone, which might perhaps be truly spoken to any other
catholic bishop: but because of the circumstances that go before joined to
these, as the consulting of Petres chair, the joining of him self thereto in
communion. To the which because they did not join them selves as he did, he
refused them. If you had spoken no more untruly then I, you would not to
color the matter the better, have imagined, that amongst other causes why S.
Hierome kept not these schismatikes company, one was, because they were
foriners and not his own bishops: an other, for that they were of a strange
language. Ah M. Nowell did you nodde here, that you could not see that S.
Hierome affirms, that the followed the Aegiptian confessors the bishop of
Romes fellow bishops? Were not they as much foriners to him as were Vitalis
and Meletius? was not their language as strange? Yeat you upon this, desire the
reader to note, that S. Hierome would B. 25.
not know Vitalis and Meletius because they were foriners not his own
bishops, etc. And so make a comparison between your refusal of the pope,
and S. Hieromes refusal of these schismatikes, laing for a ground without
any proof, that the pope is a foriner and has nothing to do with you.

Of the place of S. Austen taken out of the 110. question of his questions upon
the old and new testament. The 29. chapter.
HERE M. Nowell upon the censure of Erasmus of this work of S. Austens,
makes this short but sharp conclusion against me. So that it were to much
impudency for Nowell. fo. 112. a. 30. Dorman.
any man but only M. Dorman, to allege it for S. Augustines.

Behold I pray the good Reader in what credit Erasmus is now suddenly with
M. Nowell, whom before noting S. Hierome to be of the mind that all churches
should be subject to the Sea of Rome, he esteemed so little. Then he was no
body, now having won M. Nowelles favor again, he is so extolled, that to
deny that which he shall affirm, or contrariwise, is extreme impudency, so
great a matter is it to be in his good grace. But I pray you M. Nowell in
what case then are those shameful, shamefast and modest masters I would have
said, the compilers of your Apology, who notwithstanding his judgment upon
S. Austens libri Hypognosticon, have yeat with to much impudency for any man
but only for them, alleged them against purgatory? What case are you in
your self, who notwithstanding Erasmus judgment upon that work taken for
Chrisostomes upon the gospel of S. Mathewe, were not ashamed as modest as you
would seem Opus imperfectum.
to be, to allege it against us? I will not be so malapert as to compare with
your Apology, but surely me thinks of reason, I might as well use any
thing in this work of S. Austens as you in that of Chrysostom. If the
difference between our two cases be, that you handle the matter rhetorically,
calling the auctor an ancient auctor printed with Chrysostom, and of long
time taken for him, whereas I giving no such credit nor reverence neither, to
Erasmus judgment of the true or countrefeite writings of the old doctors,
like a plain blunt fellow allege the place as I find it: I will sone mende
that fault if it be one, and by imitation say as you do, an ancient auctor
printed with S. Augustine and of long time taken for him. And now what say
you to this ancient auctor?

First you say, that the greatest part of these words alleged Nowell.
by me, be not to be found in the place by me noted.

I grant, nor it is not necessary: for I do not so allege Dorman.
the place as though every word should be there. I do allude only to S.
Austens words. It is enough that there is there sufficient to prove your
chair, a chair of pestilence, and your body, a body without a head. Make
of it then a tronck, or what you list else. For the better declaration hereof,
I will report here the words of S. Austen, or rather this ancient auctor
(that I miss not my terms) printed with S. Austen and of long time taken
for him: which are these: Quoniam cathedram pestilentiae non esse de August.
in ques^. veter. and noui test. q. 110.
dei ordinatione asseuer auimus, etiam eorum qui extra ecclesiam, vel contra
ecclesiam seeds sibi instituerunt, cathedram pestilentiae esse dicimus. Qui
enim inconcessa praesumit, reus est, quanto magis si and corrumpat traditionem
eius cuius sedem vsurpat? Nam and ordinem ab Apostolo Petro coeptu^, and vsque
ad hoc tempus per traducem succedentiu^ episcoporu^ seruatu^ perturbant,
ordinem sibi sine origin vendicantes, hoc est corpus sine capite profitentes:
vnde congruit etiam eorum sedem cathedram pestilentiae appellare. That is to
say: for as much as we affirmed that the chair of pestilence was not of gods
ordinance, even their chair also we call the chair of pestilence, who have
made them selves sees without or against the church. For he that presumes
upon that which he ought not, is guilty: how much more if he also corrupt the
tradition of him whose seat he usurps? For they trouble the order begone of
Petre the Apostle, and kept to this time by the continuance of bishops
succeding, chalenging to them selves order without beginning, that is to say,
professing a body without a head. These words M. Nowell translated falsely
thus: wherefore it is agreeable their seat also to appear to be the chair of
pestilence.
Wherefore it is agreeable to call their seat also the chair of pestilence.
Hitherto S. Austen or etc? Of whose words I reason thus: who so ever make them
selves sees against the church or out of the church which has continual
succession of bishops from S. Peter, sit in the chair of pestilence: But
our counterfeit bishops of England do so: ergo, their chair is the chair
of pestilence. The mayor is proved by this ancient auctor: the minor also by
him, because they trouble the order begone of Petre, and continued by the
succession of bishops to their time. They trouble this order, because they
challenge to them selves order without beginning, as they who derive it not from
S. Petre the chief rock after Christ, and are a body without a head. The
which thing if you deny, M. Nowell the^ let us look to the order bego^ne of
Petre. what was that? Let S. Cyprian tell you, who in his book de simplicitate
praelatoru^ or rather De vnitate ecclesiae, witnesses, that God by his
authority disposed the beginning of unity to begin of one, that was Petre. If
this were the order begone of Petre, who sees not who be the troublers of
this order? We, that for unities sake admit but one chief head bishop under
Christ, and no other but such as be derived from him, or you that will have
many heads without such ordinary deriuation? Has not this order been kept
in the church ever since by the continuance of bishops without interruption
till your unhappy time? Peruse if you list the order in our church of
England of the bishops of Cauntorburie for example, beginning at william
Warham, the last catholic bishop (before heresy found first entreteinement
there) and so ascend by degrees till you come to saint Austen our English
Apostle. In all this succession (the space of allmoste a thousand years) this
order has been continued in England: so that you are not able to show for
your lives, any one of all those bishops that continued not this order
begone of S. Petre. Now stay not here, but from S. Austen the first bishop
of Cauntorburie, go to him from whence he received that order, to Gregory the
bishop of Rome, from Gregory to Pelagius, from him to Benedictus, and so in
order to S. Petre: and name if you can one of them in whom this order was not
kept? This being most true, where began now your order? Who was the auctor
thereof but friar Luther? From whom conueighed he this order but from Satan
the father of all disordre, and lord of all misrule? If it be not so prove the
contrary. If you do not disturb the order begone of S. Petre, then
acknowledge one head bishop over the reast, and kick not against Gods
ordonaunce, who has so disposed, that the unity of the church should begin
of one, that is of Petre. Confess that the cause during still, why (as says
saint Hierome) saint In cap. Marci. 14.
Peter was made ruler of the church: vt sub vno pastore sit vna fides, that
under one shepherd there may be one faith: that the same remedy ought to
continue also, that is, that there be one head. But to this will you by no
means be brought, and therefore I may justly conclude that you are those
headless bishops, that sit in these pestilent chaires, making to your
selves seats out of the church and against the church by troubling the order
begone by saint Petre, as both this ancient auctor says here, and Optatus
most evidently in his worckes against the Donatistes Lib. 2.
doing the like.

But against this you reason and say, that we must first Nowell. fol. 112.
prove our selves to be the true church of Christ, which we shall never be
hable to do, being in deed the Sinagog of Antichrist.

We will not prove it M. Nowell, but will make you and Dorman.
your companions to prove it for us in spite of your beardes, be you never so
loathe. For when being asked where your church in the which you make your
ministres and bishops was but fifty years ago, you shall not be hable to
answer, your very silence shall speak for us, seeing that a church Christ
must have allwaies, which because it could not be youres that was no where, it
must be that of which we are, that was allwaies and every where.

Your next refuge is to this, that these words (whose seat Nowell. fol. 113.
a. 1.
he usurps), seem to prove that the auctor here, noted some Antipope, which
has been no novelty for these 3. or 4. hundred years to have two or three
popes at once: And so some writer in favor of him by like, that was chosen and
kept residence at Rome, has written this against some other that usurped
Petres seat etc.

It is happy M. Nowell, that this is but a bare surmise of Dorman.
youres leaning to no sure fundation, but confirmed by a pore by Like. As for
the words (whose seat he usurps) they make nothing for your Antipope, but
have relation to such false bishops as being heretics or schismatikes,
corrupt the tradition of catholic bishops whose seats they usurp, by
making war with the church, and chalenging to be of the order of bishops,
and of the body of Christ's church, whereas of their bishops they can show
no beginning, and of their body they will have no head. You can not here
say, that because they were out of the church this ancient auctor called
them a body without Christ their head. For although that be true. Yeat the
words that go next before: They trouble the order begone of Peter, etc.
chalenging to them selves an order without beginning, that is to say,
professing a body without a head, argue an other head then Christ, whose
authority of being head of his church, depended not upon Petre you wot well,
but contraryewise Peter's upon his. Whereas you restreine this place to be meant,
against some false pope intruding him self into the bishoprike of Rome, you
do the auctor great wrong, who as the learned will easily espy, speaks
here generally of all such bishops, as make them selves sees out off the
church or against the church. You might if it had pleased you have gessed
nearer, if you had said that he had noted the false Donatist bishops, who
making them selves Sees against the church, professed a body without a head
as you do. As appears by Optatus living in the same time and writing of
their bishops in this wise. Igitur Optatus lib. 2. de Schismat. Donatist.
quia Claudianus Luciano, Lucianus Macrobio, Macrobius Encolpio, Encolpius
Bonifacio, Bonifacius Victori successisse videntur: si Victori diceretur, vbi
sederit, nec ante se aliquem illic fuisse monstraret, nec cathedram aliqua^
nist pestilentiae ostenderet, that is to say. Therefore because Claudianus
seems to have succeeded Lucianus, Lucianus Macrobius, Macrobius Encolpius,
Encolpius Bonifacius, Bonifacius Victor: if one should ask Victor to whom he
succeeded, neither could he name any before him, nor show any other chair
then the chair of pestilence. That to color the better this fond fantasy of
youres, you say it has been no novelty for these 3. or 400. years, to have
2. or 3. popes at once, as though some late writer were the auctor of this
work, it is a most miserable shifte, seeing that both there be store of old
written copies not unwritten these 500. years, where this work is to be
found in the name of S. Augustine, and therefore can this place by no means
(except you would have it written by prophecy before the thing were done)
be understand of any such schismatic pope: and again, if it be not S.
Augustins, it is yeat more ancient, for as much as the auctor thereof,
counts but 300. Quaestio. 44.
years from the coming of Christ, to his time.

How so ever it be, the matter can not be applied to us, who Nowell. a. 10.
do not usurp Peter's chair. Further what word is there here to prove the
chair of Rome, to be the head of the universal church, etc.

You trouble the order begone of Petre, which is enough Dorman.
to prove your chair the chair of pestilence. For that I noted you of,
although by taking upon you that which belongs to that chair, you usurp
his chair also. These words (the order begone of Petre) include the
auctoritye of the Sea of Rome, that order being first begone in Peter that he
was the head of the rest, as has been declared, and so are you answered to
your demand, what word there is here to prove the chair of Rome to be the
head of the universal church.

To proceed, we having Christ to be our head, our church Nowell.
is no dead troncke, as lacking an head: and having him our head only, and
other his ministres our governors under him, our church is no live monstre
as having many heads: no more then our common wealth having God the only
head in heaven, our prince his servant our head gouernoure in earth, is
therefore a live monstre: or the whole world having God to his head is
therefore a dead troncke, because it has no one only earthly head, nor can
have any such: no more can the universal church thorough out the whole
world, have any such one earthly head, etc. and so may he conclude that
God and Christ the authors of life be no heads or no such heads as can save
the bodies whereof they be heads, from being dead tronckes, except the said
bodies have a false usurper from Rome to be their head beside, and to give
them life.

You twang here M. Nowell upon that old false string Dorman.
that ever iarreth and never is in tune. For as I have ever told you so often
as you made mention of this comparison between the state of the world and the
church (which has been in this Repronfe of youres very often) that between
the gouernemet of the church and the whole world there is great o^^es, so do
I now answer you again. But you will say, that I am the auctor of this
comparison my self, who reason, that the church must have one head, because
kingdoms, countries, cities, be so best governed. It is my reason (I confess)
that every thing that is one is best governed by one. And therefore the world
it self, were for us that live in the same best governed by one chief head
under Christ, if for the pain of our sins God had not disposed the same to
be governed by many. Which when you say to be a thing impossible both in the
church and in the world, you speak as you are wont without any proof, much
to the derogation of gods omnipotency. Now to come to your comparison: see
I pray you whether if God had appointed all the kingdoms in the world to be
one, as he has all the churches to be one (for he came into the world, vt
dispersos congregaret in vnum, Psalm. 146.
to gather the dispersed together) it should not be also a dead troncke if it
lacked a visible head to make it one. Your similitude between the church and
our common wealth, is made between Christ head of the church only, a
multitude of ministres governors of the same under him, and the common wealth
having God the head in heaven, and one prince, his servant and head
governor in earth. This comparison makes not only not with you, but very
much also against you. First it makes not with you, because you supposing the
church to be one body and Christ the only head thereof, allow to the
church many vndreheades, whereas in the common wealth being also one body
and the other part of the comparison, there is mention but of one head under
Christ, the prince him self. So that thereupon to infer, that the church
having an infinite no more of heads being but one body, is no monstre,
because the common wealth having but one visible head like to it self is no
monstre: it is a monstrouse conclusion, more meet to proceed from a block
that has no sense, or a monstre that has many heads but wit in none of
them, then from a creature endowed with reason. It makes against you thus:
the common wealth where be many heads and every one will govern, is a
monstrouse body: but the church is Christ's common wealth, and has as you
say, many heads to govern it: therefore it is a monstre. Again: The common
wealth that because Christ is the only head thereof in heaven will admit
no other chief head in earth, is a block. But so does your church:
therefore it is a block or dead troncke.

As for the conclusions that you say I may make, that God and Christ be no
heads or no such heads, etc. and again, that as well all kingdoms, and
common wealths in Christendom be live monstres as having many heads etc. In
deed I must needs confess a truth, God has given me free will, and I may
abuse it if I list, and make as many foolish conclusions as you have done.
But I trust you will not deal with me as you ruffled before with the pore
Franciscanes and those of the company of Jesus, to conclude that I will say so
because I may say so if I list to play the fool. Now to these conclusions
I say, that truly I can not so conclude, the first of them following no
better, then if you M. Nowell would conclude, that God and Christ the auctors
of all true doctrine can not instruct men (if it so pleased them) in all
wholesome knowledge without the external help of man, because they do this
by men. For even as God uses the ministry of men to teach and preach, not
as though he could not so do without, for our infirmities sake, and because
it pleased the divine wisdom that Christ the second person in Trinity
should not be allwaies visibly present with us: for the same cause has it
pleased all mighty God, to govern the members of his church, by the means
of one visible head the B. of Rome. The folly of your second conclusion
appears I doubt not, by the difference that is between all the churches of
the world, which make all but one, and the kingdoms which be diverse and were
never appointed to be one.

And had M. Dorman had so much leisure from his divinity Nowell.
matters, as to have looked better upon his notes of the canon law, his
peculier study, he would have been better advised then to have called us
Acephalos headless, and therefore dead trunckes, who do obeie our own
prelates, seeing Acephali (as is there noted) are those who be subject to no
prelate.

And had M. Nowell had so much wit to have looked Dorman
first upon the text and then upon the gloss from whence he borrowed this note,
he would have been better advised then to have alleged it of all other for
their defense. For by the text it appears, that those whom the gloss there
calls Acephali, had heads, quos ministros seu custodes vel gardianos aut
nominibus alijs appellant, whom they call ministres, kepars, wardens or by
other names. Why does the gloss then call then headless? quia sub nullius
very praelati obedientia existunt, because they are under the obedience of no
true prelate. This is the reason of the gloss. But yeat let us ask an other
question: why were they under the obedience of no true prelate? Because their
heads were not allowed by the pope. This is the reason of the text. You must
not be angry with me M. Nowel for charging you as I do with the cano^ law. For
you bogge me in my peculier study (as you say), and you seem to have
conceived great trust upon this place, which makes me the bolder and
earnester to. With the text and the gloss agrees reason: for if your head
that stands now upon your shoulders, should suddenly be turned in to the head
of an Ass, he should not say amiss that for all the long ears, should say
you were headless, not for that that you had no head at all such a one as it
were, but in this respect that you had no such head as you should have, no
such head as a preacher should look out of a pulpite withal. To come now
nearer to the common case of you all, and to exemplify it by some of your
lignage that have gone before you: were the subjects of Nouatus trow you that
false bishop, Acephali without a head, when forsaking Cornelius the B. of
Rome, they obeyed him? If they were, you are. For your case is like, your
bishops being no more truly bisshoppes then Nouatus was, nor altogether so
truly neither. For he was made bishop by two bishops laufully made by the
pope, whereas you were made by the commission, currebant and ego non mittebam.
Now seeing the canon law helps Hier. cap. 23.
you not, yea seeing it makes directly against you, as the which accounts
them headless that appointe heads to them self without the popes
approbation, seeing at the laws of the realm you find as I hear say as
little grace: seeing that by the scriptures you are condemned for running not
being sent, what remains but to say, that the obeing of your Idol bishops
can not excuse you from being headless?

All this a do has M. Dorman made now by the space of more Nowell. fol.
114. a. 1. Clem. li. 3. Tit. 13. de censib. and exact. cap. cum sit and lib. 5.
de verb. sig. Tit. 10. ca. 1. Ex frequentib. Dorman.
then three leaves to deface scripture as no fit judge in controversies, and
to persuade us that the pope like an other Pithagoras, by his only bare word
may and ought to satisfy all men, heretics, and others, and that it shall be
sufficient for him only to say, without reason of scripture why he so says,
saving this reason only, papae est pro ratione voluntas with the pope will
stands for reason, as is mentioned in the book of his own canon law etc.

Not to deface the scripture M. Nowel have I made all this a do (there you
belie me) but to deface heretics, while by this means it shall not be laufull
for the^ to pervert and corrupt it with their false and untrue expositions.
The places that you bring out of the canon law, to prove that it is sufficient
for the pope to say without reason of scripture why he so says, are two: but
in neither of those places is that which you say. The first place speaks of
certain privileges which the pope for causes and considerations will not have
extendid to monasteries and churches after a certain time. Here says the
gloss upon this place, that the popes will in this case stands for reason.
Again in the second place which is not there where you falsely note it here
in the margent to be, but in the title de sententia excommunicat. cap. si
summus pontifex, of the pope absoluing one excommunicate it says as much,
but no where in the popes law is this odiouse saing of youres found. Look
therefore better both upon the text and the gloss, and learn to understand
them before you bring them next.

An answer to. 8. demaundes made by M. Nowell touching the pope. The 30.
Chapitre.
THE FIRST: what if there be two or three popes at once? Is it not to be
doubted which of them shall be this certain judge in controversies? Nowell.
And is not the popish church in this case, in danger to

If there should be so many popes at once, as truly popes, Dorman.
as you profess to have of your church many heads at once, then should the
church be, not only in danger but in deed, a live monstre, as your
schismatic church is. But whereas in truth there is but one laufull pope,
it is in no such danger as you fantasy, not if there were ten that pretended
every of them right to the papacy. If any such chance happen, we know it
chances by Gods permission, who as he has hitherto so guided his church,
that when the like has happened, it never sustained thereby any detriment in
faith: so are we by his promise assured who promised never to forsake his
church, that he will in no wise permit in this doubtefull time any such
controversy to be moved, as that may not without the detriment of his
church, remain in suspense until such time as God have revealed the right
judge and true pope.

What if there be never a pope at all? Shall all our doubts lie Nowell. b. 25.
therewhile undiscussed for lack of a judge, and your popish church so long
(two or three years together) lie as a dead troncke

If your doubts be such as the usage of the church, the Dorman.
consent of all nations, be not able to explicate, then is there no other
remedy but by prayer to desire allmightye God, to keep from us no longre this
necessary mean appointed by him in earth to signify to us his holy will
and pleasure. The church is not in the mean season a dead troncke, no more
then one of your particular churches is when the bishop dies. For even as
there (although not in all things) the Chapitre supplieth the lack of the
bishop in many: so the Sea of Rome being void by death, has a grave Senate,
that supplieth, although not in defining of controversies, yeat in many
things, that want of the head. I trust when the general head of the church
of England in earth dies, you will not call your church a dead troncke.

What if the pope sit not at Rome in Italy? May we not doubt Nowell.
of the certeintie of the judge, not sitting in the chair whereof he

The pope has not his certeintie of Peter's material Dorman.
chair, but of the authority and power given to Petre, the sign whereof the
chair is. And therefore you need not to trouble your self with that care:
whether he sit in the very same chair that Petre did or in some other,
whether he sit at Auinion in France, or Toletum in Spain, he is allwaies
bishop of Rome, and successor to Petre. And as we say, where the king is
there is the court: so where the pope sits there is Peter's chair, to say
Petres auctoritye.

What if he do err? What if he be an heretic? Nowell.


The pope may have his private and personal errors, Dorman.
it can not be denied. God only and not man is priuileaged that he can not so
err. But in determining any matter of faith, or delivering any doctrine to
the whole church, he that is the chief head of his church, will never
suffer him so to err. And therefore I say with S. Augustine that August.
epist. 165.
his misdoinges do not prejudice the church. If it would please you M.
Nowell to become scholar to those that you call my masters (as for any great
learning that you have showen in this Reproufe of youres it might beseem you
well enough) Pighius and Hosius, in them should you learn, Lib. 4. eccles.
hierarch. cap. 8. Lib. 2. contra Brent. folio. 83. and sequent.
that all your companions be not hable to convince so much as one pope
amongst so many as have been, to be an heretic. But let that be as
doubtefull, as this is most certain, that there was never yeat any pope that
gave in any matter of faith an heretical sentence. And therefore you are much
to blame to conceive of Gods providence for his church any such despair,
not being hable for all the time past to show so much as one example of that
which you captiously demand.

What if his election be uncertain or unlawful? Must he yeat Nowell. fol.
115. a. 2
be the most certain and only judge?

Dorman.
no right.

What if we have a she pope, such as was pope Ioane otherwise Nowell.
John the eight?

What if that be a lie, and to be found in no storye Dorman.
of worthy credit? If such a chance should yeat happen, then were there no
pope, but for the time the Sea vacant.

What if the popes successors do disanull, their praedecessours Nowell.
popes decrees, etc?

In matters perteining to things indifferent it may so Dorman.
chance, time and place so requiring: but in faith and doctrine delivered to
the whole church, that any such change or alteration has happened you are not
able to show, nor ever shall, and therefore you might have kept this what if
with the rest in your purse.

Thus are these doubts of youres answered M. Nowell, and so shall I trust the
other great many mo that you threaten me withal, which you looked for belike
at the writing hereof to come shortly from Franckeforde mart.

The pope is not judge in his own cause. The cause is A. 19.
gods and the churches. So I told you before.

You make much a do to prove that the scriptures are the way of truth,
judgments: yea and judgments off truth, which no man denies. For it
has been allwaies granted unto you, that the scriptures contain all truth
in them sufficient to confirm all true doctrine, and to overthrow the
contrary, when by the voice of the church they are interpreted and made
manifest. When we harcken to the popes interpretation of scripture, we
acknowledge and so ought all true catholics that we hear the holy ghost
speaking by his mouth, in which case we say that the credit which we give
to his sentence, is not given to him as he is a man but to gods word, whereby
we are taught that the thing which man's nature could not obtain, Christ
God and man obtained for Peter the first pope of Rome, Lucae. 22.
that is that his faith should not fail, and so consequently for all that
should after him succeed in the government of the church. And so is your
text answered: God is true but every man is a lier. Or else we could not be
assured of that which the prophets and Apostles teach us.

Of the title, head of the church of England, given to our late sovereign
King Henry the 8. The 31. Chapter.
I ASKED here, by occasion of that foolish reason of fo. 116. a. 1.
your Apology: Christ is head of the church: Ergo, it has or needs no
other, how it happened then, that your companions gave to king Henry the 8.
the title of head of the church of England, and you your selves to our
most gratiouse lady his daughter, the same also in effect? To this you say:

If it will please you to resort to the records of the 22. and 24. Nowell. 1.
b. 7.
years of King Henry the 8. there shall you find who they were, that first
offered this title to the said King: there shall you find that all Abbottes,
and other religiouse, all the bishops, Deanes, Archedeacons and clergy of
both the houses of the convocation then living gave him that title. To the
latter question of the Queen's majesty, to that you will shortly answer you
say, but presently you do not.

When you have ransacked all the records, and said all Dorman.
that you can, to make the Catholics our forefathers partakers with you of
this fact: yeat is this most surely recorded in all men's remembrance,
that all Catholics joined not with you, and those that did, were folowers and
no leaders, consented to that title which was required, and offered it not of
their own motion. The first auctors that put that wicked devise in to the
kings most noble head, were not the catholics but heretics, and the
scholars of Luther, such as were Cromwell, Cranmere, and other. I speak not
this notwithstanding to excuse them who confess their own faults, and are
most sorry and penitent therefore. This was a case wherein we may say with
our forefathers: peccauimus, unjust egimus, iniquitatem fecimus: We have
sinned, we have done unjustly, we have committed iniquity. But what is all
this to the purpose? What if the catholics did amiss with you as they did,
how can you answer this, standing in your wicked opinion still, that a
particular church may have one head, governor under Christ in earth, and
the whole may not? To that you say.

I trust the reason is not to seek in the good readers memory, Nowell. fo.
117. a. 22.
seeing it has been so often declared before: yet will I answer M. Dormans
question by an other question.

You burden very sore the readers memory to remember Dorman.
that which hitherto you never vttred. You are not wont to be so daungerouse
(I report me to the reader) to repeat one thing diverse times, but there was
good cause that you should here do as you did, to wit, because you are not
hable (standing in strength the argument of your Apology) to give any
reason, why the church of one particular realm, having two provinces, two
archebishoppes, and under them above 20. bishops, whereof Christ is as much
the head as of the whole church, should more have an other head beside
Christ over all these particular heads, then all the particular heads of
Christ's universal church should have an other head beside Christ over
them. Yeat I know you mean that reason of youres, which being so foolish,
so wicked and blasphemouse, that one man is not hable to rule and govern
(under Christ) the whole church alone, you have so often repeated, having no
other shift of descant, that even very shame compels you now at the last,
to wrappe and inuolue it in silence. As for the answer that you make by a
question: Why one kingdom may have in earth under God one head, and the
whole world can not: to that I say, that it is a false proposition, that the
whole world can not have one only head in earth under God, often in this
your Reproufe stoutely affirmed, but never as yeat proved. To this answer I
join also the second, that the questions be not like. But then you say:

If M. Dorman say the questions be not like, I ask with what Nowell. b. 1.
face he can so say, seeing that in the beginning of this his treaty, he
brought the example of civil government, in the which every kingdom has
his king, every country, city, and company have their several governors
etc. to prove that the church ought likewise to have one head.

I acknowledge this example, and dare further make Dorman.
you M. Nowell your self the judge, whether these questions of youres and
mine be like. I compare one kingdom to the whole church which is also one, and
therein rests the strength and force of my example: I make no comparison
between all kingdoms of the world which be many, and all churches which are
but one, as you do here deceauing your self and other toe. For if I should
so have done, then had not the comparison been good. Now if it were as true
that God had ordained all the kingdoms of the world to make one kingdom and
not many, as he has all the churches to be one and not many: then if you
denied to all these kingdoms joined in one, a visible king to be above all the
rest, and to govern the whole, because god is the Monarche and ruler of all,
as you do to the universal church for the same cause: I would say that you
offendid as much therein, not alowing to all these kingdoms being but one,
one head and chief governor, as you should do if you would grant to
particular kingdoms no particular king: the reason being as great why the
whole should have one ruler over it, as why any particular membre should.
But now I can not so say, because God has appointed no such order in the
world, as he has in his kingdom the church, and therefore the questions be
not like.

From this you run as one that feared to tarry to long, to guess what we
would say if the time served us, and here on Gods name you tell us a long tale
of the popes rule over all the world in temporalities, and of king John, as
much to the purpose as if you had told us of Robin hood, and therefore I pass
it over, with your other reasons that follow, fo. 118. b.
made to boulster up, the rotten reason of your Apology, because they have
been so often answered by showing the difference between the two states of the
world and the church.

The answer to the conclusion. The 32. chapter.
NOW follows M. Nowelles conclusion, wherein drawing nere to the end, and
knowing how weakly the matter has been handled by him in the whole process
of his book before, he thinks by a certain lusty bravery of words to make
amends, and so to bear away the garlande. But now let us here how he
bestirreth him.

Thus I trust good Readers you see the insufficiency, or more Nowell. fo. 119.
a. 7.
truly the lewdness of M. Dormans prouffes of the necessity of one only head
over Christ's whole church here in earth: you see where he says he has
sufficiently proved it to be Christ's pleasure, that there should be such an
one head, that he has not nor could not (for if he could he would)
allege out of the new testament (where Christ's will and pleasure is written,
and declared most largely and manifestly) as much as one word fou^ding to
that purpose so far of is it, that it is, as he says sufficiently proved.

Thus I trust you see good Readers how M. Nowell Dorman.
having begone with a lie in the very title of his book, calling it a
Reproufe of my book, which reproves but only. 15. leaves, has continued and
now ends the same in such wise as the middle and end may appear in all
men's judgment to answer to the beginning. You see where he says, that I
have not sufficiently proved it to be Christ's pleasure that there should be
one head in his steed in the whole church, because I alleged no testimony
out of the new testament, that in restreining my prouffes to the only new
testament and calling the testimonies brought out of the old law (as he does
hereafter) old shadows, while he reproves my prouffes for this cause, he
seems not to be far from the heresy of the Manichees, who condemned the
old testament. It was not M. Nowell because I could not, that I alleged no
proof out of the new testament. But the cause (if you will needs know it)
was for this, that I thought it best to use such testimonies as consisting in
fact, and having been already put in execution, you should be less able to
cavil against: especially making my count, that the appointing of one chief
priest in the old law being for the benefit of Gods people. you would
easily admit that Christ would be as beneficial to his church in the new
law. Otherwise I could have brought to you out of the gospel of S.
Matthewe the words of our Savior Matthew. 16.
to S. Petre, where he using these words: And I tell the that thou art Petre,
and upon this rock I will build my church: and again, what so ever thou
shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven, etc. made Peter, as
Chrisostom witnesses, Shepeherd of the church, head of the church, ruler
over the whole Homi. 55. lu Matthew.
world. I could have alleged lhe place of S. John where Christ committing
to Peter the charge of all his flock Joan. vlt.
excepting none, made by that means one ruler of the whole, Homil. in cap.
Joan. vlt.
and committed curam orbis terrarum, the charge of the universal world to
Peter, as says the same Chrysostom. These places could I have alleged and
other also, had it not been to avoid wrangling, and for that, that I persuaded
my self that this example taken from the government of Gods people the
Iues, should be to all indifferent me^ sufficient enough to confirm my
purpose, as til M. Nowell confute it, it is.

You see that schisms and controversies by S. Cyprians judgment Nowell.
and S. Augustins, with 217. bishops more assembled in the African council
with him, and by good reason and experience also, may be best quieted in the
countries where they arise.

You see that neither S. Cyprian, neither S. Augustine Dorman.
neither the 217. bishops (amongst whom M. Nowell before nombred Orosius
being no bishop but a priest only, and Prosper a bishop of Rhegium in
Italy and therefore not like to be at any council in Africa) neither yeat
reason or experience which teach the contrary, do say Supra cap. 11.
that schisms and controversies may be best quieted and decided in the
countries where they arise. That which they say, is meant of criminal causes,
not of schisms about doctrine, as those words of S. Cyprian containing the
reason why he would have such causes heard in the countries where they
happen being these: but ought there to make answer to their causes where they
may have accusers and witnesses of their crimes, do well declare. And thus
you see that this is a manifold lie.

You see that it becomes man, unable well to govern a Nowell.
very little thing, to humble him self and to yealde up the honor and glory
of governing the whole world and church to God, etc.

You see by the example of Peter refusing of humility Dorman.
the service that Christ offered to him in wasshing his feet, Joan, 13.
that true humilitye is to do that which Christ bids to be done. You see
withal M. Nowells honesty, that to deceive the simple, uses here these
words, Yealde up the honor and glory of governing the whole world and church
to god, as though any man so claimed the government of the church as that he
would displace Christ thereof.

Also you see that in this treaty hitherto, as M. Dorman has Nowell.
not one word out of the new testament, so has he alleged but only two
textes out of the old testament, one out of Deuteron. cap. 17. etc. an other
of Numeri. 16. which both make directly against him. etc.

You see and know I doubt not, that one text of holy Dorman.
scripture is as good as a hundred. You see that M. Nowell goes guilefully
about to abuse the simple by this term (nation) as though because the Iues
which were but one nation had their chief priest and high bishop,
therefore there should follow thereof naught else, but that every nation
country, diocese or church, should have also their chief bishop,
without any one head over the whole: whereas the Iues although they were
but one nation, were yeat the chosen people and church of God, and amongst
diverse heads of several tribues there was over all those heads one chief
head. You have seen that of S. Cyprians applieng of this text to inferior
magistrates, can be gathered no necessary argument that it may not be
otherwise applied, that is to the higher. You have seen as many as have readen
my first book. fol. 33. 34. 35. that Moises was a priest, that yeat there
follows no absurdity of being two high priests at once, because as S.
Augustine Lu quaest. super. Leuitic. lib. 3. cap. 23.
says, they were both high priests in diverse respects, the one in
commanding to be done, the other in executing things commanded. And withal
you see, that we are here by M. Nowell untruly burdened of disobedience to our
Sovereign as not acknowledging such auctoritye in the same over spiritual
matters, as was in Moises and Aaron.

Wherefore you may well understand that were it either Nowell.
proffitable or necessary etc to have such an one head, God would have
certified us of a thing so proffitable and necessary, more plainly and
exprossely then by two old shadows of the Iuishe church, which do teach us
also the contrary.

God has certified us by building his church upon one, Dorman.
by making one general pastor over all the rest, that his Matthew 16. Joan. vlt.
pleasure was to appointe this manner of government in his church. But what
mean you to find fault with the testimonies of the old testament, calling
them shadows, and to demand other of the new, having brought for your
opinion not so much as one piece of a sentence, out of either the old
testament or the new?

You see how blindely he going about to prove that there Nowell. fo. 120. a. 1
ought to be one only head over all the church, brings in for proof
thereof the regiment of several countries, kingdoms, cities etc. by several
princes, several magistrates and heads, which makes most directly with us,
that several churches, should in likewise have their several heads.

You see that our question being whether the catholic Dorman.
church of Christ which is but one, ought to be ruled by one head or many:
M. Nowell here like the blind bayard that he speakethe of, says that my
example proves for them that it ought to be ruled by many, because many
kingdoms have many kings: wherein you see that dividing the church which is
but one, he goes against the faith of the church. You see that he
dissembleth my reason, which is, that as a kingdom because it is one is best
ruled by one head: so the church which is but one is best ruled by one head.
You see that to this reason hitherto he never answered.

You see how often S. Cyprian is by him alleged for the pope Nowell.
of Rome his supremacy, in those places where he speaks of Rogatian and, of
him self being both bishops etc.

You see how the places of S. Cyprian and S. Hierom Dormna.
expressly mainteining the superiority of one above the rest in every
diocese, with the cause added, for the avoiding of schisms, brought by me to
prove by more forcible reason the necessity of one head over the whole, M.
Nowell wresteth to the direct proving of the B. of Rome his supremacy: whereof
in that place as it was not my purpose to entreat, so if I had, I had done
preposterously and confounded my appointed order of writing. You see how the
place of S. Basile brought to declare the manner off heretics in contemning the
authority of their bishops, he lays to my charge untruly, to have been
brought as spoken of the pope of Rome. You see that the comparison made between
Nouatus and our protestants of England holds in this, that either of them
labors to withdraw the subjects from their laufull obedience. You have
heard good Readers the sorry melody of M. Nowelles harp, whereupon twanging on
a false string he made a shameful lie, in saing that Vrsitius and Valens
offered up their recantation as well to Athanasius as to Julius the pope. You
see that he has oftentimes beelied. S. Cyprian and S. Hierome, feining them to
make all bishops equal in authority, and no one to be above the other. You
see his own inconstancy and disagrement with him self, one while affirming
all bishops to be equal and none to be above the other, an other while
denieng, and making chief prelates in every province: you see him rejecting
pope Leo as witness in his own cause, and bringing in the African to esbeare
witness to them selves.

You see to deface pope Leo how shamefully he sclaundreth Zosimus, of whom
the whole Africane council wrote so reverently. You see how he burdeneth
without all manner of proof, Celestinus (of whom Prosper writes so honorably)
with other his successors, to have forged a great many of the epistles now
abroad in the names of Clement, Anacletus etc. you see how he spares no
iniuriouse words to Leo calling him thief, noting him of ambition whom the
council of Calcedon called thrice blessed, and God honored with miracles.
You see that he chalengeth untruly the copies of Leo to be contrary one to an
other. You see that he is a plain makebate, and to mende his cause by setting
the doctors at variance between them selves, how he heweth, mangleth, and
cutteth away from the auctors that he alleges, words, yea sentences to
serve his purpose.

You see in defense of schisms how he labors to find unquietness
amongst the Apostles and disciples of Christ: you see that to deface unity,
as he takes it from the Apostles, so he attributes it to the Phariseis and
enemies of Christ. You see for lack of weightier matter he charge us with
the disputable opinions of scholemen and logiciners, with diversity of
apparel, of diete and meats, which manners as you have heard, were yeat
amongst the religiouse in the primitive church.

You see how often he repeateth and never proves, that it is impossible for
one man to govern the whole church. You see that Nazianzenes words were not
alleged by me as spoken of one pope, and that therefore therein as in many
other things he has also beelied me.

You see the words of an ancient auctor printed with S. Austen, and of long
time taken for him alleged: why not as boldly M. Nowel as you without
blusshing allege a work by the title of being printed with Chrysostom, and
of long time taken for him?

And universally you see M. Nowelles falsehode in translating, or fraud in
corrupting, mangling, or adding to such auctors as he does allege: you see
his lies as thick as leaves. You see my self discharged of such false
translating, corrupting, mangling, as here untruly he reproves me of. 5. times
in the margent. Neither is his deceit and fol. 120. b. 30.
guile comparable to his impudency, as being not abashed to allege the
epistle of the African council sent to Celestinus, for the proof of a decree
pretended to be made in the council against appealing from thence to Rome, and
sending legates from Rome thither, whereas there is no such decree specified
there. And thus you see good Readers, while M. Nowell in this long Reproufe of
his, has impossible for one man to govern the whole church

Your charging of me with impertinent discourses I answered before: let the
judgment of that matter be referred to the learned reader. But behold now
follows M. Nowelles conclusion.

Seeing therefore this first and most principal point of one head of the
church is not proved etc. all the popes supremacy Nowell.
comes down upon their heads.

If I had proved this first point as weakly as you would Dorman.
make men believe I have, or not proved it all, yeat comes not down the popes
supremacy, as before in the beginning of the. 11. cbapitre I showed. And
therefore for the council that you give me here out of time, to recoyle from
this Thesis of one head of the church, to the Hypothesis of the pope head of
the church, as there is no need to admit it, so there is no cause to thank
you for it.

You say that I have placed in the residue of my book as in the rerewarde,
bag and baggage, with such pages, drudges Nowell.
and slaves to attend upon the same, as are more ready to run away then to
abide any brunt of battle. The which (say you) I have not as yeat assailed,
for that I saw the B. of Sarisbury his ba^de bent upon them, whose hands if
any of that cowardly company escape etc. I promise to have them shortly in the
chase, until I have left of all M. Dormans bragging but most cowardly army of
lewd popish reasons and allegations, not as much as one soldier untaken or
put to shameful flight.

Take head what you do and ask council of your wife. Dorman.
It is possible that the favorable aspecte of Venus may moderate your
Martial fury. In any case, if this great bishops band that you speak of,
encountre not with this cowardly company (as I hear say he has enough to do
already and will combre him self with no more) venture not your own person so
good a man's body against such drudges and slaves: Against whom as it is
possible that you may take some hurt, so are you suer never to get honor.
What should so valiant a captain as full often times you have at Paul's cross
showed your self to be, when that coragiouse stomach of youres has provoked
the papists to meet with you when they durst, whose daggers were as sharp as
theirs you told the^: when you offere your self with a small company, but
yeat so that they were of the same spirit that you are, to keep Newehauen
against all the power of France: when it would you said do your heart good
to raze your buckler upon a papists face: What should I save, so singular a
captain match him self with such a sort of pages, drudges, and slaves as
were those mecocke and dastardly bishops assembled in the cou^celles of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, Calcedon: as were Behold what pages drudges and
slaves. M. Nowell has found out.
Ignatius, Policarpus, Irinaeus, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, Chrysostom,
Athanasius, Theodoret, Leo, Innocentius, whom I placed as it were in the
rerewarde, more likelier as you say to run away, or to bide by it and lay
their heads upon the block, then to play the toss buckler, to keep a hold
with you, or to dye in the field armed with your master Swinglius. But
thanked be God this is but your opinion, and a few other such Bulliners as
you are: amongst the learned they have been always taken to be as they are,
triarij milites, of the very best soldiers M. Nowell.

Of this question, whether a lay man, a woman or a child may be head of the
church. The last Chapitre.
THIS being the second point of my purposed order, to prove that the party
that should govern in spiritual matters ought to be a priest, no lay man,
etc. it is a world to see how M. Nowell bestyrreth him self about it: and
whereas he dares not come near to it, how yeat he reaches at it a far of,
as it were with a long pole or a morispike, and so labors to save his honor
as well as may be. For he says that I prove those things which no man
does deny, to wit, that no prince, man, woman nor child, may ministre the
sacraments, preach, excommunicate and absolute, etc. And lo this is the ioly
pretense that M. Nowell makes to shifte his hands of this second point, as
that wherein for excuse of his silence he says, that there is no need to
write or say any thing, because I have no ennemie at all. And therefore he
adds.

For M. Dorman can not be ignorant, that we in all our Sermones Nowell. fol.
123. a. 25.
and writings of such matters, do make a most clear and evident difference
between the functions and offices of princes civil magistrates, and priests
ecclesiastical ministres: and neither did we ever teach that princes ought,
neither did they ever desire to execute, the offices ecclesiastical off
ministering the Sacraments, preaching excommunicating, absoluing and such like.

I am not ignorant in deed of this qualification of youres, Dorman.
invented the rather to entice some seely souls to the taking of your oath.
Whom in deed I may well call seely that will thereby any thing the sooner be
moved. For youreselfe are not ignorant I trow M. Nowell, that the causes why
we stand with you in this matter, are not only for ministering the
Sacraments, for preaching, excommunicating, absoluing, but as I told you, and
you here guilefully conceal, this power extends farther, to the giving and
making of laws for the church, to authority to judge of doctrine wherewith
the me^bres must be fed, whether it be sou^de or otherwise: for these be
offices that belong to the head not to the members, except you will say that
the sheep ought to judge what meat is convenient for them, not the shepherde.
Again to appease schisms, is the office not of inferior me^bres but of the
head it self, and yeat belongs as your self have granted, to the chief
prelaces of every province. Finally to be head of the church is to have the
government of so many souls as be in that church, which because no lay
man etc. can have in Note this reason.
particular bishoprics, it follows that none can have over the whole
churches of a realm united. Of the which matter Chrysostom says. At quum
de ecclesiae praefectura, Lib. 2. de Sacerdotio.
de credenda huit vel illi tam multarum animarum cura agitur, vniuersa quidem
muliebris natura functionis istius moli ac magnitudini coedat oportet, itemque
and bona viroru^ pars. But when the question is of the government of the
church, of the committing to this man or that the charge of so many souls,
then must all the kind of women give place to the burden and greatenes of this
office, yea and a great part of men also.

You bring the examples of king David, Solomon, etc. who you say had
authority in governing of the clergy and church matters, though they might
not execute all ecclesiastical functions and offices. This matter is answered
in my first book fol. 31. and sequ. Thither I refer the Reader.

What though our most graciouse sovereign lady being a Nowell.
woman, have not so great skill in feats of war as have her capitaines,
have not so good knowledge in the laws of her realm as her Justices, and
other learned men in the laws have, (though she have in all good learning and
in the scriptures toe, more knowledge then had any of your popes these seven
hundred years I believe, and therefore no let in that point, but she may be
head of the whole church as well and rather then the pope. What if she fit
not in public judgment, nor determine controversies as do her Justices, etc.
what I say if she can not execute all civil offices in her own person:
would you therefore take from her, her civil principality, etc? Surely you
may with as good reason do it, as you would take away her superiority over
her clergy from her, for that she can not, may not, nor will not execute
ecclesiastical functions.

Your comparison is false M. Nowell. For there is no law Dorman.
neither of gods nor man's, that forbids a Queen although a woman, to
sit in judgment, or to be present with her army in battle, as Delbora did
both. So that the not Iudic. cap. 5.
doing hereof proceeds not of lack of ability or power, as contrariwise it
does that the prince meddleth not with ecclesiastical matters, whose condition
in that, that he is a lay man makes him unable for that function. Whereas M.
Nowell notes the Queen's majesty to have more knowledge in all good learning
and in the scriptures toe, then had any pope these seven hundred years, as I
am not he that would abase those her majesty's rare gifts of excellent
learning and princely qualities, far more plentifully by the goodness of God
bestowed upon her, then any other so noble prince, man or woman, that this
day lives, but as my bounden duty is, render most humble thanckes to
almighty God therefore: so can I in no wise but abhor this most impudent
parasite good Reader, who upon his beelefe (as though he had made never a lie
in all this book before) A lie. 82.
adds this of all other the most shameful. Which I nothing doubt but her
graces most rare modesty can so evil abide to here, that long ere this she
has judged him in her princely heart to be as he is, a vain liar and
shameless parasite. Whom if her grace should command to An Emperors
reward for a flatterer.
be rewarded for his labor, as Sigismunde the emperor rewarded one of the
same profession, whom praising him above measure he buffeted as fast,
answering him when he asked: why beatest thou me Emperor, why bitest thou me
flatterer: as the reward were princely for such a gift, so were the fact
worthy so mighty a prince. But now AEneas Siluius li. 2. Com. de reb. gest.
Alphonsi.
to the good Reader, what cause haste thowe to trust hereafter this man's
belief in any matter touching the pope, the learning considered of
Innocentius the third, Aeneas Siluius called Pius the 2. Adrianus 6. Marcel^us
2. Paulus 4. and Pius. 4. that now is, and diverse other within that compass,
as to the Learned is not unknown? This parasite staieth not here but going
farther says.

Though the Queen's majesty have not that understanding of Nowell. fol. 124. a.
1.
all the affairs of her realm, that experience in all things, that actiuitie
in executing them, that has the whole body of her most honorable council,
yeat does the whole body of her council though most honorable, humbly
acknowledge her to be their head, only proud priests because some things
are incide^t to their office, which the prince may not What if the prince
listed?
nor list not to do, refuse their Sovereign to be their supreme governor.

You beely all priests M. Nowell, and may be ashamed to make the bishops
only counselors in religion, whom Dorman.
before you confessed by S. Cyprians mind to be judges in earth in Christ's
steed, whereas you would here make them no judges, or judges in the princes
steed. You deal untruly to sclaundre the clergy as you do. In whose
defense I will say as S. Ambrose did to those that objected to Lib. 5. ep. 32.
him the Emperors authority in matters of religion. Soluimus quae sunt
Caesaris Caesari, and quae sunt dei, deo. Tributu^ Caesaris est, non negatur.
Ecclesia dei est, Caesari vtique non debet addici, quia ius Caesaris esse non
potest templum dei. Quod cum honorificenti^ Imperatoris nemo dictum potest
negare. Quid enim honorifice^tius qua^ vt imperator ecclesiae filius esse
dicatur? Quod sine peccato dicitur, cum gratia dicitur: Imperator enim bonus
in^ra ecclesiam, non supra eccl^siam est. We pay to Caesar that which is his,
and to God that which belongs to God. Tribute is due to Caesar, it is not
denied him. The church is gods it may not apperteine to Caesar, because the
temple of God, can not be Caesar's right. The which no man can deny to be
said but with the Emperors honor. For what is more honorable then for the
Emperor to be called the son of the church? The which when it is said, it
is spoken with favor, without offense. For a good Emperor is within the
church not above the church. Thus much S. Ambrose, a proud priest by your
judgment, because he acknowledged not the Emperor to be his supreme governor
in causes ecclesiastical. But because you think M. Nowell and say also, that
I have lewdely abused my self in confuting that which no man holds, I will
make it appear that you have lewdely done in so saing, and that I went not
about to prove that the head is not the head because it can not, or list not
do all offices of all the principal me^bres of the body, which you say
untruly is the effect of all my second long treaty, but that temporal
princes can not be the heads because they can not do the office of the head.
The which to prove I will allege your own words, wherein the part of a
head you say consists. They are these.

To command things as well ecclesiastical as civil to be done, Nowell.
to see them done, to commend and reward all well doers of them, to correct
and punish all evil doers of them, or negligent in their office, is the part
of a head or supreme governor, to do things commanded is the office of
inferior members and obedient subjects.

We have now good Reader M. Nowels own limitatio^ Dorman.
wherein the office of the head of the church consists. I pray the consider
when I alleged scripture, that the government Act. 20.
of the church was committed to bishops and priests, that they must be
obeyed which watch for our souls, spoken also of priests: Hebr. 13.
when I alleged the blessed martyr Ignatus bidding us Epist. ad Smirne^^es
first to honor God, next the bishop as bearing his image, and then after
that the king, willing all the people to obey Epist. ad Piladelphenses. Lib.
10. cap. 2 eccl. histor. Ambros. lib. 5. epi. 32.
the Emperor, the Emperor to obey the bishop, the bishop Christ etc. when
I alleged the example of Constantine the first Christian Emperor, refusing to
judge over bisshoppes, because God had given them power to judge him: when I
alleged these words of S. Ambrose to the Emperor: Quando audisti
clementissime imperator in causa fidei laicos de episcopo iudicasse? Ita ergo
quada^ adulatione curuamur vt sacerdotalis iuris simus immemores, and quod deus
donauit mihi, hoc ipse putem alijs esse credendum? Si docendus est episcopus a
laico quid sequitur? Laicus ergo disputet and episcopus audiat, episcopus
discat a laico. At certe si velscripturaru^ seriem diuinaru^, vel vetera
tempora retractemus, quis est qui abnuat in causa fidei, in causa inquam fidei
episcopos solerede imperatoribus, non imperatores de episcopis iudicare? Eris
deo fauente, etiam senectutis maturitate prouectior, and tunc de hoc censebis
qualis ille episcopus sit qui laicis ius sacerdotale substernit. That is to
say, when have you heard most gentle Emperor, that lay men have judged of
the bishop? Be we therefore so crookened with flattrye, that we should forget
the priestly right, and that which God gave to me I should think to be to be
committed to other? If the bishop be to be taught of the Lay man, what will
follow? Let the lay man then dispute and the bishop be a hearer: let the
bishop learn off the lay man. But truly if we will look to the course of
the Note.
holy scripture, or call to memory the times past, who can deny that in a
cause of faith, a matter I say of faith, the bishops were wont to judge of
Christian. Emperors, not Emperors of bishops. You shall be God willing
your self one day of more ripe age, and then you shall judge what manner of
bishop he is, which brings the right of priesthode in subjection to lay
men. Thus far the words of Saint Ambrose to Valentinian the Emperor,
taking upon him by evil council to entremedle in ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. When to these places I added the notable testimonies out of
Athanasius, where the Emperor In epist. ad Solitar. vitam agent.
is bidden not to entremedle nor command in ecclesiastical matters: He is
called Antichriste for making him self chief of the bishops, for ruling in
ecclesiastical judgments, for making his palace the consistory of
ecclesiastical matters: Finally when I brought Calvin him self against this
opinion of making temporal princes the heads in ecclesiastical matters, did
I fight with mine own shadow? Did I labor in confuting that which no man
holds? Are not these auctorities directly against the commanding of princes
in ecclesiastical things, against the taking upon them to correct or judge
bishops in matters of faith, wherein the office M. Nowell says of the
head does consiste? You may therefore now perceive good Readers that it was
but a pretended cause of M. Nowelles part that he here alleges, to shift of
that to M. Iuell, at the least from him self, which he was suer he should
never be able to answer.

Wherefore now to conclude with you M. Nowell, I will give you this frendely
council for a farewell, to strive no longre against priests, lest it happen
to you that the blessed Martyr S. Cyprian says was revealed to him. Qui Lib.
4. epist. 9.
Christo non credit sacerdotem facienti, postea credere in ipiet sacerdotem
vindica^ti. He that believes not Christ appointing the priest, shall after
begin to believe him reue^ging the priest. Struggle no longer against the Sea
of Rome, of the A singulier testimony ^or the church of Rome. It may be
added be fore. fol. 192. b. Psalm. contra pa^em Donati.
which S. Augustine says: Ipsa est seeds Petri quam non vincunt superbae
inferorum portae. That See is the rock which the proud gates of hell shall
not overcome. For if you do, you are like to leese your labor as you see,
except a lymme you think be able to do more then the wide gates off the
devils palace. (??)

Deo Gratias.
Quandoquidem Liber iste perlectus and approbatus est a viris Sacrae Theologiae
and linguae Anglicanae peritissimis, iudico eum suto posse imprimi and
euulgari.

Ita testor and iudico Cunerus Petri, pastor Sancti Petri
Louaniensis. 16. Octobris Anno. 1561.

