ENCOVRAGMENTS FOR THE VVarres of France.

To excitate and induce all generous minded and heroic Noblemen, Gallant
Gentlemen, and courageous Soldiers, who under the Conduct and Regiment of the
most Martial and magnanimous Lord the ^arle of Mortoun are worthily disposed
to serve our King his most sacred Majesty in France.

By WILLIAM DOUGLASSE North-Britaine.

Alter erit tum (...) et altera quae vehat Argo
Dilectos heroas: erunt etiam altera bella
Atque iterum ad Troiam magnus mittetur Achilleis


EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Wr^i^toun* 1627. Cum Privilegio.



TO THE RIGHT Honorable and truly Noble Lord William Earl of Mortoun, Lord
Dalkieth, and Aberdoure, etc.
IT is a maxim and general observed in Philosophy that all things naturally
tends and inclines to the center of the own kind: if so in things Physical
where altogether nature bears the sway, much more in matters Political where
reason rules and has the Pre-eminence, yea, even in Religion and piety, as
the common Proverb goes Charity begins at the self.

What marvel then, right Noble Lord, that I (although the meanest of all such
who stand oblished and ingadged to your L. in all humble duty and service)
yet having the honor to be one of your L. Name, and presuming upon the good
report I hear in the mouths of all men of your L. good nature, courteous
humane and affable disposition have adventured and taken the boldness in this
little trivial task, and extemporaniall lines (the very first essay and fruit
of my Muse) to address my self, and have recourse unto your honorable L. the
true and worthy center of my Sphere and Horizon: and that my Darkness being
enlightened, by the meanest reflects that flows from the Sunshine of your L.
worth, I may, darre appear in public and the more boldly show my self to the
view of the World in this learned and Apollo-bred age. It is clear and
evident, that the mirthlesse Music of the Droning Be, is no ways so
pleasant as the melodious warbling of the matchless Mearle or rarest Philomel
and the rest of Heavens sweet singing Quiristers yet does she not ceaese to
fill the vacuitie of the spacious Air, and to please the ear of the Auditors
in giving them all that nature has given her, so I in this time of necessity
and common concurrance while as every man endevors to be some way stedable to
the most worthy proceedings of our most sacred Sovereigns intended Wars,
though I can neither do as others, nor say or sing as others, yet with others
I will be bold to show forth my goodwill, though it were but to roll and
tumble my Tub with Diogenes, and with the Be to blast soorth the bombing
sound, of my barren Song. And as for your honorable L. who is the due subject
of my Song, I am persuaded that as the naughtiest metal, even Lead it self,
being presented to the most rare Alchimist stone by the touch and virtue
thereof, is presently transformed into Gold: so no question this dross of my
plumbish Poesy being once presented and touched with the most rare virtue of
your L. favor, shall incontinent be Metamorphosed in a golden shape: and las
the weary Dove flying to the safe Ark of your L. protection with this one leaf
of the olive maybee sheltered and enjoy a sure cover from all the stormy
blastes, not of the uncertain god AEolus, but of the certain windy Devi^
Zoilus, such a damnable detracter, who is well practiced and learned in his
art of carping and calumniating other men's works, but was never so well
learned himself, as to understand but these three words (...) (...). So hoping,
yea, assuring my self your L. out of your ever accustomed courtesy and
goodness, will excuse and take in good part this my boldness and presumption
and so much the rather, my chief aim herein being the glory of God, the
eredit of our King and Country, and the celebration of your L. duly deserved
honor and praise, wherein I have done as I could though not as I would: yet
protesting when a more favoring influence shall, afford me seem matter of
greater importance the same also shall come forth under the shelter of your L.
honorable Name whom I have chosen to be the great Protector and only
Maecenas of my Muse as I am and shall ever remain,

Your L. own in all humble duty and affectionat service while I breath, W. D.

To the Courteous Reader.
KInd courteous Reader, whosoever thou be,
Who viewes these Infant ishues of my brain
Let me receive no censures sharp from thee
Since these my verse but from a novice vain
In tennours low I study to be plain,
Leaving a higher style for great engines,
This birth abortiue do not then disdaint,
Tho be not here elaborat my lines
Not used as yet on Heliconian Mountains
On Pindus top, or Acidalian Fountains
Your servant in all bound duty. W. D.

TO MY MVCH RESPECTED FRIEND AND Cousing Mr. William Douglasse.
I Can not but commend thy 'spyring Spreit,
Who now so soon do haunt Parnassus springs
And for due declaration of thy wit
So high do soar with Pegasean wings,
Since tender years such tribute now imbringes:
Unto Apollo and the Muses shrine,
In grauer age when thou some subject sings,
What shall the greatness be of thy engine?
How aptly here thy tennours does combine
Precedents past to matters now in hand
Of Country men, while Courage does incline
With valor to advance by Sea and Land?
Praise worthy thou, of Douglasses a Mearle
To Douglasses does sing and Mortouns Earl.
Ge. Colquhoun.

In Amici and Condiscipuli mihi dilectissimi M, Gulielmi Douglasij Libellum.
MIra canis, sed vera canis: cum annalibus olim
Douglasidum memoras fortia facta virum
Gallorum frauds, Scotorum camine lauds
pangis: Saxonidas pingis honor duces
Ergo tibi nomen Patrium, ergo in amore paterno
vincta est pro meritis terra Britanna tuis.
Ge. Dunlopus.

EPIGRAMS, Upon the most Honorable and brave resolution of the right Worthy,
Virtuous, Noble, Heroicke, Martial and Magnanimous Lord William Earl of
Mortoun, Lord Dalkieth and Aberdoure etc. One of his most sacred Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Counsel in both Kingdoms: and great General to all the hie
minded and courageous Noblemen, Gallant Gentlemen, and brave Soldiers who
follows and accompanyes his Honorable Lordshippe to France.
NOW is the time if e're in any age
For Martial men and Gallants to go forth,
Against the French, to vindicat with rage,
Their wrongs and vilipending of Our Worth
What has the valiant Scots of Galls nowgaind
Eight hundredth years who have their state maintained?
In Parliament worthy Colmannus wise
Much against this League did constantly contend
Who Thane of Mar in brave Achaius days
When Charli-mane did here his Legate send
An aid of Scotts does earnestly implore
against Saxons, who suppressed the Celticke shore.
Colmannus wise with grace and gravity
Unto his King and Nobles does declare,
To Scotts that League must prejudicial be,
Against English in one I Will who natives are
Since aid of French stood in uncertainty
Of Elements unconstant wind and Sea.
Time has confirmde Colmannus counsel good
Who against this League his speeches did propone,
Spent by the Scotts what speates of bravest blood,
In fending France whiles English them oppone?
Abroad in France at home in Britannie
What bravest Scots did in that quarrel die?
Were French e're since victors in any War
Wherein not Scots did chiefest credit carry?
To English brave since French inferior far
In valor, worth, in matters military:
So long with them been at such deep debate,
Were not for Scots undone long since their state:
The English Archers so by the French were fearde,
Whiles Edward the black Prince who praisde so much
Through most of France his stately Trophies rierde,
With his victorious troops wrought matters such
That numbers small of his with easy toil
Whole Myriads of feeble French would foil.
If not impeded by those civil jarres
And by the Martial Scots wel-knowne might,
What valiantly was won by them in Wars,
And what they did possess by Normand right
The worthy English in Celticke Diadame
Unto this day had still maintainde the same.
Now Wars of Lancaster and York are done,
And both the Roses well long since are joynde
And Scotland now and England all in one
Under one King are happily conjoynde
Unit in bounds, in bodies, minds, and love
Against all the World invincible to prove.
Since then the French most mad in their intent,
Has incitate our most courageous King
That for revenge and for their ruin bent
Deserved wars does duly against them bring:
And by his general brave Buckinghame
He has begun their fronters for to tame,
It is full time for Scots for to concur
And by their Kings and Englands injury
Unto their proper spleen to be a spur
And against the French for to increase their fury.
That Archers of the Corpse so long neglected
Nor is our gens d'armes as due respected.
Nor have they kept in mind that League so old
Nor duties done to them, which were so great;
Into their histories not we inrolde
The actions of the Scots does not entreat
Our deeds in France both recent and of old
By Forrainers not by the French or told
How can the Scots forget in ages all
In latest times their great ingratitude?
Since God this Land from errors did recall,
Resaued here pretending much our good.
Since that our Queen of Scotland only heir.
In France espoused to their Dolphine their.
When they as Friends had seized in their hand
Our Fortresses, and strengths of importance
They much oppressed the people of this Land,
And every where as victors did advance,
Badlie for Soul and bodies ruin bent
Did use tyrannical government.
Which Tyranny had longer here indurde,
If English (we not meriting so much)
With strongest troops to hardness all inurde
Had not them forcde to composition such
That soon they left the limits of this Land,
For which to England yet we obligde stand.
Then Martial Mortoun with thy Men at arms
Like thy Ancestors worthily advance:
Let to thy Foes notorious be their harms
By Douglasse Name sounded again throught France:
That they who French wont to defend before
Now of their spoils and victories may glore.
As in the Wars of Scots by oldest right
The Vanguard to the Douglasse did belong,
So first of Scots against the French to fight
Lead thou our trained troops their lands along,
That ancient valor which in ages old
May now again reviue in Douglasse bold.
Two Douglasse Earls (their valor this proeur'de)
In Turoues Dukedom were worthily invest
Which yet their successors if not injurde
Unto this day had still the same possessed:
Since thou have right from thy ancestors race
Let now thy Sword thee in Possession place.
Right Gallant Guilliam King Achaius Brother
Transported first five Thousand Scotts to France
As wise and valiant he, as any other
With Lillies first the Lion did advance,
For rare exployts right fast his fame did fly
Through Flanders, France through Spain and Italy.
Most famous Florence was by him restorde,
By cruel Goths when brought to great decay:
With Monuments and buildings brave decorde,
Which keeps in mind his name unto this day,
And yet respects the Scots with Honors hie
Since they restorers of their liberty.
So valiant William of stately Douglasse stem
Is now the first into their sturring times
Gallants transportes from Scotlands Diadem
To conquesse and to kepee those Celtick climes
The bloody heart with Lion to erect,
King Charles Foes with terror to correct.
That he in France may possibly repeat
Those Provinces which do him to belong,
Since he as heir to conquering William great,
Deprivde of Normandy receives great wrong
By and attoure his right and greatest claim
To all the rest of Celticke Diadem.
He is the Man to whom the mates of Mars
Directed has the drift of their designs
His Grandour chiefest end of wished Wars
He highest aim whom hope to most assigns
That true elie him we Charles the great may see
Greater nor Charles the great or fifth to be.
For, shall we not expect to be complete
What prophesied by sacred Sibill Songs?
In Gods own time he will raise some man of Spreit
To free his Church and vindicate their wrongs
The Antichrist with all his cursed crew,
The tyran Turk the Lord in Hell will spew.
And is there one from east to occident
A Potent Prince so for this purpose meet,
As is King Charles our Monarche eminent.
In whom those Prophesies shall be compleet:
That so Gods Saints enjoy may liberty
Hence by his Sword from proud oppressors free.
So then it restes for all that seek renown
With their brave King concur in such a quarrel
His old unconquered Caledonian Crown
For such pretense they will refuse no perrell;
Invincible they will their courage show,
That all the World may still their courage know.
FINIS.
An Acrostiche or Alphabeticall Sonnet to the said Noble Earl.
Wise, valiant, virtuous, Worlds admired worth
In courtesy, and courage next to none
Loved of all, heroike heart go forth,
Let arms advance thy old Ancestoures Throne:
In our vnconquerde soill at of this one
As many good was ere of any Name?
Mars had not else four hundredth years by gone
Doubled the Douglasse still augmenting Fame
Or was the Vandgard ever lost with shame,
Whereas chief Chiftaine Douglasse did appear?
Grand honor of the royal Diadame
Lo, for their woethin Parliament they bear
And yet more praise expects of thee alone
Since seldom God gave virtue More to one. Anagr.

An Echo resounding and answering to the same purpose.
COme Echo can thou answer to my call? E. all.
What votes thou to this Earls brave adventer? E. enter.
Will thou stand good then for all future evil? E. I will.
But what? all future chances are uncertain? E. Certain.
Who then does know men's afterward estates? F. Fates.
And cannot their presages fail for ever? E. never.
Who does inspire them? God from Heaven hic? E. eaven he.
What shall the Earl of his pains exonor? E. honor.
And since he goes what shall he bring again? E. Gain.
What gain? For by long time Fame will decay? E. nay.
Shall none forget to memorate this voage? E. no age.
Then who is fit to conquer such a Pearl? E a Earl.
And who bee's Master of this matchles Fortoun? E. Mortoun.
Quod Galli arctissima jamdiu cum Scotis necessitudine neglecta pactisque
violatis stristissimis and antiquissimis Scotiam iustissime contra seipsos
armarunt.
Carmen Elegiacum.
TEmporibus priscis fulsit victoria Gallis
Vllene quae Scotis non fuit auxiliis?
Mirum igitur Gallos vincendos milite Scoto
Victores toties milite Scotigeno:
Nempe sui nostro cum regno faedris icti
immemores, fragilem nunc violasse fidem
Constat: ut in Celtis no^ sunt data praemia nostris
Debita, nec laus, nec gloria militibus:
Quid referam Fratres Anglos cum class retentos?
Quid referam oppressos Relligione pios?
Quid Cereris sacrum arcanae puerilibus ausis
Vulgatum memorem, spretaque connubia.
Carolus ille ergo noster regum editus alto
Gallorum, Anglorum, Scotigenumque satu;
Normannaeque ducis qui longa ab origin Gentis
Ius certum in Celtas nunc habet imperij,
Armis accinctus justis hic Carolus ensem
distrinxit justum, justaque bell a movet,
Vindicet vt frauds, vt debita forte reposcat
sceptra, utque oppressos subleues ense pios.
FINIS.
Quod Nobilissimus Mortoniae Comes ex antiquissima and Invictissima
Douglasiorum Familia cujus majores toties Gallis opem temporibus aerumnosis
tulerunt, nunc in Gallos ex Scotia primus milites ducat.
SI qui de nostris vnquam meruere camaeuis,
Vel si vnquam Musae quid potuere meae.
An non te quem prima decent praeconia laudis
Carmine nunc celebret Calliopeia mea?
Tune ille antiqui magna de stirpe Douglassi
Regis ut and patriae raptus amore tuae,
Prima Caledoniae qui primus belliger infers
In Francos meritis arma petita suis.
Qui regem Patriamque tuam virtutibus ornas:
Exuperas proavos qui probitate pios.
Tanta tua baec virtus nostr^ been nota Monarchae
te facit astrigeras Martis adire Domos.
Tanta tua boec virtus regali milite structum
mittit te ad Trojam major Achille novam.
Te duce longinquos quis non percurrat ad Indos
Succinctus gladio jussa subire tua:
Hostis imo armatas procedentem ante catervas
Si te tam validum viderit ire ducem,
Non modo terga dabit sed ter verba baec geminabit.
Heu cum Scotigenis venit ad arma Deus.
Qualis vt aethereis si Iuppiter esset in armis,
qualis et in castris Mars foret ipse suis:
Talis eris dum bella gerens sub imagine Martis
structus eris clypeo tu Jove nate tuo.
Mart igitur part^s qui diu latuere triumphos
Nomini ut and patriae tute repone tuae.
FINIS.



